self-defence.

"We have all been selfish and neglected him, so we won't fight about
it, but try and do better," said Archie, generously taking more than
his share of blame, for he had been less inattentive than either of the
others.

"Rose has stood by him like a good one, and it's no wonder he likes to
have her round best. I should myself if I was down on my luck as he is,"
put in Charlie, feeling that he really had not done "the little thing"
justice.

"I'll tell you what it is, boys we haven't been half good enough to
Rose, and we've got to make it up to her somehow," said Archie, who had
a very manly sense of honour about paying his debts, even to a girl.

"I'm awfully sorry I made fun of her doll when Jamie lugged it out; and
I called her 'baby bunting' when she cried over the dead kitten. Girls
are such geese sometimes, I can't help it," said Steve, confessing his
transgressions handsomely, and feeling quite ready to atone for them if
he only knew how.

"I'll go down on my knees and beg her pardon for treating her as if she
was a child. Don't it make her mad, though? Come to think of it, she's
only two years or so younger than I am. But she is so small and pretty,
she always seems like a dolly to me," and the Prince looked down from
his lofty height of five feet five as if Rose was indeed a pygmy beside
him.

"That dolly has got a real good little heart, and a bright mind of her
own, you'd better believe. Mac says she understands some things quicker
than he can, and mother thinks she is an uncommonly nice girl, though
she don't know all creation. You needn't put on airs, Charlie, though
you are a tall one, for Rose likes Archie better than you; she said she
did because he treated her respectfully."

"Steve looks as fierce as a game-cock; but don't you get excited, my
son, for it won't do a bit of good. Of course, everybody likes the Chief
best; they ought to, and I'll punch their heads if they don't. So calm
yourself, Dandy, and mend your own manners before you come down on other
people's."

Thus the Prince with great dignity and perfect good nature, while Archie
looked modestly gratified with the flattering opinions of his kinsfolk,
and Steve subsided, feeling he had done his duty as a cousin and a
brother. A pause ensued, during which Aunt Jane appeared in the other
room, accompanied by a tea-tray sumptuously spread, and prepared to feed
her big nestling, as that was a task she allowed no one to share with
her.

"If you have a minute to spare before you go, child, I wish you'd just
make Mac a fresh shade; this has got a berry stain on it, and he must
be tidy, for he is to go out to-morrow if it is a cloudy day," said Mrs.
Jane, spreading toast in a stately manner, while Mac slopped his tea
about without receiving a word of reproof.

"Yes, aunt," answered Rose, so meekly that the boys could hardly believe
it could be the same voice which had issued the stern command, "Out of
this room, every one of you!" not very long ago.

They had not time to retire, without unseemly haste, before she walked
into the parlour and sat down at the work-table without a word. It was
funny to see the look the three tall lads cast at the little person
sedately threading a needle with green silk. They all wanted to say
something expressive of repentance, but no one knew how to begin, and it
was evident, from the prim expression of Rose's face, that she intended
to stand upon her dignity till they had properly abased themselves. The
pause was becoming very awkward, when Charlie, who possessed all the
persuasive arts of a born scapegrace, went slowly down upon his knees
before her, beat his breast, and said, in a heart-broken tone,

"Please forgive me this time, and I'll never do so any more."

It was very hard to keep sober, but Rose managed it and answered gravely,

"It is Mac's pardon you should ask, not mine, for you haven't hurt me,
and I shouldn't wonder if you had him a great deal, with all that light
and racket, and talk about things that only worry him."

"Do you really think we've hurt him, cousin?" asked Archie, with a
troubled look, while Charlie settled down in a remorseful heap among the
table legs.

"Yes, I do, for he has got a raging headache, and his eyes are as red as
as this emery bag," answered Rose, solemnly plunging her needle into a
fat flannel strawberry.

Steve tore his hair, metaphorically speaking, for he clutched his
cherished top-knot, and wildly dishevelled it, as if that was the
heaviest penance he could inflict upon himself at such short notice.
Charlie laid himself out flat, melodramatically begging someone to take
him away and hang him; but Archie, who felt worst of all, said nothing
except to vow within himself that he would read to Mac till his own eyes
were as red as a dozen emery bags combined.

Seeing the wholesome effects of her treatment upon these culprits, Rose
felt that she might relent and allow them a gleam of hope. She found
it impossible to help trampling upon the prostrate Prince a little, in
words at least, for he had hurt her feelings oftener than he knew; so
she gave him a thimble-pie on the top of his head, and said, with an air
of an infinitely superior being,

"Don't be silly, but get up, and I'll tell you something much better to
do than sprawling on the floor and getting all over lint."

Charlie obediently sat himself upon a hassock at her feet; the other
sinners drew near to catch the words of wisdom about to fall from her
lips, and Rose, softened by this gratifying humility, addressed them in
her most maternal tone.

"Now, boys, if you really want to be good to Mac, you can do it in this
way. Don't keep talking about things he can't do, or go and tell what
fun you have had batting your ridiculous balls about. Get some nice book
and read quietly; cheer him up about school, and offer to help him study
by and by; you can do that better than I, because I'm only a girl, and
don't learn Greek and Latin and all sorts of headachy stuff."

"Yes, but you can do heaps of things better than we can; you've proved
that," said Archie, with an approving look that delighted Rose, though
she could not resist giving Charlie one more rebuke, by saying, with a
little bridling of the head, and a curl of the lip that wanted to smile
instead,

"I'm glad you think so, though I am a 'queer chicken."'

This scathing remark caused the Prince to hide his face for shame, and
Steve to erect his head in the proud consciousness that this shot was
not meant for him. Archie laughed, and Rose, seeing a merry blue
eye winking at her from behind two brown hands, gave Charlie's ear a
friendly tweak, and extended the olive-branch of peace.

"Now we'll all be good, and plan nice things for poor Mac," she said,
smiling so graciously that the boys felt as if the sun had suddenly
burst out from behind a heavy cloud and was shining with great
brilliancy.

The storm had cleared the air, and quite a heavenly calm succeeded,
during which plans of a most varied and surprising sort were laid, for
everyone burned to make noble sacrifices upon the shrine of "poor
Mac," and Rose was the guiding star to whom the others looked with most
gratifying submission. Of course, this elevated state of things could
not endure long, but it was very nice while it lasted, and left an
excellent effect upon the minds of all when the first ardour had
subsided.

"There, that's ready for to-morrow, and I do hope it will be cloudy,"
said Rose, as she finished off the new shade, the progress of which the
boys had watched with interest.

"I'd bespoken an extra sunny day, but I'll tell the clerk of the weather
to change it. He's an obliging fellow, and he'll attend to it, so make
yourself easy," said Charlie, who had become quite perky again.

"It is very easy for you to joke, but how would you like to wear a
blinder like that for weeks and weeks, sir?" and Rose quenched his
rising spirits by slipping the shade over his eyes, as he still sat on
the cushion at her feet.

"It's horrid! Take it off, take it off! I don't wonder the poor old boy
has the blues with a thing like that on"; and Charlie sat looking at
what seemed to him an instrument of torture, with such a sober face that
Rose took it gently away, and went in to bid Mac good-night.

"I shall go home with her, for it is getting darkish, and she is rather
timid," said Archie, forgetting that he had often laughed at this very
timidity.

"I think I might, for she's taking care of my brother," put in Steve,
asserting his rights.

"Let's all go, that will please her"; proposed Charlie, with a burst of
gallantry which electrified his mates.

"We will!" they said with one voice, and they did, to Rose's great
surprise and secret contentment; though Archie had all the care of
her, for the other two were leaping fences, running races, and having
wrestling matches all the way down.

They composed themselves on reaching the door, however; shook hands
cordially all round, made their best bows, and retired with great
elegance and dignity, leaving Rose to say to herself, with girlish
satisfaction, as she went in,

"Now, that is the way I like to be treated."



Chapter 13--Cosey Corner

Vacation was over, the boys went back to school, and poor Mac was left
lamenting. He was out of the darkened room now, and promoted to blue
goggles, through which he took a gloomy view of life, as might have been
expected; for there was nothing he could do but wander about, and try to
amuse himself without using his eyes. Anyone who has ever been condemned
to that sort of idleness knows how irksome it is, and can understand the
state of mind which caused Mac to say to Rose in a desperate tone one
day,

"Look here, if you don't invent some new employment or amusement for me,
I shall knock myself on the head as sure as you live."

Rose flew to Uncle Alec for advice, and he ordered both patient and
nurse to the mountains for a month, with Aunt Jessie and Jamie as
escort. Pokey and her mother joined the party, and one bright September
morning six very happy-looking people were aboard the express train for
Portland two smiling mammas, laden with luncheon baskets and wraps; a
pretty young girl with a bag of books on her arm; a tall thin lad with
his hat over his eyes; and two small children, who sat with their short
legs straight out before them, and their chubby faces beaming with the
first speechless delight of "truly travelling."

An especially splendid sunset seemed to have been prepared to welcome
them when, after a long day's journey, they drove into a wide, green
door-yard, where a white colt, a red cow, two cats, four kittens,
many hens, and a dozen people, old and young, were gaily disporting
themselves. Everyone nodded and smiled in the friendliest manner, and a
lively old lady kissed the new-comers all round, as she said heartily,

"Well, now, I'm proper glad to see you! Come right in and rest, and
we'll have tea in less than no time, for you must be tired. Lizzie, you
show the folks upstairs; Kitty, you fly round and help father in with
the trunks; and Jenny and I will have the table all ready by the time
you come down. Bless the dears, they want to go see the pussies, and so
they shall!"

The three pretty daughters did "fly round," and everyone felt at home at
once, all were so hospitable and kind. Aunt Jessie had raptures over the
home-made carpets, quilts and quaint furniture; Rose could not keep away
from the windows, for each framed a lovely picture; and the little folks
made friends at once with the other children, who filled their arms with
chickens and kittens, and did the honours handsomely.

The toot of a horn called all to supper, and a goodly party, including
six children besides the Camp-bells, assembled in the long dining-room,
armed with mountain appetites and the gayest spirits. It was impossible
for anyone to be shy or sober, for such gales of merriment arose they
blew the starch out of the stiffest, and made the saddest jolly. Mother
Atkinson, as all called their hostess, was the merriest there, and the
busiest; for she kept flying up to wait on the children, to bring out
some new dish, or to banish the live stock, who were of such a social
turn that the colt came into the entry and demanded sugar; the cats sat
about in people's laps, winking suggestively at the food; and speckled
hens cleared the kitchen floor of crumbs, as they joined in the chat
with a cheerful clucking.

Everybody turned out after tea to watch the sunset till all the lovely
red was gone, and mosquitoes wound their shrill horns to sound the
retreat. The music of an organ surprised the new-comers, and in
the parlor they found Father Atkinson playing sweetly on the little
instrument made by himself. All the children gathered about him, and,
led by the tuneful sisters, sang prettily till Pokey fell asleep behind
the door, and Jamie gaped audibly right in the middle of his favourite,

    "Coo," said the little doves: "Coo," said she,
    "All in the top of the old pine-tree."

The older travellers, being tired, went to "bye low" at the same time,
and slept like tops in home-spun sheets, on husk mattresses made by
Mother Atkinson, who seemed to have put some soothing powder among them,
so deep and sweet was the slumber that came.

Next day began the wholesome out-of-door life, which works such wonders
with tired minds and feeble bodies. The weather was perfect, and the
mountain air made the children as frisky as young lambs; while the
elders went about smiling at one another, and saying, "Isn't it
splendid?" Even Mac, the "slow coach," was seen to leap over a fence
as if he really could not help it; and when Rose ran after him with his
broad-brimmed hat, he made the spirited proposal to go into the woods
and hunt for a catamount.

Jamie and Pokey were at once enrolled in the Cosey Corner Light Infantry
a truly superb company, composed entirely of officers, all wearing
cocked hats, carrying flags, waving swords, or beating drums. It was a
spectacle to stir the dullest soul when this gallant band marched out of
the yard in full regimentals, with Captain Dove a solemn, big-headed
boy of eleven issuing his orders with the gravity of a general, and his
Falstaffian regiment obeying them with more docility than skill. The
little Snow children did very well, and Lieutenant Jack Dove was fine
to see; so was Drummer Frank, the errand-boy of the house, as he
rub-a-dub-dubbed with all his heart and drumsticks. Jamie had "trained"
before, and was made a colonel at once; but Pokey was the best of all,
and called forth a spontaneous burst of applause from the spectators
as she brought up the rear, her cocked hat all over one eye, her flag
trailing over her shoulder, and her wooden sword straight up in the air;
her face beaming and every curl bobbing with delight as her fat legs
tottered in the vain attempt to keep step manfully.

Mac and Rose were picking blackberries in the bushes beside the road
when the soldiers passed without seeing them, and they witnessed a sight
that was both pretty and comical. A little farther on was one of the
family burial spots so common in those parts, and just this side of it
Captain Fred Dove ordered his company to halt, explaining his reason for
so doing in the following words,

"That's a graveyard, and it's proper to muffle the drums and lower the
flags as we go by, and we'd better take off our hats, too; it's more
respectable, I think."

"Isn't that cunning of the dears?" whispered Rose, as the little troop
marched slowly by to the muffled roll of the drums, every flag and sword
held low, all the little heads uncovered, and the childish faces very
sober as the leafy shadows flickered over them.

"Let's follow and see what they are after," proposed Mac, who found
sitting on the wall and being fed with blackberries luxurious but
tiresome.

So they followed and heard the music grow lively, saw the banners wave
in the breeze again when the graveyard was passed, and watched the
company file into the dilapidated old church that stood at the corner of
three woodland roads. Presently the sound of singing made the outsiders
quicken their steps, and, stealing up, they peeped in at one of the
broken windows.

Captain Dove was up in the old wooden pulpit, gazing solemnly down upon
his company, who, having stacked their arms in the porch, now sat in the
bare pews singing a Sunday-school hymn with great vigour and relish.

"Let us pray," said Captain Dove, with as much reverence as an army
chaplain; and, folding his hands, he repeated a prayer which he thought
all would know an excellent little prayer, but not exactly appropriate
to the morning, for it was,

    "Now I lay me down to sleep."

Everyone joined in saying it, and it was a pretty sight to see the
little creatures bowing their curly heads and lisping out the words they
knew so well. Tears came into Rose's eyes as she looked; Mac took his
hat off involuntarily, and then clapped it on again as if ashamed of
showing any feeling.

"Now I shall preach you a short sermon, and my text is, 'Little
children, love one another.' I asked mamma to give me one, and she
thought that would be good; so you all sit still and I'll preach it. You
mustn't whisper, Marion, but hear me. It means that we should be good to
each other, and play fair, and not quarrel as we did this very day about
the wagon. Jack can't always drive, and needn't be mad because I like
to go with Frank. Annette ought to be horse sometimes and not always
driver; and Willie may as well make up his mind to let Marion build her
house by his, for she will do it, and he needn't fuss about it. Jamie
seems to be a good boy, but I shall preach to him if he isn't. No,
Pokey, people don't kiss in church or put their hats on. Now you must
all remember what I tell you, because I am the captain, and you should
mind me."

Here Lieutenant Jack spoke right out in meeting with the rebellious
remark,

"Don't care if you are; you'd better mind yourself, and tell how you
took away my strap, and kept the biggest doughnut, and didn't draw fair
when we had the truck."

"Yes, and you slapped Frank; I saw you!" bawled Willie Snow, bobbing up
in his pew.

"And you took my book away and hid it 'cause I wouldn't go and swing
when you wanted me to," added Annette, the oldest of the Snow trio.

"I shan't build my house by Willie's if he don't want me to, so now!"
put in little Marion, joining the mutiny.

"I will tiss Dimmy! and I tored up my hat 'tause a pin picked me,"
shouted Pokey, regardless of Jamie's efforts to restrain her.

Captain Dove looked rather taken aback at this outbreak in the ranks;
but, being a dignified and calm personage, he quelled the rising
rebellion with great tact and skill, by saying, briefly,

"We'll sing the last hymn; 'Sweet, sweet good-by' you all know that, so
do it nicely, and then we will go and have luncheon."

Peace was instantly restored, and a burst of melody drowned the
suppressed giggles of Rose and Mac, who found it impossible to keep
sober during the latter part of this somewhat remarkable service.
Fifteen minutes of repose rendered it a physical impossibility for the
company to march out as quietly as they had marched in. I grieve to
state that the entire troop raced home as hard as they could pelt, and
were soon skirmishing briskly over their lunch, utterly oblivious of
what Jamie (who had been much impressed by the sermon) called "the
captain's beautiful teck."

It was astonishing how much they all found to do at Cosey Corner;
and Mac, instead of lying in a hammock and being read to, as he had
expected, was busiest of all. He was invited to survey and lay out
Skeeterville, a town which the children were getting up in a huckleberry
pasture; and he found much amusement in planning little roads, staking
off house-lots, attending to the water-works, and consulting with the
"selectmen" about the best sites for public buildings; for Mac was a boy
still, in spite of his fifteen years and his love of books.

Then he went fishing with a certain jovial gentleman from the West; and
though they seldom caught anything but colds, they had great fun and
exercise chasing the phantom trout they were bound to have. Mac also
developed a geological mania, and went tapping about at rocks and
stones, discoursing wisely of "strata, periods, and fossil remains";
while Rose picked up leaves and lichens, and gave him lessons in botany
in return for his lectures on geology.

They led a very merry life; for the Atkinson girls kept up a sort of
perpetual picnic; and did it so capitally, that one was never tired of
it. So their visitors throve finely, and long before the month was out
it was evident that Dr. Alec had prescribed the right medicine for his
patients.



Chapter 14--A Happy Birthday

The twelfth of October was Rose's birthday, but no one seemed to
remember that interesting fact, and she felt delicate about mentioning
it, so fell asleep the night before wondering if she would have any
presents. That question was settled early the next morning, for she was
awakened by a soft tap on her face, and opening her eyes she beheld a
little black and white figure sitting on her pillow, staring at her with
a pair of round eyes very like blueberries, while one downy paw patted
her nose to attract her notice. It was Kitty Comet, the prettiest of all
the pussies, and Comet evidently had a mission to perform, for a pink
bow adorned her neck, and a bit of paper was pinned to it bearing the
words, "For Miss Rose, from Frank."

That pleased her extremely, and that was only the beginning of the
fun, for surprises and presents kept popping out in the most delightful
manner all through the day, the Atkinson girls being famous jokers and
Rose a favourite. But the best gift of all came on the way to Mount
Windy-Top, where it was decided to picnic in honour of the great
occasion. Three jolly loads set off soon after breakfast, for everybody
went, and everybody seemed bound to have an extra good time, especially
Mother Atkinson, who wore a hat as broad-brimmed as an umbrella, and
took the dinner-horn to keep her flock from straying away.

"I'm going to drive auntie and a lot of the babies, so you must ride the
pony. And please stay behind us a good bit when we go to the station,
for a parcel is coming, and you are not to see it till dinner-time. You
won't mind, will you?" said Mac, in a confidential aside during the wild
flurry of the start.

"Not a bit," answered Rose. "It hurts my feelings very much to be told
to keep out of the way at any other time, but birthdays and Christmas it
is part of the fun to be blind and stupid, and poked into corners. I'll
be ready as soon as you are, Giglamps."

"Stop under the big maple till I call then you can't possibly see
anything," added Mac, as he mounted her on the pony his father had sent
up for his use. "Barkis" was so gentle and so "willin'," however, that
Rose was ashamed to be afraid to ride him; so she had learned, that she
might surprise Dr. Alec when she got home; meantime she had many a
fine canter "over the hills and far away" with Mac, who preferred Mr.
Atkinson's old Sorrel.

Away they went, and, coming to the red maple, Rose obediently paused;
but could not help stealing a glance in the forbidden direction before
the call came. Yes, there was a hamper going under the seat, and then
she caught sight of a tall man whom Mac seemed to be hustling into
the carriage in a great hurry. One look was enough, and with a cry of
delight, Rose was off down the road as fast as Barkis could go.

"Now I'll astonish uncle," she thought. "I'll dash up in grand style,
and show him that I am not a coward, after all."

Fired by this ambition, she startled Barkis by a sharp cut, and still
more bewildered him by leaving him to his own guidance down the steep,
stony road. The approach would have been a fine success if, just as Rose
was about to pull up and salute, two or three distracted hens had not
scuttled across the road with a great squawking, which caused Barkis
to shy and stop so suddenly that his careless rider landed in an
ignominious heap just under old Sorrel's astonished nose.

Rose was up again before Dr. Alec was out of the carryall, and threw two
dusty arms about his neck crying with a breathless voice,

"O uncle, I'm so glad to see you! It is better than a cart-load of
goodies, and so dear of you to come!"

"But aren't you hurt, child! That was a rough tumble, and I'm afraid you
must be damaged somewhere," answered the Doctor, full of fond anxiety,
as he surveyed his girl with pride.

"My feelings are hurt, but my bones are all safe. It's too bad! I was
going to do it so nicely, and those stupid hens spoilt it all," said
Rose, quite crestfallen, as well as much shaken.

"I couldn't believe my eyes when I asked 'Where is Rose?' and Mac
pointed to the little Amazon pelting down the hill at such a rate. You
couldn't have done anything that would please me more, and I'm delighted
to see how well you ride. Now, will you mount again, or shall we turn
Mac out and take you in?" asked Dr. Alec, as Aunt Jessie proposed a
start, for the others were beckoning them to follow.

"Pride goeth before a fall better not try to show off again, ma'am,"
said Mac, who would have been more than mortal if he had refrained from
teasing when so good a chance offered.

"Pride does go before a fall, but I wonder if a sprained ankle always
comes after it?" thought Rose, bravely concealing her pain, as she
answered, with great dignity,

"I prefer to ride. Come on, and see who will catch up first."

She was up and away as she spoke, doing her best to efface the memory
of her downfall by sitting very erect, elbows down, head well up, and
taking the motion of the pony as Barkis cantered along as easily as a
rocking-chair.

"You ought to see her go over a fence and race when we ride together.
She can scud, too, like a deer when we play 'Follow the leader,' and
skip stones and bat balls almost as well as I can," said Mac, in reply
to his uncle's praise of his pupil.

"I'm afraid you will think her a sad tomboy, Alec; but really she seems
so well and happy, I have not the heart to check her. She has broken
out in the most unexpected way, and frisks like a colt; for she says she
feels so full of spirits she must run and shout whether it is proper or
not," added Mrs. Jessie, who had been a pretty hoyden years ago herself.

"Good good! that's the best news you could tell me," and Dr. Alec rubbed
his hands heartily. "Let the girl run and shout as much as she will it
is a sure sign of health, and as natural to a happy child as frisking is
to any young animal full of life. Tomboys make strong women usually, and
I had far rather find Rose playing football with Mac than puttering over
bead-work like that affected midget, Ariadne Blish."

"But she cannot go on playing football very long, and we must not forget
that she has a woman's work to do by and by," began Mrs. Jessie.

"Neither will Mac play football much longer, but he will be all the
better fitted for business, because of the health it gives him. Polish
is easily added, if the foundations are strong; but no amount of gilding
will be of use if your timber is not sound. I'm sure I'm right, Jessie;
and if I can do as well by my girl during the next six months as I have
the last, my experiment will succeed."

"It certainly will; for when I contrast that bright, blooming face
with the pale, listless one that made my heart ache a while ago, I can
believe in almost any miracle," said Mrs. Jessie, as Rose looked round
to point out a lovely view, with cheeks like the ruddy apples in the
orchard near by, eyes clear as the autumn sky overhead, and vigour in
every line of her girlish figure.

A general scramble among the rocks was followed by a regular gypsy
lunch, which the young folks had the rapture of helping to prepare.
Mother Atkinson put on her apron, turned up her sleeves, and fell to
work as gaily as if in her own kitchen, boiling the kettle slung on
three sticks, over a fire of cones and fir boughs; while the girls
spread the mossy table with a feast of country goodies, and the children
tumbled about in everyone's way till the toot of the horn made them
settle down like a flock of hungry birds.

As soon as the merry meal and a brief interval of repose were over,
it was unanimously voted to have some charades. A smooth, green spot
between two stately pines was chosen for the stage; shawls hung up,
properties collected, audience and actors separated, and a word quickly
chosen.

The first scene discovered Mac in a despondent attitude and shabby
dress, evidently much troubled in mind. To him entered a remarkable
creature with a brown paper bag over its head. A little pink nose peeped
through one hole in the middle, white teeth through another, and above
two eyes glared fiercely. Spires of grass stuck in each side of the
mouth seemed meant to represent whiskers; the upper corners of the bag
were twisted like ears, and no one could doubt for a moment that the
black scarf pinned on behind was a tail.

This singular animal seemed in pantomime to be comforting his master and
offering advice, which was finally acted upon, for Mac pulled off his
boots, helped the little beast into them, and gave him a bag; then,
kissing his paw, with a hopeful gesture, the creature retired, purring
so successfully that there was a general cry of "Cat, puss, boots!"

"Cat is the word," replied a voice, and the curtain fell.

The next scene was a puzzler, for in came another animal, on all-fours
this time, with a new sort of tail and long ears. A gray shawl concealed
its face, but an inquisitive sunbeam betrayed the glitter as of goggles
under the fringe. On its back rode a small gentleman in Eastern costume,
who appeared to find some difficulty in keeping his seat as his steed
jogged along. Suddenly a spirit appeared, all in white, with long
newspaper wings upon its back and golden locks about its face.
Singularly enough, the beast beheld this apparition and backed
instantly, but the rider evidently saw nothing and whipped up
unmercifully, also unsuccessfully, for the spirit stood directly in the
path, and the amiable beast would not budge a foot. A lively skirmish
followed, which ended in the Eastern gentleman being upset into a
sweet-fern bush, while the better bred animal abased itself before the
shining one.

The children were all in the dark till Mother Atkinson said, in an
inquiring tone,

"If that isn't Balaam and the ass, I'd like to know what it is. Rose
makes a sweet angel, doesn't she?"

"Ass" was evidently the word, and the angel retired, smiling with
mundane satisfaction over the compliment that reached her ears.

The next was a pretty little scene from the immortal story of "Babes in
the Wood." Jamie and Pokey came trotting in, hand in hand, and, having
been through the parts many times before, acted with great ease and much
fluency, audibly directing each other from time to time as they
went along. The berries were picked, the way lost, tears shed, baby
consolation administered, and then the little pair lay down among the
brakes and died with their eyes wide open and the toes of their four
little boots turned up to the daisies in the most pathetic manner.

"Now the wobins tum. You be twite dead, Dimmy, and I'll peep in and see
'em," one defunct innocent was heard to say.

"I hope they'll be quick, for I'm lying on a stone, and ants are walking
up my leg like fury," murmured the other.

Here the robins came flapping in with red scarves over their breasts
and leaves in their mouths, which they carefully laid upon the babes
wherever they would show best. A prickly blackberry leaf placed directly
over Pokey's nose caused her to sneeze so violently that her little legs
flew into the air; Jamie gave a startled "Ow!" and the pitying fowls
fled giggling.

After some discussion it was decided that the syllable must be "strew or
strow" and then they waited to see if it was a good guess.

This scene discovered Annette Snow in bed, evidently very ill; Miss
Jenny was her anxious mamma, and her merry conversation amused the
audience till Mac came in as a physician, and made great fun with his
big watch, pompous manner, and absurd questions. He prescribed one
pellet with an unpronounceable name, and left after demanding twenty
dollars for his brief visit.

The pellet was administered, and such awful agonies immediately set in
that the distracted mamma bade a sympathetic neighbour run for Mother
Know-all. The neighbour ran, and in came a brisk little old lady in
cap and specs, with a bundle of herbs under her arm, which she at once
applied in all sorts of funny ways, explaining their virtues as she
clapped a plantain poultice here, put a pounded catnip plaster there,
or tied a couple of mullein leaves round the sufferer's throat. Instant
relief ensued, the dying child sat up and demanded baked beans. The
grateful parent offered fifty dollars; but Mother Know-all indignantly
refused it and went smiling away, declaring that a neighbourly turn
needed no reward, and a doctor's fee was all a humbug.

The audience were in fits of laughter over this scene, for Rose imitated
Mrs. Atkinson capitally, and the herb cure was a good hit at the
excellent lady's belief that "yarbs" would save mankind if properly
applied. No one enjoyed it more than herself, and the saucy children
prepared for the grand finale in high feather.

This closing scene was brief but striking, for two trains of cars
whizzed in from opposite sides, met with a terrible collision in
the middle of the stage, and a general smash-up completed the word
catastrophe.

"Now let us act a proverb. I've got one all ready," said Rose, who was
dying to distinguish herself in some way before Uncle Alec.

So everyone but Mac, the gay Westerner, and Rose, took their places on
the rocky seats and discussed the late beautiful and varied charade, in
which Pokey frankly pronounced her own scene the "bestest of all."

In five minutes the curtain was lifted; nothing appeared but a very
large sheet of brown paper pinned to a tree, and on it was drawn a
clock-face, the hands pointing to four. A small note below informed the
public that 4 A.M. was the time. Hardly had the audience grasped this
important fact when a long waterproof serpent was seen uncoiling
itself from behind a stump. An inch-worm, perhaps, would be a better
description, for it travelled in the same humpy way as that pleasing
reptile. Suddenly a very wide-awake and active fowl advanced, pecking,
chirping, and scratching vigorously. A tuft of green leaves waved upon
his crest, a larger tuft of brakes made an umbrageous tail, and a shawl
of many colours formed his flapping wings. A truly noble bird, whose
legs had the genuine strut, whose eyes shone watchfully, and whose voice
had a ring that evidently struck terror into the catterpillar's soul, if
it was a catterpillar. He squirmed, he wriggled, he humped as fast as
he could, trying to escape; but all in vain. The tufted bird espied
him, gave one warbling sort of crow, pounced upon him, and flapped
triumphantly away.

"That early bird got such a big worm he could hardly carry him off,"
laughed Aunt Jessie, as the children shouted over the joke suggested by
Mac's nickname.

"That is one of uncle's favourite proverbs, so I got it up for his
especial benefit," said Rose, coming up with the two-legged worm beside
her.

"Very clever; what next?" asked Dr. Alec as she sat down beside him.

"The Dove boys are going to give us an 'Incident in the Life of
Napoleon,' as they call it; the children think it very splendid, and the
little fellows do it rather nicely," answered Mac with condescension.

A tent appeared, and pacing to and fro before it was a little sentinel,
who, in a brief soliloquy, informed the observers that the elements were
in a great state of confusion, that he had marched some hundred miles
or so that day, and that he was dying for want of sleep. Then he
paused, leaned upon his gun, and seemed to doze; dropped slowly down,
overpowered with slumber, and finally lay flat, with his gun beside him,
a faithless little sentinel. Enter Napoleon, cocked hat, gray coat, high
boots, folded arms, grim mouth, and a melodramatic stride. Freddy Dove
always covered himself with glory in this part, and "took the stage"
with a Napoleonic attitude that brought down the house; for the
big-headed boy, with solemn, dark eyes and square brow, was "the very
moral of that rascal, Boneyparty," Mother Atkinson said.

Some great scheme was evidently brewing in his mighty mind a trip across
the Alps, a bonfire at Moscow, or a little skirmish at Waterloo perhaps,
for he marched in silent majesty till suddenly a gentle snore disturbed
the imperial reverie. He saw the sleeping soldier and glared upon him,
saying in an awful tone,

"Ha! asleep at his post! Death is the penalty he must die!"

Picking up the musket, he is about to execute summary justice, as
emperors are in the habit of doing, when something in the face of the
weary sentinel appears to touch him. And well it might, for a most
engaging little warrior was Jack as he lay with his shako half off, his
childish face trying to keep sober, and a great black moustache over his
rosy mouth. It would have softened the heart of any Napoleon, and the
Little Corporal proved himself a man by relenting, and saying, with a
lofty gesture of forgiveness,

"Brave fellow, he is worn out; I will let him sleep, and mount guard in
his place."

Then, shouldering the gun, this noble being strode to and fro with a
dignity which thrilled the younger spectators. The sentinel awakes,
sees what has happened, and gives himself up for lost. But the Emperor
restores his weapon, and, with that smile which won all hearts, says,
pointing to a high rock whereon a crow happens to be sitting, "Be brave,
be vigilant, and remember that from yonder Pyramid generations are
beholding you," and with these memorable words he vanishes, leaving the
grateful soldier bolt upright, with his hand at his temple and deathless
devotion stamped upon his youthful countenance.

The applause which followed this superb piece had hardly subsided,
when a sudden splash and a shrill cry caused a general rush toward the
waterfall that went gambolling down the rocks, singing sweetly as it
ran. Pokey had tried to gambol also, and had tumbled into a shallow
pool, whither Jamie had gallantly followed, in a vain attempt to fish
her out, and both were paddling about half frightened, half pleased with
the unexpected bath.

This mishap made it necessary to get the dripping infants home as soon
as possible; so the wagons were loaded up, and away they went, as merry
as if the mountain air had really been "Oxygenated Sweets not Bitters,"
as Dr. Alec suggested when Mac said he felt as jolly as if he had been
drinking champagne instead of the current wine that came with a great
frosted cake wreathed with sugar roses in Aunt Plenty's hamper of
goodies.

Rose took part in all the fun, and never betrayed by look or word the
twinges of pain she suffered in her ankle. She excused herself from the
games in the evening, however, and sat talking to Uncle Alec in a lively
way, that both amazed and delighted him; for she confided to him that
she played horse with the children, drilled with the light infantry,
climbed trees, and did other dreadful things that would have caused the
aunts to cry aloud if they knew of them.

"I don't care a pin what they say if you don't mind, uncle," she
answered, when he pictured the dismay of the good ladies.

"Ah, it's all very well to defy them, but you are getting so rampant,
I'm afraid you will defy me next, and then where are we?"

"No, I won't! I shouldn't dare; because you are my guardian, and can put
me in a strait-jacket if you like;" and Rose laughed in his face, even
while she nestled closer with a confiding gesture pleasant to see.

"Upon my word, Rosy, I begin to feel like the man who bought an
elephant, and then didn't know what to do with him. I thought I had got
a pet and plaything for years to come; but here you are growing up like
a bean-stalk, and I shall find I've got a strong-minded little woman on
my hands before I can turn round. There's predicament for a man and an
uncle!"

Dr. Alec's comic distress was mercifully relieved for the time being
by a dance of goblins on the lawn, where the children, with pumpkin
lanterns on their heads, frisked about like will-o'-the-wisps, as a
parting surprise.

When Rose went to bed, she found that Uncle Alec had not forgotten her;
for on the table stood a delicate little easel, holding two miniatures
set in velvet. She knew them both, and stood looking at them till her
eyes brimmed over with tears that were both sweet and sad; for they were
the faces of her father and mother, beautifully copied from portraits
fast fading away.

Presently, she knelt down, and, putting her arms round the little
shrine, kissed one after the other, saying with an earnest voice, "I'll
truly try to make them glad to see me by and by."

And that was Rose's little prayer on the night of her fourteenth
birthday.

Two days later the Campbells went home, a larger party than when they
came; for Dr. Alec was escort and Kitty Comet was borne in state in a
basket, with a bottle of milk, some tiny sandwiches, and a doll's dish
to drink out of, as well as a bit of carpet to lie on in her palace car,
out of which she kept popping her head in the most fascinating manner.

There was a great kissing and cuddling, waving of handkerchiefs, and
last good-byes, as they went; and when they had started, Mother Atkinson
came running after them, to tuck in some little pies, hot from the oven,
"for the dears, who might get tired of bread and butter during that long
day's travel."

Another start, and another halt; for the Snow children came shrieking
up to demand the three kittens that Pokey was cooly carrying off in
a travelling bag. The unhappy kits were rescued, half smothered, and
restored to their lawful owners, amid dire lamentation from the little
kidnapper, who declared that she only "tooked um 'cause they'd want to
go wid their sister Tomit."

Start number three and stoppage number three, as Frank hailed them
with the luncheon basket, which had been forgotten, after everyone had
protested that it was safely in.

All went well after that, and the long journey was pleasantly beguiled
by Pokey and Pussy, who played together so prettily that they were
considered public benefactors.

"Rose doesn't want to go home, for she knows the aunts won't let her
rampage as she did up at Cosey Corner," said Mac, as they approached the
old house.

"I can't rampage if I want to for a time, at least; and I'll tell you
why. I sprained my ankle when I tumbled off of Barkis, and it gets worse
and worse; though I've done all I know to cure it and hide it, so it
shouldn't trouble anyone," whispered Rose, knitting her brows with pain,
as she prepared to descend, wishing her uncle would take her instead of
her bundles.

How he did it, she never knew; but Mac had her up the steps and on the
parlour sofa before she could put her foot to the ground.

"There you are right side up with care; and mind, now, if your ankle
bothers you, and you are laid up with it, I am to be your footman. It's
only fair, you know; for I don't forget how good you have been to me."
And Mac went to call Phebe, so full of gratitude and good-will that his
very goggles shone.



Chapter 15--Ear-Rings

Rose's sprain proved to be a serious one, owing to neglect, and Dr. Alec
ordered her to lie on the sofa for a fortnight at least; whereat she
groaned dismally, but dared not openly complain, lest the boys turn
upon her with some of the wise little sermons on patience which she had
delivered for their benefit.

It was Mac's turn now, and honourably did he repay his debt; for, as
school was still forbidden, he had plenty of leisure, and devoted most
of it to Rose. He took many steps for her, and even allowed her to teach
him to knit, after assuring himself that many a brave Scotchman knew how
to "click the pricks." She was obliged to take a solemn vow of secrecy,
however, before he would consent; for, though he did not mind being
called "Giglamps," "Granny" was more than his boyish soul could bear,
and at the approach of any of the Clan his knitting vanished as if by
magic, which frequent "chucking" out of sight did not improve the stripe
he was doing for Rose's new afghan.

She was busy with this pretty work one bright October afternoon, all
nicely established on her sofa in the upper hall, while Jamie and Pokey
(lent for her amusement) were keeping house in a corner, with Comet and
Rose's old doll for their "childerns."

Presently, Phebe appeared with a card. Rose read it, made a grimace,
then laughed and said,

"I'll see Miss Blish," and immediately put on her company face, pulled
out her locket, and settled her curls.

"You dear thing, how do you do? I've been trying to call every day since
you got back, but I have so many engagements, I really couldn't manage
it till to-day. So glad you are alone, for mamma said I could sit
awhile, and I brought my lace-work to show you, for it's perfectly
lovely." cried Miss Blish, greeting Rose with a kiss, which was not very
warmly returned, though Rose politely thanked her for coming, and bid
Phebe roll up the easy chair.

"How nice to have a maid!" said Ariadne, as she settled herself with
much commotion. "Still, dear, you must be very lonely, and feel the need
of a bosom friend."

"I have my cousins," began Rose, with dignity, for her visitor's
patronising manner ruffled her temper.

"Gracious, child! you don't make friends of those great boys, do you?
Mamma says she really doesn't think it's proper for you to be with them
so much."

"They are like brothers, and my aunts do think it's proper," replied
Rose, rather sharply, for it struck her that this was none of Miss
Blish's business.

"I was merely going to say I should be glad to have you for my bosom
friend, for Hatty Mason and I have had an awful quarrel, and don't
speak. She is too mean to live, so I gave her up. Just think, she never
paid back one of the caramels I've given her, and never invited me to
her party. I could have forgiven the caramels, but to be left out in
that rude way was more than I could bear, and I told her never to look
at me again as long as she lived."

"You are very kind, but I don't think I want a bosom friend, thank you,"
said Rose, as Ariadne stopped to bridle and shake her flaxen head over
the delinquent Hatty Mason.

Now, in her heart Miss Blish thought Rose "a stuck-up puss," but
the other girls wanted to know her and couldn't, the old house was a
charming place to visit, the lads were considered fine fellows, and
the Campbells "are one of our first families," mamma said. So Ariadne
concealed her vexation at Rose's coolness, and changed the subject as
fast as possible.

"Studying French, I see; who is your teacher?" she asked, flitting over
the leaves of "Paul and Virginia," that lay on the table.

"I don't study it, for I read French as well as English, and uncle and
I often speak it for hours. He talks like a native, and says I have a
remarkably good accent."

Rose really could not help this small display of superiority, for French
was one of her strong points, and she was vain of it, though she usually
managed to hide this weakness. She felt that Ariadne would be the better
for a little crushing, and could not resist the temptation to patronise
in her turn.

"Oh, indeed!" said Miss Blish, rather blankly, for French was not her
strong point by any means.

"I am to go abroad with uncle in a year or two, and he knows how
important it is to understand the languages. Half the girls who leave
school can't speak decent French, and when they go abroad they are
so mortified. I shall be very glad to help you, if you like, for, of
course, you have no one to talk with at home."

Now Ariadne, though she looked like a wax doll, had feelings within her
instead of sawdust, and these feelings were hurt by Rose's lofty tone.
She thought her more "stuck up" than ever, but did not know how to bring
her down, yet longed to do it, for she felt as if she had received a
box on the ear, and involuntarily put her hand up to it. The touch of an
ear-ring consoled her, and suggested a way of returning tit for tat in a
telling manner.

"Thank you, dear; I don't need any help, for our teacher is from Paris,
and of course he speaks better French than your uncle." Then she added,
with a gesture of her head that set the little bells on her ears to
tingling: "How do you like my new ear-rings? Papa gave them to me last
week, and everyone says they are lovely."

Rose came down from her high horse with a rapidity that was comical,
for Ariadne had the upper hand now. Rose adored pretty things, longed
to wear them, and the desire of her girlish soul was to have her ears
bored, only Dr. Alec thought it foolish, so she never had done it. She
would gladly have given all the French she could jabber for a pair of
golden bells with pearl-tipped tongues, like those Ariadne wore; and,
clasping her hands, she answered, in a tone that went to the hearer's
heart,

"They are too sweet for anything! If uncle would only let me wear some,
I should be perfectly happy."

"I wouldn't mind what he says. Papa laughed at me at first, but he likes
them now, and says I shall have diamond solitaires when I am eighteen,"
said Ariadne, quite satisfied with her shot.

"I've got a pair now that were mamma's, and a beautiful little pair of
pearl and turquoise ones, that I am dying to wear," sighed Rose.

"Then do it. I'll pierce your ears, and you must wear a bit of silk in
them till they are well; your curls will hide them nicely; then, some
day, slip in your smallest ear-rings, and see if your uncle don't like
them."

"I asked him if it wouldn't do my eyes good once when they were red, and
he only laughed. People do cure weak eyes that way, don't they?"

"Yes, indeed, and yours are sort of red. Let me see. Yes, I really think
you ought to do it before they get worse," said Ariadne, peering into
the large clear eye offered for inspection.

"Does it hurt much?" asked Rose, wavering.

"Oh dear, no; just a prick and a pull, and it's all over. I've done
lots of ears, and know just how. Come, push up your hair and get a big
needle."

"I don't quite like to do it without asking uncle's leave," faltered
Rose, when all was ready for the operation.

"Did he ever forbid it?" demanded Ariadne, hovering over her prey like a
vampire.

"No, never!"

"Then do it, unless you are afraid," cried Miss Blish, bent on
accomplishing the deed.

That last word settled the matter, and, closing her eyes, Rose said
"Punch!" in the tone of one giving the fatal order "Fire!"

Ariadne punched, and the victim bore it in heroic silence, though she
turned pale and her eyes were full of tears of anguish.

"There! Now pull the bits of silk often, and cold-cream your ears every
night, and you'll soon be ready for the rings," said Ariadne, well
pleased with her job, for the girl who spoke French with "a fine accent"
lay flat upon the sofa, looking as exhausted as if she had had both ears
cut off.

"It does hurt dreadfully, and I know uncle won't like it," sighed Rose,
as remorse began to gnaw. "Promise not to tell, or I shall be teased
to death," she added, anxiously, entirely forgetting the two little
pitchers gifted with eyes as well as ears, who had been watching the
whole performance from afar.

"Never. Mercy me, what's that?" and Ariadne started as a sudden sound of
steps and voices came up from below.

"It's the boys! Hide the needle. Do my ears show? Don't breathe a word!"
whispered Rose, scrambling about to conceal all traces of their iniquity
from the sharp eyes of the Clan.

Up they came, all in good order, laden with the proceeds of a nutting
expedition, for they always reported to Rose and paid tribute to their
queen in the handsomest manner.

"How many, and how big! We'll have a grand roasting frolic after tea,
won't we?" said Rose, plunging both hands into a bag of glossy brown
nuts, while the Clan "stood at ease" and nodded to Ariadne.

"That lot was picked especially for you, Rosy. I got every one myself,
and they are extra whackers," said Mac, presenting a bushel or so.

"You should have seen Giglamps when he was after them. He pitched out
of the tree, and would have broken his blessed old neck if Arch had
not caught him," observed Steve, as he lounged gracefully in the window
seat.

"You needn't talk, Dandy, when you didn't know a chestnut from a beech,
and kept on thrashing till I told you of it," retorted Mac, festooning
himself over the back of the sofa, being a privileged boy.

"I don't make mistakes when I thrash you, old Worm, so you'd better mind
what you are about," answered Steve, without a ray of proper respect for
his elder brother.

"It is getting dark, and I must go, or mamma will be alarmed," said
Ariadne, rising in sudden haste, though she hoped to be asked to remain
to the nut-party.

No one invited her; and all the while she was putting on her things and
chatting to Rose the boys were telegraphing to one another the sad fact
that someone ought to escort the young lady home. Not a boy felt heroic
enough to cast himself into the breach, however; even polite Archie
shirked the duty, saying to Charlie, as they quietly slipped into an
adjoining room,

"I'm not going to do all the gallivanting. Let Steve take that chit home
and show his manners."

"I'll be hanged if I do!" answered Prince, who disliked Miss Blish
because she tried to be coquettish with him.

"Then I will," and, to the dismay of both recreant lads, Dr. Alec walked
out of the room to offer his services to the "chit."

He was too late, however, for Mac, obeying a look from Rose, had already
made a victim of himself, and trudged meekly away, wishing the gentle
Ariadne at the bottom of the Red Sea.

"Then I will take this lady down to tea, as the other one has found a
gentleman to go home with her. I see the lamps are lighted below, and I
smell a smell which tells me that auntie has something extra nice for us
to-night."

As he spoke, Dr. Alec was preparing to carry Rose downstairs as usual;
but Archie and Prince rushed forward, begging with penitent eagerness
for the honour of carrying her in an arm-chair. Rose consented, fearing
that her uncle's keen eye would discover the fatal bits of silk; so the
boys crossed hands, and, taking a good grip of each curly pate, she was
borne down in state, while the others followed by way of the banisters.

Tea was ordered earlier than usual, so that Jamie and his dolly could
have a taste, at least, of the holiday fun, for they were to stay till
seven, and be allowed twelve roasted chestnuts apiece, which they were
under bonds not to eat till next day.

Tea was despatched rapidly, therefore, and the party gathered round the
wide hearth in the dining-room, where the nuts were soon dancing gaily
on hot shovels or bouncing out among the company, thereby causing
delightful panics among the little ones.

"Come, Rosy, tell us a story while we work, for you can't help much,
and must amuse us as your share," proposed Mac, who sat in the shade
pricking nuts, and who knew by experience what a capital little
Scheherazade his cousin was.

"Yes, we poor monkeys can't burn our paws for nothing, so tell away,
Pussy," added Charlie, as he threw several hot nuts into her lap and
shook his fingers afterwards.

"Well, I happen to have a little story with a moral to it in my mind,
and I will tell it, though it is intended for younger children than
you," answered Rose, who was rather fond of telling instructive tales.

"Fire away," said Geordie, and she obeyed, little thinking what a
disastrous story it would prove to herself.

"Well, once upon a time, a little girl went to see a young lady who was
very fond of her. Now, the young lady happened to be lame, and had
to have her foot bandaged up every day; so she kept a basketful of
bandages, all nicely rolled and ready. The little girl liked to play
with this basket, and one day, when she thought no one saw her, she took
one of the rolls without asking leave, and put it in her pocket."

Here Pokey, who had been peering lovingly down at the five warm nuts
that lay at the bottom of her tiny pocket, suddenly looked up and said,
"Oh!" in a startled tone, as if the moral tale had become intensely
interesting all at once.

Rose heard and saw the innocent betrayal of the small sinner, and went
on in a most impressive manner, while the boys nudged one another and
winked as they caught the joke.

"But an eye did see this naughty little girl, and whose eye do you think
it was?"

"Eye of Dod," murmured conscience-stricken Pokey, spreading two chubby
little hands before the round face, which they were not half big enough
to hide.

Rose was rather taken aback by this reply, but, feeling that she was
producing a good effect, she added seriously,

"Yes, God saw her, and so did the young lady, but she did not say
anything; she waited to see what the little girl would do about it. She
had been very happy before she took the bandage, but when it was in her
pocket she seemed troubled, and pretty soon stopped playing, and sat
down in a corner looking very sober. She thought a few minutes, and then
went and put back the roll very softly, and her face cleared up, and
she was a happy child again. The young lady was glad to see that, and
wondered what made the little girl put it back."

"Tonscience p'icked her," murmured a contrite voice from behind the
small hands pressed tightly over Pokey's red face.

"And why did she take it, do you suppose?" asked Rose, in a
school-marmish tone, feeling that all the listeners were interested in
her tale and its unexpected application.

"It was so nice and wound, and she wanted it deffly," answered the
little voice.

"Well, I'm glad she had such a good conscience. The moral is that people
who steal don't enjoy what they take, and are not happy till they put
it back. What makes that little girl hide her face?" asked Rose, as she
concluded.

"Me's so 'shamed of Pokey," sobbed the small culprit, quite overcome by
remorse and confusion at this awful disclosure.

"Come, Rose, it's too bad to tell her little tricks before everyone,
and preach at her in that way; you wouldn't like it yourself," began Dr.
Alec, taking the weeper on his knee and administering consolation in the
shape of kisses and nuts.

Before Rose could express her regret, Jamie, who had been reddening
and ruffling like a little turkey-cock for several minutes, burst out
indignantly, bent on avenging the wound given to his beloved dolly.

"I know something bad that you did, and I'm going to tell right out. You
thought we didn't see you, but we did, and you said uncle wouldn't like
it, and the boys would tease, and you made Ariadne promise not to tell,
and she punched holes in your ears to put ear-rings in. So now! and
that's much badder than to take an old piece of rag; and I hate you for
making my Pokey cry."

Jamie's somewhat incoherent explosion produced such an effect that
Pokey's small sin was instantly forgotten, and Rose felt that her hour
had come.

"What! what! what!" cried the boys in a chorus, dropping their shovels
and knives to gather round Rose, for a guilty clutching at her ears
betrayed her, and with a feeble cry of "Ariadne made me!" she hid her
head among the pillows like an absurd little ostrich.

"Now she'll go prancing round with bird cages and baskets and carts and
pigs, for all I know, in her ears, as the other girls do, and won't she
look like a goose?" asked one tormentor, tweaking a curl that strayed
out from the cushions.

"I didn't think she'd be so silly," said Mac, in a tone of
disappointment that told Rose she had sunk in the esteem of her wise
cousin.

"That Blish girl is a nuisance, and ought not to be allowed to come here
with her nonsensical notions," said the Prince, feeling a strong desire
to shake that young person as an angry dog might shake a mischievous
kitten.

"How do you like it, uncle?" asked Archie, who, being the head of a
family himself, believed in preserving discipline at all costs.

"I am very much surprised; but I see she is a girl, after all, and must
have her vanities like all the rest of them," answered Dr. Alec, with
a sigh, as if he had expected to find Rose a sort of angel, above all
earthly temptations.

"What shall you do about it, sir?" inquired Geordie, wondering what
punishment would be inflicted on a feminine culprit.

"As she is fond of ornaments, perhaps we had better give her a nose-ring
also. I have one somewhere that a Fiji belle once wore; I'll look it
up," and, leaving Pokey to Jamie's care, Dr. Alec rose as if to carry
out his suggestion in earnest.

"Good! good! We'll do it right away! Here's a gimlet, so you hold
her, boys, while I get her dear little nose all ready," cried Charlie,
whisking away the pillow as the other boys danced about the sofa in true
Fiji style.

It was a dreadful moment, for Rose could not run away she could only
grasp her precious nose with one hand and extend the other, crying
distractedly,

"O uncle, save me, save me!"

Of course he saved her; and when she was securely barricaded by his
strong arm, she confessed her folly in such humiliation of spirit, that
the lads, after a good laugh at her, decided to forgive her and lay all
the blame on the tempter, Ariadne. Even Dr. Alec relented so far as to
propose two gold rings for the ears instead of one copper one for the
nose; a proceeding which proved that if Rose had all the weakness of
her sex for jewellery, he had all the inconsistency of his in giving a
pretty penitent exactly what she wanted, spite of his better judgment.



Chapter 16--Bread and Button-Holes

"What in the world is my girl thinking about all alone here, with such
a solemn face?" asked Dr. Alec, coming into the study, one November
day, to find Rose sitting there with folded hands and a very thoughtful
aspect.

"Uncle, I want to have some serious conversation with you, if you have
time," she said, coming out of a brown study, as if she had not heard
his question.

"I'm entirely at your service, and most happy to listen," he answered,
in his politest manner, for when Rose put on her womanly little airs he
always treated her with a playful sort of respect that pleased her very
much.

Now, as he sat down beside her, she said, very soberly,

"I've been trying to decide what trade I would learn, and I want you to
advise me."

"Trade, my dear?" and Dr. Alec looked so astonished that she hastened to
explain.

"I forgot that you didn't hear the talk about it up at Cosey Corner. You
see we used to sit under the pines and sew, and talk a great deal all
the ladies, I mean and I liked it very much. Mother Atkinson thought
that everyone should have a trade, or something to make a living out of,
for rich people may grow poor, you know, and poor people have to work.
Her girls were very clever, and could do ever so many things, and Aunt
Jessie thought the old lady was right; so when I saw how happy and
independent those young ladies were, I wanted to have a trade, and then
it wouldn't matter about money, though I like to have it well enough."

Dr. Alec listened to this explanation with a curious mixture of
surprise, pleasure, and amusement in his face, and looked at his little
niece as if she had suddenly changed into a young woman. She had grown a
good deal in the last six months, and an amount of thinking had gone on
in that young head which would have astonished him greatly could he have
known it all, for Rose was one of the children who observe and meditate
much, and now and then nonplus their friends by a wise or curious
remark.

"I quite agree with the ladies, and shall be glad to help you decide on
something if I can," said the Doctor seriously. "What do you incline to?
A natural taste or talent is a great help in choosing, you know."

"I haven't any talent, or any especial taste that I can see, and that is
why I can't decide, uncle. So, I think it would be a good plan to pick
out some very useful business and learn it, because I don't do it for
pleasure, you see, but as a part of my education, and to be ready in
case I'm ever poor," answered Rose, looking as if she rather longed for
a little poverty so that her useful gift might be exercised.

"Well, now, there is one very excellent, necessary, and womanly
accomplishment that no girl should be without, for it is a help to rich
and poor, and the comfort of families depends upon it. This fine talent
is neglected nowadays, and considered old-fashioned, which is a sad
mistake, and one that I don't mean to make in bringing up my girl.
It should be a part of every girl's education, and I know of a most
accomplished lady who will teach you in the best and pleasantest
manner."

"Oh, what is it?" cried Rose eagerly, charmed to be met in this helpful
and cordial way.

"Housekeeping!" answered Dr. Alec.

"Is that an accomplishment?" asked Rose, while her face fell, for she
had indulged in all sorts of vague, delightful dreams.

"Yes; it is one of the most beautiful as well as useful of all the
arts a woman can learn. Not so romantic, perhaps, as singing,
painting, writing, or teaching, even; but one that makes many happy and
comfortable, and home the sweetest place in the world. Yes, you may
open your big eyes; but it is a fact that I had rather see you a good
housekeeper than the greatest belle in the city. It need not interfere
with any talent you may possess, but it is a necessary part of your
training, and I hope that you will set about it at once, now that you
are well and strong."

"Who is the lady?" asked Rose, rather impressed by her uncle's earnest
speech.

"Aunt Plenty."

"Is she accomplished?" began Rose in a wondering tone, for this
great-aunt of hers had seemed the least cultivated of them all.

"In the good old-fashioned way she is very accomplished, and has made
this house a happy home to us all, ever since we can remember. She is
not elegant, but genuinely good, and so beloved and respected that there
will be universal mourning for her when her place is empty. No one can
fill it, for the solid, homely virtues of the dear soul have gone out of
fashion, as I say, and nothing new can be half so satisfactory, to me at
least."

"I should like to have people feel so about me. Can she teach me to do
what she does, and to grow as good?" asked Rose, with a little prick of
remorse for even thinking that Aunt Plenty was a commonplace old lady.

"Yes, if you don't despise such simple lessons as she can give. I know
it would fill her dear old heart with pride and pleasure to feel that
anyone cared to learn of her, for she fancies her day gone by. Let
her teach you how to be what she has been a skilful, frugal, cheerful
housewife; the maker and the keeper of a happy home, and by and by you
will see what a valuable lesson it is."

"I will, uncle. But how shall I begin?"

"I'll speak to her about it, and she will make it all right with Dolly,
for cooking is one of the main things, you know."

"So it is! I don't mind that a bit, for I like to mess, and used to try
at home; but I had no one to tell me, so I never did much but spoil my
aprons. Pies are great fun, only Dolly is so cross, I don't believe she
will ever let me do a thing in the kitchen."

"Then we'll cook in the parlour. I fancy Aunt Plenty will manage her,
so don't be troubled. Only mind this, I'd rather you learned how to make
good bread than the best pies ever baked. When you bring me a handsome,
wholesome loaf, entirely made by yourself, I shall be more pleased than
if you offered me a pair of slippers embroidered in the very latest
style. I don't wish to bribe you, but I'll give you my heartiest kiss,
and promise to eat every crumb of the loaf myself."

"It's a bargain! it's a bargain! Come and tell aunty all about it, for
I'm in a hurry to begin," cried Rose, dancing before him toward the
parlor, where Miss Plenty sat alone knitting contentedly, yet ready to
run at the first call for help of any sort, from any quarter.

No need to tell how surprised and gratified she was at the invitation
she received to teach the child the domestic arts which were her only
accomplishments, nor to relate how energetically she set about her
pleasant task. Dolly dared not grumble, for Miss Plenty was the one
person whom she obeyed, and Phebe openly rejoiced, for these new lessons
brought Rose nearer to her, and glorified the kitchen in the good girl's
eyes.

To tell the truth, the elder aunts had sometimes felt that they did not
have quite their share of the little niece who had won their hearts long
ago, and was the sunshine of the house. They talked it over together
sometimes, but always ended by saying that as Alec had all the
responsibility, he should have the larger share of the dear girl's love
and time, and they would be contented with such crumbs of comfort as
they could get.

Dr. Alec had found out this little secret, and, after reproaching
himself for being blind and selfish, was trying to devise some way of
mending matters without troubling anyone, when Rose's new whim suggested
an excellent method of weaning her a little from himself. He did not
know how fond he was of her till he gave her up to the new teacher, and
often could not resist peeping in at the door to see how she got on,
or stealing sly looks through the slide when she was deep in dough, or
listening intently to some impressive lecture from Aunt Plenty. They
caught him at it now and then, and ordered him off the premises at the
point of the rolling-pin; or, if unusually successful, and, therefore,
in a milder mood, they lured him away with bribes of ginger-bread, a
stray pickle, or a tart that was not quite symmetrical enough to suit
their critical eyes.

Of course he made a point of partaking copiously of all the delectable
messes that now appeared at table, for both the cooks were on their
mettle, and he fared sumptuously every day. But an especial relish
was given to any dish when, in reply to his honest praise of it, Rose
coloured up with innocent pride, and said modestly,

"I made that, uncle, and I'm glad you like it."

It was some time before the perfect loaf appeared, for bread-making
is an art not easily learned, and Aunt Plenty was very thorough in her
teaching; so Rose studied yeast first, and through various stages of
cake and biscuit came at last to the crowning glory of the "handsome,
wholesome loaf." It appeared at tea-time, on a silver salver, proudly
borne in by Phebe, who could not refrain from whispering, with a beaming
face, as she set it down before Dr. Alec,

"Ain't it just lovely, sir?"

"It is a regularly splendid loaf! Did my girl make it all herself?" he
asked, surveying the shapely, sweet-smelling object with real interest
and pleasure.

"Every particle herself, and never asked a bit of help or advice
from anyone," answered Aunt Plenty, folding her hands with an air of
unmitigated satisfaction, for her pupil certainly did her great credit.

"I've had so many failures and troubles that I really thought I never
should be able to do it alone. Dolly let one splendid batch burn up
because I forgot it. She was there and smelt it, but never did a thing,
for she said, when I undertook to bake bread I must give my whole mind
to it. Wasn't it hard? She might have called me at least," said Rose,
recollecting, with a sigh, the anguish of that moment.

"She meant you should learn by experience, as Rosamond did in that
little affair of the purple jar, you remember."

"I always thought it very unfair in her mother not to warn the poor
thing a little bit; and she was regularly mean when Rosamond asked for a
bowl to put the purple stuff in, and she said, in such a provoking way,
'I did not agree to lend you a bowl, but I will, my dear.' Ugh! I always
want to shake that hateful woman, though she was a moral mamma."

"Never mind her now, but tell me all about my loaf," said Dr. Alec, much
amused at Rose's burst of indignation.

"There's nothing to tell, uncle, except that I did my best, gave my mind
to it, and sat watching over it all the while it was in the oven till I
was quite baked myself. Everything went right this time, and it came out
a nice, round, crusty loaf, as you see. Now taste it, and tell me if it
is good as well as handsome."

"Must I cut it? Can't I put it under a glass cover and keep it in the
parlor as they do wax flowers and fine works of that sort?"

"What an idea, uncle! It would mould and be spoilt. Besides, people
would laugh at us, and make fun of my old-fashioned accomplishment. You
promised to eat it, and you must; not all at once, but as soon as you
can, so I can make you some more."

Dr. Alec solemnly cut off his favourite crusty slice, and solemnly ate
it; then wiped his lips, and brushing back Rose's hair, solemnly kissed
her on the forehead, saying, heartily,

"My dear, it is perfect bread, and you are an honour to your teacher.
When we have our model school I shall offer a prize for the best bread,
and you will get it."

"I've got it already, and I'm quite satisfied," said Rose, slipping into
her seat, and trying to hide her right hand which had a burn on it.

But Dr. Alec saw it, guessed how it came there, and after tea insisted
on easing the pain which she would hardly confess.

"Aunt Clara says I am spoiling my hands, but I don't care, for I've had
such good times with Aunt Plenty, and I think she has enjoyed it as
much as I have. Only one thing troubles me, uncle, and I want to ask
you about it," said Rose, as they paced up and down the hall in the
twilight, the bandaged hand very carefully laid on Dr. Alec's arm.

"More little confidences? I like them immensely, so tell away, my dear."

"Well, you see I feel as if Aunt Peace would like to do something for
me, and I've found out what it can be. You know she can't go about like
Aunty Plen, and we are so busy nowadays that she is rather lonely,
I'm afraid. So I want to take lessons in sewing of her. She works so
beautifully, and it is a useful thing, you know, and I ought to be a
good needlewoman as well as housekeeper, oughtn't I?"

"Bless your kind little heart, that is what I was thinking of the other
day when Aunt Peace said she saw you very seldom now, you were so busy I
wanted to speak of it, but fancied you had as much on your hands as
you could manage. It would delight the dear woman to teach you all her
delicate handicraft, especially button-holes, for I believe that is
where young ladies fail; at least, I've heard them say so. So, do you
devote your mind to button-holes; make 'em all over my clothes if you
want something to practice on. I'll wear any quantity."

Rose laughed at this reckless offer, but promised to attend to that
important branch, though she confessed that darning was her weak point.
Whereupon Uncle Alec engaged to supply her with socks in all stages of
dilapidation, and to have a new set at once, so that she could run the
heels for him as a pleasant beginning.

Then they went up to make their request in due form, to the great
delight of gentle Aunt Peace, who got quite excited with the fun that
went on while they would yarn, looked up darning needles, and fitted out
a nice little mending basket for her pupil.

Very busy and very happy were Rose's days now, for in the morning she
went about the house with Aunt Plenty attending to linen-closets and
store-rooms, pickling and preserving, exploring garret and cellar to see
that all was right, and learning, in the good old-fashioned manner, to
look well after the ways of the household.

In the afternoon, after her walk or drive, she sat with Aunt Peace
plying her needle, while Aunt Plenty, whose eyes were failing, knitted
and chatted briskly, telling many a pleasant story of old times, till
the three were moved to laugh and cry together, for the busy needles
were embroidering all sorts of bright patterns on the lives of the
workers, though they seemed to be only stitching cotton and darning
hose.

It was a pretty sight to see the rosy-faced little maid sitting between
the two old ladies, listening dutifully to their instructions, and
cheering the lessons with her lively chatter and blithe laugh. If the
kitchen had proved attractive to Dr. Alec when Rose was there at work,
the sewing-room was quite irresistible, and he made himself so agreeable
that no one had the heart to drive him away, especially when he read
aloud or spun yarns.

"There! I've made you a new set of warm night-gowns with four
button-holes in each. See if they are not neatly done," said Rose, one
day, some weeks after the new lessons began.

"Even to a thread, and nice little bars across the end so I can't tear
them when I twitch the buttons out. Most superior work, ma'am, and I'm
deeply grateful; so much so, that I'll sew on these buttons myself, and
save those tired fingers from another prick."

"You sew them on?" cried Rose, with her eyes wide open in amazement.

"Wait a bit till I get my sewing tackle, and then you shall see what I
can do."

"Can he, really?" asked Rose of Aunt Peace, as Uncle Alec marched off
with a comical air of importance.

"Oh, yes, I taught him years ago, before he went to sea; and I suppose
he has had to do things for himself, more or less, ever since; so he has
kept his hand in."

He evidently had, for he was soon back with a funny little work-bag, out
of which he produced a thimble without a top; and, having threaded his
needle, he proceeded to sew on the buttons so handily that Rose was much
impressed and amused.

"I wonder if there is anything in the world that you cannot do," she
said, in a tone of respectful admiration.

"There are one or two things that I am not up to yet," he answered,
with a laugh in the corner of his eye, as he waxed his thread with a
flourish.

"I should like to know what?"

"Bread and button-holes, ma'am."



Chapter 17--Good Bargains

It was a rainy Sunday afternoon, and four boys were trying to spend it
quietly in the "liberry," as Jamie called the room devoted to books and
boys, at Aunt Jessie's. Will and Geordie were sprawling on the sofa,
deep in the adventures of the scapegraces and ragamuffins whose
histories are now the fashion. Archie lounged in the easy chair,
surrounded by newspapers; Charlie stood upon the rug, in an Englishman's
favourite attitude, and, I regret to say, both were smoking cigars.

"It is my opinion that this day will never come to an end," said Prince,
with a yawn that nearly rent him asunder.

"Read and improve your mind, my son," answered Archie, peering solemnly
over the paper behind which he had been dozing.

"Don't you preach, parson, but put on your boots and come out for a
tramp, instead of mulling over the fire like a granny."

"No, thank you, tramps in an easterly storm don't strike me as amusing."
There Archie stopped and held up his hand, for a pleasant voice was
heard saying outside,

"Are the boys in the library, auntie?"

"Yes, dear, and longing for sunshine; so run in and make it for them,"
answered Mrs. Jessie.

"It's Rose," and Archie threw his cigar into the fire.

"What's that for?" asked Charlie.

"Gentlemen don't smoke before ladies."

"True; but I'm not going to waste my weed," and Prince poked his into
the empty inkstand that served them for an ash tray.

A gentle tap at the door was answered by a chorus of "Come in," and Rose
appeared, looking blooming and breezy with the chilly air.

"If I disturb you, say so, and I'll go away," she began, pausing on the
threshold with modest hesitation, for something in the elder boys' faces
excited her curiosity.

"You never disturb us, cousin," said the smokers, while the readers tore
themselves from the heroes of the bar-room and gutter long enough to nod
affably to their guest.

As Rose bent to warm her hands, one end of Archie's cigar stuck out of
the ashes, smoking furiously and smelling strongly.

"Oh, you bad boys, how could you do it, to-day of all days?" she said
reproachfully.

"Where's the harm?" asked Archie.

"You know as well as I do; your mother doesn't like it, and it's a bad
habit, for it wastes money and does you no good."

"Fiddlesticks! every man smokes, even Uncle Alec, whom you think so
perfect," began Charlie, in his teasing way.

"No, he doesn't! He has given it up, and I know why," cried Rose
eagerly.

"Now I think of it, I haven't seen the old meerschaum since he came
home. Did he stop it on our account?" asked Archie.

"Yes," and Rose told the little scene on the seashore in the camping-out
time.

Archie seemed much impressed, and said manfully, "He won't have done
that in vain so far as I'm concerned. I don't care a pin about smoking,
so can give it up as easy as not, and I promise you I will. I only do it
now and then for fun."

"You too?" and Rose looked up at the bonny Prince, who never looked less
bonny than at that moment, for he had resumed his cigar just to torment
her.

Now Charlie cared as little as Archie about smoking, but it would not
do to yield too soon: so he shook his head, gave a great puff, and said
loftily,

"You women are always asking us to give up harmless little things just
because you don't approve of them. How would you like it if we did the
same by you, miss?"

"If I did harmful or silly things, I'd thank you for telling me of them,
and I'd try to mend my ways," answered Rose heartily.

"Well, now, we'll see if you mean what you say. I'll give up smoking to
please you, if you will give up something to please me," said Prince,
seeing a good chance to lord it over the weaker vessel at small cost to
himself.

"I'll agree if it is as foolish as cigars."

"Oh, it's ever so much sillier."

"Then I promise; what is it?" and Rose quite trembled with anxiety to
know which of her pet habits or possessions she must lose.

"Give up your ear-rings," and Charlie laughed wickedly, sure that she
would never hold to that bargain.

Rose uttered a cry and clapped both hands to her ears where the gold
rings hung.

"Oh, Charlie, wouldn't anything else do as well? I've been through so
much teasing and trouble, I do want to enjoy my pretty ear-rings, for I
can wear them now."

"Wear as many as you like, and I'll smoke in peace," returned this bad
boy.

"Will nothing else satisfy you?" imploringly.

"Nothing," sternly.

Rose stood silent for a minute, thinking of something Aunt Jessie once
said "You have more influence over the boys than you know; use it for
their good, and I shall thank you all my life." Here was a chance to
do some good by sacrificing a little vanity of her own. She felt it was
right to do it, yet found it very hard, and asked wistfully,

"Do you mean never wear them, Charlie?"

"Never, unless you want me to smoke."

"I never do."

"Then clinch the bargain."

He had no idea she would do it, and was much surprised when she took
the dear rings from her ears, with a quick gesture, and held them out to
him, saying, in a tone that made the colour come up to his brown cheek,
it was so full of sweet good will,

"I care more for my cousins than for my ear-rings, so I promise, and
I'll keep my word."

"For shame, Prince! let her wear her little danglers if she likes, and
don't bargain about doing what you know is right," cried Archie, coming
out of his grove of newspapers with an indignant bounce.

But Rose was bent on showing her aunt that she could use her influence
for the boys' good, and said steadily,

"It is fair, and I want it to be so, then you will believe I'm in
earnest. Here, each of you wear one of these on your watch-guard
to remind you. I shall not forget, because very soon I cannot wear
ear-rings if I want to."

As she spoke, Rose offered a little ring to each cousin, and the boys,
seeing how sincere she was, obeyed her. When the pledges were safe, Rose
stretched a hand to each, and the lads gave hers a hearty grip, half
pleased and half ashamed of their part in the compact.

Just at that moment Dr. Alec and Mrs. Jessie came in.

"What's this? Dancing Ladies' Triumph on Sunday?" exclaimed Uncle Alec,
surveying the trio with surprise.

"No, sir, it is the Anti-Tobacco League. Will you join?" said Charlie,
while Rose slipped away to her aunt, and Archie buried both cigars
behind the back log.

When the mystery was explained, the elders were well pleased, and Rose
received a vote of thanks, which made her feel as if she had done a
service to her country, as she had, for every boy who grows up free from
bad habits bids fair to make a good citizen.

"I wish Rose would drive a bargain with Will and Geordie also, for I
think these books are as bad for the small boys as cigars for the large
ones," said Mrs. Jessie, sitting down on the sofa between the readers,
who politely curled up their legs to make room for her.

"I thought they were all the fashion," answered Dr. Alec, settling in
the big chair with Rose.

"So is smoking, but it is harmful. The writers of these popular stories
intend to do good, I have no doubt, but it seems to me they fail because
their motto is, 'Be smart, and you will be rich,' instead of 'Be honest,
and you will be happy.' I do not judge hastily, Alec, for I have read a
dozen, at least, of these stories, and, with much that is attractive to
boys, I find a great deal to condemn in them, and other parents say the
same when I ask them."

"Now, Mum, that's too bad! I like 'em tip-top. This one is a regular
screamer," cried Will.

"They're bully books, and I'd like to know where's the harm," added
Geordie.

"You have just shown us one of the chief evils, and that is slang,"
answered their mother quickly.

"Must have it, ma'am. If these chaps talked all right, there'd be no fun
in 'em," protested Will.

"A boot-black mustn't use good grammar, and a newsboy must swear a
little, or he wouldn't be natural," explained Geordie, both boys ready
to fight gallantly for their favourites.

"But my sons are neither boot-blacks nor newsboys, and I object to
hearing them use such words as 'screamer,' 'bully,' and 'buster.' In
fact, I fail to see the advantage of writing books about such people
unless it is done in a very different way. I cannot think they will help
to refine the ragamuffins if they read them, and I'm sure they can do no
good to the better class of boys, who through these books are introduced
to police courts, counterfeiters' dens, gambling houses, drinking
saloons, and all sorts of low life."

"Some of them are about first-rate boys, mother; and they go to sea and
study, and sail round the world, having great larks all the way."

"I have read about them, Geordie, and though they are better than the
others, I am not satisfied with these optical delusions, as I call
them. Now, I put it to you, boys, is it natural for lads from fifteen
to eighteen to command ships, defeat pirates, outwit smugglers, and
so cover themselves with glory, that Admiral Farragut invites them to
dinner, saying, 'Noble boy, you are an honour to your country!' Or,
if the hero is in the army, he has hair-breadth escapes and adventures
enough in one small volume to turn his hair white, and in the end
he goes to Washington at the express desire of the President or
Commander-in-chief to be promoted to no end of stars and bars. Even if
the hero is merely an honest boy trying to get his living, he is not
permitted to do so in a natural way, by hard work and years of patient
effort, but is suddenly adopted by a millionaire whose pocket-book he
has returned; or a rich uncle appears from sea just in the nick of time;
or the remarkable boy earns a few dollars, speculates in pea-nuts or
neckties, and grows rich so rapidly that Sinbad in the diamond valley is
a pauper compared to him. Isn't it so, boys?"

"Well, the fellows in these books are mighty lucky, and very smart, I
must say," answered Will, surveying an illustration on the open page
before him, where a small but virtuous youth is upsetting a tipsy giant
in a bar-room, and under it the elegant inscription, "Dick Dauntless
punches the head of Sam Soaker."

"It gives boys such wrong ideas of life and business; shows them so
much evil and vulgarity that they need not know about, and makes the
one success worth having a fortune, a lord's daughter, or some worldly
honour, often not worth the time it takes to win. It does seem to me
that some one might write stories that should be lively, natural and
helpful tales in which the English should be good, the morals pure, and
the characters such as we can love in spite of the faults that all may
have. I can't bear to see such crowds of eager little fellows at the
libraries reading such trash; weak, when it is not wicked, and totally
unfit to feed the hungry minds that feast on it for want of something
better. There! my lecture is done; now I should like to hear what you
gentlemen have to say," and Aunt Jessie subsided with a pretty flush on
the face that was full of motherly anxiety for her boys.

"Tom Brown just suits mother, and me too, so I wish Mr. Hughes would
write another story as good," said Archie.

"You don't find things of this sort in Tom Brown; yet these books are
all in the Sunday-school libraries" and Mrs. Jessie read the following
paragraph from the book she had taken from Will's hand,

"'In this place we saw a tooth of John the Baptist. Ben said he could
see locust and wild honey sticking to it. I couldn't. Perhaps John used
a piece of the true cross for a tooth-pick.'"

"A larky sort of a boy says that, Mum, and we skip the parts where they
describe what they saw in the different countries," cried Will.

"And those descriptions, taken mostly from guidebooks, I fancy, are the
only parts of any real worth. The scrapes of the bad boys make up the
rest of the story, and it is for those you read these books, I think,"
answered his mother, stroking back the hair off the honest little face
that looked rather abashed at this true statement of the case.

"Anyway, mother, the ship part is useful, for we learn how to sail
her, and by and by that will all come handy when we go to sea," put in
Geordie.

"Indeed, then you can explain this manoeuvre to me, of course," and Mrs.
Jessie read from another page the following nautical paragraph,

"The wind is south-south-west, and we can have her up four points closer
to the wind, and still be six points off the wind. As she luffs up we
shall man the fore and main sheets, slack on the weather, and haul on
the lee braces."

"I guess I could, if I wasn't afraid of uncle. He knows so much
more than I do, he'd laugh," began Geordie, evidently puzzled by the
question.

"Ho, you know you can't, so why make believe? We don't understand half
of the sea lingo, Mum, and I dare say it's all wrong," cried Will,
suddenly going over to the enemy, to Geordie's great disgust.

"I do wish the boys wouldn't talk to me as if I was a ship," said Rose,
bringing forward a private grievance. "Coming home from church this
morning, the wind blew me about, and Will called out, right in the
street, 'Brail up the foresail, and take in the flying-jib, that will
ease her.'"

The boys shouted at the plaintive tone in which Rose repeated the words
that offended her, and Will vainly endeavoured to explain that he only
meant to tell her to wrap her cloak closer, and tie a veil over the
tempest-tossed feathers in her hat.

"To tell the truth, if the boys must have slang, I can bear the 'sea
lingo,' as Will calls it, better than the other. It afflicts me less to
hear my sons talk about 'brailing up the foresail' than doing as they
'darn please,' and 'cut your cable' is decidedly preferable to 'let her
rip.' I once made a rule that I would have no slang in the house. I give
it up now, for I cannot keep it; but I will not have rubbishy books; so,
Archie, please send these two after your cigars."

Mrs. Jessie held both the small boys fast with an arm round each neck,
and when she took this base advantage of them they could only
squirm with dismay. "Yes, right behind the back log," she continued,
energetically. "There, my hearties (you like sea slang, so I'll give
you a bit) now, I want you to promise not to read any more stuff for a
month, and I'll agree to supply you with wholesome fare."

"Oh, mother, not a single one?" cried Will.

"Couldn't we just finish those?" pleaded Geordie.

"The boys threw away half-smoked cigars; and your books must go after
them. Surely you would not be outdone by the 'old fellows,' as you call
them, or be less obedient to little Mum than they were to Rose."

"Course not! Come on, Geordie," and Will took the vow like a hero. His
brother sighed and obeyed, but privately resolved to finish his story
the minute the month was over.

"You have laid out a hard task for yourself, Jessie, in trying to
provide good reading for boys who have been living on sensation stories.
It will be like going from raspberry tarts to plain bread and butter;
but you will probably save them from a bilious fever," said Dr. Alec,
much amused at the proceedings.

"I remember hearing grandpa say that a love for good books was one
of the best safeguards a man could have," began Archie, staring
thoughtfully at the fine library before him.

"Yes, but there's no time to read nowadays; a fellow has to keep
scratching round to make money or he's nobody," cut in Charlie, trying
to look worldly-wise.

"This love of money is the curse of America, and for the sake of it men
will sell honour and honesty, till we don't know whom to trust, and it
is only a genius like Agassiz who dares to say, 'I cannot waste my time
in getting rich,'" said Mrs. Jessie sadly.

"Do you want us to be poor, mother?" asked Archie, wondering.

"No, dear, and you never need be, while you can use your hands; but I am
afraid of this thirst for wealth, and the temptations it brings. O, my
boys! I tremble for the time when I must let you go, because I think it
would break my heart to have you fail as so many fail. It would be far
easier to see you dead if it could be said of you as of Sumner 'No man
dared offer him a bribe.'"

Mrs. Jessie was so earnest in her motherly anxiety that her voice
faltered over the last words, and she hugged the yellow heads closer in
her arms, as if she feared to let them leave that safe harbour for the
great sea where so many little boats go down. The younger lads nestled
closer to her, and Archie said, in his quiet, resolute way,

"I cannot promise to be an Agassiz or a Sumner, mother; but I do promise
to be an honest man, please God."

"Then I'm satisfied!" and holding fast the hand he gave her, she sealed
his promise with a kiss that had all a mother's hope and faith in it.

"I don't see how they ever can be bad, she is so fond and proud of
them," whispered Rose, quite touched by the little scene.

"You must help her make them what they should be. You have begun
already, and when I see those rings where they are, my girl is prettier
in my sight than if the biggest diamonds that ever twinkled shone in her
ears," answered Dr. Alec, looking at her with approving eyes.

"I'm so glad you think I can do anything, for I perfectly ache to be
useful; everyone is so good to me, especially Aunt Jessie."

"I think you are in a fair way to pay your debts, Rosy, for when girls
give up their little vanities, and boys their small vices, and try to
strengthen each other in well-doing, matters are going as they ought.
Work away, my dear, and help their mother keep these sons fit friends
for an innocent creature like yourself; they will be the manlier men for
it, I can assure you."



Chapter 18--Fashion and Physiology

"Please, sir, I guess you'd better step up right away, or it will be too
late, for I heard Miss Rose say she knew you wouldn't like it, and she'd
never dare to let you see her."

Phebe said this as she popped her head into the study, where Dr. Alec
sat reading a new book.

"They are at it, are they?" he said, looking up quickly, and giving
himself a shake, as if ready for a battle of some sort.

"Yes, sir, as hard as they can talk, and Miss Rose don't seem to know
what to do, for the things are ever so stylish, and she looks elegant in
'em; though I like her best in the old ones," answered Phebe.

"You are a girl of sense. I'll settle matters for Rosy, and you'll lend
a hand. Is everything ready in her room, and are you sure you understand
how they go?"

"Oh, yes, sir; but they are so funny! I know Miss Rose will think it's a
joke," and Phebe laughed as if something tickled her immensely.

"Never mind what she thinks so long as she obeys. Tell her to do it for
my sake, and she will find it the best joke she ever saw. I expect to
have a tough time of it, but we'll win yet," said the Doctor, as he
marched upstairs with the book in his hand, and an odd smile on his
face.

There was such a clatter of tongues in the sewing-room that no one heard
his tap at the door, so he pushed it open and took an observation. Aunt
Plenty, Aunt Clara, and Aunt Jessie were all absorbed in gazing at Rose,
who slowly revolved between them and the great mirror, in a full winter
costume of the latest fashion.

"Bless my heart! worse even than I expected," thought the Doctor, with
an inward groan, for, to his benighted eyes, the girl looked like a
trussed fowl, and the fine new dress had neither grace, beauty, nor
fitness to recommend it.

The suit was of two peculiar shades of blue, so arranged that patches of
light and dark distracted the eye. The upper skirt was tied so lightly
back that it was impossible to take a long step, and the under one
was so loaded with plaited frills that it "wobbled" no other word
will express it ungracefully, both fore and aft. A bunch of folds was
gathered up just below the waist behind, and a great bow rode a-top. A
small jacket of the same material was adorned with a high ruff at the
back, and laid well open over the breast, to display some lace and a
locket. Heavy fringes, bows, puffs, ruffles, and revers finished off the
dress, making one's head ache to think of the amount of work wasted,
for not a single graceful line struck the eye, and the beauty of the
material was quite lost in the profusion of ornament.

A high velvet hat, audaciously turned up in front, with a bunch of pink
roses and a sweeping plume, was cocked over one ear, and, with her curls
braided into a club at the back of her neck, Rose's head looked more
like that of a dashing young cavalier than a modest little girl's.
High-heeled boots tilted her well forward, a tiny muff pinioned her
arms, and a spotted veil, tied so closely over her face that her
eyelashes were rumpled by it, gave the last touch of absurdity to her
appearance.

"Now she looks like other girls, and as I like to see her," Mrs. Clara
was saying, with an air of great satisfaction.

"She does look like a fashionable young lady, but somehow I miss my
little Rose, for children dressed like children in my day," answered
Aunt Plenty, peering through her glasses with a troubled look, for
she could not imagine the creature before her ever sitting in her lap,
running to wait upon her, or making the house gay with a child's blithe
presence.

"Things have changed since your day, Aunt, and it takes time to get used
to new ways. But you, Jessie, surely like this costume better than the
dowdy things Rose has been wearing all summer. Now, be honest, and own
you do," said Mrs. Clara, bent on being praised for her work.

"Well, dear to be quite honest, then, I think it is frightful," answered
Mrs. Jessie, with a candour that caused revolving Rose to stop in
dismay.

"Hear, hear," cried a deep voice, and with a general start the ladies
became aware that the enemy was among them.

Rose blushed up to her hat brim, and stood, looking, as she felt, like a
fool, while Mrs. Clara hastened to explain.

"Of course, I don't expect you to like it, Alec, but I don't consider
you a judge of what is proper and becoming for a young lady. Therefore,
I have taken the liberty of providing a pretty street suit for Rose.
She need not wear it if you object, for I know we promised to let you do
what you liked with the poor dear for a year."

"It is a street costume, is it?" asked the Doctor, mildly. "Do you know,
I never should have guessed that it was meant for winter weather and
brisk locomotion. Take a turn, Rosy, and let me see all its beauties and
advantages."

Rose tried to walk off with her usual free tread, but the under-skirt
got in her way, the over-skirt was so tight she could not take a long
step, and her boots made it impossible to carry herself perfectly erect.

"I haven't got used to it yet," she said, petulantly, kicking at her
train, as she turned to toddle back again.

"Suppose a mad dog or a runaway horse was after you, could you get out
of the way without upsetting, Colonel," asked the Doctor, with a twinkle
in the eyes that were fixed on the rakish hat.

"Don't think I could, but I'll try," and Rose made a rush across the
room. Her boot-heels caught on a rug, several strings broke, her hat
tipped over her eyes, and she plunged promiscuously into a chair, where
she sat laughing so infectiously that all but Mrs. Clara joined in her
mirth.

"I should say that a walking suit in which one could not walk, and a
winter suit which exposes the throat, head, and feet to cold and damp,
was rather a failure, Clara, especially as it has no beauty to reconcile
one to its utter unfitness," said Dr. Alec, as he helped Rose undo her
veil, adding, in a low tone, "Nice thing for the eyes; you'll soon see
spots when it's off as well as when it's on, and, by and by, be a case
for an oculist."

"No beauty!" cried Mrs. Clara, warmly, "Now, that is just a man's
blindness. This is the best of silk and camel's hair, real ostrich
feathers, and an expensive ermine muff. What could be in better taste,
or more proper for a young girl?"

"I'll shew you, if Rose will go to her room and oblige me by putting on
what she finds there," answered the Doctor, with unexpected readiness.

"Alec, if it is a Bloomer, I shall protest. I've been expecting it, but
I know I cannot bear to see that pretty child sacrificed to your wild
ideas of health. Tell me it isn't a Bloomer!" and Mrs. Clara clasped her
hands imploringly.

"It is not."

"Thank Heaven!" and she resigned herself with a sigh of relief, adding
plaintively, "I did hope you'd accept my suit, for poor Rose has been
afflicted with frightful clothes long enough to spoil the taste of any
girl."

"You talk of my afflicting the child, and then make a helpless guy like
that of her!" answered the Doctor, pointing to the little fashion plate
that was scuttling out of sight as fast as it could go.

He closed the door with a shrug, but before anyone could speak, his
quick eye fell upon an object which caused him to frown, and demand in
an indignant tone,

"After all I have said, were you really going to tempt my girl with
those abominable things?"

"I thought we put them away when she wouldn't wear them," murmured Mrs.
Clara, whisking a little pair of corsets out of sight with guilty haste.
"I only brought them to try, for Rose is growing stout, and will have
no figure if it is not attended to soon," she added, with an air of calm
conviction that roused the Doctor still more, for this was one of his
especial abominations.

"Growing stout! Yes, thank Heaven, she is, and shall continue to do it,
for Nature knows how to mould a woman better than any corset-maker,
and I won't have her interfered with. My dear Clara, have you lost your
senses that you can for a moment dream of putting a growing girl into an
instrument of torture like this?" and with a sudden gesture he plucked
forth the offending corsets from under the sofa cushion, and held them
out with the expression one would wear on beholding the thumbscrews or
the rack of ancient times.

"Don't be absurd, Alec. There is no torture about it, for tight lacing
is out of fashion, and we have nice, sensible things nowadays. Everyone
wears them; even babies have stiffened waists to support their weak
little backs," began Mrs. Clara, rushing to the defence of the pet
delusion of most women.

"I know it, and so the poor little souls have weak backs all their days,
as their mothers had before them. It is vain to argue the matter, and I
won't try, but I wish to state, once for all, that if I ever see a pair
of corsets near Rose, I'll put them in the fire, and you may send the
bill to me."

As he spoke the corsets were on their way to destruction, but Mrs.
Jessie caught his arm, exclaiming merrily, "Don't burn them, for mercy
sake, Alec; they are full of whalebones, and will make a dreadful odour.
Give them to me. I'll see that they do no harm."

"Whalebones, indeed! A regular fence of them, and metal gate-posts in
front. As if our own bones were not enough, if we'd give them a
chance to do their duty," growled the Doctor, yielding up the bone
of contention with a last shake of contempt. Then his face cleared
suddenly, and he held up his finger, saying, with a smile, "Hear those
girls laugh; cramped lungs could not make hearty music like that."

Peals of laughter issued from Rose's room, and smiles involuntarily
touched the lips of those who listened to the happy sound.

"Some new prank of yours, Alec?" asked Aunt Plenty, indulgently, for she
had come to believe in most of her nephew's odd notions, because they
seemed to work so well.

"Yes, ma'am, my last, and I hope you will like it. I discovered what
Clara was at, and got my rival suit ready for to-day. I'm not going to
'afflict' Rose, but let her choose, and if I'm not entirely mistaken,
she will like my rig best. While we wait I'll explain, and then you will
appreciate the general effect better. I got hold of this little book,
and was struck with its good sense and good taste, for it suggests a
way to clothe women both healthfully and handsomely, and that is a great
point. It begins at the foundations, as you will see if you will look
at these pictures, and I should think women would rejoice at this
lightening of their burdens."

As he spoke, the Doctor laid the book before Aunt Plenty, who obediently
brought her spectacles to bear upon the illustrations, and after a long
look exclaimed, with a scandalised face,

"Mercy on us, these things are like the night-drawers Jamie wears! You
don't mean to say you want Rose to come out in this costume? It's not
proper, and I won't consent to it!"

"I do mean it, and I'm sure my sensible aunt will consent when she
understands that these well I'll call them by an Indian name, and say
pajamas are for underwear, and Rose can have as pretty frocks as she
likes outside. These two suits of flannel, each in one piece from head
to foot, with a skirt or so hung on this easily-fitting waist, will
keep the child warm without burdening her with belts, and gathers, and
buckles, and bunches round the waist, and leave free the muscles that
need plenty of room to work in. She shall never have the back-ache if I
can help it, nor the long list of ills you dear women think you cannot
escape."

"I don't consider it modest, and I'm sure Rose will be shocked at it,"
began Mrs. Clara, but stopped suddenly, as Rose appeared in the doorway,
not looking shocked a bit.

"Come on, my hygienic model, and let us see you," said her uncle, with
an approving glance, as she walked in, looking so mischievously merry,
that it was evident she enjoyed the joke.

"Well, I don't see anything remarkable. That is a neat, plain suit; the
materials are good, and it's not unbecoming, if you want her to look
like a little school-girl; but it has not a particle of style, and no
one would ever give it a second glance," said Mrs. Clara, feeling that
her last remark condemned the whole thing.

"Exactly what I want," answered the provoking Doctor, rubbing his hands
with a satisfied air. "Rosy looks now like what she is, a modest little
girl, who does not want to be stared at. I think she would get a glance
of approval, though, from people who like sense and simplicity rather
than fuss and feathers. Revolve, my Hebe, and let me refresh my eyes by
the sight of you."

There was very little to see, however, only a pretty Gabrielle dress, of
a soft warm shade of brown, coming to the tops of a trim pair of boots
with low heels. A seal-skin sack, cap, and mittens, with a glimpse of
scarlet at the throat, and the pretty curls tied up with a bright velvet
of the same colour, completed the external adornment, making her look
like a robin redbreast wintry, yet warm.

"How do you like it, Rosy?" asked the Doctor, feeling that her opinion
was more important to the success of his new idea than that of all the
aunts on the hill.

"I feel very odd and light, but I'm warm as a toast, and nothing seems
to be in my way," answered Rose, with a skip which displayed shapely
gaiters on legs that now might be as free and active as a boy's under
the modest skirts of the girl.

"You can run away from the mad dogs, and walk off at a smart pace
without tumbling on your nose, now, I fancy?"

"Yes, uncle! suppose the dog coming, I just hop over a wall so and when
I walk of a cold day, I go like this."

Entering fully into the spirit of the thing, Rose swung herself over
the high back of the sofa as easily as one of her cousins, and then
went down the long hall as if her stout boots were related to the famous
seven-leaguers.

"There! you see how it will be; dress her in that boyish way and she
will act like a boy. I do hate all these inventions of strong-minded
women!" exclaimed Mrs. Clara, as Rose came back at a run.

"Ah, but you see some of these sensible inventions come from the brain
of a fashionable modiste, who will make you more lovely, or what you
value more 'stylish' outside and comfortable within. Mrs. Van Tassel
has been to Madame Stone, and is wearing a full suit of this sort. Van
himself told me, when I asked how she was, that she had given up lying
on the sofa, and was going about in a most astonishing way, considering
her feeble health."

"You don't say so! Let me see that book a moment," and Aunt Clara
examined the new patterns with a more respectful air, for if the elegant
Mrs. Van Tassel wore these "dreadful things" it would never do to be
left behind, in spite of her prejudices.

Dr. Alec looked at Mrs. Jessie, and both smiled, for "little Mum" had
been in the secret, and enjoyed it mightily.

"I thought that would settle it," he said with a nod.

"I didn't wait for Mrs. Van to lead the way, and for once in my life I
have adopted a new fashion before Clara. My freedom suit is ordered, and
you may see me playing tag with Rose and the boys before long," answered
Mrs. Jessie, nodding back at him.

Meantime Aunt Plenty was examining Rose's costume, for the hat and sack
were off, and the girl was eagerly explaining the new under-garments.

"See, auntie, all nice scarlet flannel, and a gay little petticoat, and
long stockings, oh, so warm! Phebe and I nearly died laughing when I put
this rig on, but I like it ever so much. The dress is so comfortable,
and doesn't need any belt or sash, and I can sit without rumpling any
trimming, that's such a comfort! I like to be tidy, and so, when I wear
fussed-up things, I'm thinking of my clothes all the time, and that's
tiresome. Do say you like it. I resolved I would, just to please uncle,
for he does know more about health than anyone else, I'm sure, and I'd
wear a bag if he asked me to do it."

"I don't ask that, Rose, but I wish you'd weigh and compare the
two suits, and then choose which seems best. I leave it to your own
commonsense," answered Dr. Alec, feeling pretty sure he had won.

"Why, I take this one, of course, uncle. The other is fashionable, and
yes I must say I think it's pretty but it's very heavy, and I should
have to go round like a walking doll if I wore it. I'm much obliged to
auntie, but I'll keep this, please."

Rose spoke gently but decidedly, though there was a look of regret when
her eye fell on the other suit which Phebe had brought in; and it was
very natural to like to look as other girls did. Aunt Clara sighed;
Uncle Alec smiled, and said heartily,

"Thank you, dear; now read this book and you will understand why I ask
it of you. Then, if you like, I'll give you a new lesson; you asked for
one yesterday, and this is more necessary than French or housekeeping."

"Oh, what?" and Rose caught up the book which Mrs. Clara had thrown down
with a disgusted look.

Though Dr. Alec was forty, the boyish love of teasing was not yet dead
in him, and, being much elated at his victory, he could not resist the
temptation of shocking Mrs. Clara by suggesting dreadful possibilities,
so he answered, half in earnest, half in jest, "Physiology, Rose.
Wouldn't you like to be a little medical student, with Uncle Doctor for
teacher, and be ready to take up his practice when he has to stop? If
you agree, I'll hunt up my old skeleton to-morrow."

That was too much for Aunt Clara, and she hastily departed, with her
mind in a sad state of perturbation about Mrs. Van Tassel's new costume
and Rose's new study.



Chapter 19--Brother Bones

Rose accepted her uncle's offer, as Aunt Myra discovered two or three
days later. Coming in for an early call, and hearing voices in the
study, she opened the door, gave a cry and shut it quickly, looking a
good deal startled. The Doctor appeared in a moment, and begged to know
what the matter was.

"How can you ask when that long box looks so like a coffin I thought it
was one, and that dreadful thing stared me in the face as I opened the
door," answered Mrs. Myra, pointing to the skeleton that hung from the
chandelier cheerfully grinning at all beholders.

"This is a medical college where women are freely admitted, so walk in,
madam, and join the class if you'll do me the honour," said the Doctor,
waving her forward with his politest bow.

"Do, auntie, it's perfectly splendid," cried Rose's voice, and Rose's
blooming face was seen behind the ribs of the skeleton, smiling and
nodding in the gayest possible manner.

"What are you doing, child?" demanded Aunt Myra, dropping into a chair
and staring about her.

"Oh, I'm learning bones to-day, and I like it so much. There are twelve
ribs, you know, and the two lower ones are called floating ribs, because
they are not fastened to the breastbone. That's why they go in so easily
if you lace tight and squeeze the lungs and heart in the let me see,
what was that big word oh, I know thoracic cavity," and Rose beamed with
pride as she aired her little bit of knowledge.

"Do you think that is a good sort of thing for her to be poking over?
She is a nervous child, and I'm afraid it will be bad for her," said
Aunt Myra, watching Rose as she counted vertebrae, and waggled a
hip-joint in its socket with an inquiring expression.

"An excellent study, for she enjoys it, and I mean to teach her how
to manage her nerves so that they won't be a curse to her, as many a
woman's become through ignorance or want of thought. To make a mystery
or terror of these things is a mistake, and I mean Rose shall understand
and respect her body so well that she won't dare to trifle with it as
most women do."

"And she really likes it?"

"Very much, auntie! It's all so wonderful, and so nicely planned, you
can hardly believe what you see. Just think, there are 600,000,000 air
cells in one pair of lungs, and 2,000 pores to a square inch of surface;
so you see what quantities of air we must have, and what care we should
take of our skin so all the little doors will open and shut right. And
brains, auntie, you've no idea how curious they are; I haven't got to
them yet, but I long to, and uncle is going to show me a manikin that
you can take to pieces. Just think how nice it will be to see all the
organs in their places; I only wish they could be made to work as ours
do."

It was funny to see Aunt Myra's face as Rose stood before her talking
rapidly with one hand laid in the friendliest manner on the skeleton's
shoulder. Every word both the Doctor and Rose uttered hit the good lady
in her weakest spot, and as she looked and listened a long array of
bottles and pill-boxes rose up before her, reproaching her with the
"ignorance and want of thought" that made her what she was, a nervous,
dyspeptic, unhappy old woman.

"Well, I don't know but you may be right, Alec, only I wouldn't carry
it too far. Women don't need much of this sort of knowledge, and are not
fit for it. I couldn't bear to touch that ugly thing, and it gives me
the creeps to hear about 'organs,'" said Aunt Myra, with a sigh and her
hand on her side.

"Wouldn't it be a comfort to know that your liver was on the right side,
auntie, and not on the left!" asked Rose with a naughty laugh in her
eyes, for she had lately learnt that Aunt Myra's liver complaint was not
in the proper place.

"It's a dying world, child, and it don't much matter where the pain
is, for sooner or later we all drop off and are seen no more," was Aunt
Myra's cheerful reply.

"Well, I intend to know what kills me if I can, and meantime, I'm going
to enjoy myself in spite of a dying world. I wish you'd do so too, and
come and study with uncle, it would do you good, I'm sure," and Rose
went back to counting vertebrae with such a happy face, that Aunt Myra
had not the heart to say a word to dampen her ardour.

"Perhaps it's as well to let her do what she likes the little while
she is with us. But pray be careful of her, Alec, and not allow her to
overwork," she whispered as she went out.

"That's exactly what I'm trying to do, ma'am, and rather a hard job
I find it," he added, as he shut the door, for the dear aunts were
dreadfully in his way sometimes.

Half an hour later came another interruption in the shape of Mac, who
announced his arrival by the brief but elegant remark,

"Hullo! what new game is this?"

Rose explained, Mac gave a long whistle of surprise, and then took a
promenade round the skeleton, observing gravely,

"Brother Bones looks very jolly, but I can't say much for his beauty."

"You mustn't make fun of him, for he's a good old fellow, and you'd be
just as ugly if your flesh was off," said Rose, defending her new friend
with warmth.

"I dare say, so I'll keep my flesh on, thank you. You are so busy you
can't read to a fellow, I suppose?" asked Mac, whose eyes were better,
but still too weak for books.

"Don't you want to come and join my class? Uncle explains it all to us,
and you can take a look at the plates as they come along. We'll give
up bones today and have eyes instead; that will be more interesting to
you," added Rose, seeing no ardent thirst for physiological information
in his face.

"Rose, we must not fly about from one thing to another in this way,"
began Dr. Alec, but she whispered quickly, with a nod towards Mac, whose
goggles were turned wistfully in the direction of the forbidden books,

"He's blue to-day, and we must amuse him; give a little lecture on eyes,
and it will do him good. No matter about me, uncle."

"Very well; the class will please be seated," and the Doctor gave a
sounding rap on the table.

"Come, sit by me, dear, then we can both see the pictures; and if your
head gets tired you can lie down," said Rose, generously opening her
little college to a brother, and kindly providing for the weaknesses
that all humanity is subject to.

Side by side they sat and listened to a very simple explanation of the
mechanism of the eye, finding it as wonderful as a fairy tale, for fine
plates illustrated it, and a very willing teacher did his best to make
the lesson pleasant.

"Jove! if I'd known what mischief I was doing to that mighty delicate
machine of mine, you wouldn't have caught me reading by firelight,
or studying with a glare of sunshine on my book," said Mac, peering
solemnly at a magnified eye-ball; then, pushing it away, he added
indignantly, "Why isn't a fellow taught all about his works, and how
to manage 'em, and not left to go blundering into all sorts of worries?
Telling him after he's down isn't much use, for then he's found it out
himself and won't thank you."

"Ah, Mac, that's just what I keep lecturing about, and people won't
listen. You lads need that sort of knowledge so much, and fathers and
mothers ought to be able to give it to you. Few of them are able, and
so we all go blundering, as you say. Less Greek and Latin and more
knowledge of the laws of health for my boys, if I had them. Mathematics
are all very well, but morals are better, and I wish, how I wish that I
could help teachers and parents to feel it as they ought."

"Some do; Aunt Jessie and her boys have capital talks, and I wish we
could; but mother's so busy with her housekeeping, and father with his
business, there never seems to be any time for that sort of thing; even
if there was, it don't seem as if it would be easy to talk to them,
because we've never got into the way of it, you know."

Poor Mac was right there, and expressed a want that many a boy and girl
feels. Fathers and mothers are too absorbed in business and housekeeping
to study their children, and cherish that sweet and natural confidence
which is a child's surest safeguard, and a parent's subtlest power. So
the young hearts hide trouble or temptation till the harm is done, and
mutual regret comes too late. Happy the boys and girls who tell all
things freely to father or mother, sure of pity, help, and pardon; and
thrice happy the parents who, out of their own experience, and by
their own virtues, can teach and uplift the souls for which they are
responsible.

This longing stirred in the hearts of Rose and Mac, and by a natural
impulse both turned to Dr. Alec, for in this queer world of ours,
fatherly and motherly hearts often beat warm and wise in the breasts
of bachelor uncles and maiden aunts; and it is my private opinion that
these worthy creatures are a beautiful provision of nature for the
cherishing of other people's children. They certainly get great comfort
out of it, and receive much innocent affection that otherwise would be
lost.

Dr. Alec was one of these, and his big heart had room for every one of
the eight cousins, especially orphaned Rose and afflicted Mac; so, when
the boy uttered that unconscious reproach to his parents, and Rose added
with a sigh, "It must be beautiful to have a mother!" the good Doctor
yearned over them, and, shutting his book with a decided slam, said in
that cordial voice of his,

"Now, look here, children, you just come and tell me all your worries,
and with God's help, I'll settle them for you. That is what I'm here
for, I believe, and it will be a great happiness to me if you can trust
me."

"We can, uncle, and we will!" both answered, with a heartiness that
gratified him much.

"Good! now school is dismissed, and I advise you to go and refresh your
600,000,000 air cells by a brisk run in the garden. Come again whenever
you like, Mac, and we'll teach you all we can about your 'works,' as you
call them, so you can keep them running smoothly."

"We'll come, sir, much obliged," and the class in physiology went out to
walk.

Mac did come again, glad to find something he could study in spite of
his weak eyes, and learned much that was of more value than anything his
school had ever taught him.

Of course, the other lads made great fun of the whole thing, and
plagued Dr. Alec's students half out of their lives. But they kept
on persistently, and one day something happened which made the other
fellows behave themselves for ever after.

It was a holiday, and Rose up in her room thought she heard the voices
of her cousins, so she ran down to welcome them, but found no one there.

"Never mind, they will be here soon, and then we'll have a frolic," she
said to herself, and thinking she had been mistaken she went into the
study to wait. She was lounging over the table looking at a map when an
odd noise caught her ear. A gentle tapping somewhere, and following the
sound it seemed to come from the inside of the long case in which the
skeleton lived when not professionally engaged. This case stood upright
in a niche between two book-cases at the back of the room, a darkish
corner, where Brother Bones, as the boys would call him, was out of the
way.

As Rose stood looking in that direction, and wondering if a rat had got
shut in, the door of the case swung slowly open, and with a great start
she saw a bony arm lifted, and a bony finger beckon to her. For a minute
she was frightened, and ran to the study door with a fluttering heart,
but just as she touched the handle a queer, stifled sort of giggle made
her stop short and turn red with anger. She paused an instant to collect
herself, and then went softly toward the bony beckoner. A nearer look
revealed black threads tied to the arm and fingers, the ends of threads
disappearing through holes bored in the back of the case. Peeping into
the dark recess, she also caught sight of the tip of an elbow covered
with a rough gray cloth which she knew very well.

Quick as a flash she understood the joke, her fear vanished, and with
a wicked smile, she whipped out her scissors, cut the threads, and
the bony arm dropped with a rattle. Before she could say, "Come out,
Charlie, and let my skeleton alone," a sudden irruption of boys, all in
a high state of tickle, proclaimed to the hidden rogue that his joke was
a failure.

"I told him not to do it, because it might give you a start," explained
Archie, emerging from the closet.

"I had a smelling bottle all ready if she fainted away," added Steve,
popping up from behind the great chair.

"It's too bad of you not to squawk and run; we depended on it, it's such
fun to howl after you," said Will and Geordie, rolling out from under
the sofa in a promiscuous heap.

"You are getting altogether too strong-minded, Rose; most girls would
have been in a jolly twitter to see this old fellow waggling his finger
at them," complained Charlie, squeezing out from his tight quarters,
dusty and disgusted.

"I'm used to your pranks now, so I'm always on the watch and prepared.
But I won't have Brother Bones made fun of. I know uncle wouldn't like
it, so please don't," began Rose just as Dr. Alec came in, and, seeing
the state of the case at a glance, he said quietly,

"Hear how I got that skeleton, and then I'm sure you will treat it with
respect."

The boys settled down at once on any article of furniture that was
nearest and listened dutifully.

"Years ago, when I was in the hospital, a poor fellow was brought there
with a rare and very painful disease. There was no hope for him, but we
did our best, and he was so grateful that when he died he left us his
body that we might discover the mysteries of his complaint, and so be
able to help others afflicted in the same way. It did do good, and his
brave patience made us remember him long after he was gone. He thought
I had been kind to him, and said to a fellow-student of mine, 'Tell the
Doctor I lave him me bones, for I've nothing else in the wide world, and
I'll nos be wanting 'em at all, at all, when the great pain hat kilt me
entirely.' So that is how they came to be mine, and why I've kept them
carefully, for, though only a poor, ignorant fellow, Mike Nolan did what
he could to help others, and prove his gratitude to those who tried to
help him."

As Dr. Alec paused, Archie closed the door of the case as respectfully
as if the mummy of an Egyptian king was inside; Will and Geordie looked
solemnly at one another, evidently much impressed, and Charlie pensively
remarked from the coal-hod where he sat,

"I've often heard of a skeleton in the house, but I think few people
have one as useful and as interesting as ours."



Chapter 20--Under The Mistletoe

Rose made Phebe promise that she would bring her stocking into the
"Bower," as she called her pretty room, on Christmas morning, because
that first delicious rummage loses half its charm if two little
night-caps at least do not meet over the treasures, and two happy voices
Oh and Ah together.

So when Rose opened her eyes that day they fell upon faithful Phebe,
rolled up in a shawl, sitting on the rug before a blazing fire, with her
untouched stocking laid beside her.

"Merry Christmas!" cried the little mistress smiling gaily.

"Merry Christmas!" answered the little maid, so heartily that it did one
good to hear her.

"Bring the stockings right away, Phebe, and let's see what we've got,"
said Rose, sitting up among the pillows, and looking as eager as a
child.

A pair of long knobby hose were laid out upon the coverlet, and their
contents examined with delight, though each knew every blessed thing
that had been put into the other's stocking.

Never mind what they were; it is evident that they were quite
satisfactory, for as Rose leaned back, she said, with a luxurious sigh
of satisfaction, "Now, I believe I've got everything in the world that I
want," and Phebe answered, smiling over a lapful of treasures, "This is
the most splendid Christmas I ever had since I was born." Then she added
with an important air,

"Do wish for something else, because I happen to know of two more
presents outside the door this minute."

"Oh, me, what richness!" cried Rose, much excited. "I used to wish for
a pair of glass slippers like Cinderella's, but as I can't have them, I
really don't know what to ask for."

Phebe clapped her hands as she skipped off the bed and ran to the door,
saying merrily, "One of them is for your feet, anyway. I don't know what
you'll say to the other, but I think it's elegant."

So did Rose, when a shining pair of skates and a fine sled appeared.

"Uncle sent those; I know he did; and, now I see them, I remember that
I did want to skate and coast. Isn't it a beauty? See! they fit nicely,"
and, sitting on the new sled, Rose tried a skate on her little bare
foot, while Phebe stood by admiring the pretty tableau.

"Now we must hurry and get dressed, for there is a deal to do to-day,
and I want to get through in time to try my sled before dinner."

"Gracious me, and I ought to be dusting my parlors this blessed minute!"
and mistress and maid separated with such happy faces that anyone would
have known what day it was without being told.

"Birnam Wood has come to Dunsinane, Rosy," said Dr. Alec, as he left the
breakfast table to open the door for a procession of holly, hemlock, and
cedar boughs that came marching up the steps.

Snowballs and "Merry Christmases!" flew about pretty briskly for several
minutes; then all fell to work trimming the old house, for the family
always dined together there on that day.

"I rode miles and mileses, as Ben says, to get this fine bit, and I'm
going to hang it there as the last touch to the rig-a-madooning," said
Charlie, as he fastened a dull green branch to the chandelier in the
front parlor.

"It isn't very pretty," said Rose, who was trimming the chimney-piece
with glossy holly sprays.

"Never mind that, it's mistletoe, and anyone who stands under it will
get kissed whether they like it or not. Now's your time, ladies,"
answered the saucy Prince, keeping his place and looking sentimentally
at the girls, who retired precipitately from the dangerous spot.

"You won't catch me," said Rose, with great dignity.

"See if I don't!"

"I've got my eye on Phebe," observed Will, in a patronising tone that
made them all laugh.

"Bless the dear; I shan't mind it a bit," answered Phebe, with such a
maternal air that Will's budding gallantry was chilled to death.

"Oh, the mistletoe bough," sang Rose.

"Oh, the mistletoe bough!" echoed all the boys, and the teasing ended in
the plaintive ballad they all liked so well.

There was plenty of time to try the new skates before dinner, and then
Rose took her first lesson on the little bay, which seemed to have
frozen over for that express purpose. She found tumbling down and
getting up again warm work for a time, but with six boys to teach her,
she managed at last to stand alone; and, satisfied with that success,
she refreshed herself with a dozen grand coasts on the Amazon, as her
sled was called.

"Ah, that fatal colour! it breaks my heart to see it," croaked Aunt
Myra, as Rose came down a little late, with cheeks almost as ruddy
as the holly berries on the wall, and every curl as smooth as Phebe's
careful hands could make it.

"I'm glad to see that Alec allows the poor child to make herself pretty
in spite of his absurd notions," added Aunt Clara, taking infinite
satisfaction in the fact that Rose's blue silk dress had three frills on
it.

"She's a very intelligent child, and has a nice little manner of her
own," observed Aunt Jane, with unusual affability; for Rose had just
handed Mac a screen to guard his eyes from the brilliant fire.

"If I had a daughter like that to show my Jem when he gets home, I
should be a very proud and happy woman," thought Aunt Jessie, and then
reproached herself for not being perfectly satisfied with her four brave
lads.

Aunt Plenty was too absorbed in the dinner to have an eye for anything
else; if she had not been, she would have seen what an effect her new
cap produced upon the boys. The good lady owned that she did "love a
dressy cap," and on this occasion her head gear was magnificent; for
the towering structure of lace was adorned with buff ribbons to such an
extent that it looked as if a flock of yellow butterflies had settled on
her dear old head. When she trotted about the rooms the ruches quivered,
the little bows all stood erect, and the streamers waved in the breeze
so comically that it was absolutely necessary for Archie to smother the
Brats in the curtains till they had had their first laugh out.

Uncle Mac had brought Fun See to dinner, and it was a mercy he did,
for the elder lads found a vent for their merriment in joking the young
Chinaman on his improved appearance. He was in American costume now,
with a cropped head, and spoke remarkably good English after six months
at school; but, for all that, his yellow face and beady eyes made a
curious contrast to the blonde Campbells all about him. Will called him
the "Typhoon," meaning Tycoon, and the name stuck to him to his great
disgust.

Aunt Peace was brought down and set in the chair of state at table, for
she never failed to join the family on this day, and sat smiling at them
all, "like an embodiment of Peace on earth," Uncle Alec said, as he took
his place beside her, while Uncle Mac supported Aunt Plenty at the other
end.

"I ate hardly any breakfast, and I've done everything I know to make
myself extra hungry, but I really don't think I can eat straight
through, unless I burst my buttons off," whispered Geordie to Will, as
he surveyed the bounteous stores before him with a hopeless sigh.

"A fellow never knows what he can do till he tries," answered Will,
attacking his heaped-up plate with an evident intention of doing his
duty like a man.

Everybody knows what a Christmas dinner is, so we need waste no words in
describing this one, but hasten at once to tell what happened at the
end of it. The end, by the way, was so long in coming that the gas was
lighted before dessert was over, for a snow flurry had come on and the
wintry daylight faded fast. But that only made it all the jollier in the
warm, bright rooms, full of happy souls. Everyone was very merry, but
Archie seemed particularly uplifted so much so, that Charlie confided to
Rose that he was afraid the Chief had been at the decanters.

Rose indignantly denied the insinuation, for when healths were drunk
in the good old-fashioned way to suit the elders, she had observed that
Aunt Jessie's boys filled their glasses with water, and had done the
same herself in spite of the Prince's jokes about "the rosy."

But Archie certainly was unusually excited, and when someone remembered
that it was the anniversary of Uncle Jem's wedding, and wished he was
there to make a speech, his son electrified the family by trying to do
it for him. It was rather incoherent and flowery, as maiden speeches are
apt to be, but the end was considered superb; for, turning to his mother
with a queer little choke in his voice, he said that she "deserved to be
blessed with peace and plenty, to be crowned with roses and lads'-love,
and to receive the cargo of happiness sailing home to her in spite of
wind or tide to add another Jem to the family jewels."

That allusion to the Captain, now on his return trip, made Mrs. Jessie
sob in her napkin, and set the boys cheering. Then, as if that was not
sensation enough, Archie suddenly dashed out of the room, as if he had
lost his wits.

"Too bashful to stay and be praised," began Charlie, excusing the
peculiarities of his chief as in duty bound.

"Phebe beckoned to him; I saw her," cried Rose, staring hard at the
door.

"Is it more presents coming?" asked Jamie, just as his brother
re-appeared, looking more excited than ever.

"Yes; a present for mother, and here it is!" roared Archie, flinging
wide the door to let in a tall man, who cried out,

"Where's my little woman? The first kiss for her, then the rest may come
on as fast as they like."

Before the words were out of his mouth, Mrs. Jessie was half-hidden
under his rough great-coat, and four boys were prancing about him
clamouring for their turn.

Of course, there was a joyful tumult for a time, during which Rose
slipped into the window recess and watched what went on, as if it were
a chapter in a Christmas story. It was good to see bluff Uncle Jem look
proudly at his tall son, and fondly hug the little ones. It was better
still to see him shake his brothers' hands as if he would never leave
off, and kiss all the sisters in a way that made even solemn Aunt Myra
brighten up for a minute. But it was best of all to see him finally
established in grandfather's chair, with his "little woman" beside him,
his three youngest boys in his lap, and Archie hovering over him like a
large-sized cherub. That really was, as Charlie said, "A landscape to do
one's heart good."

"All hearty and all here, thank God!" said Captain Jem in the first
pause that came, as he looked about him with a grateful face.

"All but Rose," answered loyal little Jamie, remembering the absent.

"Faith, I forgot the child! Where is George's little girl?" asked the
Captain, who had not seen her since she was a baby.

"You'd better say Alec's great girl," said Uncle Mac, who professed to
be madly jealous of his brother.

"Here I am, sir," and Rose appeared from behind the curtains, looking as
if she had rather have stayed there.

"Saint George Germain, how the mite has grown!" cried Captain Jem, as he
tumbled the boys out of his lap, and rose to greet the tall girl, like
a gentleman as he was. But, somehow, when he shook her hand it looked so
small in his big one, and her face reminded him so strongly of his dead
brother, that he was not satisfied with so cold a welcome, and with
a sudden softening of the keen eyes he took her up in his arms,
whispering, with a rough cheek against her smooth one,

"God bless you, child! forgive me if I forgot you for a minute, and be
sure that not one of your kinsfolk is happier to see you here than Uncle
Jem."

That made it all right; and when he set her down, Rose's face was
so bright it was evident that some spell had been used to banish the
feeling of neglect that had kept her moping behind the curtain so long.

That everyone sat round and heard all about the voyage home how the
Captain had set his heart on getting there in time to keep Christmas;
how everything had conspired to thwart his plan; and how, at the very
last minute, he had managed to do it, and had sent a telegram to Archie,
bidding him keep the secret, and be ready for his father at any moment,
for the ship got into another port, and he might be late.

Then Archie told how that telegram had burnt in his pocket all
dinner-time; how he had to take Phebe into his confidence, and how
clever she was to keep the Captain back till the speech was over and he
could come in with effect.

The elders would have sat and talked all the evening, but the young
folks were bent on having their usual Christmas frolic; so, after an
hour of pleasant chat, they began to get restless, and having consulted
together in dumb show, they devised a way to very effectually break up
the family council.

Steve vanished, and, sooner than the boys imagined Dandy could get
himself up, the skirl of the bag-pipe was heard in the hall, and the
bonny piper came to lead Clan Campbell to the revel.

"Draw it mild, Stevie, my man; ye play unco weel, but ye mak a most
infernal din," cried Uncle Jem, with his hands over his ears, for this
accomplishment was new to him, and "took him all aback," as he expressed
it.

So Steve droned out a Highland reel as softly as he could, and the boys
danced it to a circle of admiring relations. Captain Jem was a true
sailor, however, and could not stand idle while anything lively was
going on; so, when the piper's breath gave out, he cut a splendid
pigeon-wing into the middle of the hall, saying, "Who can dance a Fore
and After?" and, waiting for no reply, began to whistle the air so
invitingly that Mrs Jessie "set" to him laughing like a girl; Rose and
Charlie took their places behind, and away went the four with a spirit
and skill that inspired all the rest to "cut in" as fast as they could.

That was a grand beginning, and they had many another dance before
anyone would own they were tired. Even Fun See distinguished himself
with Aunt Plenty, whom he greatly admired as the stoutest lady in the
company; plumpness being considered a beauty in his country. The merry
old soul professed herself immensely flattered by his admiration, and
the boys declared she "set her cap at him," else he would never have
dared to catch her under the mistletoe, and, rising on the tips of his
own toes, gallantly salute her fat cheek.

How they all laughed at her astonishment, and how Fun's little black
eyes twinkled over this exploit! Charlie put him up to it, and Charlie
was so bent on catching Rose, that he laid all sorts of pitfalls for
her, and bribed the other lads to help him. But Rose was wide-awake,
and escaped all his snares, professing great contempt for such foolish
customs. Poor Phebe did not fare so well, and Archie was the only one
who took a base advantage of her as she stood innocently offering tea to
Aunt Myra, whom she happened to meet just under the fatal bough. If
his father's arrival had not rather upset him, I doubt if the dignified
Chief would have done it, for he apologized at once in the handsomest
manner, and caught the tray that nearly dropped from Phebe's hands.

Jamie boldly invited all the ladies to come and salute him; and as for
Uncle Jem, he behaved as if the entire room was a grove of mistletoe.
Uncle Alec slyly laid a bit of it on Aunt Peace's cap, and then softly
kissed her; which little joke seemed to please her very much, for she
liked to have part in all the home pastimes, and Alec was her favourite
nephew.

Charlie alone failed to catch his shy bird, and the oftener she escaped
the more determined he was to ensnare her. When every other wile had
been tried in vain, he got Archie to propose a game with forfeits.

"I understand that dodge," thought Rose, and was on her guard so
carefully that not one among the pile soon collected belonged to her.

"Now let us redeem them and play something else," said Will, quite
unconscious of the deeply-laid plots all about him.

"One more round and then we will," answered the Prince, who had now
baited his trap anew.

Just as the question came to Rose, Jamie's voice was heard in the hall,
crying distressfully, "Oh, come quick, quick!" Rose started up, missed
the question, and was greeted with a general cry of "Forfeit! forfeit!"
in which the little traitor came to join.

"Now I've got her," thought the young rascal, exulting in his fun-loving
soul.

"Now I'm lost," thought Rose, as she gave up her pin-cushion with a
sternly defiant look that would have daunted anyone but the reckless
Prince. In fact, it made even him think twice, and resolve to "let Rose
off easy,'' she had been so clever.

"Here's a very pretty pawn, and what shall be done to redeem it?" asked
Steve, holding the pin-cushion over Charlie's head, for he had insisted
on being judge, and kept that for the last.

"Fine or superfine?"

"Super."

"Hum, well, she shall take old Mac under the mistletoe, and kiss him
prettily. Won't he be mad, though?" and this bad boy chuckled over the
discomfort he had caused two harmless beings.

There was an impressive pause among the young folks in their corner, for
they all knew that Mac would "be mad," since he hated nonsense of this
sort, and had gone to talk with the elders when the game began. At
this moment he was standing before the fire, listening to a discussion
between his uncles and his father, looking as wise as a young owl, and
blissfully unconscious of the plots against him.

Charlie expected that Rose would say, "I won't!" therefore he was rather
astonished, not to say gratified, when, after a look at the victim,
she laughed suddenly, and, going up to the group of gentlemen, drew her
uncle Mac under the mistletoe and surprised him with a hearty kiss.

"Thank you, my dear," said the innocent gentleman, looking much pleased
at the unexpected honour.

"Oh, come; that's not fair," began Charlie. But Rose cut him short by
saying, as she made him a fine courtesy,

"You said 'Old Mac,' and though it was very disrespectful, I did it.
That was your last chance, sir, and you've lost it."

He certainly had, for, as he spoke, Rose pulled down the mistletoe and
threw it into the fire, while the boys jeered at the crestfallen Prince,
and exalted quick-witted Rose to the skies.

"What's the joke?" asked young Mac, waked out of a brown study by the
laughter, in which the elders joined.

But there was a regular shout when, the matter having been explained to
him, Mac took a meditative stare at Rose through his goggles, and said
in a philosophical tone, "Well, I don't think I should have minded much
if she had done it."

That tickled the lads immensely, and nothing but the appearance of a
slight refection would have induced them to stop chaffing the poor Worm,
who could not see anything funny in the beautiful resignation he had
shown on this trying occasion.

Soon after this, the discovery of Jamie curled up in the sofa corner, as
sound asleep as a dormouse, suggested the propriety of going home, and a
general move was made.

They were all standing about the hall lingering over the good-nights,
when the sound of a voice softly singing "Sweet Home," made them pause
and listen. It was Phebe, poor little Phebe, who never had a home, never
knew the love of father or mother, brother or sister; who stood all
alone in the wide world, yet was not sad nor afraid, but took her bits
of happiness gratefully, and sung over her work without a thought of
discontent.

I fancy the happy family standing there together remembered this and
felt the beauty of it, for when the solitary voice came to the burden of
its song, other voices took it up and finished it so sweetly, that the
old house seemed to echo the word "Home" in the ears of both the orphan
girls, who had just spent their first Christmas under its hospitable
roof.



Chapter 21--A Scare

"Brother Alec, you surely don't mean to allow that child to go out such
a bitter cold day as this," said Mrs. Myra, looking into the study,
where the Doctor sat reading his paper, one February morning.

"Why not? If a delicate invalid like yourself can bear it, surely
my hearty girl can, especially as she is dressed for cold weather,"
answered Dr. Alec with provoking confidence.

"But you have no idea how sharp the wind is. I am chilled to the very
marrow of my bones," answered Aunt Myra, chafing the end of her purple
nose with her sombre glove.

"I don't doubt it, ma'am, if you will wear crape and silk instead of fur
and flannel. Rosy goes out in all weathers, and will be none the worse
for an hour's brisk skating."

"Well, I warn you that you are trifling with the child's health, and
depending too much on the seeming improvement she has made this year.
She is a delicate creature for all that, and will drop away suddenly at
the first serious attack, as her poor mother did," croaked Aunt Myra,
with a despondent wag of the big bonnet.

"I'll risk it," answered Dr. Alec, knitting his brows, as he always did
when any allusion was made to that other Rose.

"Mark my words, you will repent it," and with that awful prophecy, Aunt
Myra departed like a black shadow.

Now it must be confessed that among the Doctor's failings and he had his
share was a very masculine dislike of advice which was thrust upon him
unasked. He always listened with respect to the great-aunts, and often
consulted Mrs. Jessie; but the other three ladies tried his patience
sorely, by constant warnings, complaints and counsels. Aunt Myra was an
especial trial, and he always turned contrary the moment she began
to talk. He could not help it, and often laughed about it with comic
frankness. Here now was a sample of it, for he had just been thinking
that Rose had better defer her run till the wind went down and the sun
was warmer. But Aunt Myra spoke, and he could not resist the temptation
to make light of her advice, and let Rose brave the cold. He had no
fear of its harming her, for she went out every day, and it was a great
satisfaction to him to see her run down the avenue a minute afterward,
with her skates on her arm, looking like a rosy-faced Esquimaux in her
seal-skin suit, as she smiled at Aunt Myra stalking along as solemnly as
a crow.

"I hope the child won't stay out long, for this wind is enough to chill
the marrow in younger bones than Myra's," thought Dr. Alec, half an
hour later, as he drove toward the city to see the few patients he had
consented to take for old acquaintance' sake.

The thought returned several times that morning, for it was truly a
bitter day, and, in spite of his bear-skin coat, the Doctor shivered.
But he had great faith in Rose's good sense, and it never occurred
to him that she was making a little Casabianca of herself, with the
difference of freezing instead of burning at her post.

You see, Mac had made an appointment to meet her at a certain spot, and
have a grand skating bout as soon as the few lessons he was allowed were
over. She had promised to wait for him, and did so with a faithfulness
that cost her dear, because Mac forgot his appointment when the lessons
were done, and became absorbed in a chemical experiment, till a general
combustion of gases drove him out of his laboratory. Then he suddenly
remembered Rose, and would gladly have hurried away to her, but his
mother forbade his going out, for the sharp wind would hurt his eyes.

"She will wait and wait, mother, for she always keeps her word, and
I told her to hold on till I came," explained Mac, with visions of a
shivering little figure watching on the windy hill-top.

"Of course, your uncle won't let her go out such a day as this. If he
does, she will have the sense to come here for you, or to go home again
when you don't appear," said Aunt Jane, returning to her "Watts on the
Mind."

"I wish Steve would just cut up and see if she's there, since I can't
go," began Mac, anxiously.

"Steve won't stir a peg, thank you. He's got his own toes to thaw
out, and wants his dinner," answered Dandy, just in from school, and
wrestling impatiently with his boots.

So Mac resigned himself, and Rose waited dutifully till dinner-time
assured her that her waiting was in vain. She had done her best to keep
warm, had skated till she was tired and hot, then stood watching others
till she was chilled; tried to get up a glow again by trotting up and
down the road, but failed to do so, and finally cuddled disconsolately
under a pine-tree to wait and watch. When she at length started for
home, she was benumbed with cold, and could hardly make her way against
the wind that buffeted the frost-bitten rose most unmercifully.

Dr. Alec was basking in the warmth of the study fire, after his drive,
when the sound of a stifled sob made him hurry to the door and look
anxiously into the hall. Rose lay in a shivering bunch near the
register, with her things half off, wringing her hands, and trying
not to cry with the pain returning warmth brought to her half-frozen
fingers.

"My darling, what is it?" and Uncle Alec had her in his arms in a
minute.

"Mac didn't come I can't get warm the fire makes me ache!" and with a
long shiver Rose burst out crying, while her teeth chattered, and her
poor little nose was so blue, it made one's heart ache to see it.

In less time than it takes to tell it, Dr. Alec had her on the sofa
rolled up in the bear-skin coat, with Phebe rubbing her cold feet while
he rubbed the aching hands, and Aunt Plenty made a comfortable hot
drink, and Aunt Peace sent down her own foot-warmer and embroidered
blanket "for the dear."

Full of remorseful tenderness, Uncle Alec worked over his new patient
till she declared she was all right again. He would not let her get up
to dinner, but fed her himself, and then forgot his own while he sat
watching her fall into a drowse, for Aunt Plenty's cordial made her
sleepy.

She lay so several hours for the drowse deepened into a heavy sleep, and
Uncle Alec, still at his post, saw with growing anxiety that a feverish
colour began to burn in her cheeks, that her breathing was quick and
uneven, and now and then she gave a little moan, as if in pain. Suddenly
she woke up with a start, and seeing Aunt Plenty bending over her, put
out her arms like a sick child, saying wearily,

"Please, could I go to bed?"

"The best place for you, deary. Take her right up, Alec; I've got the
hot water ready, and after a nice bath, she shall have a cup of my sage
tea, and be rolled up in blankets to sleep off her cold," answered the
old lady, cheerily, as she bustled away to give orders.

"Are you in pain, darling?" asked Uncle Alec, as he carried her up.

"My side aches when I breathe, and I feel stiff and queer; but it isn't
bad, so don't be troubled, uncle," whispered Rose, with a little hot
hand against his cheek.

But the poor doctor did look troubled, and had cause to do so, for
just then Rose tried to laugh at Dolly charging into the room with a
warming-pan, but could not, for the sharp pain took her breath away and
made her cry out.

"Pleurisy," sighed Aunt Plenty, from the depths of the bath-tub.

"Pewmonia!" groaned Dolly, burrowing among the bedclothes with the
long-handled pan, as if bent on fishing up that treacherous disease.

"Oh, is it bad?" asked Phebe, nearly dropping a pail of hot water in her
dismay, for she knew nothing of sickness, and Dolly's suggestion had a
peculiarly dreadful sound to her.

"Hush!" ordered the Doctor, in a tone that silenced all further
predictions, and made everyone work with a will.

"Make her as comfortable as you can, and when she is in her little bed
I'll come and say good-night," he added, when the bath was ready and the
blankets browning nicely before the fire.

Then he went away to talk quite cheerfully to Aunt Peace about its being
"only a chill"; after which he tramped up and down the hall, pulling his
beard and knitting his brows, sure signs of great inward perturbation.

"I thought it would be too good luck to get through the year without a
downfall. Confound my perversity! Why couldn't I take Myra's advice and
keep Rose at home. It's not fair that the poor child should suffer
for my sinful over-confidence. She shall not suffer for it! Pneumonia,
indeed! I defy it," and he shook his fist in the ugly face of an Indian
idol that happened to be before him, as if that particularly hideous god
had some spite against his own little goddess.

In spite of his defiance his heart sunk when he saw Rose again, for
the pain was worse, and the bath and blankets, the warming-pan and
piping-hot sage tea, were all in vain. For several hours there was no
rest for the poor child, and all manner of gloomy forebodings haunted
the minds of those who hovered about her with faces full of the
tenderest anxiety.

In the midst of the worst paroxysm Charlie came to leave a message from
his mother, and was met by Phebe coming despondently downstairs with a
mustard plaster that had brought no relief.

"What the dickens is the matter? You look as dismal as a tombstone," he
said, as she held up her hand to stop his lively whistling.

"Miss Rose is dreadful sick."

"The deuce she is!"

"Don't swear, Mr. Charlie; she really is, and it's Mr. Mac's fault," and
Phebe told the sad tale in a few sharp words, for she felt at war with
the entire race of boys at that moment.

"I'll give it to him, make your mind easy about that," said Charlie,
with an ominous doubling up of his fist. "But Rose isn't dangerously
ill, is she?" he added anxiously, as Aunt Plenty was seen to trot across
the upper hall, shaking a bottle violently as she went.

"Oh, but she is though. The Doctor don't say much, but he don't call it
a 'chill' any more. It's 'pleurisy' now, and I'm so afraid it will be
pewmonia to-morrow," answered Phebe, with a despairing glance at the
plaster.

Charlie exploded into a stifled laugh at the new pronunciation of
pneumonia, to Phebe's great indignation.

"How can you have the heart to do it, and she in such horrid pain? Hark
to that, and then laugh if you darst," she said with a tragic gesture,
and her black eyes full of fire.

Charlie listened and heard little moans that went to his heart and made
his face as sober as Phebe's. "O uncle, please stop the pain, and let me
rest a minute! Don't tell the boys I wasn't brave. I try to bear it, but
it's so sharp I can't help crying."

Neither could Charlie, when he heard the broken voice say that; but,
boy-like, he wouldn't own it, and said pettishly, as he rubbed his
sleeve across his eyes,

"Don't hold that confounded thing right under my nose; the mustard makes
my eyes smart."

"Don't see how it can, when it hasn't any more strength in it than meal.
The Doctor said so, and I'm going to get some better," began Phebe,
not a bit ashamed of the great tears that were bedewing the condemned
plaster.

"I'll go!" and Charlie was off like a shot, glad of an excuse to get out
of sight for a few minutes.

When he came back all inconvenient emotion had been disposed of, and,
having delivered a box of the hottest mustard procurable for money, he
departed to "blow up" Mac, that being his next duty in his opinion. He
did it so energetically and thoroughly that the poor Worm was cast into
the depths of remorseful despair, and went to bed that evening feeling
that he was an outcast from among men, and bore the mark of Cain upon
his brow.

Thanks to the skill of the Doctor, and the devotion of his helpers, Rose
grew easier about midnight, and all hoped that the worst was over. Phebe
was making tea by the study fire, for the Doctor had forgotten to eat
and drink since Rose was ill, and Aunt Plenty insisted on his having
a "good cordial dish of tea" after his exertions. A tap on the window
startled Phebe, and, looking up, she saw a face peering in. She was
not afraid, for a second look showed her that it was neither ghost nor
burglar, but Mac, looking pale and wild in the wintry moonlight.

"Come and let a fellow in," he said in a low tone, and when he stood in
the hall he clutched Phebe's arm, whispering gruffly, "How is Rose?"

"Thanks be to goodness, she's better," answered Phebe, with a smile that
was like broad sunshine to the poor lad's anxious heart.

"And she will be all right again to-morrow?"

"Oh, dear no! Dolly says she's sure to have rheumatic fever, if she
don't have noo-monia!" answered Phebe, careful to pronounce the word
rightly this time.

Down went Mac's face, and remorse began to gnaw at him again as he gave
a great sigh and said doubtfully,

"I suppose I couldn't see her?"

"Of course not at this time of night, when we want her to go to sleep!"

Mac opened his mouth to say something more, when a sneeze came upon him
unawares, and a loud "Ah rash hoo!" awoke the echoes of the quiet house.

"Why didn't you stop it?" said Phebe reproachfully. "I dare say you've
waked her up."

"Didn't know it was coming. Just my luck!" groaned Mac, turning to go
before his unfortunate presence did more harm.

But a voice from the stair-head called softly, "Mac, come up; Rose wants
to see you."

Up he went, and found his uncle waiting for him.

"What brings you here at this hour, my boy?" asked the Doctor in a
whisper.

"Charlie said it was all my fault, and if she died I'd killed her. I
couldn't sleep, so I came to see how she was, and no one knows it but
Steve," he said with such a troubled face and voice that the Doctor had
not the heart to blame him.

Before he could say anything more a feeble voice called "Mac!" and with
a hasty "Stay a minute just to please her, and then slip away, for I
want her to sleep," the Doctor led him into the room.

The face on the pillow looked very pale and childish, and the smile that
welcomed Mac was very faint, for Rose was spent with pain, yet could not
rest till she had said a word of comfort to her cousin.

"I knew your funny sneeze, and I guessed that you came to see how I did,
though it is very late. Don't be worried, I'm better now, and it is my
fault I was ill, not yours; for I needn't have been so silly as to wait
in the cold just because I said I would."

Mac hastened to explain, to load himself with reproaches, and to beg
her not to die on any account, for Charlie's lecture had made a deep
impression on the poor boy's mind.

"I didn't know there was any danger of my dying," and Rose looked up at
him with a solemn expression in her great eyes.

"Oh, I hope not; but people do sometimes go suddenly, you know, and I
couldn't rest till I'd asked you to forgive me," faltered Mac, thinking
that Rose looked very like an angel already, with the golden hair loose
on the pillow, and the meekness of suffering on her little white face.

"I don't think I shall die; uncle won't let me; but if I do, remember I
forgave you."

She looked at him with a tender light in her eyes, and, seeing how
pathetic his dumb grief was, she added softly, drawing his head down, "I
wouldn't kiss you under the mistletoe, but I will now, for I want you to
be sure I do forgive and love you just the same."

That quite upset poor Mac; he could only murmur his thanks and get out
of the room as fast as possible, to grope his way to the couch at the
far end of the hall, and lie there till he fell asleep, worn out with
trying not to "make a baby" of himself.



Chapter 22--Something to do

Whatever danger there might have been from the effects of that sudden
chill, it was soon over, though, of course, Aunt Myra refused to
believe it, and Dr. Alec cherished his girl with redoubled vigilance and
tenderness for months afterward. Rose quite enjoyed being sick, because
as soon as the pain ended the fun began, and for a week or two she led
the life of a little princess secluded in the Bower, while every one
served, amused, and watched over her in the most delightful manner. But
the doctor was called away to see an old friend, who was dangerously
ill, and then Rose felt like a young bird deprived of its mother's
sheltering wing; especially on one afternoon when the aunts were taking
their naps, and the house was very still within while snow fell softly
without.

"I'll go and hunt up Phebe, she is always nice and busy, and likes to
have me help her. If Dolly is out of the way we can make caramels and
surprise the boys when they come," Rose said to herself, as she threw
down her book and felt ready for society of some sort.

She took the precaution to peep through the slide before she entered the
kitchen, for Dolly allowed no messing when she was round. But the coast
was clear, and no one but Phebe appeared, sitting at the table with her
head on her arms apparently asleep. Rose was just about to wake her
with a "Boo!" when she lifted her head, dried her wet eyes with her
blue apron, and fell to work with a resolute face on something she was
evidently much interested in. Rose could not make out what it was,
and her curiosity was greatly excited, for Phebe was writing with a
sputtering pen on some bits of brown paper, apparently copying something
from a little book.

"I must know what the dear thing is about, and why she cried, and then
set her lips tight and went to work with all her might," thought Rose,
forgetting all about the caramels, and, going round to the door, she
entered the kitchen, saying pleasantly,

"Phebe, I want something to do. Can't you let me help you about
anything, or shall I be in the way?"

"Oh, dear no, miss; I always love to have you round when things are
tidy. What would you like to do?" answered Phebe, opening a drawer as
if about to sweep her own affairs out of sight; but Rose stopped her,
exclaiming, like a curious child,

"Let me see! What is it? I won't tell if you'd rather not have Dolly
know."

"I'm only trying to study a bit; but I'm so stupid I don't get on much,"
answered the girl reluctantly, permitting her little mistress to examine
the poor contrivances she was trying to work with.

A broken slate that had blown off the roof, an inch or two of pencil, an
old almanac for a reader, several bits of brown or yellow paper ironed
smoothly and sewn together for a copy-book, and the copies sundry
receipts written in Aunt Plenty's neat hand. These, with a small bottle
of ink and a rusty pen, made up Phebe's outfit, and it was little wonder
that she did not "get on" in spite of the patient persistence that dried
the desponding tears and drove along the sputtering pen with a will.

"You may laugh if you want to, Miss Rose, I know my things are queer,
and that's why I hide 'em; but I don't mind since you've found me out,
and I ain't a bit ashamed except of being so backward at my age," said
Phebe humbly, though her cheeks grew redder as she washed out some
crooked capitals with a tear or two not yet dried upon the slate.

"Laugh at you! I feel more like crying to think what a selfish girl I
am, to have loads of books and things and never remember to give you
some. Why didn't you come and ask me, and not go struggling along alone
in this way? It was very wrong of you, Phebe, and I'll never forgive you
if you do so again," answered Rose, with one hand on Phebe's shoulder,
while the other gently turned the leaves of the poor little copy-book.

"I didn't like to ask for anything more when you are so good to me all
the time, miss, dear," began Phebe, looking up with grateful eyes.

"O you proud thing! just as if it wasn't fun to give away, and I had the
best of it. Now, see here, I've got a plan and you mustn't say no, or
I shall scold. I want something to do, and I'm going to teach you all
I know; it won't take long," and Rose laughed as she put her arm around
Phebe's neck, and patted the smooth dark head with the kind little hand
that so loved to give.

"It would be just heavenly!" and Phebe's face shone at the mere idea;
but fell again as she added wistfully, "Only I'm afraid I ought not
to let you do it, Miss Rose. It will take time, and maybe the Doctor
wouldn't like it."

"He didn't want me to study much, but he never said a word about
teaching, and I don't believe he will mind a bit. Anyway, we can try it
till he comes, so pack up your things and go right to my room and we'll
begin this very day; I'd truly like to do it, and we'll have nice times,
see if we don't!" cried Rose eagerly.

It was a pretty sight to see Phebe bundle her humble outfit into her
apron, and spring up as if the desire of her heart had suddenly been
made a happy fact to her; it was a still prettier sight to see Rose run
gaily on before, smiling like a good fairy as she beckoned to the other,
singing as she went,

    "The way into my parlour is up a winding stair,
     And many are the curious things I'll show you when you're there.
     Will you, will you walk in, Phebe dear?"

"Oh, won't I!" answered Phebe fervently, adding, as they entered the
Bower, "You are the dearest spider that ever was, and I'm the happiest
fly."

"I'm going to be very strict, so sit down in that chair and don't say
a word till school is ready to open," ordered Rose, delighted with the
prospect of such a useful and pleasant "something to do."

So Phebe sat demurely in her place while her new teacher laid forth
books and slates, a pretty inkstand and a little globe; hastily tore a
bit off her big sponge, sharpened pencils with more energy than skill,
and when all was ready gave a prance of satisfaction that set the pupil
laughing.

"Now the school is open, and I shall hear you read, so that I may know
in which class to put you, Miss Moore," began Rose with great dignity,
as she laid a book before her scholar, and sat down in the easy chair
with a long rule in her hand.

Phebe did pretty well, only tripping now and then over a hard word, and
pronouncing identical "identickle," in a sober way that tickled Rose,
though never a smile betrayed her. The spelling lesson which followed
was rather discouraging; Phebe's ideas of geography were very vague, and
grammar was nowhere, though the pupil protested that she tried so hard
to "talk nice like educated folks" that Dolly called her "a stuck-up
piece who didn't know her place."

"Dolly's an old goose, so don't you mind her, for she will say 'nater,'
'vittles,' and 'doos' as long as she lives, and insist that they are
right. You do talk very nicely, Phebe, I've observed it, and grammar
will help you, and show you some things are right and others ain't are
not, I mean," added Rose, correcting herself, and feeling that she
must mind her own parts of speech if she was to serve as an example for
Phebe.

When the arithmetic came, the little teacher was surprised to find her
scholar quicker in some things than herself, for Phebe had worked away
at the columns in the butcher's and baker's books till she could add so
quickly and correctly that Rose was amazed, and felt that in this branch
the pupil would soon excel the teacher if she kept on at the same pace.
Her praise cheered Phebe immensely, and they went bravely on, both
getting so interested that time flew unheeded till Aunt Plenty appeared,
exclaiming, as she stared at the two heads bent over one slate,

"Bless my heart, what is going on now?"

"School, aunty. I'm teaching Phebe, and it's great fun!" cried Rose,
looking up with a bright face.

But Phebe's was brighter, though she added with a wistful look,

"Maybe I ought to have asked leave first; only when Miss Rose proposed
this, I was so happy I forgot to. Shall I stop, ma'am?"

"Of course not, child; I'm glad to see you fond of your book, and to
find Rose helping you along. My blessed mother used to sit at work with
her maids about her, teaching them many a useful thing in the good old
fashion that's gone by now. Only don't neglect your work, dear, or let
the books interfere with the duties."

As Aunt Plenty spoke, with her kind old face beaming approvingly upon
the girls, Phebe glanced at the clock, saw that it pointed to five, knew
that Dolly would soon be down, expecting to find preparations for supper
under way, and, hastily dropping her pencil, she jumped up, saying,

"Please, can I go? I'll clear up after I've done my chores."

"School is dismissed," answered Rose, and with a grateful "Thank you,
heaps and heaps!" Phebe ran away singing the multiplication table as she
set the tea ditto.

That was the way it began, and for a week the class of one went on
with great pleasure and profit to all concerned; for the pupil proved
a bright one, and came to her lessons as to a feast, while the young
teacher did her best to be worthy the high opinion held of her, for
Phebe firmly believed that Miss Rose knew everything in the way of
learning.

Of course the lads found out what was going on, and chaffed the girls
about the "Seminary," as they called the new enterprise; but they
thought it a good thing on the whole, kindly offered to give lessons in
Greek and Latin gratis, and decided among themselves that "Rose was a
little trump to give the Phebe-bird such a capital boost."

Rose herself had some doubts as to how it would strike her uncle, and
concocted a wheedlesome speech which should at once convince him that
it was the most useful, wholesome, and delightful plan ever devised. But
she got no chance to deliver her address, for Dr. Alec came upon her so
unexpectedly that it went out of her head entirely. She was sitting on
the floor in the library, poring over a big book laid open in her lap,
and knew nothing of the long-desired arrival till two large, warm hands
met under her chin and gently turned her head back, so that someone
could kiss her heartily on either cheek, while a fatherly voice said,
half reproachfully, "Why is my girl brooding over a dusty Encyclopedia
when she ought to be running to meet the old gentleman who couldn't get
on another minute without her?"

"O uncle! I'm so glad! and so sorry! Why didn't you let us know what
time you'd be here, or call out the minute you came? Haven't I been
home-sick for you? and now I'm so happy to have you back I could hug
your dear old curly head off," cried Rose, as the Encyclopedia went down
with a bang, and she up with a spring that carried her into Dr. Alec's
arms, to be kept there in the sort of embrace a man gives to the dearest
creature the world holds for him.

Presently he was in his easy chair with Rose upon his knee smiling up
in his face and talking as fast as her tongue could go, while he watched
her with an expression of supreme content, as he stroked the smooth
round cheek, or held the little hand in his, rejoicing to see how rosy
was the one, how plump and strong the other.

"Have you had a good time? Did you save the poor lady? Aren't you glad
to be home again with your girl to torment you?"

"Yes, to all those questions. Now tell me what you've been at, little
sinner? Aunty Plen says you want to consult me about some new and
remarkable project which you have dared to start in my absence."

"She didn't tell you, I hope?"

"Not a word more expect that you were rather doubtful how I'd take it,
and so wanted to 'fess' yourself and get round me as you always try
to do, though you don't often succeed. Now, then, own up and take the
consequences."

So Rose told about her school in her pretty, earnest way, dwelling
on Phebe's hunger for knowledge, and the delight it was to help her,
adding, with a wise nod,

"And it helps me too, uncle, for she is so quick and eager I have to do
my best or she will get ahead of me in some things. To-day, now, she had
the word 'cotton' in a lesson and asked all about it, and I was ashamed
to find I really knew so little that I could only say that it was a
plant that grew down South in a kind of a pod, and was made into cloth.
That's what I was reading up when you came, and to-morrow I shall tell
her all about it, and indigo too. So you see it teaches me also, and is
as good as a general review of what I've learned, in a pleasanter way
than going over it alone."

"You artful little baggage! that's the way you expect to get round me,
is it? That's not studying, I suppose?"

"No, sir, it's teaching; and please, I like it much better than having a
good time by myself. Besides, you know, I adopted Phebe and promised to
be a sister to her, so I am bound to keep my word, am I not?" answered
Rose, looking both anxious and resolute as she waited for her sentence.

Dr. Alec was evidently already won, for Rose had described the old slate
and brown paper copy-book with pathetic effect, and the excellent man
had not only decided to send Phebe to school long before the story was
done, but reproached himself for forgetting his duty to one little girl
in his love for another. So when Rose tried to look meek and failed
utterly, he laughed and pinched her cheek, and answered in that genial
way which adds such warmth and grace to any favour,

"I haven't the slightest objection in the world. In fact, I was
beginning to think I might let you go at your books again, moderately,
since you are so well; and this is an excellent way to try your powers.
Phebe is a brave, bright lass, and shall have a fair chance in the
world, if we can give it to her, so that if she ever finds her friends
they need not be ashamed of her."

"I think she has found some already," began Rose eagerly.

"Hey? what? has anyone turned up since I've been gone?" asked Dr. Alec
quickly, for it was a firm belief in the family that Phebe would prove
to be "somebody" sooner or later.

"No, her best friend turned up when you came home, uncle," answered Rose
with an approving pat, adding gratefully, "I can't half thank you for
being so good to my girl, but she will, because I know she is going to
make a woman to be proud of, she's so strong and true, and loving."

"Bless your dear heart, I haven't begun to do anything yet, more shame
to me! But I'm going at it now, and as soon as she gets on a bit,
she shall go to school as long as she likes. How will that do for a
beginning?"

"It will be 'just heavenly,' as Phebe says, for it is the wish of her
life to 'get lots of schooling,' and she will be too happy when I tell
her. May I, please? it will be so lovely to see the dear thing open her
big eyes and clap her hands at the splendid news."

"No one shall have a finger in this nice little pie; you shall do it all
yourself, only don't go too fast, or make too many castles in the air,
my dear; for time and patience must go into this pie of ours if it is to
turn out well."

"Yes, uncle, only when it is opened won't 'the birds begin to sing?"'
laughed Rose, taking a turn about the room as a vent for the joyful
emotions that made her eyes shine. All of a sudden she stopped and asked
soberly,

"If Phebe goes to school who will do her work? I'm willing, if I can."

"Come here and I'll tell you a secret. Dolly's 'bones' are getting so
troublesome, and her dear old temper so bad, that the aunts have decided
to pension her off and let her go and live with her daughter, who has
married very well. I saw her this week, and she'd like to have her
mother come, so in the spring we shall have a grand change, and get
a new cook and chamber-girl if any can be found to suit our honoured
relatives."

"Oh, me! how can I ever get on without Phebe? Couldn't she stay, just so
I could see her? I'd pay her board rather than have her go, I'm so fond
of her."

How Dr. Alec laughed at that proposal, and how satisfied Rose was when
he explained that Phebe was still to be her maid, with no duties except
such as she could easily perform between school-hours.

"She is a proud creature, for all her humble ways, and even from us
would not take a favour if she did not earn it somewhere. So this
arrangement makes it all square and comfortable, you see, and she will
pay for the schooling by curling these goldilocks a dozen times a day if
you let her."

"Your plans are always so wise and kind! That's why they work so well,
I suppose, and why people let you do what you like with them. I really
don't see how other girls get along without an Uncle Alec!" answered
Rose, with a sigh of pity for those who had missed so great a blessing.

When Phebe was told the splendid news, she did not "stand on her head
with rapture," as Charlie prophesied she would, but took it quietly,
because it was such a happy thing she had no words "big and beautiful
enough to thank them in," she said; but every hour of her day was
brightened by this granted wish, and dedicated to the service of those
who gave it.

Her heart was so full of content that if overflowed in music, and the
sweet voice singing all about the house gave thanks so blithely that
no other words were needed. Her willing feet were never tired of taking
steps for those who had smoothed her way; her skilful hands were always
busy in some labour of love for them, and on the face fast growing in
comeliness there was an almost womanly expression of devotion, which
proved how well Phebe had already learned one of life's great lessons
gratitude.



Chapter 23--Peace-Making

"Steve, I want you to tell me something," said Rose to Dandy, who was
making faces at himself in the glass, while he waited for an answer to
the note he brought from his mother to Aunt Plenty.

"P'raps I will, and p'raps I won't. What is it?"

"Haven't Arch and Charlie quarrelled?"

"Dare say; we fellows are always having little rows, you know. I do
believe a sty is coming on my star-board eye," and Steve affected to be
absorbed in a survey of his yellow lashes.

"No, that won't do; I want to know all about it; for I'm sure something
more serious than a 'little row' is the matter. Come, please tell me,
Stenie, there's a dear."

"Botheration! you don't want me to turn telltale, do you?" growled
Steve, pulling his top-knot, as he always did when perplexed.

"Yes, I do," was Rose's decided answer for she saw from his manner that
she was right, and determined to have the secret out of him if coaxing
would do it. "I don't wish you to tell things to everyone, of course,
but to me you may, and you must, because I have a right to know. You
boys need somebody to look after you, and I'm going to do it, for girls
are nice peacemakers, and know how to manage people. Uncle said so, and
he is never wrong."

Steve was about to indulge in a derisive hoot at the idea of her looking
after them, but a sudden thought restrained him, and suggested a way in
which he could satisfy Rose, and better himself at the same time.

"What will you give me if I'll tell you every bit about it?" he asked,
with a sudden red in his cheeks and an uneasy look in his eyes, for he
was half ashamed of the proposition.

"What do you want?" and Rose looked up rather surprised at his question.

"I'd like to borrow some money. I shouldn't think of asking you, only
Mac never has a cent. since he's set up his old chemical shop, where
he'll blow himself to bits some day, and you and uncle will have the fun
of putting him together again," and Steve tried to look as if the idea
amused him.

"I'll lend it to you with pleasure, so tell away," said Rose, bound to
get at the secret.

Evidently much relieved by the promise, Steve set his top-knot
cheerfully erect again, and briefly stated the case.

"As you say, it's all right to tell you, but don't let the boys know
I blabbed, or Prince will take my head off. You see, Archie don't like
some of the fellows Charlie goes with, and cuts 'em. That makes Prince
mad, and he holds on just to plague Arch, so they don't speak to one
another, if they can help it, and that's the row."

"Are those boys bad?" asked Rose, anxiously.

"Guess not, only rather wild. They are older than our fellows, but
they like Prince, he's such a jolly boy; sings so well, dances jigs and
breakdowns, you know, and plays any game that's going. He beat Morse at
billiards, and that's something to brag of, for Morse thinks he knows
everything. I saw the match, and it was great fun!"

Steve got quite excited over the prowess of Charlie, whom he admired
immensely, and tried to imitate. Rose did not know half the danger
of such gifts and tastes as Charlie's, but felt instinctively that
something must be wrong if Archie disapproved.

"If Prince likes any billiard-playing boy better than Archie, I don't
think much of his sense," she said severely.

"Of course he doesn't; but, you see, Charlie and Arch are both as proud
as they can be, and won't give in. I suppose Arch is right, but I don't
blame Charlie a bit for liking to be with the others sometimes, they are
such a jolly set," and Steve shook his head morally, even while his eye
twinkled over the memory of some of the exploits of the "jolly set."

"Oh, dear me!" sighed Rose, "I don't see what I can do about it, but
I wish the boys would make up, for Prince can't come to any harm with
Archie, he's so good and sensible."

"That's the trouble; Arch preaches, and Prince won't stand it. He
told Arch he was a prig and a parson, and Arch told him he wasn't a
gentleman. My boots! weren't they both mad, though! I thought for a
minute they'd pitch into one another and have it out. Wish they had, and
not gone stalking round stiff and glum ever since. Mac and I settle our
rows with a bat or so over the head, and then we are all right."

Rose couldn't help laughing as Steve sparred away at a fat sofa-pillow,
to illustrate his meaning; and, having given it several scientific
whacks, he pulled down his cuffs and smiled upon her with benign pity
for her feminine ignorance of this summary way of settling a quarrel.

"What droll things boys are!" she said, with a mixture of admiration and
perplexity in her face, which Steve accepted as a compliment to his sex.

"We're a pretty clever invention, miss, and you can't get on without
us," he answered, with his nose in the air. Then, taking a sudden plunge
into business, he added, "How about that bit of money you were going to
lend me? I've told, now you pay up."

"Of course I will! How much do you want?" and Rose pulled out her purse.

"Could you spare five dollars? I want to pay a little debt of honour
that is rather pressing," and Steve put on a mannish air that was
comical to see.

"Aren't all debts honourable?" asked innocent Rose.

"Yes, of course; but this is a bet I made, and it ought to be settled up
at once," began Steve, finding it awkward to explain.

"Oh, don't bet, it's not right, and I know your father wouldn't like it.
Promise you won't do so again; please promise!" and Rose held fast the
hand into which she had just put the money.

"Well, I won't. It's worried me a good deal, but I was joked into it.
Much obliged, cousin, I'm all right now," and Steve departed hastily.

Having decided to be a peace-maker, Rose waited for an opportunity, and
very soon it came.

She was spending the day with Aunt Clara, who had been entertaining some
young guests, and invited Rose to meet them, for she thought it high
time her niece conquered her bashfulness and saw a little of society.
Dinner was over, and everyone had gone. Aunt Clara was resting before
going out to an evening party, and Rose was waiting for Charlie to come
and take her home.

She sat alone in the elegant drawing-room, feeling particularly nice and
pretty, for she had her best frock on, a pair of gold bands her aunt had
just given her, and a tea-rose bud in her sash, like the beautiful Miss
Van Tassel, whom everyone admired. She had spread out her little skirts
to the best advantage, and, leaning back in a luxurious chair, sat
admiring her own feet in new slippers with rosettes almost as big as
dahlias. Presently Charlie came lounging in, looking rather sleepy and
queer, Rose thought. On seeing her, however, he roused up and said with
a smile that ended in a gape,

"I thought you were with mother, so I took forty winks after I got those
girls off. Now, I'm at your service, Rosamunda, whenever you like."

"You look as if your head ached. If it does, don't mind me. I'm not
afraid to run home alone, it's so early," answered Rose, observing the
flushed cheeks and heavy eyes of her cousin.

"I think I see myself letting you do it. Champagne always makes my
headache, but the air will set me up."

"Why do you drink it, then?" asked Rose, anxiously.

"Can't help it, when I'm host. Now, don't you begin to lecture; I've had
enough of Archie's old-fashioned notions, and I don't want any more."

Charlie's tone was decidedly cross, and his whole manner so unlike his
usual merry good-nature, that Rose felt crushed, and answered meekly,

"I wasn't going to lecture, only when people like other people, they
can't bear to see them suffer pain."

That brought Charlie round at once, for Rose's lips trembled a little,
though she tried to hide it by smelling the flower she pulled from her
sash.

"I'm a regular bear, and I beg your pardon for being so cross, Rosy," he
said in the old frank way that was so winning.

"I wish you'd beg Archie's too, and be good friends again. You never
were cross when he was your chum," Rose said, looking up at him as he
bent toward her from the low chimney-piece, where he had been leaning
his elbows.

In an instant he stood as stiff and straight as a ramrod, and the heavy
eyes kindled with an angry spark as he said, in his high and mighty
manner,

"You'd better not meddle with what you don't understand, cousin."

"But I do understand, and it troubles me very much to see you so cold
and stiff to one another. You always used to be together, and now you
hardly speak. You are so ready to beg my pardon I don't see why you
can't beg Archie's, if you are in the wrong."

"I'm not!" this was so short and sharp that Rose started, and Charlie
added in a calmer but still very haughty tone: "A gentleman always begs
pardon when he has been rude to a lady, but one man doesn't apologize to
another man who has insulted him."

"Oh, my heart, what a pepperpot!" thought Rose, and, hoping to make him
laugh, she added slyly: "I was not talking about men, but boys, and one
of them a Prince, who ought to set a good example to his subjects."

But Charlie would not relent, and tried to turn the subject by saying
gravely, as he unfastened the little gold ring from his watch-guard,

"I've broken my word, so I want to give this back and free you from the
bargain. I'm sorry, but I think it a foolish promise, and don't intend
to keep it. Choose a pair of ear-rings to suit yourself, as my forfeit.
You have a right to wear them now."

"No, I can only wear one, and that is no use, for Archie will keep his
word I'm sure!" Rose was so mortified and grieved at this downfall
of her hopes that she spoke sharply, and would not take the ring the
deserter offered her.

He shrugged his shoulders, and threw it into her lap, trying to look
cool and careless, but failing entirely, for he was ashamed of himself,
and out of sorts generally. Rose wanted to cry, but pride would not
let her, and, being very angry, she relieved herself by talk instead of
tears. Looking pale and excited, she rose out of her chair, cast away
the ring, and said in a voice that she vainly tried to keep steady,

"You are not at all the boy I thought you were, and I don't respect you
one bit. I've tried to help you be good, but you won't let me, and I
shall not try any more. You talk a great deal about being a gentleman,
but you are not, for you've broken your word, and I can never trust
you again. I don't wish you to go home with me. I'd rather have Mary.
Good-night."

And with that last dreadful blow, Rose walked out of the room, leaving
Charlie as much astonished as if one of his pet pigeons had flown in his
face and pecked at him. She was so seldom angry, that when her temper
did get the better of her it made a deep impression on the lads, for
it was generally a righteous sort of indignation at some injustice or
wrong-doing, not childish passion.

Her little thunderstorm cleared off in a sob or two as she put on her
things in the entry-closet, and when she emerged she looked the brighter
for the shower. A hasty good-night to Aunt Clara now under the hands of
the hairdresser and then she crept down to find Mary the maid. But
Mary was out, so was the man, and Rose slipped away by the back-door,
flattering herself that she had escaped the awkwardness of having
Charlie for escort.

There she was mistaken, however, for the gate had hardly closed behind
her when a well-known tramp was heard, and the Prince was beside her,
saying in a tone of penitent politeness that banished Rose's wrath like
magic,

"You needn't speak to me if you don't choose, but I must see you safely
home, cousin."

She turned at once, put out her hand, and answered heartily,

"I was the cross one. Please forgive me, and let's be friends again."

Now that was better than a dozen sermons on the beauty of forgiveness,
and did Charlie more good, for it showed him how sweet humility was, and
proved that Rose practised as she preached.

He shook the hand warmly, then drew it through his arm and said, as if
anxious to recover the good opinion with the loss of which he had been
threatened,

"Look here, Rosy, I've put the ring back, and I'm going to try again.
But you don't know how hard it is to stand being laughed at."

"Yes, I do! Ariadne plagues me every time I see her, because I don't
wear ear-rings after all the trouble I had getting ready for them."

"Ah, but her twaddle isn't half as bad as the chaffing I get. It takes
a deal of pluck to hold out when you are told you are tied to an apron
string, and all that sort of thing," sighed Charlie.

"I thought you had a 'deal of pluck,' as you call it. The boys all say
you are the bravest of the seven," said Rose.

"So I am about some things, but I cannot bear to be laughed at."

"It is hard, but if one is right won't that make it easier?"

"Not to me; it might to a pious parson like Arch."

"Please don't call him names! I guess he has what is called moral
courage, and you physical courage. Uncle explained the difference to
me, and moral is the best, though often it doesn't look so," said Rose
thoughtfully.

Charlie didn't like that, and answered quickly, "I don't believe he'd
stand it any better than I do, if he had those fellows at him."

"Perhaps that's why he keeps out of their way, and wants you to."

Rose had him there, and Charlie felt it, but would not give in just
yet, though he was going fast, for somehow, in the dark he seemed to
see things clearer than in the light, and found it very easy to be
confidential when it was "only Rose."

"If he was my brother, now, he'd have some right to interfere," began
Charlie, in an injured tone.

"I wish he was!" cried Rose.

"So do I," answered Charlie, and then they both laughed at his
inconsistency.

The laugh did them good, and when Prince spoke again, it was in a
different tone pensive, not proud nor perverse.

"You see, it's hard upon me that I have no brothers and sisters. The
others are better off and needn't go abroad for chums if they don't
like. I am all alone, and I'd be thankful even for a little sister."

Rose thought that very pathetic, and, overlooking the uncomplimentary
word "even" in that last sentence, she said, with a timid sort of
earnestness that conquered her cousin at once,

"Play I was a little sister. I know I'm silly, but perhaps I'm better
than nothing, and I'd dearly love to do it."

"So should I! and we will, for you are not silly, my dear, but a very
sensible girl, we all think, and I'm proud to have you for a sister.
There, now!" and Charlie looked down at the curly head bobbing along
beside him with real affection in his face.

Rose gave a skip of pleasure, and laid one seal-skin mitten over the
other on his arm, as she said happily,

"That's so nice of you! Now, you needn't be lonely any more, and I'll
try to fill Archie's place till he comes back, for I know he will, as
soon as you let him."

"Well, I don't mind telling you that while he was my mate I never missed
brothers and sisters, or wanted anyone else; but since he cast me off,
I'll be hanged if I don't feel as forlorn as old Crusoe before Friday
turned up."

This burst of confidence confirmed Rose in her purpose of winning
Charlie's Mentor back to him, but she said no more, contented to have
done so well. They parted excellent friends, and Prince went home,
wondering why "a fellow didn't mind saying things to a girl or woman
which they would die before they'd own to another fellow."

Rose also had some sage reflections upon the subject, and fell asleep
thinking that there were a great many curious things in this world, and
feeling that she was beginning to find out some of them.

Next day she trudged up the hill to see Archie, and having told him
as much as she thought best about her talk with Charlie, begged him to
forget and forgive.

"I've been thinking that perhaps I ought to, though I am in the right.
I'm no end fond of Charlie, and he's the best-hearted lad alive; but he
can't say No, and that will play the mischief with him, if he does not
take care," said Archie in his grave, kind way.

"While father was home, I was very busy with him, so Prince got into a
set I don't like. They try to be fast, and think it's manly, and they
flatter him, and lead him on to do all sorts of things play for money,
and bet, and loaf about. I hate to have him do so, and tried to stop it,
but went to work the wrong way, so we got into a mess."

"He is all ready to make up if you don't say much, for he owned to me
he was wrong; but I don't think he will own it to you, in words," began
Rose.

"I don't care for that; if he'll just drop those row-dies and come back,
I'll hold my tongue and not preach. I wonder if he owes those fellows
money, and so doesn't like to break off till he can pay it. I hope not,
but don't dare to ask; though, perhaps, Steve knows, he's always after
Prince, more's the pity," and Archie looked anxious.

"I think Steve does know, for he talked about debts of honour the day I
gave him--" There Rose stopped short and turned scarlet.

But Archie ordered her to "fess," and had the whole story in five
minutes, for none dared disobey the Chief. He completed her affliction
by putting a five-dollar bill into her pocket by main force, looking
both indignant and resolute as he said,

"Never do so again; but send Steve to me, if he is afraid to go to his
father. Charlie had nothing to do with that; he wouldn't borrow a penny
of a girl, don't think it. But that's the harm he does Steve, who adores
him, and tries to be like him in all things. Don't say a word; I'll make
it all right, and no one shall blame you."

"Oh me! I always make trouble by trying to help, and then letting out
the wrong thing," sighed Rose, much depressed by her slip of the tongue.

Archie comforted her with the novel remark that it was always best to
tell the truth, and made her quite cheerful by promising to heal the
breach with Charlie as soon as possible.

He kept his word so well that the very next afternoon, as Rose looked
out of the window, she beheld the joyful spectacle of Archie and Prince
coming up the avenue, arm-in-arm, as of old, talking away as if to make
up for the unhappy silence of the past weeks.

Rose dropped her work, hurried to the door, and, opening it wide, stood
there smiling down upon them so happily, that the faces of the lads
brightened as they ran up the steps eager to show that all was well with
them.

"Here's our little peace-maker!" said Archie, shaking hands with vigour.

But Charlie added, with a look that made Rose very proud and happy, "And
my little sister."



Chapter 24--Which?

"Uncle, I have discovered what girls are made for," said Rose, the day
after the reconciliation of Archie and the Prince.

"Well, my dear, what is it?" asked Dr. Alec, who was "planking the
deck," as he called his daily promenade up and down the hall.

"To take care of boys," answered Rose, quite beaming with satisfaction
as she spoke. "Phebe laughed when I told her, and said she thought girls
had better learn to take care of themselves first. But that's because
she hasn't got seven boy-cousins as I have."

"She is right, nevertheless, Rosy, and so are you, for the two things go
together, and in helping seven lads you are unconsciously doing much
to improve one lass," said Dr. Alec, stopping to nod and smile at the
bright-faced figure resting on the old bamboo chair, after a lively
game of battledore and shuttlecock, in place of a run which a storm
prevented.

"Am I? I'm glad of that; but really, uncle, I do feel as if I must take
care of the boys, for they come to me in all sorts of troubles, and ask
advice, and I like it so much. Only I don't always know what to do,
and I'm going to consult you privately and then surprise them with my
wisdom."

"All right, my dear; what's the first worry? I see you have something on
your little mind, so come and tell uncle."

Rose put her arm in his, and, pacing to and fro, told him all about
Charlie, asking what she could do to keep him straight, and be a real
sister to him.

"Could you make up your mind to go and stay with Aunt Clara a month?"
asked the Doctor, when she ended.

"Yes, sir; but I shouldn't like it. Do you really want me to go?"

"The best cure for Charlie is a daily dose of Rose water, or Rose and
water, or Rose and water; will you go and see that he takes it?" laughed
Dr. Alec.

"You mean that if I'm there and try to make it pleasant, he will stay at
home and keep out of mischief?"

"Exactly."

"But could I make it pleasant? He would want the boys."

"No danger but he'd have the boys, for they swarm after you like bees
after their queen. Haven't you found that out?"

"Aunt Plen often says they never used to be here half so much before I
came, but I never thought I made the difference, it seemed so natural to
have them round."

"Little modesty doesn't know what a magnet she is; but she will find it
out some day," and the Doctor softly stroked the cheek that had grown
rosy with pleasure at the thought of being so much loved. "Now, you see,
if I move the magnet to Aunt Clara's, the lads will go there as sure as
iron to steel, and Charlie will be so happy at home he won't care for
these mischievous mates of his I hope," added the Doctor, well knowing
how hard it was to wean a seventeen-year-old boy from his first taste of
what is called "seeing life," which, alas! often ends in seeing death.

"I'll go, uncle, right away! Aunt Clara is always asking me, and will
be glad to get me. I shall have to dress and dine late, and see lots of
company, and be very fashionable, but I'll try not to let it hurt me;
and if I get in a puzzle or worried about anything I can run to you,"
answered Rose, good-will conquering timidity.

So it was decided, and without saying much about the real reason for
this visit, Rose was transplanted to Aunt Clara's, feeling that she had
a work to do, and very eager to do it well.

Dr. Alec was right about the bees, for the boys did follow their queen,
and astonished Mrs. Clara by their sudden assiduity in making calls,
dropping in to dinner, and getting up evening frolics. Charlie was a
devoted host, and tried to show his gratitude by being very kind to his
"little sister," for he guessed why she came, and his heart was touched
by her artless endeavours to "help him be good."

Rose often longed to be back in the old house with the simpler pleasures
and more useful duties of the life there; but, having made up her mind,
in spite of Phebe, that "girls were made to take care of boys," here
motherly little soul found much to enjoy in the new task she had
undertaken.

It was a pretty sight to see the one earnest, sweet-faced girl among the
flock of tall lads, trying to understand, to help and please them with
a patient affection that worked many a small miracle unperceived. Slang,
rough manners, and careless habits were banished or bettered by the
presence of a little gentlewoman; and all the manly virtues cropping up
were encouraged by the hearty admiration bestowed upon them by one whose
good opinion all valued more than they confessed; while Rose tried to
imitate the good qualities she praised in them, to put away her girlish
vanities and fears, to be strong and just, and frank and brave, as well
as modest, kind, and beautiful.

This trial worked so well that when the month was over, Mac and Steve
demanded a visit in their turn, and Rose went, feeling that she would
like to hear grim Aunt Jane say, as Aunt Clara did at parting, "I wish I
could keep you all my life, dear."

After Mac and Steve had had their turn, Archie and Company bore her away
for some weeks; and with them she was so happy, she felt as if she would
like to stay for ever, if she could have Uncle Alec also.

Of course, Aunt Myra could not be neglected, and, with secret despair,
Rose went to the "Mausoleum," as the boys called her gloomy abode.
Fortunately, she was very near home, and Dr. Alec dropped in so often
that her visit was far less dismal than she expected. Between them, they
actually made Aunt Myra laugh heartily more than once; and Rose did her
so much good by letting in the sunshine, singing about the silent house,
cooking wholesome messes, and amusing the old lady with funny little
lectures on physiology, that she forgot to take her pills and gave up
"Mum's Elixir," because she slept so well, after the long walks and
drives she was beguiled into taking, that she needed no narcotic.

So the winter flew rapidly away, and it was May before Rose was fairly
settled again at home. They called her the "Monthly Rose," because
she had spent a month with each of the aunts, and left such pleasant
memories of bloom and fragrance behind her, that all wanted the family
flower back again.

Dr. Alec rejoiced greatly over his recovered treasure; but as the time
drew near when his year of experiment ended, he had many a secret fear
that Rose might like to make her home for the next twelve month with
Aunt Jessie, or even Aunt Clara, for Charlie's sake. He said nothing,
but waited with much anxiety for the day when the matter should be
decided; and while he waited he did his best to finish as far as
possible the task he had begun so well.

Rose was very happy now, being out nearly all day enjoying the beautiful
awakening of the world, for spring came bright and early, as if anxious
to do its part. The old horse-chestnuts budded round her windows, green
things sprung up like magic in the garden under her hands, hardy flowers
bloomed as fast as they could, the birds sang blithely overhead, and
every day a chorus of pleasant voices cried, "Good morning, cousin,
isn't it jolly weather?"

No one remembered the date of the eventful conversation which resulted
in the Doctor's experiment (no one but himself at least); so when the
aunts were invited to tea one Saturday they came quite unsuspiciously,
and were all sitting together having a social chat, when Brother Alec
entered with two photographs in his hand.

"Do you remember that?" he said, showing one to Aunt Clara, who happened
to be nearest.

"Yes, indeed; it is very like her when she came. Quite her sad,
unchildlike expression, and thin little face, with the big dark eyes."

The picture was passed round, and all agreed that "it was very like
Rose a year ago." This point being settled, the Doctor showed the second
picture, which was received with great approbation, and pronounced a
"charming likeness."

It certainly was, and a striking contrast to the first one, for it was a
blooming, smiling face, full of girlish spirit and health, with no sign
of melancholy, though the soft eyes were thoughtful, and the lines about
the lips betrayed a sensitive nature.

Dr. Alec set both photographs on the chimneypiece, and, falling back
a step or two, surveyed them with infinite satisfaction for several
minutes, then wheeled round, saying briefly, as he pointed to the two
faces,

"Time is up; how do you think my experiment has succeeded, ladies?"

"Bless me, so it is!" cried Aunt Plenty, dropping a stitch in her
surprise.

"Beautifully, dear," answered Aunt Peace, smiling entire approval.

"She certainly has improved, but appearances are deceitful, and she had
no constitution to build upon," croaked Aunt Myra.

"I am willing to allow that, as far as mere health goes, the experiment
is a success," graciously observed Aunt Jane, unable to forget Rose's
kindness to her Mac.

"So am I; and I'll go farther, for I really do believe Alec has done
wonders for the child; she will be a beauty in two or three years,"
added Aunt Clara, feeling that she could say nothing better than that.

"I always knew he would succeed, and I'm so glad you all allow it, for
he deserves more credit than you know, and more praise than he will
ever get," cried Aunt Jessie, clapping her hands with an enthusiasm that
caused Jamie's little red stocking to wave like a triumphal banner in
the air.

Dr. Alec made them a splendid bow, looking much gratified, and then said
soberly,

"Thank you; now the question is, shall I go on? for this is only the
beginning. None of you know the hindrances I've had, the mistakes I've
made, the study I've given the case, and the anxiety I've often felt.
Sister Myra is right is one thing Rose is a delicate creature, quick to
flourish in the sunshine, and as quick to droop without it. She has no
special weakness, but inherits her mother's sensitive nature, and needs
the wisest, tenderest care, to keep a very ardent little soul from
wearing out a finely organised little body. I think I have found the
right treatment, and; with you to help me, I believe we may build up a
lovely and a noble woman, who will be a pride and comfort to us all."

There Dr. Alec stopped to get his breath, for he had spoken very
earnestly, and his voice got a little husky over the last words. A
gentle murmur from the aunts seemed to encourage him, and he went on
with an engaging smile, for the good man was slyly trying to win all the
ladies to vote for him when the time came.

"Now, I don't wish to be selfish or arbitrary, because I am her
guardian, and I shall leave Rose free to choose for herself. We all want
her, and if she likes to make her home with any of you rather than with
me, she shall do so. In fact, I encouraged her visits last winter, that
she might see what we can all offer her, and judge where she will be
happiest. Is not that the fairest way? Will you agree to abide by her
choice, as I do?"

"Yes, we will," said all the aunts, in quite a flutter of excitement at
the prospect of having Rose for a whole year.

"Good! she will be here directly, and then we will settle the question
for another year. A most important year, mind you, for she has got a
good start, and will blossom rapidly now if all goes well with her. So
I beg of you don't undo my work, but deal very wisely and gently with
my little girl, for if any harm come to her, I think it would break my
heart."

As he spoke, Dr. Alec turned his back abruptly and affected to be
examining the pictures again; but the aunts understood how dear the
child was to the solitary man who had loved her mother years ago, and
who now found his happiness in cherishing the little Rose who was so
like her. The good ladies nodded and sighed, and telegraphed to one
another that none of them would complain if not chosen, or ever try to
rob Brother Alec of his "Heart's Delight," as the boys called Rose.

Just then a pleasant sound of happy voices came up from the garden, and
smiles broke out on all serious faces. Dr. Alec turned at once, saying,
as he threw back his head, "There she is; now for it!"

The cousins had been a-Maying, and soon came flocking in laden with the
spoils.

"Here is our bonny Scotch rose with all her thorns about her," said Dr.
Alec, surveying her with unusual pride and tenderness, as she went to
show Aunt Peace her basket full of early flowers, fresh leaves, and
curious lichens.

"Leave your clutter in the hall, boys, and sit quietly down if you
choose to stop here, for we are busy," said Aunt Plenty, shaking her
finger at the turbulent Clan, who were bubbling over with the jollity
born of spring sunshine and healthy exercise.

"Of course, we choose to stay! Wouldn't miss our Saturday high tea for
anything," said the Chief, as he restored order among his men with a
nod, a word, and an occasional shake.

"What is up? a court-martial?" asked Charlie, looking at the assembled
ladies with affected awe and real curiosity, for these faces betrayed
that some interesting business was afloat.

Dr. Alec explained in a few words, which he made as brief and calm as he
could; but the effect was exciting, nevertheless, for each of the lads
began at once to bribe, entice, and wheedle "our cousin" to choose his
home.

"You really ought to come to us for mother's sake, as a relish, you
know, for she must be perfectly satiated with boys," began Archie, using
the strongest argument he could think of at the moment.

"Oh, do! we'll never slam, or bounce at you or call you 'fraid cat,' if you
only will," besought Geordie and Will, distorting their countenances in the
attempt to smile with overpowering sweetness.

"And I'll always wash my hands 'fore I touch you, and you shall be my dolly,
'cause Pokey's gone away, and I'll love you _hard_," cried Jamie, clinging
to her with his chubby face full of affection.

"Brothers and sister ought to live together; especially when the brother
needs some one to make home pleasant for him," added Charlie, with the
wheedlesome tone and look that Rose always found so difficult to resist.

"You had her longest, and it's our turn now; Mac needs her more than you do,
Prince, for she's 'the light of his eyes,' he says. Come, Rose, choose us,
and I'll never use the musky pomade you hate again as long as I live," said
Steve, with his most killing air, as he offered this noble sacrifice.

Mac peered wistfully over his goggles, saying in an unusually wide-awake and
earnest way, --

"Do, cousin, then we can study chemistry together. My experiments don't blow
up very often now, and the gases aren't at all bad when you get used to
them."

Rose meantime had stood quite still, with the flowers dropping from her
hands as her eyes went from one eager face to another, while smiles rippled
over her own at the various enticements offered her. During the laugh that
followed Mac's handsome proposition, she looked at her uncle, whose eyes
were fixed on her with an expression of love and longing that went to her
heart.

"Ah! yes," she thought, "he wants me most! I've often longed to give him
something that he wished for very much, and now I can."

So, when, at a sudden gesture from Aunt Peace, silence fell, Rose said
slowly, with a pretty colour in her cheeks, and a beseeching look about
the room, as if asking pardon of the boys,

"It's very hard to choose when everybody is so fond of me; therefore I
think I'd better go to the one who seems to need me most."

"No, dear, the one you love the best and will be happiest with," said
Dr. Alec quickly, as a doleful sniff from Aunt Myra, and a murmur of "My
sainted Caroline," made Rose pause and look that way.

"Take time, cousin; don't be in a hurry to make up your mind, and
remember, 'Codlin's your friend,'" added Charlie, hopeful still.

"I don't want any time! I know who I love best, who I'm happiest
with, and I choose uncle. Will he have me?" cried Rose, in a tone that
produced a sympathetic thrill among the hearers, it was so full of
tender confidence and love.

If she really had any doubt, the look in Dr. Alec's face banished it
without a word, as he opened wide his arms, and she ran into them,
feeling that home was there.

No one spoke for a minute, but there were signs of emotion among the
aunts, which warned the boys to bestir themselves before the water-works
began to play. So they took hands and began to prance about uncle and
niece, singing, with sudden inspiration, the nursery rhyme,

    "Ring around a Rosy!"

Of course that put an end to all sentiment, and Rose emerged laughing
from Dr. Alec's bosom, with the mark of a waistcoat button nicely
imprinted on her left cheek. He saw it, and said with a merry kiss that
half effaced it, "This is my ewe lamb, and I have set my mark on her, so
no one can steal her away."

That tickled the boys, and they set up a shout of,

    "Uncle had a little lamb!"

But Rose hushed the noise by slipping into the circle, and making them
dance prettily like lads and lasses round a May-pole; while Phebe,
coming in with fresh water for the flowers, began to twitter, chirp, and
coo, as if all the birds of the air had come to join in the spring revel
of the eight cousins.






Flower Fables


by

Louisa May Alcott




  "Pondering shadows, colors, clouds
  Grass-buds, and caterpillar shrouds
  Boughs on which the wild bees settle,
  Tints that spot the violet's petal."
                            EMERSON'S WOOD-NOTES.



                      TO
                 ELLEN EMERSON,
           FOR WHOM THEY WERE FANCIED,
               THESE FLOWER FABLES
                  ARE INSCRIBED,
                  BY HER FRIEND,

                           THE AUTHOR.

Boston, Dec. 9, 1854.




Contents

  The Frost King: or, The Power of Love
  Eva's Visit to Fairy-Land
  The Flower's Lesson
  Lily-Bell and Thistledown
  Little Bud
  Clover-Blossom
  Little Annie's Dream: or, The Fairy Flower
  Ripple, the Water-Spirit
  Fairy Song




FLOWER FABLES.


THE summer moon shone brightly down upon the sleeping earth, while
far away from mortal eyes danced the Fairy folk.  Fire-flies hung
in bright clusters on the dewy leaves, that waved in the cool
night-wind; and the flowers stood gazing, in very wonder, at the
little Elves, who lay among the fern-leaves, swung in the vine-boughs,
sailed on the lake in lily cups, or danced on the mossy ground,
to the music of the hare-bells, who rung out their merriest peal
in honor of the night.

Under the shade of a wild rose sat the Queen and her little
Maids of Honor, beside the silvery mushroom where the feast
was spread.

"Now, my friends," said she, "to while away the time till the bright
moon goes down, let us each tell a tale, or relate what we have done
or learned this day.  I will begin with you, Sunny Lock," added she,
turning to a lovely little Elf, who lay among the fragrant leaves
of a primrose.

With a gay smile, "Sunny Lock" began her story.

"As I was painting the bright petals of a blue bell, it told me
this tale."




THE FROST-KING:
       OR,
THE POWER OF LOVE.


THREE little Fairies sat in the fields eating their breakfast;
each among the leaves of her favorite flower, Daisy, Primrose,
and Violet, were happy as Elves need be.

The morning wind gently rocked them to and fro, and the sun
shone warmly down upon the dewy grass, where butterflies spread
their gay wings, and bees with their deep voices sung
among the flowers; while the little birds hopped merrily about
to peep at them.

On a silvery mushroom was spread the breakfast; little cakes
of flower-dust lay on a broad green leaf, beside a crimson
strawberry, which, with sugar from the violet, and cream
from the yellow milkweed, made a fairy meal, and their drink was
the dew from the flowers' bright leaves.

"Ah me," sighed Primrose, throwing herself languidly back,
"how warm the sun grows! give me another piece of strawberry,
and then I must hasten away to the shadow of the ferns.  But
while I eat, tell me, dear Violet, why are you all so sad?
I have scarce seen a happy face since my return from Rose Land;
dear friend, what means it?"

"I will tell you," replied little Violet, the tears gathering
in her soft eyes.  "Our good Queen is ever striving to keep
the dear flowers from the power of the cruel Frost-King; many ways
she tried, but all have failed.  She has sent messengers to his court
with costly gifts; but all have returned sick for want of sunlight,
weary and sad; we have watched over them, heedless of sun or shower,
but still his dark spirits do their work, and we are left to weep
over our blighted blossoms.  Thus have we striven, and in vain;
and this night our Queen holds council for the last time.  Therefore
are we sad, dear Primrose, for she has toiled and cared for us,
and we can do nothing to help or advise her now."

"It is indeed a cruel thing," replied her friend; "but as we cannot
help it, we must suffer patiently, and not let the sorrows of others
disturb our happiness.  But, dear sisters, see you not how high
the sun is getting?  I have my locks to curl, and my robe to prepare
for the evening; therefore I must be gone, or I shall be brown as
a withered leaf in this warm light."  So, gathering a tiny mushroom
for a parasol, she flew away; Daisy soon followed, and Violet was
left alone.

Then she spread the table afresh, and to it came fearlessly the busy
ant and bee, gay butterfly and bird; even the poor blind mole and
humble worm were not forgotten; and with gentle words she gave to all,
while each learned something of their kind little teacher; and the
love that made her own heart bright shone alike on all.

The ant and bee learned generosity, the butterfly and bird
contentment, the mole and worm confidence in the love of others;
and each went to their home better for the little time they had been
with Violet.

Evening came, and with it troops of Elves to counsel their good Queen,
who, seated on her mossy throne, looked anxiously upon the throng
below, whose glittering wings and rustling robes gleamed like
many-colored flowers.

At length she rose, and amid the deep silence spoke thus:--

"Dear children, let us not tire of a good work, hard though it be
and wearisome; think of the many little hearts that in their sorrow
look to us for help.  What would the green earth be without its
lovely flowers, and what a lonely home for us!  Their beauty fills
our hearts with brightness, and their love with tender thoughts.
Ought we then to leave them to die uncared for and alone?  They give
to us their all; ought we not to toil unceasingly, that they may
bloom in peace within their quiet homes?  We have tried to gain
the love of the stern Frost-King, but in vain; his heart is hard as
his own icy land; no love can melt, no kindness bring it back to
sunlight and to joy.  How then may we keep our frail blossoms
from his cruel spirits?  Who will give us counsel?  Who will be
our messenger for the last time?  Speak, my subjects."

Then a great murmuring arose, and many spoke, some for costlier gifts,
some for war; and the fearful counselled patience and submission.

Long and eagerly they spoke, and their soft voices rose high.

Then sweet music sounded on the air, and the loud tones were hushed,
as in wondering silence the Fairies waited what should come.

Through the crowd there came a little form, a wreath of pure
white violets lay among the bright locks that fell so softly
round the gentle face, where a deep blush glowed, as, kneeling at
the throne, little Violet said:--

"Dear Queen, we have bent to the Frost-King's power, we have borne
gifts unto his pride, but have we gone trustingly to him and
spoken fearlessly of his evil deeds?  Have we shed the soft light
of unwearied love around his cold heart, and with patient tenderness
shown him how bright and beautiful love can make even the darkest lot?

"Our messengers have gone fearfully, and with cold looks and
courtly words offered him rich gifts, things he cared not for,
and with equal pride has he sent them back.

"Then let me, the weakest of your band, go to him, trusting
in the love I know lies hidden in the coldest heart.

"I will bear only a garland of our fairest flowers; these
will I wind about him, and their bright faces, looking lovingly
in his, will bring sweet thoughts to his dark mind, and their
soft breath steal in like gentle words.  Then, when he sees them
fading on his breast, will he not sigh that there is no warmth there
to keep them fresh and lovely?  This will I do, dear Queen, and
never leave his dreary home, till the sunlight falls on flowers
fair as those that bloom in our own dear land."

Silently the Queen had listened, but now, rising and placing her hand
on little Violet's head, she said, turning to the throng below:--
"We in our pride and power have erred, while this, the weakest and
lowliest of our subjects, has from the innocence of her own pure heart
counselled us more wisely than the noblest of our train.
All who will aid our brave little messenger, lift your wands,
that we may know who will place their trust in the Power of Love."

Every fairy wand glistened in the air, as with silvery voices
they cried, "Love and little Violet."

Then down from the throne, hand in hand, came the Queen and Violet,
and till the moon sank did the Fairies toil, to weave a wreath
of the fairest flowers.  Tenderly they gathered them, with the
night-dew fresh upon their leaves, and as they wove chanted sweet
spells, and whispered fairy blessings on the bright messengers
whom they sent forth to die in a dreary land, that their gentle
kindred might bloom unharmed.

At length it was done; and the fair flowers lay glowing
in the soft starlight, while beside them stood the Fairies, singing
to the music of the wind-harps:--


 "We are sending you, dear flowers,
    Forth alone to die,
  Where your gentle sisters may not weep
    O'er the cold graves where you lie;
  But you go to bring them fadeless life
    In the bright homes where they dwell,
  And you softly smile that 't is so,
    As we sadly sing farewell.

  O plead with gentle words for us,
    And whisper tenderly
  Of generous love to that cold heart,
    And it will answer ye;
  And though you fade in a dreary home,
    Yet loving hearts will tell
  Of the joy and peace that you have given:
    Flowers, dear flowers, farewell!"


The morning sun looked softly down upon the broad green earth,
which like a mighty altar was sending up clouds of perfume from its
breast, while flowers danced gayly in the summer wind, and birds sang
their morning hymn among the cool green leaves.  Then high above,
on shining wings, soared a little form.  The sunlight rested softly
on the silken hair, and the winds fanned lovingly the bright face,
and brought the sweetest odors to cheer her on.

Thus went Violet through the clear air, and the earth looked
smiling up to her, as, with the bright wreath folded in her
arms, she flew among the soft, white clouds.

On and on she went, over hill and valley, broad rivers and
rustling woods, till the warm sunlight passed away, the winds
grew cold, and the air thick with falling snow.  Then far below
she saw the Frost-King's home.  Pillars of hard, gray ice supported
the high, arched roof, hung with crystal icicles.  Dreary gardens
 lay around, filled with withered flowers and bare, drooping trees;
while heavy clouds hung low in the dark sky, and a cold wind
murmured sadly through the wintry air.

With a beating heart Violet folded her fading wreath more closely
to her breast, and with weary wings flew onward to the dreary palace.

Here, before the closed doors, stood many forms with dark faces and
harsh, discordant voices, who sternly asked the shivering little Fairy
why she came to them.

Gently she answered, telling them her errand, beseeching them
to let her pass ere the cold wind blighted her frail blossoms.
Then they flung wide the doors, and she passed in.

Walls of ice, carved with strange figures, were around her;
glittering icicles hung from the high roof, and soft, white snow
covered the hard floors.  On a throne hung with clouds sat
the Frost-King; a crown of crystals bound his white locks, and
a dark mantle wrought with delicate frost-work was folded over
his cold breast.

His stern face could not stay little Violet, and on through
the long hall she went, heedless of the snow that gathered on
her feet, and the bleak wind that blew around her; while the King
with wondering eyes looked on the golden light that played upon the
dark walls as she passed.

The flowers, as if they knew their part, unfolded their bright leaves,
and poured forth their sweetest perfume, as, kneeling at the throne,
the brave little Fairy said,--

"O King of blight and sorrow, send me not away till I have
brought back the light and joy that will make your dark home bright
and beautiful again.  Let me call back to the desolate gardens the
fair forms that are gone, and their soft voices blessing you will
bring to your breast a never failing joy.  Cast by your icy crown
and sceptre, and let the sunlight of love fall softly on your heart.

"Then will the earth bloom again in all its beauty, and your dim eyes
will rest only on fair forms, while music shall sound through these
dreary halls, and the love of grateful hearts be yours.  Have pity
on the gentle flower-spirits, and do not doom them to an early death,
when they might bloom in fadeless beauty, making us wiser by their
gentle teachings, and the earth brighter by their lovely forms.
These fair flowers, with the prayers of all Fairy Land, I lay
before you; O send me not away till they are answered."

And with tears falling thick and fast upon their tender leaves,
Violet laid the wreath at his feet, while the golden light grew ever
brighter as it fell upon the little form so humbly kneeling there.

The King's stern face grew milder as he gazed on the gentle Fairy,
and the flowers seemed to look beseechingly upon him; while their
fragrant voices sounded softly in his ear, telling of their dying
sisters, and of the joy it gives to bring happiness to the weak
and sorrowing.  But he drew the dark mantle closer over his breast
and answered coldly,--

"I cannot grant your prayer, little Fairy; it is my will
the flowers should die.  Go back to your Queen, and tell her
that I cannot yield my power to please these foolish flowers."

Then Violet hung the wreath above the throne, and with weary foot
went forth again, out into the cold, dark gardens, and still the
golden shadows followed her, and wherever they fell, flowers bloomed
and green leaves rustled.

Then came the Frost-Spirits, and beneath their cold wings the
flowers died, while the Spirits bore Violet to a low, dark cell,
saying as they left her, that their King was angry that she had dared
to stay when he had bid her go.

So all alone she sat, and sad thoughts of her happy home came back
to her, and she wept bitterly.  But soon came visions of the gentle
flowers dying in their forest homes, and their voices ringing
in her ear, imploring her to save them.  Then she wept no longer,
but patiently awaited what might come.

Soon the golden light gleamed faintly through the cell, and she heard
little voices calling for help, and high up among the heavy cobwebs
hung poor little flies struggling to free themselves, while their
cruel enemies sat in their nets, watching their pain.

With her wand the Fairy broke the bands that held them, tenderly bound
up their broken wings, and healed their wounds; while they lay in the
warm light, and feebly hummed their thanks to their kind deliverer.

Then she went to the ugly brown spiders, and in gentle words
told them, how in Fairy Land their kindred spun all the elfin cloth,
and in return the Fairies gave them food, and then how happily they
lived among the green leaves, spinning garments for their neighbors.
"And you too," said she, "shall spin for me, and I will give you
better food than helpless insects.  You shall live in peace,
and spin your delicate threads into a mantle for the stern King;
and I will weave golden threads amid the gray, that when folded over
his cold heart gentle thoughts may enter in and make it their home."

And while she gayly sung, the little weavers spun their silken
threads, the flies on glittering wings flew lovingly above her head,
and over all the golden light shone softly down.

When the Frost-Spirits told their King, he greatly wondered and
often stole to look at the sunny little room where friends and enemies
worked peacefully together.  Still the light grew brighter, and
floated out into the cold air, where it hung like bright clouds
above the dreary gardens, whence all the Spirits' power could not
drive it; and green leaves budded on the naked trees, and
flowers bloomed; but the Spirits heaped snow upon them, and
they bowed their heads and died.

At length the mantle was finished, and amid the gray threads
shone golden ones, making it bright; and she sent it to the King,
entreating him to wear it, for it would bring peace and love
to dwell within his breast.

But he scornfully threw it aside, and bade his Spirits take her
to a colder cell, deep in the earth; and there with harsh words
they left her.

Still she sang gayly on, and the falling drops kept time so musically,
that the King in his cold ice-halls wondered at the low, sweet sounds
that came stealing up to him.

Thus Violet dwelt, and each day the golden light grew stronger; and
from among the crevices of the rocky walls came troops of little
velvet-coated moles, praying that they might listen to the sweet
music, and lie in the warm light.

"We lead," said they, "a dreary life in the cold earth; the
flower-roots are dead, and no soft dews descend for us to drink,
no little seed or leaf can we find.  Ah, good Fairy, let us be
your servants: give us but a few crumbs of your daily bread, and we
will do all in our power to serve you."

And Violet said, Yes; so day after day they labored to make
a pathway through the frozen earth, that she might reach the roots
of the withered flowers; and soon, wherever through the dark galleries
she went, the soft light fell upon the roots of flowers, and they
with new life spread forth in the warm ground, and forced fresh sap
to the blossoms above.  Brightly they bloomed and danced in the
soft light, and the Frost-Spirits tried in vain to harm them, for when
they came beneath the bright clouds their power to do evil left them.

From his dark castle the King looked out on the happy flowers,
who nodded gayly to him, and in sweet colors strove to tell him
of the good little Spirit, who toiled so faithfully below,
that they might live.  And when he turned from the brightness without,
to his stately palace, it seemed so cold and dreary, that he folded
Violet's mantle round him, and sat beneath the faded wreath upon his
ice-carved throne, wondering at the strange warmth that came from it;
till at length he bade his Spirits bring the little Fairy from
her dismal prison.

Soon they came hastening back, and prayed him to come and see
how lovely the dark cell had grown.  The rough floor was spread
with deep green moss, and over wall and roof grew flowery vines,
filling the air with their sweet breath; while above played the clear,
soft light, casting rosy shadows on the glittering drops that lay
among the fragrant leaves; and beneath the vines stood Violet,
casting crumbs to the downy little moles who ran fearlessly about
and listened as she sang to them.

When the old King saw how much fairer she had made the dreary cell
than his palace rooms, gentle thoughts within whispered him to grant
her prayer, and let the little Fairy go back to her friends and home;
but the Frost-Spirits breathed upon the flowers and bid him see how
frail they were, and useless to a King.  Then the stern, cold thoughts
came back again, and he harshly bid her follow him.

With a sad farewell to her little friends she followed him, and
before the throne awaited his command.  When the King saw how pale and
sad the gentle face had grown, how thin her robe, and weak her wings,
and yet how lovingly the golden shadows fell around her and brightened
as they lay upon the wand, which, guided by patient love, had made
his once desolate home so bright, he could not be cruel to the one
who had done so much for him, and in kindly tone he said,--

"Little Fairy, I offer you two things, and you may choose
between them.  If I will vow never more to harm the flowers you may
love, will you go back to your own people and leave me and my Spirits
to work our will on all the other flowers that bloom? The earth
is broad, and we can find them in any land, then why should you care
what happens to their kindred if your own are safe? Will you do this?"

"Ah!" answered Violet sadly, "do you not know that beneath
the flowers' bright leaves there beats a little heart that loves
and sorrows like our own?  And can I, heedless of their beauty,
doom them to pain and grief, that I might save my own dear blossoms
from the cruel foes to which I leave them?  Ah no! sooner would I
dwell for ever in your darkest cell, than lose the love of those
warm, trusting hearts."

"Then listen," said the King, "to the task I give you.  You shall
raise up for me a palace fairer than this, and if you can work
that miracle I will grant your prayer or lose my kingly crown.
And now go forth, and begin your task; my Spirits shall not harm you,
and I will wait till it is done before I blight another flower."

Then out into the gardens went Violet with a heavy heart; for
she had toiled so long, her strength was nearly gone.  But the
flowers whispered their gratitude, and folded their leaves as if they
blessed her; and when she saw the garden filled with loving friends,
who strove to cheer and thank her for her care, courage and strength
returned; and raising up thick clouds of mist, that hid her from the
wondering flowers, alone and trustingly she began her work.

As time went by, the Frost-King feared the task had been
too hard for the Fairy; sounds were heard behind the walls of mist,
bright shadows seen to pass within, but the little voice was never
heard.  Meanwhile the golden light had faded from the garden,
the flowers bowed their heads, and all was dark and cold as when
the gentle Fairy came.

And to the stern King his home seemed more desolate and sad; for
he missed the warm light, the happy flowers, and, more than all,
the gay voice and bright face of little Violet.  So he wandered
through his dreary palace, wondering how he had been content
to live before without sunlight and love.

And little Violet was mourned as dead in Fairy-Land, and many tears
were shed, for the gentle Fairy was beloved by all, from the Queen
down to the humblest flower.  Sadly they watched over every bird
and blossom which she had loved, and strove to be like her in
kindly words and deeds.  They wore cypress wreaths, and spoke of her
as one whom they should never see again.

Thus they dwelt in deepest sorrow, till one day there came to them an
unknown messenger, wrapped in a dark mantle, who looked with wondering
eyes on the bright palace, and flower-crowned elves, who kindly
welcomed him, and brought fresh dew and rosy fruit to refresh the
weary stranger.  Then he told them that he came from the Frost-King,
who begged the Queen and all her subjects to come and see the palace
little Violet had built; for the veil of mist would soon be withdrawn,
and as she could not make a fairer home than the ice-castle, the King
wished her kindred near to comfort and to bear her home.  And while
the Elves wept, he told them how patiently she had toiled, how
her fadeless love had made the dark cell bright and beautiful.

These and many other things he told them; for little Violet had won
the love of many of the Frost-Spirits, and even when they killed the
flowers she had toiled so hard to bring to life and beauty, she spoke
gentle words to them, and sought to teach them how beautiful is love.
Long stayed the messenger, and deeper grew his wonder that the Fairy
could have left so fair a home, to toil in the dreary palace of his
cruel master, and suffer cold and weariness, to give life and joy to
the weak and sorrowing.  When the Elves had promised they would come,
he bade farewell to happy Fairy-Land, and flew sadly home.

At last the time arrived, and out in his barren garden, under a canopy
of dark clouds, sat the Frost-King before the misty wall, behind which
were heard low, sweet sounds, as of rustling trees and warbling birds.

Soon through the air came many-colored troops of Elves.  First the
Queen, known by the silver lilies on her snowy robe and the bright
crown in her hair, beside whom flew a band of Elves in crimson and
gold, making sweet music on their flower-trumpets, while all around,
with smiling faces and bright eyes, fluttered her loving subjects.

On they came, like a flock of brilliant butterflies, their shining
wings and many-colored garments sparkling in the dim air; and soon
the leafless trees were gay with living flowers, and their sweet
voices filled the gardens with music.  Like his subjects, the King
looked on the lovely Elves, and no longer wondered that little Violet
wept and longed for her home.  Darker and more desolate seemed his
stately home, and when the Fairies asked for flowers, he felt ashamed
that he had none to give them.

At length a warm wind swept through the gardens, and the mist-clouds
passed away, while in silent wonder looked the Frost-King and
the Elves upon the scene before them.

Far as eye could reach were tall green trees whose drooping boughs
made graceful arches, through which the golden light shone softly,
making bright shadows on the deep green moss below, where the fairest
flowers waved in the cool wind, and sang, in their low, sweet voices,
how beautiful is Love.

Flowering vines folded their soft leaves around the trees,
making green pillars of their rough trunks.  Fountains threw their
bright waters to the roof, and flocks of silver-winged birds flew
singing among the flowers, or brooded lovingly above their nests.
Doves with gentle eyes cooed among the green leaves, snow-white clouds
floated in the sunny shy, and the golden light, brighter than before,
shone softly down.

Soon through the long aisles came Violet, flowers and green leaves
rustling as she passed.  On she went to the Frost-King's throne,
bearing two crowns, one of sparkling icicles, the other of pure
white lilies, and kneeling before him, said,--

"My task is done, and, thanks to the Spirits of earth and air, I have
made as fair a home as Elfin hands can form.  You must now decide.
Will you be King of Flower-Land, and own my gentle kindred for your
loving friends?  Will you possess unfading peace and joy, and the
grateful love of all the green earth's fragrant children?  Then take
this crown of flowers.  But if you can find no pleasure here,
go back to your own cold home, and dwell in solitude and darkness,
where no ray of sunlight or of joy can enter.

"Send forth your Spirits to carry sorrow and desolation over
the happy earth, and win for yourself the fear and hatred of those
who would so gladly love and reverence you.  Then take this glittering
crown, hard and cold as your own heart will be, if you will shut out
all that is bright and beautiful.  Both are before you.  Choose."

The old King looked at the little Fairy, and saw how lovingly
the bright shadows gathered round her, as if to shield her
from every harm; the timid birds nestled in her bosom, and the
flowers grew fairer as she looked upon them; while her gentle friends,
with tears in their bright eyes, folded their hands beseechingly,
and smiled on her.

Kind thought came thronging to his mind, and he turned to look at
the two palaces.  Violet's, so fair and beautiful, with its rustling
trees, calm, sunny skies, and happy birds and flowers, all created
by her patient love and care.  His own, so cold and dark and dreary,
his empty gardens where no flowers could bloom, no green trees dwell,
or gay birds sing, all desolate and dim;--and while he gazed, his own
Spirits, casting off their dark mantles, knelt before him and besought
him not to send them forth to blight the things the gentle Fairies
loved so much.  "We have served you long and faithfully," said they,
"give us now our freedom, that we may learn to be beloved by the sweet
flowers we have harmed so long.  Grant the little Fairy's prayer;
and let her go back to her own dear home.  She has taught us that
Love is mightier than Fear.  Choose the Flower crown, and we will be
the truest subjects you have ever had."

Then, amid a burst of wild, sweet music, the Frost-King placed
the Flower crown on his head, and knelt to little Violet; while far
and near, over the broad green earth, sounded the voices of flowers,
singing their thanks to the gentle Fairy, and the summer wind
was laden with perfumes, which they sent as tokens of their gratitude;
and wherever she went, old trees bent down to fold their slender
branches round her, flowers laid their soft faces against her own,
and whispered blessings; even the humble moss bent over the little
feet, and kissed them as they passed.

The old King, surrounded by the happy Fairies, sat in Violet's
lovely home, and watched his icy castle melt away beneath the bright
sunlight; while his Spirits, cold and gloomy no longer, danced
with the Elves, and waited on their King with loving eagerness.
Brighter grew the golden light, gayer sang the birds, and the
harmonious voices of grateful flowers, sounding over the earth,
carried new joy to all their gentle kindred.


 Brighter shone the golden shadows;
   On the cool wind softly came
 The low, sweet tones of happy flowers,
   Singing little Violet's name.
 'Mong the green trees was it whispered,
   And the bright waves bore it on
 To the lonely forest flowers,
   Where the glad news had not gone.

 Thus the Frost-King lost his kingdom,
   And his power to harm and blight.
 Violet conquered, and his cold heart
   Warmed with music, love, and light;
 And his fair home, once so dreary,
   Gay with lovely Elves and flowers,
 Brought a joy that never faded
   Through the long bright summer hours.

 Thus, by Violet's magic power,
   All dark shadows passed away,
 And o'er the home of happy flowers
   The golden light for ever lay.
 Thus the Fairy mission ended,
   And all Flower-Land was taught
 The "Power of Love," by gentle deeds
   That little Violet wrought.


As Sunny Lock ceased, another little Elf came forward; and this was
the tale "Silver Wing" told.



EVA'S VISIT TO FAIRY-LAND.


DOWN among the grass and fragrant clover lay little Eva by the
brook-side, watching the bright waves, as they went singing by under
the drooping flowers that grew on its banks.  As she was wondering
where the waters went, she heard a faint, low sound, as of far-off
music.  She thought it was the wind, but not a leaf was stirring,
and soon through the rippling water came a strange little boat.

It was a lily of the valley, whose tall stem formed the mast,
while the broad leaves that rose from the roots, and drooped again
till they reached the water, were filled with gay little Elves,
who danced to the music of the silver lily-bells above, that rang
a merry peal, and filled the air with their fragrant breath.

On came the fairy boat, till it reached a moss-grown rock; and here
it stopped, while the Fairies rested beneath the violet-leaves,
and sang with the dancing waves.

Eva looked with wonder on their gay faces and bright garments, and
in the joy of her heart sang too, and threw crimson fruit for the
little folks to feast upon.

They looked kindly on the child, and, after whispering long among
themselves, two little bright-eyed Elves flew over the shining water,
and, lighting on the clover-blossoms, said gently, "Little maiden,
many thanks for your kindness; and our Queen bids us ask if you will
go with us to Fairy-Land, and learn what we can teach you."

"Gladly would I go with you, dear Fairies," said Eva, "but I cannot
sail in your little boat.  See!  I can hold you in my hand, and could
not live among you without harming your tiny kingdom, I am so large."

Then the Elves laughed gayly, as they folded their arms about her,
saying, "You are a good child, dear Eva, to fear doing harm to those
weaker than yourself.  You cannot hurt us now.  Look in the water
and see what we have done."

Eva looked into the brook, and saw a tiny child standing between
the Elves.  "Now I can go with you," said she, "but see, I can
no longer step from the bank to yonder stone, for the brook seems now
like a great river, and you have not given me wings like yours."

But the Fairies took each a hand, and flew lightly over the stream.
The Queen and her subjects came to meet her, and all seemed glad to
say some kindly word of welcome to the little stranger.  They placed
a flower-crown upon her head, laid their soft faces against her own,
and soon it seemed as if the gentle Elves had always been her friends.

"Now must we go home," said the Queen, "and you shall go with us,
little one."

Then there was a great bustle, as they flew about on shining wings,
some laying cushions of violet leaves in the boat, others folding the
Queen's veil and mantle more closely round her, lest the falling dews
should chill her.

The cool waves' gentle plashing against the boat, and the sweet chime
of the lily-bells, lulled little Eva to sleep, and when she woke
it was in Fairy-Land.  A faint, rosy light, as of the setting sun,
shone on the white pillars of the Queen's palace as they passed in,
and the sleeping flowers leaned gracefully on their stems, dreaming
beneath their soft green curtains.  All was cool and still, and the
Elves glided silently about, lest they should break their slumbers.
They led Eva to a bed of pure white leaves, above which drooped
the fragrant petals of a crimson rose.

"You can look at the bright colors till the light fades, and then
the rose will sing you to sleep," said the Elves, as they folded the
soft leaves about her, gently kissed her, and stole away.

Long she lay watching the bright shadows, and listening to the song
of the rose, while through the long night dreams of lovely things
floated like bright clouds through her mind; while the rose bent
lovingly above her, and sang in the clear moonlight.

With the sun rose the Fairies, and, with Eva, hastened away to
the fountain, whose cool waters were soon filled with little forms,
and the air ringing with happy voices, as the Elves floated in the
blue waves among the fair white lilies, or sat on the green moss,
smoothing their bright locks, and wearing fresh garlands of dewy
flowers.  At length the Queen came forth, and her subjects gathered
round her, and while the flowers bowed their heads, and the trees
hushed their rustling, the Fairies sang their morning hymn to
the Father of birds and blossoms, who had made the earth so fair a
home for them.

Then they flew away to the gardens, and soon, high up among the
tree-tops, or under the broad leaves, sat the Elves in little groups,
taking their breakfast of fruit and pure fresh dew; while the
bright-winged birds came fearlessly among them, pecking the same
ripe berries, and dipping their little beaks in the same flower-cups,
and the Fairies folded their arms lovingly about them, smoothed their
soft bosoms, and gayly sang to them.

"Now, little Eva," said they, "you will see that Fairies are not
idle, wilful Spirits, as mortals believe.  Come, we will show you
what we do."

They led her to a lovely room, through whose walls of deep green
leaves the light stole softly in.  Here lay many wounded insects,
and harmless little creatures, whom cruel hands had hurt; and pale,
drooping flowers grew beside urns of healing herbs, from whose fresh
leaves came a faint, sweet perfume.

Eva wondered, but silently followed her guide, little Rose-Leaf,
who with tender words passed among the delicate blossoms,
pouring dew on their feeble roots, cheering them with her loving words
and happy smile.

Then she went to the insects; first to a little fly who lay in a
flower-leaf cradle.

"Do you suffer much, dear Gauzy-Wing?" asked the Fairy.  "I will
bind up your poor little leg, and Zephyr shall rock you to sleep."
So she folded the cool leaves tenderly about the poor fly, bathed his
wings, and brought him refreshing drink, while he hummed his thanks,
and forgot his pain, as Zephyr softly sung and fanned him with her
waving wings.

They passed on, and Eva saw beside each bed a Fairy, who with gentle
hands and loving words soothed the suffering insects.  At length
they stopped beside a bee, who lay among sweet honeysuckle flowers,
in a cool, still place, where the summer wind blew in, and the green
leaves rustled pleasantly.  Yet he seemed to find no rest, and
murmured of the pain he was doomed to bear.  "Why must I lie here,
while my kindred are out in the pleasant fields, enjoying the sunlight
and the fresh air, and cruel hands have doomed me to this dark place
and bitter pain when I have done no wrong?  Uncared for and forgotten,
I must stay here among these poor things who think only of themselves.
Come here, Rose-Leaf, and bind up my wounds, for I am far more useful
than idle bird or fly."

Then said the Fairy, while she bathed the broken wing,--

"Love-Blossom, you should not murmur.  We may find happiness in
seeking to be patient even while we suffer.  You are not forgotten or
uncared for, but others need our care more than you, and to those
who take cheerfully the pain and sorrow sent, do we most gladly give
our help.  You need not be idle, even though lying here in darkness
and sorrow; you can be taking from your heart all sad and discontented
feelings, and if love and patience blossom there, you will be better
for the lonely hours spent here.  Look on the bed beside you; this
little dove has suffered far greater pain than you, and all our care
can never ease it; yet through the long days he hath lain here, not an
unkind word or a repining sigh hath he uttered.  Ah, Love-Blossom,
the gentle bird can teach a lesson you will be wiser and better for."

Then a faint voice whispered, "Little Rose-Leaf, come quickly, or
I cannot thank you as I ought for all your loving care of me."

So they passed to the bed beside the discontented bee, and here upon
the softest down lay the dove, whose gentle eyes looked gratefully
upon the Fairy, as she knelt beside the little couch, smoothed the
soft white bosom, folded her arms about it and wept sorrowing tears,
while the bird still whispered its gratitude and love.

"Dear Fairy, the fairest flowers have cheered me with their sweet
breath, fresh dew and fragrant leaves have been ever ready for me,
gentle hands to tend, kindly hearts to love; and for this I can only
thank you and say farewell."

Then the quivering wings were still, and the patient little dove
was dead; but the bee murmured no longer, and the dew from the flowers
fell like tears around the quiet bed.

Sadly Rose-Leaf led Eva away, saying, "Lily-Bosom shall have a grave
tonight beneath our fairest blossoms, and you shall see that
gentleness and love are prized far above gold or beauty, here in
Fairy-Land.  Come now to the Flower Palace, and see the Fairy Court."

Beneath green arches, bright with birds and flowers, beside singing
waves, went Eva into a lofty hall.  The roof of pure white lilies
rested on pillars of green clustering vines, while many-colored
blossoms threw their bright shadows on the walls, as they danced below
in the deep green moss, and their low, sweet voices sounded softly
through the sunlit palace, while the rustling leaves kept time.

Beside the throne stood Eva, and watched the lovely forms around her,
as they stood, each little band in its own color, with glistening
wings, and flower wands.

Suddenly the music grew louder and sweeter, and the Fairies knelt,
and bowed their heads, as on through the crowd of loving subjects
came the Queen, while the air was filled with gay voices singing
to welcome her.

She placed the child beside her, saying, "Little Eva, you shall see
now how the flowers on your great earth bloom so brightly.  A band
of loving little gardeners go daily forth from Fairy-Land, to tend
and watch them, that no harm may befall the gentle spirits that dwell
beneath their leaves.  This is never known, for like all good it is
unseen by mortal eyes, and unto only pure hearts like yours do we
make known our secret.  The humblest flower that grows is visited by
our messengers, and often blooms in fragrant beauty unknown, unloved
by all save Fairy friends, who seek to fill the spirits with all sweet
and gentle virtues, that they may not be useless on the earth; for the
noblest mortals stoop to learn of flowers.  Now, Eglantine, what have
you to tell us of your rosy namesakes on the earth?"

From a group of Elves, whose rose-wreathed wands showed the flower
they loved, came one bearing a tiny urn, and, answering the Queen,
she said,--

"Over hill and valley they are blooming fresh and fair as summer sun
and dew can make them.  No drooping stem or withered leaf tells of any
evil thought within their fragrant bosoms, and thus from the fairest
of their race have they gathered this sweet dew, as a token of their
gratitude to one whose tenderness and care have kept them pure and
happy; and this, the loveliest of their sisters, have I brought to
place among the Fairy flowers that never pass away."

Eglantine laid the urn before the Queen, and placed the fragrant rose
on the dewy moss beside the throne, while a murmur of approval went
through the hall, as each elfin wand waved to the little Fairy
who had toiled so well and faithfully, and could bring so fair a gift
to their good Queen.

Then came forth an Elf bearing a withered leaf, while her many-colored
robe and the purple tulips in her hair told her name and charge.

"Dear Queen," she sadly said, "I would gladly bring as pleasant
tidings as my sister, but, alas! my flowers are proud and wilful,
and when I went to gather my little gift of colored leaves for royal
garments, they bade me bring this withered blossom, and tell you
they would serve no longer one who will not make them Queen over all
the other flowers.  They would yield neither dew nor honey, but
proudly closed their leaves and bid me go."

"Your task has been too hard for you," said the Queen kindly, as she
placed the drooping flower in the urn Eglantine had given, "you will
see how this dew from a sweet, pure heart will give new life and
loveliness even to this poor faded one.  So can you, dear Rainbow, by
loving words and gentle teachings, bring back lost purity and peace
to those whom pride and selfishness have blighted.  Go once again
to the proud flowers, and tell them when they are queen of their own
hearts they will ask no fairer kingdom.  Watch more tenderly than ever
over them, see that they lack neither dew nor air, speak lovingly
to them, and let no unkind word or deed of theirs anger you.  Let them
see by your patient love and care how much fairer they might be,
and when next you come, you will be laden with gifts from humble,
loving flowers."

Thus they told what they had done, and received from their Queen some
gentle chiding or loving word of praise.

"You will be weary of this," said little Rose-Leaf to Eva; "come now
and see where we are taught to read the tales written on flower-leaves,
and the sweet language of the birds, and all that can make a Fairy
heart wiser and better."

Then into a cheerful place they went, where were many groups of
flowers, among whose leaves sat the child Elves, and learned from
their flower-books all that Fairy hands had written there.  Some
studied how to watch the tender buds, when to spread them to the
sunlight, and when to shelter them from rain; how to guard the
ripening seeds, and when to lay them in the warm earth or send them
on the summer wind to far off hills and valleys, where other Fairy
hands would tend and cherish them, till a sisterhood of happy flowers
sprang up to beautify and gladden the lonely spot where they had
fallen.  Others learned to heal the wounded insects, whose frail limbs
a breeze could shatter, and who, were it not for Fairy hands, would
die ere half their happy summer life had gone.  Some learned how by
pleasant dreams to cheer and comfort mortal hearts, by whispered words
of love to save from evil deeds those who had gone astray, to fill
young hearts with gentle thoughts and pure affections, that no sin
might mar the beauty of the human flower; while others, like mortal
children, learned the Fairy alphabet.  Thus the Elves made loving
friends by care and love, and no evil thing could harm them, for
those they helped to cherish and protect ever watched to shield and
save them.

Eva nodded to the gay little ones, as they peeped from among the
leaves at the stranger, and then she listened to the Fairy lessons.
Several tiny Elves stood on a broad leaf while the teacher sat
among the petals of a flower that bent beside them, and asked
questions that none but Fairies would care to know.

"Twinkle, if there lay nine seeds within a flower-cup and the wind
bore five away, how many would the blossom have?"  "Four," replied the
little one.

"Rosebud, if a Cowslip opens three leaves in one day and four the
next, how many rosy leaves will there be when the whole flower
has bloomed?"

"Seven," sang the gay little Elf.

"Harebell, if a silkworm spin one yard of Fairy cloth in an hour,
how many will it spin in a day?"

"Twelve," said the Fairy child.

"Primrose, where lies Violet Island?"

"In the Lake of Ripples."

"Lilla, you may bound Rose Land."

"On the north by Ferndale, south by Sunny Wave River, east by the hill
of Morning Clouds, and west by the Evening Star."

"Now, little ones," said the teacher, "you may go to your painting,
that our visitor may see how we repair the flowers that earthly hands
have injured."

Then Eva saw how, on large, white leaves, the Fairies learned to
imitate the lovely colors, and with tiny brushes to brighten the blush
on the anemone's cheek, to deepen the blue of the violet's eye, and
add new light to the golden cowslip.

"You have stayed long enough," said the Elves at length, "we have
many things to show you.  Come now and see what is our dearest work."

So Eva said farewell to the child Elves, and hastened with little
Rose-Leaf to the gates.  Here she saw many bands of Fairies, folded in
dark mantles that mortals might not know them, who, with the child
among them, flew away over hill and valley.  Some went to the cottages
amid the hills, some to the sea-side to watch above the humble fisher
folks; but little Rose-Leaf and many others went into the noisy city.

Eva wondered within herself what good the tiny Elves could do in this
great place; but she soon learned, for the Fairy band went among the
poor and friendless, bringing pleasant dreams to the sick and old,
sweet, tender thoughts of love and gentleness to the young, strength
to the weak, and patient cheerfulness to the poor and lonely.

Then the child wondered no longer, but deeper grew her love
for the tender-hearted Elves, who left their own happy home to cheer
and comfort those who never knew what hands had clothed and fed them,
what hearts had given of their own joy, and brought such happiness
to theirs.

Long they stayed, and many a lesson little Eva learned:  but when
she begged them to go back, they still led her on, saying, "Our work
is not yet done; shall we leave so many sad hearts when we may
cheer them, so many dark homes that we may brighten?  We must stay
yet longer, little Eva, and you may learn yet more."

Then they went into a dark and lonely room, and here they found
a pale, sad-eyed child, who wept bitter tears over a faded flower.

"Ah," sighed the little one, "it was my only friend, and I
cherished it with all my lone heart's love; 't was all that made
my sad life happy; and it is gone."

Tenderly the child fastened the drooping stem, and placed it
where the one faint ray of sunlight stole into the dreary room.

"Do you see," said the Elves, "through this simple flower will we
keep the child pure and stainless amid the sin and sorrow around her.
The love of this shall lead her on through temptation and through
grief, and she shall be a spirit of joy and consolation to the sinful
and the sorrowing."

And with busy love toiled the Elves amid the withered leaves,
and new strength was given to the flower; while, as day by day the
friendless child watered the growing buds, deeper grew her love for
the unseen friends who had given her one thing to cherish in her
lonely home; sweet, gentle thoughts filled her heart as she bent
above it, and the blossom's fragrant breath was to her a whispered
voice of all fair and lovely things; and as the flower taught her,
so she taught others.

The loving Elves brought her sweet dreams by night, and happy thoughts
by day, and as she grew in childlike beauty, pure and patient amid
poverty and sorrow, the sinful were rebuked, sorrowing hearts grew
light, and the weak and selfish forgot their idle fears, when they saw
her trustingly live on with none to aid or comfort her.  The love
she bore the tender flower kept her own heart innocent and bright,
and the pure human flower was a lesson to those who looked upon it;
and soon the gloomy house was bright with happy hearts, that learned
of the gentle child to bear poverty and grief as she had done, to
forgive those who brought care and wrong to them, and to seek for
happiness in humble deeds of charity and love.

"Our work is done," whispered the Elves, and with blessings on the
two fair flowers, they flew away to other homes;--to a blind old man
who dwelt alone with none to love him, till through long years of
darkness and of silent sorrow the heart within had grown dim and cold.
No sunlight could enter at the darkened eyes, and none were near
to whisper gentle words, to cheer and comfort.

Thus he dwelt forgotten and alone, seeking to give no joy to others,
possessing none himself.  Life was dark and sad till the untiring
Elves came to his dreary home, bringing sunlight and love.  They
whispered sweet words of comfort,--how, if the darkened eyes could
find no light without, within there might be never-failing happiness;
gentle feelings and sweet, loving thoughts could make the heart fair,
if the gloomy, selfish sorrow were but cast away, and all would be
bright and beautiful.

They brought light-hearted children, who gathered round him, making
the desolate home fair with their young faces, and his sad heart gay
with their sweet, childish voices.  The love they bore he could not
cast away, sunlight stole in, the dark thoughts passed away, and the
earth was a pleasant home to him.

Thus their little hands led him back to peace and happiness,
flowers bloomed beside his door, and their fragrant breath brought
happy thoughts of pleasant valleys and green hills; birds sang to him,
and their sweet voices woke the music in his own soul, that never
failed to calm and comfort.  Happy sounds were heard in his once
lonely home, and bright faces gathered round his knee, and listened
tenderly while he strove to tell them all the good that gentleness and
love had done for him.

Still the Elves watched near, and brighter grew the heart as kindly
thoughts and tender feelings entered in, and made it their home;
and when the old man fell asleep, above his grave little feet trod
lightly, and loving hands laid fragrant flowers.

Then went the Elves into the dreary prison-houses, where sad hearts
pined in lonely sorrow for the joy and freedom they had lost.  To
these came the loving band with tender words, telling of the peace
they yet might win by patient striving and repentant tears, thus
waking in their bosoms all the holy feelings and sweet affections
that had slept so long.

They told pleasant tales, and sang their sweetest songs to cheer and
gladden, while the dim cells grew bright with the sunlight, and
fragrant with the flowers the loving Elves had brought, and by their
gentle teachings those sad, despairing hearts were filled with patient
hope and earnest longing to win back their lost innocence and joy.

Thus to all who needed help or comfort went the faithful Fairies; and
when at length they turned towards Fairy-Land, many were the grateful,
happy hearts they left behind.

Then through the summer sky, above the blossoming earth, they
journeyed home, happier for the joy they had given, wiser for the good
they had done.

All Fairy-Land was dressed in flowers, and the soft wind went singing
by, laden with their fragrant breath.  Sweet music sounded through the
air, and troops of Elves in their gayest robes hastened to the palace
where the feast was spread.

Soon the bright hall was filled with smiling faces and fair forms, and
little Eva, as she stood beside the Queen, thought she had never seen
a sight so lovely.

The many-colored shadows of the fairest flowers played on the pure
white walls, and fountains sparkled in the sunlight, making music
as the cool waves rose and fell, while to and fro, with waving wings
and joyous voices, went the smiling Elves, bearing fruit and honey,
or fragrant garlands for each other's hair.

Long they feasted, gayly they sang, and Eva, dancing merrily
among them, longed to be an Elf that she might dwell forever
in so fair a home.

At length the music ceased, and the Queen said, as she laid her hand
on little Eva's shining hair:--

"Dear child, tomorrow we must bear you home, for, much as we long
to keep you, it were wrong to bring such sorrow to your loving earthly
friends; therefore we will guide you to the brook-side, and there say
farewell till you come again to visit us.  Nay, do not weep, dear
Rose-Leaf; you shall watch over little Eva's flowers, and when she
looks at them she will think of you.  Come now and lead her to the
Fairy garden, and show her what we think our fairest sight.  Weep
no more, but strive to make her last hours with us happy as you can."

With gentle caresses and most tender words the loving Elves gathered
about the child, and, with Rose-Leaf by her side, they led her through
the palace, and along green, winding paths, till Eva saw what seemed
a wall of flowers rising before her, while the air was filled with the
most fragrant odors, and the low, sweet music as of singing blossoms.

"Where have you brought me, and what mean these lovely sounds?"
asked Eva.

"Look here, and you shall see," said Rose-Leaf, as she bent aside
the vines, "but listen silently or you cannot hear."

Then Eva, looking through the drooping vines, beheld a garden filled
with the loveliest flowers; fair as were all the blossoms she had seen
in Fairy-Land, none were so beautiful as these.  The rose glowed
with a deeper crimson, the lily's soft leaves were more purely white,
the crocus and humble cowslip shone like sunlight, and the violet
was blue as the sky that smiled above it.

"How beautiful they are," whispered Eva, "but, dear Rose-Leaf, why
do you keep them here, and why call you this your fairest sight?"

"Look again, and I will tell you," answered the Fairy.

Eva looked, and saw from every flower a tiny form come forth to
welcome the Elves, who all, save Rose-Leaf, had flown above the wall,
and were now scattering dew upon the flowers' bright leaves and
talking gayly with the Spirits, who gathered around them, and seemed
full of joy that they had come.  The child saw that each one wore the
colors of the flower that was its home.  Delicate and graceful were
the little forms, bright the silken hair that fell about each lovely
face; and Eva heard the low, sweet murmur of their silvery voices and
the rustle of their wings.  She gazed in silent wonder, forgetting she
knew not who they were, till the Fairy said,--

"These are the spirits of the flowers, and this the Fairy Home where
those whose hearts were pure and loving on the earth come to bloom in
fadeless beauty here, when their earthly life is past.  The humblest
flower that blooms has a home with us, for outward beauty is a
worthless thing if all be not fair and sweet within.  Do you see
yonder lovely spirit singing with my sister Moonlight?  a clover
blossom was her home, and she dwelt unknown, unloved; yet patient and
content, bearing cheerfully the sorrows sent her.  We watched and saw
how fair and sweet the humble flower grew, and then gladly bore her
here, to blossom with the lily and the rose.  The flowers' lives
are often short, for cruel hands destroy them; therefore is it our
greatest joy to bring them hither, where no careless foot or wintry
wind can harm them, where they bloom in quiet beauty, repaying our
care by their love and sweetest perfumes."

"I will never break another flower," cried Eva; "but let me go
to them, dear Fairy; I would gladly know the lovely spirits, and ask
forgiveness for the sorrow I have caused.  May I not go in?"

"Nay, dear Eva, you are a mortal child, and cannot enter here; but I
will tell them of the kind little maiden who has learned to love them,
and they will remember you when you are gone.  Come now, for you have
seen enough, and we must be away."

On a rosy morning cloud, surrounded by the loving Elves, went Eva
through the sunny sky.  The fresh wind bore them gently on, and soon
they stood again beside the brook, whose waves danced brightly as if
to welcome them.

"Now, ere we say farewell," said the Queen, as they gathered nearer
to the child, "tell me, dear Eva, what among all our Fairy gifts
will make you happiest, and it shall be yours."

"You good little Fairies," said Eva, folding them in her arms, for
she was no longer the tiny child she had been in Fairy-Land, "you dear
good little Elves, what can I ask of you, who have done so much
to make me happy, and taught me so many good and gentle lessons,
the memory of which will never pass away?  I can only ask of you the
power to be as pure and gentle as yourselves, as tender and loving
to the weak and sorrowing, as untiring in kindly deeds to all.  Grant
me this gift, and you shall see that little Eva has not forgotten
what you have taught her."

"The power shall be yours," said the Elves, and laid their soft hands
on her head; "we will watch over you in dreams, and when you would have
tidings of us, ask the flowers in your garden, and they will tell you
all you would know.  Farewell.  Remember Fairy-Land and all your
loving friends."

They clung about her tenderly, and little Rose-Leaf placed a flower
crown on her head, whispering softly, "When you would come to us
again, stand by the brook-side and wave this in the air, and we will
gladly take you to our home again.  Farewell, dear Eva.  Think of your
little Rose-Leaf when among the flowers."

Long Eva watched their shining wings, and listened to the music of
their voices as they flew singing home, and when at length the last
little form had vanished among the clouds, she saw that all around her
where the Elves had been, the fairest flowers had sprung up, and the
lonely brook-side was a blooming garden.

Thus she stood among the waving blossoms, with the Fairy garland in
her hair, and happy feelings in her heart, better and wiser for her
visit to Fairy-Land.

"Now, Star-Twinkle, what have you to teach?" asked the Queen.

"Nothing but a little song I heard the hare-bells singing," replied
the Fairy, and, taking her harp, sang, in a low, sweet voice:--




THE FLOWER'S LESSON.


  THERE grew a fragrant rose-tree where the brook flows,
  With two little tender buds, and one full rose;
  When the sun went down to his bed in the west,
  The little buds leaned on the rose-mother's breast,
  While the bright eyed stars their long watch kept,
  And the flowers of the valley in their green cradles slept;
  Then silently in odors they communed with each other,
  The two little buds on the bosom of their mother.
  "O sister," said the little one, as she gazed at the sky,
  "I wish that the Dew Elves, as they wander lightly by,
  Would bring me a star; for they never grow dim,
  And the Father does not need them to burn round him.
  The shining drops of dew the Elves bring each day
  And place in my bosom, so soon pass away;
  But a star would glitter brightly through the long summer hours,
  And I should be fairer than all my sister flowers.
  That were better far than the dew-drops that fall
  On the high and the low, and come alike to all.
  I would be fair and stately, with a bright star to shine
  And give a queenly air to this crimson robe of mine."
  And proudly she cried, "These fire-flies shall be
  My jewels, since the stars can never come to me."
  Just then a tiny dew-drop that hung o'er the dell
  On the breast of the bud like a soft star fell;
  But impatiently she flung it away from her leaf,
  And it fell on her mother like a tear of grief,
  While she folded to her breast, with wilful pride,
  A glittering fire-fly that hung by her side.
  "Heed," said the mother rose, "daughter mine,
  Why shouldst thou seek for beauty not thine?
  The Father hath made thee what thou now art;
  And what he most loveth is a sweet, pure heart.
  Then why dost thou take with such discontent
  The loving gift which he to thee hath sent?
  For the cool fresh dew will render thee far
  More lovely and sweet than the brightest star;
  They were made for Heaven, and can never come to shine
  Like the fire-fly thou hast in that foolish breast of thine.
  O my foolish little bud, do listen to thy mother;
  Care only for true beauty, and seek for no other.
  There will be grief and trouble in that wilful little heart;
  Unfold thy leaves, my daughter, and let the fly depart."
  But the proud little bud would have her own will,
  And folded the fire-fly more closely still;
  Till the struggling insect tore open the vest
  Of purple and green, that covered her breast.
  When the sun came up, she saw with grief
  The blooming of her sister bud leaf by leaf.
  While she, once as fair and bright as the rest,
  Hung her weary head down on her wounded breast.
  Bright grew the sunshine, and the soft summer air
  Was filled with the music of flowers singing there;
  But faint grew the little bud with thirst and pain,
  And longed for the cool dew; but now 't was in vain.
  Then bitterly she wept for her folly and pride,
  As drooping she stood by her fair sister's side.
  Then the rose mother leaned the weary little head
  On her bosom to rest, and tenderly she said:
  "Thou hast learned, my little bud, that, whatever may betide,
  Thou canst win thyself no joy by passion or by pride.
  The loving Father sends the sunshine and the shower,
  That thou mayst become a perfect little flower;--
  The sweet dews to feed thee, the soft wind to cheer,
  And the earth as a pleasant home, while thou art dwelling here.
  Then shouldst thou not be grateful for all this kindly care,
  And strive to keep thyself most innocent and fair?
  Then seek, my little blossom, to win humility;
  Be fair without, be pure within, and thou wilt happy be.
  So when the quiet Autumn of thy fragrant life shall come,
  Thou mayst pass away, to bloom in the Flower Spirits' home."
  Then from the mother's breast, where it still lay hid,
  Into the fading bud the dew-drop gently slid;
  Stronger grew the little form, and happy tears fell,
  As the dew did its silent work, and the bud grew well,
  While the gentle rose leaned, with motherly pride,
  O'er the fair little ones that bloomed at her side.

  Night came again, and the fire-flies flew;
  But the bud let them pass, and drank of the dew;
  While the soft stars shone, from the still summer heaven,
  On the happy little flower that had learned the lesson given.


The music-loving Elves clapped their hands, as Star-Twinkle ceased;
and the Queen placed a flower crown, with a gentle smile, upon the
Fairy's head, saying,--

"The little bud's lesson shall teach us how sad a thing is pride,
and that humility alone can bring true happiness to flower and Fairy.
You shall come next, Zephyr."

And the little Fairy, who lay rocking to and fro upon a fluttering
vine-leaf, thus began her story:--

"As I lay resting in the bosom of a cowslip that bent above the brook,
a little wind, tired of play, told me this tale of



LILY-BELL AND THISTLEDOWN.


ONCE upon a time, two little Fairies went out into the world, to
seek their fortune.  Thistledown was as gay and gallant a little Elf
as ever spread a wing.  His purple mantle, and doublet of green, were
embroidered with the brightest threads, and the plume in his cap
came always from the wing of the gayest butterfly.

But he was not loved in Fairy-Land, for, like the flower whose
name and colors he wore, though fair to look upon, many were the
little thorns of cruelty and selfishness that lay concealed by his
gay mantle.  Many a gentle flower and harmless bird died by his hand,
for he cared for himself alone, and whatever gave him pleasure must
be his, though happy hearts were rendered sad, and peaceful homes
destroyed.

Such was Thistledown; but far different was his little friend,
Lily-Bell.  Kind, compassionate, and loving, wherever her gentle face
was seen, joy and gratitude were found; no suffering flower or insect,
that did not love and bless the kindly Fairy; and thus all Elf-Land
looked upon her as a friend.

Nor did this make her vain and heedless of others; she humbly dwelt
among them, seeking to do all the good she might; and many a houseless
bird and hungry insect that Thistledown had harmed did she feed and
shelter, and in return no evil could befall her, for so many
friends were all about her, seeking to repay her tenderness and love
by their watchful care.

She would not now have left Fairy-Land, but to help and counsel her
wild companion, Thistledown, who, discontented with his quiet home,
WOULD seek his fortune in the great world, and she feared he would
suffer from his own faults for others would not always be as gentle
and forgiving as his kindred.  So the kind little Fairy left her home
and friends to go with him; and thus, side by side, they flew beneath
the bright summer sky.

On and on, over hill and valley, they went, chasing the gay
butterflies, or listening to the bees, as they flew from flower to
flower like busy little housewives, singing as they worked; till
at last they reached a pleasant garden, filled with flowers and green,
old trees.

"See," cried Thistledown, "what a lovely home is here; let us rest
among the cool leaves, and hear the flowers sing, for I am sadly tired
and hungry."

So into the quiet garden they went, and the winds gayly welcomed them,
while the flowers nodded on their stems, offering their bright leaves
for the Elves to rest upon, and fresh, sweet honey to refresh them.

"Now, dear Thistle, do not harm these friendly blossoms," said
Lily-Bell; "see how kindly they spread their leaves, and offer us
their dew.  It would be very wrong in you to repay their care with
cruelty and pain.  You will be tender for my sake, dear Thistle."

Then she went among the flowers, and they bent lovingly before her,
and laid their soft leaves against her little face, that she might see
how glad they were to welcome one so good and gentle, and kindly
offered their dew and honey to the weary little Fairy, who sat among
their fragrant petals and looked smilingly on the happy blossoms, who,
with their soft, low voices, sang her to sleep.

While Lily-Bell lay dreaming among the rose-leaves, Thistledown went
wandering through the garden.  First he robbed the bees of their
honey, and rudely shook the little flowers, that he might get the dew
they had gathered to bathe their buds in.  Then he chased the bright
winged flies, and wounded them with the sharp thorn he carried for a
sword; he broke the spider's shining webs, lamed the birds, and soon
wherever he passed lay wounded insects and drooping flowers; while
the winds carried the tidings over the garden, and bird and blossom
looked upon him as an evil spirit, and fled away or closed their
leaves, lest he should harm them.

Thus he went, leaving sorrow and pain behind him, till he came to the
roses where Lily-Bell lay sleeping.  There, weary of his cruel sport,
he stayed to rest beneath a graceful rose-tree, where grew one
blooming flower and a tiny bud.

"Why are you so slow in blooming, little one? You are too old to be
rocked in your green cradle longer, and should be out among your
sister flowers," said Thistle, as he lay idly in the shadow of the
tree.

"My little bud is not yet strong enough to venture forth," replied the
rose, as she bent fondly over it; "the sunlight and the rain would
blight her tender form, were she to blossom now, but soon she will be
fit to bear them; till then she is content to rest beside her mother,
and to wait."

"You silly flower," said Thistledown, "see how quickly I will make you
bloom! your waiting is all useless."  And speaking thus, he pulled
rudely apart the folded leaves, and laid them open to the sun and air;
while the rose mother implored the cruel Fairy to leave her little bud
untouched.

"It is my first, my only one," said she, "and I have watched over it
with such care, hoping it would soon bloom beside me; and now you have
destroyed it.  How could you harm the little helpless one, that never
did aught to injure you?"  And while her tears fell like summer rain,
she drooped in grief above the little bud, and sadly watched it fading
in the sunlight; but Thistledown, heedless of the sorrow he had given,
spread his wings and flew away.

Soon the sky grew dark, and heavy drops began to fall.  Then Thistle
hastened to the lily, for her cup was deep, and the white leaves
fell like curtains over the fragrant bed; he was a dainty little Elf,
and could not sleep among the clovers and bright buttercups.  But
when he asked the flower to unfold her leaves and take him in, she
turned her pale, soft face away, and answered sadly, "I must shield my
little drooping sisters whom you have harmed, and cannot let you in."

Then Thistledown was very angry, and turned to find shelter among the
stately roses; but they showed their sharp thorns, and, while their
rosy faces glowed with anger, told him to begone, or they would repay
him for the wrong he had done their gentle kindred.

He would have stayed to harm them, but the rain fell fast, and he
hurried away, saying, "The tulips will take me in, for I have praised
their beauty, and they are vain and foolish flowers."

But when he came, all wet and cold, praying for shelter among their
thick leaves, they only laughed and said scornfully, "We know you,
and will not let you in, for you are false and cruel, and will
only bring us sorrow.  You need not come to us for another mantle,
when the rain has spoilt your fine one; and do not stay here, or
we will do you harm."

Then they waved their broad leaves stormily, and scattered the heavy
drops on his dripping garments.

"Now must I go to the humble daisies and blue violets," said Thistle,
"they will be glad to let in so fine a Fairy, and I shall die in
this cold wind and rain."

So away he flew, as fast as his heavy wings would bear him, to the
daisies; but they nodded their heads wisely, and closed their leaves
yet closer, saying sharply,--

"Go away with yourself, and do not imagine we will open our leaves
to you, and spoil our seeds by letting in the rain.  It serves you
rightly; to gain our love and confidence, and repay it by such
cruelty!  You will find no shelter here for one whose careless hand
wounded our little friend Violet, and broke the truest heart that ever
beat in a flower's breast.  We are very angry with you, wicked Fairy;
go away and hide yourself."

"Ah," cried the shivering Elf, "where can I find shelter? I will go
to the violets:  they will forgive and take me in."

But the daisies had spoken truly; the gentle little flower was dead,
and her blue-eyed sisters were weeping bitterly over her faded leaves.

"Now I have no friends," sighed poor Thistledown, "and must die of
cold.  Ah, if I had but minded Lily-Bell, I might now be dreaming
beneath some flower's leaves."

"Others can forgive and love, beside Lily-Bell and Violet," said
a faint, sweet voice; "I have no little bud to shelter now, and you
can enter here."  It was the rose mother that spoke, and Thistle saw
how pale the bright leaves had grown, and how the slender stem was
bowed.  Grieved, ashamed, and wondering at the flower's forgiving
words, he laid his weary head on the bosom he had filled with sorrow,
and the fragrant leaves were folded carefully about him.

But he could find no rest.  The rose strove to comfort him; but when
she fancied he was sleeping, thoughts of her lost bud stole in, and
the little heart beat so sadly where he lay, that no sleep came; while
the bitter tears he had caused to flow fell more coldly on him than
the rain without.  Then he heard the other flowers whispering among
themselves of his cruelty, and the sorrow he had brought to their
happy home; and many wondered how the rose, who had suffered most,
could yet forgive and shelter him.

"Never could I forgive one who had robbed me of my children.  I could
bow my head and die, but could give no happiness to one who had taken
all my own," said Hyacinth, bending fondly over the little ones that
blossomed by her side.

"Dear Violet is not the only one who will leave us," sobbed little
Mignonette; "the rose mother will fade like her little bud, and we
shall lose our gentlest teacher.  Her last lesson is forgiveness;
let us show our love for her, and the gentle stranger Lily-Bell,
by allowing no unkind word or thought of him who has brought us all
this grief."

The angry words were hushed, and through the long night nothing was
heard but the dropping of the rain, and the low sighs of the rose.

Soon the sunlight came again, and with it Lily-Bell seeking for
Thistledown; but he was ashamed, and stole away.

When the flowers told their sorrow to kind-hearted Lily-Bell, she wept
bitterly at the pain her friend had given, and with loving words
strove to comfort those whom he had grieved; with gentle care she
healed the wounded birds, and watched above the flowers he had harmed,
bringing each day dew and sunlight to refresh and strengthen, till all
were well again; and though sorrowing for their dead friends, still
they forgave Thistle for the sake of her who had done so much for
them.  Thus, erelong, buds fairer than that she had lost lay on the
rose mother's breast, and for all she had suffered she was well repaid
by the love of Lily-Bell and her sister flowers.

And when bird, bee, and blossom were strong and fair again, the gentle
Fairy said farewell, and flew away to seek her friend, leaving behind
many grateful hearts, who owed their joy and life to her.


Meanwhile, over hill and dale went Thistledown, and for a time was
kind and gentle to every living thing.  He missed sadly the little
friend who had left her happy home to watch over him, but he was
too proud to own his fault, and so went on, hoping she would find him.

One day he fell asleep, and when he woke the sun had set, and the dew
began to fall; the flower-cups were closed, and he had nowhere to go,
till a friendly little bee, belated by his heavy load of honey, bid
the weary Fairy come with him.

"Help me to bear my honey home, and you can stay with us tonight,"
he kindly said.

So Thistle gladly went with him, and soon they came to a pleasant
garden, where among the fairest flowers stood the hive, covered with
vines and overhung with blossoming trees.  Glow-worms stood at the
door to light them home, and as they passed in, the Fairy thought how
charming it must be to dwell in such a lovely place.  The floor of wax
was pure and white as marble, while the walls were formed of golden
honey-comb, and the air was fragrant with the breath of flowers.

"You cannot see our Queen to-night," said the little bee, "but
I will show you to a bed where you can rest."

And he led the tired Fairy to a little cell, where on a bed of
flower-leaves he folded his wings and fell asleep.

As the first ray of sunlight stole in, he was awakened by sweet music.
It was the morning song of the bees.


  "Awake! awake! for the earliest gleam
     Of golden sunlight shines
   On the rippling waves, that brightly flow
     Beneath the flowering vines.
   Awake! awake! for the low, sweet chant
     Of the wild-birds' morning hymn
   Comes floating by on the fragrant air,
     Through the forest cool and dim;
         Then spread each wing,
         And work, and sing,
   Through the long, bright sunny hours;
         O'er the pleasant earth
         We journey forth,
   For a day among the flowers.

  "Awake! awake! for the summer wind
     Hath bidden the blossoms unclose,
   Hath opened the violet's soft blue eye,
     And wakened the sleeping rose.
   And lightly they wave on their slender stems
     Fragrant, and fresh, and fair,
   Waiting for us, as we singing come
     To gather our honey-dew there.
         Then spread each wing,
         And work, and sing,
   Through the long, bright sunny hours;
         O'er the pleasant earth
         We journey forth,
   For a day among the flowers!"


Soon his friend came to bid him rise, as the Queen desired to speak
with him.  So, with his purple mantle thrown gracefully over his
shoulder, and his little cap held respectfully in his hand, he
followed Nimble-Wing to the great hall, where the Queen was being
served by her little pages.  Some bore her fresh dew and honey, some
fanned her with fragrant flower-leaves, while others scattered the
sweetest perfumes on the air.

"Little Fairy," said the Queen, "you are welcome to my palace; and
we will gladly have you stay with us, if you will obey our laws.
We do not spend the pleasant summer days in idleness and pleasure, but
each one labors for the happiness and good of all.  If our home is
beautiful, we have made it so by industry; and here, as one large,
loving family, we dwell; no sorrow, care, or discord can enter in,
while all obey the voice of her who seeks to be a wise and gentle
Queen to them.  If you will stay with us, we will teach you many
things.  Order, patience, industry, who can teach so well as they
who are the emblems of these virtues?

"Our laws are few and simple.  You must each day gather your share of
honey, see that your cell is sweet and fresh, as you yourself must be;
rise with the sun, and with him to sleep.  You must harm no flower in
doing your work, nor take more than your just share of honey; for they
so kindly give us food, it were most cruel to treat them with aught
save gentleness and gratitude.  Now will you stay with us, and learn
what even mortals seek to know, that labor brings true happiness?"

And Thistle said he would stay and dwell with them; for he was tired
of wandering alone, and thought he might live here till Lily-Bell
should come, or till he was weary of the kind-hearted bees.  Then they
took away his gay garments, and dressed him like themselves, in the
black velvet cloak with golden bands across his breast.

"Now come with us," they said.  So forth into the green fields
they went, and made their breakfast among the dewy flowers; and then
till the sun set they flew from bud to blossom, singing as they went;
and Thistle for a while was happier than when breaking flowers and
harming gentle birds.

But he soon grew tired of working all day in the sun, and longed to be
free again.  He could find no pleasure with the industrious bees, and
sighed to be away with his idle friends, the butterflies; so while the
others worked he slept or played, and then, in haste to get his share,
he tore the flowers, and took all they had saved for their own food.
Nor was this all; he told such pleasant tales of the life he led
before he came to live with them, that many grew unhappy and
discontented, and they who had before wished no greater joy than
the love and praise of their kind Queen, now disobeyed and blamed her
for all she had done for them.

Long she bore with their unkind words and deeds; and when at length
she found it was the ungrateful Fairy who had wrought this trouble in
her quiet kingdom, she strove, with sweet, forgiving words, to show
him all the wrong he had done; but he would not listen, and still went
on destroying the happiness of those who had done so much for him.

Then, when she saw that no kindness could touch his heart, she said:--

"Thistledown, we took you in, a friendless stranger, fed and clothed
you, and made our home as pleasant to you as we could; and in return
for all our care, you have brought discontent and trouble to my
subjects, grief and care to me.  I cannot let my peaceful kingdom
be disturbed by you; therefore go and seek another home.  You may find
other friends, but none will love you more than we, had you been
worthy of it; so farewell."  And the doors of the once happy home
he had disturbed were closed behind him.

Then he was very angry, and determined to bring some great sorrow on
the good Queen.  So he sought out the idle, wilful bees, whom he had
first made discontented, bidding them follow him, and win the honey
the Queen had stored up for the winter.

"Let us feast and make merry in the pleasant summer-time," said
Thistle; "winter is far off, why should we waste these lovely days,
toiling to lay up the food we might enjoy now.  Come, we will take
what we have made, and think no more of what the Queen has said."

So while the industrious bees were out among the flowers, he led
the drones to the hive, and took possession of the honey, destroying
and laying waste the home of the kind bees; then, fearing that
in their grief and anger they might harm him, Thistle flew away to
seek new friends.


After many wanderings, he came at length to a great forest, and here
beside a still lake he stayed to rest. Delicate wood-flowers grew near
him in the deep green moss, with drooping heads, as if they listened
to the soft wind singing among the pines.  Bright-eyed birds peeped
at him from their nests, and many-colored insects danced above the
cool, still lake.

"This is a pleasant place," said Thistle; "it shall be my home for a
while.  Come hither, blue dragon-fly, I would gladly make a friend of
you, for I am all alone."

The dragon-fly folded his shining wings beside the Elf, listened to
the tale he told, promised to befriend the lonely one, and strove
to make the forest a happy home to him.

So here dwelt Thistle, and many kind friends gathered round him,
for he spoke gently to them, and they knew nothing of the cruel deeds
he had done; and for a while he was happy and content.  But at length
he grew weary of the gentle birds, and wild-flowers, and sought new
pleasure in destroying the beauty he was tired of; and soon the
friends who had so kindly welcomed him looked upon him as an evil
spirit, and shrunk away as he approached.

At length his friend the dragon-fly besought him to leave the quiet
home he had disturbed.  Then Thistle was very angry, and while the
dragon-fly was sleeping among the flowers that hung over the lake, he
led an ugly spider to the spot, and bade him weave his nets about the
sleeping insect, and bind him fast.  The cruel spider gladly obeyed
the ungrateful Fairy; and soon the poor fly could move neither leg nor
wing.  Then Thistle flew away through the wood, leaving sorrow and
trouble behind him.

He had not journeyed far before he grew weary, and lay down to rest.
Long he slept, and when he awoke, and tried to rise, his hands and
wings were bound; while beside him stood two strange little figures,
with dark faces and garments, that rustled like withered leaves; who
cried to him, as he struggled to get free,--

"Lie still, you naughty Fairy, you are in the Brownies' power, and
shall be well punished for your cruelty ere we let you go."

So poor Thistle lay sorrowfully, wondering what would come of it,
and wishing Lily-Bell would come to help and comfort him; but he had
left her, and she could not help him now.

Soon a troop of Brownies came rustling through the air, and gathered
round him, while one who wore an acorn-cup on his head, and was their
King, said, as he stood beside the trembling Fairy,--

"You have done many cruel things, and caused much sorrow to happy
hearts; now you are in my power, and I shall keep you prisoner
till you have repented.  You cannot dwell on the earth without harming
the fair things given you to enjoy, so you shall live alone in
solitude and darkness, till you have learned to find happiness in
gentle deeds, and forget yourself in giving joy to others.  When you
have learned this, I will set you free."

Then the Brownies bore him to a high, dark rock, and, entering a
little door, led him to a small cell, dimly lighted by a crevice
through which came a single gleam of sunlight; and there, through
long, long days, poor Thistle sat alone, and gazed with wistful eyes
at the little opening, longing to be out on the green earth.  No one
came to him, but the silent Brownies who brought his daily food; and
with bitter tears he wept for Lily-Bell, mourning his cruelty and
selfishness, seeking to do some kindly deed that might atone for his
wrong-doing.

A little vine that grew outside his prison rock came creeping up,
and looked in through the crevice, as if to cheer the lonely Fairy,
who welcomed it most gladly, and daily sprinkled its soft leaves
with his small share of water, that the little vine might live,
even if it darkened more and more his dim cell.

The watchful Brownies saw this kind deed, and brought him fresh
flowers, and many things, which Thistle gratefully received, though
he never knew it was his kindness to the vine that gained for him
these pleasures.

Thus did poor Thistle strive to be more gentle and unselfish, and
grew daily happier and better.

Now while Thistledown was a captive in the lonely cell, Lily-Bell was
seeking him far and wide, and sadly traced him by the sorrowing hearts
he had left behind.

She healed the drooping flowers, cheered the Queen Bee's grief,
brought back her discontented subjects, restored the home to peace
and order, and left them blessing her.

Thus she journeyed on, till she reached the forest where Thistledown
had lost his freedom.  She unbound the starving dragon-fly, and tended
the wounded birds; but though all learned to love her, none could tell
where the Brownies had borne her friend, till a little wind came
whispering by, and told her that a sweet voice had been heard, singing
Fairy songs, deep in a moss-grown rock.

Then Lily-Bell went seeking through the forest, listening for the
voice.  Long she looked and listened in vain; when one day, as she was
wandering through a lonely dell, she heard a faint, low sound of
music, and soon a distant voice mournfully singing,--


 "Bright shines the summer sun,
    Soft is the summer air;
  Gayly the wood-birds sing,
    Flowers are blooming fair.

 "But, deep in the dark, cold rock,
    Sadly I dwell,
  Longing for thee, dear friend,
    Lily-Bell! Lily-Bell!"


"Thistle, dear Thistle, where are you?" joyfully cried Lily-Bell,
as she flew from rock to rock.  But the voice was still, and she
would have looked in vain, had she not seen a little vine, whose green
leaves fluttering to and fro seemed beckoning her to come; and as she
stood among its flowers she sang,--


 "Through sunlight and summer air
    I have sought for thee long,
  Guided by birds and flowers,
    And now by thy song.

 "Thistledown! Thistledown!
    O'er hill and dell
  Hither to comfort thee
    Comes Lily-Bell."


Then from the vine-leaves two little arms were stretched out to her,
and Thistledown was found.  So Lily-Bell made her home in the shadow
of the vine, and brought such joy to Thistle, that his lonely cell
seemed pleasanter to him than all the world beside; and he grew daily
more like his gentle friend.  But it did not last long, for one day
she did not come.  He watched and waited long, for the little face
that used to peep smiling in through the vine-leaves.  He called and
beckoned through the narrow opening, but no Lily-Bell answered; and
he wept sadly as he thought of all she had done for him, and that now
he could not go to seek and help her, for he had lost his freedom
by his own cruel and wicked deeds.

At last he besought the silent Brownie earnestly to tell him
whither she had gone.

"O let me go to her," prayed Thistle; "if she is in sorrow, I will
comfort her, and show my gratitude for all she has done for me:  dear
Brownie, set me free, and when she is found I will come and be your
prisoner again.  I will bear and suffer any danger for her sake."

"Lily-Bell is safe," replied the Brownie; "come, you shall learn
the trial that awaits you."

Then he led the wondering Fairy from his prison, to a group of tall,
drooping ferns, beneath whose shade a large white lily had been
placed, forming a little tent, within which, on a couch of thick green
moss, lay Lily-Bell in a deep sleep; the sunlight stole softly in,
and all was cool and still.

"You cannot wake her," said the Brownie, as Thistle folded his arms
tenderly about her.  "It is a magic slumber, and she will not wake
till you shall bring hither gifts from the Earth, Air, and Water
Spirits.  'T is a long and weary task, for you have made no friends
to help you, and will have to seek for them alone.  This is the trial
we shall give you; and if your love for Lily-Bell be strong enough
to keep you from all cruelty and selfishness, and make you kind and
loving as you should be, she will awake to welcome you, and love you
still more fondly than before."

Then Thistle, with a last look on the little friend he loved so well,
set forth alone to his long task.


The home of the Earth Spirits was the first to find, and no one
would tell him where to look.  So far and wide he wandered, through
gloomy forests and among lonely hills, with none to cheer him when
sad and weary, none to guide him on his way.

On he went, thinking of Lily-Bell, and for her sake bearing all;
for in his quiet prison many gentle feelings and kindly thoughts had
sprung up in his heart, and he now strove to be friends with all, and
win for himself the love and confidence of those whom once he sought
to harm and cruelly destroy.

But few believed him; for they remembered his false promises and
evil deeds, and would not trust him now; so poor Thistle found few
to love or care for him.

Long he wandered, and carefully he sought; but could not find the
Earth Spirits' home.  And when at length he reached the pleasant
garden where he and Lily-Bell first parted, he said within himself,--

"Here I will stay awhile, and try to win by kindly deeds the flowers'
forgiveness for the pain and sorrow I brought them long ago; and they
may learn to love and trust me.  So, even if I never find the Spirits,
I shall be worthier of Lily-Bell's affection if I strive to atone for
the wrong I have done."

Then he went among the flowers, but they closed their leaves, and
shrank away, trembling with fear; while the birds fled to hide
among the leaves as he passed.

This grieved poor Thistle, and he longed to tell them how changed
he had become; but they would not listen.  So he tried to show, by
quiet deeds of kindness, that he meant no harm to them; and soon
the kind-hearted birds pitied the lonely Fairy, and when he came near
sang cheering songs, and dropped ripe berries in his path, for he
no longer broke their eggs, or hurt their little ones.

And when the flowers saw this, and found the once cruel Elf now
watering and tending little buds, feeding hungry insects, and
helping the busy ants to bear their heavy loads, they shared the pity
of the birds, and longed to trust him; but they dared not yet.

He came one day, while wandering through the garden, to the little
rose he had once harmed so sadly.  Many buds now bloomed beside her,
and her soft face glowed with motherly pride, as she bent fondly over
them.  But when Thistle came, he saw with sorrow how she bade them
close their green curtains, and conceal themselves beneath the leaves,
for there was danger near; and, drooping still more closely over them,
she seemed to wait with trembling fear the cruel Fairy's coming.

But no rude hand tore her little ones away, no unkind words were
spoken; but a soft shower of dew fell lightly on them, and Thistle,
bending tenderly above them, said,--

"Dear flower, forgive the sorrow I once brought you, and trust me now
for Lily-Bell's sake.  Her gentleness has changed my cruelty to
kindness, and I would gladly repay all for the harm I have done;
but none will love and trust me now."

Then the little rose looked up, and while the dew-drops shone
like happy tears upon her leaves, she said,--

"I WILL love and trust you, Thistle, for you are indeed much
changed.  Make your home among us, and my sister flowers will soon
learn to love you as you deserve.  Not for sweet Lily-Bell's sake,
but for your own, will I become your friend; for you are kind and
gentle now, and worthy of our love.  Look up, my little ones, there is
no danger near; look up, and welcome Thistle to our home."

Then the little buds raised their rosy faces, danced again upon
their stems, and nodded kindly at Thistle, who smiled on them through
happy tears, and kissed the sweet, forgiving rose, who loved and
trusted him when most forlorn and friendless.

But the other flowers wondered among themselves, and Hyacinth said,--

"If Rose-Leaf is his friend, surely we may be; yet still I fear he may
soon grow weary of this gentleness, and be again the wicked Fairy he
once was, and we shall suffer for our kindness to him now."

"Ah, do not doubt him!" cried warm-hearted little Mignonette; "surely
some good spirit has changed the wicked Thistle into this good little
Elf.  See how tenderly he lifts aside the leaves that overshadow pale
Harebell, and listen now how softly he sings as he rocks little
Eglantine to sleep.  He has done many friendly things, though none
save Rose-Leaf has been kind to him, and he is very sad.  Last night
when I awoke to draw my curtains closer, he sat weeping in the
moonlight, so bitterly, I longed to speak a kindly word to him.
Dear sisters, let us trust him."

And they all said little Mignonette was right; and, spreading wide
their leaves, they bade him come, and drink their dew, and lie among
the fragrant petals, striving to cheer his sorrow.  Thistle told them
all, and, after much whispering together, they said,--

"Yes, we will help you to find the Earth Spirits, for you are striving
to be good, and for love of Lily-Bell we will do much for you."

So they called a little bright-eyed mole, and said, "Downy-Back,
we have given you a pleasant home among our roots, and you are
a grateful little friend; so will you guide dear Thistle to the
Earth Spirits' home?"

Downy-Back said, "Yes," and Thistle, thanking the kindly flowers,
followed his little guide, through long, dark galleries, deeper
and deeper into the ground; while a glow-worm flew before to light
the way.  On they went, and after a while, reached a path lit up by
bright jewels hung upon the walls.  Here Downy-Back, and Glimmer,
the glow-worm, left him, saying,--

"We can lead you no farther; you must now go on alone, and the music
of the Spirits will guide you to their home."

Then they went quickly up the winding path, and Thistle, guided
by the sweet music, went on alone.

He soon reached a lovely spot, whose golden halls were bright
with jewels, which sparkled brightly, and threw many-colored shadows
on the shining garments of the little Spirits, who danced below
to the melody of soft, silvery bells.

Long Thistle stood watching the brilliant forms that flashed and
sparkled round him; but he missed the flowers and the sunlight,
and rejoiced that he was not an Earth Spirit.

At last they spied him out, and, gladly welcoming him, bade him join
in their dance.  But Thistledown was too sad for that, and when he
told them all his story they no longer urged, but sought to comfort
him; and one whom they called little Sparkle (for her crown and robe
shone with the brightest diamonds), said:  "You will have to work
for us, ere you can win a gift to show the Brownies; do you see
those golden bells that make such music, as we wave them to and fro?
We worked long and hard ere they were won, and you can win one of
those, if you will do the task we give you."

And Thistle said, "No task will be too hard for me to do for dear
Lily-Bell's sake."

Then they led him to a strange, dark place, lit up with torches;
where troops of Spirits flew busily to and fro, among damp rocks, and
through dark galleries that led far down into the earth.  "What do
they here?" asked Thistle.

"I will tell," replied little Sparkle, "for I once worked here
myself.  Some of them watch above the flower-roots, and keep them
fresh and strong; others gather the clear drops that trickle from the
damp rocks, and form a little spring, which, growing ever larger,
rises to the light above, and gushes forth in some green field or
lonely forest; where the wild-birds come to drink, and wood-flowers
spread their thirsty leaves above the clear, cool waves, as they go
dancing away, carrying joy and freshness wherever they go.  Others
shape the bright jewels into lovely forms, and make the good-luck
pennies which we give to mortals whom we love.  And here you must toil
till the golden flower is won."

Then Thistle went among the Spirits, and joined in their tasks;
he tended the flower-roots, gathered the water-drops, and formed the
good-luck pennies.  Long and hard he worked, and was often sad and
weary, often tempted by unkind and selfish thoughts; but he thought
of Lily-Bell, and strove to be kind and loving as she had been; and
soon the Spirits learned to love the patient Fairy, who had left his
home to toil among them for the sake of his gentle friend.

At length came little Sparkle to him, saying, "You have done enough;
come now, and dance and feast with us, for the golden flower is won."

But Thistle could not stay, for half his task was not yet done; and
he longed for sunlight and Lily-Bell.  So, taking a kind farewell,
he hastened through the torch-lit path up to the light again; and,
spreading his wings, flew over hill and dale till he reached the
forest where Lily-Bell lay sleeping.

It was early morning, and the rosy light shone brightly through the
lily-leaves upon her, as Thistle entered, and laid his first gift
at the Brownie King's feet.

"You have done well," said he, "we hear good tidings of you from
bird and flower, and you are truly seeking to repair the evil
you have done.  Take now one look at your little friend, and then
go forth to seek from the Air Spirits your second gift."

Then Thistle said farewell again to Lily-Bell, and flew far and wide
among the clouds, seeking the Air Spirits; but though he wandered till
his weary wings could bear him no longer, it was in vain.  So, faint
and sad, he lay down to rest on a broad vine-leaf, that fluttered
gently in the wind; and as he lay, he saw beneath him the home
of the kind bees whom he had so disturbed, and Lily-Bell had helped
and comforted.

"I will seek to win their pardon, and show them that I am no longer
the cruel Fairy who so harmed them," thought Thistle, "and when they
become again my friends, I will ask their help to find the Air
Spirits; and if I deserve it, they will gladly aid me on my way."

So he flew down into the field below, and hastened busily from
flower to flower, till he had filled a tiny blue-bell with sweet,
fresh honey.  Then he stole softly to the hive, and, placing it near
the door, concealed himself to watch.  Soon his friend Nimble-Wing
came flying home, and when he spied the little cup, he hummed with
joy, and called his companions around him.

"Surely, some good Elf has placed it here for us," said they; "let us
bear it to our Queen; it is so fresh and fragrant it will be a fit
gift for her"; and they joyfully took it in, little dreaming who had
placed it there.

So each day Thistle filled a flower-cup, and laid it at the door;
and each day the bees wondered more and more, for many strange things
happened.  The field-flowers told of the good spirit who watched
above them, and the birds sang of the same kind little Elf bringing
soft moss for their nests, and food for their hungry young ones;
while all around the hive had grown fairer since the Fairy came.

But the bees never saw him, for he feared he had not yet done enough
to win their forgiveness and friendship; so he lived alone among the
vines, daily bringing them honey, and doing some kindly action.

At length, as he lay sleeping in a flower-bell, a little bee came
wandering by, and knew him for the wicked Thistle; so he called his
friends, and, as they flew murmuring around him, he awoke.

"What shall we do to you, naughty Elf?" said they.  "You are in
our power, and we will sting you if you are not still."

"Let us close the flower-leaves around him and leave him here
to starve," cried one, who had not yet forgotten all the sorrow
Thistle had caused them long ago.

"No, no, that were very cruel, dear Buzz," said little Hum; "let us
take him to our Queen, and she will tell us how to show our anger for
the wicked deeds he did.  See how bitterly he weeps; be kind to him,
he will not harm us more."

"You good little Hum!" cried a kind-hearted robin who had hopped near
to listen to the bees.  "Dear friends, do you not know that this is
the good Fairy who has dwelt so quietly among us, watching over bird
and blossom, giving joy to all he helps?  It is HE who brings the
honey-cup each day to you, and then goes silently away, that you may
never know who works so faithfully for you.  Be kind to him, for if
he has done wrong, he has repented of it, as you may see."

"Can this be naughty Thistle?" said Nimble-Wing.

"Yes, it is I," said Thistle, "but no longer cruel and unkind.  I have
tried to win your love by patient industry.  Ah, trust me now, and you
shall see I am not naughty Thistle any more."

Then the wondering bees led him to their Queen, and when he had told
his tale, and begged their forgiveness, it was gladly given; and
all strove to show him that he was loved and trusted.  Then he asked
if they could tell him where the Air Spirits dwelt, for he must not
forget dear Lily-Bell; and to his great joy the Queen said, "Yes,"
and bade little Hum guide Thistle to Cloud-Land.

Little Hum joyfully obeyed; and Thistle followed him, as he flew
higher and higher among the soft clouds, till in the distance they saw
a radiant light.

"There is their home, and I must leave you now, dear Thistle," said
the little bee; and, bidding him farewell, he flew singing back; while
Thistle, following the light, soon found himself in the Air Spirits'
home.

The sky was gold and purple like an autumn sunset, and long walls of
brilliant clouds lay round him.  A rosy light shone through the silver
mist, on gleaming columns and the rainbow roof; soft, fragrant winds
went whispering by, and airy little forms were flitting to and fro.

Long Thistle wondered at the beauty round him; and then he went
among the shining Spirits, told his tale, and asked a gift.

But they answered like the Earth Spirits.  "You must serve us first,
and then we will gladly give you a robe of sunlight like our own."

And then they told him how they wafted flower-seeds over the earth,
to beautify and brighten lonely spots; how they watched above the
blossoms by day, and scattered dews at night, brought sunlight
into darkened places, and soft winds to refresh and cheer.

"These are the things we do," said they, "and you must aid us
for a time."

And Thistle gladly went with the lovely Spirits; by day he joined
the sunlight and the breeze in their silent work; by night, with
Star-Light and her sister spirits, he flew over the moon-lit earth,
dropping cool dew upon the folded flowers, and bringing happy dreams
to sleeping mortals.  Many a kind deed was done, many a gentle word
was spoken; and each day lighter grew his heart, and stronger his
power of giving joy to others.

At length Star-Light bade him work no more, and gladly gave him
the gift he had won.  Then his second task was done, and he flew gayly
back to the green earth and slumbering Lily-Bell.

The silvery moonlight shone upon her, as he came to give his second
gift; and the Brownie spoke more kindly than before.

"One more trial, Thistle, and she will awake.  Go bravely forth and
win your last and hardest gift."


Then with a light heart Thistle journeyed away to the brooks and
rivers, seeking the Water Spirits.  But he looked in vain; till,
wandering through the forest where the Brownies took him captive,
he stopped beside the quiet lake.

As he stood here he heard a sound of pain, and, looking in the tall
grass at his side, he saw the dragon-fly whose kindness he once
repayed by pain and sorrow, and who now lay suffering and alone.

Thistle bent tenderly beside him, saying, "Dear Flutter, do not
fear me.  I will gladly ease your pain, if you will let me; I am your
friend, and long to show you how I grieve for all the wrong I did you,
when you were so kind to me.  Forgive, and let me help and comfort
you."

Then he bound up the broken wing, and spoke so tenderly that Flutter
doubted him no longer, and was his friend again.

Day by day did Thistle watch beside him, making little beds of
cool, fresh moss for him to rest upon, fanning him when he slept,
and singing sweet songs to cheer him when awake.  And often when
poor Flutter longed to be dancing once again over the blue waves,
the Fairy bore him in his arms to the lake, and on a broad leaf,
with a green flag for a sail, they floated on the still water; while
the dragon-fly's companions flew about them, playing merry games.

At length the broken wing was well, and Thistle said he must again
seek the Water Spirits.  "I can tell you where to find them," said
Flutter; "you must follow yonder little brook, and it will lead you
to the sea, where the Spirits dwell.  I would gladly do more for you,
dear Thistle, but I cannot, for they live deep beneath the waves.
You will find some kind friend to aid you on your way; and so
farewell."

Thistle followed the little brook, as it flowed through field and
valley, growing ever larger, till it reached the sea.  Here the wind
blew freshly, and the great waves rolled and broke at Thistle's feet,
as he stood upon the shore, watching the billows dancing and sparkling
in the sun.

"How shall I find the Spirits in this great sea, with none to help or
guide me? Yet it is my last task, and for Lily-Bell's sake I must not
fear or falter now," said Thistle.  So he flew hither and thither
over the sea, looking through the waves.  Soon he saw, far below,
the branches of the coral tree.

"They must be here," thought he, and, folding his wings, he plunged
into the deep, cold sea.  But he saw only fearful monsters and dark
shapes that gathered round him; and, trembling with fear, he struggled
up again.

The great waves tossed him to and fro, and cast him bruised and faint
upon the shore.  Here he lay weeping bitterly, till a voice beside him
said, "Poor little Elf, what has befallen you?  These rough waves are
not fit playmates for so delicate a thing as you.  Tell me your
sorrow, and I will comfort you."

And Thistle, looking up, saw a white sea-bird at his side, who tried
with friendly words to cheer him.  So he told all his wanderings,
and how he sought the Sea Spirits.

"Surely, if bee and blossom do their part to help you, birds should
aid you too," said the Sea-bird.  "I will call my friend, the
Nautilus, and he will bear you safely to the Coral Palace where the
Spirits dwell."

So, spreading his great wings, he flew away, and soon Thistle saw
a little boat come dancing over the waves, and wait beside the shore
for him.

In he sprang.  Nautilus raised his little sail to the wind, and the
light boat glided swiftly over the blue sea.  At last Thistle cried,
"I see lovely arches far below; let me go, it is the Spirits' home."

"Nay, close your eyes, and trust to me.  I will bear you safely down,"
said Nautilus.

So Thistle closed his eyes, and listened to the murmur of the sea,
as they sank slowly through the waves.  The soft sound lulled him
to sleep, and when he awoke the boat was gone, and he stood among
the Water Spirits, in their strange and lovely home.

Lofty arches of snow-white coral bent above him, and the walls
of brightly tinted shells were wreathed with lovely sea-flowers, and
the sunlight shining on the waves cast silvery shadows on the ground,
where sparkling stones glowed in the sand.  A cool, fresh wind swept
through the waving garlands of bright sea-moss, and the distant murmur
of dashing waves came softly on the air.  Soon troops of graceful
Spirits flitted by, and when they found the wondering Elf, they
gathered round him, bringing pearl-shells heaped with precious stones,
and all the rare, strange gifts that lie beneath the sea.  But Thistle
wished for none of these, and when his tale was told, the kindly
Spirits pitied him; and little Pearl sighed, as she told him of the
long and weary task he must perform, ere he could win a crown of
snow-white pearls like those they wore.  But Thistle had gained
strength and courage in his wanderings, and did not falter now, when
they led him to a place among the coral-workers, and told him he must
labor here, till the spreading branches reached the light and air,
through the waves that danced above.

With a patient hope that he might yet be worthy of Lily-Bell,
the Fairy left the lovely spirits and their pleasant home, to toil
among the coral-builders, where all was strange and dim.  Long, long,
he worked; but still the waves rolled far above them, and his task was
not yet done; and many bitter tears poor Thistle shed, and sadly he
pined for air and sunlight, the voice of birds, and breath of flowers.
Often, folded in the magic garments which the Spirits gave him, that
he might pass unharmed among the fearful creatures dwelling there,
he rose to the surface of the sea, and, gliding through the waves,
gazed longingly upon the hills, now looking blue and dim so far away,
or watched the flocks of summer birds, journeying to a warmer land;
and they brought sad memories of green old forests, and sunny fields,
to the lonely little Fairy floating on the great, wild sea.

Day after day went by, and slowly Thistle's task drew towards an end.
Busily toiled the coral-workers, but more busily toiled he; insect
and Spirit daily wondered more and more, at the industry and patience
of the silent little Elf, who had a friendly word for all, though
he never joined them in their sport.

Higher and higher grew the coral-boughs, and lighter grew the Fairy's
heart, while thoughts of dear Lily-Bell cheered him on, as day by day
he steadily toiled; and when at length the sun shone on his work,
and it was done, he stayed but to take the garland he had won, and
to thank the good Spirits for their love and care.  Then up through
the cold, blue waves he swiftly glided, and, shaking the bright drops
from his wings, soared singing up to the sunny sky.


On through the fragrant air went Thistle, looking with glad face
upon the fair, fresh earth below, where flowers looked smiling up,
and green trees bowed their graceful heads as if to welcome him.  Soon
the forest where Lily-Bell lay sleeping rose before him, and as he
passed along the cool, dim wood-paths, never had they seemed so fair.

But when he came where his little friend had slept, it was no longer
the dark, silent spot where he last saw her.  Garlands hung from every
tree, and the fairest flowers filled the air with their sweet breath.
Bird's gay voices echoed far and wide, and the little brook went
singing by, beneath the arching ferns that bent above it; green
leaves rustled in the summer wind, and the air was full of music.
But the fairest sight was Lily-Bell, as she lay on the couch of
velvet moss that Fairy hands had spread.  The golden flower lay
beside her, and the glittering robe was folded round her little form.
The warmest sunlight fell upon her, and the softest breezes lifted
her shining hair.

Happy tears fell fast, as Thistle folded his arms around her,
crying, "O Lily-Bell, dear Lily-Bell, awake! I have been true to you,
and now my task is done."

Then, with a smile, Lily-Bell awoke, and looked with wondering eyes
upon the beauty that had risen round her.

"Dear Thistle, what mean these fair things, and why are we in this
lovely place?"

"Listen, Lily-Bell," said the Brownie King, as he appeared beside her.
And then he told all that Thistle had done to show his love for her;
how he had wandered far and wide to seek the Fairy gifts, and toiled
long and hard to win them; how he had been loving, true, and tender,
when most lonely and forsaken.

"Bird, bee, and blossom have forgiven him, and none is more loved
and trusted now by all, than the once cruel Thistle," said the King,
as he bent down to the happy Elf, who bowed low before him.

"You have learned the beauty of a gentle, kindly heart, dear Thistle;
and you are now worthy to become the friend of her for whom you have
done so much.  Place the crown upon her head, for she is Queen of all
the Forest Fairies now."

And as the crown shone on the head that Lily-Bell bent down on
Thistle's breast, the forest seemed alive with little forms, who
sprang from flower and leaf, and gathered round her, bringing gifts
for their new Queen.

"If I am Queen, then you are King, dear Thistle," said the Fairy.
"Take the crown, and I will have a wreath of flowers.  You have toiled
and suffered for my sake, and you alone should rule over these little
Elves whose love you have won."

"Keep your crown, Lily-Bell, for yonder come the Spirits with their
gifts to Thistle," said the Brownie.  And, as he pointed with his
wand, out from among the mossy roots of an old tree came trooping
the Earth Spirits, their flower-bells ringing softly as they came,
and their jewelled garments glittering in the sun.  On to where
Thistledown stood beneath the shadow of the flowers, with Lily-Bell
beside him, went the Spirits; and then forth sprang little Sparkle,
waving a golden flower, whose silvery music filled the air.  "Dear
Thistle," said the shining Spirit, "what you toiled so faithfully
to win for another, let us offer now as a token of our love for you."

As she ceased, down through the air came floating bands of lovely
Air Spirits, bringing a shining robe, and they too told their love
for the gentle Fairy who had dwelt with them.

Then softly on the breeze came distant music, growing ever nearer,
till over the rippling waves came the singing Water Spirits, in their
boats of many-colored shells; and as they placed their glittering
crown on Thistle's head, loud rang the flowers, and joyously sang
the birds, while all the Forest Fairies cried, with silvery voices,
"Lily-Bell and Thistledown!  Long live our King and Queen!"

"Have you a tale for us too, dear Violet-Eye?" said the Queen, as
Zephyr ceased.  The little Elf thus named looked from among the
flower-leaves where she sat, and with a smile replied, "As I was
weaving garlands in the field, I heard a primrose tell this tale
to her friend Golden-Rod."



LITTLE BUD.


IN a great forest, high up among the green boughs, lived Bird
Brown-Breast, and his bright-eyed little mate.  They were now very
happy; their home was done, the four blue eggs lay in the soft nest,
and the little wife sat still and patient on them, while the husband
sang, and told her charming tales, and brought her sweet berries
and little worms.

Things went smoothly on, till one day she found in the nest a little
white egg, with a golden band about it.

"My friend," cried she, "come and see!  Where can this fine egg have
come from?  My four are here, and this also; what think you of it?"

The husband shook his head gravely, and said, "Be not alarmed, my
love; it is doubtless some good Fairy who has given us this, and we
shall find some gift within; do not let us touch it, but do you sit
carefully upon it, and we shall see in time what has been sent us."

So they said nothing about it, and soon their home had four little
chirping children; and then the white egg opened, and, behold,
a little maiden lay singing within.  Then how amazed were they,
and how they welcomed her, as she lay warm beneath the mother's wing,
and how the young birds did love her.

Great joy was in the forest, and proud were the parents of their
family, and still more of the little one who had come to them;
while all the neighbors flocked in, to see Dame Brown-Breast's
little child.  And the tiny maiden talked to them, and sang so
merrily, that they could have listened for ever.  Soon she was
the joy of the whole forest, dancing from tree to tree, making
every nest her home, and none were ever so welcome as little Bud;
and so they lived right merrily in the green old forest.

The father now had much to do to supply his family with food, and
choice morsels did he bring little Bud.  The wild fruits were her
food, the fresh dew in the flower-cups her drink, while the green
leaves served her for little robes; and thus she found garments in
the flowers of the field, and a happy home with Mother Brown-Breast;
and all in the wood, from the stately trees to the little mosses
in the turf, were friends to the merry child.

And each day she taught the young birds sweet songs, and as their gay
music rang through the old forest, the stern, dark pines ceased their
solemn waving, that they might hear the soft sounds stealing through
the dim wood-paths, and mortal children came to listen, saying softly,
"Hear the flowers sing, and touch them not, for the Fairies are here."

Then came a band of sad little Elves to Bud, praying that they might
hear the sweet music; and when she took them by the hand, and spoke
gently to them, they wept and said sadly, when she asked them whence
they came,--

"We dwelt once in Fairy-Land, and O how happy were we then! But alas!
we were not worthy of so fair a home, and were sent forth into the
cold world.  Look at our robes, they are like the withered leaves;
our wings are dim, our crowns are gone, and we lead sad, lonely lives
in this dark forest.  Let us stay with you; your gay music sounds
like Fairy songs, and you have such a friendly way with you, and speak
so gently to us.  It is good to be near one so lovely and so kind; and
you can tell us how we may again become fair and innocent.  Say we may
stay with you, kind little maiden."

And Bud said, "Yes," and they stayed; but her kind little heart
was grieved that they wept so sadly, and all she could say could not
make them happy; till at last she said,--

"Do not weep, and I will go to Queen Dew-Drop, and beseech her
to let you come back.  I will tell her that you are repentant,
and will do anything to gain her love again; that you are sad, and
long to be forgiven.  This will I say, and more, and trust she will
grant my prayer."

"She will not say no to you, dear Bud," said the poor little Fairies;
"she will love you as we do, and if we can but come again to our lost
home, we cannot give you thanks enough.  Go, Bud, and if there be
power in Fairy gifts, you shall be as happy as our hearts' best love
can make you."

The tidings of Bud's departure flew through the forest, and all her
friends came to say farewell, as with the morning sun she would go;
and each brought some little gift, for the land of Fairies was
far away, and she must journey long.

"Nay, you shall not go on your feet, my child," said Mother
Brown-Breast; "your friend Golden-Wing shall carry you.  Call him
hither, that I may seat you rightly, for if you should fall off
my heart would break."

Then up came Golden-Wing, and Bud was safely seated on the cushion
of violet-leaves; and it was really charming to see her merry little
face, peeping from under the broad brim of her cow-slip hat, as
her butterfly steed stood waving his bright wings in the sunlight.
Then came the bee with his yellow honey-bags, which he begged she
would take, and the little brown spider that lived under the great
leaves brought a veil for her hat, and besought her to wear it,
lest the sun should shine too brightly; while the ant came bringing a
tiny strawberry, lest she should miss her favorite fruit.  The mother
gave her good advice, and the papa stood with his head on one side,
and his round eyes twinkling with delight, to think that his
little Bud was going to Fairy-Land.

Then they all sang gayly together, till she passed out of sight
over the hills, and they saw her no more.


And now Bud left the old forest far behind her.  Golden-Wing
bore her swiftly along, and she looked down on the green mountains,
and the peasant's cottages, that stood among overshadowing trees;
and the earth looked bright, with its broad, blue rivers winding
through soft meadows, the singing birds, and flowers, who kept their
bright eyes ever on the sky.

And she sang gayly as they floated in the clear air, while her friend
kept time with his waving wings, and ever as they went along all grew
fairer; and thus they came to Fairy-Land.

As Bud passed through the gates, she no longer wondered that the
exiled Fairies wept and sorrowed for the lovely home they had lost.
Bright clouds floated in the sunny sky, casting a rainbow light on
the Fairy palaces below, where the Elves were dancing; while the
low, sweet voices of the singing flowers sounded softly through the
fragrant air, and mingled with the music of the rippling waves, as
they flowed on beneath the blossoming vines that drooped above them.

All was bright and beautiful; but kind little Bud would not linger,
for the forms of the weeping Fairies were before her; and
though the blossoms nodded gayly on their stems to welcome her,
and the soft winds kissed her cheek, she would not stay, but on
to the Flower Palace she went, into a pleasant hall whose walls
were formed of crimson roses, amid whose leaves sat little Elves,
making sweet music on their harps.  When they saw Bud, they gathered
round her, and led her through the flower-wreathed arches to a group
of the most beautiful Fairies, who were gathered about a stately lily,
in whose fragrant cup sat one whose purple robe and glittering crown
told she was their Queen.

Bud knelt before her, and, while tears streamed down her little face,
she told her errand, and pleaded earnestly that the exiled Fairies
might be forgiven, and not be left to pine far from their friends and
kindred.  And as she prayed, many wept with her; and when she ceased,
and waited for her answer, many knelt beside her, praying forgiveness
for the unhappy Elves.

With tearful eyes, Queen Dew-Drop replied,--

"Little maiden, your prayer has softened my heart.  They shall not be
left sorrowing and alone, nor shall you go back without a kindly word
to cheer and comfort them.  We will pardon their fault, and when they
can bring hither a perfect Fairy crown, robe, and wand, they shall be
again received as children of their loving Queen.  The task is hard,
for none but the best and purest can form the Fairy garments; yet with
patience they may yet restore their robes to their former brightness.
Farewell, good little maiden; come with them, for but for you they
would have dwelt for ever without the walls of Fairy-Land."

"Good speed to you, and farewell," cried they all, as, with loving
messages to their poor friends, they bore her to the gates.


Day after day toiled little Bud, cheering the Fairies, who,
angry and disappointed, would not listen to her gentle words,
but turned away and sat alone weeping.  They grieved her kind heart
with many cruel words; but patiently she bore with them, and when
they told her they could never perform so hard a task, and must dwell
for ever in the dark forest, she answered gently, that the snow-white
lily must be planted, and watered with repentant tears, before the
robe of innocence could be won; that the sun of love must shine
in their hearts, before the light could return to their dim crowns,
and deeds of kindness must be performed, ere the power would come
again to their now useless wands.

Then they planted the lilies; but they soon drooped and died, and
no light came to their crowns.  They did no gentle deeds, but cared
only for themselves; and when they found their labor was in vain,
they tried no longer, but sat weeping.  Bud, with ceaseless toil and
patient care, tended the lilies, which bloomed brightly, the crowns
grew bright, and in her hands the wands had power over birds and
blossoms, for she was striving to give happiness to others,
forgetful of herself.  And the idle Fairies, with thankful words, took
the garments from her, and then with Bud went forth to Fairy-Land,
and stood with beating hearts before the gates; where crowds of Fairy
friends came forth to welcome them.

But when Queen Dew-Drop touched them with her wand, as they passed in,
the light faded from their crowns, their robes became like withered
leaves, and their wands were powerless.

Amid the tears of all the Fairies, the Queen led them to the gates,
and said,--

"Farewell! It is not in my power to aid you; innocence and love are
not within your hearts, and were it not for this untiring little
maiden, who has toiled while you have wept, you never would have
entered your lost home.  Go and strive again, for till all is once
more fair and pure, I cannot call you mine."

"Farewell!" sang the weeping Fairies, as the gates closed on their
outcast friends; who, humbled and broken-hearted, gathered around Bud;
and she, with cheering words, guided them back to the forest.


Time passed on, and the Fairies had done nothing to gain their
lovely home again.  They wept no longer, but watched little Bud,
as she daily tended the flowers, restoring their strength and beauty,
or with gentle words flew from nest to nest, teaching the little birds
to live happily together; and wherever she went blessings fell, and
loving hearts were filled with gratitude.

Then, one by one, the Elves secretly did some little work of kindness,
and found a quiet joy come back to repay them.  Flowers looked
lovingly up as they passed, birds sang to cheer them when sad thoughts
made them weep.  And soon little Bud found out their gentle deeds,
and her friendly words gave them new strength.  So day after day
they followed her, and like a band of guardian spirits they flew
far and wide, carrying with them joy and peace.

And not only birds and flowers blessed them, but human beings also;
for with tender hands they guided little children from danger, and
kept their young hearts free from evil thoughts; they whispered
soothing words to the sick, and brought sweet odors and fair flowers
to their lonely rooms.  They sent lovely visions to the old and blind,
to make their hearts young and bright with happy thoughts.

But most tenderly did they watch over the poor and sorrowing,
and many a poor mother blessed the unseen hands that laid food
before her hungry little ones, and folded warm garments round
their naked limbs.  Many a poor man wondered at the fair flowers
that sprang up in his little garden-plot, cheering him with their
bright forms, and making his dreary home fair with their loveliness,
and looked at his once barren field, where now waved the golden corn,
turning its broad leaves to the warm sun, and promising a store of
golden ears to give him food; while the care-worn face grew bright,
and the troubled heart filled with gratitude towards the invisible
spirits who had brought him such joy.

Thus time passed on, and though the exiled Fairies longed often for
their home, still, knowing they did not deserve it, they toiled on,
hoping one day to see the friends they had lost; while the joy of
their own hearts made their life full of happiness.

One day came little Bud to them, saying,--

"Listen, dear friends.  I have a hard task to offer you.  It is a
great sacrifice for you light loving Fairies to dwell through the long
winter in the dark, cold earth, watching over the flower roots, to keep
them free from the little grubs and worms that seek to harm them.
But in the sunny Spring when they bloom again, their love and
gratitude will give you happy homes among their bright leaves.

"It is a wearisome task, and I can give you no reward for all your
tender care, but the blessings of the gentle flowers you will have
saved from death.  Gladly would I aid you; but my winged friends are
preparing for their journey to warmer lands, and I must help them
teach their little ones to fly, and see them safely on their way.
Then, through the winter, must I seek the dwellings of the poor
and suffering, comfort the sick and lonely, and give hope and courage
to those who in their poverty are led astray.  These things must I do;
but when the flowers bloom again I will be with you, to welcome back
our friends from over the sea."

Then, with tears, the Fairies answered, "Ah, good little Bud, you have
taken the hardest task yourself, and who will repay you for all your
deeds of tenderness and mercy in the great world? Should evil befall
you, our hearts would break.  We will labor trustingly in the earth,
and thoughts of you shall cheer us on; for without you we had been
worthless beings, and never known the joy that kindly actions bring.
Yes, dear Bud, we will gladly toil among the roots, that the fair
flowers may wear their gayest robes to welcome you."

Then deep in the earth the Fairies dwelt, and no frost or snow
could harm the blossoms they tended.  Every little seed was laid
in the soft earth, watered, and watched.  Tender roots were folded
in withered leaves, that no chilling drops might reach them; and
safely dreamed the flowers, till summer winds should call them forth;
while lighter grew each Fairy heart, as every gentle deed was
tenderly performed.

At length the snow was gone, and they heard little voices calling them
to come up; but patiently they worked, till seed and root were green
and strong.  Then, with eager feet, they hastened to the earth above,
where, over hill and valley, bright flowers and budding trees smiled
in the warm sunlight, blossoms bent lovingly before them, and rang
their colored bells, till the fragrant air was full of music; while
the stately trees waved their great arms above them, and scattered
soft leaves at their feet.

Then came the merry birds, making the wood alive with their gay
voices, calling to one another, as they flew among the vines,
building their little homes.  Long waited the Elves, and at last
she came with Father Brown-Breast.  Happy days passed; and
summer flowers were in their fullest beauty, when Bud bade the Fairies
come with her.


Mounted on bright-winged butterflies, they flew over forest and
meadow, till with joyful eyes they saw the flower-crowned walls
of Fairy-Land.

Before the gates they stood, and soon troops of loving Elves
came forth to meet them.  And on through the sunny gardens they went,
into the Lily Hall, where, among the golden stamens of a graceful
flower, sat the Queen; while on the broad, green leaves around it
stood the brighteyed little maids of honor.

Then, amid the deep silence, little Bud, leading the Fairies to the
throne, said,--

"Dear Queen, I here bring back your subjects, wiser for their sorrow,
better for their hard trial; and now might any Queen be proud of them,
and bow to learn from them that giving joy and peace to others
brings it fourfold to us, bearing a double happiness in the blessings
to those we help.  Through the dreary months, when they might have
dwelt among fair Southern flowers, beneath a smiling sky, they toiled
in the dark and silent earth, filling the hearts of the gentle Flower
Spirits with grateful love, seeking no reward but the knowledge of
their own good deeds, and the joy they always bring.  This they have
done unmurmuringly and alone; and now, far and wide, flower blessings
fall upon them, and the summer winds bear the glad tidings unto those
who droop in sorrow, and new joy and strength it brings, as they look
longingly for the friends whose gentle care hath brought such
happiness to their fair kindred.

"Are they not worthy of your love, dear Queen? Have they not won
their lovely home? Say they are pardoned, and you have gained
the love of hearts pure as the snow-white robes now folded over them."

As Bud ceased, she touched the wondering Fairies with her wand,
and the dark faded garments fell away; and beneath, the robes
of lily-leaves glittered pure and spotless in the sun-light.
Then, while happy tears fell, Queen Dew-Drop placed the bright crowns
on the bowed heads of the kneeling Fairies, and laid before them
the wands their own good deeds had rendered powerful.

They turned to thank little Bud for all her patient love,
but she was gone; and high above, in the clear air, they saw
the little form journeying back to the quiet forest.

She needed no reward but the joy she had given.  The Fairy hearts
were pure again, and her work was done; yet all Fairy-Land had learned
a lesson from gentle little Bud.


"Now, little Sunbeam, what have you to tell us?" said the Queen,
looking down on a bright-eyed Elf, who sat half hidden in the deep
moss at her feet.

"I too, like Star-Twinkle, have nothing but a song to offer,"
replied the Fairy; and then, while the nightingale's sweet voice
mingled with her own, she sang,--



CLOVER-BLOSSOM.


   IN a quiet, pleasant meadow,
     Beneath a summer sky,
   Where green old trees their branches waved,
     And winds went singing by;
   Where a little brook went rippling
     So musically low,
   And passing clouds cast shadows
     On the waving grass below;
   Where low, sweet notes of brooding birds
     Stole out on the fragrant air,
   And golden sunlight shone undimmed
     On all most fresh and fair;--
   There bloomed a lovely sisterhood
     Of happy little flowers,
   Together in this pleasant home,
     Through quiet summer hours.
   No rude hand came to gather them,
     No chilling winds to blight;
   Warm sunbeams smiled on them by day,
     And soft dews fell at night.
   So here, along the brook-side,
     Beneath the green old trees,
   The flowers dwelt among their friends,
     The sunbeams and the breeze.

   One morning, as the flowers awoke,
     Fragrant, and fresh, and fair,
   A little worm came creeping by,
     And begged a shelter there.
   "Ah! pity and love me," sighed the worm,
     "I am lonely, poor, and weak;
   A little spot for a resting-place,
     Dear flowers, is all I seek.
   I am not fair, and have dwelt unloved
     By butterfly, bird, and bee.
   They little knew that in this dark form
     Lay the beauty they yet may see.
   Then let me lie in the deep green moss,
     And weave my little tomb,
   And sleep my long, unbroken sleep
     Till Spring's first flowers come.
   Then will I come in a fairer dress,
     And your gentle care repay
   By the grateful love of the humble worm;
     Kind flowers, O let me stay!"
   But the wild rose showed her little thorns,
     While her soft face glowed with pride;
   The violet hid beneath the drooping ferns,
     And the daisy turned aside.
   Little Houstonia scornfully laughed,
     As she danced on her slender stem;
   While the cowslip bent to the rippling waves,
     And whispered the tale to them.
   A blue-eyed grass looked down on the worm,
     As it silently turned away,
   And cried, "Thou wilt harm our delicate leaves,
     And therefore thou canst not stay."
   Then a sweet, soft voice, called out from far,
     "Come hither, poor worm, to me;
   The sun lies warm in this quiet spot,
     And I'll share my home with thee."
   The wondering flowers looked up to see
     Who had offered the worm a home:
   'T was a clover-blossom, whose fluttering leaves
     Seemed beckoning him to come;
   It dwelt in a sunny little nook,
     Where cool winds rustled by,
   And murmuring bees and butterflies came,
     On the flower's breast to lie.
   Down through the leaves the sunlight stole,
     And seemed to linger there,
   As if it loved to brighten the home
     Of one so sweet and fair.
   Its rosy face smiled kindly down,
     As the friendless worm drew near;
   And its low voice, softly whispering, said
     "Poor thing, thou art welcome here;
   Close at my side, in the soft green moss,
     Thou wilt find a quiet bed,
   Where thou canst softly sleep till Spring,
     With my leaves above thee spread.
   I pity and love thee, friendless worm,
     Though thou art not graceful or fair;
   For many a dark, unlovely form,
     Hath a kind heart dwelling there;
   No more o'er the green and pleasant earth,
     Lonely and poor, shalt thou roam,
   For a loving friend hast thou found in me,
     And rest in my little home."
   Then, deep in its quiet mossy bed,
     Sheltered from sun and shower,
   The grateful worm spun its winter tomb,
     In the shadow of the flower.
   And Clover guarded well its rest,
     Till Autumn's leaves were sere,
   Till all her sister flowers were gone,
     And her winter sleep drew near.
   Then her withered leaves were softly spread
     O'er the sleeping worm below,
   Ere the faithful little flower lay
     Beneath the winter snow.

   Spring came again, and the flowers rose
     From their quiet winter graves,
   And gayly danced on their slender stems,
     And sang with the rippling waves.
   Softly the warm winds kissed their cheeks;
     Brightly the sunbeams fell,
   As, one by one, they came again
     In their summer homes to dwell.
   And little Clover bloomed once more,
     Rosy, and sweet, and fair,
   And patiently watched by the mossy bed,
     For the worm still slumbered there.
   Then her sister flowers scornfully cried,
     As they waved in the summer air,
   "The ugly worm was friendless and poor;
     Little Clover, why shouldst thou care?
   Then watch no more, nor dwell alone,
     Away from thy sister flowers;
   Come, dance and feast, and spend with us
     These pleasant summer hours.
   We pity thee, foolish little flower,
     To trust what the false worm said;
   He will not come in a fairer dress,
     For he lies in the green moss dead."
   But little Clover still watched on,
     Alone in her sunny home;
   She did not doubt the poor worm's truth,
     And trusted he would come.

   At last the small cell opened wide,
     And a glittering butterfly,
   From out the moss, on golden wings,
     Soared up to the sunny sky.
   Then the wondering flowers cried aloud,
     "Clover, thy watch was vain;
   He only sought a shelter here,
     And never will come again."
   And the unkind flowers danced for joy,
     When they saw him thus depart;
   For the love of a beautiful butterfly
     Is dear to a flower's heart.
   They feared he would stay in Clover's home,
     And her tender care repay;
   So they danced for joy, when at last he rose
     And silently flew away.
   Then little Clover bowed her head,
     While her soft tears fell like dew;
   For her gentle heart was grieved, to find
     That her sisters' words were true,
   And the insect she had watched so long
     When helpless, poor, and lone,
   Thankless for all her faithful care,
     On his golden wings had flown.
   But as she drooped, in silent grief,
     She heard little Daisy cry,
   "O sisters, look!  I see him now,
     Afar in the sunny sky;
   He is floating back from Cloud-Land now,
     Borne by the fragrant air.
   Spread wide your leaves, that he may choose
     The flower he deems most fair."
   Then the wild rose glowed with a deeper blush,
     As she proudly waved on her stem;
   The Cowslip bent to the clear blue waves,
     And made her mirror of them.
   Little Houstonia merrily danced,
     And spread her white leaves wide;
   While Daisy whispered her joy and hope,
     As she stood by her gay friends' side.
   Violet peeped from the tall green ferns,
     And lifted her soft blue eye
   To watch the glittering form, that shone
     Afar in the summer sky.
   They thought no more of the ugly worm,
     Who once had wakened their scorn;
   But looked and longed for the butterfly now,
     As the soft wind bore him on.

   Nearer and nearer the bright form came,
     And fairer the blossoms grew;
   Each welcomed him, in her sweetest tones;
     Each offered her honey and dew.
   But in vain did they beckon, and smile, and call,
     And wider their leaves unclose;
   The glittering form still floated on,
     By Violet, Daisy, and Rose.
   Lightly it flew to the pleasant home
     Of the flower most truly fair,
   On Clover's breast he softly lit,
     And folded his bright wings there.
   "Dear flower," the butterfly whispered low,
     "Long hast thou waited for me;
   Now I am come, and my grateful love
     Shall brighten thy home for thee;
   Thou hast loved and cared for me, when alone,
     Hast watched o'er me long and well;
   And now will I strive to show the thanks
     The poor worm could not tell.
   Sunbeam and breeze shall come to thee,
     And the coolest dews that fall;
   Whate'er a flower can wish is thine,
     For thou art worthy all.
   And the home thou shared with the friendless worm
     The butterfly's home shall be;
   And thou shalt find, dear, faithful flower,
     A loving friend in me."
   Then, through the long, bright summer hours
     Through sunshine and through shower,
   Together in their happy home
     Dwelt butterfly and flower.


"Ah, that is very lovely," cried the Elves, gathering round
little Sunbeam as she ceased, to place a garland in her hair and
praise her song.

"Now," said the Queen, "call hither Moon-light and Summer-Wind,
for they have seen many pleasant things in their long wanderings,
and will gladly tell us them."

"Most joyfully will we do our best, dear Queen," said the Elves,
as they folded their wings beside her.

"Now, Summer-Wind," said Moonlight, "till your turn comes, do you sit
here and fan me while I tell this tale of



LITTLE ANNIE'S DREAM;
  OR,
  THE FAIRY FLOWER.


IN a large and pleasant garden sat little Annie all alone, and
she seemed very sad, for drops that were not dew fell fast upon the
flowers beside her, who looked wonderingly up, and bent still nearer,
as if they longed to cheer and comfort her.  The warm wind lifted up
her shining hair and softly kissed her cheek, while the sunbeams,
looking most kindly in her face, made little rainbows in her tears,
and lingered lovingly about her.  But Annie paid no heed to sun,
or wind, or flower; still the bright tears fell, and she forgot
all but her sorrow.

"Little Annie, tell me why you weep," said a low voice in her ear;
and, looking up, the child beheld a little figure standing on a
vine-leaf at her side; a lovely face smiled on her, from amid
bright locks of hair, and shining wings were folded on a white and
glittering robe, that fluttered in the wind.

"Who are you, lovely little thing?" cried Annie, smiling through
her tears.

"I am a Fairy, little child, and am come to help and comfort you; now
tell me why you weep, and let me be your friend," replied the spirit,
as she smiled more kindly still on Annie's wondering face.

"And are you really, then, a little Elf, such as I read of
in my fairy books?  Do you ride on butterflies, sleep in flower-cups,
and live among the clouds?"

"Yes, all these things I do, and many stranger still, that all
your fairy books can never tell; but now, dear Annie," said the Fairy,
bending nearer, "tell me why I found no sunshine on your face; why are
these great drops shining on the flowers, and why do you sit alone
when BIRD and BEE are calling you to play?"

"Ah, you will not love me any more if I should tell you all,"
said Annie, while the tears began to fall again; "I am not happy,
for I am not good; how shall I learn to be a patient, gentle child?
good little Fairy, will you teach me how?"

"Gladly will I aid you, Annie, and if you truly wish to be
a happy child, you first must learn to conquer many passions that
you cherish now, and make your heart a home for gentle feelings and
happy thoughts; the task is hard, but I will give this fairy flower
to help and counsel you.  Bend hither, that I may place it in your
breast; no hand can take it hence, till I unsay the spell that
holds it there."

As thus she spoke, the Elf took from her bosom a graceful flower,
whose snow-white leaves shone with a strange, soft light.  "This is
a fairy flower," said the Elf, "invisible to every eye save yours;
now listen while I tell its power, Annie.  When your heart is filled
with loving thoughts, when some kindly deed has been done, some duty
well performed, then from the flower there will arise the sweetest,
softest fragrance, to reward and gladden you.  But when an unkind word
is on your lips, when a selfish, angry feeling rises in your heart,
or an unkind, cruel deed is to be done, then will you hear the soft,
low chime of the flower-bell; listen to its warning, let the word
remain unspoken, the deed undone, and in the quiet joy of your own
heart, and the magic perfume of your bosom flower, you will find
a sweet reward."

"O kind and generous Fairy, how can I ever thank you for this lovely
gift!" cried Annie.  "I will be true, and listen to my little bell
whenever it may ring.  But shall I never see YOU more?  Ah! if you
would only stay with me, I should indeed be good."

"I cannot stay now, little Annie," said the Elf, "but when
another Spring comes round, I shall be here again, to see how well
the fairy gift has done its work.  And now farewell, dear child;
be faithful to yourself, and the magic flower will never fade."

Then the gentle Fairy folded her little arms around Annie's neck,
laid a soft kiss on her cheek, and, spreading wide her shining wings,
flew singing up among the white clouds floating in the sky.

And little Annie sat among her flowers, and watched with wondering joy
the fairy blossom shining on her breast.

The pleasant days of Spring and Summer passed away, and in
little Annie's garden Autumn flowers were blooming everywhere,
with each day's sun and dew growing still more beautiful and bright;
but the fairy flower, that should have been the loveliest of all,
hung pale and drooping on little Annie's bosom; its fragrance seemed
quite gone, and the clear, low music of its warning chime rang often
in her ear.

When first the Fairy placed it there, she had been pleased with
her new gift, and for a while obeyed the fairy bell, and often tried
to win some fragrance from the flower, by kind and pleasant words
and actions; then, as the Fairy said, she found a sweet reward in
the strange, soft perfume of the magic blossom, as it shone upon her
breast; but selfish thoughts would come to tempt her, she would yield,
and unkind words fell from her lips; and then the flower drooped pale
and scentless, the fairy bell rang mournfully, Annie would forget
her better resolutions, and be again a selfish, wilful little child.

At last she tried no longer, but grew angry with the faithful flower,
and would have torn it from her breast; but the fairy spell still
held it fast, and all her angry words but made it ring a louder,
sadder peal.  Then she paid no heed to the silvery music sounding
in her ear, and each day grew still more unhappy, discontented,
and unkind; so, when the Autumn days came round, she was no better
for the gentle Fairy's gift, and longed for Spring, that it might
be returned; for now the constant echo of the mournful music made her
very sad.

One sunny morning, when the fresh, cool Winds were blowing,
and not a cloud was in the sky, little Annie walked among her flowers,
looking carefully into each, hoping thus to find the Fairy, who alone
could take the magic blossom from her breast.  But she lifted up their
drooping leaves, peeped into their dewy cups in vain; no little Elf
lay hidden there, and she turned sadly from them all, saying, "I will
go out into the fields and woods, and seek her there.  I will not
listen to this tiresome music more, nor wear this withered flower
longer."  So out into the fields she went, where the long grass
rustled as she passed, and timid birds looked at her from their nests;
where lovely wild-flowers nodded in the wind, and opened wide their
fragrant leaves, to welcome in the murmuring bees, while butterflies,
like winged flowers, danced and glittered in the sun.

Little Annie looked, searched, and asked them all if any one
could tell her of the Fairy whom she sought; but the birds looked
wonderingly at her with their soft, bright eyes, and still sang on;
the flowers nodded wisely on their stems, but did not speak,
while butterfly and bee buzzed and fluttered away, one far too busy,
the other too idle, to stay and tell her what she asked.

Then she went through broad fields of yellow grain, that waved
around her like a golden forest; here crickets chirped, grasshoppers
leaped, and busy ants worked, but they could not tell her what
she longed to know.

"Now will I go among the hills," said Annie, "she may be there."
So up and down the green hill-sides went her little feet; long she
searched and vainly she called; but still no Fairy came.  Then
by the river-side she went, and asked the gay dragon-flies, and the
cool white lilies, if the Fairy had been there; but the blue waves
rippled on the white sand at her feet, and no voice answered her.

Then into the forest little Annie went; and as she passed along the
dim, cool paths, the wood-flowers smiled up in her face, gay squirrels
peeped at her, as they swung amid the vines, and doves cooed softly
as she wandered by; but none could answer her.  So, weary with
her long and useless search, she sat amid the ferns, and feasted
on the rosy strawberries that grew beside her, watching meanwhile
the crimson evening clouds that glowed around the setting sun.

The night-wind rustled through the boughs, rocking the flowers
to sleep; the wild birds sang their evening hymns, and all within
the wood grew calm and still; paler and paler grew the purple light,
lower and lower drooped little Annie's head, the tall ferns bent
to shield her from the dew, the whispering pines sang a soft lullaby;
and when the Autumn moon rose up, her silver light shone on the child,
where, pillowed on green moss, she lay asleep amid the wood-flowers
in the dim old forest.

And all night long beside her stood the Fairy she had sought, and
by elfin spell and charm sent to the sleeping child this dream.

Little Annie dreamed she sat in her own garden, as she had often
sat before, with angry feelings in her heart, and unkind words upon
her lips.  The magic flower was ringing its soft warning, but she paid
no heed to anything, save her own troubled thoughts; thus she sat,
when suddenly a low voice whispered in her ear,--

"Little Annie, look and see the evil things that you are cherishing;
I will clothe in fitting shapes the thoughts and feelings that now
dwell within your heart, and you shall see how great their power
becomes, unless you banish them for ever."

Then Annie saw, with fear and wonder, that the angry words she uttered
changed to dark, unlovely forms, each showing plainly from what fault
or passion it had sprung.  Some of the shapes had scowling faces and
bright, fiery eyes; these were the spirits of Anger.  Others, with
sullen, anxious looks, seemed gathering up all they could reach, and
Annie saw that the more they gained, the less they seemed to have;
and these she knew were shapes of Selfishness.  Spirits of Pride were
there, who folded their shadowy garments round them, and turned
scornfully away from all the rest.  These and many others
little Annie saw, which had come from her own heart, and taken form
before her eyes.

When first she saw them, they were small and weak; but as she looked
they seemed to grow and gather strength, and each gained a
strange power over her.  She could not drive them from her sight,
and they grew ever stronger, darker, and more unlovely to her eyes.
They seemed to cast black shadows over all around, to dim the
sunshine, blight the flowers, and drive away all bright and lovely
things; while rising slowly round her Annie saw a high, dark wall,
that seemed to shut out everything she loved; she dared not move,
or speak, but, with a strange fear at her heart, sat watching the dim
shapes that hovered round her.

Higher and higher rose the shadowy wall, slowly the flowers near her
died, lingeringly the sunlight faded; but at last they both were gone,
and left her all alone behind the gloomy wall.  Then the spirits
gathered round her, whispering strange things in her ear, bidding her
obey, for by her own will she had yielded up her heart to be their
home, and she was now their slave.  Then she could hear no more, but,
sinking down among the withered flowers, wept sad and bitter tears,
for her lost liberty and joy; then through the gloom there shone
a faint, soft light, and on her breast she saw her fairy flower,
upon whose snow-white leaves her tears lay shining.

Clearer and brighter grew the radiant light, till the evil spirits
turned away to the dark shadow of the wall, and left the child alone.

The light and perfume of the flower seemed to bring new strength
to Annie, and she rose up, saying, as she bent to kiss the blossom
on her breast, "Dear flower, help and guide me now, and I will listen
to your voice, and cheerfully obey my faithful fairy bell."

Then in her dream she felt how hard the spirits tried to tempt
and trouble her, and how, but for her flower, they would have led
her back, and made all dark and dreary as before.  Long and hard
she struggled, and tears often fell; but after each new trial,
brighter shone her magic flower, and sweeter grew its breath, while
the spirits lost still more their power to tempt her.  Meanwhile,
green, flowering vines crept up the high, dark wall, and hid its
roughness from her sight; and over these she watched most tenderly,
for soon, wherever green leaves and flowers bloomed, the wall beneath
grew weak, and fell apart.  Thus little Annie worked and hoped,
till one by one the evil spirits fled away, and in their place
came shining forms, with gentle eyes and smiling lips, who gathered
round her with such loving words, and brought such strength and joy
to Annie's heart, that nothing evil dared to enter in; while slowly
sank the gloomy wall, and, over wreaths of fragrant flowers, she
passed out into the pleasant world again, the fairy gift no longer
pale and drooping, but now shining like a star upon her breast.

Then the low voice spoke again in Annie's sleeping ear, saying,
"The dark, unlovely passions you have looked upon are in your heart;
watch well while they are few and weak, lest they should darken your
whole life, and shut out love and happiness for ever.  Remember well
the lesson of the dream, dear child, and let the shining spirits
make your heart their home."

And with that voice sounding in her ear, little Annie woke to find
it was a dream; but like other dreams it did not pass away; and as she
sat alone, bathed in the rosy morning light, and watched the forest
waken into life, she thought of the strange forms she had seen, and,
looking down upon the flower on her breast, she silently resolved to
strive, as she had striven in her dream, to bring back light and
beauty to its faded leaves, by being what the Fairy hoped to render
her, a patient, gentle little child.  And as the thought came to her
mind, the flower raised its drooping head, and, looking up into the
earnest little face bent over it, seemed by its fragrant breath to
answer Annie's silent thought, and strengthen her for what might come.

Meanwhile the forest was astir, birds sang their gay good-morrows
from tree to tree, while leaf and flower turned to greet the sun,
who rose up smiling on the world; and so beneath the forest boughs
and through the dewy fields went little Annie home, better and wiser
for her dream.


Autumn flowers were dead and gone, yellow leaves lay rustling on the
ground, bleak winds went whistling through the naked trees, and cold,
white Winter snow fell softly down; yet now, when all without looked
dark and dreary, on little Annie's breast the fairy flower bloomed
more beautiful than ever.  The memory of her forest dream had never
passed away, and through trial and temptation she had been true, and
kept her resolution still unbroken; seldom now did the warning bell
sound in her ear, and seldom did the flower's fragrance cease to float
about her, or the fairy light to brighten all whereon it fell.

So, through the long, cold Winter, little Annie dwelt like a sunbeam
in her home, each day growing richer in the love of others, and
happier in herself; often was she tempted, but, remembering her dream,
she listened only to the music of the fairy bell, and the unkind
thought or feeling fled away, the smiling spirits of gentleness
and love nestled in her heart, and all was bright again.

So better and happier grew the child, fairer and sweeter grew the
flower, till Spring came smiling over the earth, and woke the flowers,
set free the streams, and welcomed back the birds; then daily did
the happy child sit among her flowers, longing for the gentle Elf
to come again, that she might tell her gratitude for all the magic
gift had done.

At length, one day, as she sat singing in the sunny nook where
all her fairest flowers bloomed, weary with gazing at the far-off sky
for the little form she hoped would come, she bent to look with joyful
love upon her bosom flower; and as she looked, its folded leaves
spread wide apart, and, rising slowly from the deep white cup,
appeared the smiling face of the lovely Elf whose coming she had
waited for so long.

"Dear Annie, look for me no longer; I am here on your own breast,
for you have learned to love my gift, and it has done its work
most faithfully and well," the Fairy said, as she looked into the
happy child's bright face, and laid her little arms most tenderly
about her neck.

"And now have I brought another gift from Fairy-Land, as a fit reward
for you, dear child," she said, when Annie had told all her gratitude
and love; then, touching the child with her shining wand, the Fairy
bid her look and listen silently.

And suddenly the world seemed changed to Annie; for the air was filled
with strange, sweet sounds, and all around her floated lovely forms.
In every flower sat little smiling Elves, singing gayly as they rocked
amid the leaves.  On every breeze, bright, airy spirits came floating
by; some fanned her cheek with their cool breath, and waved her long
hair to and fro, while others rang the flower-bells, and made a
pleasant rustling among the leaves.  In the fountain, where the water
danced and sparkled in the sun, astride of every drop she saw merry
little spirits, who plashed and floated in the clear, cool waves, and
sang as gayly as the flowers, on whom they scattered glittering dew.
The tall trees, as their branches rustled in the wind, sang a low,
dreamy song, while the waving grass was filled with little voices
she had never heard before.  Butterflies whispered lovely tales in
her ear, and birds sang cheerful songs in a sweet language she had
never understood before.  Earth and air seemed filled with beauty
and with music she had never dreamed of until now.

"O tell me what it means, dear Fairy! is it another and a lovelier
dream, or is the earth in truth so beautiful as this?" she cried,
looking with wondering joy upon the Elf, who lay upon the flower
in her breast.

"Yes, it is true, dear child," replied the Fairy, "and few are the
mortals to whom we give this lovely gift; what to you is now so full
of music and of light, to others is but a pleasant summer world;
they never know the language of butterfly or bird or flower, and they
are blind to all that I have given you the power to see.  These fair
things are your friends and playmates now, and they will teach you
many pleasant lessons, and give you many happy hours; while the garden
where you once sat, weeping sad and bitter tears, is now brightened
by your own happiness, filled with loving friends by your own kindly
thoughts and feelings; and thus rendered a pleasant summer home
for the gentle, happy child, whose bosom flower will never fade.
And now, dear Annie, I must go; but every Springtime, with the
earliest flowers, will I come again to visit you, and bring
some fairy gift.  Guard well the magic flower, that I may find all
fair and bright when next I come."

Then, with a kind farewell, the gentle Fairy floated upward
through the sunny air, smiling down upon the child, until she vanished
in the soft, white clouds, and little Annie stood alone in her
enchanted garden, where all was brightened with the radiant light,
and fragrant with the perfume of her fairy flower.


When Moonlight ceased, Summer-Wind laid down her rose-leaf fan, and,
leaning back in her acorn cup, told this tale of



RIPPLE, THE WATER-SPIRIT.


DOWN in the deep blue sea lived Ripple, a happy little Water-Spirit;
all day long she danced beneath the coral arches, made garlands
of bright ocean flowers, or floated on the great waves that sparkled
in the sunlight; but the pastime that she loved best was lying
in the many-colored shells upon the shore, listening to the low,
murmuring music the waves had taught them long ago; and here
for hours the little Spirit lay watching the sea and sky, while
singing gayly to herself.

But when tempests rose, she hastened down below the stormy billows,
to where all was calm and still, and with her sister Spirits waited
till it should be fair again, listening sadly, meanwhile, to the cries
of those whom the wild waves wrecked and cast into the angry sea,
and who soon came floating down, pale and cold, to the Spirits'
pleasant home; then they wept pitying tears above the lifeless forms,
and laid them in quiet graves, where flowers bloomed, and jewels
sparkled in the sand.

This was Ripple's only grief, and she often thought of those who
sorrowed for the friends they loved, who now slept far down in the dim
and silent coral caves, and gladly would she have saved the lives
of those who lay around her; but the great ocean was far mightier than
all the tender-hearted Spirits dwelling in its bosom.  Thus she could
only weep for them, and lay them down to sleep where no cruel waves
could harm them more.

One day, when a fearful storm raged far and wide, and the Spirits saw
great billows rolling like heavy clouds above their heads, and heard
the wild winds sounding far away, down through the foaming waves
a little child came floating to their home; its eyes were closed as if
in sleep, the long hair fell like sea-weed round its pale, cold face,
and the little hands still clasped the shells they had been gathering
on the beach, when the great waves swept it into the troubled sea.

With tender tears the Spirits laid the little form to rest upon its
bed of flowers, and, singing mournful songs, as if to make its sleep
more calm and deep, watched long and lovingly above it, till the storm
had died away, and all was still again.

While Ripple sang above the little child, through the distant roar
of winds and waves she heard a wild, sorrowing voice, that seemed to
call for help.  Long she listened, thinking it was but the echo of
their own plaintive song, but high above the music still sounded
the sad, wailing cry.  Then, stealing silently away, she glided up
through foam and spray, till, through the parting clouds, the sunlight
shone upon her from the tranquil sky; and, guided by the mournful
sound, she floated on, till, close before her on the beach, she saw
a woman stretching forth her arms, and with a sad, imploring voice
praying the restless sea to give her back the little child it had
so cruelly borne away.  But the waves dashed foaming up among the
bare rocks at her feet, mingling their cold spray with her tears,
and gave no answer to her prayer.

When Ripple saw the mother's grief, she longed to comfort her;
so, bending tenderly beside her, where she knelt upon the shore,
the little Spirit told her how her child lay softly sleeping, far down
in a lovely place, where sorrowing tears were shed, and gentle hands
laid garlands over him.  But all in vain she whispered kindly words;
the weeping mother only cried,--

"Dear Spirit, can you use no charm or spell to make the waves bring
back my child, as full of life and strength as when they swept him
from my side?  O give me back my little child, or let me lie beside
him in the bosom of the cruel sea."

"Most gladly will I help you if I can, though I have little power
to use; then grieve no more, for I will search both earth and sea,
to find some friend who can bring back all you have lost.  Watch daily
on the shore, and if I do not come again, then you will know my search
has been in vain.  Farewell, poor mother, you shall see your little
child again, if Fairy power can win him back."  And with these
cheering words Ripple sprang into the sea; while, smiling through her
tears, the woman watched the gentle Spirit, till her bright crown
vanished in the waves.

When Ripple reached her home, she hastened to the palace of the Queen,
and told her of the little child, the sorrowing mother, and the
promise she had made.

"Good little Ripple," said the Queen, when she had told her all,
"your promise never can be kept; there is no power below the sea
to work this charm, and you can never reach the Fire-Spirits' home,
to win from them a flame to warm the little body into life.  I pity
the poor mother, and would most gladly help her; but alas! I am a
Spirit like yourself, and cannot serve you as I long to do."

"Ah, dear Queen! if you had seen her sorrow, you too would seek to
keep the promise I have made.  I cannot let her watch for ME in
vain, till I have done my best: then tell me where the Fire-Spirits
dwell, and I will ask of them the flame that shall give life to the
little child and such great happiness to the sad, lonely mother:
tell me the path, and let me go."

"It is far, far away, high up above the sun, where no Spirit ever
dared to venture yet," replied the Queen.  "I cannot show the path,
for it is through the air.  Dear Ripple, do not go, for you can
never reach that distant place: some harm most surely will befall;
and then how shall we live, without our dearest, gentlest Spirit?
Stay here with us in your own pleasant home, and think more of this,
for I can never let you go."

But Ripple would not break the promise she had made, and besought
so earnestly, and with such pleading words, that the Queen at last
with sorrow gave consent, and Ripple joyfully prepared to go.  She,
with her sister Spirits, built up a tomb of delicate, bright-colored
shells, wherein the child might lie, till she should come to wake him
into life; then, praying them to watch most faithfully above it,
she said farewell, and floated bravely forth, on her long, unknown
journey, far away.

"I will search the broad earth till I find a path up to the sun,
or some kind friend who will carry me; for, alas! I have no wings,
and cannot glide through the blue air as through the sea," said Ripple
to herself, as she went dancing over the waves, which bore her swiftly
onward towards a distant shore.

Long she journeyed through the pathless ocean, with no friends
to cheer her, save the white sea-birds who went sweeping by, and
only stayed to dip their wide wings at her side, and then flew
silently away.  Sometimes great ships sailed by, and then with
longing eyes did the little Spirit gaze up at the faces that looked
down upon the sea; for often they were kind and pleasant ones, and
she gladly would have called to them and asked them to be friends.
But they would never understand the strange, sweet language that
she spoke, or even see the lovely face that smiled at them above the
waves; her blue, transparent garments were but water to their eyes,
and the pearl chains in her hair but foam and sparkling spray; so,
hoping that the sea would be most gentle with them, silently she
floated on her way, and left them far behind.

At length green hills were seen, and the waves gladly bore the little
Spirit on, till, rippling gently over soft white sand, they left her
on the pleasant shore.

"Ah, what a lovely place it is!" said Ripple, as she passed through
sunny valleys, where flowers began to bloom, and young leaves rustled
on the trees.

"Why are you all so gay, dear birds?" she asked, as their cheerful
voices sounded far and near; "is there a festival over the earth,
that all is so beautiful and bright?"

"Do you not know that Spring is coming? The warm winds whispered it
days ago, and we are learning the sweetest songs, to welcome her
when she shall come," sang the lark, soaring away as the music gushed
from his little throat.

"And shall I see her, Violet, as she journeys over the earth?" asked
Ripple again.

"Yes, you will meet her soon, for the sunlight told me she was near;
tell her we long to see her again, and are waiting to welcome her
back," said the blue flower, dancing for joy on her stem, as she
nodded and smiled on the Spirit.

"I will ask Spring where the Fire-Spirits dwell; she travels over
the earth each year, and surely can show me the way," thought Ripple,
as she went journeying on.

Soon she saw Spring come smiling over the earth; sunbeams and breezes
floated before, and then, with her white garments covered with
flowers, with wreaths in her hair, and dew-drops and seeds falling
fast from her hands the beautiful season came singing by.

"Dear Spring, will you listen, and help a poor little Spirit,
who seeks far and wide for the Fire-Spirits' home?" cried Ripple; and
then told why she was there, and begged her to tell what she sought.

"The Fire-Spirits' home is far, far away, and I cannot guide you
there; but Summer is coming behind me," said Spring, "and she may know
better than I.  But I will give you a breeze to help you on your way;
it will never tire nor fail, but bear you easily over land and sea.
Farewell, little Spirit!  I would gladly do more, but voices are
calling me far and wide, and I cannot stay."

"Many thanks, kind Spring!" cried Ripple, as she floated away on the
breeze; "give a kindly word to the mother who waits on the shore, and
tell her I have not forgotten my vow, but hope soon to see her again."

Then Spring flew on with her sunshine and flowers, and Ripple went
swiftly over hill and vale, till she came to the land where Summer
was dwelling.  Here the sun shone warmly down on the early fruit,
the winds blew freshly over fields of fragrant hay, and rustled with
a pleasant sound among the green leaves in the forests; heavy dews
fell softly down at night, and long, bright days brought strength
and beauty to the blossoming earth.

"Now I must seek for Summer," said Ripple, as she sailed slowly
through the sunny sky.

"I am here, what would you with me, little Spirit?" said a musical
voice in her ear; and, floating by her side, she saw a graceful form,
with green robes fluttering in the air, whose pleasant face looked
kindly on her, from beneath a crown of golden sunbeams that cast
a warm, bright glow on all beneath.

Then Ripple told her tale, and asked where she should go; but
Summer answered,--

"I can tell no more than my young sister Spring where you may find
the Spirits that you seek; but I too, like her, will give a gift to
aid you.  Take this sunbeam from my crown; it will cheer and brighten
the most gloomy path through which you pass.  Farewell! I shall carry
tidings of you to the watcher by the sea, if in my journey round the
world I find her there."

And Summer, giving her the sunbeam, passed away over the distant
hills, leaving all green and bright behind her.

So Ripple journeyed on again, till the earth below her shone
with yellow harvests waving in the sun, and the air was filled
with cheerful voices, as the reapers sang among the fields or in
the pleasant vineyards, where purple fruit hung gleaming through
the leaves; while the sky above was cloudless, and the changing
forest-trees shone like a many-colored garland, over hill and plain;
and here, along the ripening corn-fields, with bright wreaths of
crimson leaves and golden wheat-ears in her hair and on her purple
mantle, stately Autumn passed, with a happy smile on her calm face,
as she went scattering generous gifts from her full arms.

But when the wandering Spirit came to her, and asked for what she
sought, this season, like the others, could not tell her where to go;
so, giving her a yellow leaf, Autumn said, as she passed on,--

"Ask Winter, little Ripple, when you come to his cold home; he knows
the Fire-Spirits well, for when he comes they fly to the earth,
to warm and comfort those dwelling there; and perhaps he can tell you
where they are.  So take this gift of mine, and when you meet his
chilly winds, fold it about you, and sit warm beneath its shelter,
till you come to sunlight again.  I will carry comfort to the
patient woman, as my sisters have already done, and tell her you are
faithful still."

Then on went the never-tiring Breeze, over forest, hill, and field,
till the sky grew dark, and bleak winds whistled by.  Then Ripple,
folded in the soft, warm leaf, looked sadly down on the earth,
that seemed to lie so desolate and still beneath its shroud of snow,
and thought how bitter cold the leaves and flowers must be; for the
little Water-Spirit did not know that Winter spread a soft white
covering above their beds, that they might safely sleep below till
Spring should waken them again.  So she went sorrowfully on, till
Winter, riding on the strong North-Wind, came rushing by, with
a sparkling ice-crown in his streaming hair, while from beneath his
crimson cloak, where glittering frost-work shone like silver threads,
he scattered snow-flakes far and wide.

"What do you seek with me, fair little Spirit, that you come
so bravely here amid my ice and snow?  Do not fear me; I am warm
at heart, though rude and cold without," said Winter, looking kindly
on her, while a bright smile shone like sunlight on his pleasant face,
as it glowed and glistened in the frosty air.

When Ripple told him why she had come, he pointed upward, where the
sunlight dimly shone through the heavy clouds, saying,--

"Far off there, beside the sun, is the Fire-Spirits' home; and the
only path is up, through cloud and mist.  It is a long, strange path,
for a lonely little Spirit to be going; the Fairies are wild, wilful
things, and in their play may harm and trouble you.  Come back with
me, and do not go this dangerous journey to the sky.  I'll gladly
bear you home again, if you will come."

But Ripple said, "I cannot turn back now, when I am nearly there.
The Spirits surely will not harm me, when I tell them why I am come;
and if I win the flame, I shall be the happiest Spirit in the sea,
for my promise will be kept, and the poor mother happy once again.
So farewell, Winter!  Speak to her gently, and tell her to hope still,
for I shall surely come."

"Adieu, little Ripple!  May good angels watch above you!  Journey
bravely on, and take this snow-flake that will never melt, as MY
gift," Winter cried, as the North-Wind bore him on, leaving a cloud
of falling snow behind.

"Now, dear Breeze," said Ripple, "fly straight upward through the air,
until we reach the place we have so long been seeking; Sunbeam shall
go before to light the way, Yellow-leaf shall shelter me from heat and
rain, while Snow-flake shall lie here beside me till it comes of use.
So farewell to the pleasant earth, until we come again.  And now away,
up to the sun!"

When Ripple first began her airy journey, all was dark and dreary;
heavy clouds lay piled like hills around her, and a cold mist
filled the air but the Sunbeam, like a star, lit up the way, the leaf
lay warmly round her, and the tireless wind went swiftly on.  Higher
and higher they floated up, still darker and darker grew the air,
closer the damp mist gathered, while the black clouds rolled and
tossed, like great waves, to and fro.

"Ah!" sighed the weary little Spirit, "shall I never see the light
again, or feel the warm winds on my cheek?  It is a dreary way indeed,
and but for the Seasons' gifts I should have perished long ago; but
the heavy clouds MUST pass away at last, and all be fair again.
So hasten on, good Breeze, and bring me quickly to my journey's end."

Soon the cold vapors vanished from her path, and sunshine shone
upon her pleasantly; so she went gayly on, till she came up among
the stars, where many new, strange sights were to be seen.  With
wondering eyes she looked upon the bright worlds that once seemed dim
and distant, when she gazed upon them from the sea; but now they moved
around her, some shining with a softly radiant light, some circled
with bright, many-colored rings, while others burned with a red,
angry glare.  Ripple would have gladly stayed to watch them longer,
for she fancied low, sweet voices called her, and lovely faces
seemed to look upon her as she passed; but higher up still, nearer
to the sun, she saw a far-off light, that glittered like a brilliant
crimson star, and seemed to cast a rosy glow along the sky.

"The Fire-Spirits surely must be there, and I must stay no longer
here," said Ripple.  So steadily she floated on, till straight
before her lay a broad, bright path, that led up to a golden arch,
beyond which she could see shapes flitting to and fro. As she drew
near, brighter glowed the sky, hotter and hotter grew the air, till
Ripple's leaf-cloak shrivelled up, and could no longer shield her from
the heat; then she unfolded the white snow-flake, and, gladly wrapping
the soft, cool mantle round her, entered through the shining arch.

Through the red mist that floated all around her, she could see
high walls of changing light, where orange, blue, and violet flames
went flickering to and fro, making graceful figures as they danced
and glowed; and underneath these rainbow arches, little Spirits
glided, far and near, wearing crowns of fire, beneath which flashed
their wild, bright eyes; and as they spoke, sparks dropped quickly
from their lips, and Ripple saw with wonder, through their garments
of transparent light, that in each Fairy's breast there burned a
steady flame, that never wavered or went out.

As thus she stood, the Spirits gathered round her, and their
hot breath would have scorched her, but she drew the snow-cloak
closer round her, saying,--

"Take me to your Queen, that I may tell her why I am here, and ask
for what I seek."

So, through long halls of many-colored fire, they led her to
a Spirit fairer than the rest, whose crown of flames waved to and fro
like golden plumes, while, underneath her violet robe, the light
within her breast glowed bright and strong.

"This is our Queen," the Spirits said, bending low before her,
as she turned her gleaming eyes upon the stranger they had brought.

Then Ripple told how she had wandered round the world in search
of them, how the Seasons had most kindly helped her on, by giving
Sun-beam, Breeze, Leaf, and Flake; and how, through many dangers, she
had come at last to ask of them the magic flame that could give life
to the little child again.

When she had told her tale, the spirits whispered earnestly
among themselves, while sparks fell thick and fast with every word;
at length the Fire-Queen said aloud,--

"We cannot give the flame you ask, for each of us must take a part
of it from our own breasts; and this we will not do, for the brighter
our bosom-fire burns, the lovelier we are.  So do not ask us for this
thing; but any other gift we will most gladly give, for we feel kindly
towards you, and will serve you if we may."

But Ripple asked no other boon, and, weeping sadly, begged them
not to send her back without the gift she had come so far to gain.

"O dear, warm-hearted Spirits! give me each a little light from your
own breasts, and surely they will glow the brighter for this kindly
deed; and I will thankfully repay it if I can." As thus she spoke,
the Queen, who had spied out a chain of jewels Ripple wore upon her
neck, replied,--

"If you will give me those bright, sparkling stones, I will bestow on
you a part of my own flame; for we have no such lovely things to wear
about our necks, and I desire much to have them.  Will you give it me
for what I offer, little Spirit?"

Joyfully Ripple gave her the chain; but, as soon as it touched her
hand, the jewels melted like snow, and fell in bright drops to the
ground; at this the Queen's eyes flashed, and the Spirits gathered
angrily about poor Ripple, who looked sadly at the broken chain,
and thought in vain what she could give, to win the thing she longed
so earnestly for.

"I have many fairer gems than these, in my home below the sea;
and I will bring all I can gather far and wide, if you will grant
my prayer, and give me what I seek," she said, turning gently to
the fiery Spirits, who were hovering fiercely round her.

"You must bring us each a jewel that will never vanish from our hands
as these have done," they said, "and we will each give of our fire;
and when the child is brought to life, you must bring hither all the
jewels you can gather from the depths of the sea, that we may try them
here among the flames; but if they melt away like these, then we shall
keep you prisoner, till you give us back the light we lend.  If you
consent to this, then take our gift, and journey home again; but
fail not to return, or we shall seek you out."

And Ripple said she would consent, though she knew not if the jewels
could be found; still, thinking of the promise she had made, she
forgot all else, and told the Spirits what they asked most surely
should be done.  So each one gave a little of the fire from their
breasts, and placed the flame in a crystal vase, through which
it shone and glittered like a star.

Then, bidding her remember all she had promised them, they led her
to the golden arch, and said farewell.

So, down along the shining path, through mist and cloud, she
travelled back; till, far below, she saw the broad blue sea she left
so long ago.

Gladly she plunged into the clear, cool waves, and floated back
to her pleasant home; where the Spirits gathered joyfully about her,
listening with tears and smiles, as she told all her many wanderings,
and showed the crystal vase that she had brought.

"Now come," said they, "and finish the good work you have so bravely
carried on." So to the quiet tomb they went, where, like a marble
image, cold and still, the little child was lying.  Then Ripple placed
the flame upon his breast, and watched it gleam and sparkle there,
while light came slowly back into the once dim eyes, a rosy glow shone
over the pale face, and breath stole through the parted lips; still
brighter and warmer burned the magic fire, until the child awoke
from his long sleep, and looked in smiling wonder at the faces bending
over him.

Then Ripple sang for joy, and, with her sister Spirits, robed the
child in graceful garments, woven of bright sea-weed, while in
his shining hair they wreathed long garlands of their fairest flowers,
and on his little arms hung chains of brilliant shells.

"Now come with us, dear child," said Ripple; "we will bear you safely
up into the sunlight and the pleasant air; for this is not your home,
and yonder, on the shore, there waits a loving friend for you."

So up they went, through foam and spray, till on the beach, where
the fresh winds played among her falling hair, and the waves broke
sparkling at her feet, the lonely mother still stood, gazing wistfully
across the sea.  Suddenly, upon a great blue billow that came rolling
in, she saw the Water-Spirits smiling on her; and high aloft, in their
white gleaming arms, her child stretched forth his hands to welcome
her; while the little voice she so longed to hear again cried gayly,--

"See, dear mother, I am come; and look what lovely things the
gentle Spirits gave, that I might seem more beautiful to you."

Then gently the great wave broke, and rolled back to the sea, leaving
Ripple on the shore, and the child clasped in his mother's arms.

"O faithful little Spirit! I would gladly give some precious gift
to show my gratitude for this kind deed; but I have nothing save
this chain of little pearls: they are the tears I shed, and the sea
has changed them thus, that I might offer them to you," the happy
mother said, when her first joy was passed, and Ripple turned to go.

"Yes, I will gladly wear your gift, and look upon it as my fairest
ornament," the Water-Spirit said; and with the pearls upon her breast,
she left the shore, where the child was playing gayly to and fro,
and the mother's glad smile shone upon her, till she sank beneath
the waves.

And now another task was to be done; her promise to the
Fire-Spirits must be kept.  So far and wide she searched among
the caverns of the sea, and gathered all the brightest jewels
shining there; and then upon her faithful Breeze once more went
journeying through the sky.

The Spirits gladly welcomed her, and led her to the Queen,
before whom she poured out the sparkling gems she had gathered
with such toil and care; but when the Spirits tried to form them
into crowns, they trickled from their hands like colored drops of dew,
and Ripple saw with fear and sorrow how they melted one by one away,
till none of all the many she had brought remained.  Then the
Fire-Spirits looked upon her angrily, and when she begged them
to be merciful, and let her try once more, saying,--

"Do not keep me prisoner here.  I cannot breathe the flames that
give you life, and but for this snow-mantle I too should melt away,
and vanish like the jewels in your hands.  O dear Spirits, give me
some other task, but let me go from this warm place, where all is
strange and fearful to a Spirit of the sea."

They would not listen; and drew nearer, saying, while bright sparks
showered from their lips, "We will not let you go, for you have
promised to be ours if the gems you brought proved worthless; so fling
away this cold white cloak, and bathe with us in the fire fountains,
and help us bring back to our bosom flames the light we gave you
for the child."

Then Ripple sank down on the burning floor, and felt that her life
was nearly done; for she well knew the hot air of the fire-palace
would be death to her.  The Spirits gathered round, and began to lift
her mantle off; but underneath they saw the pearl chain, shining with
a clear, soft light, that only glowed more brightly when they laid
their hands upon it.

"O give us this!" cried they; "it is far lovelier than all the rest,
and does not melt away like them; and see how brilliantly it glitters
in our hands.  If we may but have this, all will be well, and you
are once more free."

And Ripple, safe again beneath her snow flake, gladly gave
the chain to them; and told them how the pearls they now placed
proudly on their breasts were formed of tears, which but for them
might still be flowing.  Then the Spirits smiled most kindly on her,
and would have put their arms about her, and have kissed her cheek,
but she drew back, telling them that every touch of theirs was
like a wound to her.

"Then, if we may not tell our pleasure so, we will show it in a
different way, and give you a pleasant journey home.  Come out with
us," the Spirits said, "and see the bright path we have made for you."
So they led her to the lofty gate, and here, from sky to earth,
a lovely rainbow arched its radiant colors in the sun.

"This is indeed a pleasant road," said Ripple.  "Thank you,
friendly Spirits, for your care; and now farewell.  I would gladly
stay yet longer, but we cannot dwell together, and I am longing sadly
for my own cool home.  Now Sunbeam, Breeze, Leaf, and Flake, fly back
to the Seasons whence you came, and tell them that, thanks to their
kind gifts, Ripple's work at last is done."

Then down along the shining pathway spread before her, the happy
little Spirit glided to the sea.


"Thanks, dear Summer-Wind," said the Queen; "we will remember the
lessons you have each taught us, and when next we meet in Fern Dale,
you shall tell us more.  And now, dear Trip, call them from the lake,
for the moon is sinking fast, and we must hasten home."

The Elves gathered about their Queen, and while the rustling leaves
were still, and the flowers' sweet voices mingled with their own,
they sang this



FAIRY SONG.


   The moonlight fades from flower and tree,
     And the stars dim one by one;
   The tale is told, the song is sung,
     And the Fairy feast is done.
   The night-wind rocks the sleeping flowers,
     And sings to them, soft and low.
   The early birds erelong will wake:
    'T is time for the Elves to go.

   O'er the sleeping earth we silently pass,
     Unseen by mortal eye,
   And send sweet dreams, as we lightly float
     Through the quiet moonlit sky;--
   For the stars' soft eyes alone may see,
     And the flowers alone may know,
   The feasts we hold, the tales we tell:
     So 't is time for the Elves to go.

   From bird, and blossom, and bee,
     We learn the lessons they teach;
   And seek, by kindly deeds, to win
     A loving friend in each.
   And though unseen on earth we dwell,
     Sweet voices whisper low,
   And gentle hearts most joyously greet
     The Elves where'er they go.

   When next we meet in the Fairy dell,
     May the silver moon's soft light
   Shine then on faces gay as now,
     And Elfin hearts as light.
   Now spread each wing, for the eastern sky
     With sunlight soon will glow.
   The morning star shall light us home:
     Farewell! for the Elves must go.


As the music ceased, with a soft, rustling sound the Elves
spread their shining wings, and flew silently over the sleeping earth;
the flowers closed their bright eyes, the little winds were still,
for the feast was over, and the Fairy lessons ended.






HOSPITAL SKETCHES


By

LOUISA MAY ALCOTT



  THESE SKETCHES
  ARE RESPECTFULLY DEDICATED
  TO HER FRIEND
  MISS HANNAH STEVENSON
  BY
  L.M.A.




CONTENTS

   I.  Obtaining Supplies
  II.  A Forward Movement
 III.  A Day
  IV.  A Night
   V.  Off Duty
  VI.  A Postscript




CHAPTER I

OBTAINING SUPPLIES.

"I want something to do."

This remark being addressed to the world in general, no one in
particular felt it their duty to reply; so I repeated it to the smaller
world about me, received the following suggestions, and settled the
matter by answering my own inquiry, as people are apt to do when very
much in earnest.

"Write a book," quoth the author of my being.

"Don't know enough, sir. First live, then write."

"Try teaching again," suggested my mother.

"No thank you, ma'am, ten years of that is enough."

"Take a husband like my Darby, and fulfill your mission," said sister
Joan, home on a visit.

"Can't afford expensive luxuries, Mrs. Coobiddy."

"Turn actress, and immortalize your name," said sister Vashti, striking
an attitude.

"I won't."

"Go nurse the soldiers," said my young brother, Tom, panting for "the
tented field."

"I will!"

So far, very good. Here was the will--now for the way. At first sight
not a foot of it appeared, but that didn't matter, for the Periwinkles
are a hopeful race; their crest is an anchor, with three cock-a-doodles
crowing atop. They all wear rose-colored spectacles, and are lineal
descendants of the inventor of aerial architecture. An hour's
conversation on the subject set the whole family in a blaze of
enthusiasm. A model hospital was erected, and each member had accepted
an honorable post therein. The paternal P. was chaplain, the maternal
P. was matron, and all the youthful P.s filled the pod of futurity with
achievements whose brilliancy eclipsed the glories of the present and
the past. Arriving at this satisfactory conclusion, the meeting
adjourned, and the fact that Miss Tribulation was available as army
nurse went abroad on the wings of the wind.

In a few days a townswoman heard of my desire, approved of it, and
brought about an interview with one of the sisterhood which I wished to
join, who was at home on a furlough, and able and willing to satisfy
all inquiries. A morning chat with Miss General S.--we hear no end of
Mrs. Generals, why not a Miss?--produced three results: I felt that I
could do the work, was offered a place, and accepted it, promising not
to desert, but stand ready to march on Washington at an hour's notice.

A few days were necessary for the letter containing my request and
recommendation to reach headquarters, and another, containing my
commission, to return; therefore no time was to be lost; and heartily
thanking my pair of friends, I tore home through the December slush as
if the rebels were after me, and like many another recruit, burst in
upon my family with the announcement--

"I've enlisted!"

An impressive silence followed. Tom, the irrepressible, broke it with a
slap on the shoulder and the graceful compliment--

"Old Trib, you're a trump!"

"Thank you; then I'll take something:" which I did, in the shape of
dinner, reeling off my news at the rate of three dozen words to a
mouthful; and as every one else talked equally fast, and all together,
the scene was most inspiring.

As boys going to sea immediately become nautical in speech, walk as if
they already had their "sea legs" on, and shiver their timbers on all
possible occasions, so I turned military at once, called my dinner my
rations, saluted all new comers, and ordered a dress parade that very
afternoon. Having reviewed every rag I possessed, I detailed some for
picket duty while airing over the fence; some to the sanitary
influences of the wash-tub; others to mount guard in the trunk; while
the weak and wounded went to the Work-basket Hospital, to be made ready
for active service again. To this squad I devoted myself for a week;
but all was done, and I had time to get powerfully impatient before the
letter came. It did arrive however, and brought a disappointment along
with its good will and friendliness, for it told me that the place in
the Armory Hospital that I supposed I was to take, was already filled,
and a much less desirable one at Hurly-burly House was offered instead.

"That's just your luck, Trib. I'll tote your trunk up garret for you
again; for of course you won't go," Tom remarked, with the disdainful
pity which small boys affect when they get into their teens. I was
wavering in my secret soul, but that settled the matter, and I crushed
him on the spot with martial brevity--

"It is now one; I shall march at six."

I have a confused recollection of spending the afternoon in pervading
the house like an executive whirlwind, with my family swarming after
me, all working, talking, prophesying and lamenting, while I packed my
"go-abroady" possessions, tumbled the rest into two big boxes, danced
on the lids till they shut, and gave them in charge, with the
direction,--

"If I never come back, make a bonfire of them."

Then I choked down a cup of tea, generously salted instead of sugared,
by some agitated relative, shouldered my knapsack--it was only a
traveling bag, but do let me preserve the unities--hugged my family
three times all round without a vestige of unmanly emotion, till a
certain dear old lady broke down upon my neck, with a despairing sort
of wail--

"Oh, my dear, my dear, how can I let you go?"

"I'll stay if you say so, mother."

"But I don't; go, and the Lord will take care of you."

Much of the Roman matron's courage had gone into the Yankee matron's
composition, and, in spite of her tears, she would have sent ten sons
to the war, had she possessed them, as freely as she sent one daughter,
smiling and flapping on the door-step till I vanished, though the eyes
that followed me were very dim, and the handkerchief she waved was very
wet.

My transit from The Gables to the village depot was a funny mixture of
good wishes and good byes, mud-puddles and shopping. A December
twilight is not the most cheering time to enter upon a somewhat
perilous enterprise, and, but for the presence of Vashti and neighbor
Thorn, I fear that I might have added a drop of the briny to the native
moisture of--

    "The town I left behind me;"

though I'd no thought of giving out: oh, bless you, no! When the engine
screeched "Here we are," I clutched my escort in a fervent embrace, and
skipped into the car with as blithe a farewell as if going on a bridal
tour--though I believe brides don't usually wear cavernous black
bonnets and fuzzy brown coats, with a hair-brush, a pair of rubbers,
two books, and a bag of ginger-bread distorting the pockets of the
same. If I thought that any one would believe it, I'd boldly state that
I slept from C. to B., which would simplify matters immensely; but as I
know they wouldn't, I'll confess that the head under the funereal
coal-hod fermented with all manner of high thoughts and heroic purposes
"to do or die,"--perhaps both; and the heart under the fuzzy brown coat
felt very tender with the memory of the dear old lady, probably sobbing
over her army socks and the loss of her topsy-turvy Trib. At this
juncture I took the veil, and what I did behind it is nobody's
business; but I maintain that the soldier who cries when his mother
says "Good bye," is the boy to fight best, and die bravest, when the
time comes, or go back to her better than he went.

Till nine o'clock I trotted about the city streets, doing those last
errands which no woman would even go to heaven without attempting, if
she could. Then I went to my usual refuge, and, fully intending to keep
awake, as a sort of vigil appropriate to the occasion, fell fast asleep
and dreamed propitious dreams till my rosy-faced cousin waked me with a
kiss.

A bright day smiled upon my enterprise, and at ten I reported myself to
my General, received last instructions and no end of the sympathetic
encouragement which women give, in look, touch, and tone more
effectually than in words. The next step was to get a free pass to
Washington, for I'd no desire to waste my substance on railroad
companies when "the boys" needed even a spinster's mite. A friend of
mine had procured such a pass, and I was bent on doing likewise, though
I had to face the president of the railroad to accomplish it. I'm a
bashful individual, though I can't get any one to believe it; so it
cost me a great effort to poke about the Worcester depot till the right
door appeared, then walk into a room containing several gentlemen, and
blunder out my request in a high state of stammer and blush. Nothing
could have been more courteous than this dreaded President, but it was
evident that I had made as absurd a demand as if I had asked for the
nose off his respectable face. He referred me to the Governor at the
State House, and I backed out, leaving him no doubt to regret that such
mild maniacs were left at large. Here was a Scylla and Charybdis
business: as if a President wasn't trying enough, without the Governor
of Massachusetts and the hub of the hub piled on top of that. "I never
can do it," thought I. "Tom will hoot at you if you don't," whispered
the inconvenient little voice that is always goading people to the
performance of disagreeable duties, and always appeals to the most
effective agent to produce the proper result. The idea of allowing any
boy that ever wore a felt basin and a shoddy jacket with a microscopic
tail, to crow over me, was preposterous, so giving myself a mental slap
for such faint-heartedness, I streamed away across the Common,
wondering if I ought to say "your Honor," or simply "Sir," and decided
upon the latter, fortifying myself with recollections of an evening in
a charming green library, where I beheld the Governor placidly
consuming oysters, and laughing as if Massachusetts was a myth, and he
had no heavier burden on his shoulders than his host's handsome hands.

Like an energetic fly in a very large cobweb, I struggled through the
State House, getting into all the wrong rooms and none of the right,
till I turned desperate, and went into one, resolving not to come out
till I'd made somebody hear and answer me. I suspect that of all the
wrong places I had blundered into, this was the most so. But I didn't
care; and, though the apartment was full of soldiers, surgeons,
starers, and spittoons, I cornered a perfectly incapable person, and
proceeded to pump for information with the following result:

"Was the Governor anywhere about?"

No, he wasn't.

"Could he tell me where to look?"

No, he couldn't.

"Did he know anything about free passes?"

No, he didn't.

"Was there any one there of whom I could inquire?"

Not a person.

"Did he know of any place where information could be obtained?"

Not a place.

"Could he throw the smallest gleam of light upon the matter, in any
way?"

Not a ray.

I am naturally irascible, and if I could have shaken this negative
gentleman vigorously, the relief would have been immense. The
prejudices of society forbidding this mode of redress, I merely
glowered at him; and, before my wrath found vent in words, my General
appeared, having seen me from an opposite window, and come to know what
I was about. At her command the languid gentleman woke up, and troubled
himself to remember that Major or Sergeant or something Mc K. knew all
about the tickets, and his office was in Milk Street. I perked up
instanter, and then, as if the exertion was too much for him, what did
this animated wet blanket do but add--

"I think Mc K. may have left Milk Street, now, and I don't know where
he has gone."

"Never mind; the new comers will know where he has moved to, my dear,
so don't be discouraged; and if you don't succeed, come to me, and we
will see what to do next," said my General.

I blessed her in a fervent manner and a cool hall, fluttered round the
corner, and bore down upon Milk Street, bent on discovering Mc K. if
such a being was to be found. He wasn't, and the ignorance of the
neighborhood was really pitiable. Nobody knew anything, and after
tumbling over bundles of leather, bumping against big boxes, being
nearly annihilated by descending bales, and sworn at by aggravated
truckmen, I finally elicited the advice to look for Mc K. in Haymarket
Square. Who my informant was I've really forgotten; for, having hailed
several busy gentlemen, some one of them fabricated this delusive
quietus for the perturbed spirit, who instantly departed to the
sequestered locality he named. If I had been in search of the
Koh-i-noor diamond I should have been as likely to find it there as any
vestige of Mc K. I stared at signs, inquired in shops, invaded an
eating house, visited the recruiting tent in the middle of the Square,
made myself a nuisance generally, and accumulated mud enough to retard
another Nile. All in vain: and I mournfully turned my face toward the
General's, feeling that I should be forced to enrich the railroad
company after all; when, suddenly, I beheld that admirable young man,
brother-in-law Darby Coobiddy, Esq. I arrested him with a burst of
news, and wants, and woes, which caused his manly countenance to lose
its usual repose.

"Oh, my dear boy, I'm going to Washington at five, and I can't find the
free ticket man, and there won't be time to see Joan, and I'm so tired
and cross I don't know what to do; and will you help me, like a cherub
as you are?"

"Oh, yes, of course. I know a fellow who will set us right," responded
Darby, mildly excited, and darting into some kind of an office, held
counsel with an invisible angel, who sent him out radiant. "All serene.
I've got him. I'll see you through the business, and then get Joan from
the Dove Cote in time to see you off."

I'm a woman's rights woman, and if any man had offered help in the
morning, I should have condescendingly refused it, sure that I could do
everything as well, if not better, myself. My strong-mindedness had
rather abated since then, and I was now quite ready to be a "timid
trembler," if necessary.

Dear me! how easily Darby did it all: he just asked one question,
received an answer, tucked me under his arm, and in ten minutes I stood
in the presence of Mc K., the Desired.

"Now my troubles are over," thought I, and as usual was direfully
mistaken.

"You will have to get a pass from Dr. H., in Temple Place, before I can
give you a pass, madam," answered Mc K., as blandly as if he wasn't
carrying desolation to my soul. Oh, indeed! why didn't he send me to
Dorchester Heights, India Wharf, or Bunker Hill Monument, and done with
it? Here I was, after a morning's tramp, down in some place about Dock
Square, and was told to step to Temple Place. Nor was that all; he
might as well have asked me to catch a hummingbird, toast a salamander,
or call on the man in the moon, as find a Doctor at home at the busiest
hour of the day. It was a blow; but weariness had extinguished
enthusiasm, and resignation clothed me as a garment. I sent Darby for
Joan, and doggedly paddled off, feeling that mud was my native element,
and quite sure that the evening papers would announce the appearance of
the Wandering Jew, in feminine habiliments.

"Is Dr. H. in?"

"No, mum, he aint."

Of course he wasn't; I knew that before I asked: and, considering it
all in the light of a hollow mockery, added:

"When will he probably return?"

If the damsel had said, "ten to-night," I should have felt a grim
satisfaction, in the fulfillment of my own dark prophecy; but she said,
"At two, mum;" and I felt it a personal insult.

"I'll call, then. Tell him my business is important:" with which
mysteriously delivered message I departed, hoping that I left her
consumed with curiosity; for mud rendered me an object of interest.

By way of resting myself, I crossed the Common, for the third time,
bespoke the carriage, got some lunch, packed my purchases, smoothed my
plumage, and was back again, as the clock struck two. The Doctor hadn't
come yet; and I was morally certain that he would not, till, having
waited till the last minute, I was driven to buy a ticket, and, five
minutes after the irrevocable deed was done, he would be at my service,
with all manner of helpful documents and directions. Everything goes by
contraries with me; so, having made up my mind to be disappointed, of
course I wasn't; for, presently, in walked Dr. H., and no sooner had he
heard my errand, and glanced at my credentials, than he said, with the
most engaging readiness:

"I will give you the order, with pleasure, madam."

Words cannot express how soothing and delightful it was to find, at
last, somebody who could do what I wanted, without sending me from Dan
to Beersheba, for a dozen other to do something else first. Peace
descended, like oil, upon the ruffled waters of my being, as I sat
listening to the busy scratch of his pen; and, when he turned about,
giving me not only the order, but a paper of directions wherewith to
smooth away all difficulties between Boston and Washington, I felt as
did poor Christian when the Evangelist gave him the scroll, on the safe
side of the Slough of Despond. I've no doubt many dismal nurses have
inflicted themselves upon the worthy gentleman since then; but I am
sure none have been more kindly helped, or are more grateful, than T.
P.; for that short interview added another to the many pleasant
associations that already surround his name.

Feeling myself no longer a "Martha Struggles," but a comfortable young
woman, with plain sailing before her, and the worst of the voyage well
over, I once more presented myself to the valuable Mc K. The order was
read, and certain printed papers, necessary to be filled out, were
given a young gentleman--no, I prefer to say Boy, with a scornful
emphasis upon the word, as the only means of revenge now left me. This
Boy, instead of doing his duty with the diligence so charming in the
young, loitered and lounged, in a manner which proved his education to
have been sadly neglected in the--

    "How doth the little busy bee,"

direction. He stared at me, gaped out of the window, ate peanuts, and
gossiped with his neighbors--Boys, like himself, and all penned in a
row, like colts at a Cattle Show. I don't imagine he knew the anguish
he was inflicting; for it was nearly three, the train left at five, and
I had my ticket to get, my dinner to eat, my blessed sister to see, and
the depot to reach, if I didn't die of apoplexy. Meanwhile, Patience
certainly had her perfect work that day, and I hope she enjoyed the job
more than I did.

Having waited some twenty minutes, it pleased this reprehensible Boy to
make various marks and blots on my documents, toss them to a venerable
creature of sixteen, who delivered them to me with such paternal
directions, that it only needed a pat on the head and an
encouraging--"Now run home to your Ma, little girl, and mind the
crossings, my dear," to make the illusion quite perfect.

Why I was sent to a steamboat office for car tickets, is not for me to
say, though I went as meekly as I should have gone to the Probate
Court, if sent. A fat, easy gentleman gave me several bits of paper,
with coupons attached, with a warning not to separate them, which
instantly inspired me with a yearning to pluck them apart, and see what
came of it. But, remembering through what fear and tribulation I had
obtained them, I curbed Satan's promptings, and, clutching my prize, as
if it were my pass to the Elysian Fields, I hurried home. Dinner was
rapidly consumed; Joan enlightened, comforted, and kissed; the dearest
of apple-faced cousins hugged; the kindest of apple-faced cousins'
fathers subjected to the same process; and I mounted the ambulance,
baggage-wagon, or anything you please but hack, and drove away, too
tired to feel excited, sorry, or glad.



CHAPTER II

A FORWARD MOVEMENT.

As travellers like to give their own impressions of a journey, though
every inch of the way may have been described a half a dozen times
before, I add some of the notes made by the way, hoping that they will
amuse the reader, and convince the skeptical that such a being as Nurse
Periwinkle does exist, that she really did go to Washington, and that
these Sketches are not romance.

New York Train--Seven P.M.--Spinning along to take the boat at New
London. Very comfortable; much gingerbread, and Mrs. C.'s fine pear,
which deserves honorable mention, because my first loneliness was
comforted by it, and pleasant recollections of both kindly sender and
bearer. Look much at Dr. H.'s paper of directions--put my tickets in
every conceivable place, that they may be get-at-able, and finish by
losing them entirely. Suffer agonies till a compassionate neighbor
pokes them out of a crack with his pen-knife. Put them in the inmost
corner of my purse, that in the deepest recesses of my pocket, pile a
collection of miscellaneous articles atop, and pin up the whole. Just
get composed, feeling that I've done my best to keep them safely, when
the Conductor appears, and I'm forced to rout them all out again,
exposing my precautions, and getting into a flutter at keeping the man
waiting. Finally, fasten them on the seat before me, and keep one eye
steadily upon the yellow torments, till I forget all about them, in
chat with the gentleman who shares my seat. Having heard complaints of
the absurd way in which American women become images of petrified
propriety, if addressed by strangers, when traveling alone, the inborn
perversity of my nature causes me to assume an entirely opposite style
of deportment; and, finding my companion hails from Little Athens, is
acquainted with several of my three hundred and sixty-five cousins, and
in every way a respectable and respectful member of society, I put my
bashfulness in my pocket, and plunge into a long conversation on the
war, the weather, music, Carlyle, skating, genius, hoops, and the
immortality of the soul.

Ten P.M.--Very sleepy. Nothing to be seen outside, but darkness made
visible; nothing inside but every variety of bunch into which the human
form can be twisted, rolled, or "massed," as Miss Prescott says of her
jewels. Every man's legs sprawl drowsily, every woman's head (but
mine,) nods, till it finally settles on somebody's shoulder, a new
proof of the truth of the everlasting oak and vine simile; children
fret; lovers whisper; old folks snore, and somebody privately imbibes
brandy, when the lamps go out. The penetrating perfume rouses the
multitude, causing some to start up, like war horses at the smell of
powder. When the lamps are relighted, every one laughs, sniffs, and
looks inquiringly at his neighbor--every one but a stout gentleman,
who, with well-gloved hands folded upon his broad-cloth rotundity,
sleeps on impressively. Had he been innocent, he would have waked up;
for, to slumber in that babe-like manner, with a car full of giggling,
staring, sniffing humanity, was simply preposterous. Public suspicion
was down upon him at once. I doubt if the appearance of a flat black
bottle with a label would have settled the matter more effectually than
did the over dignified and profound repose of this short-sighted being.
His moral neck-cloth, virtuous boots, and pious attitude availed him
nothing, and it was well he kept his eyes shut, for "Humbug!" twinkled
at him from every window-pane, brass nail and human eye around him.

Eleven P.M.--In the boat "City of Boston," escorted thither by my car
acquaintance, and deposited in the cabin. Trying to look as if the
greater portion of my life had been passed on board boats, but
painfully conscious that I don't know the first thing; so sit bolt
upright, and stare about me till I hear one lady say to another--"We
must secure our berths at once;" whereupon I dart at one, and, while
leisurely taking off my cloak, wait to discover what the second move
may be. Several ladies draw the curtains that hang in a semi-circle
before each nest--instantly I whisk mine smartly together, and then
peep out to see what next. Gradually, on hooks above the blue and
yellow drapery, appear the coats and bonnets of my neighbors, while
their boots and shoes, in every imaginable attitude, assert themselves
below, as if their owners had committed suicide in a body. A violent
creaking, scrambling, and fussing, causes the fact that people are
going regularly to bed to dawn upon my mind. Of course they are; and so
am I--but pause at the seventh pin, remembering that, as I was born to
be drowned, an eligible opportunity now presents itself; and, having
twice escaped a watery grave, the third immersion will certainly
extinguish my vital spark. The boat is new, but if it ever intends to
blow up, spring a leak, catch afire, or be run into, it will do the
deed to-night, because I'm here to fulfill my destiny. With tragic
calmness I resign myself, replace my pins, lash my purse and papers
together, with my handkerchief, examine the saving circumference of my
hoop, and look about me for any means of deliverance when the moist
moment shall arrive; for I've no intention of folding my hands and
bubbling to death without an energetic splashing first. Barrels,
hen-coops, portable settees, and life-preservers do not adorn the
cabin, as they should; and, roving wildly to and fro, my eye sees no
ray of hope till it falls upon a plump old lady, devoutly reading in
the cabin Bible, and a voluminous night-cap. I remember that, at the
swimming school, fat girls always floated best, and in an instant my
plan is laid. At the first alarm I firmly attach myself to the plump
lady, and cling to her through fire and water; for I feel that my old
enemy, the cramp, will seize me by the foot, if I attempt to swim; and,
though I can hardly expect to reach Jersey City with myself and my
baggage in as good condition as I hoped, I might manage to get picked
up by holding to my fat friend; if not it will be a comfort to feel
that I've made an effort and shall die in good society. Poor dear
woman! how little she dreamed, as she read and rocked, with her cap in
a high state of starch, and her feet comfortably cooking at the
register, what fell designs were hovering about her, and how intently a
small but determined eye watched her, till it suddenly closed.

Sleep got the better of fear to such an extent that my boots appeared
to gape, and my bonnet nodded on its peg, before I gave in. Having
piled my cloak, bag, rubbers, books and umbrella on the lower shelf, I
drowsily swarmed onto the upper one, tumbling down a few times, and
excoriating the knobby portions of my frame in the act. A very brief
nap on the upper roost was enough to set me gasping as if a dozen
feather beds and the whole boat were laid over me. Out I turned; and
after a series of convulsions, which caused my neighbor to ask if I
wanted the stewardess, I managed to get my luggage up and myself down.
But even in the lower berth, my rest was not unbroken, for various
articles kept dropping off the little shelf at the bottom of the bed,
and every time I flew up, thinking my hour had come, I bumped my head
severely against the little shelf at the top, evidently put there for
that express purpose. At last, after listening to the swash of the
waves outside, wondering if the machinery usually creaked in that way,
and watching a knot-hole in the side of my berth, sure that death would
creep in there as soon as I took my eye from it, I dropped asleep, and
dreamed of muffins.

Five A.M.--On deck, trying to wake up and enjoy an east wind and a
morning fog, and a twilight sort of view of something on the shore.
Rapidly achieve my purpose, and do enjoy every moment, as we go rushing
through the Sound, with steamboats passing up and down, lights dancing
on the shore, mist wreaths slowly furling off, and a pale pink sky
above us, as the sun comes up.

Seven A.M.--In the cars, at Jersey City. Much fuss with tickets, which
one man scribbles over, another snips, and a third "makes note on."
Partake of refreshment, in the gloom of a very large and dirty depot.
Think that my sandwiches would be more relishing without so strong a
flavor of napkin, and my gingerbread more easy of consumption if it had
not been pulverized by being sat upon. People act as if early traveling
didn't agree with them. Children scream and scamper; men smoke and
growl; women shiver and fret; porters swear; great truck horses pace up
and down with loads of baggage; and every one seems to get into the
wrong car, and come tumbling out again. One man, with three children, a
dog, a bird-cage, and several bundles, puts himself and his possessions
into every possible place where a man, three children, dog, bird-cage
and bundles could be got, and is satisfied with none of them. I follow
their movements, with an interest that is really exhausting, and, as
they vanish, hope for rest, but don't get it. A strong-minded woman,
with a tumbler in her hand, and no cloak or shawl on, comes rushing
through the car, talking loudly to a small porter, who lugs a folding
bed after her, and looks as if life were a burden to him.

"You promised to have it ready. It is not ready. It must be a car with
a water jar, the windows must be shut, the fire must be kept up, the
blinds must be down. No, this won't do. I shall go through the whole
train, and suit myself, for you promised to have it ready. It is not
ready," &c., all through again, like a hand-organ. She haunted the
cars, the depot, the office and baggage-room, with her bed, her
tumbler, and her tongue, till the train started; and a sense of fervent
gratitude filled my soul, when I found that she and her unknown invalid
were not to share our car.

Philadelphia.--An old place, full of Dutch women, in "bellus top"
bonnets, selling vegetables, in long, open markets. Every one seems to
be scrubbing their white steps. All the houses look like tidy jails,
with their outside shutters. Several have crape on the door-handles,
and many have flags flying from roof or balcony. Few men appear, and
the women seem to do the business, which, perhaps, accounts for its
being so well done. Pass fine buildings, but don't know what they are.
Would like to stop and see my native city; for, having left it at the
tender age of two, my recollections are not vivid.

Baltimore.--A big, dirty, shippy, shiftless place, full of goats,
geese, colored people, and coal, at least the part of it I see. Pass
near the spot where the riot took place, and feel as if I should enjoy
throwing a stone at somebody, hard. Find a guard at the ferry, the
depot, and here and there, along the road. A camp whitens one
hill-side, and a cavalry training school, or whatever it should be
called, is a very interesting sight, with quantities of horses and
riders galloping, marching, leaping, and skirmishing, over all manner
of break-neck places. A party of English people get in--the men, with
sandy hair and red whiskers, all trimmed alike, to a hair; rough grey
coats, very rosy, clean faces, and a fine, full way of speaking, which
is particularly agreeable, after our slip-shod American gabble. The two
ladies wear funny velvet fur-trimmed hoods; are done up, like compact
bundles, in tartan shawls; and look as if bent on seeing everything
thoroughly. The devotion of one elderly John Bull to his red-nosed
spouse was really beautiful to behold. She was plain and cross, and
fussy and stupid, but J. B., Esq., read no papers when she was awake,
turned no cold shoulder when she wished to sleep, and cheerfully said,
"Yes, me dear," to every wish or want the wife of his bosom expressed.
I quite warmed to the excellent man, and asked a question or two, as
the only means of expressing my good will. He answered very civilly,
but evidently hadn't been used to being addressed by strange women in
public conveyances; and Mrs. B. fixed her green eyes upon me, as if she
thought me a forward hussy, or whatever is good English for a presuming
young woman. The pair left their friends before we reached Washington;
and the last I saw of them was a vision of a large plaid lady, stalking
grimly away, on the arm of a rosy, stout gentleman, loaded with rugs,
bags, and books, but still devoted, still smiling, and waving a hearty
"Fare ye well! We'll meet ye at Willard's on Chusday."

Soon after their departure we had an accident; for no long journey in
America would be complete without one. A coupling iron broke; and,
after leaving the last car behind us, we waited for it to come up,
which it did, with a crash that knocked every one forward on their
faces, and caused several old ladies to screech dismally. Hats flew
off, bonnets were flattened, the stove skipped, the lamps fell down,
the water jar turned a somersault, and the wheel just over which I sat
received some damage. Of course, it became necessary for all the men to
get out, and stand about in everybody's way, while repairs were made;
and for the women to wrestle their heads out of the windows, asking
ninety-nine foolish questions to one sensible one. A few wise females
seized this favorable moment to better their seats, well knowing that
few men can face the wooden stare with which they regard the former
possessors of the places they have invaded.

The country through which we passed did not seem so very unlike that
which I had left, except that it was more level and less wintry. In
summer time the wide fields would have shown me new sights, and the
way-side hedges blossomed with new flowers; now, everything was sere
and sodden, and a general air of shiftlessness prevailed, which would
have caused a New England farmer much disgust, and a strong desire to
"buckle to," and "right up" things. Dreary little houses, with chimneys
built outside, with clay and rough sticks piled crosswise, as we used
to build cob towers, stood in barren looking fields, with cow, pig, or
mule lounging about the door. We often passed colored people, looking
as if they had come out of a picture book, or off the stage, but not at
all the sort of people I'd been accustomed to see at the North.

Wayside encampments made the fields and lanes gay with blue coats and
the glitter of buttons. Military washes flapped and fluttered on the
fences; pots were steaming in the open air; all sorts of tableaux seen
through the openings of tents, and everywhere the boys threw up their
caps and cut capers as we passed.

Washington.--It was dark when we arrived; and, but for the presence of
another friendly gentleman, I should have yielded myself a helpless
prey to the first overpowering hackman, who insisted that I wanted to
go just where I didn't. Putting me into the conveyance I belonged in,
my escort added to the obligation by pointing out the objects of
interest which we passed in our long drive. Though I'd often been told
that Washington was a spacious place, its visible magnitude quite took
my breath away, and of course I quoted Randolph's expression, "a city
of magnificent distances," as I suppose every one does when they see
it. The Capitol was so like the pictures that hang opposite the staring
Father of his Country, in boarding-houses and hotels, that it did not
impress me, except to recall the time when I was sure that Cinderella
went to housekeeping in just such a place, after she had married the
inflammable Prince; though, even at that early period, I had my doubts
as to the wisdom of a match whose foundation was of glass.

The White House was lighted up, and carriages were rolling in and out
of the great gate. I stared hard at the famous East Room, and would
have liked a peep through the crack of the door. My old gentleman was
indefatigable in his attentions, and I said, "Splendid!" to everything
he pointed out, though I suspect I often admired the wrong place, and
missed the right. Pennsylvania Avenue, with its bustle, lights, music,
and military, made me feel as if I'd crossed the water and landed
somewhere in Carnival time. Coming to less noticeable parts of the
city, my companion fell silent, and I meditated upon the perfection
which Art had attained in America--having just passed a bronze statue
of some hero, who looked like a black Methodist minister, in a cocked
hat, above the waist, and a tipsy squire below; while his horse stood
like an opera dancer, on one leg, in a high, but somewhat remarkable
wind, which blew his mane one way and his massive tail the other.

"Hurly-burly House, ma'am!" called a voice, startling me from my
reverie, as we stopped before a great pile of buildings, with a flag
flying before it, sentinels at the door, and a very trying quantity of
men lounging about. My heart beat rather faster than usual, and it
suddenly struck me that I was very far from home; but I descended with
dignity, wondering whether I should be stopped for want of a
countersign, and forced to pass the night in the street. Marching
boldly up the steps, I found that no form was necessary, for the men
fell back, the guard touched their caps, a boy opened the door, and, as
it closed behind me, I felt that I was fairly started, and Nurse
Periwinkle's Mission was begun.



CHAPTER III

A DAY.

"They've come! they've come! hurry up, ladies--you're wanted."

"Who have come? the rebels?"

This sudden summons in the gray dawn was somewhat startling to a three
days' nurse like myself, and, as the thundering knock came at our door,
I sprang up in my bed, prepared

    "To gird my woman's form,
     And on the ramparts die,"

if necessary; but my room-mate took it more coolly, and, as she began a
rapid toilet, answered my bewildered question,--

"Bless you, no child; it's the wounded from Fredericksburg; forty
ambulances are at the door, and we shall have our hands full in fifteen
minutes."

"What shall we have to do?"

"Wash, dress, feed, warm and nurse them for the next three months, I
dare say. Eighty beds are ready, and we were getting impatient for the
men to come. Now you will begin to see hospital life in earnest, for
you won't probably find time to sit down all day, and may think
yourself fortunate if you get to bed by midnight. Come to me in the
ball-room when you are ready; the worst cases are always carried there,
and I shall need your help."

So saying, the energetic little woman twirled her hair into a button at
the back of her head, in a "cleared for action" sort of style, and
vanished, wrestling her way into a feminine kind of pea-jacket as she
went.

I am free to confess that I had a realizing sense of the fact that my
hospital bed was not a bed of roses just then, or the prospect before
me one of unmingled rapture. My three days' experiences had begun with
a death, and, owing to the defalcation of another nurse, a somewhat
abrupt plunge into the superintendence of a ward containing forty beds,
where I spent my shining hours washing faces, serving rations, giving
medicine, and sitting in a very hard chair, with pneumonia on one side,
diphtheria on the other, five typhoids on the opposite, and a dozen
dilapidated patriots, hopping, lying, and lounging about, all staring
more or less at the new "nuss," who suffered untold agonies, but
concealed them under as matronly an aspect as a spinster could assume,
and blundered through her trying labors with a Spartan firmness, which
I hope they appreciated, but am afraid they didn't. Having a taste for
"ghastliness," I had rather longed for the wounded to arrive, for
rheumatism wasn't heroic, neither was liver complaint, or measles; even
fever had lost its charms since "bathing burning brows" had been used
up in romances, real and ideal; but when I peeped into the dusky street
lined with what I at first had innocently called market carts, now
unloading their sad freight at our door, I recalled sundry
reminiscences I had heard from nurses of longer standing, my ardor
experienced a  sudden chill, and I indulged in a most unpatriotic wish
that I was safe at home again, with a quiet day before me, and no
necessity for being hustled up, as if I were a hen and had only to hop
off my roost, give my plumage a peck, and be ready for action. A second
bang at the door sent this recreant desire to the right about, as a
little woolly head popped in, and Joey, (a six years' old contraband,)
announced--

"Miss Blank is jes' wild fer ye, and says fly round right away. They's
comin' in, I tell yer, heaps on 'em--one was took out dead, and I see
him,--hi! warn't he a goner!"

With which cheerful intelligence the imp scuttled away, singing like a
blackbird, and I followed, feeling that Richard was not himself again,
and wouldn't be for a long time to come.

The first thing I met was a regiment of the vilest odors that ever
assaulted the human nose, and took it by storm. Cologne, with its seven
and seventy evil savors, was a posy-bed to it; and the worst of this
affliction was, every one had assured me that it was a chronic weakness
of all hospitals, and I must bear it. I did, armed with lavender water,
with which I so besprinkled myself and premises, that, like my friend
Sairy, I was soon known among my patients as "the nurse with the
bottle." Having been run over by three excited surgeons, bumped against
by migratory coal-hods, water-pails, and small boys, nearly scalded by
an avalanche of newly-filled tea-pots, and hopelessly entangled in a
knot of colored sisters coming to wash, I progressed by slow stages up
stairs and down, till the main hall was reached, and I paused to take
breath and a survey. There they were! "our brave boys," as the papers
justly call them, for cowards could hardly have been so riddled with
shot and shell, so torn and shattered, nor have borne suffering for
which we have no name, with an uncomplaining fortitude, which made one
glad to cherish each as a brother. In they came, some on stretchers,
some in men's arms, some feebly staggering along propped on rude
crutches, and one lay stark and still with covered face, as a comrade
gave his name to be recorded before they carried him away to the dead
house. All was hurry and confusion; the hall was full of these wrecks
of humanity, for the most exhausted could not reach a bed till duly
ticketed and registered; the walls were lined with rows of such as
could sit, the floor covered with the more disabled, the steps and
doorways filled with helpers and lookers on; the sound of many feet and
voices made that usually quiet hour as noisy as noon; and, in the midst
of it all, the matron's motherly face brought more comfort to many a
poor soul, than the cordial draughts she administered, or the cheery
words that welcomed all, making of the hospital a home.

The sight of several stretchers, each with its legless, armless, or
desperately wounded occupant, entering my ward, admonished me that I
was there to work, not to wonder or weep; so I corked up my feelings,
and returned to the path of duty, which was rather "a hard road to
travel" just then. The house had been a hotel before hospitals were
needed, and many of the doors still bore their old names; some not so
inappropriate as might be imagined, for my ward was in truth a
ball-room, if gun-shot wounds could christen it. Forty beds were
prepared, many already tenanted by tired men who fell down anywhere,
and drowsed till the smell of food roused them. Round the great stove
was gathered the dreariest group I ever saw--ragged, gaunt and pale,
mud to the knees, with bloody bandages untouched since put on days
before; many bundled up in blankets, coats being lost or useless; and
all wearing that disheartened look which proclaimed defeat,  more
plainly than any telegram of the Burnside blunder. I pitied them so
much, I dared not speak to them, though, remembering all they had been
through since the rout at Fredericksburg, I yearned to serve the
dreariest of them all. Presently, Miss Blank tore me from my refuge
behind piles of one-sleeved shirts, odd socks, bandages and lint; put
basin, sponge, towels, and a block of brown soap into my hands, with
these appalling directions:

"Come, my dear, begin to wash as fast as you can. Tell them to take off
socks, coats and shirts, scrub them well, put on clean shirts, and the
attendants will finish them off, and lay them in bed."

If she had requested me to shave them all, or dance a hornpipe on the
stove funnel, I should have been less staggered; but to scrub some
dozen lords of creation at a moment's notice, was really--really--.
However, there was no time for nonsense, and, having resolved when I
came to do everything I was bid, I drowned my scruples in my wash-bowl,
clutched my soap manfully, and, assuming a business-like air, made a
dab at the first dirty specimen I saw, bent on performing my task vi et
armis if necessary. I chanced to light on a withered old Irishman,
wounded in the head, which caused that portion of his frame to be
tastefully laid out like a garden, the bandages being the walks, his
hair the shrubbery. He was so overpowered by the honor of having a lady
wash him, as he expressed it, that he did nothing but roll up his eyes,
and bless me, in an irresistible style which was too much for my sense
of the ludicrous; so we laughed together, and when I knelt down to take
off his shoes, he "flopped" also, and wouldn't hear of my touching
"them dirty craters. May your bed above be aisy darlin', for the day's
work ye ar doon!--Whoosh! there ye are, and bedad, it's hard tellin'
which is the dirtiest, the fut or the shoe." It was; and if he hadn't
been to the fore, I should have gone on pulling, under the impression
that the "fut" was a boot, for trousers, socks, shoes and legs were a
mass of mud. This comical tableau produced a general grin, at which
propitious beginning I took heart and scrubbed away like any tidy
parent on a Saturday night. Some of them took the performance like
sleepy children, leaning their tired heads against me as I worked,
others looked grimly scandalized, and several of the roughest colored
like bashful girls. One wore a soiled little bag about his neck, and,
as I moved it, to bathe his wounded breast, I said,

"Your talisman didn't save you, did it?"

"Well, I reckon it did, marm, for that shot would a gone a couple a
inches deeper but for my old mammy's camphor bag," answered the
cheerful philosopher.

Another, with a gun-shot wound through the cheek, asked for a
looking-glass, and when I brought one, regarded his swollen face with a
dolorous expression, as he muttered--

"I vow to gosh, that's too bad! I warn't a bad looking chap before, and
now I'm done for; won't there be a thunderin' scar? and what on earth
will Josephine Skinner say?"

He looked up at me with his one eye so appealingly, that I controlled
my risibles, and assured him that if Josephine was a girl of sense, she
would admire the honorable scar, as a lasting proof that he had faced
the enemy, for all women thought a wound the best decoration a brave
soldier could wear. I hope Miss Skinner verified the good opinion I so
rashly expressed of her, but I shall never know.

The next scrubbee was a nice looking lad, with a curly brown mane, and
a budding trace of gingerbread over the lip, which he called his beard,
and defended stoutly, when the barber jocosely suggested its
immolation. He lay on a bed,  with one leg gone, and the right arm so
shattered that it must evidently follow: yet the little Sergeant was as
merry as if his afflictions were not worth lamenting over; and when a
drop or two of salt water mingled with my suds at the sight of this
strong young body, so marred and maimed, the boy looked up, with a
brave smile, though there was a little quiver of the lips, as he said,

"Now don't you fret yourself about me, miss; I'm first rate here, for
it's nuts to lie still on this bed, after knocking about in those
confounded ambulances, that shake what there is left of a fellow to
jelly. I never was in one of these places before, and think this
cleaning up a jolly thing for us, though I'm afraid it isn't for you
ladies."

"Is this your first battle, Sergeant?"

"No, miss; I've been in six scrimmages, and never got a scratch till
this last one; but it's done the business pretty thoroughly for me, I
should say. Lord! what a scramble there'll be for arms and legs, when
we old boys come out of our graves, on the Judgment Day: wonder if we
shall get our own again? If we do, my leg will have to tramp from
Fredericksburg, my arm from here, I suppose, and meet my body, wherever
it may be."

The fancy seemed to tickle him mightily, for he laughed blithely, and
so did I; which, no doubt, caused the new nurse to be regarded as a
light-minded sinner by the Chaplain, who roamed vaguely about,
informing the men that they were all worms, corrupt of heart, with
perishable bodies, and souls only to be saved by a diligent perusal of
certain tracts, and other equally cheering bits of spiritual
consolation, when spirituous ditto would have been preferred.

"I say, Mrs.!" called a voice behind me; and, turning, I saw a rough
Michigander, with an arm blown off at the shoulder, and two or three
bullets still in him--as he afterwards mentioned, as carelessly as if
gentlemen were in the habit of carrying such trifles about with them. I
went to him, and, while administering a dose of soap and water, he
whispered, irefully:

"That red-headed devil, over yonder, is a reb, damn him! You'll agree
to that, I'll bet? He's got shet of a foot, or he'd a cut like the rest
of the lot. Don't you wash him, nor feed him, but jest let him holler
till he's tired. It's a blasted shame to fetch them fellers in here,
along side of us; and so I'll tell the chap that bosses this concern;
cuss me if I don't."

I regret to say that I did not deliver a moral sermon upon the duty of
forgiving our enemies, and the sin of profanity, then and there; but,
being a red-hot Abolitionist, stared fixedly at the tall rebel, who was
a copperhead, in every sense of the word, and privately resolved to put
soap in his eyes, rub his nose the wrong way, and excoriate his cuticle
generally, if I had the washing of him.

My amiable intentions, however, were frustrated; for, when I
approached, with as Christian an expression as my principles would
allow, and asked the question--"Shall I try to make you more
comfortable, sir?" all I got for my pains was a gruff--

"No; I'll do it myself."

"Here's your Southern chivalry, with a witness," thought I, dumping the
basin down before him, thereby quenching a strong desire to give him a
summary baptism, in return for his ungraciousness; for my angry
passions rose, at this rebuff, in a way that would have scandalized
good Dr. Watts. He was a disappointment in all respects, (the rebel,
not the blessed Doctor,) for he was neither fiendish, romantic,
pathetic, or anything interesting; but a long, fat man, with a head
like a burning bush, and a perfectly expressionless face: so I could
dislike him without the slightest drawback, and ignored his existence
from that day forth. One redeeming trait he certainly did possess, as
the floor speedily testified; for his ablutions were so vigorously
performed, that his bed soon stood like an isolated island, in a sea of
soap-suds, and he resembled a dripping merman, suffering from the loss
of a fin. If cleanliness is a near neighbor to godliness, then was the
big rebel the godliest man in my ward that day.

Having done up our human wash, and laid it out to dry, the second
syllable of our version of the word war-fare was enacted with much
success. Great trays of bread, meat, soup and coffee appeared; and both
nurses and attendants turned waiters, serving bountiful rations to all
who could eat. I can call my pinafore to testify to my good will in the
work, for in ten minutes it was reduced to a perambulating bill of
fare, presenting samples of all the refreshments going or gone. It was
a lively scene; the long room lined with rows of beds, each filled by
an occupant, whom water, shears, and clean raiment, had transformed
from a dismal ragamuffin into a recumbent hero, with a cropped head. To
and fro rushed matrons, maids, and convalescent "boys," skirmishing
with knives and forks; retreating with empty plates; marching and
counter-marching, with unvaried success, while the clash of busy spoons
made most inspiring music for the charge of our Light Brigade:

   "Beds to the front of them,
    Beds to the right of them,
    Beds to the left of them,
    Nobody blundered.
    Beamed at by hungry souls,
    Screamed at with brimming bowls,
    Steamed at by army rolls,
    Buttered and sundered.
    With coffee not cannon plied,
    Each must be satisfied,
    Whether they lived or died;
    All the men wondered."

Very welcome seemed the generous meal, after a week of suffering,
exposure, and short commons; soon the brown faces began to smile, as
food, warmth, and rest, did their pleasant work; and the grateful
"Thankee's" were followed by more graphic accounts of the battle and
retreat, than any paid reporter could have given us. Curious contrasts
of the tragic and comic met one everywhere; and some touching as well
as ludicrous episodes, might have been recorded that day. A six foot
New Hampshire man, with a leg broken and perforated by a piece of
shell, so large that, had I not seen the wound, I should have regarded
the story as a Munchausenism, beckoned me to come and help him, as he
could not sit up, and both his bed and beard were getting plentifully
anointed with soup. As I fed my big nestling with corresponding
mouthfuls, I asked him how he felt during the battle.

"Well, 'twas my fust, you see, so I aint ashamed to say I was a trifle
flustered in the beginnin', there was such an allfired racket; for ef
there's anything I do spleen agin, it's noise. But when my mate, Eph
Sylvester, caved, with a bullet through his head, I got mad, and
pitched in, licketty cut. Our part of the fight didn't last long; so a
lot of us larked round Fredericksburg, and give some of them houses a
pretty consid'able of a rummage, till we was ordered out of the mess.
Some of our fellows cut like time; but I warn't a-goin' to run for
nobody; and, fust thing I knew, a shell bust, right in front of us, and
I keeled over, feelin' as if I was blowed higher'n a kite. I sung out,
and the boys come back for me, double quick; but the way they chucked
me over them fences was a caution, I tell you. Next day I was most as
black as that darkey yonder, lickin' plates on the sly. This is bully
coffee, ain't it? Give us another pull at it, and I'll be obleeged to
you."

I did; and, as the last gulp subsided, he said, with a rub of his old
handkerchief over eyes as well as mouth:

"Look a here; I've got a pair a earbobs and a handkercher pin I'm a
goin' to give you, if you'll have them; for you're the very moral o'
Lizy Sylvester, poor Eph's wife: that's why I signalled you to come
over here. They aint much, I guess, but they'll do to memorize the rebs
by."

Burrowing under his pillow, he produced a little bundle of what he
called "truck," and gallantly presented me with a pair of earrings,
each representing a cluster of corpulent grapes, and the pin a basket
of astonishing fruit, the whole large and coppery enough for a small
warming-pan. Feeling delicate about depriving him of such valuable
relics, I accepted the earrings alone, and was obliged to depart,
somewhat abruptly, when my friend stuck the warming-pan in the bosom of
his night-gown, viewing it with much complacency, and, perhaps, some
tender memory, in that rough heart of his, for the comrade he had lost.

Observing that the man next him had left his meal untouched, I offered
the same service I had performed for his neighbor, but he shook his
head.

"Thank you, ma'am; I don't think I'll ever eat again, for I'm shot in
the stomach. But I'd like a drink of water, if you aint too busy."

I rushed away, but the water-pails were gone to be refilled, and it was
some time before they reappeared. I did not forget my patient patient,
meanwhile, and, with the first mugful, hurried back to him. He seemed
asleep; but something in the tired white face caused me to listen at
his lips for a breath. None came. I touched his forehead; it was cold:
and then I knew that, while he waited, a better nurse than I had given
him a cooler draught, and healed him with a touch. I laid the sheet
over the quiet sleeper, whom no noise could now disturb; and, half an
hour later, the bed was empty. It seemed a poor requital for all he had
sacrificed and suffered,--that hospital bed, lonely even in a crowd;
for there was no familiar face for him to look his last upon; no
friendly voice to say, Good bye; no hand to lead him gently down into
the Valley of the Shadow; and he vanished, like a drop in that red sea
upon whose shores so many women stand lamenting. For a moment I felt
bitterly indignant at this seeming carelessness of the value of life,
the sanctity of death; then consoled myself with the thought that, when
the great muster roll was called, these nameless men might be promoted
above many whose tall monuments record the barren honors they have won.

All having eaten, drank, and rested, the surgeons began their rounds;
and I took my first lesson in the art of dressing wounds. It wasn't a
festive scene, by any means; for Dr P., whose Aid I constituted myself,
fell to work with a vigor which soon convinced me that I was a weaker
vessel, though nothing would have induced me to confess it then. He had
served in the Crimea, and seemed to regard a dilapidated body very much
as I should have regarded a damaged garment; and, turning up his cuffs,
whipped out a very unpleasant looking housewife, cutting, sawing,
patching and piecing, with the enthusiasm of an accomplished surgical
seamstress; explaining the process, in scientific terms, to the
patient, meantime; which, of course, was immensely cheering and
comfortable. There was an uncanny sort of fascination in watching him,
as he peered and probed into the mechanism of those wonderful bodies,
whose mysteries he understood so well. The more intricate the wound,
the better he liked it. A poor private, with both legs off, and shot
through the lungs, possessed more attractions for him than a dozen
generals, slightly scratched in some "masterly retreat;" and had any
one appeared in small pieces, requesting to be put together again, he
would have considered it a special dispensation.

The amputations were reserved till the morrow, and the merciful magic
of ether was not thought necessary that day, so the poor souls had to
bear their pains as best they might. It is all very well to talk of the
patience of woman; and far be it from me to pluck that feather from her
cap, for, heaven knows, she isn't allowed to wear many; but the patient
endurance of these men, under trials of the flesh, was truly wonderful.
Their fortitude seemed contagious, and scarcely a cry escaped them,
though I often longed to groan for them, when pride kept their white
lips shut, while great drops stood upon their foreheads, and the bed
shook with the irrepressible tremor of their tortured bodies. One or
two Irishmen anathematized the doctors with the frankness of their
nation, and ordered the Virgin to stand by them, as if she had been the
wedded Biddy to whom they could administer the poker, if she didn't;
but, as a general thing, the work went on in silence, broken only by
some quiet request for roller, instruments, or plaster, a sigh from the
patient, or a sympathizing murmur from the nurse.

It was long past noon before these repairs were even partially made;
and, having got the bodies of my boys into something like order, the
next task was to minister to their minds, by writing letters to the
anxious souls at home; answering questions, reading papers, taking
possession of money and valuables; for the eighth commandment was
reduced to a very fragmentary condition, both by the blacks and whites,
who ornamented our hospital with their presence. Pocket books, purses,
miniatures, and watches, were sealed up, labelled, and handed over to
the matron, till such times as the owners thereof were ready to depart
homeward or campward again. The letters dictated to me, and revised by
me, that afternoon, would have made an excellent chapter for some
future history of the war; for, like that which Thackeray's "Ensign
Spooney" wrote his mother just before Waterloo, they were "full of
affection, pluck, and bad spelling;" nearly all giving lively accounts
of the battle, and ending with a somewhat sudden plunge from patriotism
to provender, desiring "Marm," "Mary Ann," or "Aunt Peters," to send
along some pies, pickles, sweet stuff, and apples, "to yourn in haste,"
Joe, Sam, or Ned, as the case might be.

My little Sergeant insisted on trying to scribble something with his
left hand, and patiently accomplished some half dozen lines of
hieroglyphics, which he gave me to fold and direct, with a boyish
blush, that rendered a glimpse of "My Dearest Jane," unnecessary, to
assure me that the heroic lad had been more successful in the service
of Commander-in-Chief Cupid than that of Gen. Mars; and a charming
little romance blossomed instanter in Nurse Periwinkle's romantic
fancy, though no further confidences were made that day, for Sergeant
fell asleep, and, judging from his tranquil face, visited his absent
sweetheart in the pleasant land of dreams.

At five o'clock a great bell rang, and the attendants flew, not to
arms, but to their trays, to bring up supper, when a second uproar
announced that it was ready. The new comers woke at the sound; and I
presently discovered that it took a very bad wound to incapacitate the
defenders of the faith for the consumption of their rations; the amount
that some of them sequestered was amazing; but when I suggested the
probability of a famine hereafter, to the matron, that motherly lady
cried out: "Bless their hearts, why shouldn't they eat? It's their only
amusement; so fill every one, and, if there's not enough ready
to-night, I'll lend my share to the Lord by giving it to the boys."
And, whipping up her coffee-pot and plate of toast, she gladdened the
eyes and stomachs of two or three dissatisfied heroes, by serving them
with a liberal hand; and I haven't the slightest doubt that, having
cast her bread upon the waters, it came back buttered, as another
large-hearted old lady was wont to say.

Then came the doctor's evening visit; the administration of medicines;
washing feverish faces; smoothing tumbled beds; wetting wounds; singing
lullabies; and preparations for the night. By eleven, the last labor of
love was done; the last "good night" spoken; and, if any needed a
reward for that day's work, they surely received it, in the silent
eloquence of those long lines of faces, showing pale and peaceful in
the shaded rooms, as we quitted them, followed by grateful glances that
lighted us to bed, where rest, the sweetest, made our pillows soft,
while Night and Nature took our places, filling that great house of
pain with the healing miracles of Sleep, and his diviner brother, Death.



CHAPTER IV

A NIGHT.

Being fond of the night side of nature, I was soon promoted to the post
of night nurse, with every facility for indulging in my favorite
pastime of "owling." My colleague, a black-eyed widow, relieved me at
dawn, we two taking care of the ward, between us, like the immortal
Sairy and Betsey, "turn and turn about." I usually found my boys in the
jolliest state of mind their condition allowed; for it was a known fact
that Nurse Periwinkle objected to blue devils, and entertained a belief
that he who laughed most was surest of recovery. At the beginning of my
reign, dumps and dismals prevailed; the nurses looked anxious and
tired, the men gloomy or sad; and a general
"Hark!-from-the-tombs-a-doleful-sound" style of conversation seemed to
be the fashion: a state of things which caused one coming from a merry,
social New England town, to feel as if she had got into an exhausted
receiver; and the instinct of self-preservation, to say nothing of a
philanthropic desire to serve the race, caused a speedy change in Ward
No. 1.

More flattering than the most gracefully turned compliment, more
grateful than the most admiring glance, was the sight of those rows of
faces, all strange to me a little while ago, now lighting up, with
smiles of welcome, as I came among them, enjoying that moment heartily,
with a womanly pride in their regard, a motherly affection for them
all. The evenings were spent in reading aloud, writing letters, waiting
on and amusing the men, going the rounds with Dr. P., as he made his
second daily survey, dressing my dozen wounds afresh, giving last
doses, and making them cozy for the long hours to come, till the nine
o'clock bell rang, the gas was turned down, the day nurses went off
duty, the night watch came on, and my nocturnal adventure began.

My ward was now divided into three rooms; and, under favor of the
matron, I had managed to sort out the patients in such a way that I had
what I called, "my duty room," my "pleasure room," and my "pathetic
room," and worked for each in a different way. One, I visited, armed
with a dressing tray, full of rollers, plasters, and pins; another,
with books, flowers, games, and gossip; a third, with teapots,
lullabies, consolation, and sometimes, a shroud.

Wherever the sickest or most helpless man chanced to be, there I held
my watch, often visiting the other rooms, to see that the general
watchman of the ward did his duty by the fires and the wounds, the
latter needing constant wetting. Not only on this account did I
meander, but also to get fresher air than the close rooms afforded;
for, owing to the stupidity of that mysterious "somebody" who does all
the damage in the world, the windows had been carefully nailed down
above, and the lower sashes could only be raised in the mildest
weather, for the men lay just below. I had suggested a summary smashing
of a few panes here and there, when frequent appeals to headquarters
had proved unavailing, and daily orders to lazy attendants had come to
nothing. No one seconded the motion, however, and the nails were far
beyond my reach; for, though belonging to the sisterhood of
"ministering angels," I had no wings, and might as well have asked for
Jacob's ladder, as a pair of steps, in that charitable chaos.

One of the harmless ghosts who bore me company during the haunted
hours, was Dan, the watchman, whom I regarded with a certain awe; for,
though so much together, I never fairly saw his face, and, but for his
legs, should never have recognized him, as we seldom met by day. These
legs were remarkable, as was his whole figure, for his body was short,
rotund, and done up in a big jacket, and muffler; his beard hid the
lower part of his face, his hat-brim the upper; and all I ever
discovered was a pair of sleepy eyes, and a very mild voice. But the
legs!--very long, very thin, very crooked and feeble, looking like grey
sausages in their tight coverings, without a ray of pegtopishness about
them, and finished off with a pair of expansive, green cloth shoes,
very like Chinese junks, with the sails down. This figure, gliding
noiselessly about the dimly lighted rooms, was strongly suggestive of
the spirit of a beer barrel mounted on cork-screws, haunting the old
hotel in search of its lost mates, emptied and staved in long ago.

Another goblin who frequently appeared to me, was the attendant of the
pathetic room, who, being a faithful soul, was often up to tend two or
three men, weak and wandering as babies, after the fever had gone. The
amiable creature beguiled the watches of the night by brewing jorums of
a fearful beverage, which he called coffee, and insisted on sharing
with me; coming in with a great bowl of something like mud soup,
scalding hot, guiltless of cream, rich in an all-pervading flavor of
molasses, scorch and tin pot. Such an amount of good will and
neighborly kindness also went into the mess, that I never could find
the heart to refuse, but always received it with thanks, sipped it with
hypocritical relish while he remained, and whipped it into the slop-jar
the instant he departed, thereby gratifying him, securing one rousing
laugh in the doziest hour of the night, and no one was the worse for
the transaction but the pigs. Whether they were "cut off untimely in
their sins," or not, I carefully abstained from inquiring.

It was a strange life--asleep half the day, exploring Washington the
other half, and all night hovering, like a massive cherubim, in a red
rigolette, over the slumbering sons of man. I liked it, and found many
things to amuse, instruct, and interest me. The snores alone were quite
a study, varying from the mild sniff to the stentorian snort, which
startled the echoes and hoisted the performer erect to accuse his
neighbor of the deed, magnanimously forgive him, and wrapping the
drapery of his couch about him, lie down to vocal slumber. After
listening for a week to this band of wind instruments, I indulged in
the belief that I could recognize each by the snore alone, and was
tempted to join the chorus by breaking out with John Brown's favorite
hymn:

"Blow ye the trumpet, blow!"

I would have given much to have possessed the art of sketching, for
many of the faces became wonderfully interesting when unconscious. Some
grew stern and grim, the men evidently dreaming of war, as they gave
orders, groaned over their wounds, or damned the rebels vigorously;
some grew sad and infinitely pathetic, as if the pain borne silently
all day, revenged itself by now betraying what the man's pride had
concealed so well. Often the roughest grew young and pleasant when
sleep smoothed the hard lines away, letting the real nature assert
itself; many almost seemed to speak, and I learned to know these men
better by night than through any intercourse by day. Sometimes they
disappointed me, for faces that looked merry and good in the light,
grew bad and sly when the shadows came; and though they made no
confidences in words, I read their lives, leaving them to wonder at the
change of manner this midnight magic wrought in their nurse. A few
talked busily; one drummer boy sang sweetly, though no persuasions
could win a note from him by day; and several depended on being told
what they had talked of in the morning. Even my constitutionals in the
chilly halls, possessed a certain charm, for the house was never still.
Sentinels tramped round it all night long, their muskets glittering in
the wintry moonlight as they walked, or stood before the doors,
straight and silent, as figures of stone, causing one to conjure up
romantic visions of guarded forts, sudden surprises, and daring deeds;
for in these war times the hum drum life of Yankeedom had vanished, and
the most prosaic feel some thrill of that excitement which stirs the
nation's heart, and makes its capital a camp of hospitals. Wandering up
and down these lower halls, I often heard cries from above, steps
hurrying to and fro, saw surgeons passing up, or men coming down
carrying a stretcher, where lay a long white figure, whose face was
shrouded and whose fight was done. Sometimes I stopped to watch the
passers in the street, the moonlight shining on the spire opposite, or
the gleam of some vessel floating, like a white-winged sea-gull, down
the broad Potomac, whose fullest flow can never wash away the red stain
of the land.

The night whose events I have a fancy to record, opened with a little
comedy, and closed with a great tragedy; for a virtuous and useful life
untimely ended is always tragical to those who see not as God sees. My
headquarters were beside the bed of a New Jersey boy, crazed by the
horrors of that dreadful Saturday. A slight wound in the knee brought
him there; but his mind had suffered more than his body; some string of
that delicate machine was over strained, and, for days, he had been
reliving in imagination, the scenes he could not forget, till his
distress broke out in incoherent ravings, pitiful to hear. As I sat by
him, endeavoring to soothe his poor distracted brain by the constant
touch of wet hands over his hot forehead, he lay cheering his comrades
on, hurrying them back, then counting them as they fell around him,
often clutching my arm, to drag me from the vicinity of a bursting
shell, or covering up his head to screen himself from a shower of shot;
his face brilliant with fever; his eyes restless; his head never still;
every muscle strained and rigid; while an incessant stream of defiant
shouts, whispered warnings, and broken laments, poured from his lips
with that forceful bewilderment which makes such wanderings so hard to
overhear.

It was past eleven, and my patient was slowly wearying himself into
fitful intervals of quietude, when, in one of these pauses, a curious
sound arrested my attention. Looking over my shoulder, I saw a
one-legged phantom hopping nimbly down the room; and, going to meet it,
recognized a certain Pennsylvania gentleman, whose wound-fever had
taken a turn for the worse, and, depriving him of the few wits a
drunken campaign had left him, set him literally tripping on the light,
fantastic toe "toward home," as he blandly informed me, touching the
military cap which formed a striking contrast to the severe simplicity
of the rest of his decidedly undress uniform. When sane, the least
movement produced a roar of pain or a volley of oaths; but the
departure of reason seemed to have wrought an agreeable change, both in
the man and his manners; for, balancing himself on one leg, like a
meditative stork, he plunged into an animated discussion of the war,
the President, lager beer, and Enfield rifles, regardless of any
suggestions of mine as to the propriety of returning to bed, lest he be
court-martialed for desertion.

Anything more supremely ridiculous can hardly be imagined than this
figure, scantily draped in white, its one foot covered with a big blue
sock, a dingy cap set rakingly askew on its shaven head, and placid
satisfaction beaming in its broad red face, as it flourished a mug in
one hand, an old boot in the other, calling them canteen and knapsack,
while it skipped and fluttered in the most unearthly fashion. What to
do with the creature I didn't know; Dan was absent, and if I went to
find him, the perambulator might festoon himself out of the window, set
his toga on fire, or do some of his neighbors a mischief. The attendant
of the room was sleeping like a near relative of the celebrated Seven,
and nothing short of pins would rouse him; for he had been out that
day, and whiskey asserted its supremacy in balmy whiffs. Still
declaiming, in a fine flow of eloquence, the demented gentleman hopped
on, blind and deaf to my graspings and entreaties; and I was about to
slam the door in his face, and run for help, when a second and saner
phantom, "all in white," came to the rescue, in the likeness of a big
Prussian, who spoke no English, but divined the crisis, and put an end
to it, by bundling the lively monoped into his bed, like a baby, with
an authoritative command to "stay put," which received added weight
from being delivered in an odd conglomeration of French and German,
accompanied by warning wags of a head decorated with a yellow cotton
night cap, rendered most imposing by a tassel like a bell-pull. Rather
exhausted by his excursion, the member from Pennsylvania subsided; and,
after an irrepressible laugh together, my Prussian ally and myself were
returning to our places, when the echo of a sob caused us to glance
along the beds. It came from one in the corner--such a little bed!--and
such a tearful little face looked up at us, as we stopped beside it!
The twelve years old drummer boy was not singing now, but sobbing, with
a manly effort all the while to stifle the distressful sounds that
would break out.

"What is it, Teddy?" I asked, as he rubbed the tears away, and checked
himself in the middle of a great sob to answer plaintively:

"I've got a chill, ma'am, but I ain't cryin' for that, 'cause I'm used
to it. I dreamed Kit was here, and when I waked up he wasn't, and I
couldn't help it, then."

The boy came in with the rest, and the man who was taken dead from the
ambulance was the Kit he mourned. Well he might; for, when the wounded
were brought from Fredericksburg, the child lay in one of the camps
thereabout, and this good friend, though sorely hurt himself, would not
leave him to the exposure and neglect of such a time and place; but,
wrapping him in his own blanket, carried him in his arms to the
transport, tended him during the passage, and only yielded up his
charge when Death met him at the door of the hospital which promised
care and comfort for the boy. For ten days, Teddy had shivered or
burned with fever and ague, pining the while for Kit, and refusing to
be comforted, because he had not been able to thank him for the
generous protection, which, perhaps, had cost the giver's life. The
vivid dream had wrung the childish heart with a fresh pang, and when I
tried the solace fitted for his years, the remorseful fear that haunted
him found vent in a fresh burst of tears, as he looked at the wasted
hands I was endeavoring to warm:

"Oh! if I'd only been as thin when Kit carried me as I am now, maybe he
wouldn't have died; but I was heavy, he was hurt worser than we knew,
and so it killed him; and I didn't see him, to say good bye."

This thought had troubled him in secret; and my assurances that his
friend would probably have died at all events, hardly assuaged the
bitterness of his regretful grief.

At this juncture, the delirious man began to shout; the one-legged rose
up in his bed, as if preparing for another dart, Teddy bewailed himself
more piteously than before: and if ever a woman was at her wit's end,
that distracted female was Nurse Periwinkle, during the space of two or
three minutes, as she vibrated between the three beds, like an agitated
pendulum. Like a most opportune reinforcement, Dan, the bandy,
appeared, and devoted himself to the lively party, leaving me free to
return to my post; for the Prussian, with a nod and a smile, took the
lad away to his own bed, and lulled him to sleep with a soothing
murmur, like a mammoth humble bee. I liked that in Fritz, and if he
ever wondered afterward at the dainties which sometimes found their way
into his rations, or the extra comforts of his bed, he might have found
a solution of the mystery in sundry persons' knowledge of the fatherly
action of that night.

Hardly was I settled again, when the inevitable bowl appeared, and its
bearer delivered a message I had expected, yet dreaded to receive:

"John is going, ma'am, and wants to see you, if you can come."

"The moment this boy is asleep; tell him so, and let me know if I am in
danger of being too late."

My Ganymede departed, and while I quieted poor Shaw, I thought of John.
He came in a day or two after the others; and, one evening, when I
entered my "pathetic room," I found a lately emptied bed occupied by a
large, fair man, with a fine face, and the serenest eyes I ever met.
One of the earlier comers had often spoken of a friend, who had
remained behind, that those apparently worse wounded than himself might
reach a shelter first. It seemed a David and Jonathan sort of
friendship. The man fretted for his mate, and was never tired of
praising John--his courage, sobriety, self-denial, and unfailing
kindliness of heart; always winding up with: "He's an out an' out fine
feller, ma'am; you see if he aint."

I had some curiosity to behold this piece of excellence, and when he
came, watched him for a night or two, before I made friends with him;
for, to tell the truth, I was a little afraid of the stately looking
man, whose bed had to be lengthened to accommodate his commanding
stature; who seldom spoke, uttered no complaint, asked no sympathy, but
tranquilly observed what went on about him; and, as he lay high upon
his pillows, no picture of dying stateman or warrior was ever fuller of
real dignity than this Virginia blacksmith. A most attractive face he
had, framed in brown hair and beard, comely featured and full of vigor,
as yet unsubdued by pain; thoughtful and often beautifully mild while
watching the afflictions of others, as if entirely forgetful of his
own. His mouth was grave and firm, with plenty of will and courage in
its lines, but a smile could make it as sweet as any woman's; and his
eyes were child's eyes, looking one fairly in the face, with a clear,
straightforward glance, which promised well for such as placed their
faith in him. He seemed to cling to life, as if it were rich in duties
and delights, and he had learned the secret of content. The only time I
saw his composure disturbed, was when my surgeon brought another to
examine John, who scrutinized their faces with an anxious look, asking
of the elder: "Do you think I shall pull through, sir?" "I hope so, my
man." And, as the two passed on, John's eye still followed them, with
an intentness which would have won a clearer answer from them, had they
seen it. A momentary shadow flitted over his face; then came the usual
serenity, as if, in that brief eclipse, he had acknowledged the
existence of some hard possibility, and, asking nothing yet hoping all
things, left the issue in God's hands, with that submission which is
true piety.

The next night, as I went my rounds with Dr. P., I happened to ask
which man in the room probably suffered most; and, to my great
surprise, he glanced at John:

"Every breath he draws is like a stab; for the ball pierced the left
lung, broke a rib, and did no end of damage here and there; so the poor
lad can find neither forgetfulness nor ease, because he must lie on his
wounded back or suffocate. It will be a hard struggle, and a long one,
for he possesses great vitality; but even his temperate life can't save
him; I wish it could."

"You don't mean he must die, Doctor?"

"Bless you there's not the slightest hope for him; and you'd better
tell him so before long; women have a way of doing such things
comfortably, so I leave it to you. He won't last more than a day or
two, at furthest."

I could have sat down on the spot and cried heartily, if I had not
learned the wisdom of bottling up one's tears for leisure moments. Such
an end seemed very hard for such a man, when half a dozen worn out,
worthless bodies round him, were gathering up the remnants of wasted
lives, to linger on for years perhaps, burdens to others, daily
reproaches to themselves. The army needed men like John, earnest,
brave, and faithful; fighting for liberty and justice with both heart
and hand, true soldiers of the Lord. I could not give him up so soon,
or think with any patience of so excellent a nature robbed of its
fulfillment, and blundered into eternity by the rashness or stupidity
of those at whose hands so many lives may be required. It was an easy
thing for Dr. P. to say: "Tell him he must die," but a cruelly hard
thing to do, and by no means as "comfortable" as he politely suggested.
I had not the heart to do it then, and privately indulged the hope that
some change for the better might take place, in spite of gloomy
prophesies; so, rendering my task unnecessary. A few minutes later, as
I came in again, with fresh rollers, I saw John sitting erect, with no
one to support him, while the surgeon dressed his back. I had never
hitherto seen it done; for, having simpler wounds to attend to, and
knowing the fidelity of the attendant, I had left John to him, thinking
it might be more agreeable and safe; for both strength and experience
were needed in his case. I had forgotten that the strong man might long
for the gentle tendance of a woman's hands, the sympathetic magnetism
of a woman's presence, as well as the feebler souls about him. The
Doctor's words caused me to reproach myself with neglect, not of any
real duty perhaps, but of those little cares and kindnesses that solace
homesick spirits, and make the heavy hours pass easier. John looked
lonely and forsaken just then, as he sat with bent head, hands folded
on his knee, and no outward sign of suffering, till, looking nearer, I
saw great tears roll down and drop upon the floor. It was a new sight
there; for, though I had seen many suffer, some swore, some groaned,
most endured silently, but none wept. Yet it did not seem weak, only
very touching, and straightway my fear vanished, my heart opened wide
and took him in, as, gathering the bent head in my arms, as freely as
if he had been a little child, I said, "Let me help you bear it, John."

Never, on any human countenance, have I seen so swift and beautiful a
look of gratitude, surprise and comfort, as that which answered me more
eloquently than the whispered--

"Thank you, ma'am, this is right good! this is what I wanted!"

"Then why not ask for it before?"

"I didn't like to be a trouble; you seemed so busy, and I could manage
to get on alone."

"You shall not want it any more, John."

Nor did he; for now I understood the wistful look that sometimes
followed me, as I went out, after a brief pause beside his bed, or
merely a passing nod, while busied with those who seemed to need me
more than he, because more urgent in their demands; now I knew that to
him, as to so many, I was the poor substitute for mother, wife, or
sister, and in his eyes no stranger, but a friend who hitherto had
seemed neglectful; for, in his modesty, he had never guessed the truth.
This was changed now; and, through the tedious operation of probing,
bathing, and dressing his wounds, he leaned against me, holding my hand
fast, and, if pain wrung further tears from him, no one saw them fall
but me. When he was laid down again, I hovered about him, in a
remorseful state of mind that would not let me rest, till I had bathed
his face, brushed his "bonny brown hair," set all things smooth about
him, and laid a knot of heath and heliotrope on his clean pillow. While
doing this, he watched me with the satisfied expression I so liked to
see; and when I offered the little nosegay, held it carefully in his
great hand, smoothed a ruffled leaf or two, surveyed and smelt it with
an air of genuine delight, and lay contentedly regarding the glimmer of
the sunshine on the green. Although the manliest man among my forty, he
said, "Yes, ma'am," like a little boy; received suggestions for his
comfort with the quick smile that brightened his whole face; and now
and then, as I stood tidying the table by his bed, I felt him softly
touch my gown, as if to assure himself that I was there. Anything more
natural and frank I never saw, and found this brave John as bashful as
brave, yet full of excellencies and fine aspirations, which, having no
power to express themselves in words, seemed to have bloomed into his
character and made him what he was.

After that night, an hour of each evening that remained to him was
devoted to his ease or pleasure. He could not talk much, for breath was
precious, and he spoke in whispers; but from occasional conversations,
I gleaned scraps of private history which only added to the affection
and respect I felt for him. Once he asked me to write a letter, and as
I settled pen and paper, I said, with an irrepressible glimmer of
feminine curiosity, "Shall it be addressed to wife, or mother, John?"

"Neither, ma'am; I've got no wife, and will write to mother myself when
I get better. Did you think I was married because of this?" he asked,
touching a plain ring he wore, and often turned thoughtfully on his
finger when he lay alone.

"Partly that, but more from a settled sort of look you have; a look
which young men seldom get until they marry."

"I didn't know that; but I'm not so very young, ma'am, thirty in May,
and have been what you might call settled this ten years; for mother's
a widow, I'm the oldest child she has, and it wouldn't do for me to
marry until Lizzy has a home of her own, and Laurie's learned his
trade; for we're not rich, and I must be father to the children and
husband to the dear old woman, if I can."

"No doubt but you are both, John; yet how came you to go to war, if you
felt so? Wasn't enlisting as bad as marrying?"

"No, ma'am, not as I see it, for one is helping my neighbor, the other
pleasing myself. I went because I couldn't help it. I didn't want the
glory or the pay; I wanted the right thing done, and people kept saying
the men who were in earnest ought to fight. I was in earnest, the Lord
knows! but I held off as long as I could, not knowing which was my
duty; mother saw the case, gave me her ring to keep me steady, and said
'Go:' so I went."

A short story and a simple one, but the man and the mother were
portrayed better than pages of fine writing could have done it.

"Do you ever regret that you came, when you lie here suffering so much?"

"Never, ma'am; I haven't helped a great deal, but I've shown I was
willing to give my life, and perhaps I've got to; but I don't blame
anybody, and if it was to do over again, I'd do it. I'm a little sorry
I wasn't wounded in front; it looks cowardly to be hit in the back, but
I obeyed orders, and it don't matter in the end, I know."

Poor John! it did not matter now, except that a shot in the front might
have spared the long agony in store for him. He seemed to read the
thought that troubled me, as he spoke so hopefully when there was no
hope, for he suddenly added:

"This is my first battle; do they think it's going to be my last?"

"I'm afraid they do, John."

It was the hardest question I had ever been called upon to answer;
doubly hard with those clear eyes fixed on mine, forcing a truthful
answer by their own truth. He seemed a little startled at first,
pondered over the fateful fact a moment, then shook his head, with a
glance at the broad chest and muscular limbs stretched out before him:

"I'm not afraid, but it's difficult to believe all at once. I'm so
strong it don't seem possible for such a little wound to kill me."

Merry Mercutio's dying words glanced through my memory as he spoke:
"'Tis not so deep as a well, nor so wide as a church door, but 'tis
enough." And John would have said the same could he have seen the
ominous black holes between his shoulders; he never had; and, seeing
the ghastly sights about him, could not believe his own wound more
fatal than these, for all the suffering it caused him.

"Shall I write to your mother, now?" I asked, thinking that these
sudden tidings might change all plans and purposes; but they did not;
for the man received the order of the Divine Commander to march with
the same unquestioning obedience with which the soldier had received
that of the human one; doubtless remembering that the first led him to
life, and the last to death.

"No, ma'am; to Laurie just the same; he'll break it to her best, and
I'll add a line to her myself when you get done."

So I wrote the letter which he dictated, finding it better than any I
had sent; for, though here and there a little ungrammatical or
inelegant, each sentence came to me briefly worded, but most
expressive; full of excellent counsel to the boy, tenderly bequeathing
"mother and Lizzie" to his care, and bidding him good bye in words the
sadder for their simplicity. He added a few lines, with steady hand,
and, as I sealed it, said, with a patient sort of sigh, "I hope the
answer will come in time for me to see it;" then, turning away his
face, laid the flowers against his lips, as if to hide some quiver of
emotion at the thought of such a sudden sundering of all the dear home
ties.

These things had happened two days before; now John was dying, and the
letter had not come. I had been summoned to many death beds in my life,
but to none that made my heart ache as it did then, since my mother
called me to watch the departure of a spirit akin to this in its
gentleness and patient strength. As I went in, John stretched out both
hands:

"I know you'd come! I guess I'm moving on, ma'am."

He was; and so rapidly that, even while he spoke, over his face I saw
the grey veil falling that no human hand can lift. I sat down by him,
wiped the drops from his forehead, stirred the air about him with the
slow wave of a fan, and waited to help him die. He stood in sore need
of help--and I could do so little; for, as the doctor had foretold, the
strong body rebelled against death, and fought every inch of the way,
forcing him to draw each breath with a spasm, and clench his hands with
an imploring look, as if he asked, "How long must I endure this, and be
still!" For hours he suffered dumbly, without a moment's respire, or a
moment's murmuring; his limbs grew cold, his face damp, his lips white,
and, again and again, he tore the covering off his breast, as if the
lightest weight added to his agony; yet through it all, his eyes never
lost their perfect serenity, and the man's soul seemed to sit therein,
undaunted by the ills that vexed his flesh.

One by one, the men woke, and round the room appeared a circle of pale
faces and watchful eyes, full of awe and pity; for, though a stranger,
John was beloved by all. Each man there had wondered at his patience,
respected his piety, admired his fortitude, and now lamented his hard
death; for the influence of an upright nature had made itself deeply
felt, even in one little week. Presently, the Jonathan who so loved
this comely David, came creeping from his bed for a last look and word.
The kind soul was full of trouble, as the choke in his voice, the grasp
of his hand, betrayed; but there were no tears, and the farewell of the
friends was the more touching for its brevity.

"Old boy, how are you?" faltered the one.

"Most through, thank heaven!" whispered the other.

"Can I say or do anything for you anywheres?"

"Take my things home, and tell them that I did my best."

"I will! I will!"

"Good bye, Ned."

"Good bye, John, good bye!"

They kissed each other, tenderly as women, and so parted, for poor Ned
could not stay to see his comrade die. For a little while, there was no
sound in the room but the drip of water, from a stump or two, and
John's distressful gasps, as he slowly breathed his life away. I
thought him nearly gone, and had just laid down the fan, believing its
help to be no longer needed, when suddenly he rose up in his bed, and
cried out with a bitter cry that broke the silence, sharply startling
every one with its agonized appeal:

"For God's sake, give me air!"

It was the only cry pain or death had wrung from him, the only boon he
had asked; and none of us could grant it, for all the airs that blew
were useless now. Dan flung up the window. The first red streak of dawn
was warming the grey east, a herald of the coming sun; John saw it, and
with the love of light which lingers in us to the end, seemed to read
in it a sign of hope of help, for, over his whole face there broke that
mysterious expression, brighter than any smile, which often comes to
eyes that look their last. He laid himself gently down; and, stretching
out his strong right arm, as if to grasp and bring the blessed air to
his lips in a fuller flow, lapsed into a merciful unconsciousness,
which assured us that for him suffering was forever past. He died then;
for, though the heavy breaths still tore their way up for a little
longer, they were but the waves of an ebbing tide that beat unfelt
against the wreck, which an immortal voyager had deserted with a smile.
He never spoke again, but to the end held my hand close, so close that
when he was asleep at last, I could not draw it away. Dan helped me,
warning me as he did so that it was unsafe for dead and living flesh to
lie so long together; but though my hand was strangely cold and stiff,
and four white marks remained across its back, even when warmth and
color had returned elsewhere, I could not but be glad that, through its
touch, the presence of human sympathy, perhaps, had lightened that hard
hour.

When they had made him ready for the grave, John lay in state for half
an hour, a thing which seldom happened in that busy place; but a
universal sentiment of reverence and affection seemed to fill the
hearts of all who had known or heard of him; and when the rumor of his
death went through the house, always astir, many came to see him, and I
felt a tender sort of pride in my lost patient; for he looked a most
heroic figure, lying there stately and still as the statue of some
young knight asleep upon his tomb. The lovely expression which so often
beautifies dead faces, soon replaced the marks of pain, and I longed
for those who loved him best to see him when half an hour's
acquaintance with Death had made them friends. As we stood looking at
him, the ward master handed me a letter, saying it had been forgotten
the night before. It was John's letter, come just an hour too late to
gladden the eyes that had longed and looked for it so eagerly! yet he
had it; for, after I had cut some brown locks for his mother, and taken
off the ring to send her, telling how well the talisman had done its
work, I kissed this good son for her sake, and laid the letter in his
hand, still folded as when I drew my own away, feeling that its place
was there, and making myself happy with the thought, that, even in his
solitary place in the "Government Lot," he would not be without some
token of the love which makes life beautiful and outlives death. Then I
left him, glad to have known so genuine a man, and carrying with me an
enduring memory of the brave Virginia blacksmith, as he lay serenely
waiting for the dawn of that long day which knows no night.



CHAPTER V

OFF DUTY.

"My dear girl, we shall have you sick in your bed, unless you keep
yourself warm and quiet for a few days. Widow Wadman can take care of
the ward alone, now the men are so comfortable, and have her vacation
when you are about again. Now do be prudent in time, and don't let me
have to add a Periwinkle to my bouquet of patients."

This advice was delivered, in a paternal manner, by the youngest
surgeon in the hospital, a kind-hearted little gentleman, who seemed to
consider me a frail young blossom, that needed much cherishing, instead
of a tough old spinster, who had been knocking about the world for
thirty years. At the time I write of, he discovered me sitting on the
stairs, with a nice cloud of unwholesome steam rising from the
washroom; a party of January breezes disporting themselves in the
halls; and perfumes, by no means from "Araby the blest," keeping them
company; while I enjoyed a fit of coughing, which caused my head to
spin in a way that made the application of a cool banister both
necessary and agreeable, as I waited for the frolicsome wind to restore
the breath I'd lost; cheering myself, meantime, with a secret
conviction that pneumonia was waiting for me round the corner. This
piece of advice had been offered by several persons for a week, and
refused by me with the obstinacy with which my sex is so richly gifted.
But the last few hours had developed several surprising internal and
external phenomena, which impressed upon me the fact that if I didn't
make a masterly retreat very soon, I should tumble down somewhere, and
have to be borne ignominiously from the field. My head felt like a
cannon ball; my feet had a tendency to cleave to the floor; the walls
at times undulated in a most disagreeable manner; people looked
unnaturally big; and the "very bottles on the mankle shelf" appeared to
dance derisively before my eyes. Taking these things into
consideration, while blinking stupidly at Dr. Z., I resolved to retire
gracefully, if I must; so, with a valedictory to my boys, a private
lecture to Mrs. Wadman, and a fervent wish that I could take off my
body and work in my soul, I mournfully ascended to my apartment, and
Nurse P was reported off duty.

For the benefit of any ardent damsel whose patriotic fancy may have
surrounded hospital life with a halo of charms, I will briefly describe
the bower to which I retired, in a somewhat ruinous condition. It was
well ventilated, for five panes of glass had suffered compound
fractures, which all the surgeons and nurses had failed to heal; the
two windows were draped with sheets, the church hospital opposite being
a brick and mortar Argus, and the female mind cherishing a prejudice in
favor of retiracy during the night-capped periods of existence. A bare
floor supported two narrow iron beds, spread with thin mattresses like
plasters, furnished with pillows in the last stages of consumption. In
a fire place, guiltless of shovel, tongs, andirons, or grate, burned a
log inch by inch, being too long to to go on all at once; so, while the
fire blazed away at one end, I did the same at the other, as I tripped
over it a dozen times a day, and flew up to poke it a dozen times at
night. A mirror (let us be elegant!) of the dimensions of a muffin, and
about as reflective, hung over a tin basin, blue pitcher, and a brace
of yellow mugs. Two invalid tables, ditto chairs, wandered here and
there, and the closet contained a varied collection of bonnets,
bottles, bags, boots, bread and butter, boxes and bugs. The closet was
a regular Blue Beard cupboard to me; I always opened it with fear and
trembling, owing to rats, and shut it in anguish of spirit; for time
and space were not to be had, and chaos reigned along with the rats.
Our chimney-piece was decorated with a flat-iron, a Bible, a candle
minus stick, a lavender bottle, a new tin pan, so brilliant that it
served nicely for a pier-glass, and such of the portly black bugs as
preferred a warmer climate than the rubbish hole afforded. Two arks,
commonly called trunks, lurked behind the door, containing the worldly
goods of the twain who laughed and cried, slept and scrambled, in this
refuge; while from the white-washed walls above either bed, looked down
the pictured faces of those whose memory can make for us--

"One little room an everywhere."

For a day or two I managed to appear at meals; for the human grub must
eat till the butterfly is ready to break loose, and no one had time to
come up two flights while it was possible for me to come down. Far be
it from me to add another affliction or reproach to that enduring man,
the steward; for, compared with his predecessor, he was a horn of
plenty; but--I put it to any candid mind--is not the following bill of
fare susceptible of improvement, without plunging the nation madly into
debt? The three meals were "pretty much of a muchness," and consisted
of beef, evidently put down for the men of '76; pork, just in from the
street; army bread, composed of saw-dust and saleratus; butter, salt as
if churned by Lot's wife; stewed blackberries, so much like preserved
cockroaches, that only those devoid of imagination could partake
thereof with relish; coffee, mild and muddy; tea, three dried
huckleberry leaves to a quart of water--flavored with lime--also
animated and unconscious of any approach to clearness. Variety being
the spice of life, a small pinch of the article would have been
appreciated by the hungry, hard-working sisterhood, one of whom, though
accustomed to plain fare, soon found herself reduced to bread and
water; having an inborn repugnance to the fat of the land, and the salt
of the earth.

Another peculiarity of these hospital meals was the rapidity with which
the edibles vanished, and the impossibility of getting a drop or crumb
after the usual time. At the first ring of the bell, a general stampede
took place; some twenty hungry souls rushed to the dining-room, swept
over the table like a swarm of locusts, and left no fragment for any
tardy creature who arrived fifteen minutes late. Thinking it of more
importance that the patients should be well and comfortably fed, I took
my time about my own meals for the first day or two after I came, but
was speedily enlightened by Isaac, the black waiter, who bore with me a
few times, and then informed me, looking as stern as fate:

"I say, mam, ef you comes so late you can't have no vittles,--'cause
I'm 'bleeged fer ter git things ready fer de doctors 'mazin' spry arter
you nusses and folks is done. De gen'lemen don't kere fer ter wait, no
more does I; so you jes' please ter come at de time, and dere won't be
no frettin' nowheres."

It was a new sensation to stand looking at a full table, painfully
conscious of one of the vacuums which Nature abhors, and receive orders
to right about face, without partaking of the nourishment which your
inner woman clamorously demanded. The doctors always fared better than
we; and for a moment a desperate impulse prompted me to give them a
hint, by walking off with the mutton, or confiscating the pie. But
Ike's eye was on me, and, to my shame be it spoken, I walked meekly
away; went dinnerless that day, and that evening went to market, laying
in a small stock of crackers, cheese and apples, that my boys might not
be neglected, nor myself obliged to bolt solid and liquid dyspepsias,
or starve. This plan would have succeeded admirably had not the evil
star under which I was born, been in the ascendant during that month,
and cast its malign influences even into my "'umble" larder; for the
rats had their dessert off my cheese, the bugs set up housekeeping in
my cracker bag, and the apples like all worldly riches, took to
themselves wings and flew away; whither no man could tell, though
certain black imps might have thrown light upon the matter, had not the
plaintiff in the case been loth to add another to the many trials of
long-suffering Africa. After this failure I resigned myself to fate,
and, remembering that bread was called the staff of life, leaned pretty
exclusively upon it; but it proved a broken reed, and I came to the
ground after a few weeks of prison fare, varied by an occasional potato
or surreptitious sip of milk.

Very soon after leaving the care of my ward, I discovered that I had no
appetite, and cut the bread and butter interests almost entirely,
trying the exercise and sun cure instead. Flattering myself that I had
plenty of time, and could see all that was to be seen, so far as a lone
lorn female could venture in a city, one-half of whose male population
seemed to be taking the other half to the guard-house,--every morning I
took a brisk run in one direction or another; for the January days were
as mild as Spring. A rollicking north wind and occasional snow storm
would have been more to my taste, for the one would have braced and
refreshed tired body and soul, the other have purified the air, and
spread a clean coverlid over the bed, wherein the capital of these
United States appeared to be dozing pretty soundly just then.

One of these trips was to the Armory Hospital, the neatness, comfort,
and convenience of which makes it an honor to its presiding genius, and
arouses all the covetous propensities of such nurses as came from other
hospitals to visit it.

The long, clean, warm, and airy wards, built barrack-fashion, with the
nurse's room at the end, were fully appreciated by Nurse Periwinkle,
whose ward and private bower were cold, dirty, inconvenient, up stairs
and down stairs, and in every body's chamber. At the Armory, in ward K,
I found a cheery, bright-eyed, white-aproned little lady, reading at
her post near the stove; matting under her feet; a draft of fresh air
flowing in above her head; a table full of trays, glasses, and such
matters, on one side, a large, well-stocked medicine chest on the
other; and all her duty seemed to be going about now and then to give
doses, issue orders, which well-trained attendants executed, and pet,
advise, or comfort Tom, Dick, or Harry, as she found best. As I watched
the proceedings, I recalled my own tribulations, and contrasted the two
hospitals in a way that would have caused my summary dismissal, could
it have been reported at headquarters. Here, order, method, common
sense and liberality reigned and ruled, in a style that did one's heart
good to see; at the Hurly burly Hotel, disorder, discomfort, bad
management, and no visible head, reduced things to a condition which I
despair of describing. The circumlocution fashion prevailed, forms and
fusses tormented our souls, and unnecessary strictness in one place was
counterbalanced by unpardonable laxity in another. Here is a sample: I
am dressing Sam Dammer's shoulder; and, having cleansed the wound, look
about for some strips of adhesive plaster to hold on the little square
of wet linen which is to cover the gunshot wound; the case is not in
the tray; Frank, the sleepy, half-sick attendant, knows nothing of it;
we rummage high and low; Sam is tired, and fumes; Frank dawdles and
yawns; the men advise and laugh at the flurry; I feel like a boiling
tea-kettle, with the lid ready to fly off and damage somebody.

"Go and borrow some from the next ward, and spend the rest of the day
in finding ours," I finally command. A pause; then Frank scuffles back
with the message: "Miss Peppercorn ain't got none, and says you ain't
no business to lose your own duds and go borrowin' other folkses." I
say nothing, for fear of saying too much, but fly to the surgery. Mr.
Toddypestle informs me that I can't have anything without an order from
the surgeon of my ward. Great heavens! where is he? and away I rush, up
and down, here and there, till at last I find him, in a state of bliss
over a complicated amputation, in the fourth story. I make my demand;
he answers: "In five minutes," and works away, with his head upside
down, as he ties an artery, saws a bone, or does a little needle-work,
with a visible relish and very sanguinary pair of hands. The five
minutes grow to fifteen, and Frank appears, with the remark that,
"Dammer wants to know what in thunder you are keeping him there with
his finger on a wet rag for?" Dr. P. tears himself away long enough to
scribble the order, with which I plunge downward to the surgery again,
find the door locked, and, while hammering away on it, am told that two
friends are waiting to see me in the hall. The matron being away, her
parlor is locked, and there is nowhere to see my guests but in my own
room, and no time to enjoy them till the plaster is found. I settle
this matter, and circulate through the house to find Toddypestle, who
has no right, to leave the surgery till night. He is discovered in the
dead house, smoking a cigar; and very much the worse for his researches
among the spirituous preparations that fill the surgery shelves. He is
inclined to be gallant, and puts the finishing blow to the fire of my
wrath; for the tea-kettle lid flies off, and driving him before me to
his post, I fling down the order, take what I choose; and, leaving the
absurd incapable kissing his hand to me, depart, feeling, as Grandma
Riglesty is reported to have done, when she vainly sought for chips, in
Bimleck Jackwood's "shifless paster."

I find Dammer a well acted charade of his own name, and, just as I get
him done, struggling the while with a burning desire to clap an
adhesive strip across his mouth, full of heaven-defying oaths, Frank
takes up his boot to put it on, and exclaims:

"I'm blest ef here ain't that case now! I recollect seeing it pitch in
this mornin', but forgot all about it, till my heel went smash inter
it. Here, ma'am, ketch hold on it, and give the boys a sheet on't all
round, 'gainst it tumbles inter t'other boot next time yer want it."

If a look could annihilate, Francis Saucebox would have ceased to
exist; but it couldn't; therefore, he yet lives, to aggravate some
unhappy woman's soul, and wax fat in some equally congenial situation.

Now, while I'm freeing my mind, I should like to enter my protest
against employing convalescents as attendants, instead of strong,
properly trained, and cheerful men. How it may be in other places I
cannot say; but here it was a source of constant trouble and confusion,
these feeble, ignorant men trying to sweep, scrub, lift, and wait upon
their sicker comrades. One, with a diseased heart, was expected to run
up and down stairs, carry heavy trays, and move helpless men; he tried
it, and grew rapidly worse than when he first came: and, when he was
ordered out to march away to the convalescent hospital, fell, in a sort
of fit, before he turned the corner, and was brought back to die.
Another, hurt by a fall from his horse, endeavored to do his duty, but
failed entirely, and the wrath of the ward master fell upon the nurse,
who must either scrub the rooms herself, or take the lecture; for the
boy looked stout and well, and the master never happened to see him
turn white with pain, or hear him groan in his sleep when an
involuntary motion strained his poor back. Constant complaints were
being made of incompetent attendants, and some dozen women did double
duty, and then were blamed for breaking down. If any hospital director
fancies this a good and economical arrangement, allow one used up nurse
to tell him it isn't, and beg him to spare the sisterhood, who
sometimes, in their sympathy, forget that they are mortal, and run the
risk of being made immortal, sooner than is agreeable to their partial
friends.

Another of my few rambles took me to the Senate Chamber, hoping to hear
and see if this large machine was run any better than some small ones I
knew of. I was too late, and found the Speaker's chair occupied by a
colored gentleman of ten; while two others were "on their legs," having
a hot debate on the cornball question, as they gathered the waste paper
strewn about the floor into bags; and several white members played
leap-frog over the desks, a much wholesomer relaxation than some of the
older Senators indulge in, I fancy. Finding the coast clear, I likewise
gambolled up and down, from gallery to gallery; sat in Sumner's chair,
and cudgelled an imaginary Brooks within an inch of his life; examined
Wilson's books in the coolest possible manner; warmed my feet at one of
the national registers; read people's names on scattered envelopes, and
pocketed a castaway autograph or two; watched the somewhat
unparliamentary proceedings going on about me, and wondered who in the
world all the sedate gentlemen were, who kept popping out of odd doors
here and there, like respectable Jacks-in-the-box. Then I wandered over
the "palatial residence" of Mrs. Columbia, and examined its many
beauties, though I can't say I thought her a tidy housekeeper, and
didn't admire her taste in pictures, for the eye of this humble
individual soon wearied of expiring patriots, who all appeared to be
quitting their earthly tabernacles in convulsions, ruffled shirts, and
a whirl of torn banners, bomb shells, and buff and blue arms and legs.
The statuary also was massive and concrete, but rather wearying to
examine; for the colossal ladies and gentlemen, carried no cards of
introduction in face or figure; so, whether the meditative party in a
kilt, with well-developed legs, shoes like army slippers, and a
ponderous nose, was Columbus, Cato, or Cockelorum Tibby, the tragedian,
was more than I could tell. Several robust ladies attracted me; but
which was America and which Pocahontas was a mystery; for all affected
much looseness of costume, dishevelment of hair, swords, arrows,
lances, scales, and other ornaments quite passe with damsels of our
day, whose effigies should go down to posterity armed with fans,
crochet needles, riding whips, and parasols, with here and there one
holding pen or pencil, rolling-pin or broom. The statue of Liberty I
recognized at once, for it had no pedestal as yet, but stood flat in
the mud, with Young America most symbolically making dirt pies, and
chip forts, in its shadow. But high above the squabbling little throng
and their petty plans, the sun shone full on Liberty's broad forehead,
and, in her hand, some summer bird had built its nest. I accepted the
good omen then, and, on the first of January, the Emancipation Act gave
the statue a nobler and more enduring pedestal than any marble or
granite ever carved and quarried by human bands.

One trip to Georgetown Heights, where cedars sighed overhead, dead
leaves rustled underfoot, pleasant paths led up and down, and a brook
wound like a silver snake by the blackened ruins of some French
Minister's house, through the poor gardens of the black washerwomen who
congregated there, and, passing the cemetery with a murmurous lullaby,
rolled away to pay its little tribute to the river. This breezy run was
the last I took; for, on the morrow, came rain and wind: and
confinement soon proved a powerful reinforcement to the enemy, who was
quietly preparing to spring a mine, and blow me five hundred miles from
the position I had taken in what I called my Chickahominy Swamp.

Shut up in my room, with no voice, spirits, or books, that week was not
a holiday, by any means. Finding meals a humbug, I stopped away
altogether, trusting that if this sparrow was of any worth, the Lord
would not let it fall to the ground. Like a flock of friendly ravens,
my sister nurses fed me, not only with food for the body, but kind
words for the mind; and soon, from being half starved, I found myself
so beteaed and betoasted, petted and served, that I was quite "in the
lap of luxury," in spite of cough, headache, a painful consciousness of
my pleura, and a realizing sense of bones in the human frame. From the
pleasant house on the hill, the home in the heart of Washington, and
the Willard caravansary, came friends new and old, with bottles,
baskets, carriages and invitations for the invalid; and daily our
Florence Nightingale climbed the steep stairs, stealing a moment from
her busy life, to watch over the stranger, of whom she was as
thoughtfully tender as any mother. Long may she wave! Whatever others
may think or say, Nurse Periwinkle is forever grateful; and among her
relics of that Washington defeat, none is more valued than the little
book which appeared on her pillow, one dreary day; for the D D. written
in it means to her far more than Doctor of Divinity.

Being forbidden to meddle with fleshly arms and legs, I solaced myself
by mending cotton ones, and, as I sat sewing at my window, watched the
moving panorama that passed below; amusing myself with taking notes of
the most striking figures in it. Long trains of army wagons kept up a
perpetual rumble from morning till night; ambulances rattled to and fro
with busy surgeons, nurses taking an airing, or convalescents going in
parties to be fitted to artificial limbs. Strings of sorry looking
horses passed, saying as plainly as dumb creatures could, "Why, in a
city full of them, is there no horsepital for us?" Often a cart came
by, with several rough coffins in it and no mourners following;
barouches, with invalid officers, rolled round the corner, and carriage
loads of pretty children, with black coachmen, footmen, and maids. The
women who took their walks abroad, were so extinguished in three story
bonnets, with overhanging balconies of flowers, that their charms were
obscured; and all I can say of them is that they dressed in the worst
possible taste, and walked like ducks.

The men did the picturesque, and did it so well that Washington looked
like a mammoth masquerade. Spanish hats, scarlet lined riding cloaks,
swords and sashes, high boots and bright spurs, beards and mustaches,
which made plain faces comely, and comely faces heroic; these vanities
of the flesh transformed our butchers, bakers, and candlestick makers
into gallant riders of gaily caparisoned horses, much handsomer than
themselves; and dozens of such figures were constantly prancing by,
with private prickings of spurs, for the benefit of the perambulating
flower-bed. Some of these gentlemen affected painfully tight uniforms,
and little caps, kept on by some new law of gravitation, as they
covered only the bridge of the nose, yet never fell off; the men looked
like stuffed fowls, and rode as if the safety of the nation depended on
their speed alone. The fattest, greyest officers dressed most, and
ambled statelily along, with orderlies behind, trying to look as if
they didn't know the stout party in front, and doing much caracoling on
their own account.

The mules were my especial delight; and an hour's study of a constant
succession of them introduced me to many of their characteristics; for
six of these odd little beasts drew each army wagon, and went hopping
like frogs through the stream of mud that gently rolled along the
street. The coquettish mule had small feet, a nicely trimmed tassel of
a tail, perked up ears, and seemed much given to little tosses of the
head, affected skips and prances; and, if he wore the bells, or were
bedizzened with a bit of finery, put on as many airs as any belle. The
moral mule was a stout, hard-working creature, always tugging with all
his might; often pulling away after the rest had stopped, laboring
under the conscientious delusion that food for the entire army depended
upon his private exertions. I respected this style of mule; and had I
possessed a juicy cabbage, would have pressed it upon him, with thanks
for his excellent example. The historical mule was a melo-dramatic
quadruped, prone to startling humanity by erratic leaps, and wild
plunges, much shaking of his stubborn head, and lashing out of his
vicious heels; now and then falling flat and apparently dying a la
Forrest: a gasp--a squirm--a flop, and so on, till the street was well
blocked up, the drivers all swearing like demons in bad hats, and the
chief actor's circulation decidedly quickened by every variety of kick,
cuff jerk, and haul. When the last breath seemed to have left his body,
and "Doctors were in vain," a sudden resurrection took place; and if
ever a mule laughed with scornful triumph, that was the beast, as he
leisurely rose, gave a comfortable shake, and calmly regarding the
excited crowd seemed to say--"A hit! a decided hit! for the stupidest
of animals has bamboozled a dozen men. Now, then! what are you stopping
the way for?" The pathetic mule was, perhaps, the most interesting of
all; for, though he always seemed to be the smallest, thinnest, weakest
of the six, the postillion, with big boots, long-tailed coat, and heavy
whip, was sure to bestride this one, who struggled feebly along, head
down, coat muddy and rough, eye spiritless and sad, his very tail a
mortified stump, and the whole beast a picture of meek misery, fit to
touch a heart of stone. The jovial mule was a roly poly, happy-go-lucky
little piece of horse-flesh, taking everything easily, from cudgeling
to caressing; strolling along with a roguish twinkle of the eye, and,
if the thing were possible, would have had his hands in his pockets,
and whistled as he went. If there ever chanced to be an apple core, a
stray turnip, or wisp of hay, in the gutter, this Mark Tapley was sure
to find it, and none of his mates seemed to begrudge him his bite. I
suspected this fellow was the peacemaker, confidant and friend of all
the others, for he had a sort of
"Cheer-up,-old-boy,-I'll-pull-you-through" look, which was exceedingly
engaging.

Pigs also possessed attractions for me, never having had an opportunity
of observing their graces of mind and manner, till I came to
Washington, whose porcine citizens appeared to enjoy a larger liberty
than many of its human ones. Stout, sedate looking pigs, hurried by
each morning to their places of business, with a preoccupied air, and
sonorous greeting to their friends. Genteel pigs, with an extra curl to
their tails, promenaded in pairs, lunching here and there, like
gentlemen of leisure. Rowdy pigs pushed the passers by off the side
walk; tipsy pigs hiccoughed their version of "We wont go home till
morning," from the gutter; and delicate young pigs tripped daintily
through the mud, as if, like "Mrs. Peerybingle," they plumed themselves
upon their ankles, and kept themselves particularly neat in point of
stockings. Maternal pigs, with their interesting families, strolled by
in the sun; and often the pink, baby-like squealers lay down for a nap,
with a trust in Providence worthy of human imitation.

But more interesting than officers, ladies, mules, or pigs, were my
colored brothers and sisters, because so unlike the respectable members
of society I'd known in moral Boston.

Here was the genuine article--no, not the genuine article at all, we
must go to Africa for that--but the sort of creatures generations of
slavery have made them: obsequious, trickish, lazy and ignorant, yet
kind-hearted, merry-tempered, quick to feel and accept the least token
of the brotherly love which is slowly teaching the white hand to grasp
the black, in this great struggle for the liberty of both the races.

Having been warned not to be too rampant on the subject of slavery, as
secesh principles flourished even under the respectable nose of Father
Abraham, I had endeavored to walk discreetly, and curb my unruly
member; looking about me with all my eyes, the while, and saving up the
result of my observations for future use. I had not been there a week
before the neglected, devil-may care expression in many of the faces
about me, seemed an urgent appeal to leave nursing white bodies, and
take some care for these black souls. Much as the lazy boys and saucy
girls tormented me, I liked them, and found that any show of interest
or friendliness brought out the better traits which live in the most
degraded and forsaken of us all. I liked their cheerfulness, for the
dreariest old hag, who scrubbed all day in that pestilential steam,
gossipped and grinned all the way out, when night set her free from
drudgery. The girls romped with their dusky sweethearts, or tossed
their babies, with the tender pride that makes mother-love a beautifier
to the homeliest face. The men and boys sang and whistled all day long;
and often, as I held my watch, the silence of the night was sweetly
broken by some chorus from the street, full of real melody, whether the
song was of heaven, or of hoe-cakes; and, as I listened, I felt that we
never should doubt nor despair concerning a race which, through such
griefs and wrongs, still clings to this good gift, and seems to solace
with it the patient hearts that wait and watch and hope until the end.

I expected to have to defend myself from accusations of prejudice
against color; but was surprised to find things just the other way, and
daily shocked some neighbor by treating the blacks as I did the whites.
The men would swear at the "darkies," would put two gs into negro, and
scoff at the idea of any good coming from such trash. The nurses were
willing to be served by the colored people, but seldom thanked them,
never praised, and scarcely recognized them in the street; whereat the
blood of two generations of abolitionists waxed hot in my veins, and,
at the first opportunity, proclaimed itself, and asserted the right of
free speech as doggedly as the irrepressible Folsom herself.

Happening to catch up a funny little black baby, who was toddling about
the nurses' kitchen, one day, when I went down to make a mess for some
of my men, a Virginia woman standing by elevated her most prominent
features, with a sniff of disapprobation, exclaiming:

"Gracious, Miss P.! how can you? I've been here six months. and never
so much as touched the little toad with a poker."

"More shame for you, ma'am," responded Miss P.; and, with the natural
perversity of a Yankee, followed up the blow by kissing "the toad,"
with ardor. His face was providentially as clean and shiny as if his
mamma had just polished it up with a corner of her apron and a drop
from the tea-kettle spout, like old Aunt Chloe, This rash act, and the
anti-slavery lecture that followed, while one hand stirred gruel for
sick America, and the other hugged baby Africa, did not produce the
cheering result which I fondly expected; for my comrade henceforth
regarded me as a dangerous fanatic, and my protege nearly came to his
death by insisting on swarming up stairs to my room, on all occasions,
and being walked on like a little black spider.

I waited for New Year's day with more eagerness than I had ever known
before; and, though it brought me no gift, I felt rich in the act of
justice so tardily performed toward some of those about me. As the
bells rung midnight, I electrified my room-mate by dancing out of bed,
throwing up the window, and flapping my handkerchief, with a feeble
cheer, in answer to the shout of a group of colored men in the street
below. All night they tooted and tramped, fired crackers, sung "Glory,
Hallelujah," and took comfort, poor souls! in their own way. The sky
was clear, the moon shone benignly, a mild wind blew across the river,
and all good omens seemed to usher in the dawn of the day whose
noontide cannot now be long in coming. If the colored people had taken
hands and danced around the White House, with a few cheers for the much
abused gentleman who has immortalized himself by one just act, no
President could have had a finer levee, or one to be prouder of.

While these sights and sounds were going on without, curious scenes
were passing within, and I was learning that one of the best methods of
fitting oneself to be a nurse in a hospital, is to be a patient there;
for then only can one wholly realize what the men suffer and sigh for;
how acts of kindness touch and win; how much or little we are to those
about us; and for the first time really see that in coming there we
have taken our lives in our hands, and may have to pay dearly for a
brief experience. Every one was very kind; the attendants of my ward
often came up to report progress, to fill my wood box, or bring
messages and presents from my boys. The nurses took many steps with
those tired feet of theirs, and several came each evening, to chat over
my fire and make things cozy for the night. The doctors paid daily
visits, tapped at my lungs to see if pneumonia was within, left doses
without names, and went away, leaving me as ignorant, and much more
uncomfortable than when they came. Hours began to get confused; people
looked odd; queer faces haunted the room, and the nights were one long
fight with weariness and pain. Letters from home grew anxious; the
doctors lifted their eyebrows, and nodded ominously; friends said
"Don't stay," and an internal rebellion seconded the advice; but the
three months were not out, and the idea of giving up so soon was
proclaiming a defeat before I was fairly routed; so to all "Don't
stays" I opposed "I wills," till, one fine morning, a gray-headed
gentleman rose like a welcome ghost on my hearth; and, at the sight of
him, my resolution melted away, my heart turned traitor to my boys,
and, when he said, "Come home," I answered, "Yes, father;" and so ended
my career as an army nurse.

I never shall regret the going, though a sharp tussle with typhoid, ten
dollars, and a wig, are all the visible results of the experiment; for
one may live and learn much in a month. A good fit of illness proves
the value of health; real danger tries one's mettle; and self-sacrifice
sweetens character. Let no one who sincerely desires to help the work
on in this way, delay going through any fear; for the worth of life
lies in the experiences that fill it, and this is one which cannot be
forgotten. All that is best and bravest in the hearts of men and women,
comes out in scenes like these; and, though a hospital is a rough
school, its lessons are both stern and salutary; and the humblest of
pupils there, in proportion to his faithfulness, learns a deeper faith
in God and in himself. I, for one, would return tomorrow, on the
"up-again,-and-take-another" principle, if I could; for the amount of
pleasure and profit I got out of that month compensates for all the
pangs; and, though a sadly womanish feeling, I take some satisfaction
in the thought that, if I could not lay my head on the altar of my
country, I have my hair; and that is more than handsome Helen did for
her dead husband, when she sacrificed only the ends of her ringlets on
his urn. Therefore, I close this little chapter of hospital
experiences, with the regret that they were no better worth recording;
and add the poetical gem with which I console myself for the untimely
demise of "Nurse Periwinkle:"

    Oh, lay her in a little pit,
    With a marble stone to cover it;
    And carve thereon a gruel spoon,
    To show a "nuss" has died too soon.



CHAPTER VI

A POSTSCRIPT.

My Dear S.:--As inquiries like your own have come to me from various
friendly readers of the Sketches, I will answer them en masse and in
printed form, as a sort of postscript to what has gone before. One of
these questions was, "Are there no services by hospital death-beds, or
on Sundays?"

In most Hospitals I hope there are; in ours, the men died, and were
carried away, with as little ceremony as on a battle-field. The first
event of this kind which I witnessed was so very brief, and bare of
anything like reverence, sorrow, or pious consolation, that I heartily
agreed with the bluntly expressed opinion of a Maine man lying next his
comrade, who died with no visible help near him, but a compassionate
woman and a tender-hearted Irishman, who dropped upon his knees, and
told his beads, with Catholic fervor, for the good of his Protestant
brother's parting soul:

"If, after gettin' all the hard knocks, we are left to die this way,
with nothing but a Paddy's prayers to help us, I guess Christians are
rather scarce round Washington."

I thought so too; but though Miss Blank, one of my mates, anxious that
souls should be ministered to, as well as bodies, spoke more than once
to the Chaplain, nothing ever came of it. Unlike another Shepherd,
whose earnest piety weekly purified the Senate Chamber, this man did
not feed as well as fold his flock, nor make himself a human symbol of
the Divine Samaritan, who never passes by on the other side.

I have since learned that our non-committal Chaplain had been a
Professor in some Southern College; and, though he maintained that he
had no secesh proclivities, I can testify that he seceded from his
ministerial duties, I may say, skedaddled; for, being one of his own
words, it is as appropriate as inelegant. He read Emerson, quoted
Carlyle, and tried to be a Chaplain; but judging from his success, I am
afraid he still hankered after the hominy pots of Rebeldom.

Occasionally, on a Sunday afternoon, such of the nurses, officers,
attendants, and patients as could avail themselves of it, were gathered
in the Ball Room, for an hour's service, of which the singing was the
better part. To me it seemed that if ever strong, wise, and loving
words were needed, it was then; if ever mortal man had living texts
before his eyes to illustrate and illuminate his thought, it was there;
and if ever hearts were prompted to devoutest self-abnegation, it was
in the work which brought us to anything but a Chapel of Ease. But some
spiritual paralysis seemed to have befallen our pastor; for, though
many faces turned toward him, full of the dumb hunger that often comes
to men when suffering or danger brings then nearer to the heart of
things, they were offered the chaff of divinity, and its wheat was left
for less needy gleaners, who knew where to look. Even the fine old
Bible stories, which may be made as lifelike as any history of our day,
by a vivid fancy and pictorial diction, were robbed of all their charms
by dry explanations and literal applications, instead of being useful
and pleasant lessons to those men, whom weakness had rendered as docile
as children in a father's hands.

I watched the listless countenances all about me, while a mild Daniel
was moralizing in a den of utterly uninteresting lions; while Shadrach,
Meshech, and Abednego were leisurely passing through the fiery furnace,
where, I sadly feared, some of us sincerely wished they had remained as
permanencies; while the Temple of Solomon was laboriously erected, with
minute descriptions of the process, and any quantity of bells and
pomegranates on the raiment of the priests. Listless they were at the
beginning, and listless at the end; but the instant some stirring old
hymn was given out, sleepy eyes brightened, lounging figures sat erect,
and many a poor lad rose up in his bed, or stretch an eager hand for
the book, while all broke out with a heartiness that proved that
somewhere at the core of even the most abandoned, there still glowed
some remnant of the native piety that flows in music from the heart of
every little child. Even the big rebel joined, and boomed away in a
thunderous bass, singing--

    "Salvation! let the echoes fly,"

as energetically as if he felt the need of a speedy execution of the
command.

That was the pleasantest moment of the hour, for then it seemed a
homelike and happy spot; the groups of men looking over one another's
shoulders as they sang; the few silent figures in the beds; here and
there a woman noiselessly performing some necessary duty, and singing
as she worked; while in the arm chair standing in the midst, I placed,
for my own satisfaction, the imaginary likeness of a certain faithful
pastor, who took all outcasts by the hand, smote the devil in whatever
guise he came, and comforted the indigent in spirit with the best
wisdom of a great and tender heart, which still speaks to us from its
Italian grave. With that addition, my picture was complete; and I often
longed to take a veritable sketch of a Hospital Sunday, for, despite
its drawbacks, consisting of continued labor, the want of proper books,
the barren preaching that bore no fruit, this day was never like the
other six.

True to their home training, our New England boys did their best to
make it what it should be. With many, there was much reading of
Testaments, humming over of favorite hymns, and looking at such books
as I could cull from a miscellaneous library. Some lay idle, slept, or
gossiped; yet, when I came to them for a quiet evening chat, they often
talked freely and well of themselves; would blunder out some timid hope
that their troubles might "do 'em good, and keep 'em stiddy;" would
choke a little, as they said good night, and turned their faces to the
wall to think of mother, wife, or home, these human ties seeming to be
the most vital religion which they yet knew. I observed that some of
them did not wear their caps on this day, though at other times they
clung to them like Quakers; wearing them in bed, putting them on to
read the paper, eat an apple, or write a letter, as if, like a new sort
of Samson, their strength lay, not in their hair, but in their hats.
Many read no novels, swore less, were more silent, orderly, and
cheerful, as if the Lord were an invisible Wardmaster, who went his
rounds but once a week, and must find all things at their best. I liked
all this in the poor, rough boys, and could have found it in my heart
to put down sponge and tea-pot, and preach a little sermon then and
there, while homesickness and pain had made these natures soft, that
some good seed might be cast therein, to blossom and bear fruit here or
hereafter.

Regarding the admission of friends to nurse their sick, I can only say,
it was not allowed at Hurly-burly House; though one indomitable parent
took my ward by storm, and held her position, in spite of doctors,
matron, and Nurse Periwinkle. Though it was against the rules, though
the culprit was an acid, frost-bitten female, though the young man
would have done quite as well without her anxious fussiness, and the
whole room-full been much more comfortable, there was something so
irresistible in this persistent devotion, that no one had the heart to
oust her from her post. She slept on the floor, without uttering a
complaint; bore jokes somewhat of the rudest; fared scantily, though
her basket was daily filled with luxuries for her boy; and tended that
petulant personage with a never-failing patience beautiful to see.

I feel a glow of moral rectitude in saying this of her; for, though a
perfect pelican to her young, she pecked and cackled (I don't know that
pelicans usually express their emotions in that manner,) most
obstreperously, when others invaded her premises; and led me a weary
life, with "George's tea-rusks," "George's foot bath," "George's
measles," and "George's mother;" till after a sharp passage of arms and
tongues with the matron, she wrathfully packed up her rusks, her son,
and herself, and departed, in an ambulance, scolding to the very last.

This is the comic side of the matter. The serious one is harder to
describe; for the presence, however brief, of relations and friends by
the bedside of the dead or dying, is always a trial to the bystanders.
They are not near enough to know how best to comfort, yet too near to
turn their backs upon the sorrow that finds its only solace in
listening to recitals of last words, breathed into nurse's ears, or
receiving the tender legacies of love and longing bequeathed through
them.

To me, the saddest sight I saw in that sad place, was the spectacle of
a grey-haired father, sitting hour after hour by his son, dying from
the poison of his wound. The old father, hale and hearty; the young
son, past all help, though one could scarcely believe it; for the
subtle fever, burning his strength away, flushed his cheeks with color,
filled his eyes with lustre, and lent a mournful mockery of health to
face and figure, making the poor lad comelier in death than in life.
His bed was not in my ward; but I was often in and out, and for a day
or two, the pair were much together, saying little, but looking much.
The old man tried to busy himself with book or pen, that his presence
might not be a burden; and once when he sat writing, to the anxious
mother at home, doubtless, I saw the son's eyes fix upon his face, with
a look of mingled resignation and regret, as if endeavoring to teach
himself to say cheerfully the long good bye. And again, when the son
slept, the father watched him as he had himself been watched; and
though no feature of his grave countenance changed, the rough hand,
smoothing the lock of hair upon the pillow, the bowed attitude of the
grey head, were more pathetic than the loudest lamentations. The son
died; and the father took home the pale relic of the life he gave,
offering a little money to the nurse, as the only visible return it was
in his power to make her; for though very grateful, he was poor. Of
course, she did not take it, but found a richer compensation in the old
man's earnest declaration:

"My boy couldn't have been better cared for if he'd been at home; and
God will reward you for it, though I can't."

My own experiences of this sort began when my first man died. He had
scarcely been removed, when his wife came in. Her eye went straight to
the well-known bed; it was empty; and feeling, yet not believing the
hard truth, she cried out, with a look I never shall forget:

"Why, where's Emanuel?"

I had never seen her before, did not know her relationship to the man
whom I had only nursed for a day, and was about to tell her he was
gone, when McGee, the tender-hearted Irishman before mentioned, brushed
by me with a cheerful--"It's shifted to a better bed he is, Mrs.
Connel. Come out, dear, till I show ye;" and, taking her gently by the
arm, he led her to the matron, who broke the heavy tidings to the wife,
and comforted the widow.

Another day, running up to my room for a breath of fresh air and a five
minutes rest after a disagreeable task, I found a stout young woman
sitting on my bed, wearing the miserable look which I had learned to
know by that time. Seeing her, reminded me that I had heard of some
one's dying in the night, and his sister's arriving in the morning.
This must be she, I thought. I pitied her with all my heart. What could
I say or do? Words always seem impertinent at such times; I did not
know the man; the woman was neither interesting in herself nor graceful
in her grief; yet, having known a sister's sorrow myself, I could have
not leave her alone with her trouble in that strange place, without a
word. So, feeling heart-sick, home-sick, and not knowing what else to
do, I just put my arms about her, and began to cry in a very helpless
but hearty way; for, as I seldom indulge in this moist luxury, I like
to enjoy it with all my might, when I do.

It so happened I could not have done a better thing; for, though not a
word was spoken, each felt the other's sympathy; and, in the silence,
our handkerchiefs were more eloquent than words. She soon sobbed
herself quiet; and leaving her on my bed, I went back to work, feeling
much refreshed by the shower, though I'd forgotten to rest, and had
washed my face instead of my hands. I mention this successful
experience as a receipt proved and approved, for the use of any nurse
who may find herself called upon to minister to these wounds of the
heart. They will find it more efficacious than cups of tea,
smelling-bottles, psalms, or sermons; for a friendly touch and a
companionable cry, unite the consolations of all the rest for
womankind; and, if genuine, will be found a sovereign cure for the
first sharp pang so many suffer in these heavy times.

I am gratified to find that my little Sergeant has found favor in
several quarters, and gladly respond to sundry calls for news of him,
though my personal knowledge ended five months ago. Next to my good
John--I hope the grass is green above him, far away there in
Virginia!--I placed the Sergeant on my list of worthy boys; and many
jovial chat have I enjoyed with the merry-hearted lad, who had a fancy
for fun, when his poor arm was dressed. While Dr. P. poked and
strapped, I brushed the remains of the Sergeant's brown mane--shorn
sorely against his will--and gossiped with all my might, the boy making
odd faces, exclamations, and appeals, when nerves got the better of
nonsense, as they sometimes did:

"I'd rather laugh than cry, when I must sing out anyhow, so just say
that bit from Dickens again, please, and I'll stand it like a man." He
did; for "Mrs. Cluppins," "Chadband," and "Sam Weller," always helped
him through;  thereby causing me to lay another offering of love and
admiration on the shrine of the god of my idolatry, though he does wear
too much jewelry and talk slang.

The Sergeant also originated, I believe, the fashion of calling his
neighbors by their afflictions instead of their names; and I was rather
taken aback by hearing them bandy remarks of this sort, with perfect
good humor and much enjoyment of the new game.

"Hallo, old Fits is off again!" "How are you, Rheumatiz?" "Will you
trade apples, Ribs?" "I say, Miss P. may I give Typus a drink of this?"
"Look here, No Toes, lend us a stamp, there's a good feller," etc. He
himself was christened "Baby B.," because he tended his arm on a little
pillow, and called it his infant.

Very fussy about his grub was Sergeant B., and much trotting of
attendants was necessary when he partook of nourishment. Anything more
irresistibly wheedlesome I never saw, and constantly found myself
indulging him, like the most weak-minded parent, merely for the
pleasure of seeing his blue eyes twinkle, his merry mouth break into a
smile, and his one hand execute a jaunty little salute that was
entirely captivating. I am afraid that Nurse P. damaged her dignity,
frolicking with this persuasive young gentleman, though done for his
well being. But "boys will be boys," is perfectly applicable to the
case; for, in spite of years, sex and the "prunes-and-prisms" doctrine
laid down for our use, I have a fellow feeling for lads, and always
owed Fate a grudge because I wasn't a lord of creation instead of a
lady.

Since I left, I have heard, from a reliable source, that my Sergeant
has gone home; therefore, the small romance that budded the first day I
saw him, has blossomed into its second chapter, and I now imagine
"dearest Jane" filling my place, tending the wounds I tended, brushing
the curly jungle I brushed, loving the excellent little youth I loved,
and eventually walking altarward, with the Sergeant stumping gallantly
at her side. If she doesn't do all this, and no end more, I'll never
forgive her; and sincerely pray to the guardian saint of lovers, that
"Baby B." may prosper in his wooing, and his name be long in the land.

One of the lively episodes of hospital life, is the frequent marching
away of such as are well enough to rejoin their regiments, or betake
themselves to some convalescent camp. The ward master comes to the door
of each room that is to be thinned, reads off a list of names, bids
their owners look sharp and be ready when called for; and, as he
vanishes, the rooms fall into an indescribable state of
topsy-turvyness, as the boys begin to black their boots, brighten
spurs, if they have them, overhaul knapsacks, make presents; are fitted
out with needfuls, and--well, why not?--kissed sometimes, as they say,
good-bye; for in all human probability we shall never meet again, and a
woman's heart yearns over anything that has clung to her for help and
comfort. I never liked these breakings-up of my little household:
though my short stay showed me but three. I was immensely gratified by
the hand shakes I got, for their somewhat painful cordiality assured me
that I had not tried in vain. The big Prussian rumbled out his
unintelligible adieux, with a grateful face and a premonitory smooth of
his yellow mustache, but got no farther, for some one else stepped up,
with a large brown hand extended, and this recommendation of our very
faulty establishment:

"We're off, ma'am, and I'm powerful sorry, for I'd no idea a 'orspittle
was such a jolly place. Hope I'll git another ball somewheres easy, so
I'll come back, and be took care on again. Mean, ain't it?"

I didn't think so, but the doctrine of inglorious ease was not the
right one to preach up, so I tried to look shocked, failed signally,
and consoled myself by giving him the fat pincushion he had admired as
the "cutest little machine agoin." Then they fell into line in front of
the house, looking rather wan and feeble, some of them, but trying to
step out smartly and march in good order, though half the knapsacks
were carried by the guard, and several leaned on sticks instead of
shouldering guns. All looked up and smiled, or waved their hands and
touched their caps, as they passed under our windows down the long
street, and so away, some to their homes in this world, and some to
that in the next; and, for the rest of the day, I felt like Rachel
mourning for her children, when I saw the empty beds and missed the
familiar faces.

You ask if nurses are obliged to witness amputations and such matters,
as a part of their duty? I think not, unless they wish; for the patient
is under the effects of ether, and needs no care but such as the
surgeons can best give. Our work begins afterward, when the poor soul
comes to himself, sick, faint, and wandering; full of strange pains and
confused visions, of disagreeable sensations and sights. Then we must
sooth and sustain, tend and watch; preaching and practicing patience,
till sleep and time have restored courage and self-control.

I witnessed several operations; for the height of my ambition was to go
to the front after a battle, and feeling that the sooner I inured
myself to trying sights, the more useful I should be. Several of my
mates shrunk from such things; for though the spirit was wholly
willing, the flesh was inconveniently weak. One funereal lady came to
try her powers as a nurse; but, a brief conversation eliciting the
facts that she fainted at the sight of blood, was afraid to watch
alone, couldn't possibly take care of delirious persons, was nervous
about infections, and unable to bear much fatigue, she was mildly
dismissed. I hope she found her sphere, but fancy a comfortable bandbox
on a high shelf would best meet the requirements of her case.

Dr. Z. suggested that I should witness a dissection; but I never
accepted his invitations, thinking that my nerves belonged to the
living, not to the dead, and I had better finish my education as a
nurse before I began that of a surgeon. But I never met the little man
skipping through the hall, with oddly shaped cases in his hand, and an
absorbed expression of countenance, without being sure that a select
party of surgeons were at work in the dead house, which idea was a
rather trying one, when I knew the subject was some person whom I had
nursed and cared for.

But this must not lead any one to suppose that the surgeons were
willfully hard or cruel, though one of them remorsefully confided to me
that he feared his profession blunted his sensibilities, and perhaps,
rendered him indifferent to the sight of pain.

I am inclined to think that in some cases it does; for, though a
capital surgeon and a kindly man, Dr. P., through long acquaintance
with many of the ills flesh is heir to, had acquired a somewhat trying
habit of regarding a man and his wound as separate institutions, and
seemed rather annoyed that the former should express any opinion upon
the latter, or claim any right in it, while under his care. He had a
way of twitching off a bandage, and giving a limb a comprehensive sort
of clutch, which though no doubt entirely scientific, was rather
startling than soothing, and highly objectionable as a means of
preparing nerves for any fresh trial. He also expected the patient to
assist in small operations, as he considered them, and to restrain all
demonstrations during the process.

"Here, my man, just hold it this way, while I look into it a bit," he
said one day to Fitz G., putting a wounded arm into the keeping of a
sound one, and proceeding to poke about among bits of bone and visible
muscles, in a red and black chasm made by some infernal machine of the
shot or shell description. Poor Fitz held on like a grim Death, ashamed
to show fear before a woman, till it grew more than he could bear in
silence; and, after a few smothered groans, he looked at me
imploringly, as if he said, "I wouldn't, ma'am, if I could help it,"
and fainted quietly away.

Dr. P. looked up, gave a compassionate sort of cluck, and poked away
more busily than ever, with a nod at me and a brief--"Never mind; be so
good as to hold this till I finish."

I obeyed, cherishing the while a strong desire to insinuate a few of
his own disagreeable knives and scissors into him, and see how he liked
it. A very disrespectful and ridiculous fancy of course; for he was
doing all that could be done, and the arm prospered finely in his
hands. But the human mind is prone to prejudice; and though a
personable man, speaking French like a born "Parley voo," and whipping
off legs like an animated guillotine, I must confess to a sense of
relief when he was ordered elsewhere; and suspect that several of the
men would have faced a rebel battery with less trepidation than they
did Dr. P., when he came briskly in on his morning round.

As if to give us the pleasures of contrast, Dr. Z. succeeded him, who,
I think, suffered more in giving pain than did his patients in enduring
it; for he often paused to ask: "Do I hurt you?" and seeing his
solicitude, the boys invariably answered: "Not much; go ahead, Doctor,"
though the lips that uttered this amiable fib might be white with pain
as they spoke. Over the dressing of some of the wounds, we used to
carry on conversations upon subjects foreign to the work in hand, that
the patient might forget himself in the charms of our discourse.
Christmas eve was spent in this way; the Doctor strapping the little
Sergeant's arm, I holding the lamp, while all three laughed and talked,
as if anywhere but in a hospital ward; except when the chat was broken
by a long-drawn "Oh!" from "Baby B.," an abrupt request from the Doctor
to "Hold the lamp a little higher, please," or an encouraging, "Most
through, Sergeant," from Nurse P.

The chief Surgeon, Dr. O., I was told, refused the higher salary,
greater honor, and less labor, of an appointment to the Officer's
Hospital, round the corner, that he might serve the poor fellows at
Hurly-burly House, or go to the front, working there day and night,
among the horrors that succeed the glories of a battle. I liked that so
much, that the quiet, brown-eyed Doctor was my especial admiration; and
when my own turn came, had more faith in him than in all the rest put
together, although he did advise me to go home, and authorize the
consumption of blue pills.

Speaking of the surgeons reminds me that, having found all manner of
fault, it becomes me to celebrate the redeeming feature of Hurly-burly
House. I had been prepared by the accounts of others, to expect much
humiliation of spirit from the surgeons, and to be treated by them like
a door-mat, a worm, or any other meek and lowly article, whose mission
it is to be put down and walked upon; nurses being considered as mere
servants, receiving the lowest pay, and, it's my private opinion, doing
the hardest work of any part of the army, except the mules. Great,
therefore, was my surprise, when I found myself treated with the utmost
courtesy and kindness. Very soon my carefully prepared meekness was
laid upon the shelf; and, going from one extreme to the other, I more
than once expressed a difference of opinion regarding sundry messes it
was my painful duty to administer.

As eight of us nurses chanced to be off duty at once, we had an
excellent opportunity of trying the virtues of these gentlemen; and I
am bound to say they stood the test admirably, as far as my personal
observation went. Dr. O.'s stethoscope was unremitting in its
attentions; Dr. S. brought his buttons into my room twice a day, with
the regularity of a medical clock; while Dr. Z. filled my table with
neat little bottles, which I never emptied, prescribed Browning,
bedewed me with Cologne, and kept my fire going, as if, like the
candles in St. Peter's, it must never be permitted to die out. Waking,
one cold night, with the certainty that my last spark had pined away
and died, and consequently hours of coughing were in store for me, I
was amazed to see a ruddy light dancing on the wall, a jolly blaze
roaring up the chimney, and, down upon his knees before it, Dr. Z.,
whittling shavings. I ought to have risen up and thanked him on the
spot; but, knowing that he was one of those who like to do good by
stealth, I only peeped at him as if he were a friendly ghost; till,
having made things as cozy as the most motherly of nurses could have
done, he crept away, leaving me to feel, as somebody says, "as if
angels were a watching of me in my sleep;" though that species of wild
fowl do not usually descend in broadcloth and glasses. I afterwards
discovered that he split the wood himself on that cool January
midnight, and went about making or mending fires for the poor old
ladies in their dismal dens; thus causing himself to be felt--a bright
and shining light in more ways than one. I never thanked him as I
ought; therefore, I publicly make a note of it, and further aggravate
that modest M.D. by saying that if this was not being the best of
doctors and the gentlest of gentlemen, I shall be happy to see any
improvement upon it.

To such as wish to know where these scenes took place, I must
respectfully decline to answer; for Hurly-burly House has ceased to
exist as a hospital; so let it rest, with all its sins upon its
head,--perhaps I should say chimney top. When the nurses felt ill, the
doctors departed, and the patients got well, I believe the concern
gently faded from existence, or was merged into some other and better
establishment, where I hope the washing of three hundred sick people is
done out of the house, the food is eatable, and mortal women are not
expected to possess an angelic exemption from all wants, and the
endurance of truck horses.

Since the appearance of these hasty Sketches, I have heard from several
of my comrades at the Hospital; and their approval assures me that I
have not let sympathy and fancy run away with me, as that lively team
is apt to do when harnessed to a pen. As no two persons see the same
thing with the same eyes, my view of hospital life must be taken
through my glass, and held for what it is worth. Certainly, nothing was
set down in malice, and to the serious-minded party who objected to a
tone of levity in some portions of the Sketches, I can only say that it
is a part of my religion to look well after the cheerfulnesses of life,
and let the dismals shift for themselves; believing, with good Sir
Thomas More, that it is wise to "be merrie in God."

The next hospital I enter will, I hope, be one for the colored
regiments, as they seem to be proving their right to the admiration and
kind offices of their white relations, who owe them so large a debt, a
little part of which I shall be so proud to pay.

Yours,
  With a firm faith
    In the good time coming,
      TRIBULATION PERIWINKLE.





JACK AND JILL

By Louisa May Alcott



   To the schoolmates of ELLSWORTH DEVENS,
   Whose lovely character will not soon be forgotten,
   This Village Story is affectionately inscribed by their friend,

   L.M.A.
   1880



Contents

     Chapter I      The Catastrophe
     Chapter II     Two Penitents
     Chapter III    Ward No. I
     Chapter IV     Ward No. 2
     Chapter V      Secrets
     Chapter VI     Surprises
     Chapter VII    Jill's Mission
     Chapter VIII   Merry and Molly
     Chapter IX     The Debating Club
     Chapter X      The Dramatic Club
     Chapter XI     "Down Brakes"
     Chapter XII    The Twenty-second of February
     Chapter XIII   Jack Has a Mystery
     Chapter XIV    And Jill Finds it out
     Chapter XV     Saint Lucy
     Chapter XVI    Up at Merry's
     Chapter XVII   Down at Molly's
     Chapter XVIII  May Baskets
     Chapter XIX    Good Templars
     Chapter XX     A Sweet Memory
     Chapter XXI    Pebbly Beach
     Chapter XXII   A Happy Day
     Chapter XXIII  Cattle Show
     Chapter XXIV   Down the River





JACK AND JILL


    Jack and Jill went up the hill
    To coast with fun and laughter;
    Jack fell down and broke his crown,
    And Jill came tumbling after.




Chapter I. The Catastrophe


"Clear the lulla!" was the general cry on a bright December afternoon,
when all the boys and girls of Harmony Village were out enjoying the
first good snow of the season. Up and down three long coasts they went
as fast as legs and sleds could carry them. One smooth path led into the
meadow, and here the little folk congregated; one swept across the pond,
where skaters were darting about like water-bugs; and the third, from
the very top of the steep hill, ended abruptly at a rail fence on the
high bank above the road. There was a group of lads and lasses sitting
or leaning on this fence to rest after an exciting race, and, as they
reposed, they amused themselves with criticising their mates, still
absorbed in this most delightful of out-door sports.

"Here comes Frank Minot, looking as solemn as a judge," cried one, as
a tall fellow of sixteen spun by, with a set look about the mouth and
a keen sparkle of the eyes, fixed on the distant goal with a do-or-die
expression.

  "Here's Molly Loo
  And little Boo!"

sang out another; and down came a girl with flying hair, carrying a
small boy behind her, so fat that his short legs stuck out from the
sides, and his round face looked over her shoulder like a full moon.

"There's Gus Burton; doesn't he go it?" and such a very long boy whizzed
by, that it looked almost as if his heels were at the top of the hill
when his head was at the bottom!

"Hurrah for Ed Devlin!" and a general shout greeted a sweet-faced lad,
with a laugh on his lips, a fine color on his brown cheek, and a gay
word for every girl he passed.

"Laura and Lotty keep to the safe coast into the meadow, and Molly Loo
is the only girl that dares to try this long one to the pond. I wouldn't
for the world; the ice can't be strong yet, though it is cold enough to
freeze one's nose off," said a timid damsel, who sat hugging a post and
screaming whenever a mischievous lad shook the fence.

"No, she isn't; here's Jack and Jill going like fury."

  "Clear the track
  For jolly Jack!"

sang the boys, who had rhymes and nicknames for nearly every one.

Down came a gay red sled, bearing a boy who seemed all smile and
sunshine, so white were his teeth, so golden was his hair, so bright
and happy his whole air. Behind him clung a little gypsy of a girl, with
black eyes and hair, cheeks as red as her hood, and a face full of fun
and sparkle, as she waved Jack's blue tippet like a banner with one
hand, and held on with the other.

"Jill goes wherever Jack does, and he lets her. He's such a good-natured
chap, he can't say 'No.'"

"To a girl," slyly added one of the boys, who had wished to borrow the
red sled, and had been politely refused because Jill wanted it.

"He's the nicest boy in the world, for he never gets mad," said the
timid young lady, recalling the many times Jack had shielded her from
the terrors which beset her path to school, in the shape of cows, dogs,
and boys who made faces and called her "'Fraid-cat."

"He doesn't dare to get mad with Jill, for she'd take his head off
in two minutes if he did," growled Joe Flint, still smarting from the
rebuke Jill had given him for robbing the little ones of their safe
coast because he fancied it.

"She wouldn't! she's a dear! _You_ needn't sniff at her because she is
poor. She's ever so much brighter than you are, or she wouldn't always
be at the head of your class, old Joe," cried the girls, standing by
their friend with a unanimity which proved what a favorite she was.

Joe subsided with as scornful a curl to his nose as its chilly state
permitted, and Merry Grant introduced a subject of general interest by
asking abruptly,--

"Who is going to the candy-scrape to-night?"

"All of us. Frank invited the whole set, and we shall have a tip-top
time. We always do at the Minots'," cried Sue, the timid trembler.

"Jack said there was a barrel of molasses in the house, so there would
be enough for all to eat and some to carry away. They know how to do
things handsomely;" and the speaker licked his lips, as if already
tasting the feast in store for him.

"Mrs. Minot is a mother worth having," said Molly Loo, coming up with
Boo on the sled; and she knew what it was to need a mother, for she had
none, and tried to care for the little brother with maternal love and
patience.

"She is just as sweet as she can be!" declared Merry, enthusiastically.

"Especially when she has a candy-scrape," said Joe, trying to be
amiable, lest he should be left out of the party.

Whereat they all laughed, and went gayly away for a farewell frolic, as
the sun was setting and the keen wind nipped fingers and toes as well as
noses.

Down they went, one after another, on the various coasts,--solemn Frank,
long Gus, gallant Ed, fly-away Molly Loo, pretty Laura and Lotty, grumpy
Joe, sweet-faced Merry with Sue shrieking wildly behind her, gay Jack
and gypsy Jill, always together,--one and all bubbling over with the
innocent jollity born of healthful exercise. People passing in the road
below looked up and smiled involuntarily at the red-cheeked lads and
lasses, filling the frosty air with peals of laughter and cries of
triumph as they flew by in every conceivable attitude; for the fun was
at its height now, and the oldest and gravest observers felt a glow of
pleasure as they looked, remembering their own young days.

"Jack, take me down that coast. Joe said I wouldn't dare to do it, so I
must," commanded Jill, as they paused for breath after the long trudge
up hill. Jill, of course, was not her real name, but had been given
because of her friendship with Jack, who so admired Janey Pecq's spirit
and fun.

"I guess I wouldn't. It is very bumpy and ends in a big drift; not half
so nice as this one. Hop on and we'll have a good spin across the
pond;" and Jack brought "Thunderbolt" round with a skilful swing and an
engaging air that would have won obedience from anybody but wilful Jill.

"It is very nice, but I won't be told I don't 'dare' by any boy in the
world. If you are afraid, I'll go alone." And, before he could speak,
she had snatched the rope from his hand, thrown herself upon the sled,
and was off, helter-skelter, down the most dangerous coast on the
hill-side.

She did not get far, however; for, starting in a hurry, she did not
guide her steed with care, and the red charger landed her in the snow
half-way down, where she lay laughing till Jack came to pick her up.

"If you _will_ go, I'll take you down all right. I'm not afraid, for
I've done it a dozen times with the other fellows; but we gave it up
because it is short and bad," he said, still good-natured, though a
little hurt at the charge of cowardice; for Jack was as brave as a
little lion, and with the best sort of bravery,--the courage to do
right.

"So it is; but I _must_ do it a few times, or Joe will plague me and
spoil my fun to-night," answered Jill, shaking her skirts and rubbing
her blue hands, wet and cold with the snow.

"Here, put these on; I never use them. Keep them if they fit; I only
carry them to please mother." And Jack pulled out a pair of red mittens
with the air of a boy used to giving away.

"They are lovely warm, and they do fit. Must be too small for your paws,
so I'll knit you a new pair for Christmas, and make you wear them, too,"
said Jill, putting on the mittens with a nod of thanks, and ending her
speech with a stamp of her rubber boots to enforce her threat.

Jack laughed, and up they trudged to the spot whence the three coasts
diverged.

"Now, which will you have?" he asked, with a warning look in the honest
blue eyes which often unconsciously controlled naughty Jill against her
will.

"That one!" and the red mitten pointed firmly to the perilous path just
tried.

"You will do it?"

"I will!"

"Come on, then, and hold tight."

Jack's smile was gone now, and he waited without a word while Jill
tucked herself up, then took his place in front, and off they went on
the brief, breathless trip straight into the drift by the fence below.

"I don't see anything very awful in that. Come up and have another.
Joe is watching us, and I'd like to show him that _we_ aren't afraid of
anything," said Jill, with a defiant glance at a distant boy, who had
paused to watch the descent.

"It is a regular 'go-bang,' if that is what you like," answered Jack, as
they plowed their way up again.

"It is. You boys think girls like little mean coasts without any fun or
danger in them, as if we couldn't be brave and strong as well as you.
Give me three go-bangs and then we'll stop. My tumble doesn't count, so
give me two more and then I'll be good."

Jill took her seat as she spoke, and looked up with such a rosy,
pleading face that Jack gave in at once, and down they went again,
raising a cloud of glittering snow-dust as they reined up in fine style
with their feet on the fence.

"It's just splendid! Now, one more!" cried Jill, excited by the cheers
of a sleighing party passing below.

Proud of his skill, Jack marched back, resolved to make the third "go"
the crowning achievement of the afternoon, while Jill pranced after him
as lightly as if the big boots were the famous seven-leagued ones, and
chattering about the candy-scrape and whether there would be nuts or
not.

So full were they of this important question, that they piled on
hap-hazard, and started off still talking so busily that Jill forgot to
hold tight and Jack to steer carefully. Alas, for the candy-scrape that
never was to be! Alas, for poor "Thunderbolt" blindly setting forth
on the last trip he ever made! And oh, alas, for Jack and Jill, who
wilfully chose the wrong road and ended their fun for the winter! No
one knew how it happened, but instead of landing in the drift, or at the
fence, there was a great crash against the bars, a dreadful plunge off
the steep bank, a sudden scattering of girl, boy, sled, fence, earth,
and snow, all about the road, two cries, and then silence.

"I knew they'd do it!" and, standing on the post where he had perched,
Joe waved his arms and shouted: "Smash-up! Smash-up! Run! Run!" like a
raven croaking over a battlefield when the fight was done.

Down rushed boys and girls ready to laugh or cry, as the case might be,
for accidents will happen on the best-regulated coasting-grounds. They
found Jack sitting up looking about him with a queer, dazed expression,
while an ugly cut on the forehead was bleeding in a way which sobered
the boys and frightened the girls half out of their wits.

"He's killed! He's killed!" wailed Sue, hiding her face and beginning to
cry.

"No, I'm not. I'll be all right when I get my breath. Where's Jill?"
asked Jack, stoutly, though still too giddy to see straight.

The group about him opened, and his comrade in misfortune was discovered
lying quietly in the snow with all the pretty color shocked out of her
face by the fall, and winking rapidly, as if half stunned. But no wounds
appeared, and when asked if she was dead, she answered in a vague sort
of way,--

"I guess not. Is Jack hurt?"

"Broken his head," croaked Joe, stepping aside, that she might behold
the fallen hero vainly trying to look calm and cheerful with red drops
running down his cheek and a lump on his forehead.

Jill shut her eyes and waved the girls away, saying, faintly,--

"Never mind me. Go and see to him."

"Don't! I'm all right," and Jack tried to get up in order to prove that
headers off a bank were mere trifles to him; but at the first movement
of the left leg he uttered a sharp cry of pain, and would have fallen if
Gus had not caught and gently laid him down.

"What is it, old chap?" asked Frank, kneeling beside him, really alarmed
now, the hurts seeming worse than mere bumps, which were common affairs
among baseball players, and not worth much notice.

"I lit on my head, but I guess I've broken my leg. Don't frighten
mother," and Jack held fast to Frank's arm as he looked into the anxious
face bent over him; for, though the elder tyrannized over the younger,
the brothers loved one another dearly.

"Lift his head, Frank, while I tie my handkerchief round to stop the
bleeding," said a quiet voice, as Ed Devlin laid a handful of soft snow
on the wound; and Jack's face brightened as he turned to thank the one
big boy who never was rough with the small ones.

"Better get him right home," advised Gus, who stood by looking on, with
his little sisters Laura and Lotty clinging to him.

"Take Jill, too, for it's my opinion she has broken her back. She can't
stir one bit," announced Molly Loo, with a droll air of triumph, as if
rather pleased than otherwise to have her patient hurt the worse; for
Jack's wound was very effective, and Molly had a taste for the tragic.

This cheerful statement was greeted with a wail from Susan and howls
from Boo, who had earned that name from the ease with which, on all
occasions, he could burst into a dismal roar without shedding a tear,
and stop as suddenly as he began.

"Oh, I am so sorry! It was my fault; I shouldn't have let her do it,"
said Jack, distressfully.

"It was all _my_ fault; I made him. If I'd broken every bone I've got,
it would serve me right. Don't help me, anybody; I'm a wicked thing, and
I deserve to lie here and freeze and starve and die!" cried Jill, piling
up punishments in her remorseful anguish of mind and body.

"But we want to help you, and we can settle about blame by and by,"
whispered Merry with a kiss; for she adored dashing Jill, and never
would own that she did wrong.

"Here come the wood-sleds just in time. I'll cut away and tell one of
them to hurry up." And, freeing himself from his sisters, Gus went off
at a great pace, proving that the long legs carried a sensible head as
well as a kind heart.

As the first sled approached, an air of relief pervaded the agitated
party, for it was driven by Mr. Grant, a big, benevolent-looking farmer,
who surveyed the scene with the sympathetic interest of a man and a
father.

"Had a little accident, have you? Well, that's a pretty likely place for
a spill. Tried it once myself and broke the bridge of my nose," he said,
tapping that massive feature with a laugh which showed that fifty years
of farming had not taken all the boy out of him. "Now then, let's see
about this little chore, and lively, too, for it's late, and these
parties ought to be housed," he added, throwing down his whip, pushing
back his cap, and nodding at the wounded with a reassuring smile.

"Jill first, please, sir," said Ed, the gentle squire of dames,
spreading his overcoat on the sled as eagerly as ever Raleigh laid down
his velvet cloak for a queen to walk upon.

"All right. Just lay easy, my dear, and I won't hurt you a mite if I can
help it."

Careful as Mr. Grant was, Jill could have screamed with pain as he
lifted her; but she set her lips and bore it with the courage of a
little Indian; for all the lads were looking on, and Jill was proud to
show that a girl could bear as much as a boy. She hid her face in the
coat as soon as she was settled, to hide the tears that would come, and
by the time Jack was placed beside her, she had quite a little cistern
of salt water stored up in Ed's coat-pocket.

Then the mournful procession set forth, Mr. Grant driving the oxen, the
girls clustering about the interesting invalids on the sled, while the
boys came behind like a guard of honor, leaving the hill deserted by
all but Joe, who had returned to hover about the fatal fence, and poor
"Thunderbolt," split asunder, lying on the bank to mark the spot where
the great catastrophe occurred.




Chapter II. Two Penitents


Jack and Jill never cared to say much about the night which followed
the first coasting party of the season, for it was the saddest and the
hardest their short lives had ever known. Jack suffered most in body;
for the setting of the broken leg was such a painful job, that it wrung
several sharp cries from him, and made Frank, who helped, quite weak
and white with sympathy, when it was over. The wounded head ached
dreadfully, and the poor boy felt as if bruised all over, for he had the
worst of the fall. Dr. Whiting spoke cheerfully of the case, and made so
light of broken legs, that Jack innocently asked if he should not be up
in a week or so.

"Well, no; it usually takes twenty-one days for bones to knit, and young
ones make quick work of it," answered the doctor, with a last scientific
tuck to the various bandages, which made Jack feel like a hapless
chicken trussed for the spit.

"Twenty-one days! Three whole weeks in bed! I shouldn't call that quick
work," groaned the dismayed patient, whose experience of illness had
been limited.

"It is a forty days' job, young man, and you must make up your mind to
bear it like a hero. We will do our best; but next time, look before
you leap, and save your bones. Good-night; you'll feel better in the
morning. No jigs, remember;" and off went the busy doctor for another
look at Jill, who had been ordered to bed and left to rest till the
other case was attended to.

Any one would have thought Jack's plight much the worse, but the
doctor looked more sober over Jill's hurt back than the boy's compound
fractures; and the poor little girl had a very bad quarter of an hour
while he was trying to discover the extent of the injury.

"Keep her quiet, and time will show how much damage is done," was all
he said in her hearing; but if she had known that he told Mrs. Pecq he
feared serious consequences, she would not have wondered why her mother
cried as she rubbed the numb limbs and placed the pillows so tenderly.

Jill suffered most in her mind; for only a sharp stab of pain now and
then reminded her of her body; but her remorseful little soul gave her
no peace for thinking of Jack, whose bruises and breakages her lively
fancy painted in the darkest colors.

"Oh, don't be good to me, Mammy; I made him go, and now he's hurt
dreadfully, and may die; and it is all my fault, and everybody ought to
hate me," sobbed poor Jill, as a neighbor left the room after reporting
in a minute manner how Jack screamed when his leg was set, and how Frank
was found white as a sheet, with his head under the pump, while Gus
restored the tone of his friend's nerves, by pumping as if the house was
on fire.

"Whist, my lass, and go to sleep. Take a sup of the good wine Mrs. Minot
sent, for you are as cold as a clod, and it breaks my heart to see my
Janey so."

"I can't go to sleep; I don't see how Jack's mother could send me
anything when I've half killed him. I want to be cold and ache and have
horrid things done to me. Oh, if I ever get out of this bed I'll be the
best girl in the world, to pay for this. See if I ain't!" and Jill
gave such a decided nod that her tears flew all about the pillow like a
shower.

"You'd better begin at once, for you won't get out of that bed for a
long while, I'm afraid, my lamb," sighed her mother, unable to conceal
the anxiety that lay so heavy on her heart.

"Am I hurt badly, Mammy?"

"I fear it, lass."

"I'm _glad_ of it; I ought to be worse than Jack, and I hope I am. I'll
bear it well, and be good right away. Sing, Mammy, and I'll try to go to
sleep to please you."

Jill shut her eyes with sudden and unusual meekness, and before her
mother had crooned half a dozen verses of an old ballad, the little
black head lay still upon the pillow, and repentant Jill was fast asleep
with a red mitten in her hand.

Mrs. Pecq was an Englishwoman who had left Montreal at the death of her
husband, a French Canadian, and had come to live in the tiny cottage
which stood near Mrs. Minot's big house, separated only by an
arbor-vitae hedge. A sad, silent person, who had seen better days, but
said nothing about them, and earned her bread by sewing, nursing, work
in the factory, or anything that came in her way, being anxious to
educate her little girl. Now, as she sat beside the bed in the small,
poor room, that hope almost died within her, for here was the child
laid up for months, probably, and the one ambition and pleasure of the
solitary woman's life was to see Janey Pecq's name over all the high
marks in the school-reports she proudly brought home.

"She'll win through, please Heaven, and I'll see my lass a gentlewoman
yet, thanks to the good friend in yonder, who will never let her want
for care," thought the poor soul, looking out into the gloom where a
long ray of light streamed from the great house warm and comfortable
upon the cottage, like the spirit of kindness which made the inmates
friends and neighbors.

Meantime, that other mother sat by her boy's bed as anxious but with
better hope, for Mrs. Minot made trouble sweet and helpful by the way in
which she bore it; and her boys were learning of her how to find silver
linings to the clouds that must come into the bluest skies.

Jack lay wide awake, with hot cheeks, and throbbing head, and all sorts
of queer sensations in the broken leg. The soothing potion he had
taken did not affect him yet, and he tried to beguile the weary time by
wondering who came and went below. Gentle rings at the front door, and
mysterious tappings at the back, had been going on all the evening; for
the report of the accident had grown astonishingly in its travels, and
at eight o'clock the general belief was that Jack had broken both legs,
fractured his skull, and lay at the point of death, while Jill had
dislocated one shoulder, and was bruised black and blue from top to
toe. Such being the case, it is no wonder that anxious playmates and
neighbors haunted the doorsteps of the two houses, and that offers of
help poured in.

Frank, having tied up the bell and put a notice in the lighted
side-window, saying, "Go to the back door," sat in the parlor, supported
by his chum, Gus, while Ed played softly on the piano, hoping to lull
Jack to sleep. It did soothe him, for a very sweet friendship existed
between the tall youth and the lad of thirteen. Ed went with the
big fellows, but always had a kind word for the smaller boys; and
affectionate Jack, never ashamed to show his love, was often seen with
his arm round Ed's shoulder, as they sat together in the pleasant red
parlors, where all the young people were welcome and Frank was king.

"Is the pain any easier, my darling?" asked Mrs. Minot, leaning over the
pillow, where the golden head lay quiet for a moment.

"Not much. I forget it listening to the music. Dear old Ed is playing
all my favorite tunes, and it is very nice. I guess he feels pretty
sorry about me."

"They all do. Frank could not talk of it. Gus wouldn't go home to tea,
he was so anxious to do something for us. Joe brought back the bits of
your poor sled, because he didn't like to leave them lying round for any
one to carry off, he said, and you might like them to remember your fall
by."

Jack tried to laugh, but it was rather a failure, though he managed to
say, cheerfully,--

"That was good of old Joe. I wouldn't lend him 'Thunderbolt' for fear
he'd hurt it. Couldn't have smashed it up better than I did, could he?
Don't think I want any pieces to remind me of _that_ fall. I just wish
you'd seen us, mother! It must have been a splendid spill to look at,
any way."

"No, thank you; I'd rather not even try to imagine my precious boy going
heels over head down that dreadful hill. No more pranks of that sort for
some time, Jacky;" and Mrs. Minot looked rather pleased on the whole to
have her venturesome bird safe under her maternal wing.

"No coasting till some time in January. What a fool I was to do it!
Go-bangs always are dangerous, and that's the fun of the thing. Oh
dear!"

Jack threw his arms about and frowned darkly, but never said a word of
the wilful little baggage who had led him into mischief; he was too much
of a gentleman to tell on a girl, though it cost him an effort to hold
his tongue, because Mamma's good opinion was very precious to him, and
he longed to explain. She knew all about it, however, for Jill had been
carried into the house reviling herself for the mishap, and even in the
midst of her own anxiety for her boy, Mrs. Minot understood the state of
the case without more words. So she now set his mind at rest by saying,
quietly.

"Foolish fun, as you see, dear. Another time, stand firm and help Jill
to control her headstrong will. When you learn to yield less and she
more, there will be no scrapes like this to try us all."

"I'll remember, mother. I hate not to be obliging, but I guess it would
have saved us lots of trouble if I'd said No in the beginning. I tried
to, but she _would_ go. Poor Jill! I'll take better care of her next
time. Is she very ill, Mamma?"

"I can tell you better to-morrow. She does not suffer much, and we hope
there is no great harm done."

"I wish she had a nice place like this to be sick in. It must be very
poky in those little rooms," said Jack, as his eye roved round the large
chamber where he lay so cosey, warm, and pleasant, with the gay chintz
curtains draping doors and windows, the rosy carpet, comfortable chairs,
and a fire glowing in the grate.

"I shall see that she suffers for nothing, so don't trouble your kind
heart about her to-night, but try to sleep; that's what you need,"
answered his mother, wetting the bandage on his forehead, and putting a
cool hand on the flushed cheeks.

Jack obediently closed his eyes and listened while the boys sang "The
Sweet By and By," softening their rough young voices for his sake till
the music was as soft as a lullaby. He lay so still his mother thought
he was off, but presently a tear slipped out and rolled down the red
cheek, wetting her hand as it passed.

"My blessed boy, what is it?" she whispered, with a touch and a tone
that only mothers have.

The blue eyes opened wide, and Jack's own sunshiny smile broke through
the tears that filled them as he said with a sniff,--

"Everybody is so good to me I can't help making a noodle of myself.

"You are not a noodle!" cried Mamma, resenting the epithet. "One of the
sweet things about pain and sorrow is that they show us how well we are
loved, how much kindness there is in the world, and how easily we can
make others happy in the same way when they need help and sympathy.
Don't forget that, little son."

"Don't see how I can, with you to show me how nice it is. Kiss me
good-night, and then 'I'll be good,' as Jill says."

Nestling his head upon his mother's arm, Jack lay quiet till, lulled by
the music of his mates, he drowsed away into the dreamless sleep which
is Nurse Nature's healthiest soothing sirup for weary souls and bodies.




Chapter III. Ward No. 1


For some days, nothing was seen and little was heard of the "dear
sufferers," as the old ladies called them. But they were not forgotten;
the first words uttered when any of the young people met were: "How is
Jack?" "Seen Jill yet?" and all waited with impatience for the moment
when they could be admitted to their favorite mates, more than ever
objects of interest now.

Meantime, the captives spent the first few days in sleep, pain, and
trying to accept the hard fact that school and play were done with for
months perhaps. But young spirits are wonderfully elastic and soon cheer
up, and healthy young bodies heal fast, or easily adapt themselves to
new conditions. So our invalids began to mend on the fourth day, and
to drive their nurses distracted with efforts to amuse them, before the
first week was over.

The most successful attempt originated in Ward No. 1, as Mrs. Minot
called Jack's apartment, and we will give our sympathizing readers some
idea of this place, which became the stage whereon were enacted many
varied and remarkable scenes.

Each of the Minot boys had his own room, and there collected his own
treasures and trophies, arranged to suit his convenience and taste.
Frank's was full of books, maps, machinery, chemical messes, and
geometrical drawings, which adorned the walls like intricate cobwebs.
A big chair, where he read and studied with his heels higher than his
head, a basket of apples for refreshment at all hours of the day or
night, and an immense inkstand, in which several pens were always
apparently bathing their feet, were the principal ornaments of his
scholastic retreat.

Jack's hobby was athletic sports, for he was bent on having a strong and
active body for his happy little soul to live and enjoy itself in. So a
severe simplicity reigned in his apartment; in summer, especially, for
then his floor was bare, his windows were uncurtained, and the chairs
uncushioned, the bed being as narrow and hard as Napoleon's. The only
ornaments were dumbbells, whips, bats, rods, skates, boxing-gloves, a
big bath-pan and a small library, consisting chiefly of books on games,
horses, health, hunting, and travels. In winter his mother made things
more comfortable by introducing rugs, curtains, and a fire. Jack,
also, relented slightly in the severity of his training, occasionally
indulging in the national buckwheat cake, instead of the prescribed
oatmeal porridge, for breakfast, omitting his cold bath when the
thermometer was below zero, and dancing at night, instead of running a
given distance by day.

Now, however, he was a helpless captive, given over to all sorts of
coddling, laziness, and luxury, and there was a droll mixture of mirth
and melancholy in his face, as he lay trussed up in bed, watching the
comforts which had suddenly robbed his room of its Spartan simplicity.
A delicious couch was there, with Frank reposing in its depths, half
hidden under several folios which he was consulting for a history of the
steam-engine, the subject of his next composition.

A white-covered table stood near, with all manner of dainties set forth
in a way to tempt the sternest principles. Vases of flowers bloomed on
the chimney-piece,--gifts from anxious young ladies, left with their
love. Frivolous story-books and picture-papers strewed the bed, now
shrouded in effeminate chintz curtains, beneath which Jack lay like
a wounded warrior in his tent. But the saddest sight for our crippled
athlete was a glimpse, through a half-opened door, at the beloved
dumb-bells, bats, balls, boxing-gloves, and snow-shoes, all piled
ignominiously away in the bath-pan, mournfully recalling the fact that
their day was over, now, at least for some time.

He was about to groan dismally, when his eye fell on a sight which made
him swallow the groan, and cough instead, as if it choked him a little.
The sight was his mother's face, as she sat in a low chair rolling
bandages, with a basket beside her in which were piles of old linen,
lint, plaster, and other matters, needed for the dressing of wounds. As
he looked, Jack remembered how steadily and tenderly she had stood by
him all through the hard times just past, and how carefully she had
bathed and dressed his wound each day in spite of the effort it cost her
to give him pain or even see him suffer.

"That's a better sort of strength than swinging twenty-pound dumb-bells
or running races; I guess I'll try for that kind, too, and not howl or
let her see me squirm when the doctor hurts," thought the boy, as he saw
that gentle face so pale and tired with much watching and anxiety, yet
so patient, serene, and cheerful, that it was like sunshine.

"Lie down and take a good nap, mother dear, I feel first-rate, and Frank
can see to me if I want anything. Do, now," he added, with a persuasive
nod toward the couch, and a boyish relish in stirring up his lazy
brother.

After some urging, Mamma consented to go to her room for forty winks,
leaving Jack in the care of Frank, begging him to be as quiet as
possible if the dear boy wished to sleep, and to amuse him if he did
not.

Being worn out, Mrs. Minot lengthened her forty winks into a three
hours' nap, and as the "dear boy" scorned repose, Mr. Frank had his
hands full while on guard.

"I'll read to you. Here's Watt, Arkwright, Fulton, and a lot of capital
fellows, with pictures that will do your heart good. Have a bit, will
you?" asked the new nurse, flapping the leaves invitingly.--for Frank
had a passion for such things, and drew steam-engines all over his
slate, as Tommy Traddles drew hosts of skeletons when low in his
spirits.

"I don't want any of your old boilers and stokers and whirligigs. I'm
tired of reading, and want something regularly jolly," answered Jack,
who had been chasing white buffaloes with "The Hunters of the West,"
till he was a trifle tired and fractious.

"Play cribbage, euchre, anything you like;" and Frank obligingly
disinterred himself from under the folios, feeling that it _was_ hard
for a fellow to lie flat a whole week.

"No fun; just two of us. Wish school was over, so the boys would come
in; doctor said I might see them now."

"They'll be along by and by, and I'll hail them. Till then, what shall
we do? I'm your man for anything, only put a name to it."

"Just wish I had a telegraph or a telephone, so I could talk to Jill.
Wouldn't it be fun to pipe across and get an answer!"

"I'll make either you say;" and Frank looked as if trifles of that sort
were to be had for the asking.

"Could you, really?"

"We'll start the telegraph first, then you can send things over if you
like," said Frank, prudently proposing the surest experiment.

"Go ahead, then. I'd like that, and so would Jill, for I know she wants
to hear from me."

"There's one trouble, though; I shall have to leave you alone for a few
minutes while I rig up the ropes;" and Frank looked sober, for he was a
faithful boy, and did not want to desert his post.

"Oh, never mind; I won't want anything. If I do, I can pound for Ann."

"And wake mother. I'll fix you a better way than that;" and, full
of inventive genius, our young Edison spliced the poker to part of a
fishing-rod in a jiffy, making a long-handled hook which reached across
the room.

"There's an arm for you; now hook away, and let's see how it works,"
he said, handing over the instrument to Jack, who proceeded to show its
unexpected capabilities by hooking the cloth off the table in attempting
to get his handkerchief, catching Frank by the hair when fishing for a
book, and breaking a pane of glass in trying to draw down the curtain.

"It's so everlasting long, I can't manage it," laughed Jack, as it
finally caught in his bed-hangings, and nearly pulled them, ring and
all, down upon his head.

"Let it alone, unless you need something very much, and don't bother
about the glass. It's just what we want for the telegraph wire or
rope to go through. Keep still, and I'll have the thing running in ten
minutes;" and, delighted with the job, Frank hurried away, leaving Jack
to compose a message to send as soon as it was possible.

"What in the world is that flying across the Minots' yard,--a brown hen
or a boy's kite?" exclaimed old Miss Hopkins, peering out of her window
at the singular performances going on in her opposite neighbor's garden.

First, Frank appeared with a hatchet and chopped a clear space in the
hedge between his own house and the cottage; next, a clothes line was
passed through this aperture and fastened somewhere on the other side;
lastly, a small covered basket, slung on this rope, was seen hitching
along, drawn either way by a set of strings; then, as if satisfied with
his job, Frank retired, whistling "Hail Columbia."

"It's those children at their pranks again. I thought broken bones
wouldn't keep them out of mischief long," said the old lady, watching
with great interest the mysterious basket travelling up and down the
rope from the big house to the cottage.

If she had seen what came and went over the wires of the "Great
International Telegraph," she would have laughed till her spectacles
flew off her Roman nose. A letter from Jack, with a large orange, went
first, explaining the new enterprise:--

"Dear Jill,--It's too bad you can't come over to see me. I am pretty
well, but awful tired of keeping still. I want to see you ever so much.
Frank has fixed us a telegraph, so we can write and send things. Won't
it be jolly! I can't look out to see him do it; but, when you pull your
string, my little bell rings, and I know a message is coming. I send you
an orange. Do you like _gorver_ jelly? People send in lots of goodies,
and we will go halves. Good-by.

"Jack"

Away went the basket, and in fifteen minutes it came back from the
cottage with nothing in it but the orange.

"Hullo! Is she mad?" asked Jack, as Frank brought the despatch for him
to examine.

But, at the first touch, the hollow peel opened, and out fell a letter,
two gum-drops, and an owl made of a peanut, with round eyes drawn at the
end where the stem formed a funny beak. Two bits of straw were the legs,
and the face looked so like Dr. Whiting that both boys laughed at the
sight.

"That's so like Jill; she'd make fun if she was half dead. Let's see
what she says;" and Jack read the little note, which showed a sad
neglect of the spelling-book:--

"Dear Jacky,--I can't stir and it's horrid. The telly graf is very nice
and we will have fun with it. I never ate any _gorver_ jelly. The orange
was first rate. Send me a book to read. All about bears and ships
and crockydiles. The doctor was coming to see you, so I sent him the
quickest way. Molly Loo says it is dreadful lonesome at school without
us. Yours truly,

"Jill"

Jack immediately despatched the book and a sample of guava jelly, which
unfortunately upset on the way, to the great detriment of "The Wild
Beasts of Asia and Africa." Jill promptly responded with the loan of a
tiny black kitten, who emerged spitting and scratching, to Jack's great
delight; and he was cudgelling his brains as to how a fat white rabbit
could be transported, when a shrill whistle from without saved Jill from
that inconvenient offering.

"It's the fellows; do you want to see them?" asked Frank, gazing down
with calm superiority upon the three eager faces which looked up at him.

"Guess I do!" and Jack promptly threw the kitten overboard, scorning to
be seen by any manly eye amusing himself with such girlish toys.

Bang! went the front door; tramp, tramp, tramp, came six booted feet up
the stairs; and, as Frank threw wide the door, three large beings
paused on the threshold to deliver the courteous "Hullo!" which is the
established greeting among boys on all social occasions.

"Come along, old fellows; I'm ever so glad to see you!" cried the
invalid, with such energetic demonstrations of the arms that he looked
as if about to fly or crow, like an excited young cockerel.

"How are you, Major?"

"Does the leg ache much, Jack?"

"Mr. Phipps says you'll have to pay for the new rails."

With these characteristic greetings, the gentlemen cast away their hats
and sat down, all grinning cheerfully, and all with eyes irresistibly
fixed upon the dainties, which proved too much for the politeness of
ever-hungry boys.

"Help yourselves," said Jack, with a hospitable wave. "All the dear old
ladies in town have been sending in nice things, and I can't begin to
eat them up. Lend a hand and clear away this lot, or we shall have to
throw them out of the window. Bring on the doughnuts and the tarts and
the shaky stuff in the entry closet, Frank, and let's have a lark."

No sooner said than done. Gus took the tarts, Joe the doughnuts, Ed the
jelly, and Frank suggested "spoons all round" for the Italian cream. A
few trifles in the way of custard, fruit, and wafer biscuits were not
worth mentioning; but every dish was soon emptied, and Jack said, as he
surveyed the scene of devastation with great satisfaction,--

"Call again to-morrow, gentlemen, and we will have another bout. Free
lunches at 5 P.M. till further notice. Now tell me all the news."

For half an hour, five tongues went like mill clappers, and there is no
knowing when they would have stopped if the little bell had not suddenly
rung with a violence that made them jump.

"That's Jill; see what she wants, Frank;" and while his brother sent off
the basket, Jack told about the new invention, and invited his mates to
examine and admire.

They did so, and shouted with merriment when the next despatch from Jill
arrived. A pasteboard jumping-jack, with one leg done up in cotton-wool
to preserve the likeness, and a great lump of molasses candy in a brown
paper, with accompanying note:--

"Dear Sir,--I saw the boys go in, and know you are having a nice time,
so I send over the candy Molly Loo and Merry brought me. Mammy says I
can't eat it, and it will all melt away if I keep it. Also a picture of
Jack Minot, who will dance on one leg and waggle the other, and make you
laugh. I wish I could come, too. Don't you hate grewel? I do.--In haste,

"J.P."

"Let's all send her a letter," proposed Jack, and out came pens,
ink, paper, and the lamp, and every one fell to scribbling. A droll
collection was the result, for Frank drew a picture of the fatal fall
with broken rails flying in every direction, Jack with his head swollen
to the size of a balloon, and Jill in two pieces, while the various boys
and girls were hit off with a sly skill that gave Gus legs like a stork,
Molly Loo hair several yards long, and Boo a series of visible howls
coming out of an immense mouth in the shape of o's. The oxen were
particularly good, for their horns branched like those of the moose, and
Mr. Grant had a patriarchal beard which waved in the breeze as he bore
the wounded girl to a sled very like a funeral pyre, the stakes being
crowned with big mittens like torches.

"You ought to be an artist. I never saw such a dabster as you are.
That's the very moral of Joe, all in a bunch on the fence, with a blot
to show how purple his nose was," said Gus, holding up the sketch for
general criticism and admiration.

"I'd rather have a red nose than legs like a grasshopper; so you needn't
twit, Daddy," growled Joe, quite unconscious that a blot actually did
adorn his nose, as he labored over a brief despatch.

The boys enjoyed the joke, and one after the other read out his message
to the captive lady:--

"Dear Jill,--Sorry you ain't here. Great fun. Jack pretty lively. Laura
and Lot would send love if they knew of the chance. Fly round and get
well.

"Gus"

"Dear Gilliflower,--Hope you are pretty comfortable in your 'dungeon
cell.' Would you like a serenade when the moon comes? Hope you will soon
be up again, for we miss you very much. Shall be very happy to help in
any way I can. Love to your mother. Your true friend,

"E.D."

"Miss Pecq.

"_Dear Madam_,--I am happy to tell you that we are all well, and hope
you are the same. I gave Jem Cox a licking because he went to your desk.
You had better send for your books. You won't have to pay for the sled
or the fence. Jack says he will see to it. We have been having a spread
over here. First-rate things. I wouldn't mind breaking a leg, if I
had such good grub and no chores to do. No more now, from yours, with
esteem,

"Joseph P. Flint"

Joe thought that an elegant epistle, having copied portions of it from
the "Letter Writer," and proudly read it off to the boys, who assured
him that Jill would be much impressed.

"Now, Jack, hurry up and let us send the lot off, for we must go,"
said Gus, as Frank put the letters in the basket, and the clatter of
tea-things was heard below.

"I'm not going to show mine. It's private and you mustn't look,"
answered Jack, patting down an envelope with such care that no one had a
chance to peep.

But Joe had seen the little note copied, and while the others were at
the window working the telegraph he caught up the original, carelessly
thrust by Jack under the pillow, and read it aloud before any one knew
what he was about.

"My Dear,--I wish I could send you some of my good times. As I can't, I
send you much love, and I hope you will try and be patient as I am going
to, for it was our fault, and we must not make a fuss now. Ain't mothers
sweet? Mine is coming over to-morrow to see you and tell me how you are.
This round thing is a kiss for good-night.

"Your Jack"

"Isn't that spoony? You'd better hide your face, I think. He's getting
to be a regular mollycoddle, isn't he?" jeered Joe, as the boys laughed,
and then grew sober, seeing Jack's head buried in the bedclothes, after
sending a pillow at his tormentor.

It nearly hit Mrs. Minot, coming in with her patient's tea on a tray,
and at sight of her the guests hurriedly took leave, Joe nearly tumbling
downstairs to escape from Frank, who would have followed, if his mother
had not said quickly, "Stay, and tell me what is the matter."

"Only teasing Jack a bit. Don't be mad, old boy, Joe didn't mean any
harm, and it _was_ rather soft, now wasn't it?" asked Frank, trying to
appease the wounded feelings of his brother.

"I charged you not to worry him. Those boys were too much for the poor
dear, and I ought not to have left him," said Mamma, as she vainly
endeavored to find and caress the yellow head burrowed so far out of
sight that nothing but one red ear was visible.

"He liked it, and we got on capitally till Joe roughed him about Jill.
Ah, Joe's getting it now! I thought Gus and Ed would do that little
job for me," added Frank, running to the window as the sound of stifled
cries and laughter reached him.

The red ear heard also, and Jack popped up his head to ask, with
interest,--

"What are they doing to him?"

"Rolling him in the snow, and he's howling like fun."

"Serves him right," muttered Jack, with a frown. Then, as a wail arose
suggestive of an unpleasant mixture of snow in the mouth and thumps on
the back, he burst out laughing, and said, good-naturedly, "Go and stop
them, Frank; I won't mind, only tell him it was a mean trick. Hurry! Gus
is so strong he doesn't know how his pounding hurts."

Off ran Frank, and Jack told his wrongs to his mother. She sympathized
