
          "In such high hour
      Of visitation from the living God
      _Thought_ was not."

And he refers to the intense delight which he himself felt, and
which he supposes other men feel, in nature, during their
thoughtless youth, as an intimation of their immortality, and a joy
which indicates their having come fresh from the hand of God.

Now, if Wordsworth be right in supposing this feeling to be in some
degree common to all men, and most vivid in youth, we may question if
it can be _entirely_ explained as I have now tried to explain it. For
if it entirely depended on multitudes of ideas, clustering about a
beautiful object, it might seem that the youth could not feel it so
strongly as the man, because the man knows more, and must have more
ideas to make the garland of. Still less can we suppose the pleasure
to be of that melancholy and languid kind, which Scott defines as
"Resignation" and "Content;" boys being not distinguished for either
of those characters, but for eager effort and delightsome discontent.
If Wordsworth is at all right in this matter, therefore, there must
surely be some other element in the feeling not yet detected.

§ 12. Now, in a question of this subtle kind, relating to a period
of life when self-examination is rare, and expression imperfect, it
becomes exceedingly difficult to trace, with any certainty, the
movements of the minds of others, nor always easy to remember those
of our own. I cannot, from observation, form any decided opinion as
to the extent in which this strange delight in nature influences the
hearts of young persons in general; and, in stating what has passed
in my own mind, I do not mean to draw any positive conclusion as to
the nature of the feeling in other children; but the inquiry is
clearly one in which personal experience is the only safe ground to
go upon, though a narrow one; and I will make no excuse for talking
about myself with reference to this subject, because, though there
is much egotism in the world, it is often the last thing a man
thinks of doing,--and, though there is much work to be done in the
world, it is often the best thing a man can do,--to tell the exact
truth about the movements of his own mind; and there is this farther
reason, that, whatever other faculties I may or may not possess,
this gift of taking pleasure in landscape I assuredly possess in a
greater degree than most men; it having been the ruling passion of
my life, and the reason for the choice of its field of labor.

§ 13. The first thing which I remember as an event in life, was being
taken by my nurse to the brow of Friar's Crag on Derwentwater; the
intense joy, mingled with awe, that I had in looking through the
hollows in the mossy roots, over the crag, into the dark lake, has
associated itself more or less with all twining roots of trees ever
since. Two other things I remember, as, in a sort, beginnings of
life;--crossing Shapfells (being let out of the chaise to run up the
hills), and going through Glenfarg, near Kinross, in a winter's
morning, when the rocks where hung with icicles; these being
culminating points in an early life of more travelling than is usually
indulged to a child. In such journeyings, whenever they brought me
near hills, and in all mountain ground and scenery, I had a pleasure,
as early as I can remember, and continuing till I was eighteen or
twenty, infinitely greater than any which has been since possible to
me in anything; comparable for intensity only to the joy of a lover in
being near a noble and kind mistress, but no more explicable or
definable than that feeling of love itself. Only thus much I can
remember, respecting it, which is important to our present subject.

§ 14. First: it was never independent of associated thought. Almost
as soon as I could see or hear, I had got reading enough to give me
associations with all kinds of scenery; and mountains, in
particular, were always partly confused with those of my favorite
book, Scott's Monastery; so that Glenfarg and all other glens were
more or less enchanted to me, filled with forms of hesitating creed
about Christie of the Clint Hill, and the monk Eustace; and with a
general presence of White Lady everywhere. I also generally knew, or
was told by my father and mother, such simple facts of history as
were necessary to give more definite and justifiable association to
other scenes which chiefly interested me, such as the ruins of
Lochleven and Kenilworth; and thus my pleasure in mountains or ruins
was never, even in earliest childhood, free from a certain awe and
melancholy, and general sense of the meaning of death, though in its
principal influence, entirely exhilarating and gladdening.

§ 15. Secondly: it was partly dependent on contrast with a very
simple and unamused mode of general life; I was born in London, and
accustomed, for two or three years, to no other prospect than that
of the brick walls over the way; had no brothers, nor sisters, nor
companions; and though I could always make myself happy in a quiet
way, the beauty of the mountains had an additional charm of change
and adventure which a country-bred child would not have felt.

§ 16. Thirdly: there was no definite religious feeling mingled with
it. I partly believed in ghosts and fairies; but supposed that
angels belonged entirely to the Mosaic dispensation, and cannot
remember any single thought or feeling connected with them. I
believed that God was in heaven, and could hear me and see me; but
this gave me neither pleasure nor pain, and I seldom thought of it
at all. I never thought of nature as God's work, but as a separate
fact or existence.

§ 17. Fourthly: it was entirely unaccompanied by powers of
reflection or invention. Every fancy that I had about nature was put
into my head by some book; and I never reflected about anything till
I grew older; and then, the more I reflected, the less nature was
precious to me: I could then make myself happy, by thinking, in the
dark, or in the dullest scenery; and the beautiful scenery became
less essential to my pleasure.

§ 18. Fifthly: it was, according to its strength, inconsistent with
every evil feeling, with spite, anger, covetousness, discontent, and
every other hateful passion; but would associate itself deeply with
every just and noble sorrow, joy, or affection. It had not, however,
always the power to repress what was inconsistent with it; and,
though only after stout contention, might at last be crushed by what
it had partly repressed. And as it only acted by setting one impulse
against another, though it had much power in moulding the character,
it had hardly any in strengthening it; it formed temperament, but
never instilled principle; it kept me generally good-humored and
kindly, but could not teach me perseverance or self-denial: what
firmness or principle I had was quite independent of it; and it came
itself nearly as often in the form of a temptation as of a
safeguard, leading me to ramble over hills when I should have been
learning lessons, and lose days in reveries which I might have spent
in doing kindnesses.

§ 19. Lastly: although there was no definite religious sentiment
mingled with it, there was a continual perception of Sanctity in the
whole of nature, from the slightest thing to the vastest:--an
instinctive awe, mixed with delight; an indefinable thrill, such as
we sometimes imagine to indicate the presence of a disembodied
spirit. I could only feel this perfectly when I was alone; and then
it would often make me shiver from head to foot with the joy and
fear of it, when after being some time away from the hills, I first
got to the shore of a mountain river, where the brown water circled
among the pebbles, or when I saw the first swell of distant land
against the sunset, or the first low broken wall, covered with
mountain moss. I cannot in the least _describe_ the feeling; but I
do not think this is my fault, nor that of the English language,
for, I am afraid, no feeling _is_ describable. If we had to explain
even the sense of bodily hunger to a person who had never felt it,
we should be hard put to it for words; and this joy in nature seemed
to me to come of a sort of heart-hunger, satisfied with the presence
of a Great and Holy Spirit. These feelings remained in their full
intensity till I was eighteen or twenty, and then, as the reflective
and practical power increased, and the "cares of this world" gained
upon me, faded gradually away, in the manner described by Wordsworth
in his Intimations of Immortality.

§ 20. I cannot, of course, tell how far I am justified in supposing
that these sensations may be reasoned upon as common to children in
general. In the same degree they are not of course common, otherwise
children would be, most of them, very different from what they are
in their choice of pleasures. But, as far as such feelings exist, I
apprehend they are more or less similar in their nature and
influence; only producing different characters according to the
elements with which they are mingled. Thus, a very religious child
may give up many pleasures to which its instincts lead it, for the
sake of irksome duties; and an inventive child would mingle its love
of nature with watchfulness of human sayings and doings: but I
believe the feelings I have endeavored to describe are the pure
landscape-instinct; and the likelihoods of good or evil resulting
from them may be reasoned upon as generally indicating the
usefulness or danger of the modern love and study of landscape.

§ 21. And, first, observe that the charm of romantic association (§
14.) can be felt only by the modern European child. It rises
eminently out of the contrast of the beautiful past with the
frightful and monotonous present; and it depends for its force on
the existence of ruins and traditions, on the remains of
architecture, the traces of battlefields, and the precursorship of
eventful history. The instinct to which it appeals can hardly be
felt in America, and every day that either beautifies our present
architecture and dress, or overthrows a stone of mediæval monument,
contributes to weaken it in Europe. Of its influence on the mind of
Turner and Prout, and the permanent results which, through them, it
is likely to effect, I shall have to speak presently.

§ 22. Again: the influence of surprise in producing the delight, is
to be noted as a suspicious or evanescent element in it. Observe, my
pleasure was chiefly (§ 19.) when I _first_ got into beautiful
scenery, out of London. The enormous influence of novelty--the way
in which it quickens observation, sharpens sensation, and exalts
sentiment--is not half enough taken note of by us, and is to me a
very sorrowful matter. I think that what Wordsworth speaks of as a
glory in the child, because it has come fresh from God's hands, is
in reality nothing more than the freshness of all things to its
newly opened sight. I find that by keeping long away from hills, I
can in great part still restore the old childish feeling about them;
and the more I live and work among them, the more it vanishes.

§ 23. This evil is evidently common to all minds; Wordsworth himself
mourning over it in the same poem:

      "Custom hangs upon us, with a weight
      Heavy as frost, and deep almost as life."

And if we grow impatient under it, and seek to recover the mental
energy by more quickly repeated and brighter novelty, it is all over
with our enjoyment. There is no cure for this evil, any more than for
the weariness of the imagination already described, but in patience
and rest: if we try to obtain perpetual change, change itself will
become monotonous; and then we are reduced to that old despair, "If
water chokes, what will you drink after it?" And the two points of
practical wisdom in this matter are, first, to be content with as
little novelty as possible at a time; and, secondly, to preserve, as
much as possible in the world, the sources of novelty.

§ 24. I say, first, to be content with as little change as possible.
If the attention is awake, and the feelings in proper train, a turn
of a country road, with a cottage beside it, which we have not seen
before, is as much as we need for refreshment; if we hurry past it,
and take two cottages at a time, it is already too much: hence, to
any person who has all his senses about him, a quiet walk along not
more than ten or twelve miles of road a day, is the most amusing of
all travelling; and all travelling becomes dull in exact proportion
to its rapidity. Going by railroad I do not consider as travelling
at all; it is merely "being sent" to a place, and very little
different from becoming a parcel; the next step to it would of
course be telegraphic transport, of which, however, I suppose it has
been truly said by Octave Feuillet,

    "_Il y aurait des gens assez bêtes_ pour trouver ça amusant."[91]

If we walk more than ten or twelve miles, it breaks up the day too
much; leaving no time for stopping at the stream sides or shady
banks, or for any work at the end of the day; besides that the last
few miles are apt to be done in a hurry, and may then be considered
as lost ground. But if, advancing thus slowly, after some days we
approach any more interesting scenery, every yard of the changeful
ground becomes precious and piquant; and the continual increase of
hope, and of surrounding beauty, affords one of the most exquisite
enjoyments possible to the healthy mind; besides that real knowledge
is acquired of whatever it is the object of travelling to learn, and
a certain sublimity given to all places, so attained, by the true
sense of the spaces of earth that separate them. A man who really
loves travelling would as soon consent to pack a day of such
happiness into an hour of railroad, as one who loved eating would
agree, if it were possible, to concentrate his dinner into a pill.

§ 25. And, secondly, I say that it is wisdom to preserve as much as
possible the innocent _sources_ of novelty;--not definite
inferiorities of one place to another, if such can be done away; but
differences of manners and customs, of language and architecture. The
greatest effort ought especially to be made by all wise and
far-sighted persons, in the present crisis of civilization, to enforce
the distinction between wholesome reform, and heartless abandonment of
ancestral custom; between kindly fellowship of nation with nation, and
ape-like adoption, by one, of the habits of another. It is ludicrously
awful to see the luxurious inhabitants of London and Paris rushing
over the Continent (as they say, to _see_ it), and transposing every
place, as far as lies in their power, instantly into a likeness of
Regent Street and the Rue de la Paix, which they need not certainly
have come so far to see. Of this evil I shall have more to say
hereafter; meantime I return to our main subject.

§ 26. The next character we have to note in the landscape-instinct
(and on this much stress is to be laid), is its total inconsistency
with all evil passion; its absolute contrariety (whether in the
contest it were crushed or not) to all care, hatred, envy, anxiety,
and moroseness. A feeling of this kind is assuredly not one to be
lightly repressed, or treated with contempt.

But how, if it be so, the reader asks, can it be characteristic of
passionate and unprincipled men, like Byron, Shelley, and such
others, and not characteristic of the noblest and most highly
principled men?

First, because it is itself a passion, and therefore likely to be
characteristic of passionate men. Secondly, because it is (§ 18)
wholly a separate thing from moral principle, and may or may not be
joined to strength of will, or rectitude of purpose[92]; only, this
much is always observable in the men whom it characterizes, that,
whatever their faults or failings, they always understand and love
noble qualities of character; they can conceive (if not certain
phases of piety), at all events, self-devotion of the highest kind;
they delight in all that is good, gracious, and noble; and though
warped often to take delight also in what is dark or degraded, that
delight is mixed with bitter self-reproach; or else is wanton,
careless, or affected, while their delight in noble things is
constant and sincere.

§ 27. Look back to the two lists given above, § 7. I have not lately
read anything by Mrs. Radclyffe or George Sand, and cannot,
therefore, take instances from them; Keats hardly introduced human
character into his work; but glance over the others, and note the
general tone of their conceptions. Take St. Pierre's Virginia,
Byron's Myrrha, Angiolina, and Marina, and Eugene Sue's Fleur de
Marie; and out of the other lists you will only be able to find
Pamela, Clementina, and, I suppose, Clarissa,[93] to put beside
them; and these will not more than match Myrrha and Marina; leaving
Fleur de Marie and Virginia rivalless. Then meditate a little, with
all justice and mercy, over the two groups of names; and I think you
will, at last, feel that there is a pathos and tenderness of heart
among the lovers of nature in the second list, of which it is nearly
impossible to estimate either the value or the danger; that the
sterner consistency of the men in the first may, in great part, have
arisen only from the, to them, most merciful, appointment of having
had religious teaching or disciplined education in their youth;
while their want of love for nature, whether that love be originally
absent, or artificially repressed, is to none of them an advantage.
Johnson's indolence, Goldsmith's improvidence, Young's worldliness,
Milton's severity, and Bacon's servility, might all have been less,
if they could in any wise have sympathized with Byron's lonely joy
in a Jura storm,[94] or with Shelley's interest in floating paper
boats down the Serchio.

§ 28. And then observe, farther, as I kept the names of Wordsworth
and Scott out of the second list, I withdrew, also, certain names
from the first; and for this reason, that in all the men who are
named in that list, there is evidently _some_ degree of love for
nature, which may have been originally of more power than we
suppose, and may have had an infinitely hallowing and protective
influence upon them. But there also lived certain men of high
intellect in that age who had _no_ love of nature whatever. They do
not appear ever to have received the smallest sensation of ocular
delight from any natural scene, but would have lived happily all
their lives in drawingrooms or studies. And, therefore, in these men
we shall be able to determine, with the greatest chance of accuracy,
what the real influence of natural beauty is, and what the character
of a mind destitute of its love. Take, as conspicuous instances, Le
Sage and Smollett, and you will find, in meditating over their
works, that they are utterly incapable of conceiving a human soul as
endowed with any nobleness whatever; their heroes are simply beasts
endowed with some degree of human intellect;--cunning, false,
passionate, reckless, ungrateful, and abominable, incapable of noble
joy, of noble sorrow, of any spiritual perception or hope. I said,
"beasts with human intellect;" but neither Gil Blas nor Roderick
Random reach, morally, anything near the level of dogs; while the
delight which the writers themselves feel in mere filth and pain,
with an unmitigated foulness and cruelty of heart, is just as
manifest in every sentence as the distress and indignation which
with pain and injustice are seen by Shelley and Byron.

§ 29. Distinguished from these men by _some_ evidence of love for
nature, yet an evidence much less clear than that for any of those
named even in the first list, stand Cervantes, Pope, and Molière. It
is not easy to say how much the character of these last depended on
their epoch and education; but it is noticeable that the first two
agree thus far in temper with Le Sage and Smollett,--that they delight
in dwelling upon vice, misfortune, or folly, as subjects of amusement;
while yet they are distinguished from Le Sage and Smollett by capacity
of conceiving nobleness of character, only in a humiliating and
hopeless way; the one representing all chivalry as insanity, the other
placing the wisdom of man in a serene and sneering reconciliation of
good with evil. Of Molière I think very differently. Living in the
blindest period of the world's history, in the most luxurious city,
and the most corrupted court, of the time, he yet manifests through
all his writings an exquisite natural wisdom; a capacity for the most
simple enjoyment; a high sense of all nobleness, honor, and purity,
variously marked throughout his slighter work, but distinctly made the
theme of his two perfect plays--the Tartuffe and Misanthrope; and in
all that he says of art or science he has an unerring instinct for
what is useful and sincere, and uses his whole power to defend it,
with as keen a hatred of everything affected and vain. And, singular
as it may seem, the first definite lesson read to Europe, in that
school of simplicity of which Wordsworth was the supposed originator
among the mountains of Cumberland, was, in fact, given in the midst of
the court of Louis XIV., and by Molière. The little canzonet "J'aime
mieux ma mie," is, I believe, the first Wordsworthian poem brought
forward on philosophical principles to oppose the schools of art and
affectation.

§ 30. I do not know if, by a careful analysis, I could point out any
evidences of a capacity for the love of natural scenery in Molière
stealing forth through the slightness of his pastorals; but, if not,
we must simply set him aside as exceptional, as a man uniting
Wordsworth's philosophy with Le Sage's wit, turned by circumstances
from the observance of natural beauty to that of human frailty. And
thus putting him aside for the moment, I think we cannot doubt of
our main conclusion, that, though the absence of the love of nature
is not an assured condemnation, its presence is an invariable sign
of goodness of heart and justness of moral _perception_, though by
no means of moral _practice_; that in proportion to the degree in
which it is felt, will _probably_ be the degree in which all
nobleness and beauty of character will also be felt; that when it is
originally absent from any mind, that mind is in many other respects
hard, worldly, and degraded; that where, having been originally
present, it is repressed by art or education, that repression
appears to have been detrimental to the person suffering it; and
that wherever the feeling exists, it acts for good on the character
to which it belongs, though, as it may often belong to characters
weak in other respects, it may carelessly be mistaken for a source
of evil in them.

§ 31. And having arrived at this conclusion by a review of facts,
which I hope it will be admitted, whether accurate or not, has at
least been candid, these farther considerations may confirm our
belief in its truth. Observe: the whole force of education, until
very lately, has been directed in every possible way to the
destruction of the love of nature. The only knowledge which has been
considered essential among us is that of words, and, next after it,
of the abstract sciences; while every liking shown by children for
simple natural history has been either violently checked, (if it
took an inconvenient form for the housemaids,) or else scrupulously
limited to hours of play: so that it has really been impossible for
any child earnestly to study the works of God but against its
conscience; and the love of nature has become inherently the
characteristic of truants and idlers. While also the art of drawing,
which is of more real importance to the human race than that of
writing (because people can hardly draw anything without being of
some use both to themselves and others, and can hardly write
anything without wasting their own time and that of others),--this
art of drawing, I say, which on plain and stern system should be
taught to every child, just as writing is,--has been so neglected
and abused, that there is not one man in a thousand, even of its
professed teachers, who knows its first principles: and thus it
needs much ill-fortune or obstinacy--much neglect on the part of his
teachers, or rebellion on his own--before a boy can get leave to use
his eyes or his fingers; so that those who _can_ use them are for
the most part neglected or rebellious lads--runaways and bad
scholars--passionate, erratic, self-willed, and restive against all
forms of education; while your well-behaved and amiable scholars are
disciplined into blindness and palsy of half their faculties.
Wherein there is at once a notable ground for what difference we
have observed between the lovers of nature and its despisers;
between the somewhat immoral and unrespectable watchfulness of the
one, and the moral and respectable blindness of the other.

§ 32. One more argument remains, and that, I believe, an unanswerable
one. As, by the accident of education, the love of nature has been,
among us, associated with _wilfulness_, so, by the accident of time,
it has been associated with _faithlessness_. I traced, above, the
peculiar mode in which this faithlessness was indicated; but I never
intended to imply, therefore, that it was an invariable concomitant of
the love. Because it happens that, by various concurrent operations of
evil, we have been led, according to those words of the Greek poet
already quoted, "to dethrone the gods, and crown the whirlwind," it is
no reason that we should forget there was once a time when "the Lord
answered Job _out of_ the whirlwind." And if we now take final and
full view of the matter, we shall find that the love of nature,
wherever it has existed, has been a faithful and sacred element of
human feeling; that is to say, supposing all circumstances otherwise
the same with respect to two individuals, the one who loves nature
most will be _always_ found to have more _faith in God_ than the
other. It is intensely difficult, owing to the confusing and counter
influences which always mingle in the data of the problem, to make
this abstraction fairly; but so far as we can do it, so far, I boldly
assert, the result is constantly the same: the nature-worship will be
found to bring with it such a sense of the presence and power of a
Great Spirit as no mere reasoning can either induce or controvert; and
where that nature-worship is innocently pursued,--i.e. with due
respect to other claims on time, feeling, and exertion, and associated
with the higher principles of religion,--it becomes the channel of
certain sacred truths, which by no other means can be conveyed.

§ 33. This is not a statement which any investigation is needed to
prove. It comes to us at once from the highest of all authority. The
greater number of the words which are recorded in Scripture, as
directly spoken to men by the lips of the Deity, are either simple
revelations of His law, or special threatenings, commands, and
promises relating to special events. But two passages of God's
speaking, one in the Old and one in the New Testament, possess, it
seems to me, a different character from any of the rest, having been
uttered, the one to effect the last necessary change in the mind of
a man whose piety was in other respects perfect; and the other, as
the first statement to all men of the principles of Christianity by
Christ Himself--I mean the 38th to 41st chapters of the book of Job,
and the Sermon on the Mount. Now the first of these passages is,
from beginning to end, nothing else than a direction of the mind
which was to be perfected to humble observance of the works of God
in nature. And the other consists only in the inculcation of _three_
things: 1st, right conduct; 2nd, looking for eternal life; 3rd,
trusting God, through watchfulness of His dealings with His
creation: and the entire contents of the book of Job, and of the
Sermon on the Mount, will be found resolvable simply into these
three requirements from all men,--that they should act rightly, hope
for heaven, and watch God's wonders and work in the earth; the right
conduct being always summed up under the three heads of _justice_,
_mercy_, and _truth_, and no mention of any doctrinal point whatsoever
occurring in either piece of divine teaching.

§ 34. As far as I can judge of the ways of men, it seems to me that
the simplest and most necessary truths are always the last
believed; and I suppose that well-meaning people in general would
rather regulate their conduct and creed by almost any other portion
of Scripture whatsoever, than by that Sermon on the Mount, which
contains the things that Christ thought it first necessary for all
men to understand. Nevertheless, I believe the time will soon come
for the full force of these two passages of Scripture to be
accepted. Instead of supposing the love of nature necessarily
connected with the faithlessness of the age, I believe it is
connected properly with the benevolence and liberty of the age; that
it is precisely the most healthy element which distinctively belongs
to us; and that out of it, cultivated no longer in levity or
ignorance, but in earnestness and as a duty, results will spring of
an importance at present inconceivable; and lights arise, which, for
the first time in man's history, will reveal to him the true nature
of his life, the true field for his energies, and the true relations
between him and his Maker.

§ 35. I will not endeavor here to trace the various modes in which
these results are likely to be effected, for this would involve an
essay on education, on the uses of natural history, and the probable
future destiny of nations. Somewhat on these subjects I have spoken
in other places; and I hope to find time, and proper place, to say
more. But one or two observations maybe made merely to suggest the
directions in which the reader may follow out the subject for
himself.

The great mechanical impulses of the age, of which most of us are so
proud, are a mere passing fever, half-speculative, half-childish.
People will discover at last that royal roads to anything can no
more be laid in iron than they can in dust; that there are, in fact,
no royal roads to anywhere worth going to; that if there were, it
would that instant cease to be worth going to,--I mean so far as the
things to be obtained are in any way estimable in terms of _price_.
For there are two classes of precious things in the world: those
that God gives us for nothing--sun, air, and life (both mortal life
and immortal); and the secondarily precious things which he gives us
for a price: these secondarily precious things, worldly wine and
milk, can only be bought for definite money; they never can be
cheapened. No cheating nor bargaining will ever get a single thing
out of nature's "establishment" at half-price. Do we want to be
strong?--we must work. To be hungry?--we must starve. To be
happy?--we must be kind. To be wise?--we must look and think. No
changing of place at a hundred miles an hour, nor making of stuffs a
thousand yards a minute, will make us one whit stronger, happier, or
wiser. There was always more in the world than men could see, walked
they ever so slowly; they will see it no better for going fast. And
they will at last, and soon too, find out that their grand
inventions for conquering (as they think) space and time, do, in
reality, conquer nothing; for space and time are, in their own
essence, unconquerable, and besides did not want any sort of
conquering; they wanted _using_. A fool always wants to shorten
space and time: a wise man wants to lengthen both. A fool wants to
kill space and kill time: a wise man, first to gain them, then to
animate them. Your railroad, when you come to understand it, is only
a device for making the world smaller: and as for being able to talk
from place to place, that is, indeed, well and convenient; but
suppose you have, originally, nothing to say.[95] We shall be
obliged at last to confess, what we should long ago have known, that
the really precious things are thought and sight, not pace. It does
a bullet no good to go fast; and a man, if he be truly a man, no
harm to go slow; for his glory is not at all in going, but in being.

§ 36. "Well; but railroads and telegraphs are so useful for
communicating knowledge to savage nations." Yes, if you have any to
give them. If you know nothing _but_ railroads, and can communicate
nothing but aqueous vapor and gunpowder,--what then? But if you have
any other thing than those to give, then the railroad is of use only
because it communicates that other thing and the question is--what
that other thing may be. Is it religion? I believe if we had really
wanted to communicate that, we could have done it in less than 1800
years, without steam. Most of the good religious communication that
I remember has been done on foot; and it cannot be easily done
faster than at foot pace. Is it science? But what science--of
motion, meat, and medicine? Well; when you have moved your savage,
and dressed your savage, fed him with white bread, and shown him how
to set a limb,--what next? Follow out that question. Suppose every
obstacle overcome; give your savage every advantage of civilization
to the full: suppose that you have put the Red Indian in tight
shoes; taught the Chinese how to make Wedgwood's ware, and to paint
it with colors that will rub off; and persuaded all Hindoo women
that it is more pious to torment their husbands into graves than to
burn themselves at the burial,--what next? Gradually, thinking on
from point to point, we shall come to perceive that all true
happiness and nobleness are near us, and yet neglected by us; and
that till we have learned how to be happy and noble, we have not
much to tell, even to Red Indians. The delights of horse-racing and
hunting, of assemblies in the night instead of the day, of costly
and wearisome music, of costly and burdensome dress, of chagrined
contention for place or power, or wealth, or the eyes of the
multitude; and all the endless occupation without purpose, and
idleness without rest, of our vulgar world, are not, it seems to me,
enjoyments we need be ambitious to communicate. And all real and
wholesome enjoyments possible to man have been just as possible to
him, since first he was made of the earth, as they are now; and they
are possible to him chiefly in peace. To watch the corn grow, and
the blossoms set; to draw hard breath over ploughshare or spade; to
read, to think, to love, to hope, to pray,--these are the things
that make men happy; they have always had the power of doing these,
they never _will_ have power to do more. The world's prosperity or
adversity depends upon our knowing and teaching these few things:
but upon iron, or glass, or electricity, or steam, in no wise.

§ 37. And I am Utopian and enthusiastic enough to believe, that the
time will come when the world will discover this. It has now made
its experiments in every possible direction but the right one; and
it seems that it must, at last, try the right one, in a mathematical
necessity. It has tried fighting, and preaching, and fasting, buying
and selling, pomp and parsimony, pride and humiliation,--every
possible manner of existence in which it could conjecture there was
any happiness or dignity; and all the while, as it bought, sold,
and fought, and fasted, and wearied itself with policies, and
ambitions, and self-denials, God had placed its real happiness in
the keeping of the little mosses of the wayside, and of the clouds
of the firmament. Now and then a weary king, or a tormented slave,
found out where the true kingdoms of the world were, and possessed
himself, in a furrow or two of garden ground, of a truly infinite
dominion. But the world would not believe their report, and went on
trampling down the mosses, and forgetting the clouds, and seeking
happiness in its own way, until, at last, blundering and late, came
natural science; and in natural science not only the observation of
things, but the finding out of new uses for them. Of course the
world, having a choice left to it, went wrong as usual, and thought
that these mere material uses were to be the sources of its
happiness. It got the clouds packed into iron cylinders, and made it
carry its wise self at their own cloud pace. It got weavable fibres
out of the mosses, and made clothes for itself, cheap and
fine,--here was happiness at last. To go as fast as the clouds, and
manufacture everything out of anything,--here was paradise, indeed!

§ 38. And now, when, in a little while, it is unparadised again, if
there were any other mistake that the world could make, it would of
course make it. But I see not that there is any other; and, standing
fairly at its wits' end, having found that going fast, when it is
used to it, is no more paradisiacal than going slow; and that all
the prints and cottons in Manchester cannot make it comfortable in
its mind, I do verily believe it will come, finally, to understand
that God paints the clouds and shapes the moss-fibres, that men may
be happy in seeing Him at His work, and that in resting quietly
beside Him, and watching His working, and--according to the power He
has communicated to ourselves, and the guidance He grants,--in
carrying out His purposes of peace and charity among all His
creatures, are the only real happinesses that ever were, or will be,
possible to mankind.

§ 39. How far art is capable of helping us in such happiness we
hardly yet know; but I hope to be able, in the subsequent parts of
this work, to give some data for arriving at a conclusion in the
matter. Enough has been advanced to relieve the reader from any
lurking suspicion of unworthiness in our subject, and to induce him
to take interest in the mind and work of the great painter who has
headed the landscape school among us. What farther considerations
may, within any reasonable limits, be put before him, respecting the
effect of natural scenery on the human heart, I will introduce in
their proper places either as we examine, under Turner's guidance,
the different classes of scenery, or at the close of the whole work;
and therefore I have only one point more to notice here, namely, the
exact relation between landscape-painting and natural science,
properly so-called.

§ 40. For it may be thought that I have rashly assumed that the
Scriptural authorities above quoted apply to that partly superficial
view of nature which is taken by the landscape-painter, instead of
to the accurate view taken by the man of science. So far from there
being rashness in such an assumption, the whole language, both of
the book of Job and the Sermon on the Mount, gives precisely the
view of nature which is taken by the uninvestigating affection of a
humble, but powerful mind. There is no dissection of muscles or
counting of elements, but the boldest and broadest glance at the
apparent facts, and the most magnificent metaphor in expressing
them. "His eyes are like the eyelids of the morning. In his neck
remaineth strength, and sorrow is turned into joy before him." And
in the often repeated, never obeyed, command, "Consider the lilies
of the field," observe there is precisely the delicate attribution
of life which we have seen to be the characteristic of the modern
view of landscape,--"They toil not," There is no science, or hint of
science; no counting of petals, nor display of provisions for
sustenance: nothing but the expression of sympathy, at once the most
childish, and the most profound,--"They toil not."

§ 41. And we see in this, therefore, that the instinct which leads
us thus to attribute life to the lowest forms of organic nature,
does not necessarily spring from faithlessness, nor the deducing a
moral out of them from an irregular and languid conscientiousness.
In this, as in almost all things connected with moral discipline,
the same results may follow from contrary causes; and as there are a
good and evil contentment, a good and evil discontent, a good and
evil care, fear, ambition, and so on, there are also good and evil
forms of this sympathy with nature, and disposition to moralize over
it.[96] In general, active men, of strong sense and stern principle,
do not care to see anything in a leaf, but vegetable tissue, and are
so well convinced of useful moral truth, that it does not strike
them as a new or notable thing when they find it in any way
symbolized by material nature; hence there is a strong presumption,
when first we perceive a tendency in any one to regard trees as
living, and enunciate moral aphorisms over every pebble they stumble
against, that such tendency proceeds from a morbid temperament, like
Shelley's, or an inconsistent one, like Jaques's. But when the
active life is nobly fulfilled, and the mind is then raised beyond
it into clear and calm beholding of the world around us, the same
tendency again manifests itself in the most sacred way: the simplest
forms of nature are strangely animated by the sense of the Divine
presence; the trees and flowers seem all, in a sort, children of
God; and we ourselves, their fellows, made out of the same dust, and
greater than they only in having a greater portion of the Divine
power exerted on our frame, and all the common uses and palpably
visible forms of things, become subordinate in our minds to their
inner glory,--to the mysterious voices in which they talk to us
about God, and the changeful and typical aspects by which they
witness to us of holy truth, and fill us with obedient, joyful, and
thankful emotion.

§ 42. It is in raising us from the first state of inactive reverie
to the second of useful thought, that scientific pursuits are to be
chiefly praised. But in restraining us at this second stage, and
checking the impulses towards higher contemplation, they are to be
feared or blamed. They may in certain minds be consistent with such
contemplation; but only by an effort: in their nature they are
always adverse to it, having a tendency to chill and subdue the
feelings, and to resolve all things into atoms and numbers. For most
men, an ignorant enjoyment is better than an informed one; it is
better to conceive the sky as a blue dome than a dark cavity, and
the cloud as a golden throne than a sleety mist. I much question
whether any one who knows optics, however religious he may be, can
feel in equal degree the pleasure or reverence which an unlettered
peasant may feel at the sight of a rainbow. And it is mercifully
thus ordained, since the law of life, for a finite being, with
respect to the works of an infinite one, must be always an infinite
ignorance. We cannot fathom the mystery of a single flower, nor is
it intended that we should; but that the pursuit of science should
constantly be stayed by the love of beauty, and accuracy of
knowledge by tenderness of emotion.

§ 43. Nor is it even just to speak of the love of beauty as in all
respects unscientific; for there is a science of the aspects of
things as well as of their nature; and it is as much a fact to be
noted in their constitution, that they produce such and such an
effect upon the eye or heart (as, for instance, that minor scales of
sound cause melancholy), as that they are made up of certain atoms
or vibrations of matter.

It is as the master of this science of _Aspects_, that I said, some
time ago, Turner must eventually be named always with Bacon, the
master of the science of _Essence_. As the first poet who has, in
all their range, understood the grounds of noble emotion which exist
in Landscape, his future influence will be of a still more subtle
and important character. The rest of this work will therefore be
dedicated to the explanation of the principles on which he composed,
and of the aspects of nature which he was the first to discern.

  [88] Marmion, Introduction to canto II.

  [89] The investigation of this subject becomes, therefore,
       difficult beyond all other parts of our inquiry, since
       precisely the same sentiments may arise in different minds
       from totally opposite causes; and the extreme of frivolity
       may sometimes for a moment desire the same things as the
       extreme of moral power and dignity. In the following extract
       from "Marriage," the sentiment expressed by Lady Juliana (the
       ineffably foolish and frivolous heroine of the story) is as
       nearly as possible what Dante would have felt, under the same
       circumstances:

       "The air was soft and genial; not a cloud stained the bright
       azure of the heavens; and the sun shone out in all his
       splendor, shedding life and beauty even over the desolate
       heath-clad hills of Glenfern. But, after they had journeyed a
       few miles, suddenly emerging from the valley, a scene of
       matchless beauty burst at once upon the eye. Before them lay
       the dark blue waters of Lochmarlie, reflecting, as in a
       mirror, every surrounding object, and bearing on its placid,
       transparent bosom a fleet of herring-boats, the drapery of
       whose black, suspended nets contrasted, with picturesque
       effect, the white sails of the larger vessels, which were
       vainly spread to catch a breeze. All around, rocks, meadows,
       woods, and hills mingled in wild and lovely irregularity.

       "Not a breath was stirring, not a sound was heard, save the
       rushing of a waterfall, the tinkling of some silver rivulet,
       or the calm rippling of the tranquil lake; now and then, at
       intervals, the fisherman's Gaelic ditty, chanted as he lay
       stretched on the sand in some sunny nook; or the shrill,
       distant sound of childish glee. How delicious to the feeling
       heart to behold so fair a scene of unsophisticated nature, and
       to listen to her voice alone, breathing the accents of
       innocence and joy! But none of the party who now gazed on it
       had minds capable of being touched with the emotions it was
       calculated to inspire.

       "Henry, indeed, was rapturous in his expressions of admiration;
       but he concluded his panegyrics by wondering his brother did
       not keep a cutter, and resolving to pass a night on board one
       of the herring-boats, that he might eat the fish in perfection.

       "Lady Juliana thought it might be very pretty, if, instead of
       those frightful rocks and shabby cottages, there could be
       villas, and gardens, and lawns, and conservatories, and
       summer-houses, and statues.

       "Miss Bella observed, if it was hers she would cut down the
       woods, and level the hills, and have races."

  [90] Childe Harold, canto iii. st. 71.

  [91] Scènes et Proverbes. La Crise; (Scène en calèche, hors
       Paris.)

  [92] Compare the characters of Fleur de Marie and Rigolette, in
       the Mystères de Paris. I know no other instance in which the
       two tempers are so exquisitely delineated and opposed. Read
       carefully the beautiful pastoral, in the eighth chapter of
       the first Part, where Fleur de Marie is first taken into the
       fields under Montmartre, and compare it with the sixth of the
       second Part, its accurately traced companion sketch, noting
       carefully Rigolette's "Non, _je déteste la campagne_." She
       does not, however, dislike flowers or birds: "Cette caisse de
       bois, que Rigolette appellait le jardin de ses oiseaux, était
       remplie de terre recouverte de mousse, pendant l'hiver. Elle
       travaillait auprès de la fenêtre ouverte, à-demi-voilée par
       un verdoyant rideau de pois de senteur roses, de capucines
       oranges, de volubilis bleus et blancs."

  [93] I have not read Clarissa.

  [94] It might be thought that Young _could_ have sympathized with
       it. He would have made better use of it, but he would not
       have had the same delight in it. He turns his solitude to
       good account; but this is because, to him, solitude is
       sorrow, and his real enjoyment would have been of amiable
       society, and a place at court.

  [95] "The light-outspeeding telegraph
       Bears nothing on its beam."    EMERSON.

       See Appendix III., Plagiarism.

  [96] Compare what is said before in various places of good and bad
       finish, good and bad mystery, &c. If a man were disposed to
       system-making, he could easily throw together a
       counter-system to Aristotle's, showing that in all things
       there were two extremes which exactly resembled each other,
       but of which one was bad, the other good; and a mean,
       resembling neither, but better than the one, and worse than
       the other.




CHAPTER XVIII.

OF THE TEACHERS OF TURNER.


§ 1. The first step to the understanding either the mind or position
of a great man ought, I think, to be an inquiry into the elements of
his early instruction, and the mode in which he was affected by the
circumstances of surrounding life. In making this inquiry, with
respect to Turner, we shall be necessarily led to take note of the
causes which had brought landscape-painting into the state in which
he found it; and, therefore, of those transitions of style which, it
will be remembered, we overleaped (hoping for a future opportunity
of examining them) at the close of the fifteenth chapter.

§ 2. And first, I said, it will be remembered, some way back, that
the relations between Scott and Turner would probably be found to
differ very curiously from those between Dante and Giotto. They
differ primarily in this,--that Dante and Giotto, living in a
consistent age, were subjected to one and the same influence, and
maybe reasoned about almost in similar terms. But Scott and Turner,
living in an inconsistent age, became subjected to inconsistent
influences; and are at once distinguished by notable contrarieties,
requiring separate examination in each.

§ 3. Of these, the chief was that Scott, having had the blessing of
a totally neglected education, was able early to follow most of his
noble instincts; but Turner, having suffered under the instruction
of the Royal Academy, had to pass nearly thirty years of his life in
recovering from its consequences;[97] this permanent result
following for both,--that Scott never was led into any fault
foreign to his nature, but spoke what was in him, in rugged or idle
simplicity; erring only where it was natural to err, and failing
only where it was impossible to succeed. But Turner, from the
beginning, was led into constrained and unnatural error; diligently
debarred from every ordinary help to success. The one thing which
the Academy _ought_ to have taught him (namely, the simple and safe
use of oil color), it never taught him; but it carefully repressed
his perceptions of truth, his capacities of invention, and his
tendencies of choice. For him it was impossible to do right but in
the spirit of defiance; and the first condition of his progress in
learning, was the power to forget.

§ 4. One most important distinction in their feelings throughout
life was necessitated by this difference in early training. Scott
gathered what little knowledge of architecture he possessed, in
wanderings among the rocky walls of Crichtoun, Lochleven, and
Linlithgow, and among the delicate pillars of Holyrood, Roslin, and
Melrose. Turner acquired his knowledge of architecture at the desk,
from academical elevations of the Parthenon and St. Paul's; and
spent a large portion of his early years in taking views of
gentlemen's seats, temples of the Muses, and other productions of
modern taste and imagination; being at the same time directed
exclusively to classical sources for information as to the proper
subjects of art. Hence, while Scott was at once directed to the
history of his native land, and to the Gothic fields of imagination;
and his mind was fed in a consistent, natural, and felicitous way
from his youth up, poor Turner for a long time knew no inspiration
but that of Twickenham; no sublimity but that of Virginia Water. All
the history and poetry presented to him at the age when the mind
receives its dearest associations, were those of the gods and
nations of long ago; and his models of sentiment and style were the
worst and last wrecks of the Renaissance affectations.

§ 5. Therefore (though utterly free from affectation), his early
works are full of an _enforced_ artificialness, and of things
ill-done and ill-conceived, because foreign to his own instincts;
and, throughout life, whatever he did, because he thought he _ought_
to do it, was wrong; all that he planned on any principle, or in
supposed obedience to canons of taste, was false and abortive: he
only did right when he ceased to reflect; was powerful only when he
made no effort, and successful only when he had taken no aim.

§ 6. And it is one of the most interesting things connected with the
study of his art, to watch the way in which his own strength of
English instinct breaks gradually through fetter and formalism; how
from Egerian wells he steals away to Yorkshire streamlets; how from
Homeric rocks, with laurels at the top and caves in the bottom, he
climbs, at last, to Alpine precipices fringed with pine, and fortified
with the slopes of their own ruins; and how from Temples of Jupiter
and Gardens of the Hesperides, a spirit in his feet guides him, at
last, to the lonely arches of Whitby, and bleak sands of Holy Isle.

§ 7. As, however, is the case with almost all inevitable evil, in
its effect on great minds, a certain good rose even out of this
warped education; namely, his power of more completely expressing
all the tendencies of his epoch, and sympathizing with many feelings
and many scenes which must otherwise have been entirely profitless
to him. Scott's mind was just as large and full of sympathy as
Turner's; but having been permitted always to take his own choice
among sources of enjoyment, Scott was entirely incapable of entering
into the spirit of any classical scene. He was strictly a Goth and a
Scot, and his sphere of sensation may be almost exactly limited by
the growth of heather. But Turner had been forced to pay early
attention to whatever of good and right there was even in things
naturally distasteful to him. The charm of early association had
been cast around much that to other men would have been tame: while
making drawings of flower-gardens and Palladian mansions, he had
been taught sympathy with whatever grace or refinement the garden or
mansion could display, and to the close of life could enjoy the
delicacy of trellis and parterre, as well as the wildness of the
wood and the moorland; and watch the staying of the silver fountain
at its appointed height in the sky, with an interest as earnest, if
not as intense, as that with which he followed the crash of the
Alpine cataract into its clouds of wayward rage.

§ 8. The distinct losses to be weighed against this gain are, first,
the waste of time during youth in painting subjects of no interest
whatsoever,--parks, villas, and ugly architecture in general:
secondly, the devotion of its utmost strength in later years to
meaningless classical compositions, such as the Fall and Rise of
Carthage, Bay of Baiæ, Daphne and Leucippus, and such others, which,
with infinite accumulation of material, are yet utterly heartless and
emotionless, dead to the very root of thought, and incapable of
producing wholesome or useful effect on any human mind, except only as
exhibitions of technical skill and graceful arrangement: and, lastly,
his incapacity, to the close of life, of entering heartily into the
spirit of any elevated architecture; for those Palladian and classical
buildings which he had been taught that it was right to admire, being
wholly devoid of interest, and in their own formality and barrenness
quite unmanageable, he was obliged to make them manageable in his
pictures by disguising them, and to use all kinds of playing shadows
and glittering lights to obscure their ugly details; and as in their
best state such buildings are white and colorless, he associated the
idea of whiteness with perfect architecture generally, and was
confused and puzzled when he found it grey. Hence he never got
thoroughly into the feeling of Gothic; its darkness and complexity
embarrassed him; he was very apt to whiten by way of idealizing it,
and to cast aside its details in order to get breadth of delicate
light. In Venice, and the towns of Italy generally, he fastened on the
wrong buildings, and used those which he chose merely as kind of white
clouds, to set off his brilliant groups of boats, or burning spaces of
lagoon. In various other minor ways, which we shall trace in their
proper place, his classical education hindered or hurt him; but I feel
it very difficult to say how far the loss was balanced by the general
grasp it gave his mind; nor am I able to conceive what would have been
the result, if his aims had been made at once narrower and more
natural, and he had been led in his youth to delight in Gothic legends
instead of classical mythology; and, instead of the porticos of the
Parthenon, had studied in the aisles of Notre Dame.

§ 9. It is still more difficult to conjecture whether he gathered
most good or evil from the pictorial art which surrounded him in his
youth. What that art was, and how the European schools had arrived
at it, it now becomes necessary briefly to inquire.

It will be remembered that, in the 14th chapter, we left our
mediæval landscape (§ 18.) in a state of severe formality, and
perfect subordination to the interest of figure subject. I will now
rapidly trace the mode and progress of its emancipation.

§ 10. The formalized conception of scenery remained little altered
until the time of Raphael, being only better executed as the
knowledge of art advanced; that is to say, though the trees were
still stiff, and often set one on each side of the principal
figures, their color and relief on the sky were exquisitely
imitated, and all groups of near leaves and flowers drawn with the
most tender care, and studious botanical accuracy. The better the
subjects were painted, however, the more logically absurd they
became: a background wrought in Chinese confusion of towers and
rivers, was in early times passed over carelessly, and forgiven for
the sake of its pleasant color; but it appealed somewhat too far to
imaginative indulgence when Ghirlandajo drew an exquisite
perspective view of Venice and her lagoons behind an Adoration of
the Magi;[98] and the impossibly small boats which might be pardoned
in a mere illumination, representing the miraculous draught of
fishes, became, whatever may be said to the contrary, inexcusably
absurd in Raphael's fully realized landscape; so as at once to
destroy the credibility of every circumstance of the event.

§ 11. A certain charm, however, attached itself to many forms of
this landscape, owing to their very unnaturalness, as I have
endeavored to explain already in the last chapter of the second
volume, §§ 9. to 12.; noting, however, there, that it was in no wise
to be made a subject of imitation; a conclusion which I have since
seen more and more ground for holding finally. The longer I think
over the subject, the more I perceive that the pleasure we take in
such unnatural landscapes is intimately connected with our habit of
regarding the New Testament as a beautiful poem, instead of a
statement of plain facts. He who believes thoroughly that the events
are true will expect, and ought to expect, real olive copse behind
real Madonna, and no sentimental absurdities in either.

[Illustration: 11. Latest Purism.]

§ 12. Nor am I at all sure how far the delight which we take (when I
say _we_, I mean, in general, lovers of old sacred art) in such
quaint landscape, arises from its peculiar _falsehood_, and how far
from its peculiar _truth_. For as it falls into certain errors more
boldly, so, also, what truth it states, it states more firmly than
subsequent work. No engravings, that I know, render the backgrounds
of sacred pictures with sufficient care to enable the reader to
judge of this matter unless before the works themselves. I have,
therefore, engraved, on the opposite page, a bit of the background
of Raphael's Holy Family, in the Tribune of the Uffizii, at
Florence. I copied the trees leaf for leaf, and the rest of the work
with the best care I could; the engraver, Mr. Armytage, has
admirably rendered the delicate atmosphere which partly veils the
distance. Now I do not know how far it is necessary to such pleasure
as we receive from this landscape, that the trees should be both so
straight and formal in stem, and should have branches no thicker
than threads; or that the outlines of the distant hills should
approximate so closely to those on any ordinary Wedgewood's china
pattern. I know that, on the contrary, a great part of the pleasure
arises from the sweet expression of air and sunshine; from the
traceable resemblance of the city and tower to Florence and Fesole;
from the fact that, though the boughs are too thin, the lines of
ramification are true and beautiful; and from the expression of
continually varied form in the clusters of leafage. And although all
lovers of sacred art would shrink in horror from the idea of
substituting for such a landscape a bit of Cuyp or Rubens, I do not
think that the horror they feel is because Cuyp and Rubens's
landscape is _truer_, but because it is _coarser_ and more vulgar in
associated idea than Raphael's; and I think it possible that the
true forms of hills, and true thicknesses of boughs, might be
tenderly stolen into this background of Raphael's without giving
offence to any one.

§ 13. Take a somewhat more definite instance. The rock in Fig. 5.,
at the side, is one put by Ghirlandajo into the background of his
Baptism of Christ. I have no doubt Ghirlandajo's own rocks and trees
are better, in several respects, than those here represented, since
I have copied them from one of Lasinio's execrable engravings;
still, the harsh outline, and generally stiff and uninventful
blankness of the design are true enough, and characteristic of all
rock-painting of the period. In the plate below I have etched[99]
the outline of a fragment of one of Turner's cliffs, out of his
drawing of Bolton Abbey; and it does not seem to me that, supposing
them properly introduced in the composition, the substitution of the
soft natural lines for the hard unnatural ones would make
Ghirlandajo's background one whit less sacred.

[Illustration: FIG. 5.]

§ 14. But be this as it may, the fact is, as ill luck would have it,
that profanity of feeling, and skill in art, increased together; so
that we do not find the backgrounds rightly painted till the figures
become irreligious and feelingless; and hence we associate
necessarily the perfect landscape with want of feeling. The first
great innovator was either Masaccio or Filippino Lippi: their works
are so confused together in the Chapel of the Carmine, that I know
not to whom I may attribute,--or whether, without being immediately
quarrelled with, and contradicted, I may attribute to anybody,--the
landscape background of the fresco of the Tribute Money. But that
background, with one or two other fragments in the same
chapel, is far in advance of all other work I have seen of the
period, in expression of the rounded contours and large slopes of
hills, and the association of their summits with the clouds. The
opposite engraving will give some better idea of its character than
can be gained from the outlines commonly published; though the dark
spaces, which in the original are deep blue, come necessarily
somewhat too harshly on the eye when translated into light and
shade. I shall have occasion to speak with greater speciality of
this background in examining the forms of hills; meantime, it is
only as an isolated work that it can be named in the history of
pictorial progress, for Masaccio died too young to carry out his
purposes; and the men around him were too ignorant of landscape to
understand or take advantage of the little he had done. Raphael,
though he borrowed from him in the human figure, never seems to have
been influenced by his landscape, and retains either, as in Plate
11., the upright formalities of Perugino; or, by way of being
natural, expands his distances into flattish flakes of hill, nearly
formless, as in the backgrounds of the Charge to Peter and Draught
of Fishes; and thenceforward the Tuscan and Roman schools grew more
and more artificial, and lost themselves finally under round-headed
niches and Corinthian porticos.

[Illustration: 12. The Shores of Wharfe.]

[Illustration: 13. First Mountain Naturalism.]

[Illustration: 14. The Lombard Apennine.]

[Illustration: 15. St. George of the Seaweed.]

§ 15. It needed, therefore, the air of the northern mountains and of
the sea to brace the hearts of men to the development of the true
landscape schools. I sketched by chance one evening the line of the
Apennines from the ramparts of Parma, and I have put the rough note
of it, and the sky that was over it, in Plate 14., and next to this
(Plate 15.) a moment of sunset, behind the Euganean hills at Venice.
I shall have occasion to refer to both hereafter; but they have some
interest here as types of the kind of scenes which were daily set
before the eyes of Correggio and Titian, and of the sweet free
spaces of sky through which rose and fell, to them, the colored rays
of the morning and evening.

§ 16. And they are connected, also, with the forms of landscape
adopted by the Lombardic masters, in a very curious way. We noticed
that the Flemings, educated entirely in flat land, seemed to be
always contented with the scenery it supplied; and we should
naturally have expected that Titian and Correggio, living in the
midst of the levels of the lagoons, and of the plain of Lombardy,
would also have expressed, in their backgrounds, some pleasure in
such level scenery, associated, of course, with the sublimity of the
far-away Apennine, Euganean, or Alp. But not a whit. The plains of
mulberry and maize, of sea and shoal, by which they were surrounded,
never occur in their backgrounds but in cases of necessity; and both
of them, in all their important landscapes, bury themselves in wild
wood; Correggio delighting to relieve with green darkness of oak and
ivy the golden hair and snowy flesh of his figures; and Titian,
whenever the choice of a scene was in his power, retiring to the
narrow glens and forests of Cadore.

§ 17. Of the vegetation introduced by both, I shall have to speak at
length in the course of the chapters on Foliage; meantime, I give in
Plate 16. one of Titian's slightest bits of background, from one of
the frescoes in the little chapel behind St. Antonio, at Padua,
which may be compared more conveniently than any of his more
elaborate landscapes with the purist work from Raphael. For in both
these examples the trees are equally slender and delicate, only the
formality of mediæval art is, by Titian, entirely abandoned, and the
old conception of the aspen grove and meadow done away with for
ever. We are now far from cities: the painter takes true delight in
the desert; the trees grow wild and free; the sky also has lost its
peace, and is writhed into folds of motion, closely impendent upon
earth, and somewhat threatening, through its solemn light.

§ 18. Although, however, this example is characteristic of Titian in
its wildness, it is not so in its _looseness_. It is only in the
distant backgrounds of the slightest work, or when he is in a hurry,
that Titian is vague: in all his near and studied work he completes
every detail with scrupulous care. The next Plate, 17., a background
of Tintoret's, from his picture of the Entombment at Parma, is more
entirely characteristic of the Venetians. Some mistakes made in the
reduction of my drawing during the course of engraving have cramped
the curves of the boughs and leaves, of which I will give the true
outline farther on; meantime the subject, which is that described in
§ 16. of the chapter on Penetrative Imagination, Vol. II., will just
as well answer the purpose of exemplifying the Venetian love of
gloom and wildness, united with perfect definition of detail. Every
leaf and separate blade of grass is drawn; but observe how the
blades of grass are broken, how completely the aim at expression of
faultlessness and felicity has been withdrawn, as contrary to the
laws of the existent world.

[Illustration: 16. Early Naturalism.]

[Illustration: 17. Advanced Naturalism.]

§ 19. From this great Venetian school of landscape Turner received
much important teaching,--almost the only healthy teaching which he
owed to preceding art. The designs of the Liber Studiorum are founded
first on nature, but in many cases modified by _forced_ imitation of
Claude, and _fond_ imitation of Titian. All the worst and feeblest
studies in the book--as the pastoral with the nymph playing the
tambourine, that with the long bridge seen through trees, and with the
flock of goats on the walled road--owe the principal part of their
imbecilities to Claude; another group (Solway Moss, Peat Bog,
Lauffenbourg, &c.) is taken with hardly any modification by pictorial
influence, straight from nature; and the finest works in the book--the
Grande Chartreuse, Rizpah, Jason, Cephalus, and one or two more--are
strongly under the influence of Titian.

§ 20. The Venetian school of landscape expired with Tintoret, in the
year 1594; and the sixteenth century closed, like a grave, over the
great art of the world. There is _no_ entirely sincere or great art
in the seventeenth century. Rubens and Rembrandt are its two
greatest men, both deeply stained by the errors and affectations of
their age. The influence of the Venetians hardly extended to them;
the tower of the Titianesque art fell southwards; and on the dust of
its ruins grew various art-weeds, such as Domenichino and the
Carraccis. Their landscape, which may in few words be accurately
defined as "Scum of Titian," possesses no single merit, nor any
ground for the forgiveness of demerit; they are to be named only as
a link through which the Venetian influence came dimly down to
Claude and Salvator.

§ 21. Salvator possessed real genius, but was crushed by misery in his
youth, and by fashionable society in his age. He had vigorous animal
life, and considerable invention, but no depth either of thought or
perception. He took some hints directly from nature, and expressed
some conditions of the grotesque of terror with original power; but
his baseness of thought, and bluntness of sight, were unconquerable;
and his works possess no value whatsoever for any person versed in the
walks of noble art. They had little, if any, influence on Turner; if
any, it was in blinding him for some time to the grace of tree trunks,
and making him tear them too much into splinters.

§ 22. Not so Claude, who may be considered as Turner's principal
master. Claude's capacities were of the most limited kind; but he
had tenderness of perception, and sincerity of purpose, and he
effected a revolution in art. This revolution consisted mainly in
setting the sun in heaven.[100] Till Claude's time no one had
seriously thought of painting the sun but conventionally; that is to
say, as a red or yellow star, (often) with a face in it, under which
type it was constantly represented in illumination; else it was kept
out of the picture, or introduced in fragmentary distances, breaking
through clouds with almost definite rays. Perhaps the honor of
having first tried to represent the real effect of the sun in
landscape belongs to Bonifazio, in his pictures of the camps of
Israel.[101] Rubens followed in a kind of bravado, sometimes making
the rays issue from anything but the orb of the sun;--here, for
instance, Fig. 6., is an outline of the position of the sun (at _s_)
with respect to his own rays, in a sunset behind a tournament in the
Louvre: and various interesting effects of sunlight issuing from the
conventional face-filled orb occur in contemporary missal-painting;
for instance, very richly in the Harleian MS. Brit. Mus. 3469. But
all this was merely indicative of the tendency to transition which
may always be traced in any age before the man comes who is to
_accomplish_ the transition. Claude took up the new idea seriously,
made the sun his subject, and painted the effects of misty shadows
cast by his rays over the landscape, and other delicate aerial
transitions, as no one had ever done before, and, in some respects,
as no one has done in oil color since.

§ 23. "But, how, if this were so, could his capacities be of the
meanest order?" Because doing _one_ thing well, or better than others
have done it, does not necessarily imply large capacity. Capacity
means breadth of glance, understanding of the relations of things, and
invention, and these are rare and precious; but there are very few men
who have not done _something_, in the course of their lives, better
than other people. I could point out many engravers, draughtsmen, and
artists, who have each a particular merit in their manner, or
particular field of perception, that nobody else has, or ever had. But
this does not make them great men, it only indicates a small special
capacity of some kind: and all the smaller if the gift be very
peculiar and single; for a great man never so limits himself to one
thing, as that we shall be able to say, "That's all he can do." If
Claude had been a great man he would not have been so steadfastly set
on painting effects of sun; he would have looked at all nature, and at
all art, and would have painted sun effects somewhat worse, and nature
universally much better.

[Illustration: FIG. 6.]

§ 24. Such as he was, however, his discovery of the way to make
pictures look warm was very delightful to the shallow connoisseurs
of the age. Not that they cared for sunshine; but they liked seeing
jugglery. They could not feel Titian's noble color, nor Veronese's
noble composition; but they thought it highly amusing to see the sun
brought into a picture: and Claude's works were bought and
delighted in by vulgar people then, for their real-looking suns, as
pictures are now by vulgar people for having real timepieces in
their church towers.

§ 25. But when Turner arose, with an earnest desire to paint the
whole of nature, he found that the existence of the sun was an
important fact, and by no means an easily manageable one. _He_ loved
sunshine for its own sake; but he could not at first paint it. Most
things else, he would more or less manage without much technical
difficulty; but the burning orb and the golden haze could not,
somehow, be got out of the oil paint. Naturally he went to Claude,
who really had got them out of oil paint; approached him with great
reverence, as having done that which seemed to Turner most difficult
of all technical matters, and he became his faithful disciple. How
much he learned from him of manipulation, I cannot tell; but one
thing is certain, that he never quite equalled him in that
particular forte of his. I imagine that Claude's way of laying on
oil color was so methodical that it could not possibly be imitated
by a man whose mechanism was interfered with by hundreds of thoughts
and aims totally different from Claude's; and, besides, I suppose
that certain useful principles in the management of paint, of which
our schools are now wholly ignorant, had come down as far as Claude,
from the Venetians. Turner at last gave up the attempt, and adopted
a manipulation of his own, which indeed effected certain objects
attainable in no other way, but which still was in many respects
unsatisfactory, dangerous, and deeply to be regretted.

§ 26. But meantime his mind had been strongly warped by Claude's
futilities of conception. It was impossible to dwell on such works for
any length of time without being grievously harmed by them; and the
style of Turner's compositions was for ever afterwards weakened or
corrupted. For, truly, it is almost beyond belief into what depth of
absurdity Claude plunges continually in his most admired designs. For
instance; undertaking to paint Moses at the Burning Bush, he
represents a graceful landscape with a city, a river, and a bridge,
and plenty of tall trees, and the sea, and numbers of people going
about their business and pleasure in every direction; and the bush
burning quietly upon a bank in the corner; rather in the dark, and
not to be seen without close inspection. It would take some pages of
close writing to point out, one by one, the inanities of heart, soul,
and brain which such a conception involves; the ineffable ignorance of
the nature of the event, and of the scene of it; the incapacity of
conceiving anything even _in_ ignorance, which should be impressive;
the dim, stupid, serene, leguminous enjoyment of his sunny
afternoon--burn the bushes as much as they liked--these I leave the
reader to think over at his leisure, either before the picture in Lord
Ellesmere's gallery, or the sketch of it in the Liber Veritatis. But
all these kinds of fallacy sprung more or less out of the vices of the
time in which Claude lived; his own peculiar character reaches beyond
these, to an incapacity of understanding the _main point_ in anything
he had to represent, down to the minutest detail, which is quite
unequalled, as far as I know, in human nugatoriness. For instance;
here, in Fig. 7., is the head, with half the body, of Eneas drawing
his Bow, from No. 180. of the Liber Veritatis. Observe, the string is
too long by half; for if the bow were unbent, it would be two feet
longer than the whole bow. Then the arrow is too long by half, has too
heavy a head by half; and finally, it actually is _under_ the
bow-hand, instead of above it. Of the ideal and heroic refinement of
the head and drapery I will say nothing; but look only at the wretched
archery, and consider if it would be possible for any child to draw
the thing with less understanding, or to make more mistakes in the
given compass.[102]

[Illustration: FIG. 7.]

§ 27. And yet, exquisite as is Claude's instinct for blunder, he has
not strength of mind enough to blunder in a wholly original manner,
but he must needs falter out of his way to pick up other people's
puerilities, and be absurd at second-hand. I have been obliged to
laugh a little--though I hope reverently--at Ghirlandajo's
landscapes, which yet we saw had a certain charm of quaintness in
them when contrasted with his grand figures; but could any one have
believed that Claude, with all the noble landscapes of Titian set
before him, and all nature round about him, should yet go back to
Ghirlandajo for types of form. Yet such is the case. I said that the
Venetian influence came dimly down to Claude; but the old Florentine
influence came clearly. The Claudesque landscape is not, as so
commonly supposed, an idealized abstract of the nature about Rome.
It is an ultimate condition of the Florentine conventional
landscape, more or less softened by reference to nature. Fig. 8.,
from No. 145. of the Liber Veritatis, is sufficiently characteristic
of Claude's rock-drawing; and compared with Fig. 5. (p. 314), will
show exactly the kind of modification he made on old and received
types. We shall see other instances of it hereafter.

[Illustration: FIG. 8.]

Imagine this kind of reproduction of whatever other people had done
worst, and this kind of misunderstanding of all that he saw himself
in nature, carried out in Claude's trees, rocks, ships--in
everything that he touched,--and then consider what kind of school
this work was for a young and reverent disciple. As I said, Turner
never recovered the effects of it; his compositions were always
mannered, lifeless, and even foolish; and he only did noble things
when the immediate presence of nature had overpowered the
reminiscences of his master.

§ 28. Of the influence of Gaspar and Nicolo Poussin on Turner, there
is hardly anything to be said, nor much respecting that which they
had on landscape generally. Nicolo Poussin had noble powers of
design, and might have been a thoroughly great painter had he been
trained in Venice; but his Roman education kept him tame; his
trenchant severity was contrary to the tendencies of the age, and
had few imitators compared to the dashing of Salvator, and the mist
of Claude. Those few imitators adopted his manner without possessing
either his science or invention; and the Italian school of landscape
soon expired. Reminiscences of him occur sometimes in Turner's
compositions of sculptured stones for foreground; and the beautiful
Triumph of Flora, in the Louvre, probably first showed Turner the
use of definite flower, or blossom-painting, in landscape. I doubt
if he took anything from Gaspar; whatever he might have learned from
him respecting masses of foliage and golden distances, could have
been learned better, and, I believe, _was_ learned, from Titian.

§ 29. Meantime, a lower, but more living school had developed itself
in the north; Cuyp had painted sunshine as truly as Claude, gilding
with it a more homely, but far more honestly conceived landscape; and
the effects of light of De Hooghe and Rembrandt presented examples of
treatment to which southern art could show no parallel. Turner
evidently studied these with the greatest care, and with great benefit
in every way; especially this, that they neutralized the idealisms of
Claude, and showed the young painter what power might be in plain
truth, even of the most familiar kind. He painted several pictures in
imitation of these masters; and those in which he tried to rival Cuyp
are healthy and noble works, being, in fact, just what most of Cuyp's
own pictures are--faithful studies of Dutch boats in calm weather, on
smooth water. De Hooghe was too precise, and Rembrandt too dark, to be
successfully or affectionately followed by him; but he evidently
learned much from both.

§ 30. Finally, he painted many pictures in the manner of Vandevelde
(who was the accepted authority of his time in sea painting), and
received much injury from him. To the close of his life, Turner
always painted the sea too grey, and too opaque, in consequence of
his early study of Vandevelde. He never seemed to perceive color so
truly in the sea as he saw it elsewhere. But he soon discovered the
poorness of Vandevelde's forms of waves, and raised their meanly
divided surfaces into massive surge, effecting rapidly other
changes, of which more in another place.

Such was the art to which Turner, in early years, devoted his most
earnest thoughts. More or less respectful contemplation of Reynolds,
Loutherbourg, Wilson, Gainsborough, Morland, and Wilkie, was
incidentally mingled with his graver study; and he maintained a
questioning watchfulness of even the smallest successes of his
brother artists of the modern landscape school. It remains for us
only to note the position of that living school when Turner, helped
or misled, as the case may be, by the study of the older artists,
began to consider what remained for him to do, or design.

§ 31. The dead schools of landscape, composed of the works we have
just been examining, were broadly divisible into northern and
southern: the Dutch schools, more or less natural, but vulgar; the
Italian, more or less elevated, but absurd. There was a certain
foolish elegance in Claude, and a dull dignity in Gaspar; but then
their work resembled nothing that ever existed in the world. On the
contrary, a canal or cattle piece of Cuyp's had many veracities
about it; but they were, at best, truths of the ditch and dairy. The
grace of nature, or her gloom, her tender and sacred seclusions, or
her reach of power and wrath, had never been painted; nor had
_anything_ been painted yet in true _love_ of it; for both Dutch and
Italians agreed in this, that they always painted for the
_picture's_ sake, to show how well they could imitate sunshine,
arrange masses, or articulate straws,--never because they loved the
scene, or wanted to carry away some memory of it.

And thus, all that landscape of the old masters is to be considered
merely as a struggle of expiring skill to discover some new
direction in which to display itself. There was no love of nature in
the age; only a desire for something new. Therefore those schools
expired at last, leaving the chasm of nearly utter emptiness between
them and the true moderns, out of which chasm the new school rises,
not engrafted on that old one, but, from the very base of all
things, beginning with mere washes of Indian ink, touched upon with
yellow and brown; and gradually feeling its way to color.

But this infant school differed inherently from that ancienter one,
in that its motive was love. However feeble its efforts might be,
they were _for the sake of the nature_, not of the picture, and
therefore, having this germ of true life, it grew and throve. Robson
did not paint purple hills because he wanted to show how he could
lay on purple; but because he truly loved their dark peaks. Fielding
did not paint downs to show how dexterously he could sponge out
mists; but because he loved downs.

This modern school, therefore, became the only true school of
landscape which had yet existed; the artificial Claude and Gaspar
work may be cast aside out of our way,--as I have said in my
Edinburgh lectures, under the general title of "pastoralism,"--and
from the last landscape of Tintoret, if we look for _life_, we must
pass at once to the first of Turner.

§ 32. What help Turner received from this or that companion of his
youth is of no importance to any one now. Of course every great man is
always being helped by everybody,[103] for his gift is to get good out
of all things and all persons; and also there were two men associated
with him in early study, who showed high promise in the same field,
Cousen and Girtin (especially the former), and there is no saying what
these men might have done had they lived; there might, perhaps, have
been a struggle between one or other of them and Turner, as between
Giorgione and Titian. But they lived not; and Turner is the only great
man whom the school has yet produced,--quite great enough, as we shall
see, for all that needed to be done. To him, therefore, we now finally
turn, as the sole object of our inquiry. I shall first reinforce, with
such additions as they need, those statements of his general
principles which I made in the first volume, but could not then
demonstrate fully, for want of time to prepare pictorial illustration;
and then proceed to examine, piece by piece, his representations of
the facts of nature, comparing them, as it may seem expedient, with
what had been accomplished by others.

       *       *       *       *       *

I cannot close this volume without alluding briefly to a subject of
different interest from any that have occupied us in its pages. For
it may, perhaps, seem to a general reader heartless and vain to
enter zealously into questions about our arts and pleasures in a
time of so great public anxiety as this.

But he will find, if he looks back to the sixth paragraph of the
opening chapter of the last volume, some statement of feelings,
which, as they made me despondent in a time of apparent national
prosperity, now cheer me in one which, though of stern trial, I will
not be so much a coward as to call one of adversity. And I derive
this encouragement first from the belief that the War itself, with
all its bitterness, is, in the present state of the European
nations, productive of more good than evil; and, secondly, because I
have more confidence than others generally entertain, in the justice
of its cause.

I say, first, because I believe the war is at present productive of
good more than of evil. I will not argue this hardly and coldly, as
I might, by tracing in past history some of the abundant evidence
that nations have always reached their highest virtue, and wrought
their most accomplished works, in times of straitening and battle;
as, on the other hand, no nation ever yet enjoyed a protracted and
triumphant peace without receiving in its own bosom ineradicable
seeds of future decline. I will not so argue this matter; but I will
appeal at once to the testimony of those whom the war has cost the
dearest. I know what would be told me, by those who have suffered
nothing; whose domestic happiness has been unbroken; whose daily
comfort undisturbed; whose experience of calamity consists, at its
utmost, in the incertitude of a speculation, the dearness of a
luxury, or the increase of demands upon their fortune which they
could meet fourfold without inconvenience. From these, I can well
believe, be they prudent economists, or careless pleasure-seekers,
the cry for peace will rise alike vociferously, whether in street or
senate. But I ask _their_ witness, to whom the war has changed the
aspect of the earth, and imagery of heaven, whose hopes it has cut
off like a spider's web, whose treasure it has placed, in a moment,
under the seals of clay. Those who can never more see sunrise, nor
watch the climbing light gild the Eastern clouds, without thinking
what graves it has gilded, first, far down behind the dark
earth-line,--who never more shall see the crocus bloom in spring,
without thinking what dust it is that feeds the wild flowers of
Balaclava. Ask _their_ witness, and see if they will not reply that
it is well with them, and with theirs; that they would have it no
otherwise; would not, if they might, receive back their gifts of
love and life, nor take again the purple of their blood out of the
cross on the breastplate of England. Ask them: and though they
should answer only with a sob, listen if it does not gather upon
their lips into the sound of the old Seyton war-cry--"Set on."

And this not for pride--not because the names of their lost ones
will be recorded to all time, as of those who held the breach and
kept the gate of Europe against the North, as the Spartans did
against the East; and lay down in the place they had to guard, with
the like home message, "Oh, stranger, go and tell the English that
we are lying here, having obeyed their words;"--not for this, but
because, also, they have felt that the spirit which has discerned
them for eminence in sorrow--the helmed and sworded skeleton that
rakes with its white fingers the sands of the Black Sea beach into
grave-heap after grave-heap, washed by everlasting surf of
tears--has been to them an angel of other things than agony; that
they have learned, with those hollow, undeceivable eyes of his, to
see all the earth by the sunlight of deathbeds;--no inch-high stage
for foolish griefs and feigned pleasures; no dream, neither, as its
dull moralists told them;--_Any_thing but that: a place of true,
marvellous, inextricable sorrow and power; a question-chamber of
trial by rack and fire, irrevocable decision recording continually;
and no sleep, nor folding of hands, among the demon-questioners;
none among the angel-watchers, none among the men who stand or fall
beside those hosts of God. They know now the strength of sacrifice,
and that its flames can illumine as well as consume; they are bound
by new fidelities to all that they have saved,--by new love to all
for whom they have suffered; every affection which seemed to sink
with those dim life-stains into the dust, has been delegated, by
those who need it no more, to the cause for which they have expired;
and every mouldering arm, which will never more embrace the beloved
ones, has bequeathed to them its strength and its faithfulness.

For the cause of this quarrel is no dim, half-avoidable involution
of mean interests and errors, as some would have us believe. There
never was a great war caused by such things. There never can be. The
historian may trace it, with ingenious trifling, to a courtier's
jest or a woman's glance; but he does not ask--(and it is the sum of
questions)--how the warring nations had come to found their
destinies on the course of the sneer, or the smile. If they have so
based them, it is time for them to learn, through suffering, how to
build on other foundations--for great, accumulated, and most
righteous cause, their foot slides in due time; and against the
torpor, or the turpitude, of their myriads, there is loosed the
haste of the devouring sword and the thirsty arrow. But if they have
set their fortunes on other than such ground, then the war must be
owing to some deep conviction or passion in their own hearts,--a
conviction which, in resistless flow, or reckless ebb, or consistent
stay, is the ultimate arbiter of battle, disgrace, or conquest.

Wherever there is war, there _must_ be injustice on one side or the
other, or on both. There have been wars which were little more than
trials of strength between friendly nations, and in which the
injustice was not to each other, but to the God who gave them life.
But in a malignant war of these present ages there is injustice of
ignobler kind, at once to God and man, which _must_ be stemmed for
both their sakes. It may, indeed, be so involved with national
prejudices, or ignorances, that neither of the contending nations
can conceive it as attaching to their cause; nay, the constitution
of their governments, and the clumsy crookedness of their political
dealings with each other, may be such as to prevent either of them
from knowing the actual cause for which they have gone to war.
Assuredly this is, in a great degree, the state of things with _us_;
for I noticed that there never came news by telegraph of the
explosion of a powder-barrel, or of the loss of thirty men by a
sortie, but the Parliament lost confidence immediately in the
justice of the war; reopened the question whether we ever should
have engaged in it, and remained in a doubtful and repentant state
of mind until one of the enemy's powder-barrels blew up also; upon
which they were immediately satisfied again that the war was a wise
and necessary one. How far, therefore, the calamity may have been
brought upon us by men whose political principles shoot annually
like the leaves, and change color at every autumn frost:--how loudly
the blood that has been poured out round the walls of that city, up
to the horse-bridles, may now be crying from the ground against men
who did not know, when they first bade shed it, exactly what war
was, or what blood was, or what life was, or truth, or what anything
else was upon the earth; and whose tone of opinions touching the
destinies of mankind depended entirely upon whether they were
sitting on the right or left side of the House of Commons;--this, I
repeat, I know not, nor (in all solemnity I say it) do I care to
know. For if it be so, and the English nation could at the present
period of its history be betrayed into a war such as this by the
slipping of a wrong word into a protocol, or bewitched into
unexpected battle under the budding hallucinations of its sapling
senators, truly it is time for us to bear the penalty of our
baseness, and learn, as the sleepless steel glares close upon us,
how to choose our governors more wisely, and our ways more warily.
For that which brings swift punishment in war, must have brought
slow ruin in peace; and those who have now laid down their lives for
England, have doubly saved her; they have humbled at once her
enemies and herself; and have done less for her, in the conquest
they achieve, than in the sorrow that they claim.

But it is not altogether thus: we have not been cast into this war
by mere political misapprehensions, or popular ignorances. It is
quite possible that neither we nor our rulers may clearly understand
the nature of the conflict; and that we may be dealing blows in the
dark, confusedly, and as a soldier suddenly awakened from slumber by
an unknown adversary. But I believe the struggle was inevitable, and
that the sooner it came, the more easily it was to be met, and the
more nobly concluded. France and England are both of them, from
shore to shore, in a state of intense progression, change, and
experimental life. They are each of them beginning to examine, more
distinctly than ever nations did yet in the history of the world,
the dangerous question respecting the rights of governed, and the
responsibilities of governing, bodies; not, as heretofore; foaming
over them in red frenzy, with intervals of fetter and straw crown,
but in health, quietness, and daylight, with the help of a good
Queen and a great Emperor; and to determine them in a way which, by
just so much as it is more effective and rational, is likely to
produce more permanent results than ever before on the policy of
neighboring States, and to force, gradually, the discussion of
similar questions into their places of silence. To force it,--for
true liberty, like true religion, is always aggressive or
persecuted; but the attack is _generally_ made upon it by the nation
which is to be crushed,--by Persian on Athenian, Tuscan on Roman,
Austrian on Swiss; or, as now, by Russia upon us and our allies: her
attack appointed, it seems to me, for confirmation of all our
greatness, trial of our strength, purging and punishment of our
futilities, and establishment for ever, in our hands, of the
leadership in the political progress of the world.

Whether this its providential purpose be accomplished, must depend
on its enabling France and England to love one another, and teaching
these, the two noblest foes that ever stood breast to breast among
the nations, first to decipher the law of international charities;
first to discern that races, like individuals, can only reach their
true strength, dignity, or joy, in seeking each the welfare, and
exulting each in the glory, of the other. It is strange how far we
still seem from fully perceiving this. We know that two men, cast on
a desert island, could not thrive in dispeace; we can understand
that four, or twelve, might still find their account in unity; but
that a multitude should thrive otherwise than by the contentions of
its classes, or _two_ multitudes hold themselves in anywise bound by
brotherly law to serve, support, rebuke, rejoice in one another,
this seems still as far beyond our conception, as the clearest of
commandments, "Let no man seek his own, but every man another's
wealth," is beyond our habitual practice. Yet, if once we comprehend
that precept in its breadth, and feel that what we now call jealousy
for our country's honor, is, so far as it tends to other countries'
_dis_honor, merely one of the worst, because most complacent and
self-gratulatory, forms of irreligion,--a newly breathed strength
will, with the newly interpreted patriotism, animate and sanctify
the efforts of men. Learning, unchecked by envy, will be accepted
more frankly, throned more firmly, guided more swiftly; charity,
unchilled by fear, will dispose the laws of each State without
reluctance to advantage its neighbor by justice to itself; and
admiration, unwarped by prejudice, possess itself continually of new
treasure in the arts and the thoughts of the stranger.

If France and England fail of this, if again petty jealousies or
selfish interests prevail to unknit their hands from the armored
grasp, then, indeed, their faithful children will have fallen in
vain; there will be a sound as of renewed lamentation along those
Euxine waves, and a shaking among the bones that bleach by the
mounds of Sebastopol. But if they fail not of this,--if we, in our
love of our queens and kings, remember how France gave to the cause
of early civilization, first the greatest, then the holiest, of
monarchs;[104] and France, in her love of liberty, remembers how
_we_ first raised the standard of Commonwealth, trusted to the grasp
of one good and strong hand, witnessed for by victory; and so join
in perpetual compact of our different strengths, to contend for
justice, mercy, and truth throughout the world,--who dares say that
one soldier has died in vain? The scarlet of the blood that has
sealed this covenant will be poured along the clouds of a new
aurora, glorious in that Eastern heaven; for every sob of wreck-fed
breaker round those Pontic precipices, the floods shall clap their
hands between the guarded mounts of the Prince-Angel; and the
spirits of those lost multitudes, crowned with the olive and rose
among the laurel, shall haunt, satisfied, the willowy brooks and
peaceful vales of England, and glide, triumphant, by the poplar
groves and sunned coteaux of Seine.

  [97] The education here spoken of is, of course, that bearing on
       the main work of life. In other respects, Turner's education
       was more neglected than Scott's, and that not beneficently.
       See the close of the third of my Edinburgh Lectures.

  [98] The picture is in the Uffizii of Florence.

  [99] This etching is prepared for receiving mezzotint in the next
       volume; it is therefore much heavier in line, especially in
       the water, than I should have made it, if intended to be
       complete as it is.

  [100] Compare Vol. I. Part II. Sec. I. Chap. VII. I repeat here
        some things that were then said; but it is necessary now to
        review them in connection with Turner's education, as well
        as for the sake of enforcing them by illustration.

  [101] Now in the old library of Venice.

  [102] My old friend Blackwood complains bitterly, in his last
        number, of my having given this illustration at one of my
        late lectures, saying, that I "have a disagreeable knack of
        finding out the joints in my opponent's armor," and that "I
        never fight for love." I never do. I fight for truth,
        earnestly, and in no wise for jest; and against all lies,
        earnestly, and in no wise for love. They complain that "a
        noble adversary is not in Mr. Ruskin's way." No; a noble
        adversary never was, never will be. With all that is noble
        I have been, and shall be, in perpetual peace, with all that
        is ignoble and false everlastingly at war. And as for these
        Scotch _bourgeois gentilshommes_ with their "Tu n'as pas la
        patience que je pare," let them look to their fence. But
        truly, if they will tell me where Claude's strong points
        are, I will strike there, and be thankful.

  [103] His first drawing master was, I believe, that Mr. Lowe,
        whose daughters, now aged and poor, have, it seems to me,
        some claim on public regard, being connected distantly with
        the memory of Johnson, and closely with that of Turner.

  [104] Charlemagne and St. Louis.




APPENDIX.

I. CLAUDE'S TREE-DRAWING.


The reader may not improbably hear it said, by persons who are
incapable of maintaining an honest argument, and therefore incapable
of understanding or believing the honesty of an adversary, that I
have caricatured, or unfairly chosen, the examples I give of the
masters I depreciate. It is evident, in the first place, that I
could not, if I were even cunningly disposed, adopt a worse policy
than in so doing; for the discovery of caricature or falsity in my
representations, would not only invalidate the immediate statement,
but the whole book; and invalidate it in the most fatal way, by
showing that all I had ever said about "truth" was hypocrisy, and
that in my own affairs I expected to prevail by help of lies.
Nevertheless it necessarily happens, that in endeavors to facsimile
any work whatsoever, bad or good, some changes are induced from the
exact aspect of the original. These changes are, of course,
sometimes harmful, sometimes advantageous; the bad thing generally
gains; the good thing _always_ loses: so that I am continually
tormented by finding, in my plates of contrasts, the virtue and vice
I exactly wanted to talk about, eliminated from _both_ examples. In
some cases, however, the bad thing will lose also, and then I must
either cancel the plate, or increase the cost of the work by
preparing another (at a similar risk), or run the chance of
incurring the charge of dishonest representation. I desire,
therefore, very earnestly, and once for all, to have it understood
that whatever I say in the text, bearing on questions of comparison,
refers _always_ to the _original_ works; and that, if the reader has
it in his power, I would far rather he should look at those works
than at my plates of them; I only give the plates for his immediate
help and convenience: and I mention this, with respect to my plate
of Claude's ramification, because, if I have such a thing as a
prejudice at all, (and, although I do not myself think I have,
people certainly say so,) it is against Claude; and I might,
therefore, be sooner suspected of some malice in this plate than in
others. But I simply gave the original engravings from the Liber
Veritatis to Mr. Le Keux, earnestly requesting that the portions
selected might be faithfully copied; and I think he is much to be
thanked for so carefully and successfully accomplishing the task.
The figures are from the following plates:--

  No. 1. Part of the central tree in No. 134. of the Liber Veritatis.
      2. From the largest tree       "   158.
      3. Bushes at root of tree      "   134.
      4. Tree on the left            "   183.
      5. Tree on the left            "    95.
      6. Tree on the left            "    72.
      7. Principal tree              "    92.
      8. Tree on the right           "    32.

If, in fact, any change be effected in the examples in this plate, it
is for the better; for, thus detached, they all look like small
boughs, in which the faults are of little consequence; in the original
works they are seen to be intended for large trunks of trees, and the
errors are therefore pronounced on a much larger scale.

The plate of mediæval rocks (10.) has been executed with much less
attention in transcript, because the points there to be illustrated
were quite indisputable, and the instances were needed merely to show
the _kind_ of _thing_ spoken of, not the skill of particular masters.
The example from Leonardo was, however, somewhat carefully treated.
Mr. Cuff copied it accurately from the only engraving of the picture
which I believe exists, and with which, therefore, I suppose the world
is generally content. That engraving, however, in no respect seems to
me to give the look of the light behind Leonardo's rocks; so I
afterwards darkened the rocks, and put some light into the sky and
lily; and the effect is certainly more like that of the picture than
it is in the same portion of the old engraving.

Of the other masters represented in the plates of this volume, the
noblest, Tintoret, has assuredly suffered the most (Plate 17.);
first, in my too hasty drawing from the original, picture; and,
secondly, through some accidental errors of outline which occurred
in the reduction to the size of the page; lastly, and chiefly, in
the withdrawal of the heads of the four figures underneath, in the
shadow, on which the composition entirely depends. This last evil is
unavoidable. It is quite impossible to make _extracts_ from the
great masters without partly spoiling every separated feature; the
very essence of a noble composition being, that none should bear
separation from the rest.

The plate from Raphael (11) is, I think, on the whole, satisfactory.
It cost me much pains, as I had to facsimile the irregular form of
every leaf; each being, in the original picture, executed with a
somewhat wayward pencil-stroke of vivid brown on the clear sky.

Of the other plates it would be tedious to speak in detail.
Generally, it will be found that I have taken most pains to do
justice to the masters of whom I have to speak depreciatingly; and
that, if there be calumny at all, it is always of Turner, rather
than of Claude.

The reader might, however, perhaps suspect me of ill-will towards
Constable, owing to my continually introducing him for depreciatory
comparison. So far from this being the case, I had, as will be seen
in various passages of the first volume, considerable respect for
the feeling with which he worked; but I was compelled to do harsh
justice upon him now, because Mr. Leslie, in his unadvised and
unfortunate _réchauffé_ of the fallacious art-maxims of the last
century, has suffered his personal regard for Constable so far to
prevail over his judgment as to bring him forward as a great artist,
comparable in some kind with Turner. As Constable's reputation was,
even before this, most mischievous, in giving countenance to the
blotting and blundering of Modernism, I saw myself obliged, though
unwillingly, to carry the suggested comparison thoroughly out.


II. GERMAN PHILOSOPHY.

The reader must have noticed that I never speak of German art, or
German philosophy, but in depreciation. This, however, is not
because I cannot feel, or would not acknowledge, the value and
power, within certain limits, of both; but because I also feel that
the immediate tendency of the English mind is to rate them too
highly; and, therefore, it becomes a necessary task, at present, to
mark what evil and weakness there are in them, rather than what
good. I also am brought continually into collision with certain
extravagances of the German mind, by my own steady pursuit of
Naturalism as opposed to Idealism; and, therefore, I become
unfortunately cognizant of the evil, rather than of the good; which
evil, so far as I feel it, I am bound to declare. And it is not to
the point to protest, as the Chevalier Bunsen and other German
writers have done, against the expression of opinions respecting
their philosophy by persons who have not profoundly or carefully
studied it; for the very resolution to study any system of
metaphysics profoundly, must be based, in any prudent man's mind, on
some preconceived opinion of its worthiness to be studied; which
opinion of German metaphysics the naturalistic English cannot be led
to form. This is not to be murmured against,--it is in the simple
necessity of things. Men who have other business on their hands must
be content to choose what philosophy they have occasion for, by the
sample; and when, glancing into the second volume of "Hippolytus,"
we find the Chevalier Bunsen himself talking of a "finite
realization of the infinite" (a phrase considerably less rational
than "a black realization of white"), and of a triad composed of
God, Man, and Humanity[105] (which is a parallel thing to talking of
a triad composed of man, dog, and canineness), knowing those
expressions to be pure, definite, and highly finished nonsense, we
do not in general trouble ourselves to look any farther. Some one
will perhaps answer that if one always judged thus by the
sample,--as, for instance, if one judged of Turner's pictures by the
head of a figure cut out of one of them,--very precious things might
often be despised. Not, I think, often. If any one went to Turner,
expecting to learn figure-drawing from him, the sample of his
figure-drawing would accurately and justly inform him that he had
come to the wrong master. But if he came to be taught landscape, the
smallest fragment of Turner's work would justly exemplify his power.
It may sometimes unluckily happen that, in such short trial, we
strike upon an accidentally failing part of the thing to be tried,
and then we may be unjust; but there is, nevertheless, in multitudes
of cases, no other way of judging or acting; and the necessity of
occasionally being unjust is a law of life,--like that of sometimes
stumbling, or being sick. It will not do to walk at snail's pace all
our lives for fear of stumbling, nor to spend years in the
investigation of everything which, by specimen, we must condemn. He
who seizes all that he plainly discerns to be valuable, and never is
unjust but when he honestly cannot help it, will soon be enviable in
his possessions, and venerable in his equity.

Nor can I think that the risk of loss is great in the matter under
discussion. I have often been told that any one who will read Kant,
Strauss, and the rest of the German metaphysicians and divines,
resolutely through, and give his whole strength to the study of them,
will, after ten or twelve years' labor, discover that there is very
little harm in them; and this I can well believe; but I believe also
that the ten or twelve years may be better spent; and that any man who
honestly wants philosophy not for show, but for _use_, and knowing the
Proverbs of Solomon, can, by way of Commentary, afford to buy, in
convenient editions, Plato, Bacon, Wordsworth, Carlyle, and Helps,
will find that he has got as much as will be sufficient for him and
his household during life, and of as good quality as need be.

It is also often declared necessary to study the German
controversialists, because the grounds of religion "must be inquired
into." I am sorry to hear they have not been inquired into yet; but
if it be so, there are two ways of pursuing that inquiry: one for
scholarly men, who have leisure on their hands, by reading all that
they have time to read, for and against, and arming themselves at
all points for controversy with all persons; the other,--a shorter
and simpler way,--for busy and practical men, who want merely to
find out how to live and die. Now for the learned and leisurely men
I am not writing; they know what and how to read better than I can
tell them. For simple and busy men, concerned much with art, which
is eminently a practical matter, and fatigues the eyes, so as to
render much reading inexpedient, I _am_ writing; and such men I do,
to the utmost of my power, dissuade from meddling with German books;
not because I fear inquiry into the grounds of religion, but because
the only inquiry which is _possible_ to them must be conducted in a
totally different way. They have been brought up as Christians, and
doubt if they should remain Christians. They cannot ascertain, by
investigation, if the Bible be true; but _if it be_, and Christ ever
existed, and was God, then, certainly, the Sermon which He has
permitted for 1800 years to stand recorded as first of all His own
teaching in the New Testament, must be true. Let them take that
Sermon and give it fair practical trial: act out every verse of it,
with no quibbling or explaining away, except the reduction of such
_evidently_ metaphorical expressions as "cut off thy foot," "pluck
the beam out of thine eye," to their effectively practical sense.
Let them act out, or obey, every verse literally for a whole year,
so far as they can,--a year being little enough time to give to an
inquiry into religion; and if, at the end of the year, they are not
satisfied, and still need to prosecute the inquiry, let them try the
German system if they choose.


III. PLAGIARISM.

Some time after I had written the concluding chapter of this work,
the interesting and powerful poems of Emerson were brought under my
notice by one of the members of my class at the Working Men's
College. There is much in some of these poems so like parts of the
chapter in question, even in turn of expression, that though I do
not usually care to justify myself from the charge of plagiarism, I
felt that a few words were necessary in this instance.

I do not, as aforesaid, justify myself, in general, because I know
there is internal evidence in my work of its originality, if people
care to examine it; and if they do not, or have not skill enough to
know genuine from borrowed work, my simple assertion would not
convince them, especially as the charge of plagiarism is hardly ever
made but by plagiarists, and persons of the unhappy class who do not
believe in honesty but on evidence. Nevertheless, as my work is so
much out of doors, and among pictures, that I have time to read few
modern books, and am therefore in more danger than most people of
repeating, as if it were new, what others have said, it may be well
to note, once for all, that any such apparent plagiarism results in
fact from my writings being more original than I wish them to be,
from my having worked out my whole subject in unavoidable, but to
myself hurtful, ignorance of the labors of others. On the other
hand, I should be very sorry if I had _not_ been continually taught
and influenced by the writers whom I love; and am quite unable to
say to what extent my thoughts have been guided by Wordsworth,
Carlyle, and Helps; to whom (with Dante and George Herbert, in olden
time) I owe more than to any other writers;--most of all, perhaps,
to Carlyle, whom I read so constantly, that, without wilfully
setting myself to imitate him, I find myself perpetually falling
into his modes of expression, and saying many things in a "quite
other," and, I hope, stronger, way, than I should have adopted some
years ago; as also there are things which I hope are said more
clearly and simply than before, owing to the influence upon me of
the beautiful _quiet_ English of Helps. It would be both foolish and
wrong to struggle to cast off influences of this kind; for they
consist mainly in a real and healthy help;--the master, in writing
as in painting, showing certain methods of language which it would
be ridiculous, and even affected, not to employ, when once shown;
just as it would have been ridiculous in Bonifacio to refuse to
employ Titian's way of laying on color, if he felt it the best,
because he had not himself discovered it. There is all the
difference in the world between this receiving of guidance, or
allowing of influence, and wilful imitation, much more, plagiarism;
nay, the guidance may even innocently reach into local tones of
thought, and must do so to some extent; so that I find Carlyle's
stronger thinking coloring mine continually; and should be very
sorry if I did not; otherwise I should have read him to little
purpose. But what I have of my own is still all there, and, I
believe, better brought out, by far, than it would have been
otherwise. Thus, if we glance over the wit and satire of the popular
writers of the day, we shall find that the _manner_ of it, so far as
it is distinctive, is always owing to Dickens; and that out of his
first exquisite ironies branched innumerable other forms of wit,
varying with the disposition of the writers; original in the matter
and substance of them, yet never to have been expressed as they now
are, but for Dickens.

Many people will suppose that for several ideas in the chapters on
Landscape I was indebted to Humboldt's Kosmos, and Howitt's Rural
Scenery. I am indebted to Mr. Howitt's book for much pleasure, but
for no suggestion, as it was not put into my hands till the chapters
in question were in type. I wish it had been; as I should have been
glad to have taken farther note on the landscape of Theocritus, on
which Mr. Howitt dwells with just delight. Other parts of the book
will be found very suggestive and helpful to the reader who cares to
pursue the subject. Of Humboldt's Kosmos I heard much talk when it
first came out, and looked through it cursorily; but thinking it
contained no material (connected with my subject)[106] which I had
not already possessed myself of, I have never since referred to the
work. I may be mistaken in my estimate of it, but certainly owe it
absolutely nothing.

It is also often said that I borrow from Pugin. I glanced at Pugin's
Contrasts once, in the Oxford architectural reading-room, during an
idle forenoon. His "Remarks on Articles in the Rambler" were brought
under my notice by some of the reviews. I never read a word of any
other of his works, not feeling, from the style of his architecture,
the smallest interest in his opinions.

I have so often spoken, in the preceding pages, of Holman Hunt's
picture of the Light of the World, that I may as well, in this
place, glance at the envious charge against it, of being plagiarized
from a German print.

It is indeed true that there was a painting of the subject before;
and there were, of course, no paintings of the Nativity before
Raphael's time, nor of the Last Supper before Leonardo's, else those
masters could have laid no claim to originality. But what was still
more singular (the verse to be illustrated being, "Behold, I stand
at the door and knock"), the principal figure in the antecedent
picture was knocking at a door, knocked with its right hand, and had
its face turned to the spectator! Nay, it was even robed in a long
robe, down to its feet. All these circumstances were the same in Mr.
Hunt's picture; and as the chances evidently were a hundred to one
that if he had not been helped to the ideas by the German artist, he
would have represented the figure as _not_ knocking at any door, as
turning its back to the spectator, and as dressed in a short robe,
the plagiarism was considered as demonstrated. Of course no defence
is possible in such a case. All I can say is, that I shall be
sincerely grateful to any unconscientious persons who will adapt a
few more German prints in the same manner.

Finally, touching plagiarism in general, it is to be remembered that
all men who have sense and feeling are being continually helped:
they are taught by every person whom they meet, and enriched by
everything that falls in their way. The greatest is he who has been
oftenest aided; and, if the attainments of all human minds could be
traced to their real sources, it would be found that the world had
been laid most under contribution by the men of most original power,
and that every day of their existence deepened their debt to their
race, while it enlarged their gifts to it. The labor devoted to
trace the origin of any thought, or any invention, will usually
issue in the blank conclusion that there is nothing new under the
sun; yet nothing that is truly great can ever be altogether
borrowed; and he is commonly the wisest, and is always the happiest,
who receives simply, and without envious question, whatever good is
offered him, with thanks to its immediate giver.

  [105] I am truly sorry to have introduced such words in an
        apparently irreverent way. But it would be a guilty
        reverence which prevented us from exposing fallacy,
        precisely where fallacy was most dangerous, and shrank from
        unveiling an error, just because that error existed in
        parlance respecting the most solemn subjects to which it
        could possibly be attached.

  [106] See the Fourth Volume.

       *       *       *       *       *       *       *       *



Library Edition

THE COMPLETE WORKS

OF

JOHN RUSKIN

  ARROWS OF THE CHACE
  OUR FATHERS HAVE TOLD US
  THE STORM-CLOUD OF THE NINETEENTH CENTURY
  HORTUS INCLUSUS

  NATIONAL LIBRARY ASSOCIATION
  NEW YORK             CHICAGO


"Our Fathers Have Told Us"

SKETCHES OF THE HISTORY OF CHRISTENDOM

FOR BOYS AND GIRLS

WHO HAVE BEEN HELD AT ITS FONTS

PART I.

THE BIBLE OF AMIENS




CONTENTS.


                                                        PAGE

PREFACE                                                  iii

CHAPTER I.--BY THE RIVERS OF WATERS                        1

  "    II.--UNDER THE DRACHENFELS                         26

  "   III.--THE LION TAMER                                58

  "    IV.--INTERPRETATIONS                               88

APPENDIX I.--CHRONOLOGICAL LIST OF PRINCIPAL EVENTS
               REFERRED TO IN THE 'BIBLE OF AMIENS'      143

  "     II.--REFERENCES EXPLANATORY OF PHOTOGRAPHS TO
               CHAPTER IV                                144

  "    III.--GENERAL PLAN OF 'OUR FATHERS HAVE TOLD US'  153

INDEX                                                    155


PLATES.

ST. MARY (_Frontispiece_)                    _see page_  131

                                               _To face page_

PLATE I.--THE DYNASTIES OF FRANCE                          8

  "  II.--THE BIBLE OF AMIENS, NORTHERN PORCH BEFORE
            RESTORATION                                   26

  " III.--AMIENS, JOUR DES TRÉSPASSÉS, 1880               58

PLAN OF THE WEST PORCHES                                 140




Transcriber's Notes:

1. Italic characters have been represented by _xxxxx_

2. Superscript characters have been represented by xxx^yy

3. A macron, or bar over a letter, is shown as [=letter]

4. In the paragraph that begins, "Sketch for yourself, first, a map of
   France" there are images in the paragraph. I have represented
   back-slanting diagonal shading with "\\\" and forward-slanting
   diagonal shading with "///" and horizontal shading with "=".

5. In the original text, footnotes in Chapter I are represented with
   numbers, and footnotes in all the rest of the text, including the
   notes on Chapter I, are represented with symbols. I have converted
   all of them to numbers, since there is no overlap, and they seem to
   be used in the same way in the text.




PREFACE.


The long abandoned purpose, of which the following pages begin some
attempt at fulfilment, has been resumed at the request of a young
English governess, that I would write some pieces of history which her
pupils could gather some good out of;--the fruit of historical
documents placed by modern educational systems at her disposal, being
to them labour only, and sorrow.

What else may be said for the book, if it ever become one, it must say
for itself: preface, more than this, I do not care to write: and the
less, because some passages of British history, at this hour under
record, call for instant, though brief, comment.

I am told that the Queen's Guards have gone to Ireland; playing "God
save the Queen." And being, (as I have declared myself in the course
of some letters to which public attention has been lately more than
enough directed,) to the best of my knowledge, the staunchest
Conservative in England, I am disposed gravely to question the
propriety of the mission of the Queen's Guards on the employment
commanded them. My own Conservative notion of the function of the
Guards is that they should guard the Queen's throne and life, when
threatened either by domestic or foreign enemy: but not that they
should become a substitute for her inefficient police force, in the
execution of her domiciliary laws.

And still less so, if the domiciliary laws which they are sent to
execute, playing "God save the Queen," be perchance precisely contrary
to that God the Saviour's law; and therefore, such as, in the long run,
no quantity either of Queens, or Queen's men, _could_ execute. Which is
a question I have for these ten years been endeavouring to get the
British public to consider--vainly enough hitherto; and will not at
present add to my own many words on the matter. But a book has just been
published by a British officer, who, if he had not been otherwise and
more actively employed, could not only have written all my books about
landscape and picture, but is very singularly also of one mind with me,
(God knows of how few Englishmen I can now say so,) on matters regarding
the Queen's safety, and the Nation's honour. Of whose book ("Far out:
Rovings retold"), since various passages will be given in my subsequent
terminal notes, I will content myself with quoting for the end of my
Preface, the memorable words which Colonel Butler himself quotes, as
spoken to the British Parliament by its last Conservative leader, a
British officer who had also served with honour and success.

The Duke of Wellington said: "It is already well known to your
Lordships that of the troops which our gracious Sovereign did me the
honour to entrust to my command at various periods during the war--a
war undertaken for the express purpose of securing the happy
institutions and independence of the country--at least one half were
Roman Catholics. My Lords, when I call your recollection to this fact,
I am sure all further eulogy is unnecessary. Your Lordships are well
aware for what length of period and under what difficult circumstances
they maintained the Empire buoyant upon the flood which overwhelmed
the thrones and wrecked the institutions of every other people;--how
they kept alive the only spark of freedom which was left
unextinguished in Europe.... My Lords, it is mainly to the Irish
Catholics that we all owe our proud predominance in our military
career, and that I personally am indebted for the laurels with which
you have been pleased to decorate my brow.... We must confess, my
Lords, that without Catholic blood and Catholic valour no victory
could ever have been obtained, and the first military talents might
have been exerted in vain."

Let these noble words of tender Justice be the first example to my
young readers of what all History ought to be. It has been told them,
in the Laws of Fésole, that all great Art is Praise. So is all
faithful History, and all high Philosophy. For these three, Art,
History, and Philosophy, are each but one part of the Heavenly Wisdom,
which sees not as man seeth, but with Eternal Charity; and because she
rejoices not in Iniquity, _therefore_ rejoices in the Truth.

For true knowledge is of Virtues only; of poisons and vices, it is
Hecate who teaches, not Athena. And of all wisdom, chiefly the
Politician's must consist in this divine Prudence; it is not, indeed,
always necessary for men to know the virtues of their friends, or
their masters; since the friend will still manifest, and the master
use. But woe to the Nation which is too cruel to cherish the virtue of
its subjects, and too cowardly to recognize that of its enemies!




THE BIBLE OF AMIENS.

CHAPTER I.

BY THE RIVERS OF WATERS.


The intelligent English traveller, in this fortunate age for him, is
aware that, half-way between Boulogne and Paris, there is a complex
railway-station, into which his train, in its relaxing speed, rolls
him with many more than the average number of bangs and bumps
prepared, in the access of every important French _gare_, to startle
the drowsy or distrait passenger into a sense of his situation.

He probably also remembers that at this halting-place in mid-journey
there is a well-served buffet, at which he has the privilege of "Dix
minutes d'arrêt."

He is not, however, always so distinctly conscious that these ten
minutes of arrest are granted to him within not so many minutes' walk
of the central square of a city which was once the Venice of France.

Putting the lagoon islands out of question, the French River-Queen was
nearly as large in compass as Venice herself; and divided, not by slow
currents of ebbing and returning tide, but by eleven beautiful trout
streams, of which some four or five are as large, each separately, as
our Surrey Wandle, or as Isaac Walton's Dove; and which, branching out
of one strong current above the city, and uniting again after they have
eddied through its streets, are bordered, as they flow down, (fordless
except where the two Edwards rode them, the day before Crecy,) to the
sands of St. Valery, by groves of aspen, and glades of poplar, whose
grace and gladness seem to spring in every stately avenue instinct with
the image of the just man's life,--"Erit tanquam lignum quod plantatum
est secus decursus aquarum."

But the Venice of Picardy owed her name, not to the beauty of her
streams merely, but to their burden. She was a worker, like the
Adriatic princes, in gold and glass, in stone, wood, and ivory; she
was skilled like an Egyptian in the weaving of fine linen; dainty as
the maids of Judah in divers colours of needlework. And of these, the
fruits of her hands, praising her in her own gates, she sent also
portions to stranger nations, and her fame went out into all lands.

"Un règlement de l'échevinage, du 12^me avril 1566, fait voir qu'on
fabriquait à cette epoque, des velours de toutes couleurs pour
meubles, des colombettes à grands et petits carreaux, des burailles
croises, qu'on expédiait en Allemagne--en Espagne, en Turquie, et en
Barbarie!"[1]

All-coloured velvets, pearl-iridescent colombettes! (I wonder what
they may be?) and sent to vie with the variegated carpet of the Turk,
and glow upon the arabesque towers of Barbary![2] Was not this a phase
of provincial Picard life which an intelligent English traveller might
do well to inquire into? Why should this fountain of rainbows leap up
suddenly here by Somme; and a little Frankish maid write herself the
sister of Venice, and the servant of Carthage and of Tyre?

[Footnote 1: M. H. Dusevel, Histoire de la Ville d'Amiens. Amiens,
Caron et Lambert, 1848; p. 305.]

[Footnote 2: Carpaccio trusts for the chief splendour of any festa in
cities to the patterns of the draperies hung out of windows.]

And if she, why not others also of our northern villages? Has the
intelligent traveller discerned anything, in the country, or in its
shores, on his way from the gate of Calais to the _gare_ of Amiens, of
special advantage for artistic design, or for commercial enterprise? He
has seen league after league of sandy dunes. We also, we, have our sands
by Severn, by Lune, by Solway. He has seen extensive plains of useful
and not unfragrant peat,--an article sufficiently accessible also to
our Scotch and Irish industries. He has seen many a broad down and
jutting cliff of purest chalk; but, opposite, the perfide Albion gleams
no whit less blanche beyond the blue. Pure waters he has seen, issuing
out of the snowy rock; but are ours less bright at Croydon, at
Guildford, or at Winchester? And yet one never heard of treasures sent
from Solway sands to African; nor that the builders at Romsey could give
lessons in colour to the builders at Granada? What can it be, in the air
or the earth--in her stars or in her sunlight--that fires the heart and
quickens the eyes of the little white-capped Amienoise soubrette, till
she can match herself against Penelope?

The intelligent English traveller has of course no time to waste on
any of these questions. But if he has bought his ham-sandwich, and is
ready for the "En voiture, messieurs," he may perhaps condescend for
an instant to hear what a lounger about the place, neither wasteful of
his time, nor sparing of it, can suggest as worth looking at, when his
train glides out of the station.

He will see first, and doubtless with the respectful admiration which an
Englishman is bound to bestow upon such objects, the coal-sheds and
carriage-sheds of the station itself, extending in their ashy and oily
splendours for about a quarter of a mile out of the town; and then, just
as the train gets into speed, under a large chimney tower, which he
cannot see to nearly the top of, but will feel overcast by the shadow of
its smoke, he _may_ see, if he will trust his intelligent head out of
the window, and look back, fifty or fifty-one (I am not sure of my count
to a unit) similar chimneys, all similarly smoking, all with similar
works attached, oblongs of brown brick wall, with portholes numberless
of black square window. But in the midst of these fifty tall things that
smoke, he will see one, a little taller than any, and more delicate,
that does not smoke; and in the midst of these fifty masses of blank
wall enclosing 'works'--and doubtless producing works profitable and
honourable to France and the world--he will see _one_ mass of wall--not
blank, but strangely wrought by the hands of foolish men of long ago,
for the purpose of enclosing or producing no manner of profitable work
whatsoever, but one--

"This is the work of God; that ye should believe on Him whom He hath
sent"!

Leaving the intelligent traveller now to fulfil his vow of pilgrimage
to Paris,--or wherever else God may be sending him,--I will suppose
that an intelligent Eton boy or two, or thoughtful English girl, may
care quietly to walk with me as far as this same spot of commanding
view, and to consider what the workless--shall we say also
worthless?--building, and its unshadowed minaret, may perhaps farther
mean.

Minaret I have called it, for want of better English word.
Flêche--arrow--is its proper name; vanishing into the air you know not
where, by the mere fineness of it. Flameless--motionless--hurtless--the
fine arrow; unplumed, unpoisoned, and unbarbed; aimless--shall we say
also, readers young and old, travelling or abiding? It, and the walls it
rises from--what have they once meant? What meaning have they left in
them yet, for you, or for the people that live round them, and never
look up as they pass by?

Suppose we set ourselves first to learn how they came there.

At the birth of Christ, all this hillside, and the brightly-watered
plain below, with the corn-yellow champaign above, were inhabited by a
Druid-taught race, wild enough in thoughts and ways, but under Roman
government, and gradually becoming accustomed to hear the names, and
partly to confess the power, of Roman gods. For three hundred years
after the birth of Christ they heard the name of no other God.

Three hundred years! and neither apostles nor inheritors of
apostleship had yet gone into all the world and preached the gospel to
every creature. Here, on their peaty ground, the wild people, still
trusting in Pomona for apples, in Silvanus for acorns, in Ceres for
bread, and in Proserpina for rest, hoped but the season's blessing
from the Gods of Harvest, and feared no eternal anger from the Queen
of Death.

But at last, three hundred years being past and gone, in the
year of Christ 301, there came to this hillside of Amiens, on the
sixth day of the Ides of October, the Messenger of a new Life.

His name, Firminius (I suppose) in Latin, Firmin in French,--so to be
remembered here in Picardy. Firmin, not Firminius; as Denis, not
Dionysius; coming out of space--no one tells what part of space. But
received by the pagan Amienois with surprised welcome, and seen of
them--forty days--many days, we may read--preaching acceptably, and
binding with baptismal vows even persons in good society: and that in
such numbers, that at last he is accused to the Roman governor, by the
priests of Jupiter and Mercury, as one turning the world upside-down.
And in the last day of the Forty--or of the indefinite many meant by
Forty--he is beheaded, as martyrs ought to be, and his ministrations
in a mortal body ended.

The old, old story, you say? Be it so; you will the more easily
remember it. The Amienois remembered it so carefully, that, twelve
hundred years afterwards, in the sixteenth century, they thought good
to carve and paint the four stone pictures Nos. 1, 2, 3, and 4 of our
first choice photographs. (N. B.--This series is not yet arranged, but
is distinct from that referred to in Chapter IV. See Appendix II.).
Scene 1st, St. Firmin arriving; scene 2nd, St. Firmin preaching; scene
3rd, St. Firmin baptizing; and scene 4th, St. Firmin beheaded, by an
executioner with very red legs, and an attendant dog of the character
of the dog in 'Faust,' of whom we may have more to say presently.

Following in the meantime the tale of St. Firmin, as of old time
known, his body was received, and buried, by a Roman senator, his
disciple, (a kind of Joseph of Arimathea to St. Firmin,) in the Roman
senator's own garden. Who also built a little oratory over his grave.
The Roman senator's son built a church to replace the oratory,
dedicated it to Our Lady of Martyrs, and established it as an
episcopal seat--the first of the French nation's. A very notable spot
for the French nation, surely? One deserving, perhaps, some little
memory or monument,--cross, tablet, or the like? Where, therefore,
do you suppose this first cathedral of French Christianity stood, and
with what monument has it been honoured?

It stood where we now stand, companion mine, whoever you may be; and
the monument wherewith it has been honoured is this--chimney, whose
gonfalon of smoke overshadows us--the latest effort of modern art in
Amiens, the chimney of St. Acheul.

The first cathedral, you observe, of the _French_ nation; more
accurately, the first germ of cathedral _for_ the French nation--who
are not yet here; only this grave of a martyr is here, and this church
of Our Lady of Martyrs, abiding on the hillside, till the Roman power
pass away.

Falling together with it, and trampled down by savage tribes, alike
the city and the shrine; the grave forgotten,--when at last the Franks
themselves pour from the north, and the utmost wave of them, lapping
along these downs of Somme, is _here_ stayed, and the Frankish
standard planted, and the French kingdom throned.

Here their first capital, here the first footsteps[3] of the Frank in
his France! Think of it. All over the south are Gauls, Burgundians,
Bretons, heavier-hearted nations of sullen mind: at their outmost brim
and border, here at last are the Franks, the source of all Franchise,
for this our Europe. You have heard the word in England, before now,
but English word for it is none! _Honesty_ we have of our own; but
_Frankness_ we must learn of these: nay, all the western nations of us
are in a few centuries more to be known by this name of Frank. Franks,
of Paris that is to be, in time to come; but French of Paris is in
year of grace 500 an unknown tongue in Paris, as much as in
Stratford-att-ye-Bowe. French of Amiens is the kingly and courtly form
of Christian speech, Paris lying yet in Lutetian clay, to develope
into tile-field, perhaps, in due time. Here, by soft-glittering Somme,
reign Clovis and his Clotilde.

[Footnote 3: The first fixed and set-down footsteps; wandering tribes
called Franks, had overswept the country, and recoiled, again and
again. But _this_ invasion of the so-called Salian Franks, never
retreats again.]

And by St. Firmin's grave speaks now another gentle evangelist, and
the first Frank king's prayer to the King of kings is made to Him,
known only as "the God of Clotilde."

I must ask the reader's patience now with a date or two, and stern
facts--two--three--or more.

Clodion, the leader of the first Franks who reach irrevocably beyond
the Rhine, fights his way through desultory Roman cohorts as far as
Amiens, and takes it, in 445.[4]

[Footnote 4: See note at end of chapter, as also for the allusions in
p. 8, to the battle of Soissons.]

Two years afterwards, at his death, the scarcely asserted throne is
seized--perhaps inevitably--by the tutor of his children, Merovée,
whose dynasty is founded on the defeat of Attila at Chalons.

He died in 457. His son Childeric, giving himself up to the love of
women, and scorned by the Frank soldiery, is driven into exile, the
Franks choosing rather to live under the law of Rome than under a base
chief of their own. He receives asylum at the court of the king of
Thuringia, and abides there. His chief officer in Amiens, at his
departure, breaks a ring in two, and, giving him the half of it, tells
him, when the other half is sent, to return.

And, after many days, the half of the broken ring is sent, and he
returns, and is accepted king by his Franks.

The Thuringian queen follows him, (I cannot find if her husband is
first dead--still less, if dead, how dying,) and offers herself to him
for his wife.

"I have known thy usefulness, and that thou art very strong; and I
have come to live with thee. Had I known, in parts beyond sea, any one
more useful than thou, I should have sought to live with _him_."

He took her for his wife, and their son is Clovis.

A wonderful story; how far in literalness true is of no manner of moment
to us; the myth, and power of it, _do_ manifest the nature of the French
kingdom, and prophesy its future destiny. Personal valour, personal
beauty, loyalty to kings, love of women, disdain of unloving marriage,
note all these things for true, and that in the corruption of these will
be the last death of the Frank, as in their force was his first glory.

Personal valour, worth. _Utilitas_, the keystone of all. Birth
nothing, except as gifting with valour;--Law of primogeniture
unknown;--Propriety of conduct, it appears, for the present, also
nowhere! (but we are all pagans yet, remember).

Let us get our dates and our geography, at any rate, gathered out of
the great 'nowhere' of confused memory, and set well together, thus
far.

457. Merovée dies. The useful Childeric, counting his exile, and reign
in Amiens, together, is King altogether twenty-four years, 457 to 481,
and during his reign Odoacer ends the Roman empire in Italy, 476.

481. Clovis is only fifteen when he succeeds his father, as King of
the Franks in Amiens. At this time a fragment of Roman power remains
isolated in central France, while four strong and partly savage
nations form a cross round this dying centre: the Frank on the north,
the Breton on the west, the Burgundian on the east, the Visigoth
strongest of all and gentlest, in the south, from Loire to the sea.

Sketch for yourself, first, a map of France, as large as you like, as
in Plate I., fig. 1, marking only the courses of the five rivers,
Somme, Seine, Loire, Saone, Rhone; then, rudely, you find it was
divided at the time thus, fig. 2: Fleur-de-lysée part, Frank; \\\,
Breton; ///, Burgundian; =, Visigoth. I am not sure how far these last
reached across Rhone into Provence, but I think best to indicate
Provence as semée with roses.

Now, under Clovis, the Franks fight three great battles. The first,
with the Romans, near Soissons, which they win, and become masters of
France as far as the Loire. Copy the rough map fig. 2, and put the
fleur-de-lys all over the middle of it, extinguishing the Romans (fig.
3). This battle was won by Clovis, I believe, before he married
Clotilde. He wins his princess by it: cannot get his pretty vase,
however, to present to her. Keep that story well in your mind, and the
battle of Soissons, as winning mid-France for the French, and ending the
Romans there, for ever. Secondly, after he marries Clotilde, the wild
Germans attack _him_ from the north, and he has to fight for life and
throne at Tolbiac. This is the battle in which he prays to the God of
Clotilde, and quits himself of the Germans by His help. Whereupon he is
crowned in Rheims by St. Remy.

[Illustration: Plate I. THE DYNASTIES OF FRANCE.]

And now, in the new strength of his Christianity, and his twin victory
over Rome and Germany, and his love for his queen, and his ambition
for his people, he looks south on that vast Visigothic power, between
Loire and the snowy mountains. Shall Christ, and the Franks, not be
stronger than villainous Visigoths 'who are Arians also'? All his
Franks are with him, in that opinion. So he marches against the
Visigoths, meets them and their Alaric at Poitiers, ends their Alaric
and their Arianism, and carries his faithful Franks to the Pic du
Midi.

And so now you must draw the map of France once more, and put the
fleur-de-lys all over its central mass from Calais to the Pyrenees:
only Brittany still on the west, Burgundy in the east, and the white
Provence rose beyond Rhone. And now poor little Amiens has become a
mere border town like our Durham, and Somme a border streamlet like
our Tyne. Loire and Seine have become the great French rivers, and men
will be minded to build cities by these; where the well-watered
plains, not of peat, but richest pasture, may repose under the guard
of saucy castles on the crags, and moated towers on the islands. But
now let us think a little more closely what our changed symbols in the
map may mean--five fleur-de-lys for level bar.

They don't mean, certainly, that all the Goths are gone, and nobody but
Franks in France? The Franks have not massacred Visigothic man, woman,
and child, from Loire to Garonne. Nay, where their own throne is still
set by the Somme, the peat-bred people whom they found there, live there
still, though subdued. Frank, or Goth, or Roman may fluctuate hither and
thither, in chasing or flying troops: but, unchanged through all the
gusts of war, the rural people whose huts they pillage, whose farms they
ravage, and over whose arts they reign, must still be diligently,
silently, and with no time for lamentation, ploughing, sowing,
cattle-breeding!

Else how could Frank or Hun, Visigoth or Roman, live for a month, or
fight for a day?

Whatever the name, or the manners, of their masters, the ground
delvers must be the same; and the goatherd of the Pyrenees, and the
vine-dresser of Garonne, and the milkmaid of Picardy, give them what
lords you may, abide in their land always, blossoming as the trees of
the field, and enduring as the crags of the desert. And these, the
warp and first substance of the nation, are divided, not by dynasties,
but by climates; and are strong here, and helpless there, by
privileges which no invading tyrants can abolish, and through faults
which no preaching hermit can repress. Now, therefore, please let us
leave our history a minute or two, and read the lessons of constant
earth and sky.

In old times, when one posted from Calais to Paris, there was about
half an hour's trot on the level, from the gate of Calais to the long
chalk hill, which had to be climbed before arriving at the first
post-house in the village of Marquise.

That chalk rise, virtually, is the front of France; that last bit of
level north of it, virtually the last of Flanders; south of it,
stretches now a district of chalk and fine building limestone,--(if you
keep your eyes open, you may see a great quarry of it on the west of the
railway, half-way between Calais and Boulogne, where once was a blessed
little craggy dingle opening into velvet lawns;)--this high, but never
mountainous, calcareous tract, sweeping round the chalk basin of Paris
away to Caen on one side, and Nancy on the other, and south as far as
Bourges, and the Limousin. This limestone tract, with its keen fresh
air, everywhere arable surface, and quarriable banks above well-watered
meadow, is the real country of the French. Here only are their arts
clearly developed. Farther south they are Gascons, or Limousins, or
Auvergnats, or the like. Westward, grim-granitic Bretons; eastward,
Alpine-bearish Burgundians: here only, on the chalk and finely-knit
marble, between, say, Amiens and Chartres one way, and between Caen and
Rheims on the other, have you real _France_.

Of which, before we carry on the farther vital history, I must ask the
reader to consider with me, a little, how history, so called, has been
for the most part written, and of what particulars it usually
consists.

Suppose that the tale of King Lear were a true one; and that a modern
historian were giving the abstract of it in a school manual,
purporting to contain all essential facts in British history valuable
to British youth in competitive examination. The story would be
related somewhat after this manner:--

"The reign of the last king of the seventy-ninth dynasty closed in a
series of events with the record of which it is painful to pollute the
pages of history. The weak old man wished to divide his kingdom into
dowries for his three daughters; but on proposing this arrangement to
them, finding it received by the youngest with coldness and reserve,
he drove her from his court, and divided the kingdom between his two
elder children.

"The youngest found refuge at the court of France, where ultimately
the prince royal married her. But the two elder daughters, having
obtained absolute power, treated their father at first with
disrespect, and soon with contumely. Refused at last even the comforts
necessary to his declining years, the old king, in a transport of
rage, left the palace, with, it is said, only the court fool for an
attendant, and wandered, frantic and half naked, during the storms of
winter, in the woods of Britain.

"Hearing of these events, his youngest daughter hastily collected an
army, and invaded the territory of her ungrateful sisters, with the
object of restoring her father to his throne; but, being met by a well
disciplined force, under the command of her eldest sister's paramour,
Edmund, bastard son of the Earl of Gloucester, was herself defeated,
thrown into prison, and soon afterwards strangled by the adulterer's
order. The old king expired on receiving the news of her death; and the
participators in these crimes soon after received their reward; for the
two wicked queens being rivals for the affections of the bastard, the
one of them who was regarded by him with less favour poisoned the other,
and afterwards killed herself. Edmund afterwards met his death at the
hand of his brother, the legitimate son of Gloucester, under whose rule,
with that of the Earl of Kent, the kingdom remained for several
succeeding years."

Imagine this succinctly graceful recital of what the historian
conceived to be the facts, adorned with violently black and white
woodcuts, representing the blinding of Gloucester, the phrenzy of
Lear, the strangling of Cordelia, and the suicide of Goneril, and you
have a type of popular history in the nineteenth century; which is,
you may perceive after a little reflection, about as profitable
reading for young persons (so far as regards the general colour and
purity of their thoughts) as the Newgate Calendar would be; with this
farther condition of incalculably greater evil, that, while the
calendar of prison-crime would teach a thoughtful youth the dangers of
low life and evil company, the calendar of kingly crime overthrows his
respect for any manner of government, and his faith in the ordinances
of Providence itself.

Books of loftier pretence, written by bankers, members of Parliament,
or orthodox clergymen, are of course not wanting; and show that the
progress of civilization consists in the victory of usury over
ecclesiastical prejudice, or in the establishment of the Parliamentary
privileges of the borough of Puddlecombe, or in the extinction of the
benighted superstitions of the Papacy by the glorious light of
Reformation. Finally, you have the broadly philosophical history,
which proves to you that there is no evidence whatever of any
overruling Providence in human affairs; that all virtuous actions have
selfish motives; and that a scientific selfishness, with proper
telegraphic communications, and perfect knowledge of all the species
of Bacteria, will entirely secure the future well-being of the upper
classes of society, and the dutiful resignation of those beneath them.

Meantime, the two ignored powers--the Providence of Heaven, and the
virtue of men--have ruled, and rule, the world, not invisibly; and
they are the only powers of which history has ever to tell any
profitable truth. Under all sorrow, there is the force of virtue; over
all ruin, the restoring charity of God. To these alone we have to
look; in these alone we may understand the past, and predict the
future, destiny of the ages.

I return to the story of Clovis, king now of all central France. Fix
the year 500 in your minds as the approximate date of his baptism at
Rheims, and of St. Remy's sermon to him, telling him of the sufferings
and passion of Christ, till Clovis sprang from his throne, grasping
his spear, and crying, "Had I been there with my brave Franks, I would
have avenged His wrongs."

"There is little doubt," proceeds the cockney historian, "that the
conversion of Clovis was as much a matter of policy as of faith." But
the cockney historian had better limit his remarks on the characters
and faiths of men to those of the curates who have recently taken
orders in his fashionable neighbourhood, or the bishops who have
lately preached to the population of its manufacturing suburbs.
Frankish kings were made of other clay.

The Christianity of Clovis does not indeed produce any fruits of the
kind usually looked for in a modern convert. We do not hear of his
repenting ever so little of any of his sins, nor resolving to lead a new
life in any the smallest particular. He had not been impressed with
convictions of sin at the battle of Tolbiac; nor, in asking for the help
of the God of Clotilde, had he felt or professed the remotest intention
of changing his character, or abandoning his projects. What he was,
before he believed in his queen's God, he only more intensely afterwards
became, in the confidence of that before unknown God's supernatural
help. His natural gratitude to the Delivering Power, and pride in its
protection, added only fierceness to his soldiership, and deepened his
political enmities with the rancour of religions indignation. No more
dangerous snare is set by the fiends for human frailty than the belief
that our own enemies are also the enemies of God; and it is perfectly
conceivable to me that the conduct of Clovis might have been the more
unscrupulous, precisely in the measure that his faith was more sincere.

Had either Clovis or Clotilde fully understood the precepts of their
Master, the following history of France, and of Europe, would have
been other than it is. What they could understand, or in any wise were
taught, you will find that they obeyed, and were blessed in obeying.
But their history is complicated with that of several other persons,
respecting whom we must note now a few too much forgotten particulars.

If from beneath the apse of Amiens Cathedral we take the street
leading due south, leaving the railroad station on the left, it brings
us to the foot of a gradually ascending hill, some half a mile long--a
pleasant and quiet walk enough, terminating on the level of the
highest land near Amiens; whence, looking back, the Cathedral is seen
beneath us, all but the flêche, our gained hill-top being on a level
with its roof-ridge: and, to the south, the plain of France.

Somewhere about this spot, or in the line between it and St. Acheul,
stood the ancient Roman gate of the Twins, whereon were carved Romulus
and Remus being suckled by the wolf; and out of which, one bitter
winter's day, a hundred and seventy years ago when Clovis was
baptized--had ridden a Roman soldier, wrapped in his horseman's
cloak,[5] on the causeway which was part of the great Roman road from
Lyons to Boulogne.

[Footnote 5: More properly, his knight's cloak; in all likelihood the
trabea, with purple and white stripes, dedicate to the kings of Rome,
and chiefly to Romulus.]

And it is well worth your while also, some frosty autumn or winter day
when the east wind is high, to feel the sweep of it at this spot,
remembering what chanced here, memorable to all men, and serviceable,
in that winter of the year 332, when men were dying for cold in Amiens
streets:--namely, that the Roman horseman, scarce gone out of the city
gate, was met by a naked beggar, shivering with cold; and that, seeing
no other way of shelter for him, he drew his sword, divided his own
cloak in two, and gave him half of it.

No ruinous gift, nor even enthusiastically generous: Sydney's cup of
cold water needed more self-denial; and I am well assured that many a
Christian child of our day, himself well warmed and clad, meeting one
naked and cold, would be ready enough to give the _whole_ cloak off
his own shoulders to the necessitous one, if his better-advised nurse,
or mamma, would let him. But this Roman soldier was no Christian, and
did his serene charity in simplicity, yet with prudence.

Nevertheless, that same night, he beheld in a dream the Lord Jesus,
who stood before him in the midst of angels, having on his shoulders
the half of the cloak he had bestowed on the beggar.

And Jesus said to the angels that were around him, "Know ye who hath
thus arrayed me? My servant Martin, though yet unbaptized, has done
this." And Martin after this vision hastened to receive baptism, being
then in his twenty-third year.[6]

[Footnote 6: Mrs. Jameson, Legendary Art, Vol. II., p. 721.]

Whether these things ever were so, or how far so, credulous or
incredulous reader, is no business whatever of yours or mine. What is,
and shall be, everlastingly, _so_,--namely, the infallible truth of
the lesson herein taught, and the actual effect of the life of St.
Martin on the mind of Christendom,--is, very absolutely, the business
of every rational being in any Christian realm.

You are to understand, then, first of all, that the especial character
of St. Martin is a serene and meek charity to all creatures. He is not a
preaching saint--still less a persecuting one: not even an anxious one.
Of his prayers we hear little--of his wishes, nothing. What he does
always, is merely the right thing at the right moment;--rightness and
kindness being in his mind one: an extremely exemplary saint, to my
notion.

Converted and baptized--and conscious of having seen Christ--he
nevertheless gives his officers no trouble whatever--does not try to
make proselytes in his cohort. "It is Christ's business, surely!--if
He wants them, He may appear to them as He has to me," seems the
feeling of his first baptized days. He remains seventeen years in the
army, on those tranquil terms.

At the end of that time, thinking it might be well to take other
service, he asks for his dismissal from the Emperor Julian,--on whose
accusation of faintheartedness, Martin offers, unarmed, to lead his
cohort into battle, bearing only the sign of the cross. Julian takes
him at his word,--keeps him in ward till time of battle comes; but,
the day before he counts on putting him to that war ordeal, the
barbarian enemy sends embassy with irrefusable offers of submission
and peace.

The story is not often dwelt upon: how far literally true, again
observe, does not in the least matter;--here _is_ the lesson for ever
given of the way in which a Christian soldier should meet his enemies.
Which, had John Bunyan's Mr. Great-heart understood, the Celestial
gates had opened by this time to many a pilgrim who has failed to hew
his path up to them with the sword of sharpness.

But true in some practical and effectual way the story _is_; for after
a while, without any oratorizing, anathematizing, or any manner of
disturbance, we find the Roman Knight made Bishop of Tours, and
becoming an influence of unmixed good to all mankind, then, and
afterwards. And virtually the same story is repeated of his bishop's
robe as of his knight's cloak--not to be rejected because so probable
an invention; for it is just as probable an act.

Going, in his full robes, to say prayers in church, with one of his
deacons, he came across some unhappily robeless person by the wayside;
for whom he forthwith orders his deacon to provide some manner of
coat, or gown.

The deacon objecting that no apparel of that profane nature is under
his hand, St. Martin, with his customary serenity, takes off his own
episcopal stole, or whatsoever flowing stateliness it might be, throws
it on the destitute shoulders, and passes on to perform indecorous
public service in his waistcoat, or such mediæval nether attire as
remained to him.

But, as he stood at the altar, a globe of light appeared above his
head; and when he raised his bare arms with the Host--the angels were
seen round him, hanging golden chains upon them, and jewels, not of
the earth.

Incredible to you in the nature of things, wise reader, and too
palpably a gloss of monkish folly on the older story?

Be it so: yet in this fable of monkish folly, understood with the
heart, would have been the chastisement and check of every form of the
church's pride and sensuality, which in our day have literally sunk
the service of God and His poor into the service of the clergyman and
his rich; and changed what was once the garment of praise for the
spirit of heaviness, into the spangling of Pantaloons in an
ecclesiastical Masquerade.

But one more legend,--and we have enough to show us the roots of this
saint's strange and universal power over Christendom.

"What peculiarly distinguished St. Martin was his sweet, serious,
unfailing serenity; no one had ever seen him angry, or sad, or, gay;
there was nothing in his heart but piety to God and pity for men. The
Devil, who was particularly envious of his virtues, detested above all
his exceeding charity, because it was the most inimical to his own
power, and one day reproached him mockingly that he so soon received
into favour the fallen and the repentant. But St. Martin answered him
sorrowfully, saying, 'Oh most miserable that thou art! if _thou_ also
couldst cease to persecute and seduce wretched men, if thou also
couldst repent, thou also shouldst find mercy and forgiveness through
Jesus Christ.'"[7]

[Footnote 7: Mrs. Jameson, Vol. II., p. 722.]

In this gentleness was his strength; and the issue of it is
best to be estimated by comparing its scope with that of the work of
St. Firmin. The impatient missionary riots and rants about Amiens'
streets--insults, exhorts, persuades, baptizes,--turns everything, as
aforesaid, upside down for forty days: then gets his head cut off, and
is never more named, _out_ of Amiens. St. Martin teazes nobody, spends
not a breath in unpleasant exhortation, understands, by Christ's first
lesson to himself, that undipped people may be as good as dipped if
their hearts are clean; helps, forgives, and cheers, (companionable
even to the loving-cup,) as readily the clown as the king; he is the
patron of honest drinking; the stuffing of your Martinmas goose is
fragrant in his nostrils, and sacred to him the last kindly rays of
departing summer. And somehow--the idols totter before him far and
near--the Pagan gods fade, _his_ Christ becomes all men's Christ--his
name is named over new shrines innumerable in all lands; high on the
Roman hills, lowly in English fields;--St. Augustine baptized his
first English converts in St. Martin's church at Canterbury; and the
Charing Cross station itself has not yet effaced wholly from London
minds his memory or his name.

That story of the Episcopal Robe is the last of St. Martin respecting
which I venture to tell you that it is wiser to suppose it literally
true, than a _mere_ myth; myth, however, of the deepest value and
beauty it remains assuredly: and this really last story I have to
tell, which I admit you will be wiser in thinking a fable than exactly
true, nevertheless had assuredly at its root some grain of fact
(sprouting a hundred-fold) cast on good ground by a visible and
unforgettable piece of St. Martin's actual behaviour in high company;
while, as a myth, it is every whit and for ever valuable and
comprehensive.

St. Martin, then, as the tale will have it, was dining one day at the
highest of tables in the terrestrial globe--namely, with the Emperor and
Empress of Germany! You need not inquire what Emperor, or which of the
Emperor's wives! The Emperor of Germany is, in all early myths, the
expression for the highest sacred power of the State, as the Pope is the
highest sacred power of the Church. St. Martin was dining then, as
aforesaid, with the Emperor, of course sitting next him on his
left--Empress opposite on his right: everything orthodox. St. Martin
much enjoying his dinner, and making himself generally agreeable to the
company: not in the least a John Baptist sort of a saint. You are aware
also that in Royal feasts in those days persons of much inferior rank in
society were allowed in the hall: got behind people's chairs, and saw
and heard what was going on, while they unobtrusively picked up crumbs,
and licked trenchers.

When the dinner was a little forward, and time for wine came, the
Emperor fills his own cup--fills the Empress's--fills St.
Martin's,--affectionately hobnobs with St. Martin. The equally loving,
and yet more truly believing, Empress, looks across the table, humbly,
but also royally, expecting St. Martin, of course, next to hobnob with
_her_. St. Martin looks round, first, deliberately; becomes aware of a
tatterdemalion and thirsty-looking soul of a beggar at his chair side,
who has managed to get _his_ cup filled somehow, also--by a charitable
lacquey.

St. Martin turns his back on the Empress, and hobnobs with _him_!

For which charity--mythic if you like, but evermore exemplary--he
remains, as aforesaid, the patron of good-Christian topers to this
hour.

As gathering years told upon him, he seems to have felt that he had
carried weight of crozier long enough--that busy Tours must now find a
busier Bishop--that, for himself, he might innocently henceforward take
his pleasure and his rest where the vine grew and the lark sang. For his
episcopal palace, he takes a little cave in the chalk cliffs of the
up-country river: arranges all matters therein, for bed and board, at
small cost. Night by night the stream murmurs to him, day by day the
vine-leaves give their shade; and, daily by the horizon's breadth so
much nearer Heaven, the fore-running sun goes down for him beyond the
glowing water;--there, where now the peasant woman trots homewards
between her panniers, and the saw rests in the half-cleft wood, and the
village spire rises grey against the farthest light, in Turner's
'Loireside.'[8]

[Footnote 8: Modern Painters, Plate 73.]

All which things, though not themselves without profit, my special
reason for telling you now, has been that you might understand the
significance of what chanced first on Clovis' march south against the
Visigoths.

"Having passed the Loire at Tours, he traversed the lands of the abbey
of St. Martin, which he declared inviolate, and refused permission to
his soldiers to touch anything, save water and grass for their horses.
So rigid were his orders, and the obedience he exacted in this
respect, that a Frankish soldier having taken, without the consent of
the owner, some hay, which belonged to a poor man, saying in raillery
"that it was but grass," he caused the aggressor to be put to death,
exclaiming that "Victory could not be expected, if St. Martin should
be offended."

Now, mark you well, this passage of the Loire at Tours is virtually
the fulfilment of the proper bounds of the French kingdom, and the
sign of its approved and securely set power is "Honour to the poor!"
Even a little grass is not to be stolen from a poor man, on pain of
Death. So wills the Christian knight of Roman armies; throned now high
with God. So wills the first Christian king of far victorious
Franks;--here baptized to God in Jordan of his goodly land, as he goes
over to possess it.

How long?

Until that same Sign should be read backwards from a degenerate
throne;--until, message being brought that the poor of the French
people had no bread to eat, answer should be returned to them "They
may eat grass." Whereupon--by St. Martin's faubourg, and St. Martin's
gate--there go forth commands from the Poor Man's Knight against the
King--which end _his_ Feasting.

And be this much remembered by you, of the power over French souls,
past and to come, of St. Martin of Tours.


NOTES TO CHAPTER I.


The reader will please observe that notes immediately necessary to the
understanding of the text will be given, with _numbered_ references,
under the text itself; while questions of disputing authorities, or
quotations of supporting documents will have _lettered_ references,
and be thrown together at the end of each chapter.[9] One good of this
method will be that, after the numbered notes are all right, if I see
need of farther explanation, as I revise the press, I can insert a
letter referring to a _final_ note without confusion of the standing
types. There will be some use also in the final notes, in summing the
chapters, or saying what is to be more carefully remembered of them.
Thus just now it is of no consequence to remember that the first
taking of Amiens was in 445, because that is not the founding of the
Merovingian dynasty; neither that Merovæus seized the throne in 447
and died ten years later. The real date to be remembered is 481, when
Clovis himself comes to the throne, a boy of fifteen; and the three
battles of Clovis' reign to be remembered are Soissons, Tolbiac, and
Poitiers--remembering also that this was the first of the three great
battles of Poitiers;--how the Poitiers district came to have such
importance as a battle-position, we must afterwards discover if we
can. Of Queen Clotilde and her flight from Burgundy to her Frank lover
we must hear more in next chapter,--the story of the vase at Soissons
is given in "The Pictorial History of France," but must be deferred
also, with such comment as it needs, to next chapter; for I wish the
reader's mind, in the close of this first number, to be left fixed on
two descriptions of the modern 'Frank' (taking that word in its
Saracen sense), as distinguished from the modern Saracen. The first
description is by Colonel Butler, entirely true and admirable, except
in the implied extension of the contrast to olden time: for the Saxon
soul under Alfred, the Teutonic under Charlemagne, and the Frank under
St. Louis, were quite as religious as any Asiatic's, though more
practical; it is only the modern mob of kingless miscreants in the
West, who have sunk themselves by gambling, swindling, machine-making,
and gluttony, into the scurviest louts that have ever fouled the Earth
with the carcases she lent them.

[Footnote 9: The plan for numbered and lettered references is not
followed after the first chapter.]

       *       *       *       *       *

"Of the features of English character brought to light by the spread
of British dominion in Asia, there is nothing more observable than the
contrast between the religious bias of Eastern thought and the innate
absence of religion in the Anglo-Saxon mind. Turk and Greek, Buddhist
and Armenian, Copt and Parsee, all manifest in a hundred ways of daily
life the great fact of their belief in a God. In their vices as well
as in their virtues the recognition of Deity is dominant.

"With the Western, on the contrary, the outward form of practising
belief in a God is a thing to be half-ashamed of--something to hide. A
procession of priests in the Strada Reale would probably cause an
average Briton to regard it with less tolerant eye than he would cast
upon a Juggernaut festival in Orissa: but to each alike would he
display the same iconoclasm of creed, the same idea, not the less
fixed because it is seldom expressed in words: "You pray; therefore I
do not think much of you." But there is a deeper difference between
East and West lying beneath this incompatibility of temper on the part
of modern Englishmen to accept the religious habit of thought in the
East. All Eastern peoples possess this habit of thought. It is the one
tie which links together their widely differing races. Let us give an
illustration of our meaning. On an Austrian Lloyd's steamboat in the
Levant a traveller from Beyrout will frequently see strange groups of
men crowded together on the quarter-deck. In the morning the missal
books of the Greek Church will be laid along the bulwarks of the ship,
and a couple of Russian priests, coming from Jerusalem, will be busy
muttering mass. A yard to right or left a Turkish pilgrim, returning
from Mecca, sits a respectful observer of the scene. It is prayer, and
therefore it is holy in his sight. So, too, when the evening hour has
come, and the Turk spreads out his bit of carpet for the sunset
prayers and obeisance towards Mecca, the Greek looks on in silence,
without trace of scorn in his face, for it is again the worship of the
Creator by the created. They are both fulfilling the _first_ law of
the East--prayer to God; and whether the shrine be Jerusalem, Mecca,
or Lhassa, the sanctity of worship surrounds the votary, and protects
the pilgrim.

"Into this life comes the Englishman, frequently destitute of one
touch of sympathy with the prayers of any people, or the faith of any
creed; hence our rule in the East has ever rested, and will ever rest,
upon the bayonet. We have never yet got beyond the stage of conquest;
never assimilated a people to our ways, never even civilized a single
tribe around the wide dominion of our empire. It is curious how
frequently a well-meaning Briton will speak of a foreign church or
temple as though it had presented itself to his mind in the same light
in which the City of London appeared to Blucher--as something to loot.
The other idea, that a priest was a person to hang, is one which is
also often observable in the British brain. On one occasion, when we
were endeavouring to enlighten our minds on the Greek question, as it
had presented itself to a naval officer whose vessel had been
stationed in Greek and Adriatic waters during our occupation of Corfu
and the other Ionian Isles, we could only elicit from our informant
the fact that one morning before breakfast he had hanged seventeen
priests."

The second passage which I store in these notes for future use, is the
supremely magnificent one, out of a book full of magnificence,--if truth
be counted as having in it the strength of deed: Alphonse Karr's "Grains
de Bon Sens." I cannot praise either this or his more recent
"Bourdonnements" to my own heart's content, simply because they are by a
man utterly after my own heart, who has been saying in France, this
many a year, what I also, this many a year, have been saying in England,
neither of us knowing of the other, and both of us vainly. (See pages 11
and 12 of "Bourdonnements.") The passage here given is the sixty-third
clause in "Grains de Bon Sens."

"Et tout cela, monsieur, vient de ce qu'il n'y a plus de croyances--de
ce qu'on ne croit plus à rien.

"Ah! saperlipopette, monsieur, vous me la baillez belle! Vous dites
qu'on ne croit plus à rien! Mais jamais, à aucune époque, on n'a cru à
tant de billevesées, de bourdes, de mensonges, de sottises,
d'absurdités qu'aujourd'hui.

"D'abord, on _croit_ a l'incrédulité--l'incrédulité est une croyance,
une religion très exigeante, qui a ses dogmes, sa liturgie, ses
pratiques, ses rites! ...son intolérance, ses superstitions. Nous
avons des incrédules et des impies jésuites, et des incrédules et des
impies jansénistes; des impies molinistes, et des impies quiétistes;
des impies pratiquants, et non pratiquants; des impies indifférents et
des impies fanatiques; des incrédules cagots et des impies hypocrites
et tartuffes.--La religion de l'incrédulité ne se refuse même pas le
luxe des hérésies.

"On ne croit plus à la bible, je le veux bien, mais on _croit_ aux
'écritures' des journaux, on croit au 'sacerdoce' des gazettes et
carrés de papier, et à leurs 'oracles' quotidiens.

"On _croit_ au 'baptême' de la police correctionnelle et de la Cour
d'assises--on appelle 'martyrs' et 'confesseurs' les 'absents' à
Nouméa et les 'frères' de Suisse, d'Angleterre et de Belgique--et,
quand on parle des 'martyrs de la Commune' ça ne s'entend pas des
assassinés, mais des assassins.

"On se fait enterrer 'civilement,' on ne veut plus sur son cercueil
des priéres de l'Eglise, on ne veut ni cierges, ni chants
religieux,--mais on veut un cortége portant derrière la bière des
immortelles rouges;--on veut une 'oraison,' une 'prédication' de
Victor Hugo qui a ajouté cette spécialité à ses autres spécialités, si
bien qu'un de ces jours derniers, comme il suivait un convoi en
amateur, un croque-mort s'approcha de lui, le poussa du coude, et lui
dit en souriant: 'Est-ce que nous n'aurons pas quelque chose de vous,
aujourd'hui?'--Et cette prédication il la lit ou la récite--ou, s'il
ne juge pas à propos 'd'officier' lui-même, s'il s'agit d'un mort de
plus, il envoie pour la psalmodier M. Meurice ou tout autre 'prêtre'
ou 'enfant de coeur' du 'Dieu,'--A défaut de M. Hugo, s'il s'agit
d'un citoyen obscur, on se contente d'une homélie improvisée pour la
dixième fois par n'importe quel député intransigeant--et le _Miserere_
est remplacé par les cris de 'Vive la République!' poussés dans le
cimetière.

"On n'entre plus dans les églises, mais on fréquente les brasseries et
les cabarets; on y officie, on y célèbre les mystères, on y chante les
louanges d'une prétendue république _sacro-sainte_, une, indivisible,
démocratique, sociale, athénienne, intransigeante, despotique, invisible
quoique étant partout. On y communie sous différentes espèces; le matin
(_matines_) on 'tue le ver' avec le vin blanc,--il y a plus tard les
vêpres de l'absinthe, auxquelles on se ferait un crime de manquer
d'assiduité.

"On ne croit plus en Dieu, mais on _croit_ pieusement en M. Gambetta,
en MM. Marcou, Naquet, Barodet, Tartempion, etc., et en toute une
longue litanie de saints et de _dii minores_ tels que Goutte-Noire,
Polosse, Boriasse et Silibat, le héros lyonnais.

"On _croit_ à 'l'immuabilité' de M. Thiers, qui a dit avec aplomb 'Je
ne change jamais,' et qui aujourd'hui est à la fois le protecteur et
le protégé de ceux qu'il a passé une partie de sa vie à fusilier, et
qu'il fusillait encore hier.

'On _croit_ au républicanisme 'immaculé' de l'avocat de Cahors qui a
jeté par-dessus bord tous les principes républicains,--qui est à la
fois de son côté le protecteur et le protégé de M. Thiers, qui hier
l'appelait 'fou furieux,' déportait et fusillait ses amis.

"Tous deux, il est vrai, en même temps protecteurs hypocrites, et
protégés dupés.

"On ne croit plus aux miracles anciens, mais on _croit_ à des miracles
nouveaux.

"On _croit_ à une république sans le respect religieux et presque
fanatique des lois.

"On _croit_ qu'on peut s'enrichir en restant imprévoyants, insouciants
et paresseux, et autrement que par le travail et l'économie.

"On se _croit_ libre en obéissant aveuglément et bêtement à deux ou
trois coteries.

"On se _croit_ indépendant parce qu'on a tué ou chassé un lion et
qu'on l'a remplacé par deux douzaines de caniches teints en jaune.

"On _croit_ avoir conquis le 'suffrage universel' en votant par des
mots d'ordre qui en font le contraire du suffrage universel,--mené au
vote comme on mène un troupeau au pâturage, avec cette différence que
ça ne nourrit pas.--D'ailleurs, par ce suffrage universel qu'on croit
avoir et qu'on n'a pas,--il faudrait _croire_ que les soldats doivent
commander au général, les chevaux mener le cocher;--_croire_ que deux
radis valent mieux qu'une truffe, deux cailloux mieux qu'un diamant,
deux crottins mieux qu'une rose.

"On se _croit_ en République, parce que quelques demi-quarterons de
farceurs occupent les mêmes places, émargent les mêmes appointements,
pratiquent les mêmes abus, que ceux qu'on a renversés a leur bénéfice.

"On se _croit_ un peuple opprimé, heroïque, que brise ses fers, et
n'est qu'un domestique capricieux qui aime à changer de maîtres.

"On _croit_ au génie d'avocats de sixième ordre, qui ne se sont jetés
dans la politique et n'aspirent au gouvernement despotique de la
France que faute d'avoir pu gagner honnêtement, sans grand travail,
dans l'exercice d'un profession correcte, une vie obscure humectée de
chopes.

"On _croit_ que des hommes dévoyés, déclassés, décavés, fruits secs,
etc., qui n'ont étudié que le 'domino à quatre' et le 'bezigue en
quinze cents' se réveillent un matin,--après un sommeil alourdi par le
tabac et la bière--possédant la science de la politique, et l'art de
la guerre; et aptes à être dictateurs, généraux, ministres, préfets,
sous-préfets, etc.

"Et les soi-disant conservateurs eux-mêmes _croient_ que la France
peut se relever et vivre tant qu'on n'aura pas fait justice de ce
prétendu suffrage universel qui est le contraire du suffrage
universel.

"Les croyances out subi le sort de ce serpent de la fable--coupé,
haché par morceaux, dont chaque tronçon devenait un serpent.

"Les croyances se sont changées en monnaie--en billon de crédulités.

"Et pour finir la liste bien incomplète des croyances et des
crédulités--vous _croyez_, vous, qu'on ne croit à rien!"




CHAPTER II.

UNDER THE DRACHENFELS.


1. Without ignobly trusting the devices of artificial memory--far less
slighting the pleasure and power of resolute and thoughtful memory--my
younger readers will find it extremely useful to note any coincidences
or links of number which may serve to secure in their minds what may
be called Dates of Anchorage, round which others, less important, may
swing at various cables' lengths.

Thus, it will be found primarily a most simple and convenient
arrangement of the years since the birth of Christ, to divide them by
fives of centuries,--that is to say, by the marked periods of the
fifth, tenth, fifteenth, and, now fast nearing us, twentieth
centuries.

And this--at first seemingly formal and arithmetical--division, will
be found, as we use it, very singularly emphasized by signs of most
notable change in the knowledge, disciplines, and morals of the human
race.

2. All dates, it must farther be remembered, falling within the fifth
century, begin with the number 4 (401, 402, etc.); and all dates in
the tenth century with the number 9 (901, 902, etc.); and all dates in
the fifteenth century with the number 14 (1401, 1402, etc.)

In our immediate subject of study, we are concerned with the first of
these marked centuries--the fifth--of which I will therefore ask you
to observe two very interesting divisions.

All dates of years in that century, we said, must begin with the
number 4.

If you halve it for the second figure, you get 42.

And if you double it for the second figure, you get 48.

[Illustration: Plate II.--THE BIBLE OF AMIENS. NORTHERN PORCH BEFORE
RESTORATION.]

Add 1, for the third figure, to each of these numbers, and you get 421
and 481, which two dates you will please fasten well down, and let
there be no drifting about of them in your heads.

For the first is the date of the birth of Venice herself, and her
dukedom, (see 'St. Mark's Rest,' Part I., p. 30); and the second is
the date of birth of the French Venice, and her kingdom; Clovis being
in that year crowned in Amiens.

3. These are the great Birthdays--Birthdates--in the fifth century, of
Nations. Its Deathdays we will count, at another time.

Since, not for dark Rialto's dukedom, nor for fair France's kingdom,
only, are these two years to be remembered above all others in the
wild fifth century; but because they are also the birth-years of a
great Lady, and greater Lord, of all future Christendom--St.
Genevieve, and St. Benedict.

Genevieve, the 'white wave' (Laughing water)--the purest of all the
maids that have been named from the sea-foam or the rivulet's ripple,
unsullied,--not the troubled and troubling Aphrodite, but the
Leucothea of Ulysses, the guiding wave of deliverance.

White wave on the blue--whether of pure lake or sunny
sea--(thenceforth the colours of France, blue field with white
lilies), she is always the type of purity, in active brightness of the
entire soul and life--(so distinguished from the quieter and
restricted innocence of St. Agnes),--and all the traditions of sorrow
in the trial or failure of noble womanhood are connected with her
name; Ginevra, in Italian, passing into Shakespeare's Imogen; and
Guinevere, the torrent wave of the British mountain streams, of whose
pollution your modern sentimental minstrels chant and moan to you,
lugubriously useless;--but none tell you, that I hear, of the victory
and might of this white wave of France.

4. A shepherd maid she was--a tiny thing, barefooted,
bare-headed--such as you may see running wild and innocent, less
cared for now than their sheep, over many a hillside of France and
Italy. Tiny enough;--seven years old, all told, when first
one hears of her: "Seven times one are seven, (I am old, you may trust
me, linnet, linnet[10])," and all around her--fierce as the Furies, and
wild as the winds of heaven--the thunder of the Gothic armies,
reverberate over the ruins of the world.

5. Two leagues from Paris, (_Roman_ Paris, soon to pass away with Rome
herself,) the little thing keeps her flock, not even her own, nor her
father's flock, like David; she is the hired servant of a richer
farmer of Nanterre. Who can tell me anything about Nanterre?--which of
our pilgrims of this omni-speculant, omni-nescient age has thought of
visiting what shrine may be there? I don't know even on what side of
Paris it lies,[11] nor under which heap of railway cinders and iron one
is to conceive the sheep-walks and blossomed fields of fairy St.
Phyllis. There were such left, even in my time, between Paris and St.
Denis, (see the prettiest chapter in all the "Mysteries of Paris,"
where Fleur de Marie runs wild in them for the first time), but now, I
suppose, St. Phyllis's native earth is all thrown up into bastion and
glacis, (profitable and blessed of all saints, and her, as _these_
have since proved themselves!) or else are covered with manufactories
and cabarets. Seven years old she was, then, when on his way to
_England_ from Auxerre, St. Germain passed a night in her village, and
among the children who brought him on his way in the morning in more
kindly manner than Elisha's convoy, noticed this one--wider-eyed in
reverence than the rest; drew her to him, questioned her, and was
sweetly answered: That she would fain be Christ's handmaid. And he
hung round her neck a small copper coin, marked with the cross.
Thencefoward Genevieve held herself as "separated from the world."

[Footnote 10: Miss Ingelow.]

[Footnote 11: On inquiry, I find in the flat between Paris and Sèvres.]

6. It did not turn out so, however. Far the contrary. You must think of
her, instead, as the first of Parisiennes. Queen of Vanity Fair, that
was to be, sedately poor St. Phyllis, with her copper-crossed farthing
about her neck! More than Nitocris was to Egypt, more than Semiramis to
Nineveh, more than Zenobia to the city of palm trees--this
seven-years-old shepherd maiden became to Paris and her France. You have
not heard of her in that kind?--No: how should you?--for she did not
lead armies, but stayed them, and all her power was in peace.

7. There are, however, some seven or eight and twenty lives of her, I
believe; into the literature of which I cannot enter, nor need, all
having been ineffective in producing any clear picture of her to the
modern French or English mind; and leaving one's own poor sagacities
and fancy to gather and shape the sanctity of her into an
intelligible, I do not say a _credible_, form; for there is no
question here about belief,--the creature is as real as Joan of Arc,
and far more powerful;--she is separated, just as St. Martin is, by
his patience, from too provocative prelates--by her quietness of
force, from the pitiable crowd of feminine martyr saints.

There are thousands of religious girls who have never got themselves
into any calendars, but have wasted and wearied away their
lives--heaven knows why, for _we_ cannot; but here is one, at any
rate, who neither scolds herself to martyrdom, nor frets herself into
consumption, but becomes a tower of the Flock, and builder of folds
for them all her days.

8. The first thing, then, you have to note of her, is that she is a
pure native _Gaul_. She does not come as a missionary out of Hungary,
or Illyria, or Egypt, or ineffable space; but grows at Nanterre, like
a marguerite in the dew, the first "Reine Blanche" of Gaul.

I have not used this ugly word 'Gaul' before, and we must be quite
sure what it means, at once, though it will cost us a long
parenthesis.

9. During all the years of the rising power of Rome, her people called
everybody a Gaul who lived north of the sources of Tiber. If you are not
content with that general statement, you may read the article "Gallia"
in Smith's dictionary, which consists of seventy-one columns of close
print, containing each as much as three of my pages; and tells you at
the end of it, that "though long, it is not complete." You may however,
gather from it, after an attentive perusal, as much as I have above told
you.

But, as early as the second century after Christ, and much more
distinctly in the time with which we are ourselves concerned--the
fifth--the wild nations opposed to Rome, and partially subdued, or
held at bay by her, had resolved themselves into two distinct masses,
belonging to two distinct _latitudes_. One, _fixed_ in habitation of
the pleasant temperate zone of Europe--England with her western
mountains, the healthy limestone plateaux and granite mounts of
France, the German labyrinths of woody hill and winding thal, from the
Tyrol to the Hartz, and all the vast enclosed basin and branching
valleys of the Carpathians. Think of these four districts, briefly and
clearly, as 'Britain,' 'Gaul,' 'Germany,' and 'Dacia.'

10. North of these rudely but patiently _resident_ races, possessing
fields and orchards, quiet herds, homes of a sort, moralities and
memories not ignoble, dwelt, or rather drifted, and shook, a shattered
chain of gloomier tribes, piratical mainly, and predatory, nomad
essentially; homeless, of necessity, finding no stay nor comfort in
earth, or bitter sky: desperately wandering along the waste sands and
drenched morasses of the flat country stretching from the mouths of
the Rhine to those of the Vistula, and beyond Vistula nobody knows
where, nor needs to know. Waste sands and rootless bogs their portion,
ice-fastened and cloud-shadowed, for many a day of the rigorous year:
shallow pools and oozings and windings of retarded streams, black
decay of neglected woods, scarcely habitable, never loveable; to this
day the inner main-lands little changed for good[12]--and their
inhabitants now fallen even on sadder times.

[Footnote 12: See generally any description that Carlyle has had
occasion to give of Prussian or Polish ground, or edge of Baltic
shore.]

11. For in the fifth century they had herds of cattle[13] to drive and
kill, unpreserved hunting-grounds full of game and wild deer, tameable
reindeer also then, even so far in the south; spirited hogs, good for
practice of fight as in Meleager's time, and afterwards for bacon;
furry creatures innumerable, all good for meat or skin. Fish of the
infinite sea breaking their bark-fibre nets; fowl innumerable, migrant
in the skies, for their flint-headed arrows; bred horses for their own
riding; ships of no mean size, and of all sorts, flat-bottomed for the
oozy puddles, keeled and decked for strong Elbe stream and furious
Baltic on the one side, for mountain-cleaving Danube and the black
lake of Colchos on the south.

[Footnote 13: Gigantic--and not yet fossilized! See Gibbon's note on
the death of Theodebert: "The King pointed his spear--the Bull
_overturned a tree on his head_,--he died the same day."--vii. 255.
The Horn of Uri and her shield, with the chiefly towering crests of
the German helm, attest the terror of these Aurochs herds.]

12. And they were, to all outward aspect, and in all _felt_ force, the
living powers of the world, in that long hour of its transfiguration.
All else known once for awful, had become formalism, folly, or
shame:--the Roman armies, a mere sworded mechanism, fast falling
confused, every sword against its fellow;--the Roman civil multitude,
mixed of slaves, slave-masters, and harlots; the East, cut off from
Europe by the intervening weakness of the Greek. These starving troops
of the Black forests and White seas, themselves half wolf, half
drift-wood, (as _we_ once called ourselves Lion-hearts, and
Oak-hearts, so they), merciless as the herded hound, enduring as the
wild birch-tree and pine. You will hear of few beside them for five
centuries yet to come: Visigoths, west of Vistula;--Ostrogoths, east
of Vistula; radiant round little Holy Island (Heligoland), our own
Saxons, and Hamlet the Dane, and his foe the sledded Polack on the
ice,--all these south of Baltic; and pouring _across_ Baltic,
constantly, her mountain-ministered strength, Scandinavia, until at
last _she_ for a time rules all, and the Norman name is of disputeless
dominion, from the North Cape to Jerusalem.

13. _This_ is the apparent, this the only recognised world history, as
I have said, for five centuries to come. And yet the real history is
underneath all this. The wandering armies are, in the heart of them,
only living hail, and thunder, and fire along the ground. But the
Suffering Life, the rooted heart of native humanity, growing up in
eternal gentleness, howsoever wasted, forgotten, or spoiled,--itself
neither wasting, nor wandering, nor slaying, but unconquerable by
grief or death, became the seed ground of all love, that was to be
born in due time; giving, then, to mortality, what hope, joy, or
genius it could receive; and--if there be immortality--rendering out
of the grave to the Church her fostering Saints, and to Heaven her
helpful Angels.

14. Of this low-nestling, speechless, harmless, infinitely submissive,
infinitely serviceable order of being, no Historian ever takes the
smallest notice, except when it is robbed or slain. I can give you no
picture of it, bring to your ears no murmur of it, nor cry. I can only
show you the absolute 'must have been' of its unrewarded past, and the
way in which all we have thought of, or been told, is founded on the
deeper facts in its history, unthought of, and untold.

15. The main mass of this innocent and invincible peasant life is, as I
have above told you, grouped in the fruitful and temperate districts of
(relatively) mountainous Europe,--reaching, west to east, from the
Cornish Land's End to the mouth of the Danube. Already, in the times we
are now dealing with, it was full of native passion--generosity--and
intelligence capable of all things. Dacia gave to Rome the four last of
her great Emperors,[14]--Britain to Christianity the first deeds, and
the final legends, of her chivalry,--Germany, to all manhood, the truth
and the fire of the Frank,--Gaul, to all womanhood, the patience and
strength of St. Genevieve.

[Footnote 14: Claudius, Aurelian, Probus, Constantius; and after the
division of the empire, to the East, Justinian. "The emperor Justinian
was born of an obscure race of Barbarians, the inhabitants of a wild and
desolate country, to which the names of Dardania, of Dacia, and of
Bulgaria have been successively applied. The names of these Dardanian
peasants are Gothic, and almost English. Justinian is a translation of
Uprauder (upright); his father, Sabatius,--in Græco-barbarous language,
Stipes--was styled in his village 'Istock' (Stock)."--Gibbon, beginning
of chap. xl. and note.]

16. The _truth_, and the fire, of the Frank,--I must repeat with
insistence,--for my younger readers have probably been in the habit of
thinking that the French were more polite than true. They will find,
if they examine into the matter, that only Truth _can_ be polished:
and that all we recognize of beautiful, subtle, or constructive, in
the manners, the language, or the architecture of the French, comes of
a pure veracity in their nature, which you will soon feel in the
living creatures themselves if you love them: if you understand even
their worst rightly, their very Revolution was a revolt against lies;
and against the betrayal of Love. No people had ever been so loyal in
vain.

17. That they were originally Germans, they themselves I suppose would
now gladly forget; but how they shook the dust of Germany off their
feet--and gave themselves a new name--is the first of the phenomena
which we have now attentively to observe respecting them.

"The most rational critics," says Mr. Gibbon in his tenth chapter,
"_suppose_ that _about_ the year 240" (_suppose_ then, we, for our
greater comfort, say _about_ the year 250, half-way to end of fifth
century, where we are,--ten years less or more, in cases of 'supposing
about,' do not much matter, but some floating buoy of a date will be
handy here.)

'About' A.D. 250, then, "a new confederacy was formed, under the name
of Franks, by the old inhabitants of the lower Rhine and the Weser."

18. My own impression, concerning the old inhabitants of the lower
Rhine and the Weser, would have been that they consisted mostly of
fish, with superficial frogs and ducks; but Mr. Gibbon's note on the
passage informs us that the new confederation composed itself of human
creatures, in these items following.

1. The Chauci, who lived we are not told where.

2. The Sicambri   "      in the Principality of Waldeck.

3. The Attuarii   "      in the Duchy of Berg.

4. The Bructeri   "      on the banks of the Lippe.

5. The Chamavii   "      in the country of the Bructeri.

6. The Catti      "      in Hessia.

All this I believe you will be rather easier in your minds if you
forget than if you remember; but if it please you to read, or re-read,
(or best of all, get read to you by some real Miss Isabella Wardour,)
the story of Martin Waldeck in the 'Antiquary,' you will gain from it
a sufficient notion of the central character of "the Principality of
_Waldeck_" connected securely with that important German word;
'woody'--or 'wood_ish_,' I suppose?--descriptive of rock and
half-grown forest; together with some wholesome reverence for Scott's
instinctively deep foundations of nomenclature.

19. But for our present purpose we must also take seriously to our
maps again, and get things within linear limits of space.

All the maps of Germany which I have myself the privilege of possessing,
diffuse themselves, just north of Frankfort, into the likeness of a
painted window broken small by Puritan malice, and put together again by
ingenious churchwardens with every bit of it wrong side upwards;--this
curious vitrerie purporting to represent the sixty, seventy, eighty, or
ninety dukedoms, marquisates, counties, baronies, electorates, and the
like, into which hereditary Alemannia cracked itself in that latitude.
But under the mottling colours, and through the jotted and jumbled
alphabets of distracted dignities--besides a chain-mail of black
railroads over all, the chains of it not in links, but bristling
with legs, like centipedes,--a hard forenoon's work with good
magnifying-glass enables one approximately to make out the course of the
Weser, and the names of certain towns near its sources, deservedly
memorable.

20. In case you have not a forenoon to spare, nor eyesight to waste,
this much of merely necessary abstract must serve you,--that from the
Drachenfels and its six brother felsen, eastward, trending to the north,
there runs and spreads a straggling company of gnarled and mysterious
craglets, jutting and scowling above glens fringed by coppice, and
fretful or musical with stream; the crags, in pious ages, mostly
castled, for distantly or fancifully Christian purposes;--the glens,
resonant of woodmen, or burrowed at the sides by miners, and invisibly
tenanted farther, underground, by gnomes, and above by forest and other
demons. The entire district, clasping crag to crag, and guiding dell to
dell, some hundred and fifty miles (with intervals) between the Dragon
mountain above Rhine, and the Rosin mountain, 'Hartz' shadowy still to
the south of the riding grounds of Black Brunswickers of indisputable
bodily presence;--shadowy anciently with 'Hercynian' (hedge, or fence)
forest, corrupted or coinciding into Hartz, or Rosin forest, haunted by
obscurely apparent foresters of at least resinous, not to say
sulphurous, extraction.

21. A hundred and fifty miles east to west, say half as much north to
south--about a thousand square miles in whole--of metalliferous,
coniferous, and Ghostiferous mountain, fluent, and diffluent for us,
both in mediæval and recent times, with the most Essential oil of
Turpentine, and Myrrh or Frankincense of temper and imagination, which
may be typified by it, producible in Germany; especially if we think
how the more delicate uses of Rosin, as indispensable to the
Fiddle-bow, have developed themselves, from the days of St. Elizabeth
of Marburg to those of St. Mephistopheles of Weimar.

22. As far as I know, this cluster of wayward cliff and dingle has no
common name as a group of hills; and it is quite impossible to make
out the diverse branching of it in any maps I can lay hand on: but we
may remember easily, and usefully, that it is _all_ north of the
Maine,--that it rests on the Drachenfels at one end, and tosses itself
away to the morning light with a concave swoop, up to the Hartz,
(Brocken summit, 3700 feet above sea, nothing higher): with one
notable interval for Weser stream, of which presently.

23. We will call this, in future, the chain, or company, of
the Enchanted mountains; and then we shall all the more easily join on
the Giant mountains, Riesen-Gebirge, when we want them; but these are
altogether higher, sterner, and not yet to be invaded; the nearer
ones, through which our road lies, we might perhaps more aptly call
the Goblin mountains; but that would be scarcely reverent to St.
Elizabeth, nor to the numberless pretty chatelaines of towers, and
princesses of park and glen, who have made German domestic manners
sweet and exemplary, and have led their lightly rippling and
translucent lives down the glens of ages, until enchantment becomes,
perhaps, too canonical in the Almanach de Gotha.

We will call them therefore the Enchanted Mountains, not the Goblin;
perceiving gratefully also that the Rock spirits of them have really
much more of the temper of fairy physicians than of gnomes: each--as
it were with sensitive hazel wand instead of smiting rod--beckoning,
out of sparry caves, effervescent Brunnen, beneficently salt and warm.

24. At the very heart of this Enchanted chain, then--(and the
beneficentest, if one use it and guide it rightly, of all the Brunnen
there,) sprang the fountain of the earliest Frank race; "in the
principality of Waldeck,"--you can trace their current to no farther
source; there it rises out of the earth.

'Frankenberg' (Burg), on right bank of the Eder, nineteen miles north of
Marburg, you may find marked clearly in the map No. 18 of Black's
General Atlas, wherein the cluster of surrounding bewitched mountains,
and the valley of Eder-stream otherwise (as the village higher up the
dell still calls itself) "Engel-Bach," "Angel Brook," joining that of
the Fulda, just above Cassel, are also delineated in a way intelligible
to attentive mortal eyes. I should be plagued with the names in trying a
woodcut; but a few careful pen-strokes, or wriggles, of your own
off-hand touching, would give you the concurrence of the actual sources
of Weser in a comfortably extricated form, with the memorable towns on
them, or just south of them, on the other slope of the watershed,
towards Maine. Frankenberg and Waldeck on Eder, Fulda and Cassel on
Fulda, Eisenach on Werra, who accentuates himself into Weser after
taking Fulda for bride, as Tees the Greta, beyond Eisenach, under the
Wartzburg, (of which you have heard as a castle employed on Christian
mission and Bible Society purposes), town-streets below hard paved with
basalt--name of it, Iron-ach, significant of Thuringian armouries in the
old time,--it is active with mills for many things yet.

25. The rocks all the way from Rhine, thus far, are jets and spurts of
basalt through irony sandstone, with a strip of coal or two northward,
by the grace of God not worth digging for; at Frankenberg even a gold
mine; also, by Heaven's mercy, poor of its ore; but wood and iron
always to be had for the due trouble; and, of softer wealth above
ground,--game, corn, fruit, flax, wine, wool, and hemp! Monastic care
over all, in Fulda's and Walter's houses--which I find marked by a
cross as built by some pious Walter, Knight of Meiningen on the Boden
wasser, Bottom water, as of water having found its way well down at
last: so "Boden-See," of Rhine well got down out of Via Mala.

26. And thus, having got your springs of Weser clear from the rock;
and, as it were, gathered up the reins of your river, you can draw for
yourself, easily enough, the course of its farther stream, flowing
virtually straight north, to the North Sea. And mark it strongly on
your sketched map of Europe, next to the border Vistula, leaving out
Elbe yet for a time. For now, you may take the whole space between
Weser and Vistula (north of the mountains), as wild barbarian (Saxon
or Goth); but, piercing the source of the Franks at Waldeck, you will
find them gradually, but swiftly, filling all the space between Weser
and the mouths of Rhine, passing from mountain foam into calmer
diffusion over the Netherland, where their straying forest and
pastoral life has at last to embank itself into muddy agriculture, and
in bleak-flying sea mist, forget the sunshine on its basalt crags.

27. Whereupon, _we_ must also pause, to embank ourselves somewhat; and
before other things, try what we can understand in this name of Frank,
concerning which Gibbon tells us, in his sweetest tones of satisfied
moral serenity--"The love of liberty was the ruling passion of these
Germans. They deserved, they assumed, they maintained, the honourable
epithet of Franks, or Freemen." He does not, however, tell us in what
language of the time--Chaucian, Sicambrian, Chamavian, or
Cattian,--'Frank' ever meant Free: nor can I find out myself what tongue
of any time it first belongs to; but I doubt not that Miss Yonge
('History of Christian Names,' Articles on Frey and Frank), gives the
true root, in what she calls the High German "Frang," Free _Lord_. Not
by any means a Free _Commoner_, or anything of the sort! but a person
whose nature and name implied the existence around him, and beneath, of
a considerable number of other persons who were by no means 'Frang,' nor
Frangs. His title is one of the proudest then maintainable;--ratified at
last by the dignity of age added to that of valour, into the Seigneur,
or Monseigneur, not even yet in the last cockney form of it, 'Mossoo,'
wholly understood as a republican term!

28. So that, accurately thought of, the quality of Frankness glances
only with the flat side of it into any meaning of 'Libre,' but with all
its cutting edge, determinedly, and to all time, it signifies Brave,
strong, and honest, above other men.[15] The old woodland race were
never in any wolfish sense 'free,' but in a most human sense Frank,
outspoken, meaning what they had said, and standing to it, when they had
got it out. Quick and clear in word and act, fearless utterly and
restless always;--but idly lawless, or weakly lavish, neither in deed
nor word. Their frankness, if you read it as a scholar and a Christian,
and not like a modern half-bred, half-brained infidel, knowing no tongue
of all the world but in the slang of it, is really opposed, not to
Servitude,--but to Shyness![16] It is to this day the note of the
sweetest and Frenchiest of French character, that it makes simply
perfect _Servants_. Unwearied in protective friendship, in meekly
dextrous omnificence, in latent tutorship; the lovingly availablest of
valets,--the mentally and personally bonniest of bonnes. But in no
capacity shy of you! Though you be the Duke or Duchess of Montaltissimo,
you will not find them abashed at your altitude. They will speak 'up' to
you, when they have a mind.

[Footnote 15: Gibbon touches the facts more closely in a sentence of
his 22nd chapter. "The independent warriors of Germany, _who
considered truth as the noblest of their virtues_, and freedom as the
most valuable of their possessions." He is speaking especially of the
Frankish tribe of the Attuarii, against whom the Emperor Julian had to
re-fortify the Rhine from Cleves to Basle: but the first letters of
the Emperor Jovian, after Julian's death, "delegated the military
command of _Gaul_ and Illyrium (what a vast one it was, we shall see
hereafter), to Malarich, a _brave and faithful_ officer of the nation
of the Franks;" and they remain the loyal allies of Rome in her last
struggle with Alaric. Apparently for the sake only of an interesting
variety of language,--and at all events without intimation of any
causes of so great a change in the national character,--we find Mr.
Gibbon in his next volume suddenly adopting the abusive epithets of
Procopius, and calling the Franks "a light and perfidious nation"
(vii. 251). The only traceable grounds for this unexpected description
of them are that they refuse to be bribed either into friendship or
activity, by Rome or Ravenna; and that in his invasion of Italy, the
grandson of Clovis did not previously send exact warning of his
proposed route, nor even entirely signify his intentions till he had
secured the bridge of the Po at Pavia; afterwards declaring his mind
with sufficient distinctness by "assaulting, almost at the same
instant, the hostile camps of the Goths and Romans, who, instead of
uniting their arms, fled with equal precipitation."]

[Footnote 16: For detailed illustration of the word, see 'Val d'Arno,'
Lecture VIII.; 'Fors Clavigera,' Letters XLVI. 231, LXXVII. 137; and
Chaucer, 'Romaunt of Rose,' 1212--"Next _him_" (the knight sibbe to
Arthur) "daunced dame Franchise;"--the English lines are quoted and
commented on in the first lecture of 'Ariadne Florentina'; I give the
French here:--

          "Apres tous ceulx estoit Franchise
          Que ne fut ne brune ne bise.
          Ains fut comme la neige blanche
          _Courtoyse_ estoit, _joyeuse_, et _franche_.
          Le nez avoit long et tretis,
          Yeulx vers, riants; sourcilz faitis;
          Les cheveulx eut très-blons et longs
          Simple fut comme les coulons
          Le coeur eut doulx et debonnaire.
          _Elle n'osait dire ne faire
          Nulle riens que faire ne deust._"

And I hope my girl readers will never more confuse Franchise with
'Liberty.']

29. Best of servants: best of _subjects_, also, when they have
an equally frank King, or Count, or Captal, to lead them; of which we
shall see proof enough in due time;--but, instantly, note this
farther, that, whatever side-gleam of the thing they afterwards called
Liberty may be meant by the Frank name, you must at once now, and
always in future, guard yourself from confusing their Liberties with
their Activities. What the temper of the army may be towards its
chief, is _one_ question--whether either chief or army can be kept six
months quiet,--another, and a totally different one. That they must
either be fighting somebody or going somewhere, else, their life isn't
worth living to them; the activity and mercurial flashing and
flickering hither and thither, which in the soul of it is set neither
on war nor rapine, but only on change of place, mood--tense, and
tension;--which never needs to see its spurs in the dish, but has them
always bright, and on, and would ever choose rather to ride fasting
than sit feasting,--this childlike dread of being put in a corner, and
continual want of something to do, is to be watched by us with
wondering sympathy in all its sometimes splendid, but too often
unlucky or disastrous consequences to the nation itself as well as to
its neighbours.

30. And this activity, which we stolid beef-eaters, before we had been
taught by modern science that we were no better than baboons
ourselves, were wont discourteously to liken to that of the livelier
tribes of Monkey, did in fact so much impress the Hollanders, when
first the irriguous Franks gave motion and current to their marshes,
that the earliest heraldry in which we find the Frank power blazoned
seems to be founded on a Dutch endeavour to give some distantly
satirical presentment of it. "For," says a most ingenious historian,
Mons. André Favine,--'Parisian, and Advocate in the High Court of the
French Parliament in the year 1620'--"those people who bordered on the
river Sala, called 'Salts,' by the Allemaignes, were on their descent
into Dutch lands called by the Romans 'Franci Salici'" (whence
'Salique' law to come, you observe) "and by abridgment 'Salii,' as if
of the verb 'salire,' that is to say 'saulter,' to leap"--(and in
future therefore--duly also to dance--in an incomparable manner) "to
be quicke and nimble of foot, to leap and mount well, a quality most
notably requisite for such as dwell in watrie and marshy places; So
that while such of the French as dwelt on the great course of the
river" (Rhine) "were called 'Nageurs,' Swimmers, they of the marshes
were called 'Saulteurs,' Leapers, so that it was a nickname given to
the French in regard both of their natural disposition and of their
dwelling; as, yet to this day, their enemies call them French Toades,
(or Frogs, more properly) from whence grew the fable that their
ancient Kings carried such creatures in their Armes."

31. Without entering at present into debate whether fable or not, you
will easily remember the epithet 'Salian' of these fosse-leaping and
river-swimming folk (so that, as aforesaid, all the length of Rhine
must be refortified against them)--epithet however, it appears, in its
origin delicately Saline, so that we may with good discretion, as we
call our seasoned Mariners, '_old_ Salts,' think of these more brightly
sparkling Franks as 'Young Salts,'--but this equivocated presently by
the Romans, with natural respect to their martial fire and 'elan,' into
'Salii'--exsultantes,[17]--such as their own armed priests of war: and
by us now with some little farther, but slight equivocation, into
useful meaning, to be thought of as here first Salient, as a beaked
promontory, towards the France we know of; and evermore, in brilliant
elasticities of temper, a salient or out-sallying nation; lending to us
English presently--for this much of heraldry we may at once glance on
to--their 'Leopard,' not as a spotted or blotted creature, but as an
inevitably springing and pouncing one, for our own kingly and princely
shields.

[Footnote 17: Their first mischievous exsultation into Alsace being
invited by the Romans themselves, (or at least by Constantius in his
jealousy of Julian,)--with "presents and promises,--the hopes of
spoil, and a perpetual grant of all the territories they were able to
subdue." Gibbon, chap. xix. (3, 208.) By any other historian than
Gibbon, who has really no fixed opinion on any character, or question,
but, safe in the general truism that the worst men sometimes do right,
and the best often do wrong, praises when he wants to round a
sentence, and blames when he cannot otherwise edge one--it might have
startled us to be here told of the nation which "deserved, assumed,
and maintained the _honourable_ name of freemen," that "_these
undisciplined robbers_ treated as their natural enemies all the
subjects of the empire who possessed any property which they were
desirous of acquiring." The first campaign of Julian, which throws
both Franks and Alemanni back across the Rhine, but grants the Salian
Franks, under solemn oath, their established territory in the
Netherlands, must be traced at another time.]

Thus much, of their 'Salian' epithet may be enough; but from the
interpretation of the Frankish one we are still as far as ever, and
must be content, in the meantime, to stay so, noting however two ideas
afterwards entangled with the name, which are of much descriptive
importance to us.

32. "The French poet in the first book of his Franciades" (says Mons.
Favine; but what poet I know not, nor can enquire) "encounters" (in the
sense of en-quarters, or depicts as a herald) certain fables on the name
of the French by the adoption and composure of two _Gaulish_ words
joyned together, Phere-Encos which signifieth 'Beare-_Launce_,'
(--Shake-Lance, we might perhaps venture to translate,) a lighter weapon
than the Spear beginning here to quiver in the hand of its chivalry--and
Fere-encos then passing swiftly on the tongue into Francos;"--a
derivation not to be adopted, but the idea of the weapon most
carefully,--together with this following--that "among the arms of the
ancient French, over and beside the Launce, was the Battaile-Axe, which
they called _Anchon_, and moreover, yet to this day, in many Provinces
of France, it is termed an _Achon_, wherewith they served themselves in
warre, by throwing it a farre off at joyning with the enemy, onely to
discover the man and to cleave his shield. Because this _Achon_ was
darted with such violence, as it would cleave the Shield, and compell
the Maister thereof to hold down his arm, and being so discovered, as
naked or unarmed; it made way for the sooner surprizing of him. It
seemeth, that this weapon was proper and particuler to the French
Souldior, as well him on foote, as on horsebacke. For this cause they
called it _Franciscus_. Francisca, _securis oblonga, quam Franci
librabant in Hostes_. For the Horseman, beside his shield and Francisca
(Armes common, as wee have said, to the Footman), had also the Lance,
which being broken, and serving to no further effect, he laid hand on
his Francisca, as we learn the use of that weapon in the Archbishop of
Tours, his second book, and twenty-seventh chapter."

33. It is satisfactory to find how respectfully these lessons of the
Archbishop of Tours were received by the French knights; and curious
to see the preferred use of the Francisca by all the best of
them--down, not only to Coeur de Lion's time, but even to the day of
Poitiers. In the last wrestle of the battle at Poitiers gate, "Là, fit
le Roy Jehan de sa main, merveilles d'armes, et tenoit une hache de
guerre dont bien se deffendoit et combattoit,--si la quartre partie de
ses gens luy eussent ressemblé, la journée eust été pour eux." Still
more notably, in the episode of fight which Froissart stops to tell
just before, between the Sire de Verclef, (on Severn) and the Picard
squire Jean de Helennes: the Englishman, losing his sword, dismounts
to recover it, on which Helennes _casts_ his own at him with such aim
and force "qu'il acconsuit l'Anglois es cuisses, tellement que l'espée
entra dedans et le cousit tout parmi, jusqu'au hans."

On this the knight rendering himself, the squire binds his wound, and
nurses him, staying fifteen days 'pour l'amour de lui' at
Chasteleraut, while his life was in danger; and afterwards carrying
him in a litter all the way to his own chastel in Picardy. His ransom
however is 6000 nobles--I suppose about 25,000 pounds, of our present
estimate; and you may set down for one of the fatallest signs that the
days of chivalry are near their darkening, how "devint celuy Escuyer,
Chevalier, pour le grand profit qu'il eut du Seigneur de Verclef."

I return gladly to the dawn of chivalry, when, every hour and year,
men were becoming more gentle and more wise; while, even through their
worst cruelty and error, native qualities of noblest cast may be seen
asserting themselves for primal motive, and submitting themselves for
future training.

34. We have hitherto got no farther in our notion of a Salian Frank than
a glimpse of his two principal weapons,--the shadow of him, however,
begins to shape itself to us on the mist of the Brocken, bearing the
lance light, passing into the javelin,--but the axe, his woodman's
weapon, heavy;--for economical reasons, in scarcity of iron,
preferablest of all weapons, giving the fullest swing and weight of blow
with least quantity of actual metal, and roughest forging. Gibbon gives
them also a 'weighty' sword, suspended from a 'broad' belt: but Gibbon's
epithets are always gratis, and the belted sword, whatever its measure,
was probably for the leaders only; the belt, itself of gold, the
distinction of the Roman Counts, and doubtless adopted from them by the
allied Frank leaders, afterwards taking the Pauline mythic meaning of
the girdle of Truth--and so finally; the chief mark of Belted
Knighthood.

35. The Shield, for all, was round, wielded like a Highlander's
target:--armour, presumably, nothing but hard-tanned leather, or
patiently close knitted hemp; "Their close apparel," says Mr. Gibbon,
"accurately expressed the figure of their limbs," but 'apparel' is
only Miltonic-Gibbonian for 'nobody knows what.' He is more
intelligible of their persons. "The lofty stature of the Franks, and
their blue eyes, denoted a Germanic origin; the warlike barbarians
were trained from their earliest youth to run, to leap, to swim, to
dart the javelin and battle-axe with unerring aim, to advance without
hesitation against a superior enemy, and to maintain either in life or
death, the invincible reputation of their ancestors' (vi. 95). For the
first time, in 358, appalled by the Emperor Julian's victory at
Strasburg, and besieged by him upon the Meuse, a body of six hundred
Franks "dispensed with the ancient law which commanded them to conquer
or die." "Although they were strongly actuated by the allurements of
rapine, they professed a disinterested love of war, which they
considered as the supreme honour and felicity of human nature; and
their minds and bodies were so hardened by perpetual action that,
according to the lively expression of an orator, the snows of winter
were as pleasant to them as the flowers of spring" (iii. 220).

36. These mental and bodily virtues, or indurations, were probably
universal in the military rank of the nation: but we learn presently,
with surprise, of so remarkably 'free' a people, that nobody but the
King and royal family might wear their hair to their own liking. The
kings wore theirs in flowing ringlets on the back and shoulders,--the
Queens, in tresses rippling to their feet,--but all the rest of the
nation "were obliged, either by law or custom, to shave the hinder
part of their head, to comb their short hair over their forehead, and
to content themselves with the ornament of two small whiskers."

37. Moustaches,--Mr. Gibbon means, I imagine: and I take leave also to
suppose that the nobles, and noble ladies, might wear such tress and
ringlet as became them. But again, we receive unexpectedly
embarrassing light on the democratic institutions of the Franks, in
being told that "the various trades, the labours of agriculture, and
the arts of hunting and fishing, were _exercised by servile_ hands for
the _emolument_ of the Sovereign."

'Servile' and 'Emolument,' however, though at first they sound very
dreadful and very wrong, are only Miltonic-Gibbonian expressions of
the general fact that the Frankish Kings had ploughmen in their
fields, employed weavers and smiths to make their robes and swords,
hunted with huntsmen, hawked with falconers, and were in other
respects tyrannical to the ordinary extent that an English Master of
Hounds may be. "The mansion of the long-haired Kings was surrounded
with convenient yards and stables for poultry and cattle; the garden
was planted with useful vegetables; the magazines filled with corn and
wine either for sale or consumption; and the whole administration
conducted by the strictest rules of private economy."

38. I have collected these imperfect, and not always extremely
consistent, notices of the aspect and temper of the Franks out of Mr.
Gibbon's casual references to them during a period of more than two
centuries,--and the last passage quoted, which he accompanies with the
statement that "one hundred and sixty of these rural palaces were
scattered through the provinces of their kingdom," without telling us
what kingdom, or at what period, must I think be held descriptive of the
general manner and system of their monarchy after the victories of
Clovis. But, from the first hour you hear of him, the Frank, closely
considered, is always an extremely ingenious, well meaning, and
industrious personage;--if eagerly acquisitive, also intelligently
conservative and constructive; an element of order and crystalline
edification, which is to consummate itself one day, in the aisles of
Amiens; and things generally insuperable and impregnable, if the
inhabitants of them had been as sound-hearted as their builders, for
many a day beyond.

39. But for the present, we must retrace our ground a little; for
indeed I have lately observed with compunction, in rereading some of
my books for revised issue, that if ever I promise, in one number or
chapter, careful consideration of any particular point in the next,
the next never _does_ touch upon the promised point at all, but is
sure to fix itself passionately on some antithetic, antipathic, or
antipodic, point in the opposite hemisphere. This manner of conducting
a treatise I find indeed extremely conducive to impartiality and
largeness of view; but can conceive it to be--to the general
reader--not only disappointing, (if indeed I may flatter myself that I
ever interest enough to disappoint), but even liable to confirm in his
mind some of the fallacious and extremely absurd insinuations of
adverse critics respecting my inconsistency, vacillation, and
liability to be affected by changes of the weather in my principles or
opinions. I purpose, therefore, in these historical sketches, at least
to watch, and I hope partly to correct myself in this fault of promise
breaking, and at whatever sacrifice of my variously fluent or
re-fluent humour, to tell in each successive chapter in some measure
what the reader justifiably expects to be told.

40. I left, merely glanced at, in my opening chapter, the story of the
vase of Soissons. It may be found (and it is very nearly the only thing
that _is_ to be found respecting the personal life or character of the
first Louis) in every cheap popular history of France; with cheap
popular moralities engrafted thereon. Had I time to trace it to its
first sources, perhaps it might take another aspect. But I give it as
you may anywhere find it--asking you only to consider whether even as so
read--it may not properly bear a somewhat different moral.

41. The story is, then, that after the battle of Soissons, in the
division of Roman, or Gallic spoil, the king wished to have a
beautifully wrought silver vase for--'himself,' I was going to
write--and in my last chapter _did_ mistakenly infer that he wanted it
for his better self,--his Queen. But he wanted it for neither;--it was
to restore to St. Remy, that it might remain among the consecrated
treasures of Rheims. That is the first point on which the popular
histories do not insist, and which one of his warriors claiming equal
division of treasure, chose also to ignore. The vase was asked by the
King in addition to his own portion, and the Frank knights, while they
rendered true obedience to their king as a leader, had not the
smallest notion of allowing him what more recent kings call
'Royalties'--taxes on everything they touch. And one of these Frank
knights or Counts--a little franker than the rest--and as incredulous
of St. Remy's saintship as a Protestant Bishop, or Positivist
Philosopher--took upon him to dispute the King's and the Church's
claim, in the manner, suppose, of a Liberal opposition in the House of
Commons; and disputed it with such security of support by the public
opinion of the fifth century, that--the king persisting in his
request--the fearless soldier dashed the vase to pieces with his
war-axe, exclaiming "Thou shalt have no more than thy portion by lot."

42. It is the first clear assertion of French 'Liberté, Fraternité and
Egalité,' supported, then, as now, by the destruction, which is the
only possible active operation of "free" personages, on the art they
cannot produce.

The king did not continue the quarrel. Cowards will think that he paused
in cowardice, and malicious persons, that he paused in malignity. He
_did_ pause in anger assuredly; but biding its time, which the anger of
a strong man always can, and burn hotter for the waiting, which is one
of the chief reasons for Christians being told not to let the sun go
down upon it. Precept which Christians now-a-days are perfectly ready to
obey, if it is somebody else who has been injured; and indeed, the
difficulty in such cases is usually to get them to think of the injury
even while the Sun rises on their wrath.[18]

[Footnote 18: Read Mr. Plimsoll's article on coal mines for instance.]

43. The sequel is very shocking indeed--to modern sensibility. I give
it in the, if not polished, at least delicately varnished, language of
the Pictorial History.

"About a year afterwards, on reviewing his troops, he went to the man
who had struck the vase, and _examining his arms, complained_ that
_they_ were in bad condition!" (Italics mine) "and threw them" (What?
shield and sword?) on the ground. The soldier stooped to recover them;
and at that moment the King struck him on the head with his
battle-axe, crying 'Thus didst thou to the vase at Soissons.'" The
Moral modern historian proceeds to reflect that "this--as an evidence
of the condition of the Franks, and of the ties by which they were
united, gives but the idea of a band of Robbers and their chief."
Which is, indeed, so far as I can myself look into and decipher the
nature of things, the Primary idea to be entertained respecting most
of the kingly and military organizations in this world, down to our
own day; and, (unless perchance it be the Afghans and Zulus who are
stealing our lands in England--instead of we theirs, in their several
countries.) But concerning the _manner_ of this piece of military
execution, I must for the present leave the reader to consider with
himself, whether indeed it be less Kingly, or more savage, to strike
an uncivil soldier on the head with one's own battle-axe, than, for
instance, to strike a person like Sir Thomas More on the neck with an
executioner's,--using for the mechanism, and as it were guillotine bar
and rope to the blow--the manageable forms of National Law, and the
gracefully twined intervention of a polite group of noblemen and
bishops.

44. Far darker things have to be told of him than this, as his proud
life draws towards the close,--things which, if any of us could see
clear _through_ darkness, you should be told in all the truth of them.
But we never can know the truth of Sin; for its nature is to deceive
alike on the one side the Sinner, on the other the Judge.
Diabolic--betraying whether we yield to it, or condemn: Here is
Gibbon's sneer--if you care for it; but I gather first from the
confused paragraphs which conduct to it, the sentences of praise, less
niggard than the Sage of Lausanne usually grants to any hero who has
confessed the influence of Christianity.

45. "Clovis, when he was no more than fifteen years of age, succeeded,
by his father's death, to the command of the Salian tribe. The narrow
limits of his kingdom were confined to the island of the Batavians,
with the ancient dioceses of Tournay and Arras; and at the baptism of
Clovis, the number of his warriors could not exceed five thousand. The
kindred tribes of the Franks who had seated themselves along the
Scheldt, the Meuse, the Moselle, and the Rhine, were governed by their
independent kings, of the Merovingian race, the equals, the allies,
and sometimes the enemies of the Salic Prince. When he first took the
field he had neither gold nor silver in his coffers, nor wine and corn
in his magazines; but he imitated the example of Cæsar, who in the
same country had acquired wealth by the sword, and purchased soldiers
with the fruits of conquest. The untamed spirit of the Barbarians was
taught to acknowledge the advantages of regular discipline. At the
annual review of the month of March, their arms were diligently
inspected; and when they traversed a peaceful territory they were
prohibited from touching a blade of grass. The justice of Clovis was
inexorable; and his careless or disobedient soldiers were punished
with instant death. It would be superfluous to praise the valour of a
Frank; but the valour of Clovis was directed by cool and consummate
prudence. In all his transactions with mankind he calculated the
weight of interest, of passion, and of opinion; and his measures were
sometimes adapted to the sanguinary manners of the Germans,
and sometimes moderated by the milder genius of Rome, and
Christianity.

46. "But the savage conqueror of Gaul was incapable of examining the
proofs of a religion, which depends on the laborious investigation of
historic evidence, and speculative theology. He was still more
incapable of feeling the mild influence of the Gospel, which persuades
and purifies the heart of a genuine convert. His ambitious reign was a
perpetual violation of moral and Christian duties: his hands were
stained with blood, in peace as well as in war; and, as soon as Clovis
had dismissed a synod of the Gallican Church, he calmly assassinated
_all_ the princes of the Merovingian race."

47. It is too true; but rhetorically put, in the first place--for we
ought to be told how many 'all' the princes were;--in the second
place, we must note that, supposing Clovis had in any degree "searched
the Scriptures" as presented to the Western world by St. Jerome, he
was likely, as a soldier-king, to have thought more of the mission of
Joshua[19] and Jehu than of the patience of Christ, whose sufferings he
thought rather of avenging than imitating: and the question whether
the other Kings of the Franks should either succeed him, or, in envy
of his enlarged kingdom, attack and dethrone, was easily in his mind
convertible from a personal danger into the chance of the return of
the whole nation to idolatry. And, in the last place, his faith in the
Divine protection of his cause had been shaken by his defeat before
Aries by the Ostrogoths; and the Frank leopard had not so wholly
changed his spots as to surrender to an enemy the opportunity of a
first spring.

[Footnote 19: The likeness was afterwards taken up by legend, and the
walls of Angoulême, after the battle of Poitiers, are said to have
fallen at the sound of the trumpets of Clovis. "A miracle," says
Gibbon, "which may be reduced to the supposition that some clerical
engineer had secretly undermined the foundations of the rampart." I
cannot too often warn my honest readers against the modern habit of
"reducing" all history whatever to 'the supposition that' ... etc.,
etc. The legend is of course the natural and easy expression of a
metaphor.]

48. Finally, and beyond all these personal questions, the forms of
cruelty and subtlety--the former, observe, arising much out of a scorn
of pain which was a condition of honour in their women as well as men,
are in these savage races all founded on their love of glory in war,
which can only be understood by comparing what remains of the same
temper in the higher castes of the North American Indians; and, before
tracing in final clearness the actual events of the reign of Clovis to
their end, the reader will do well to learn this list of the personages
of the great Drama, taking to heart the meaning of the _name_ of each,
both in its probable effect on the mind of its bearer, and in its
fateful expression of the course of their acts, and the consequences of
it to future generations.

1. Clovis. Frank form, Hluodoveh. 'Glorious Holiness,' or
      consecration. Latin Chlodovisus, when baptized by St.
      Remy, softening afterwards through the centuries into
      Lhodovisus, Ludovicus, Louis.

2. Albofleda. 'White household fairy'? His youngest sister;
      married Theodoric (Theutreich, 'People's ruler'),
      the great King of the Ostrogoths.

3. Clotilde. Hlod-hilda. 'Glorious Battle-maid.' His wife.
      'Hilda' first meaning Battle, pure; and then passing
      into Queen or Maid of Battle. Christianized to Ste
      Clotilde in France, and Ste Hilda of Whitby cliff.

3. Clotilde. His only daughter. Died for the Catholic faith,
      under Arian persecution.

4. Childebert. His eldest son by Clotilde, the first Frank
      King in Paris. 'Battle Splendour,' softening into
      Hildebert, and then Hildebrandt, as in the Nibelung.

5. Chlodomir. 'Glorious Fame.' His second son by Clotilde.

6. Clotaire. His youngest son by Clotilde; virtually the destroyer
      of his father's house. 'Glorious Warrior.'

7. Chlodowald. Youngest son of Chlodomir. 'Glorious
      Power,' afterwards 'St. Cloud.'

49. I will now follow straight, through their light and shadow, the
course of Clovis' reign and deeds.

A.D. 481. Crowned, when he was only fifteen. Five years afterwards, he
challenges, "in the spirit, and almost in the language of chivalry,"
the Roman governor Syagrius, holding the district of Rheims and
Soissons. "Campum sibi præparari jussit--he commanded his antagonist
to prepare him a battle-field"--see Gibbon's note and reference, chap.
xxxviii. (6, 297). The Benedictine abbey of Nogent was afterwards
built on the field, marked by a circle of Pagan sepulchres. "Clovis
bestowed the adjacent lands of Leuilly and Coucy on the church of
Rheims."[20]

[Footnote 20: When?--for this tradition, as well as that of the vase,
points to a friendship between Clovis and St. Remy, and a singular
respect on the King's side for the Christians of Gaul, though he was
not yet himself converted.]

A.D. 485. The Battle of Soissons. Not dated by Gibbon: the subsequent
death of Syagrius at the court of (the younger) Alaric, was in
486--take 485 for the battle.

50. A.D. 493. I cannot find any account of the relations between Clovis
and the King of Burgundy, the uncle of Clotilde, which preceded his
betrothal to the orphan princess. Her uncle, according to the common
history, had killed both her father and mother, and compelled her sister
to take the veil--motives none assigned, nor authorities. Clotilde
herself was pursued on her way to France,[21] and the litter in which
she travelled captured, with part of her marriage portion. But the
princess herself mounted on horseback, and rode with part of her escort,
forward into France, "ordering her attendants to set fire to everything
that pertained to her uncle and his subjects which they might meet with
on the way."

[Footnote 21: It is a curious proof of the want in vulgar historians of
the slightest sense of the vital interest of anything they tell, that
neither in Gibbon, nor in Messrs. Bussey and Gaspey, nor in the
elaborate 'Histoire des Villes de France,' can I find, with the best
research my winter's morning allows, what city was at this time the
capital of Burgundy, or at least in which of its four nominal
capitals,--Dijon, Besancon, Geneva, and Vienne,--Clotilde was brought
up. The evidence seems to me in favour of Vienne--(called always by
Messrs. B. and G., 'Vienna,' with what effect on the minds of their
dimly geographical readers I cannot say)--the rather that Clotilde's
mother is said to have been "thrown into the _Rhone_ with a stone
round her neck." The author of the introduction to 'Bourgogne' in the
'Histoire des Villes' is so eager to get his little spiteful snarl at
anything like religion anywhere, that he entirely forgets the
existence of the first queen of France,--never names her, nor, as
such, the place of her birth,--but contributes only to the knowledge
of the young student this beneficial quota, that Gondeband, "plus
politique que guerrier, trouva au milieu de ses controverses
théologiques avec Avitus, évêque de _Vienne_, le temps de faire mourir
ses trois frères et de recueillir leur heritage."

The one broad fact which my own readers will find it well to remember
is that Burgundy, at this time, by whatever king or victor tribe its
inhabitants may be subdued, does practically include the whole of
French Switzerland, and even of the German, as far east as
Vindonissa:--the Reuss, from Vindonissa through Lucerne to the St.
Gothard being its effective eastern boundary; that westward--it meant
all Jura, and the plains of the Saone; and southward, included all
Savoy and Dauphiné. According to the author of 'La Suisse Historique'
Clotilde was first addressed by Clovis's herald disguised as a beggar,
while she distributed alms at the gate of St. Pierre at Geneva; and
her departure and pursued flight into France were from Dijon.]

51. The fact is not chronicled, usually, among the sayings or doings
of the Saints: but the punishment of Kings by destroying the property
of their subjects, is too well recognized a method of modern Christian
warfare to allow our indignation to burn hot against Clotilde; driven,
as she was, hard by grief and wrath. The years of her youth are not
counted to us; Clovis was already twenty-seven, and for three years
maintained the faith of his ancestral religion against all the
influence of his queen.

52. A.D. 496. I did not in the opening chapter attach nearly enough
importance to the battle of Tolbiac, thinking of it as merely
compelling the Alemanni to recross the Rhine, and establishing the
Frank power on its western bank. But infinitely wider results are
indicated in the short sentence with which Gibbon closes his account
of the battle. "After the conquest of the western provinces, the
Franks _alone_ retained their ancient possessions beyond the Rhine.
They gradually subdued and _civilized_ the exhausted countries as far
as the Elbe and the mountains of Bohemia; and the _peace of Europe_
was secured by the obedience of Germany."

53. For, in the south, Theodoric had already "sheathed the sword in
the pride of victory and the vigour of his age--and his farther reign
of three and thirty years was consecrated to the duties of civil
government." Even when his son-in-law, Alaric, fell by Clovis' hand in
the battle of Poitiers, Theodoric was content to check the Frank power
at Arles, without pursuing his success, and to protect his infant
grandchild, correcting at the same time some abuses in the civil
government of Spain. So that the healing sovereignty of the great Goth
was established from Sicily to the Danube--and from Sirmium to the
Atlantic ocean.

54. Thus, then, at the close of the fifth century, you have Europe
divided simply by her watershed; and two Christian kings reigning,
with entirely beneficent and healthy power--one in the north--one in
the south--the mightiest and worthiest of them married to the other's
youngest sister: a saint queen in the north--and a devoted and earnest
Catholic woman, queen mother in the south. It is a conjunction of
things memorable enough in the Earth's history,--much to be thought
of, O fast whirling reader, if ever, out of the crowd of pent up
cattle driven across Rhine, or Adige, you can extricate yourself for
an hour, to walk peacefully out of the south gate of Cologne, or
across Fra Giocondo's bridge at Verona--and so pausing look through
the clear air across the battlefield of Tolbiac to the blue
Drachenfels, or across the plain of St. Ambrogio to the mountains of
Garda. For there were fought--if you will think closely--the two
victor-battles of the Christian world. Constantine's only gave changed
form and dying colour to the falling walls of Rome; but the Frank and
Gothic races, thus conquering and thus ruled, founded the arts and
established the laws which gave to all future Europe her joy, and her
virtue. And it is lovely to see how, even thus early, the Feudal
chivalry depended for its life on the nobleness of its womanhood.
There was no _vision_ seen, or alleged, at Tolbiac. The King prayed
simply to the God of Clotilde. On the morning of the battle of Verona,
Theodoric visited the tent of his mother and his sister,
"and requested that on the most illustrious festival of his life, they
would adorn him with the rich garments which they had worked with
their own hands."

55. But over Clovis, there was extended yet another influence--greater
than his queen's. When his kingdom was first extended to the Loire,
the shepherdess of Nanterre was already aged,--no torch-bearing maid
of battle, like Clotilde, no knightly leader of deliverance like
Jeanne, but grey in meekness of wisdom, and now "filling more and more
with crystal light." Clovis's father had known her; he himself made
her his friend, and when he left Paris on the campaign of Poitiers,
vowed that if victorious, he would build a Christian church on the
hills of Seine. He returned in victory, and with St. Genevieve at his
side, stood on the site of the ruined Roman Thermæ, just above the
"Isle" of Paris, to fulfil his vow: and to design the limits of the
foundations of the first metropolitan church of Frankish Christendom.

The King "gave his battle-axe the swing," and tossed it with his full
force.

Measuring with its flight also, the place of his own grave, and of
Clotilde's, and St. Genevieve's.

There they rested, and rest,--in soul,--together. "La Colline tout
entière porte encore le nom de la patronne de Paris; une petite rue
obscure a gardé celui du Roi Conquerant."




"OUR FATHERS HAVE TOLD US."

ADVICE.


The three chapters[22] of "Our Fathers have told us," now submitted to
the public, are enough to show the proposed character and tendencies
of the work, to which, contrary to my usual custom, I now invite
subscription, because the degree in which I can increase its
usefulness by engraved illustration must greatly depend on the known
number of its supporters.

[Footnote 22: Viz., Chapters I. and II., and the separate travellers'
edition of Chapter IV.]

I do not recognize, in the present state of my health, any reason to
fear more loss of general power, whether in conception or industry,
than is the proper and appointed check of an old man's enthusiasm: of
which, however, enough remains in me, to warrant my readers against
the abandonment of a purpose entertained already for twenty years.

The work, if I live to complete it, will consist of ten parts, each
taking up some local division of Christian history, and gathering,
towards their close, into united illustration of the power of the
Church in the Thirteenth Century.

The next chapter, which I hope to issue soon after Christmas,
completes the first part, descriptive of the early Frank power, and of
its final skill, in the Cathedral of Amiens.

The second part, "Ponte della Pietra," will, I hope, do more for
Theodoric and Verona than I have been able to do for Clovis and the
first capital of France.

The third, "Ara Celi," will trace the foundations of the Papal power.

The fourth, "Ponte-a-Mare," and fifth, "Ponte Vecchio," will only with
much difficulty gather into brief form what I have by me of scattered
materials respecting Pisa and Florence.

The sixth, "Valle Crucis," will be occupied with the monastic
architecture of England and Wales.

The seventh, "The Springs of Eure," will be wholly given to the
cathedral of Chartres.

The eighth, "Domrémy," to that of Rouen and the schools of
architecture which it represents.

The ninth, "The Bay of Uri," to the pastoral forms of Catholicism,
reaching to our own times.

And the tenth, "The Bells of Cluse," to the pastoral Protestantism of
Savoy, Geneva, and the Scottish Border.

Each part will consist of four sections only; and one of them, the
fourth, will usually be descriptive of some monumental city or
cathedral, the resultant and remnant of the religious power examined
in the preparatory chapters.

One illustration at least will be given with each chapter,[23] and
drawings made for others, which will be placed at once in the
Sheffield museum for public reference, and engraved as I find support,
or opportunity for binding with the completed work.

[Footnote 23: The first plate for the Bible of Amiens, curiously
enough, failed in the engraving; and I shall probably have to etch it
myself. It will be issued with the fourth, in the full-size edition of
the fourth chapter.]

As in the instance of Chapter IV. of this first part, a smaller
edition of the descriptive chapters will commonly be printed in
reduced form for travellers and non-subscribers; but otherwise, I
intend this work to be furnished to subscribers only.




CHAPTER III.

THE LION TAMER.


1. It has been often of late announced as a new discovery, that man is
a creature of circumstances; and the fact has been pressed upon our
notice, in the hope, which appears to some people so pleasing, of
being able at last to resolve into a succession of splashes in mud, or
whirlwinds in air, the circumstances answerable for his creation. But
the more important fact, that his nature is not levelled, like a
mosquito's, to the mists of a marsh, nor reduced, like a mole's,
beneath the crumblings of a burrow, but has been endowed with sense to
discern, and instinct to adopt, the conditions which will make of it
the best that can be, is very necessarily ignored by philosophers who
propose, as a beautiful fulfilment of human destinies, a life
entertained by scientific gossip, in a cellar lighted by electric
sparks, warmed by tubular inflation, drained by buried rivers, and
fed, by the ministry of less learned and better provisioned races,
with extract of beef, and potted crocodile.

2. From these chemically analytic conceptions of a Paradise in
catacombs, undisturbed in its alkaline or acid virtues by the dread of
Deity, or hope of futurity, I know not how far the modern reader may
willingly withdraw himself for a little time, to hear of men who, in
their darkest and most foolish day, sought by their labour to make the
desert as the garden of the Lord, and by their love to become worthy of
permission to live with Him for ever. It has nevertheless been only by
such toil, and in such hope, that, hitherto, the happiness, skill, or
virtue of man have been possible: and even on the verge of the new
dispensation, and promised Canaan, rich in beatitudes of iron, steam,
and fire, there are some of us, here and there, who may pause in filial
piety to look back towards that wilderness of Sinai in which their
fathers worshipped and died.

[Illustration: Plate III.--AMIENS. JOUR DES TRÉPASSÉS. 1880.]

3. Admitting then, for the moment, that the main streets of
Manchester, the district immediately surrounding the Bank in London,
and the Bourse and Boulevards of Paris, are already part of the future
kingdom of Heaven, when Earth shall be all Bourse and Boulevard,--the
world of which our fathers tell us was divided to them, as you already
know, partly by climates, partly by races, partly by times; and the
'circumstances' under which a man's soul was given to him, had to be
considered under these three heads:--In what climate is he? Of what
race? At what time?

He can only be what these conditions permit. With appeal to these, he
is to be heard;--understood, if it may be;--judged, by our love,
first--by our pity, if he need it--by our humility, finally and
always.

4. To this end, it is needful evidently that we should have truthful
maps of the world to begin with, and truthful maps of our own hearts
to end with; neither of these maps being easily drawn at any time, and
perhaps least of all now--when the use of a map is chiefly to exhibit
hotels and railroads; and humility is held the disagreeablest and
meanest of the Seven mortal Sins.

5. Thus, in the beginning of Sir Edward Creasy's History of England,
you find a map purporting to exhibit the possessions of the British
Nation--illustrating the extremely wise and courteous behaviour of Mr.
Fox to a Frenchman of Napoleon's suite, in "advancing to a terrestrial
globe of unusual magnitude and distinctness, spreading his arms round
it, over both the oceans and both the Indies," and observing, in this
impressive attitude, that "while Englishmen live, they overspread the
whole world, and clasp it in the circle of their power."

6. Fired by Mr. Fox's enthusiasm,--the otherwise seldom fiery--Sir
Edward proceeds to tell us that "our island home is the favourite
domicile of freedom, empire and glory," without troubling himself, or
his readers, to consider how long the nations over whom our freedom is
imperious, and in whose shame is our glory, may be satisfied in that
arrangement of the globe and its affairs; or may be even at present
convinced of their degraded position in it by his method of its
delineation.

For, the map being drawn on Mercator's projection, represents
therefore the British dominions in North America as twice the size of
the States, and considerably larger than all South America put
together: while the brilliant crimson with which all our landed
property is coloured cannot but impress the innocent reader with the
idea of a universal flush of freedom and glory throughout all those
acres and latitudes. So that he is scarcely likely to cavil at results
so marvellous by inquiring into the nature and completeness of our
government at any particular place,--for instance in Ireland, in the
Hebrides, or at the Cape.

7. In the closing chapter of the first volume of 'The Laws of Fésole'
I have laid down the mathematical principles of rightly drawing
maps;--principles which for many reasons it is well that my young
readers should learn; the fundamental one being that you cannot
flatten the skin of an orange without splitting it, and must not, if
you draw countries on the unsplit skin, stretch them afterwards to
fill the gaps.

The British pride of wealth which does not deny itself the magnificent
convenience of penny Walter Scotts and penny Shakespeares, may
assuredly, in its future greatness, possess itself also of penny
universes, conveniently spinnable on their axes. I shall therefore
assume that my readers can look at a round globe, while I am talking
of the world; and at a properly reduced drawing of its surfaces, when
I am talking of a country.

8. Which, if my reader can at present do--or at least refer to a
fairly drawn double-circle map of the globe with converging
meridians--I will pray him next to observe, that, although the
old division of the world into four quarters is now nearly
effaced by emigration and Atlantic cable, yet the great historic
question about the globe is not how it is divided, here and there, by
ins and outs of land or sea; but how it is divided into zones all
round, by irresistible laws of light and air. It is often a matter of
very minor interest to know whether a man is an American or African, a
European or an Asiatic. But it is a matter of extreme and final
interest to know if he be a Brazilian or a Patagonian, a Japanese or a
Samoyede.

9. In the course of the last chapter, I asked the reader to hold
firmly the conception of the great division of climate, which
separated the wandering races of Norway and Siberia from the calmly
resident nations of Britain, Gaul, Germany, and Dacia.

Fasten now that division well home in your mind, by drawing, however
rudely, the course of the two rivers, little thought of by common
geographers, but of quite unspeakable importance in human history, the
Vistula and the Dniester.

10. They rise within thirty miles of each other,[24] and each runs, not
counting ins and outs, its clear three hundred miles,--the Vistula to
the north-east, the Dniester to the south-west: the two of them together
cut Europe straight across, at the broad neck of it,--and, more deeply
looking at the thing, they divide Europe, properly so called--Europa's
own, and Jove's,--the small educationable, civilizable, and more or less
mentally rational fragment of the globe, from the great Siberian
wilderness, Cis-Ural and Trans-Ural; the inconceivable chaotic space,
occupied datelessly by Scythians, Tartars, Huns, Cossacks, Bears,
Ermines, and Mammoths, in various thickness of hide, frost of brain, and
woe of abode--or of unabiding. Nobody's history worth making out, has
anything to do with them; for the force of Scandinavia never came round
by Finland at all, but always sailed or paddled itself across the
Baltic, or down the rocky west coast; and the Siberian and Russian
ice-pressure merely drives the really memorable races into greater
concentration, and kneads them up in fiercer and more necessitous
exploring masses. But by those exploring masses, of true European birth,
our own history was fashioned for ever; and, therefore, these two
truncating and guarding rivers are to be marked on your map of Europe
with supreme clearness: the Vistula, with Warsaw astride of it half way
down, and embouchure in Baltic,--the Dniester, in Euxine, flowing each
of them, measured arrow-straight, as far as from Edinburgh to London,
with windings,[25] the Vistula six hundred miles, and the Dniester
five--count them together for a thousand miles of _moat_, between Europe
and the Desert, reaching from Dantzic to Odessa.

[Footnote 24: Taking the 'San' branch of upper Vistula.]

[Footnote 25: Note, however, generally that the strength of a river,
cæteris paribus, is to be estimated by its straight course, windings
being almost always caused by flats in which it can receive no
tributaries.]

11. Having got your Europe moated off into this manageable and
comprehensible space, you are next to fix the limits which divide the
four Gothic countries, Britain, Gaul, Germany, and Dacia, from the
four Classic countries, Spain, Italy, Greece, and Lydia.

There is no other generally opponent term to 'Gothic' but 'Classic':
and I am content to use it, for the sake of practical breadth and
clearness, though its precise meaning for a little while remains
unascertained. Only get the geography well into your mind, and the
nomenclature will settle itself at its leisure.

12. Broadly, then, you have sea between Britain and Spain--Pyrenees
between Gaul and Spain--Alps between Germany and Italy--Danube between
Dacia and Greece. You must consider everything south of the Danube as
Greek, variously influenced from Athens on one side, Byzantium on the
other: then, across the Ægean, you have the great country absurdly
called Asia Minor, (for we might just as well call Greece, Europe Minor,
or Cornwall, England Minor,) but which is properly to be remembered as
'Lydia,' the country which infects with passion, and tempts with wealth;
which taught the Lydian measure in music and softened the Greek language
on its border into Ionic; which gave to ancient history the tale of
Troy, and to Christian history, the glow, and the decline, of the Seven
Churches.

13. Opposite to these four countries in the south, but separated from
them either by sea or desert, are another four, as easily
remembered--Morocco, Libya, Egypt, and Arabia.

Morocco, virtually consisting of the chain of Atlas and the coasts
depending on it, may be most conveniently thought of as including the
modern Morocco and Algeria, with the Canaries as a dependent group of
islands.

Libya, in like manner, will include the modern Tunis and Tripoli: it
will begin on the west with St. Augustine's town of Hippo; and its
coast is colonized from Tyre and Greece, dividing it into the two
districts of Carthage and Cyrene. Egypt, the country of the River, and
Arabia, the country of _no_ River, are to be thought of as the two
great southern powers of separate Religion.

14. You have thus, easily and clearly memorable, twelve countries,
distinct evermore by natural laws, and forming three zones from north
to south, all healthily habitable--but the races of the northernmost,
disciplined in endurance of cold; those of the central zone, perfected
by the enjoyable suns alike of summer and winter; those of the
southern zone, trained to endurance of heat. Writing them now in
tabular view,

     Britain       Gaul       Germany       Dacia
     Spain         Italy      Greece        Lydia
     Morocco       Libya      Egypt         Arabia,

you have the ground of all useful profane history mapped out in the
simplest terms; and then, as the fount of inspiration, for all these
countries, with the strength which every soul that has possessed, has
held sacred and supernatural, you have last to conceive perfectly the
small hill district of the Holy Land, with Philistia and Syria on its
flanks, both of them chastising forces; but Syria, in the beginning,
herself the origin of the chosen race--"A Syrian ready to perish was
my father"--and the Syrian Rachel being thought of always as the true
mother of Israel.

15. And remember, in all future study of the relations of these
countries, you must never allow your mind to be disturbed by the
accidental changes of political limit. No matter who rules a country,
no matter what it is officially called, or how it is formally divided,
eternal bars and doors are set to it by the mountains and seas,
eternal laws enforced over it by the clouds and stars. The people that
are born on it are its people, be they a thousand times again and
again conquered, exiled, or captive. The stranger cannot be its king,
the invader cannot be its possessor; and, although just laws,
maintained whether by the people or their conquerors, have always the
appointed good and strength of justice, nothing is permanently helpful
to any race or condition of men but the spirit that is in their own
hearts, kindled by the love of their native land.

16. Of course, in saying that the invader cannot be the possessor of
any country, I speak only of invasion such as that by the Vandals of
Libya, or by ourselves of India; where the conquering race does not
become permanently inhabitant. You are not to call Libya Vandalia, nor
India England, because these countries are temporarily under the rule
of Vandals and English; neither Italy Gothland under Ostrogoths, nor
England Denmark under Canute. National character varies as it fades
under invasion or in corruption; but if ever it glows again into a new
life, that life must be tempered by the earth and sky of the country
itself. Of the twelve names of countries now given in their order,
only one will be changed as we advance in our history;--Gaul will
properly become France when the Franks become her abiding inhabitants.
The other eleven primary names will serve us to the end.

17. With a moment's more patience, therefore, glancing to the far East,
we shall have laid the foundations of all our own needful geography. As
the northern kingdoms are moated from the Scythian desert by the
Vistula, so the southern are moated from the dynasties properly called
'Oriental' by the Euphrates; which, "partly sunk beneath the Persian
Gulf, reaches from the shores of Beloochistan and Oman to the mountains
of Armenia, and forms a huge hot-air funnel, the base" (or mouth) "of
which is on the tropics, while its extremity reaches thirty-seven
degrees of northern latitude. Hence it comes that the Semoom itself (the
specific and gaseous Semoom) pays occasional visits to Mosoul and
Djezeerat Omer, while the thermometer at Bagdad attains in summer an
elevation capable of staggering the belief of even an old Indian."[26]

[Footnote 26: Sir F. Palgrave, 'Arabia,' vol. ii., p. 155. I gratefully
adopt in the next paragraph his division of Asiatic nations, p. 160.]

18. This valley in ancient days formed the kingdom of Assyria, as the
valley of the Nile formed that of Egypt. In the work now before us, we
have nothing to do with its people, who were to the Jews merely a
hostile power of captivity, inexorable as the clay of their walls, or
the stones of their statues; and, after the birth of Christ, the
marshy valley is no more than a field of battle between West and East.
Beyond the great river,--Persia, India, and China, form the southern
'Oriens.' Persia is properly to be conceived as reaching from the
Persian Gulf to the mountain chains which flank and feed the Indus;
and is the true vital power of the East in the days of Marathon: but
it has no influence on Christian history except through Arabia; while,
of the northern Asiatic tribes, Mede, Bactrian, Parthian, and
Scythian, changing into Turk and Tartar, we need take no heed until
they invade us in our own historic territory.

19. Using therefore the terms 'Gothic' and 'Classic' for broad
distinction of the northern and central zones of this our own territory,
we may conveniently also use the word 'Arab'[27] for the whole southern
zone. The influence of Egypt vanishes soon after the fourth century,
while that of Arabia, powerful from the beginning, rises in the sixth
into an empire whose end we have not seen. And you may most rightly
conceive the religious principle which is the base of that empire, by
remembering, that while the Jews forfeited their prophetic power by
taking up the profession of usury over the whole earth, the Arabs
returned to the simplicity of prophecy in its beginning by the well of
Hagar, and are not opponents to Christianity; but only to the faults or
follies of Christians. They keep still their faith in the one God who
spoke to Abraham their father; and are His children in that simplicity,
far more truly than the nominal Christians who lived, and live, only to
dispute in vociferous council, or in frantic schism, the relations of
the Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost.

[Footnote 27: Gibbon's fifty-sixth chapter begins with a sentence which
may be taken as the epitome of the entire history we have to
investigate: "The three great nations of the world, the Greeks, the
Saracens, and the Franks, encountered each other on the theatre of
Italy." I use the more general word, Goths, instead of Franks; and the
more accurate word, Arab, for Saracen; but otherwise, the reader will
observe that the division is the same as mine. Gibbon does not
recognize the Roman people as a nation--but only the Roman power as an
empire.]

20. Trusting my reader then in future to retain in his mind without
confusion the idea of the three zones, Gothic, Classic, and Arab, each
divided into four countries, clearly recognizable through all ages of
remote or recent history;--I must farther, at once, simplify for him the
idea of the Roman _Empire_ (see note to last paragraph,) in the manner
of its affecting them. Its nominal extent, temporary conquests, civil
dissensions, or internal vices, are scarcely of any historical moment at
all; the real Empire is effectual only as an exponent of just law,
military order, and mechanical art, to untrained races, and as a
translation of Greek thought into less diffused and more tenable scheme
for them. The Classic zone, from the beginning to the end of its visible
authority, is composed of these two elements--Greek imagination, with
Roman order: and the divisions or dislocations of the third and fourth
century are merely the natural apparitions of their differences, when
the political system which concealed them was tested by Christianity. It
seems almost wholly lost sight of by ordinary historians, that, in the
wars of the last Romans with the Goths, the great Gothic captains were
all Christians; and that the vigorous and naïve form which the dawning
faith took in their minds is a more important subject of investigation,
by far, than the inevitable wars which followed the retirement of
Diocletian, or the confused schisms and crimes of the lascivious court
of Constantine. I am compelled, however, to notice the terms in which
the last arbitrary dissolutions of the empire took place, that they may
illustrate, instead of confusing, the arrangement of the nations which I
would fasten in your memory.

21. In the middle of the fourth century you have, politically, what
Gibbon calls "the final division of the _Eastern_ and _Western
Empires_." This really means only that the Emperor Valentinian,
yielding, though not without hesitation, to the feeling now confirmed in
the legions that the Empire was too vast to be held by a single person,
takes his brother for his colleague, and divides, not, truly speaking,
their authority, but their attention, between the east and the west. To
his brother Valens he assigns the extremely vague "Præfecture of the
East, from the lower Danube to the confines of Persia," while for his
own immediate government he reserves the "warlike præfectures of
Illyricum, Italy, and Gaul, from the extremity of Greece to the
Caledonian rampart, and from the rampart of Caledonia to the foot of
Mount Atlas." That is to say, in less poetical cadence, (Gibbon had
better have put his history into hexameters at once,) Valentinian kept
under his own watch the whole of Roman Europe and Africa, and left Lydia
and Caucasus to his brother. Lydia and Caucasus never did, and never
could, form an Eastern Empire,--they were merely outside dependencies,
useful for taxation in peace, dangerous by their multitudes in war.
There never was, from the seventh century before Christ to the seventh
after Christ, but _one_ Roman Empire, which meant, the power over
humanity of such men as Cincinnatus and Agricola; it expires as the race
and temper of these expire; the nominal extent of it, or brilliancy at
any moment, is no more than the reflection, farther or nearer upon the
clouds, of the flames of an altar whose fuel was of noble souls. There
is no true date for its division; there is none for its destruction.
Whether Dacian Probus or Noric Odoacer be on the throne of it, the force
of its living principle alone is to be watched--remaining, in arts, in
laws, and in habits of thought, dominant still in Europe down to the
twelfth century;--in language and example, dominant over all educated
men to this hour.

22. But in the nominal division of it by Valentinian, let us note
Gibbon's definition (I assume it to be his, not the Emperor's) of
European Roman Empire into Illyricum, Italy, and Gaul. I have already
said you must hold everything south of the Danube for Greek. The two
chief districts immediately south of the stream are upper and lower
Moesia, consisting of the slope of the Thracian mountains northward
to the river, with the plains between it and them. This district you
must notice for its importance in forming the Moeso-Gothic alphabet,
in which "the Greek is by far the principal element",[28] giving
sixteen letters out of the twenty-four. The Gothic invasion under the
reign of Valens is the first that establishes a Teutonic nation within
the frontier of the empire; but they only thereby bring themselves
more directly under its spiritual power. Their bishop, Ulphilas,
adopts this Moesian alphabet, two-thirds Greek, for his translation
of the Bible, and it is universally disseminated and perpetuated by
that translation, until the extinction or absorption of the Gothic
race.

[Footnote 28: Milman, 'Hist., of Christianity,' vol. iii. p. 36.]

23. South of the Thracian mountains you have Thrace herself, and the
countries confusedly called Dalmatia and Illyria, forming the coast of
the Adriatic, and reaching inwards and eastwards to the mountain
watershed. I have never been able to form a clear notion myself of the
real character of the people of these districts, in any given period;
but they are all to be massed together as northern Greek, having more
or less of Greek blood and dialect according to their nearness to
Greece proper; though neither sharing in her philosophy, nor
submitting to her discipline. But it is of course far more accurate,
in broad terms, to speak of these Illyrian, Moesian, and Macedonian
districts as all Greek, than with Gibbon or Valentinian to speak of
Greece and Macedonia as all Illyrian.[29]

[Footnote 29: I find the same generalization expressed to the modern
student under the term 'Balkan Peninsula,' extinguishing every ray and
trace of past history at once.]

24. In the same imperial or poetical generalization, we find England
massed with France under the term Gaul, and bounded by the "Caledonian
rampart." Whereas in our own division, Caledonia, Hibernia, and Wales,
are from the first considered as essential parts of Britain,[30] and
the link with the continent is to be conceived as formed by the
settlement of Britons in Brittany, and not at all by Roman authority
beyond the Humber.

[Footnote 30: Gibbon's more deliberate statement its clear enough.
"From the coast or the extremity of Caithness and Ulster, the memory
of Celtic origin was distinctly preserved in the perpetual resemblance
of languages, religion, and manners, and the peculiar character of the
British tribes might be naturally ascribed to the influence of
accidental and local circumstances." The Lowland Scots, "wheat eaters"
or Wanderers, and the Irish, are very positively identified by Gibbon
at the time our own history begins. "It is _certain_" (italics his,
not mine) "that in the declining age of the Roman Empire, Caledonia,
Ireland, and the Isle of Man, were inhabited by the Scots."--Chap. 25,
vol. iv., p. 279.

The higher civilization and feebler courage of the Lowland _English_
rendered them either the victims of Scotland, or the grateful subjects
of Rome. The mountaineers, Pict among the Grampians, or of their own
colour in Cornwall and Wales, have never been either instructed or
subdued, and remain to this day the artless and fearless strength of
the British race.]

25. Thus, then, once more reviewing our order of countries, and noting
only that the British Islands, though for the most part thrown by
measured degree much north of the rest of the north zone, are brought
by the influence of the Gulf stream into the same climate;--you have,
at the time when our history of Christianity begins, the Gothic zone
yet unconverted, and having not yet even heard of the new faith. You
have the Classic zone variously and increasingly conscious of it,
disputing with it, striving to extinguish it--and your Arab zone, the
ground and sustenance of it, encompassing the Holy Land with the
warmth of its own wings, and cherishing there--embers of phoenix
fire over all the earth,--the hope of Resurrection.

26. What would have been the course, or issue, of Christianity, had it
been orally preached only, and unsupported by its poetical literature,
might be the subject of deeply instructive speculation--if a
historian's duty were to reflect instead of record. The power of the
Christian faith was however, in the fact of it, always founded on the
written prophecies and histories of the Bible; and on the
interpretations of their meaning, given by the example, far more than
by the precept, of the great monastic orders. The poetry and history
of the Syrian Testaments were put within their reach by St. Jerome,
while the virtue and efficiency of monastic life are all expressed,
and for the most part summed, in the rule of St. Benedict. To
understand the relation of the work of these two men to the general
order of the Church, is quite the first requirement for its farther
intelligible history.

Gibbon's thirty-seventh chapter professes to give an account of the
'Institution of the Monastic Life' in the third century. But the
monastic life had been instituted somewhat earlier, and by many
prophets and kings. By Jacob, when he laid the stone for his pillow;
by Moses, when he drew aside to see the burning bush; by David, before
he had left "those few sheep in the wilderness"; and by the prophet
who "was in the deserts till the time of his showing unto Israel." Its
primary "institution," for Europe, was Numa's, in that of the Vestal
Virgins, and College of Augurs; founded on the originally Etrurian and
derived Roman conception of pure life dedicate to the service of God,
and practical wisdom dependent on His guidance.[31]

[Footnote 31: I should myself mark as the fatallest instant in the
decline of the Roman Empire, Julian's rejection of the counsel of the
Augurs. "For the last time, the Etruscan Haruspices accompanied a
Roman Emperor, but by a singular fatality their adverse interpretation
by the signs of heaven was disdained, and Julian followed the advice
of the philosophers, who coloured their predictions with the bright
hues of the Emperor's ambition." (Milman, Hist. of Christianity, chap.
vi.)]

The form which the monastic spirit took in later times depended far more
on the corruption of the common world, from which it was forced to
recoil either in indignation or terror, than on any change brought
about by Christianity in the ideal of human virtue and happiness.

27. "Egypt" (Mr. Gibbon thus begins to account for the new
Institution!), "the fruitful parent of superstition, afforded the
first example of monastic life." Egypt had her superstitions, like
other countries; but was so little the _parent_ of superstition that
perhaps no faith among the imaginative races of the world has been so
feebly missionary as hers. She never prevailed on even the nearest of
her neighbours to worship cats or cobras with her; and I am alone, to
my belief, among recent scholars, in maintaining Herodotus' statement
of her influence on the archaic theology of Greece. But that
influence, if any, was formative and delineative: not ritual: so that
in no case, and in no country, was Egypt the parent of Superstition:
while she was beyond all dispute, for all people and to all time, the
parent of Geometry, Astronomy, Architecture, and Chivalry. She was, in
its material and technic elements, the mistress of Literature, showing
authors who before could only scratch on wax and wood, how to weave
paper and engrave porphyry. She was the first exponent of the law of
Judgment after Death for Sin. She was the Tutress of Moses; and the
Hostess of Christ.

28. It is both probable and natural that, in such a country, the
disciples of any new spiritual doctrine should bring it to closer
trial than was possible among the illiterate warriors, or in the
storm-vexed solitudes of the North; yet it is a thoughtless error to
deduce the subsequent power of cloistered fraternity from the lonely
passions of Egyptian monachism. The anchorites of the first three
centuries vanish like feverish spectres, when the rational, merciful,
and laborious laws of Christian societies are established; and the
clearly recognizable rewards of heavenly solitude are granted to those
only who seek the Desert for its redemption.

29. 'The clearly _recognizable_ rewards,' I repeat, and with cautious
emphasis. No man has any data for estimating, far less right of judging,
the results of a life of resolute self-denial, until he has had the
courage to try it himself, at least for a time: but I believe no
reasonable person will wish, and no honest person dare, to deny the
benefits he has occasionally felt both in mind and body, during periods
of accidental privation from luxury, or exposure to danger. The extreme
vanity of the modern Englishman in making a momentary Stylites of
himself on the top of a Horn or an Aiguille, and his occasional
confession of a charm in the solitude of the rocks, of which he modifies
nevertheless the poignancy with his pocket newspaper, and from the
prolongation of which he thankfully escapes to the nearest table-d'hôte,
ought to make us less scornful of the pride, and more intelligent of the
passion, in which the mountain anchorites of Arabia and Palestine
condemned themselves to lives of seclusion and suffering, which were
comforted only by supernatural vision, or celestial hope. That phases of
mental disease are the necessary consequence of exaggerated and
independent emotion of any kind must, of course, be remembered in
reading the legends of the wilderness; but neither physicians nor
moralists have yet attempted to distinguish the morbid states of
intellect[32] which are extremities of noble passion, from those which
are the punishments of ambition, avarice, or lasciviousness.

[Footnote 32: Gibbon's hypothetical conclusion respecting the effects
of self-mortification, and his following historical statement, must be
noted as in themselves containing the entire views of the modern
philosophies and policies which have since changed the monasteries of
Italy into barracks, and the churches of France into magazines. "This
voluntary martyrdom _must_ have gradually destroyed the sensibility,
both of mind and body; nor _can it be presumed_ that the fanatics who
torment themselves, are capable of any lively affection for the rest
of mankind. _A cruel unfeeling temper has characterized the monks of
every age and country._"

How much of penetration, or judgment, this sentence exhibits, I hope
will become manifest to the reader as I unfold before him the actual
history of his faith; but being, I suppose, myself one of the last
surviving witnesses of the character of recluse life as it still
existed in the beginning of this century, I can point to the
portraiture of it given by Scott in the introduction to 'The
Monastery' as one perfect and trustworthy, to the letter and to the
spirit; and for myself can say, that the most gentle, refined, and in
the deepest sense amiable, phases of character I have ever known, have
been either those of monks, or of servants trained in the Catholic
Faith.]

30. Setting all questions of this nature aside for the moment, my
younger readers need only hold the broad fact that during the whole of
the fourth century, multitudes of self-devoted men led lives of
extreme misery and poverty in the effort to obtain some closer
knowledge of the Being and Will of God. We know, in any available
clearness, neither what they suffered, nor what they learned. We
cannot estimate the solemnizing or reproving power of their examples
on the less zealous Christian world; and only God knows how far their
prayers for it were heard, or their persons accepted. This only we may
observe with reverence, that among all their numbers, none seemed to
have repented their chosen manner of existence; none perish by
melancholy or suicide; their self-adjudged sufferings are never
inflicted in the hope of shortening the lives they embitter or purify;
and the hours of dream or meditation, on mountain or in cave, appear
seldom to have dragged so heavily as those which, without either
vision or reflection, we pass ourselves, on the embankment and in the
tunnel.

31. But whatever may be alleged, after ultimate and honest scrutiny,
of the follies or virtues of anchorite life, we are unjust to Jerome
if we think of him as its introducer into the West of Europe. He
passed through it himself as a phase of spiritual discipline; but he
represents, in his total nature and final work, not the vexed
inactivity of the Eremite, but the eager industry of a benevolent
tutor and pastor. His heart is in continual fervour of admiration or
of hope--remaining to the last as impetuous as a child's, but as
affectionate; and the discrepancies of Protestant objection by which
his character has been confused, or concealed, may be gathered into
some dim picture of his real self when once we comprehend the
simplicity of his faith, and sympathise a little with the eager
charity which can so easily be wounded into indignation, and is never
repressed by policy.

32. The slight trust which can be placed in modern readings of him, as
they now stand, may be at once proved by comparing the two passages in
which Milman has variously guessed at the leading principles of his
political conduct. "Jerome began (!) and ended his career as a monk of
Palestine; he attained, _he aspired to_, no dignity in the Church.
Though ordained a presbyter against his will, he escaped the episcopal
dignity which was forced upon his distinguished contemporaries."
('History of Christianity,' Book III.)

"Jerome cherished the secret hope, if it was not the avowed object of
his ambition, to succeed Damasus as Bishop of Rome. Is the rejection
of an aspirant so singularly unfit for the station, from his violent
passions, his insolent treatment of his adversaries, his utter want of
self-command, his almost unrivalled faculty of awakening hatred, to be
attributed to the sagacious and intuitive wisdom of Rome?" ('History
of Latin Christianity,' Book I., chap. ii.)

33. You may observe, as an almost unexceptional character in the
"sagacious wisdom" of the Protestant clerical mind, that it
instinctively assumes the desire of power and place not only to be
universal in Priesthood, but to be always _purely selfish_ in the ground
of it. The idea that power might possibly be desired for the sake of its
benevolent use, so far as I remember, does not once occur in the pages
of any ecclesiastical historian of recent date. In our own reading of
past ages we will, with the reader's permission, very calmly put out of
court all accounts of "hopes cherished in secret"; and pay very small
attention to the reasons for mediæval conduct which appear logical to
the rationalist, and probable to the politician.[33] We concern
ourselves only with what these singular and fantastic Christians of the
past really said, and assuredly did.

[Footnote 33: The habit of assuming, for the conduct of men of sense
and feeling, motives intelligible to the foolish, and probable to the
base, gains upon every vulgar historian, partly in the ease of it,
partly in the pride; and it is horrible to contemplate the quantity of
false witness against their neighbours which commonplace writers
commit, in the mere rounding and enforcing of their shallow sentences.
"Jerome admits, indeed, with _specious but doubtful humility_, the
inferiority of the unordained monk to the ordained priest," says Dean
Milman in his eleventh chapter, following up his gratuitous doubt of
Jerome's humility with no less gratuitous asseveration of the ambition
of his opponents. "The clergy, _no doubt_, had the sagacity to foresee
the _dangerous_ rival as to influence and authority, which was rising
up in Christian society."]

34. Jerome's life by no means "began as a monk of Palestine." Dean
Milman has not explained to us how any man's could; but Jerome's
childhood, at any rate, was extremely other than recluse, or
precociously religious. He was born of rich parents living on their
own estate, the name of his native town in North Illyria, Stridon,
perhaps now softened into Strigi, near Aquileia. In Venetian climate,
at all events, and in sight of Alps and sea. He had a brother and
sister, a kind grandfather, and a disagreeable private tutor, and was
a youth still studying grammar at Julian's death in 363.

35. A youth of eighteen, and well begun in all institutes of the
classic schools; but, so far from being a monk, not yet a
Christian;--nor at all disposed towards the severer offices even of
Roman life! or contemplating with aversion the splendours, either
worldly or sacred, which shone on him in the college days spent in its
Capital city.

For the "power and majesty of Paganism were still concentrated at Rome;
the deities of the ancient faith found their last refuge in the capital
of the empire. To the stranger, Rome still offered the appearance of a
Pagan city. It contained one hundred and fifty-two temples, and one
hundred and eighty smaller chapels or shrines, still sacred to their
tutelary God, and used for public worship. Christianity had neither
ventured to usurp those few buildings which might be converted to her
use, still less had she the power to destroy them. The religious
edifices were under the protection of the præfect of the city, and the
præfect was usually a Pagan; at all events he would not permit any
breach of the public peace, or violation of public property. Above all
still towered the Capitol, in its unassailed and awful majesty, with its
fifty temples or shrines, bearing the most sacred names in the religious
and civil annals of Rome, those of Jove, of Mars, of Janus, of Romulus,
of Cæsar, of Victory. Some years after the accession of Theodosius to
the Eastern Empire, the sacrifices were still performed as national
rites at the public cost,--_the pontiffs made their offerings in the
name of the whole human race_. The Pagan orator ventures to assert that
the Emperor dared not to endanger the safety of the empire by their
abolition. The Emperor still bore the title and insignia of the Supreme
Pontiff; the Consuls, before they entered upon their functions, ascended
the Capitol; the religious processions passed along the crowded streets,
and the people thronged to the festivals and theatres which still formed
part of the Pagan worship."[34]

[Footnote 34: Milman, 'History of Christianity,' vol. iii. p. 162. Note
the sentence in italics, for it relates the true origin of the
Papacy.]

36. Here, Jerome must have heard of what by all the Christian sects
was held the judgment of God, between them and their chief enemy--the
death of the Emperor Julian. But I have no means of tracing, and will
not conjecture, the course of his own thoughts, until the tenor of all
his life was changed at his baptism. The candour which lies at the
basis of his character has given us one sentence of his own,
respecting that change, which is worth some volumes of ordinary
confessions. "I left, not only parents and kindred, but _the
accustomed luxuries of delicate life_." The words throw full light on
what, to our less courageous temper, seems the exaggerated reading by
the early converts of Christ's words to them--"He that loveth father
or mother more than me, is not worthy of me." We are content to leave,
for much lower interests, either father or mother, and do not see the
necessity of any farther sacrifice: we should know more of ourselves
and of Christianity if we oftener sustained what St. Jerome found the
more searching trial. I find scattered indications of contempt among
his biographers, because he could not resign one indulgence--that of
scholarship; and the usual sneers at monkish ignorance and indolence
are in his case transferred to the weakness of a pilgrim who carried
his library in his wallet. It is a singular question (putting, as it
is the modern fashion to do, the idea of Providence wholly aside),
whether, but for the literary enthusiasm, which was partly a weakness,
of this old man's character, the Bible would ever have become the
library of Europe.

37. For that, observe, is the real meaning, in its first power, of the
word _Bible_. Not book, merely; but 'Bibliotheca,' Treasury of Books:
and it is, I repeat, a singular question, how far, if Jerome, at the
very moment when Rome, his tutress, ceased from her material power,
had not made her language the oracle of Hebrew prophecy, a literature
of their own, and a religion unshadowed by the terrors of the Mosaic
law, might have developed itself in the hearts of the Goth, the Frank,
and the Saxon, under Theodoric, Clovis, and Alfred.

38. Fate had otherwise determined, and Jerome was so passive an
instrument in her hands that he began the study of Hebrew as a
discipline only, and without any conception of the task he was to
fulfil, still less of the scope of its fulfilment. I could joyfully
believe that the words of Christ, "If they hear not Moses and the
Prophets, neither will they be persuaded though one rose from the
dead," had haunted the spirit of the recluse, until he resolved that
the voices of immortal appeal should be made audible to the Churches
of all the earth. But so far as we have evidence, there was no such
will or hope to exalt the quiet instincts of his natural industry; and
partly as a scholar's exercise, partly as an old man's recreation, the
severity of the Latin language was softened, like Venetian crystal, by
the variable fire of Hebrew thought, and the "Book of Books" took the
abiding form of which all the future art of the Western nations was to
be an hourly expanding interpretation.

39. And in this matter you have to note that the gist of it lies, not in
the translation of the Hebrew and Greek Scriptures into an easier and a
common language, but in their presentation to the Church as of common
authority. The earlier Gentile Christians had naturally a tendency to
carry out in various oral exaggeration or corruption, the teaching of
the Apostle of the Gentiles, until their freedom from the bondage of the
Jewish law passed into doubt of its inspiration; and, after the fall of
Jerusalem, even into horror-stricken interdiction of its observance. So
that, only a few years after the remnant of exiled Jews in Pella had
elected the Gentile Marcus for their Bishop, and obtained leave to
return to the Ælia Capitolina built by Hadrian on Mount Zion, "it became
a matter of doubt and controversy whether a man who sincerely
acknowledged Jesus as the Messiah, but who still continued to observe
the law of Moses, could possibly hope for salvation!"[35] While, on the
other hand, the most learned and the most wealthy of the Christian name,
under the generally recognised title of "knowing" (Gnostic), had more
insidiously effaced the authority of the Evangelists by dividing
themselves, during the course of the third century, "into more than
fifty numerably distinct sects, and producing a multitude of histories,
in which the actions and discourses of Christ and His Apostles were
adapted to their several tenets."[36]

[Footnote 35: Gibbon, chap. xv. (II. 277).]

[Footnote 36: Ibid., II. 283. His expression "the most learned and most
wealthy" should be remembered in confirmation of the evermore
recurring fact of Christianity, that minds modest in attainment, and
lives careless of gain, are fittest for the reception of every
constant,--_i.e._ not local or accidental,--Christian principle.]

40. It would be a task of great, and in nowise profitable difficulty
to determine in what measure the consent of the general Church, and in
what measure the act and authority of Jerome, contributed to fix in
their ever since undisturbed harmony and majesty, the canons of Mosaic
and Apostolic Scripture. All that the young reader need know is, that
when Jerome died at Bethlehem, this great deed was virtually
accomplished: and the series of historic and didactic books which form
our present Bible, (including the Apocrypha) were established in and
above the nascent thought of the noblest races of men living on the
terrestrial globe, as a direct message to them from its Maker,
containing whatever it was necessary for them to learn of His purposes
towards them, and commanding, or advising, with divine authority and
infallible wisdom, all that was best for them to do, and happiest to
desire.

41. And it is only for those who have obeyed the law sincerely,
to say how far the hope held out to them by the law-giver has been
fulfilled. The worst "children of disobedience" are those who accept,
of the Word, what they like, and refuse what they hate: nor is this
perversity in them always conscious, for the greater part of the sins
of the Church have been brought on it by enthusiasm which, in
passionate contemplation and advocacy of parts of the Scripture easily
grasped, neglected the study, and at last betrayed the balance, of the
rest. What forms and methods of self-will are concerned in the
wresting of the Scriptures to a man's destruction, is for the keepers
of consciences to examine, not for us. The history we have to learn
must be wholly cleared of such debate, and the influence of the Bible
watched exclusively on the persons who receive the Word with joy, and
obey it in truth.

42. There has, however, been always a farther difficulty in examining
the power of the Bible, than that of distinguishing honest from
dishonest readers. The hold of Christianity on the souls of men must
be examined, when we come to close dealing with it, under these three
several heads: there is first, the power of the Cross itself, and of
the theory of salvation, upon the heart,--then, the operation of the
Jewish and Greek Scriptures on the intellect,--then, the influence on
morals of the teaching and example of the living hierarchy. And in the
comparison of men as they are and as they might have been, there are
these three questions to be separately kept in mind,--first, what
would have been the temper of Europe without the charity and labour
meant by 'bearing the cross'; then, secondly, what would the intellect
of Europe have become without Biblical literature; and lastly, what
would the social order of Europe have become without its hierarchy.

43. You see I have connected the words 'charity' and 'labour' under
the general term of 'bearing the cross.' "If any man will come after
me, let him deny himself, (for charity) and take up his cross (of
pain) and follow me."

The idea has been _exactly_ reversed by modern Protestantism, which
sees, in the cross, not a furca to which it is to be nailed;
but a raft on which it, and all its valuable properties,[37] are to be
floated into Paradise.

[Footnote 37: Quite one of the most curious colours of modern
Evangelical thought is its pleasing connection of Gospel truth with
the extension of lucrative commerce! See farther the note at p. 83.]

44. Only, therefore, in days when the Cross was received with courage,
the Scripture searched with honesty, and the Pastor heard in faith,
can the pure word of God, and the bright sword of the Spirit, be
recognised in the heart and hand of Christianity. The effect of
Biblical poetry and legend on its intellect, must be traced farther,
through decadent ages, and in unfenced fields;--producing 'Paradise
Lost' for us, no less than the 'Divina Commedia';--Goethe's 'Faust,'
and Byron's 'Cain,' no less than the 'Imitatio Christi.'

45. Much more, must the scholar, who would comprehend in any degree
approaching to completeness, the influence of the Bible on mankind, be
able to read the interpretations of it which rose into the great arts of
Europe at their culmination. In every province of Christendom, according
to the degree of art-power it possessed, a series of illustrations of
the Bible were produced as time went on; beginning with vignetted
illustrations of manuscript, advancing into life-size sculpture, and
concluding in perfect power of realistic painting. These teachings and
preachings of the Church, by means of art, are not only a most important
part of the general Apostolic Acts of Christianity; but their study is a
necessary part of Biblical scholarship, so that no man can in any large
sense understand the Bible itself until he has learned also to read
these national commentaries upon it, and been made aware of their
collective weight. The Protestant reader, who most imagines himself
independent in his thought, and private in his study, of Scripture, is
nevertheless usually at the mercy of the nearest preacher who has a
pleasant voice and ingenious fancy; receiving from him thankfully, and
often reverently, whatever interpretation of texts the agreeable voice
or ready wit may recommend: while, in the meantime, he remains entirely
ignorant of, and if left to his own will, invariably destroys as
injurious, the deeply meditated interpretations of Scripture which, in
their matter, have been sanctioned by the consent of all the Christian
Church for a thousand years; and in their treatment, have been exalted
by the trained skill and inspired imagination of the noblest souls ever
enclosed in mortal clay.

46. There are few of the fathers of the Christian Church whose
commentaries on the Bible, or personal theories of its gospel, have
not been, to the constant exultation of the enemies of the Church,
fretted and disgraced by angers of controversy, or weakened and
distracted by irreconcilable heresy. On the contrary, the scriptural
teaching, through their art, of such men as Orcagna, Giotto, Angelico,
Luca della Robbia, and Luini, is, literally, free from all earthly
taint of momentary passion; its patience, meekness, and quietness are
incapable of error through either fear or anger; they are able,
without offence, to say all that they wish; they are bound by
tradition into a brotherhood which represents unperverted doctrines by
unchanging scenes; and they are compelled by the nature of their work
to a deliberation and order of method which result in the purest state
and frankest use of all intellectual power.

47. I may at once, and without need of returning to this question,
illustrate the difference in dignity and safety between the mental
actions of literature and art, by referring to a passage, otherwise
beautifully illustrative of St. Jerome's sweetness and simplicity of
character, though quoted, in the place where we find it, with no such
favouring intention,--namely, in the pretty letter of Queen Sophie
Charlotte, (father's mother of Frederick the Great,) to the Jesuit
Vota, given in part by Carlyle in his first volume, ch. iv.

"'How can St. Jerome, for example, be a key to Scripture?' she
insinuates; citing from Jerome this remarkable avowal of his method of
composing books;--especially of his method in that book, _Commentary on
the Galatians_, where he accuses both Peter and Paul of simulation, and
even of hypocrisy. The great St. Augustine has been charging him with
this sad fact, (says her Majesty, who gives chapter and verse,) and
Jerome answers, 'I followed the commentaries of Origen, of'--five or
six different persons, who turned out mostly to be heretics before
Jerome had quite done with them, in coming years, 'And to confess the
honest truth to you,' continues Jerome, 'I read all that, and after
having crammed my head with a great many things, I sent for my
amanuensis, and dictated to him, now my own thoughts, now those of
others, without much recollecting the order, nor sometimes the words,
nor even the sense'! In another place, (in the book itself further
on[38]) he says, 'I do not myself write; I have an amanuensis, and I
dictate to him what comes into my mouth. If I wish to reflect a little,
or to say the thing better, or a better thing, he knits his brows, and
the whole look of him tells me sufficiently that he cannot endure to
wait.' Here is a sacred old gentleman whom it is not safe to depend upon
for interpreting the Scriptures,--thinks her Majesty, but does not say
so,--leaving Father Vota to his reflections." Alas, no, Queen Sophie,
neither old St. Jerome's, nor any other human lips nor mind, may be
depended upon in that function; but only the Eternal Sophia, the Power
of God and the Wisdom of God: yet this you may see of your old
interpreter, that he is wholly open, innocent, and true, and that,
through such a person, whether forgetful of his author, or hurried by
his scribe, it is more than probable you may hear what Heaven knows to
be best for you; and extremely improbable you should take the least
harm,--while by a careful and cunning master in the literary art,
reticent of his doubts, and dexterous in his sayings, any number of
prejudices or errors might be proposed to you acceptably, or even
fastened in you fatally, though all the while you were not the least
required to confide in his inspiration.

[Footnote 38: 'Commentary on the Galatians,' Chap. iii.]

48. For indeed, the only confidence, and the only safety which in such
matters we can either hold or hope, are in our own desire to be rightly
guided, and willingness to follow in simplicity the guidance granted.
But all our conceptions and reasonings on the subject of inspiration
have been disordered by our habit, first of distinguishing falsely--or
at least needlessly--between inspiration of words and of acts; and
secondly by our attribution of inspired strength or wisdom to some
persons or some writers only, instead of to the whole body of believers,
in so far as they are partakers of the Grace of Christ, the Love of God,
and the Fellowship of the Holy Ghost. In the degree in which every
Christian receives, or refuses, the several gifts expressed by that
general benediction, he enters or is cast out from the inheritance of
the saints,--in the exact degree in which he denies the Christ, angers
the Father, and grieves the Holy Spirit, he becomes uninspired or
unholy,--and in the measure in which he trusts Christ, obeys the Father,
and consents with the Spirit, he becomes inspired in feeling, act, word,
and reception of word, according to the capacities of his nature. He is
not gifted with higher ability, nor called into new offices, but enabled
to use his granted natural powers, in their appointed place, to the best
purpose. A child is inspired as a child, and a maiden as a maiden; the
weak, even in their weakness, and the wise, only in their hour.

That is the simply determinable _theory_ of the inspiration of all
true members of the Church; its truth can only be known by proving it
in trial: but I believe there is no record of any man's having tried
and declared it vain.[39]

[Footnote 39: Compare the closing paragraph in p. 45 of 'The Shrine of
the Slaves.' Strangely, as I revise _this_ page for press, a slip is
sent me from 'The Christian' newspaper, in which the comment of the
orthodox evangelical editor may be hereafter representative to us of
the heresy of his sect; in its last audacity, actually _opposing_ the
power of the Spirit to the work of Christ. (I only wish I had been at
Matlock, and heard the kind physician's sermon.)

"An interesting and somewhat unusual sight was seen in Derbyshire on
Saturday last--two old fashioned Friends, dressed in the original garb
of the Quakers, preaching on the roadside to a large and attentive
audience in Matlock. One of them, who is a doctor in good practice in
the county, by name Dr. Charles A. Fox, made a powerful and effective
appeal to his audience to see to it that each one was living in
obedience to the light of the Holy Spirit within. Christ _within_ was
the hope of glory, and it was as He was followed in the ministry of
the Spirit that we were saved by Him, who became thus to each the
author and finisher of faith. He cautioned his hearers against
building their house on the sand by believing in the free and easy
Gospel so commonly preached to the wayside hearers, as if we were
saved by 'believing' this or that. Nothing short of the work of the
Holy Ghost in the soul of each one could save us, and to preach
anything short of this was simply to delude the simple and unwary in
the most terrible form.

"[It would be unfair to criticise an address from so brief an
abstract, but we must express our conviction that the obedience of
Christ unto death, the death of the Cross, _rather_ than the work of
the Spirit in us, is the good tidings for sinful men.--Ed.]"

In juxtaposition with this editorial piece of modern British press
theology, I will simply place the 4th, 6th, and 13th verses of Romans
viii., italicising the expressions which are of deepest import, and
always neglected. "That the _righteousness of the_ LAW might be
fulfilled _in us_, who walk not after the flesh, but after the
Spirit.... For to be carnally _minded_, is death, but to be
spiritually _minded_, is life, and peace.... For if ye live after the
flesh, ye shall die; but if _ye through the Spirit_ do mortify the
_deeds_ of the body, ye shall live."

It would be well for Christendom if the Baptismal service explained
what it professes to abjure.]

49. Beyond this theory of general inspiration, there is that of
special call and command, with actual dictation of the deeds to be
done or words to be said. I will enter at present into no examination
of the evidences of such separating influence; it is not claimed by
the Fathers of the Church, either for themselves, or even for the
entire body of the Sacred writers, but only ascribed to certain
passages dictated at certain times for special needs: and there is no
possibility of attaching the idea of infallible truth to any form of
human language in which even these exceptional passages have been
delivered to us. But this is demonstrably true of the entire volume of
them as we have it, and read,--each of us as it may be rendered in his
native tongue; that, however mingled with mystery which we are not
required to unravel, or difficulties which we should be insolent in
desiring to solve, it contains plain teaching for men of every rank of
soul and state of life, which so far as they honestly and implicitly
obey, they will be happy and innocent to the utmost powers of their
nature, and capable of victory over all adversities, whether of
temptation or pain.

50. Indeed, the Psalter alone, which practically was the service book of
the Church for many ages, contains merely in the first half of it the
sum of personal and social wisdom. The 1st, 8th, 12th, 14th, 15th,
19th, 23rd, and 24th psalms, well learned and believed, are enough for
all personal guidance; the 48th, 72nd, and 75th, have in them the law
and the prophecy of all righteous government; and every real triumph of
natural science is anticipated in the 104th.

51. For the contents of the entire volume, consider what other group
of historic and didactic literature has a range comparable with it.
There are--

I. The stories of the Fall and of the Flood, the grandest human
traditions founded on a true horror of sin.

II. The story of the Patriarchs, of which the effective truth is
visible to this day in the polity of the Jewish and Arab races.

III. The story of Moses, with the results of that tradition in the
moral law of all the civilized world.

IV. The story of the Kings--virtually that of all Kinghood, in David,
and of all Philosophy, in Solomon: culminating in the Psalms and
Proverbs, with the still more close and practical wisdom of
Ecclesiasticus and the Son of Sirach.

V. The story of the Prophets--virtually that of the deepest mystery,
tragedy, and permanent fate, of national existence.

VI. The story of Christ.

VII. The moral law of St. John, and his closing Apocalypse of its
fulfilment.

Think, if you can match that table of contents in any other--I do not
say 'book' but 'literature.' Think, so far as it is possible for any
of us--either adversary or defender of the faith--to extricate his
intelligence from the habit and the association of moral sentiment
based upon the Bible, what literature could have taken its place, or
fulfilled its function, though every library in the world had remained
unravaged, and every teacher's truest words had been written down?

52. I am no despiser of profane literature. So far from it that I
believe no interpretations of Greek religion have ever been so
affectionate, none of Roman religion so reverent, as those which will be
found at the base of my art teaching, and current through the entire
body of my works. But it was from the Bible that I learned the symbols
of Homer, and the faith of Horace; the duty enforced upon me in early
youth of reading every word of the gospels and prophecies as if written
by the hand of God, gave me the habit of awed attention which afterwards
made many passages of the profane writers, frivolous to an irreligious
reader, deeply grave to me. How far my mind has been paralysed by the
faults and sorrow of life,--how far short its knowledge may be of what I
might have known, had I more faithfully walked in the light I had, is
beyond my conjecture or confession: but as I never wrote for my own
pleasure or self-proclaiming, I have been guarded, as men who so write
always will be, from errors dangerous to others; and the fragmentary
expressions of feeling or statements of doctrine, which from time to
time I have been able to give, will be found now by an attentive reader
to bind themselves together into a general system of interpretation of
Sacred literature,--both classic and Christian, which will enable him
without injustice to sympathize in the faiths of candid and generous
souls, of every age and every clime.

53. That there _is_ a Sacred classic literature, running parallel with
that of the Hebrews, and coalescing in the symbolic legends of
mediæval Christendom, is shown in the most tender and impressive way
by the independent, yet similar, influence of Virgil upon Dante, and
upon Bishop Gawaine Douglas. At earlier dates, the teaching of every
master trained in the Eastern schools was necessarily grafted on the
wisdom of the Greek mythology; and thus the story of the Nemean Lion,
with the aid of Athena in its conquest, is the real root-stock of the
legend of St. Jerome's companion, conquered by the healing gentleness
of the Spirit of Life.

54. I call it a legend only. Whether Heracles ever slew, or St. Jerome
ever cherished, the wild or wounded creature, is of no moment to us in
learning what the Greeks meant by their vase-outlines of the great
contest, or the Christian painters by their fond insistence on the
constancy of the Lion-friend. Former tradition, in the story of
Samson,--of the disobedient prophet,--of David's first inspired victory,
and finally of the miracle wrought in the defence of the most favoured
and most faithful of the greater Prophets, runs always parallel in
symbolism with the Dorian fable: but the legend of St. Jerome takes up
the prophecy of the Millennium, and foretells, with the Cumæan Sibyl,
and with Isaiah, a day when the Fear of Man shall be laid in
benediction, not enmity, on inferior beings,--when they shall not hurt
nor destroy in all the holy Mountain, and the Peace of the Earth shall
be as far removed from its present sorrow, as the present gloriously
animate universe from the nascent desert, whose deeps were the place of
dragons, and its mountains, domes of fire.

Of that day knoweth no man; but the Kingdom of God is already come to
those who have tamed in their own hearts what was rampant of the lower
nature, and have learned to cherish what is lovely and human, in the
wandering children of the clouds and fields.

AVALLON, _28th August_, 1882.




CHAPTER IV.

INTERPRETATIONS.


1. It is the admitted privilege of a custode who loves his cathedral
to depreciate, in its comparison, all the other cathedrals of his
country that resemble, and all the edifices on the globe that differ
from it. But I love too many cathedrals--though I have never had the
happiness of becoming the custode of even one--to permit myself the
easy and faithful exercise of the privilege in question; and I must
vindicate my candour, and my judgment, in the outset, by confessing
that the cathedral of AMIENS has nothing to boast of in the way of
towers,--that its central flèche is merely the pretty caprice of a
village carpenter,--that the total structure is in dignity inferior to
Chartres, in sublimity to Beauvais, in decorative splendour to Rheims,
and in loveliness of figure-sculpture to Bourges. It has nothing like
the artful pointing and moulding of the arcades of Salisbury--nothing
of the might of Durham;--no Dædalian inlaying like Florence, no glow
of mythic fantasy like Verona. And yet, in all, and more than these,
ways, outshone or overpowered, the cathedral of Amiens deserves the
name given it by M. Viollet le Duc--

         "The Parthenon of Gothic Architecture."[40]

2. Of Gothic, mind you; Gothic clear of Roman tradition, and of
Arabian taint; Gothic pure, authoritative, unsurpassable, and
unaccusable;--its proper principles of structure being once understood
and admitted.

[Footnote 40: Of French Architecture, accurately, in the place quoted,
"Dictionary of Architecture," vol. i. p. 71; but in the article
"Cathédrale," it is called (vol. ii. p. 330) "l'église _ogivale_ par
excellence."]

No well-educated traveller is now without some consciousness of the
meaning of what is commonly and rightly called "purity of style," in
the modes of art which have been practised by civilized nations; and
few are unaware of the distinctive aims and character of Gothic. The
purpose of a good Gothic builder was to raise, with the native stone
of the place he had to build in, an edifice as high and as spacious as
he could, with calculable and visible security, in no protracted and
wearisome time, and with no monstrous or oppressive compulsion of
human labour.

He did not wish to exhaust in the pride of a single city the energies of
a generation, or the resources of a kingdom; he built for Amiens with
the strength and the exchequer of Amiens; with chalk from the cliffs of
the Somme,[41] and under the orders of two successive bishops, one of
whom directed the foundations of the edifice, and the other gave thanks
in it for its completion. His object, as a designer, in common with all
the sacred builders of his time in the North, was to admit as much light
into the building as was consistent with the comfort of it; to make its
structure intelligibly admirable, but not curious or confusing; and to
enrich and enforce the understood structure with ornament sufficient for
its beauty, yet yielding to no wanton enthusiasm in expenditure, nor
insolent in giddy or selfish ostentation of skill; and finally, to make
the external sculpture of its walls and gates at once an alphabet and
epitome of the religion, by the knowledge and inspiration of which an
acceptable worship might be rendered, within those gates, to the Lord
whose Fear was in His Holy Temple, and whose seat was in Heaven.

[Footnote 41: It was a universal principle with the French builders of
the great ages to use the stones of their quarries as they lay in the
bed; if the beds were thick, the stones were used of their full
thickness--if thin, of their necessary thinness, adjusting them with
beautiful care to directions of thrust and weight. The natural blocks
were never sawn, only squared into fitting, the whole native strength
and crystallization of the stone being thus kept unflawed--"_ne
dédoublant jamais_ une pierre. Cette méthode est excellente, elle
conserve à la pierre toute sa force naturelle,--tous ses moyens de
résistance." See M. Viollet le Duc, Article "Construction"
(Matériaux), vol. iv. p. 129. He adds the very notable fact that, _to
this day, in seventy departments of France, the use of the stone-saw
is unknown_.]

3. It is not easy for the citizen of the modern aggregate of bad
building, and ill-living held in check by constables, which we call a
town,--of which the widest streets are devoted by consent to the
encouragement of vice, and the narrow ones to the concealment of
misery,--not easy, I say, for the citizen of any such mean city to
understand the feeling of a burgher of the Christian ages to his
cathedral. For him, the quite simply and frankly-believed text, "Where
two or three are gathered in My name, there am I in the midst of
them," was expanded into the wider promise to many honest and
industrious persons gathered in His name--"They shall be my people and
I will be their God";--deepened in his reading of it, by some lovely
local and simply affectionate faith that Christ, as he was a Jew among
Jews, and a Galilean among Galileans, was also, in His nearness to
any--even the poorest--group of disciples, as one of their nation; and
that their own "Beau Christ d'Amiens" was as true a compatriot to them
as if He had been born of a Picard maiden.

4. It is to be remembered, however--and this is a theological point on
which depended much of the structural development of the northern
basilicas--that the part of the building in which the Divine presence
was believed to be constant, as in the Jewish Holy of Holies, was only
the enclosed choir; in front of which the aisles and transepts might
become the King's Hall of Justice, as in the presence-chamber of Christ;
and whose high altar was guarded always from the surrounding eastern
aisles by a screen of the most finished workmanship; while from those
surrounding aisles branched off a series of radiating chapels or cells,
each dedicated to some separate saint. This conception of the company of
Christ with His saints, (the eastern chapel of all being the Virgin's,)
was at the root of the entire disposition of the apse with its
supporting and dividing buttresses and piers; and the architectural form
can never be well delighted in, unless in some sympathy with the
spiritual imagination out of which it rose. We talk foolishly and
feebly of symbols and types: in old Christian architecture, every part
is _literal_: the cathedral _is_ for its builders the House of God;--it
is surrounded, like an earthly king's, with minor lodgings for the
servants; and the glorious carvings of the exterior walls and interior
wood of the choir, which an English rector would almost instinctively
think of as done for the glorification of the canons, was indeed the
Amienois carpenter's way of making his Master-carpenter
comfortable,[42]--nor less of showing his own native and insuperable
virtue of carpenter, before God and man.

[Footnote 42: The philosophic reader is quite welcome to 'detect' and
'expose' as many carnal motives as he pleases, besides the good
ones,--competition with neighbour Beauvais--comfort to sleepy
heads--solace to fat sides, and the like. He will find at last that no
quantity of competition or comfort-seeking will do anything the like
of this carving now;--still less his own philosophy, whatever its
species: and that it was indeed the little mustard seed of faith in
the heart, with a very notable quantity of honesty besides in the
habit and disposition, that made all the rest grow together for good.]

5. Whatever you wish to see, or are forced to leave unseen, at Amiens,
if the overwhelming responsibilities of your existence, and the
inevitable necessities of precipitate locomotion in their fulfilment,
have left you so much as one quarter of an hour, not out of
breath--for the contemplation of the capital of Picardy, give it
wholly to the cathedral choir. Aisles and porches, lancet windows and
roses, you can see elsewhere as well as here--but such carpenter's
work, you cannot. It is late,--fully developed flamboyant just past
the fifteenth century--and has some Flemish stolidity mixed with the
playing French fire of it; but wood-carving was the Picard's joy from
his youth up, and, so far as I know, there is nothing else so
beautiful cut out of the goodly trees of the world.

Sweet and young-grained wood it is: oak, _trained_ and chosen for such
work, sound now as four hundred years since. Under the carver's hand it
seems to cut like clay, to fold like silk, to grow like living branches,
to leap like living flame. Canopy crowning canopy, pinnacle piercing
pinnacle--it shoots and wreathes itself into an enchanted glade,
inextricable, imperishable, fuller of leafage than any forest, and
fuller of story than any book.[43]

[Footnote 43: Arnold Boulin, master-joiner (menuisier) at Amiens,
solicited the enterprise, and obtained it in the first months of the
year 1508. A contract was drawn and an agreement made with him for the
construction of one hundred and twenty stalls with historical
subjects, high backings, crownings, and pyramidal canopies. It was
agreed that the principal executor should have seven sous of Tournay
(a little less than the sou of France) a day, for himself and his
apprentice, (threepence a day the two--say a shilling a week the
master, and sixpence a week the man,) and for the superintendence of
the whole work, twelve crowns a year, at the rate of twenty-four sous
the crown; (_i.e._, twelve shillings a year). The salary of the simple
workman was only to be three sous a day. For the sculptures and
histories of the seats, the bargain was made separately with Antoine
Avernier, image-cutter, residing at Amiens, at the rate of thirty-two
sous (sixteen pence) the piece. Most of the wood came from Clermont en
Beauvoisis, near Amiens; the finest, for the bas-reliefs, from
Holland, by St. Valery and Abbeville. The Chapter appointed four of
its own members to superintend the work: Jean Dumas, Jean Fabres,
Pierre Vuaille, and Jean Lenglaché, to whom my authors (canons both)
attribute the choice of subjects, the placing of them, and the
initiation of the workmen 'au sens véritable et plus élevé de la Bible
ou des legendes, et portant quelque fois le simple savoir-faire de
l'ouvrier jusqu'à la hauteur du génie du théologien.'

Without pretending to apportion the credit of savoir-faire and
theology in the business, we have only to observe that the whole
company, master, apprentices, workmen, image-cutter, and four canons,
got well into traces, and set to work on the 3rd of July, 1508, in the
great hall of the évêché, which was to be the workshop and studio
during the whole time of the business. In the following year, another
menuisier, Alexander Huet, was associated with the body, to carry on
the stalls on the right hand of the choir, while Arnold Boulin went on
with those on the left. Arnold, leaving his new associate in command
for a time, went to Beauvais and St. Riquier, to see the woodwork
there; and in July of 1511 both the masters went to Rouen together,
'pour étudier les chaires de la cathédrale.' The year before, also,
two Franciscans, monks of Abbeville, 'expert and renowned in working
in wood,' had been called by the Amiens chapter to give their opinion
on things in progress, and had each twenty sous for his opinion, and
travelling expenses.

In 1516, another and an important name appears on the accounts,--that
of Jean Trupin, 'a simple workman at the wages of three sous a day,'
but doubtless a good and spirited carver, whose true portrait it is
without doubt, and by his own hand, that forms the elbow-rest, of the
85th stall (right hand, nearest apse), beneath which is cut his name
JHAN TRUPIN, and again under the 92nd stall, with the added wish, 'Jan
Trupin, God take care of thee' (_Dieu te pourvoie_).

The entire work was ended on St. John's Day, 1522, without (so far as
we hear) any manner of interruption by dissension, death, dishonesty,
or incapacity, among its fellow-workmen, master or servant. And the
accounts being audited by four members of the Chapter, it was found
that the total expense was 9488 livres, 11 sous, and 3 obols
(décimes), or 474 napoleons, 11 sous, 3 décimes of modern French
money, or roughly four hundred sterling English pounds.

For which sum, you perceive, a company of probably six or eight good
workmen, old and young, had been kept merry and busy for fourteen
years; and this that you see--left for substantial result and gift to
you.

I have not examined the carvings so as to assign, with any decision, the
several masters' work; but in general the flower and leaf design in the
traceries will be by the two head menuisiers, and their apprentices; the
elaborate Scripture histories by Avernier, with variously completing
incidental grotesque by Trupin; and the joining and fitting by the
common workmen. No nails are used,--all is morticed, and so beautifully
that the joints have not moved to this day, and are still almost
imperceptible. The four terminal pyramids 'you might take for giant
pines forgotten for six centuries on the soil where the church was
built; they might be looked on at first as a wild luxury of sculpture
and hollow traceries--but examined in analysis they are marvels of order
and system in construction, uniting all the lightness, strength, and
grace of the most renowned spires in the last epoch of the Middle ages.'

The above particulars are all extracted--or simply translated, out of
the excellent description of the "Stalles et les Clôtures du Choeur"
of the Cathedral of Amiens, by MM. les Chanoines Jourdain et Duval
(Amiens, Vv. Alfred Caron, 1867). The accompanying lithographic
outlines are exceedingly good, and the reader will find the entire
series of subjects indicated with precision and brevity, both for the
woodwork and the external veil of the choir, of which I have no room
to speak in this traveller's summary.]

6. I have never been able to make up my mind which was really the best
way of approaching the cathedral for the first time. If you have plenty
of leisure, and the day is fine, and you are not afraid of an hour's
walk, the really right thing to do is to walk down the main street of
the old town, and across the river, and quite out to the chalk hill[44]
out of which the citadel is half quarried--half walled;--and walk to the
top of that, and look down into the citadel's dry 'ditch,'--or, more
truly, dry valley of death, which is about as deep as a glen in
Derbyshire, (or, more precisely, the upper part of the 'Happy Valley'
at Oxford, above Lower Hincksey,) and thence across to the cathedral and
ascending slopes of the city; so, you will understand the real height
and relation of tower and town:--then, returning, find your way to the
Mount Zion of it by any narrow cross streets and chance bridges you
can--the more winding and dirty the streets, the better; and whether you
come first on west front or apse, you will think them worth all the
trouble you have had to reach them.

[Footnote 44: The strongest and finally to be defended part of the
earliest city was on this height.]

7. But if the day be dismal, as it may sometimes be, even in France,
of late years,--or if you cannot or will not walk, which may also
chance, for all our athletics and lawn-tennis,--or if you must really
go to Paris this afternoon, and only mean to see all you can in an
hour or two,--then, supposing that, notwithstanding these weaknesses,
you are still a nice sort of person, for whom it is of some
consequence which way you come at a pretty thing, or begin to look at
it--I _think_ the best way is to walk from the Hotel de France or the
Place de Perigord, up the Street of Three Pebbles, towards the railway
station--stopping a little as you go, so as to get into a cheerful
temper, and buying some bonbons or tarts for the children in one of
the charming patissiers' shops on the left. Just past them, ask for
the theatre; and just past that, you will find, also on the left,
three open arches, through which you can turn, passing the Palais de
Justice, and go straight up to the south transept, which has really
something about it to please everybody. It is simple and severe at the
bottom, and daintily traceried and pinnacled at the top, and yet seems
all of a piece--though it isn't--and everybody _must_ like the taper
and transparent fretwork of the flèche above, which seems to bend to
the west wind,--though it doesn't--at least, the bending is a long
habit, gradually yielded into, with gaining grace and submissiveness,
during the last three hundred years. And, coming quite up to the
porch, everybody must like the pretty French Madonna in the middle of
it, with her head a little aside, and her nimbus switched a little
aside too, like a becoming bonnet. A Madonna in decadence she is,
though, for all, or rather by reason of all, her prettiness, and
her gay soubrette's smile; and she has no business there, neither, for
this is St. Honoré's porch, not hers; and grim and grey St. Honoré
used to stand there to receive you,--he is banished now to the north
porch, where nobody ever goes in. This was done long ago, in the
fourteenth-century days, when the people first began to find
Christianity too serious, and devised a merrier faith for France, and
would have bright-glancing, soubrette Madonnas everywhere--letting
their own dark-eyed Joan of Arc be burned for a witch. And
thenceforward, things went their merry way, straight on, 'ça allait,
ça ira,' to the merriest days of the guillotine.

But they could still carve, in the fourteenth century, and the Madonna
and her hawthorn-blossom lintel are worth your looking at,--much more
the field above, of sculpture as delicate and more calm, which tells
St. Honoré's own story, little talked of now in his Parisian faubourg.

8. I will not keep you just now to tell St. Honoré's story--(only too
glad to leave you a little curious about it, if it were
possible)[45]--for certainly you will be impatient to go into the
church; and cannot enter it to better advantage than by this door. For
all cathedrals of any mark have nearly the same effect when you enter at
the west door; but I know no other which shows so much of its nobleness
from the south interior transept; the opposite rose being of exquisite
fineness in tracery, and lovely in lustre; and the shafts of the
transept aisles forming wonderful groups with those of the choir and
nave; also, the apse shows its height better, as it opens to you when
you advance from the transept into the mid-nave, than when it is seen at
once from the west end of the nave; where it is just possible for an
irreverent person rather to think the nave narrow, than the apse high.
Therefore, if you let me guide you, go in at this south transept door,
(and put a sou into every beggar's box who asks it there,--it is none of
your business whether they should be there or not, nor whether they
deserve to have the sou,--be sure only that you yourself deserve to have
it to give; and give it prettily, and not as if it burnt your fingers).
Then, being once inside, take what first sensation and general glimpse
of it pleases you--promising the custode to come back to _see_ it
properly; (only then mind you keep the promise;) and in this first
quarter of an hour, seeing only what fancy bid you--but at least, as I
said, the apse from mid-nave, and all the traverses of the building,
from its centre. Then you will know, when you go outside again, what the
architect was working for, and what his buttresses and traceries mean.
For the outside of a French cathedral, except for its sculpture, is
always to be thought of as the wrong side of the stuff, in which you
find how the threads go that produce the inside or right-side pattern.
And if you have no wonder in you for that choir and its encompassing
circlet of light, when you look up into it from the cross-centre, you
need not travel farther in search of cathedrals, for the waiting-room of
any station is a better place for you;--but, if it amaze you and delight
you at first, then, the more you know of it, the more it will amaze. For
it is not possible for imagination and mathematics together, to do
anything nobler or stronger than that procession of window, with
material of glass and stone--nor anything which shall look loftier, with
so temperate and prudent measure of actual loftiness.

[Footnote 45: See, however, pages 32 and 130 (§§ 36, 112-114) of the
octavo edition of 'The Two Paths.']

9. From the pavement to the keystone of its vault is but 132 French
feet--about 150 English. Think only--you who have been in
Switzerland,--the Staubbach falls _nine_ hundred! Nay, Dover cliff
under the castle, just at the end of the Marine Parade, is twice as
high; and the little cockneys parading to military polka on the
asphalt below, think themselves about as tall as it, I suppose,--nay,
what with their little lodgings and stodgings and podgings about it,
they have managed to make it look no bigger than a moderate-sized
limekiln. Yet it is twice the height of Amiens' apse!--and it takes
good building, with only such bits of chalk as one can quarry beside
Somme, to make your work stand half that height, for six hundred
years.

10. It takes good building, I say, and you may even aver the
best--that ever was, or is again likely for many a day to be, on the
unquaking and fruitful earth, where one could calculate on a pillar's
standing fast, once well set up; and where aisles of aspen, and
orchards of apple, and clusters of vine, gave type of what might be
most beautifully made sacred in the constancy of sculptured stone.
From the unhewn block set on end in the Druid's Bethel, to _this_
Lord's House and blue-vitrailed gate of Heaven, you have the entire
course and consummation of the Northern Religious Builder's passion
and art.

11. But, note further--and earnestly,--this apse of Amiens is not only
the best, but the very _first_ thing done _perfectly_ in its manner,
by Northern Christendom. In pages 323 and 327 of the sixth volume of
M. Viollet le Duc, you will find the exact history of the development
of these traceries through which the eastern light shines on you as
you stand, from the less perfect and tentative forms of Rheims: and so
momentary was the culmination of the exact rightness, that here, from
nave to transept--built only ten years later,--there is a little
change, not towards decline, but to a not quite necessary precision.
Where decline begins, one cannot, among the lovely fantasies that
succeeded, exactly say--but exactly, and indisputably, we know that
this apse of Amiens is the first virgin perfect work,--Parthenon also
in that sense,--of Gothic Architecture.

12. Who built it, shall we ask? God, and Man,--is the first and most
true answer. The stars in their courses built it, and the Nations.
Greek Athena labours here--and Roman Father Jove, and Guardian Mars.
The Gaul labours here, and the Frank: knightly Norman,--mighty
Ostrogoth,--and wasted anchorite of Idumea.

The actual Man who built it scarcely cared to tell you he did so; nor do
the historians brag of him. Any quantity of heraldries of knaves and
fainéants you may find in what they call their 'history': but this is
probably the first time you ever read the name of Robert of Luzarches. I
say he 'scarcely cared'--we are not sure that he cared at all. He
signed his name nowhere, that I can hear of. You may perhaps find some
recent initials cut by English remarkable visitors desirous of
immortality, here and there about the edifice, but Robert the
builder--or at least the Master of building, cut _his_ on no stone of
it. Only when, after his death, the headstone had been brought forth
with shouting, Grace unto it, this following legend was written,
recording all who had part or lot in the labour, within the middle of
the labyrinth then inlaid in the pavement of the nave. You must read it
trippingly on the tongue: it was rhymed gaily for you by pure French
gaiety, not the least like that of the Théâtre de Folies.

     "En l'an de Grace mil deux cent
     Et vingt, fu l'oeuvre de cheens
     Premièrement encomenchie.
     A donc y ert de cheste evesquie
     Evrart, évêque bénis;
     Et, Roy de France, Loys
       Qui fut fils Phelippe le Sage.
     Qui maistre y ert de l'oeuvre
     Maistre Robert estoit només
     Et de Luzarches surnomés.
     Maistre Thomas fu après lui
     De Cormont. Et après, son filz
     Maistre Regnault, qui mestre
     Fist a chest point chi cheste lectre
     Que l'incarnation valoit
     Treize cent, moins douze, en faloit."

13. I have written the numerals in letters, else the metre would not
have come clear: they were really in figures thus, "II C. et XX,"
"XIII C. moins XII". I quote the inscription from M. l'Abbé Rozé's
admirable little book, "Visite à la Cathédrale d'Amiens,"--Sup. Lib.
de Mgr l'Evêque d'Amiens, 1877,--which every grateful traveller should
buy, for I am only going to steal a little bit of it here and there. I
only wish there had been a translation of the legend to steal, too;
for there are one or two points, both of idea and chronology, in it,
that I should have liked the Abbé's opinion of.

The main purport of the rhyme, however, we perceive to be, line for
line, as follows:--

     "In the year of Grace, Twelve Hundred
     And twenty, the work, then falling to ruin,
     Was first begun again.
     Then was, of this Bishopric
     Everard the blessed Bishop.
     And, King of France, Louis,
     Who was son to Philip the Wise.
     He who was Master of the Work
     Was called Master Robert,
     And called, beyond that, of Luzarches.
     Master Thomas was after him,
     Of Cormont. And after him, his son,
     Master Reginald, who to be put
     Made--at this point--this reading.
     When the Incarnation was of account
     Thirteen hundred, less twelve, which it failed of."

In which legend, while you stand where once it was written (it was
removed--to make the old pavement more polite--in the year, I
sorrowfully observe, of my own earliest tour on the Continent, 1825,
when I had not yet turned my attention to Ecclesiastical
Architecture), these points are noticeable--if you have still a little
patience.

14. 'The work'--_i.e._, the Work of Amiens in especial, her cathedral,
was 'déchéant,' falling to ruin, for the--I cannot at once say--fourth,
fifth, or what time,--in the year 1220. For it was a wonderfully
difficult matter for little Amiens to get this piece of business fairly
done, so hard did the Devil pull against her. She built her first
Bishop's church (scarcely more than St. Firmin's tomb-chapel) about the
year 350, just outside the railway station on the road to Paris;[46]
then, after being nearly herself destroyed, chapel and all, by the Frank
invasion, having recovered, and converted her Franks, she built another
and a properly called cathedral, where this one stands now, under
Bishop St. Save (St. Sauve, or Salve). But even this proper cathedral
was only of wood, and the Normans burnt it in 881. Rebuilt, it stood for
200 years; but was in great part destroyed by lightning in 1019. Rebuilt
again, it and the town were more or less burnt together by lightning, in
1107,--my authority says calmly, "un incendie provoqué par la même cause
détruisit _la ville_, et une partie de la cathédrale." The 'partie'
being rebuilt once more, the whole was again reduced to ashes, "réduite
en cendre par le feu de ciel en 1218, ainsi que tous les titres, les
martyrologies, les calendriers, et les Archives de l'Evêché et du
Chapitre."

[Footnote 46: At St. Acheul. See the first chapter of this book, and
the "Description Historique de la Cathédrale d'Amiens," by A. P. M.
Gilbert. 8vo, Amiens, 1833, pp. 5-7.]

15. It was the fifth cathedral, I count, then, that lay in 'ashes,'
according to Mons. Gilbert--in ruin certainly--déchéant;--and ruin of
a very discouraging completeness it would have been, to less lively
townspeople--in 1218. But it was rather of a stimulating completeness
to Bishop Everard and his people--the ground well cleared for them, as
it were: and lightning (feu de l'enfer, not du ciel, recognized for a
diabolic plague, as in Egypt), was to be defied to the pit. They only
took two years, you see, to pull themselves together; and to work they
went, in 1220, they, and their bishop, and their king, and their
Robert of Luzarches. And this, that roofs you, was what their hands
found to do with their might.

16. Their king was 'à-donc,' 'at that time,' Louis VIII., who is
especially further called the son of Philip of August, or Philip the
Wise, because his father was not dead in 1220; but must have resigned
the practical kingdom to his son, as his own father had done to him;
the old and wise king retiring to his chamber, and thence silently
guiding his son's hands, very gloriously, yet for three years.

But, farther--and this is the point on which chiefly I would have
desired the Abbé's judgment--Louis VIII. died of fever at Montpensier in
1226. And the entire conduct of the main labour of the cathedral, and
the chief glory of its service, as we shall hear presently, was _Saint_
Louis's; for a time of forty-four years. And the inscription was put "à
ce point ci" by the last architect, six years after St. Louis's death.
How is it that the great and holy king is not named?

17. I must not, in this traveller's brief, lose time in conjectural
answers to the questions which every step here will raise from the
ravaged shrine. But this is a very solemn one; and must be kept in our
hearts, till we may perhaps get clue to it. One thing only we are sure
of,--that at least the _due_ honour--alike by the sons of Kings and
sons of Craftsmen--is given always to their fathers; and that
apparently the chief honour of all is given here to Philip the Wise.
From whose house, not of parliament but of peace, came, in the years
when this temple was first in building, an edict indeed of
peace-making: "That it should be criminal for any man to take
vengeance for an insult or injury till forty days after the commission
of the offence--and then only with the approbation of the Bishop of
the Diocese." Which was perhaps a wiser effort to end the Feudal
system in its Saxon sense,[47] than any of our recent projects for
ending it in the Norman one.

[Footnote 47: Feud, Saxon faedh, low Latin Faida (Scottish 'fae,'
English 'foe,' derivative), Johnson. Remember also that the root of
Feud, in its Norman sense of land-allotment, is _foi_, not _fee_,
which Johnson, old Tory as he was, did not observe--neither in general
does the modern Antifeudalist.]

18. "A ce point ci." The point, namely, of the labyrinth inlaid in the
cathedral floor; a recognized emblem of many things to the people, who
knew that the ground they stood on was holy, as the roof over their
head. Chiefly, to them, it was an emblem of noble human
life--strait-gated, narrow-walled, with infinite darknesses and the
"inextricabilis error" on either hand--and in the depth of it, the
brutal nature to be conquered.

19. This meaning, from the proudest heroic, and purest legislative, days
of Greece, the symbol had borne for all men skilled in her traditions:
to the schools of craftsmen the sign meant further their craft's
noblesse, and pure descent from the divinely-terrestrial skill of
Dædalus, the labyrinth-builder, and the first sculptor of imagery
_pathetic_[48] with human life and death.

[Footnote 48:

                      "Tu quoque, magnam
     Partem opere in tanto, sineret dolor, Icare, haberes,
     Bis conatus erat casus effingere in auro,--
     Bis patriæ cecidere manus."

There is, advisedly, no pathos allowed in primary sculpture. Its heroes
conquer without exultation, and die without sorrow.]

20. Quite the most beautiful sign of the power of true
Christian-Catholic faith is this continual acknowledgment by it of the
brotherhood--nay, more, the fatherhood, of the elder nations who had
not seen Christ; but had been filled with the Spirit of God; and
obeyed, according to their knowledge, His unwritten law. The pure
charity and humility of this temper are seen in all Christian art,
according to its strength and purity of race; but best, to the full,
seen and interpreted by the three great Christian-Heathen poets,
Dante, Douglas of Dunkeld,[49] and George Chapman. The prayer with
which the last ends his life's work is, so far as I know, the
perfectest and deepest expression of Natural Religion given us in
literature; and if you can, pray it here--standing on the spot where
the builder once wrote the history of the Parthenon of Christianity.

[Footnote 49: See 'Fors Clavigera,' Letter LXI., p. 22.]

21. "I pray thee, Lord, the Father, and the Guide of our reason, that
we may remember the nobleness with which Thou hast adorned us; and
that Thou wouldst be always on our right hand and on our left,[50] in
the motion of our own Wills: that so we may be purged from the
contagion of the Body and the Affections of the Brute, and overcome
them and rule; and use, as it becomes men to use them, for
instruments. And then, that Thou wouldst be in Fellowship with us for
the careful correction of our reason, and for its conjunction by the
light of truth with the things that truly are.

[Footnote 50: Thus, the command to the children of Israel "that they go
forward" is to their own wills. They obeying, the sea retreats, _but not
before_ they dare to advance into it. _Then_, the waters are a wall unto
them, on their right hand and their left.]

"And in the third place, I pray to Thee the Saviour, that
Thou wouldst utterly cleanse away the closing gloom from
the eyes of our souls, that we may know well who is to be held
for God, and who for mortal. Amen."[51]

[Footnote 51: The original is written in Latin only. "Supplico tibi,
Domine, Pater et Dux rationis nostræ, ut nostræ Nobilitatis
recordemur, quâ tu nos ornasti: et ut tu nobis presto sis, ut iis qui
per sese moventur; ut et a Corporis contagio, Brutorumque affectuum
repurgemur, eosque superemus, atque regamus; et, sicut decet, pro
instruments iis utamur. Deinde, ut nobis adjuncto sis; ad accuratam
rationis nostræ correctionem, et conjunctionem cum iis qui verè sunt,
per lucem veritatis. Et tertium, Salvatori supplex oro, ut ab oculis
animorum nostrorum caliginem prorsus abstergas; ut norimus bene, qui
Deus, aut Mortalis habendus. Amen."]

22. And having prayed this prayer, or at least, read it with honest
wishing, (which if you cannot, there is no hope of your at present
taking pleasure in any human work of large faculty, whether poetry,
painting, or sculpture,) we may walk a little farther westwards down
the nave, where, in the middle of it, but only a few yards from its
end, two flat stones (the custode will show you them), one a little
farther back than the other, are laid over the graves of the two great
bishops, all whose strength of life was given, with the builder's, to
raise this temple. Their actual graves have not been disturbed; but
the tombs raised over them, once and again removed, are now set on
your right and left hand as you look back to the apse, under the third
arch between the nave and aisles.

23. Both are of bronze, cast at one flow--and with insuperable, in
some respects inimitable, skill in the caster's art.

"Chefs-d'oeuvre de fonte,--le tout fondu d'un seul jet, et
admirablement."[52] There are only two other such tombs left in
France, those of the children of St. Louis. All others of their
kind--and they were many in every great cathedral of France--were
first torn from the graves they covered, to destroy the memory of
France's dead; and then melted down into sous and centimes, to buy
gunpowder and absinthe with for her living,--by the Progressive Mind
of Civilization in her first blaze of enthusiasm and new light, from
1789 to 1800.

[Footnote 52: Viollet le Duc, vol. viii., p. 256. He adds: "L'une
d'elles est comme art" (meaning general art of sculpture), "un
monument du premier ordre;" but this is only partially true--also I
find a note in M. Gilbert's account of them, p. 126: "Les deux doigts
qui manquent, à la main droite de l'évêque Gaudefroi paraissent être
un défaut survenu à la fonte." See further, on these monuments, and
those of St. Louis' children, Viollet le Duc, vol, ix., pp. 61, 62.]

The children's tombs, one on each side of the altar of St. Denis, are
much smaller than these, though wrought more beautifully. These beside
you are the _only two Bronze tombs of her Men of the great ages_, left
in France!

24. And they are the tombs of the pastors of her people, who built for
her the first perfect temple to her God. The Bishop Everard's is on
your right, and has engraved round the border of it this
inscription:[53]--

"Who fed the people, who laid the foundations of this
  Structure, to whose care the City was given,
 Here, in ever-breathing balm of fame, rests Everard.
 A man compassionate to the afflicted, the widow's protector, the orphan's
 Guardian. Whom he could, he recreated with gifts.
                To words of men,
 If gentle, a lamb; if violent, a lion; if proud, biting steel."

[Footnote 53: I steal again from the Abbé Rozé the two
inscriptions,--with his introductory notice of the evilly-inspired
interference with them.

"La tombe d'Evrard de Fouilloy, (died 1222,) coulée en bronze en
plein-relief, était supportée dès le principe, par des monstres
engagés dans une maçonnerie remplissant le dessous du monument, pour
indiquer que cet évêque avait posé les fondements de la Cathédrale. Un
_architecte malheureusement inspiré_ a osé arracher la maçonnerie,
pour qu'on ne vit plus la main du prélat fondateur, à la base de
l'édifice.

"On lit, sur la bordure, l'inscription suivante en beaux caractères du
XIII^e siècle:

     "'Qui populum pavit, qui fundam[=e]ta locavit
       Hui[=u]s structure, cuius fuit urbs data cure
       Hic redolens nardus, famâ requiescit Ewardus,
       Vir pius ahflictis, vidvis tutela, relictis
       Custos, quos poterat recreabat munere; vbis,
       Mitib agnus erat, tumidis leo, lima supbis.'

"Geoffrey d'Eu (died 1237) est représenté comme son prédécesseur en
habits épiscopaux, mais le dessous du bronze supporté par des chimères
est évidé, ce prélat ayant élevé l'édifice jusqu'aux voûtes. Voici la
légende gravée sur la bordure:

     "'Ecce premunt humile Gaufridi membra cubile.
       Seu minus aut simile nobis parat omnibus ille;
       Quem laurus gemina decoraverat, in medicinâ
       Lege q[=u] divina, decuerunt cornua bina;
       Clare vir Augensis, quo sedes Ambianensis
       Crevit in imensis; in coelis auctus, Amen, sis.'

Tout est à étudier dans ces deux monuments; tout y est d'un haut
intérêt, quant au dessin, à la sculpture, à l'agencement des ornements
et des draperies."

In saying above that Geoffroy of Eu returned thanks in the Cathedral
for its completion, I meant only that he had brought at least the
choir into condition for service: "Jusqu'aux voûtes" may or may not
mean that the vaulting was closed.]

English, at its best, in Elizabethan days, is a nobler language than
ever Latin was; but its virtue is in colour and tone, not in what may
be called metallic or crystalline condensation. And it is impossible
to translate the last line of this inscription in as few English
words. Note in it first that the Bishop's friends and enemies are
spoken of as in word, not act; because the swelling, or mocking, or
flattering, words of men are indeed what the meek of the earth must
know how to bear and to welcome;--their deeds, it is for kings and
knights to deal with: not but that the Bishops often took deeds in
hand also; and in actual battle they were permitted to strike with the
mace, but not with sword or lance--_i.e._, not to "shed blood"! For it
was supposed that a man might always recover from a mace-blow; (which,
however, would much depend on the bishop's mind who gave it). The
battle of Bouvines, quite one of the most important in mediæval
history, was won against the English, and against odds besides of
Germans, under their Emperor Otho, by two French bishops (Senlis and
Bayeux)--who both generalled the French King's line, and led its
charges. Our Earl of Salisbury surrendered to the Bishop of Bayeux in
person.

25. Note farther, that quite one of the deadliest and most diabolic
powers of evil words, or, rightly so called, blasphemy, has been
developed in modern days in the effect of sometimes quite innocently
meant and enjoyed 'slang.' There are two kinds of slang, in the essence
of it: one 'Thieves' Latin'--the special language of rascals, used for
concealment; the other, one might perhaps best call Louts' Latin!--the
lowering or insulting words invented by vile persons to bring good
things, in their own estimates, to their own level, or beneath it. The
really worst power of this kind of blasphemy is in its often making it
impossible to use plain words without a degrading or ludicrous attached
sense:--thus I could not end my translation of this epitaph, as the old
Latinist could, with the exactly accurate image "to the proud, a
file"--because of the abuse of the word in lower English, retaining,
however, quite shrewdly, the thirteenth-century idea. But the _exact_
force of the symbol here is in its allusion to jewellers' work, filing
down facets. A proud man is often also a precious one: and may be made
brighter in surface, and the purity of his inner self shown, by good
_filing_.

26. Take it all in all, the perfect duty of a Bishop is expressed in
these six Latin lines,--au mieux mieux--beginning with his pastoral
office--_Feed_ my sheep--qui _pavit_ populum. And be assured, good
reader, these ages never could have told you what a Bishop's, or any
other man's, duty was, unless they had each man in his place both done
it well--and seen it well done. The Bishop Geoffroy's tomb is on your
left, and its inscription is:

     "Behold, the limbs of Godfrey press their lowly bed,
      Whether He is preparing for us all one less than, or like it.
      Whom the twin laurels adorned, in medicine
      And in divine law, the dual crests became him.
      Bright-shining man of Eu, by whom the throne of Amiens
      Rose into immensity, be _thou_ increased in Heaven."

                                                     Amen.

And now at last--this reverence done and thanks paid--we will turn
from these tombs, and go out at one of the western doors--and so see
gradually rising above us the immensity of the three porches, and of
the thoughts engraved in them.

27. What disgrace or change has come upon them, I will not tell you
to-day--except only the 'immeasurable' loss of the great old
foundation-steps, open, sweeping broad from side to side for all who
came; unwalled, undivided, sunned all along by the westering day,
lighted only by the moon and the stars at night; falling steep and many
down the hillside--ceasing one by one, at last wide and few towards the
level--and worn by pilgrim feet, for six hundred years. So I once saw
them, and twice,--such things can now be never seen more.

Nor even of the west front itself, above, is much of the old masonry
left: but in the porches nearly all,--except the actual outside
facing, with its rose moulding, of which only a few flowers have been
spared here and there.[54] But the sculpture has been carefully and
honourably kept and restored to its place--pedestals or niches
restored here and there with clay; or some which you see white and
crude, re-carved entirely; nevertheless the impression you may receive
from the whole is still what the builder meant; and I will tell you
the order of its theology without further notices of its decay.

[Footnote 54: The horizontal lowest part of the moulding between the
northern and central porch is old. Compare its roses with the new ones
running round the arches above--and you will know what 'Restoration'
means.]

28. You will find it always well, in looking at any cathedral, to make
your quarters of the compass sure, in the beginning; and to remember
that, as you enter it, you are looking and advancing eastward; and
that if it has three entrance porches, that on your left in entering
is the northern, that on your right the southern. I shall endeavour in
all my future writing of architecture, to observe the simple law of
always calling the door of the north transept the north door; and that
on the same side of the west front, the northern door, and so of their
opposites. This will save, in the end, much printing and much
confusion, for a Gothic cathedral has, almost always, these five great
entrances; which may be easily, if at first attentively, recognized
under the titles of the Central door (or porch), the Northern door,
the Southern door, the North door, and the South door.

But when we use the terms right and left, we ought always
to use them as in going _out_ of the cathedral, or walking down the
nave,--the entire north side and aisles of the building being its
right side, and the south, its left,--these terms being only used well
and authoritatively, when they have reference either to the image of
Christ in the apse or on the rood, or else to the central statue,
whether of Christ, the Virgin, or a saint, in the west front. At
Amiens, this central statue, on the 'trumeau' or supporting and
dividing pillar of the central porch, is of Christ Immanuel,--God
_with_ us. On His right hand and His left, occupying the entire walls
of the central porch, are the apostles and the four greater prophets.
The twelve minor prophets stand side by side on the front, three on
each of its great piers.[55]

[Footnote 55: See now the plan at the end of this chapter.]

The northern porch is dedicated to St. Firmin, the first Christian
missionary to Amiens.

The southern porch, to the Virgin.

But these are both treated as withdrawn behind the great foundation of
Christ and the Prophets; and their narrow recesses partly conceal
their sculpture, until you enter them. What you have first to think
of, and read, is the scripture of the great central porch, and the
façade itself.

29. You have then in the centre of the front, the image of Christ
Himself, receiving you: "I am the Way, the truth and the life." And the
order of the attendant powers may be best understood by thinking of them
as placed on Christ's right and left hand: this being also the order
which the builder adopts in his Scripture history on the façade--so that
it is to be read from left to right--_i.e._ from Christ's left to
Christ's right, as _He_ sees it. Thus, therefore, following the order of
the great statues: first in the central porch, there are six apostles on
Christ's right hand, and six on His left. On His left hand, next to Him,
Peter; then in receding order, Andrew, James, John, Matthew, Simon; on
His right hand, next Him, Paul; and in receding order, James the Bishop,
Philip, Bartholomew, Thomas and Jude. These opposite ranks of the
Apostles occupy what may be called the apse or curved bay of the porch,
and form a nearly semicircular group, clearly visible as we approach.
But on the sides of the porch, outside the lines of apostles, and not
seen clearly till we enter the porch, are the four greater prophets. On
Christ's left, Isaiah and Jeremiah, on His right, Ezekiel and Daniel.

30. Then in front, along the whole façade--read in order from Christ's
left to His right--come the series of the twelve minor prophets, three
to each of the four piers of the temple, beginning at the south angle
with Hosea, and ending with Malachi.

As you look full at the façade in front, the statues which fill the
minor porches are either obscured in their narrower recesses or
withdrawn behind each other so as to be unseen. And the entire mass of
the front is seen, literally, as built on the foundation of the
Apostles and Prophets, Jesus Christ Himself being the chief
corner-stone. Literally _that_; for the receding Porch is a deep
'angulus,' and its mid-pillar is the 'Head of the Corner.'

Built on the foundation of the Apostles and Prophets, that is to say
of the Prophets who foretold _Christ_, and the Apostles who declared
Him. Though Moses was an Apostle, of _God_, he is not here--though
Elijah was a Prophet, of _God_, he is not here. The voice of the
entire building is that of the Heaven at the Transfiguration, "This is
my beloved Son, hear ye Him."

31. There is yet another and a greater prophet still, who, as it seems
at first, is not here. Shall the people enter the gates of the temple,
singing "Hosanna to the Son of _David_"; and see no image of His
father, then?--Christ Himself declare, "I am the root and the
offspring of David"; and yet the Root have no sign near it of its
Earth?

Not so. David and his Son are together. David is the pedestal of the
Christ.

32. We will begin our examination of the Temple front, therefore, with
this its goodly pedestal stone. The statue of David is only two-thirds
life-size, occupying the niche in front of the pedestal. He holds his
sceptre in his right hand, the scroll in his left. King and Prophet,
type of all Divinely right doing, and right claiming, and right
proclaiming, kinghood, for ever.

The pedestal of which this statue forms the fronting or Western
sculpture, is square, and on the two sides of it are two flowers in
vases, on its north side the lily, and on its south the rose. And the
entire monolith is one of the noblest pieces of Christian sculpture in
the world.

Above this pedestal comes a minor one, bearing in front of it a
tendril of vine which completes the floral symbolism of the whole. The
plant which I have called a lily is not the Fleur de Lys, nor the
Madonna's, but an ideal one with bells like the crown Imperial
(Shakespeare's type of 'lilies of all kinds'), representing the _mode
of growth_ of the lily of the valley, which could not be sculptured so
large in its literal form without appearing monstrous, and is exactly
expressed in this tablet--as it fulfils, together with the rose and
vine, its companions, the triple saying of Christ, "I am the Rose of
Sharon, and the Lily of the Valley." "I am the true Vine."

       *       *       *       *       *

33. On the side of the upper stone are supporters of a different
character. Supporters,--not captives nor victims; the Cockatrice and
Adder. Representing the most active evil principles of the earth, as
in their utmost malignity; still, Pedestals of Christ, and even in
their deadly life, accomplishing His final will.

Both creatures are represented accurately in the mediæval traditional
form, the cockatrice half dragon, half cock; the deaf adder laying one
ear against the ground and stopping the other with her tail.

The first represents the infidelity of Pride. The cockatrice--king
serpent or highest serpent--saying that he _is_ God, and _will be_
God.

The second, the infidelity of Death. The adder (nieder or nether
snake) saying that he _is_ mud, and _will be_ mud.

34. Lastly, and above all, set under the feet of the statue
of Christ Himself, are the lion and dragon; the images of Carnal sin,
or _Human sin_, as distinguished from the Spiritual and Intellectual
sin of Pride, by which the angels also fell.

To desire kingship rather than servantship--the Cockatrice's sin, or
deaf Death rather than hearkening Life--the Adder's sin,--these are
both possible to all the intelligences of the universe. But the
distinctively Human sins, anger and lust, seeds in our race of their
perpetual sorrow--Christ in His own humanity, conquered; and conquers
in His disciples. Therefore His foot is on the heads of these; and the
prophecy, "Inculcabis super Leonem et Aspidem," is recognized always
as fulfilled in Him, and in all His true servants, according to the
height of their authority, and the truth of their power.

35. In this mystic sense, Alexander III. used the words, in restoring
peace to Italy, and giving forgiveness to her deadliest enemy, under
the porch of St. Mark's.[56] But the meaning of every act, as of every
art, of the Christian ages, lost now for three hundred years, cannot
but be in our own times read reversed, if at all, through the
counter-spirit which we now have reached; glorifying Pride and Avarice
as the virtues by which all things move and have their being--walking
after our own lusts as our sole guides to salvation, and foaming out
our own shame for the sole earthly product of our hands and lips.

[Footnote 56: See my abstract of the history of Barbarossa and
Alexander, in 'Fiction, Fair and Foul,' '_Nineteenth Century_,'
November, 1880, pp. 752 _seq._]

36. Of the statue of Christ, itself, I will not speak here at any
length, as no sculpture would satisfy, or ought to satisfy, the hope of
any loving soul that has learned to trust in Him; but at the time, it
was beyond what till then had been reached in sculptured tenderness; and
was known far and near as the "Beau Dieu d'Amiens."[57] Yet understood,
observe, just as clearly to be no more than a symbol of the Heavenly
Presence, as the poor coiling worms below were no more than symbols of
the demoniac ones. No _idol_, in our sense of the word--only a letter,
or sign of the Living Spirit,--which, however, was indeed conceived by
every worshipper as here meeting him at the temple gate: the Word of
Life, the King of Glory, and the Lord of Hosts.

[Footnote 57: See account, and careful drawing of it, in Viollet le
Duc--article "Christ," Dict. of Architecture, iii. 245.]

"Dominus Virtutum," "Lord of Virtues,"[58] is the best single rendering
of the idea conveyed to a well-taught disciple in the thirteenth
century by the words of the twenty-fourth Psalm.

[Footnote 58: See the circle of the Powers of the Heavens in the
Byzantine rendering. I. Wisdom; II. Thrones; III. Dominations; IV.
Angels; V. Archangels; VI. Virtues; VII. Potentates; VIII. Princes;
IX. Seraphim. In the Gregorian order, (Dante, Par. xxviii., Cary's
note,) the Angels and Archangels are separated, giving altogether nine
orders, but not ranks. Note that in the Byzantine circle the cherubim
are first, and that it is the strength of the Virtues which calls on
the dead to rise ('St. Mark's Rest,' p. 97, and pp. 158-159).]

37. Under the feet of His apostles, therefore, in the quatrefoil
medallions of the foundation, are represented the virtues which each
Apostle taught, or in his life manifested;--it may have been, sore
tried, and failing in the very strength of the character which he
afterwards perfected. Thus St. Peter, denying in fear, is afterwards
the Apostle of courage; and St. John, who, with his brother, would
have burnt the inhospitable village, is afterwards the Apostle of
love. Understanding this, you see that in the sides of the porch, the
apostles with their special virtues stand thus in opposite ranks.

Now you see how these virtues answer to each other in their opposite
ranks. Remember the left-hand side is always the first, and see how
the left-hand virtues lead to the right hand:--

                   Courage        to Faith.
                   Patience       to Hope.
                   Gentillesse    to Charity.
                   Love           to Chastity.
                   Obedience      to Wisdom.
                   Perseverance   to Humility.

38. Note farther that the Apostles are all tranquil, nearly all with
books, some with crosses, but all with the same message,--"Peace be to
this house. And if the Son of Peace be there," etc.[59]

[Footnote 59: The modern slang name for a priest, among the mob of
France, is a 'Pax Vobiscum,' or shortly, a Vobiscum.]

ST. PAUL,              Faith.     Courage,      ST. PETER.

ST. JAMES THE BISHOP,  Hope.      Patience,     ST. ANDREW.

ST. PHILIP,            Charity.   Gentillesse,  ST. JAMES.

ST. BARTHOLOMEW,       Chastity.  Love,         ST. JOHN.

ST. THOMAS,            Wisdom.    Obedience,    ST. MATTHEW.

ST. JUDE,              Humility.  Perseverance, ST. SIMON.

But the Prophets--all seeking, or wistful, or tormented, or wondering,
or praying, except only Daniel. The _most_ tormented is Isaiah;
spiritually sawn asunder. No scene of his martyrdom below, but his
seeing the Lord in His temple, and yet feeling he had unclean lips.
Jeremiah also carries his cross--but more serenely.

39. And now, I give in clear succession, the order of the statues of
the whole front, with the subjects of the quatrefoils beneath each of
them, marking the upper quatrefoil A, the lower B. The six prophets
who stand at the angles of the porches, Amos, Obadiah, Micah, Nahum,
Zephaniah, and Haggai, have each of them four quatrefoils, marked, A
and C the upper ones, B and D the lower.

Beginning, then, on the left-hand side of the central porch, and
reading outwards, you have--

         1. ST. PETER.

                             A. Courage.
                             B. Cowardice.

         2. ST. ANDREW.

                             A. Patience.
                             B. Anger.

         3. ST. JAMES.

                             A. Gentillesse.
                             B. Churlishness.

         4. ST. JOHN.

                             A. Love.
                             B. Discord.

         5. ST. MATTHEW.

                             A. Obedience.
                             B. Rebellion.

         6. ST. SIMON.

                             A. Perseverance.
                             B. Atheism.

Now, right-hand side of porch, reading outwards:

         7. ST. PAUL.

                             A. Faith.
                             B. Idolatry.

         8. ST. JAMES, BISHOP.

                             A. Hope.
                             B. Despair.

         9. ST. PHILIP.

                             A. Charity.
                             B. Avarice.

        10. ST. BARTHOLOMEW.

                             A. Chastity.
                             B. Lust.

        11. ST. THOMAS.

                             A. Wisdom.
                             B. Folly.

        12. ST. JUDE.

                             A. Humility.
                             B. Pride.

Now, left-hand side again--the two outermost statues:

        13. ISAIAH.

          A. "I saw the Lord sitting upon a throne."        vi. 1.
          B. "Lo, this hath touched thy lips."              vi. 7.

        14. JEREMIAH.

          A. The Burial of the Girdle.                 xiii. 4, 5.
          B. The Breaking of the Yoke.               xxviii.   10.

Right-hand side:

        15. EZEKIEL.

          A. Wheel within wheel.                            i. 16.
          B. "Son of man, set thy face toward Jerusalem." xxi.  2.

        16. DANIEL.

          A. "He hath shut the lions' mouths."             vi. 22.
          B. "In the same hour came forth fingers
               of a man's hand."                             v. 5.

40. Now, beginning on the left-hand side (southern side)
of the entire façade, and reading it straight across, not turning into
the porches at all except for the paired quatrefoils:

        17. HOSEA.

          A. "So I bought her to me with fifteen
                pieces of silver."                         iii. 2.
          B. "So will I also be for thee."                 iii. 3.

        18. JOEL.

          A. The Sun and Moon lightless.                   ii. 10.
          B. The Fig-tree and Vine leafless.                i.  7.

        19. AMOS.

  To The {A. "The Lord will cry from Zion."                  i. 2.
  front  {B. "The habitations of the shepherds
                shall mourn."                                i. 2.

  Inside {C. The Lord with the mason's line.               vii. 8.
  porch  {D. The place where it rained not.                 iv. 7.

        20. OBADIAH.

  Inside {A. "I hid them in a cave."            2 Kings xviii. 13.
  porch  {B. He fell on his face.                      xviii.   7.

  To the {C. The captain of fifty.
  front  {D. The messenger.

        21. JONAH.

          A. Escaped from the sea.
          B. Under the gourd.

        22. MICAH.

  To the {A. The Tower of the Flock.                        iv. 8.
  front  {B. Each shall rest, and "none shall make
              them afraid."                                 iv. 4.

  Inside {C. Swords into ploughshares.                      iv. 3.
  porch  {D. Spears into pruning-hooks.                     iv. 3.

        23. NAHUM.

  Inside {A. None shall look back.                          ii. 8.
  porch  {B. The burden of Nineveh.                          i. 1.

  To the {C. Thy princes and thy great ones.              iii. 17.
  front  {D. Untimely figs.                               iii. 12.

        24. HABAKKUK.

          A. "I will watch to see what he will say,"        ii. 1.
          B. The ministry to Daniel.

        25. ZEPHANIAH.

  To the {A. The Lord strikes Ethiopia.                    ii. 12.
  front  {B. The Beasts in Nineveh.                        ii. 15.

  Inside {C. The Lord visits Jerusalem.                     i. 12.
  porch  {D. The Hedgehog and Bittern.[60]                 ii. 14.

        26. HAGGAI.

  Inside {A. The houses of the princes, _ornées de
  porch       lambris_.                                     i.  4.
         {B. The heaven is stayed from dew.                 i. 10.

  To the {C. The Lord's temple desolate.                     i. 4.
  front  {D. "Thus saith the Lord of Hosts."                 i. 7.

        27. ZECHARIAH.

          A. The lifting up of iniquity.                   v. 6-9.
          B. The angel that spake to me.                  iv.   1.

        28. MALACHI.

          A. "Ye have wounded the Lord."                   ii. 17.
          B. This commandment is to _you_.                 ii.  1.

[Footnote 60: See the Septuagint version.]

41. Having thus put the sequence of the statues and their quatrefoils
briefly before the spectator--(in case the railway time presses, it
may be a kindness to him to note that if he walks from the east end of
the cathedral down the street to the south, Rue St. Denis, it takes
him by the shortest line to the station)--I will begin again with St.
Peter, and interpret the sculptures in the quatrefoils a little more
fully. Keeping the fixed numerals for indication of the statues, St.
Peter's quatrefoils will be 1 A and 1 B, and Malachi's 28 A and 28 B.

1, A. COURAGE, with a leopard on his shield; the French and
       English agreeing in the reading of that symbol, down
       to the time of the Black Prince's leopard coinage in
       Aquitaine.[61]

[Footnote 61: For a list of the photographs of the quatrefoils
described in this chapter, see the appendices at the end of this
volume.]

2, B. COWARDICE, a man frightened at an animal darting out
       of a thicket, while a bird sings on. The coward has
       not the heart of a thrush.

2, A. PATIENCE, holding a shield with a bull on it (never giving
       back).[62]

[Footnote 62: In the cathedral of Laon there is a pretty compliment
paid to the oxen who carried the stones of its tower to the hill-top
it stands on. The tradition is that they harnessed themselves,--but
tradition does not say how an ox can harness himself even if he had a
mind. Probably the first form of the story was only that they went
joyfully, "lowing as they went." But at all events their statues are
carved on the height of the tower, eight, colossal, looking from its
galleries across the plains of France. See drawing in Viollet le Duc,
under article "Clocher."]

2, B. ANGER, a woman stabbing a man with a sword. Anger
       is essentially a feminine vice--a man, worth calling so,
       may be driven to fury or insanity by _indignation_,
       (compare the Black Prince at Limoges,) but not by
       anger. Fiendish enough, often so--"Incensed with
       indignation, Satan stood, _unterrified_--" but in that last
       word is the difference, there is as much fear in Anger,
       as there is in Hatred.

3, A. GENTILLESSE, bearing shield with a lamb.

3, B. CHURLISHNESS, again a woman, kicking over her cup-bearer.
       The final forms of ultimate French churlishness
       being in the feminine gestures of the Cancan.
       See the favourite prints in shops of Paris.

4, A. LOVE; the Divine, not human love: "I in them, and
       Thou in me." Her shield bears a tree with many
       branches grafted into its cut-off stem: "In those days
       shall Messiah be cut off, but not for Himself."

4, B. DISCORD, a wife and husband quarrelling. She has
       dropped her distaff (Amiens wool manufacture, see farther
       on--9, A.)

5, A. OBEDIENCE, bears shield with camel. Actually the most
       disobedient and ill-tempered of all serviceable beasts,--yet
       passing his life in the most painful service. I do
       not know how far his character was understood by the
       northern sculptor; but I believe he is taken as a type
       of burden-bearing, without joy or sympathy, such as
       the horse has, and without power of offence, such as the
       ox has. His bite is bad enough, (see Mr. Palgrave's
       account of him,) but presumably little known of at
       Amiens, even by Crusaders, who would always ride
       their own war-horses, or nothing.

5, B. REBELLION, a man snapping his fingers at his Bishop.
       (As Henry the Eighth at the Pope,--and the modern
       French and English cockney at all priests whatever.)

6, A. PERSEVERENCE, the grandest spiritual form of the virtue
       commonly called 'Fortitude.' Usually, overcoming
       or tearing a lion; here, _caressing_ one, and _holding_ her
       crown. "Hold fast that which thou hast, that no man
       take thy crown."

6, B. ATHEISM, leaving his shoes at the church door. The infidel
       fool is always represented in twelfth and thirteenth
       century MS. as barefoot--the Christian having "his
       feet shod with the preparation of the Gospel of Peace."
       Compare "How beautiful are thy feet with shoes, O
       Prince's Daughter!"

7, A. FAITH, holding cup with cross above it, her accepted
       symbol throughout ancient Europe. It is also an enduring
       one, for, all differences of Church put aside, the
       words, "Except ye eat the flesh of the Son of Man and
       Drink His blood, ye have no life in you," remain in
       their mystery, to be understood only by those who have
       learned the sacredness of food, in all times and places,
       and the laws of life and spirit, dependent on its acceptance,
       refusal, and distribution.

7, B. IDOLATRY, kneeling to a monster. The _contrary_ of
       Faith--not _want_ of Faith. Idolatry is faith in the
       wrong thing, and quite distinct from Faith in _No_ thing
       (6, B), the "Dixit Insipiens." Very wise men may be
       idolaters, but they cannot be atheists.

8, A. HOPE, with Gonfalon Standard and _distant_ crown; as
       opposed to the constant crown of Fortitude (6, A).

        The Gonfalon (Gund, war, fahr, standard, according
      to Poitevin's dictionary), is the pointed ensign of forward
      battle; essentially sacred; hence the constant
      name "Gonfaloniere" of the battle standard-bearers of
      the Italian republics.

        Hope has it, because she fights forward always to her
      aim, or at least has the joy of seeing it draw nearer.
      Faith and Fortitude wait, as St. John in prison, but unoffended.
      Hope is, however, put under St. James, because
      of the 7th and 8th verses of his last chapter, ending
      "Stablish your hearts, for the coming of the Lord
      draweth nigh." It is he who examines Dante on the
      nature of Hope. 'Par.,' c. xxv., and compare Cary's
      notes.

8, B. DESPAIR, stabbing himself. Suicide not thought heroic
       or sentimental in the 13th century; and no Gothic
       Morgue built beside Somme.

9, A. CHARITY, bearing shield with woolly ram, and giving a
       mantle to a naked beggar. The old wool manufacture
       of Amiens having this notion of its purpose--namely,
       to clothe the poor first, the rich afterwards. No nonsense
       talked in those days about the evil consequences
       of indiscriminate charity.

9, B. AVARICE, with coffer and money. The modern, alike
       English and Amienois, notion of the Divine consummation
       of the wool manufacture.

10, A. CHASTITY, shield with the Phoenix.[63]

[Footnote 63: For the sake of comparing the pollution, and reversal of
its once glorious religion, in the modern French mind, it is worth the
reader's while to ask at M. Goyer's (Place St. Denis) for the 'Journal
de St. Nicholas' for 1880, and look at the 'Phénix,' as drawn on p.
610. The story is meant to be moral, and the Phoenix there
represents Avarice, but the entire destruction of all sacred and
poetical tradition in a child's mind by such a picture is an
immorality which would neutralize a year's preaching. To make it worth
M. Goyer's while to show you the number, buy the one with 'les
conclusions de Jeanie' in it, p. 337: the church scene (with dialogue)
in the text is lovely.]

10, B. LUST, a too violent kiss.

11, A. WISDOM, shield with, I think, an eatable root; meaning
        temperance, as the beginning of wisdom.

11, B. FOLLY, the ordinary type used in all early Psalters, of
        a glutton, armed with a club. Both this vice and
        virtue are the earthly wisdom and folly, completing
        the spiritual wisdom and folly opposite under St.
        Matthew. Temperance, the complement of Obedience,
        and Covetousness, with violence, that of Atheism.

12, A. HUMILITY, shield with dove.

12, B. PRIDE, falling from his horse.

42. All these quatrefoils are rather symbolic than representative;
and, since their purpose was answered enough if their sign was
understood, they have been entrusted to a more inferior workman than
the one who carved the now sequent series under the Prophets. Most of
these subjects represent an historical fact, or a scene spoken of by
the prophet as a real vision; and they have in general been executed
by the ablest hands at the architect's command.

With the interpretation of these, I have given again the name of the
prophet whose life or prophecy they illustrate.

13. ISAIAH.

13, A. "I saw the Lord sitting upon a throne" (vi. I).

           The vision of the throne "high and lifted up"
         between seraphim.

13, B. "Lo, this hath touched thy lips" (vi. 7).

           The Angel stands before the prophet, and holds,
         or rather held, the coal with tongs, which have been
         finely undercut, but are now broken away, only a
         fragment remaining in his hand.

14. JEREMIAH.

14, A. The burial of the girdle (xiii. 4, 5).

           The prophet is digging by the shore of Euphrates,
         represented by vertically winding furrows down the
         middle of the tablet. Note, the translation should be
         "hole in the ground," not "rock."

14, B. The breaking of the yoke (xxviii. 10).

           From the prophet Jeremiah's neck; it is here
         represented as a doubled and redoubled chain.

15. EZEKIEL.

15, A. Wheel within wheel (i. 16).

           The prophet sitting; before him two wheels of
         equal size, one involved in the ring of the other.

15, B. "Son of man, set thy face toward Jerusalem" (xxi. 2).

           The prophet before the gate of Jerusalem.

16. DANIEL.

16, A. "He hath shut the lions' mouths" (vi. 22).

           Daniel holding a book, the lions treated as heraldic
         supporters. The subject is given with more
         animation farther on in the series (24, B).

16, B. "In the same hour came forth fingers of a Man's hand" (v. 5).

           Belshazzar's feast represented by the king alone,
         seated at a small oblong table. Beside him the youth
         Daniel, looking only fifteen or sixteen, graceful and
         gentle, interprets. At the side of the quatrefoil,
         out of a small wreath of cloud, comes a small bent
         hand, writing, as if with a pen upside down on a piece
         of Gothic wall.[64]

           For modern bombast as opposed to old simplicity,
         compare the Belshazzar's feast of John Martin!

[Footnote 64: I fear this hand has been broken since I described it; at
all events, it is indistinguishably shapeless in the photograph (No. 9
of the series).]

  43. The next subject begins the series of the minor prophets.

17. HOSEA.

17, A. "So I bought her to me for fifteen pieces of silver and
         an homer of barley" (iii. 2).

           The prophet pouring the grain and the silver into
         the lap of the woman, "beloved of her friend." The
         carved coins are each wrought with the cross, and, I
         believe, legend of the French contemporary coin.

17, B. "So will I also be for thee" (iii. 3).

           He puts a ring on her finger.

18. JOEL.

18, A. The sun and moon lightless (ii. 10).

           The sun and moon as two small flat pellets, up in
         the external moulding.

18, B. The barked fig-tree and waste vine (i. 7).

           Note the continual insistance on the blight of vegetation
         as a Divine punishment, 19 D.

19. AMOS.

_To the front._

19, A. "The Lord will cry from Zion" (i. 2).

          Christ appears with crossletted nimbus.

19, B. "The habitations of the shepherds shall mourn" (i. 2).

          Amos with the shepherd's hooked or knotted staff,
        and wicker-worked bottle, before his tent. (Architecture
        in right-hand foil restored.)

_Inside Porch._

19, C. The Lord with the mason's line (vii. 8).

           Christ, again here, and henceforward always, with
         crosslet nimbus, has a large trowel in His hand, which
         He lays on the top of a half-built wall. There seems
         a line twisted round the handle.

19, D. The place where it rained not (iv. 7).

           Amos is gathering the leaves of the fruitless vine,
         to feed the sheep, who find no grass. One of the
         finest of the reliefs.

20. OBADIAH.

_Inside Porch._

20, A. "I hid them in a cave" (1 Kings xviii. 13).

            Three prophets at the mouth of a well, to whom
          Obadiah brings loaves.

20, B. "He fell on his face" (xviii. 7).

           He kneels before Elijah, who wears his rough
         mantle.

_To the front._

20, C. The captain of fifty.

           Elijah (?) speaking to an armed man under a tree.

20, D. The Messenger.

           A messenger on his knees before a king. I cannot
         interpret these two scenes (20, C and 20, D).
         The uppermost _may_ mean the dialogue of Elijah
         with the captains (2 Kings i. 2), and the lower one,
         the return of the messengers (2 Kings i. 5).

21. JONAH.

21, A. Escaped from the sea.

21, B. Under the gourd. A small grasshopper-like beast
         gnawing the gourd stem. I should like to know
         what insects _do_ attack the Amiens gourds. This may
         be an entomological study, for aught we know.

22. MICAH.

_To the front._

22, A. The Tower of the Flock (iv. 8).

           The tower is wrapped in clouds, God appearing
         above it.

22, B. Each shall rest and "none shall make them afraid" (iv. 4).

            A man and his wife "under his vine and fig-tree."

_Inside Porch._

22, C. "Swords into ploughshares" (iv. 3).

          Nevertheless, two hundred years after these medallions
        were cut, the sword manufacture had become a
        staple in Amiens! Not to her advantage.

22, D. "Spears into pruning-hooks" (iv. 3).

23. NAHUM.

_Inside Porch._

23, A. "None shall look back" (ii. 8).

23, B. The Burden of Nineveh (i. I).[65]

[Footnote 65: The statue of the prophet, above, is the grandest of the
entire series; and note especially the "diadema" of his own luxuriant
hair plaited like a maiden's, indicating the Achillean force of this
most terrible of the prophets. (Compare 'Fors Clavigera,' Letter LXV.,
page 157.) For the rest, this long flowing hair was always one of the
insignia of the Frankish kings, and their way of dressing both hair
and beard may be seen more nearly and definitely in the
angle-sculptures of the long font in the north transept, the most
interesting piece of work in the whole cathedral, in an antiquarian
sense, and of much artistic value also. (See ante chap. ii. p. 45.)]

_To the front._

23, C. "Thy Princes and thy great ones" (iii. 17).

  23, A, B, and C, are all incapable of sure interpretation. The
         prophet in A is pointing down to a little hill, said by
         the Père Rozé to be covered with grasshoppers. I
         can only copy what he says of them.

23, D. "Untimely figs" (iii. 12).

          Three people beneath a fig-tree catch its falling
        fruit in their mouths.

24. HABAKKUK.

24, A. "I will watch to see what he will say unto me" (ii. 1).

           The prophet is writing on his tablet to Christ's
         dictation.

24, B. The ministry to Daniel.

           The traditional visit to Daniel. An angel carries
         Habakkuk by the hair of his head; the prophet
         has a loaf of bread in each hand. They break
         through the roof of the cave. Daniel is stroking one
         young lion on the back; the head of another is thrust
         carelessly under his arm. Another is gnawing
         bones in the bottom of the cave.

25. ZEPHANIAH.

_To the front._

25, A. The Lord strikes Ethiopia (ii. 12).

           Christ striking a city with a sword. Note that all
         violent actions are in these bas-reliefs feebly or ludicrously
         expressed; quiet ones always right.

25, B. The beasts in Nineveh (ii. 15).

           Very fine. All kinds of crawling things among
         the tottering walls, and peeping out of their rents
         and crannies. A monkey sitting squat, developing
         into a demon, reverses the Darwinian theory.

_Inside porch._

25, C. The Lord visits Jerusalem (i. 12).

           Christ passing through the streets of Jerusalem,
         with a lantern in each hand.

25, D. The Hedgehog and Bittern[66] (ii. 14).

           With a singing bird in a cage in the window.

[Footnote 66: See ante p. 117, note.]

26. HAGGAI.

_Inside Porch._

26, A. The houses of the princes, _ornées de lambris_ (i. 4).

           A perfectly built house of square stones gloomily
         strong, the grating (of a prison?) in front of foundation.

26, B. The Heaven is stayed from dew (i. 10).

           The heavens as a projecting mass, with stars, sun,
         and moon on surface. Underneath, two withered
         trees.

_To the front._

26, C. The Lord's temple desolate (i. 4).

           The falling of the temple, "not one stone left on
         another," grandly loose. Square stones again. Examine
         the text (i. 6).

26, D. "Thus saith the Lord of Hosts" (i. 7).

          Christ pointing up to His ruined temple.

27. ZECHARIAH.

27, A. The lifting up of Iniquity (v. 6 to 9).

          Wickedness in the Ephah.

27, B. "The angel that spake to me" (iv. 1).

          The prophet almost reclining, a glorious winged
        angel hovering out of cloud.

28. MALACHI.

28, A. "Ye have wounded the Lord" (ii. 17).

          The priests are thrusting Christ through with a
        barbed lance, whose point comes out at His back.

28, B. "This commandment is to _you_" (ii. 1).

          In these panels, the undermost is often introductory
        to the one above, an illustration of it. It is perhaps
        chapter i. verse 6, that is meant to be spoken here by
        the sitting figure of Christ, to the indignant priests.

44. With this bas-relief terminates the series of sculpture in
illustration of Apostolic and Prophetic teaching, which constitutes
what I mean by the "Bible" of Amiens. But the two lateral porches
contain supplementary subjects necessary for completion of the
pastoral and traditional teaching addressed to her people in that day.

The Northern Porch, dedicated to her first missionary St. Firmin, has
on its central pier his statue; above, on the flat field of the back
of the arch, the story of the finding of his body; on the sides of the
porch, companion saints and angels in the following order:--

CENTRAL STATUE.

ST. FIRMIN.

  _Southern (left) side._

  41. St. Firmin the Confessor.
  42. St. Domice.
  43. St. Honoré.
  44. St. Salve.
  45. St. Quentin.
  46. St. Gentian.

  _Northern (right) side._

  47. St. Geoffroy.
  48. An angel.
  49. St. Fuscien, martyr.
  50. St. Victoric, martyr.
  51. An angel.
  52. St. Ulpha.

45. Of these saints, excepting St. Firmin and St. Honoré, of whom I have
already spoken,[67] St. Geoffroy is more real for us than the rest; he
was born in the year of the battle of Hastings, at Molincourt in the
Soissonais, and was Bishop of Amiens from 1104 to 1150. A man of
entirely simple, pure, and right life: one of the severest of ascetics,
but without gloom--always gentle and merciful. Many miracles are
recorded of him, but all indicating a tenour of life which was chiefly
miraculous by its justice and peace. Consecrated at Rheims, and attended
by a train of other bishops and nobles to his diocese, he dismounts from
his horse at St. Acheul, the place of St. Firmin's first tomb, and walks
barefoot to his cathedral, along the causeway now so defaced: at another
time he walks barefoot from Amiens to Picquigny to ask from the Vidame
of Amiens the freedom of the Chatelain Adam. He maintained the
privileges of the citizens, with the help of Louis le Gros, against the
Count of Amiens, defeated him, and razed his castle; nevertheless, the
people not enough obeying him in the order of their life, he blames his
own weakness, rather than theirs, and retires to the Grande Chartreuse,
holding himself unfit to be their bishop. The Carthusian superior
questioning him on his reasons for retirement, and asking if he had ever
sold the offices of the Church, the Bishop answered, "My father, my
hands are pure of simony, but I have a thousand times allowed myself to
be seduced by praise."

[Footnote 67: See ante Chap. I., pp. 5-6, for the history of St.
Firmin, and for St. Honoré p. 95, § 8 of this chapter, with the
reference there given.]

46. St. Firmin the Confessor was the son of the Roman senator who
received St. Firmin himself. He preserved the tomb of the martyr in
his father's garden, and at last built a church over it, dedicated to
our Lady of martyrs, which was the first episcopal seat of Amiens, at
St. Acheul, spoken of above. St. Ulpha was an Amienoise girl, who
lived in a chalk cave above the marshes of the Somme;--if ever Mr.
Murray provides you with a comic guide to Amiens, no doubt the
enlightened composer of it will count much on your enjoyment of the
story of her being greatly disturbed at her devotions by the frogs,
and praying them silent. You are now, of course, wholly superior to
such follies, and are sure that God cannot, or will not, so much as
shut a frog's mouth for you. Remember, therefore, that as He also now
leaves open the mouth of the liar, blasphemer, and betrayer, you must
shut your own ears against _their_ voices as you can.

Of her name, St. Wolf--or Guelph--see again Miss Yonge's Christian
names. Our tower of Wolf's stone, Ulverstone, and Kirk of Ulpha, are,
I believe, unconscious of Picard relatives.

47. The other saints in this porch are all in like manner provincial,
and, as it were, personal friends of the Amienois; and under them, the
quatrefoils represent the pleasant order of the guarded and hallowed
year--the zodiacal signs above, and labours of the months below; little
differing from the constant representations of them--except in the May:
see below. The Libra also is a little unusual in the female figure
holding the scales; the lion especially good-tempered--and the 'reaping'
one of the most beautiful figures in the whole series of sculptures;
several of the others peculiarly refined and far-wrought. In Mr.
Kaltenbacher's photographs, as I have arranged them, the bas-reliefs may
be studied nearly as well as in the porch itself. Their order is as
follows, beginning with December, in the left-hand inner corner of the
porch:--

41. DECEMBER.--Killing and scalding swine. Above, Capricorn
      with quickly diminishing tail; I cannot make out
      the accessories.

42. JANUARY.--Twin-headed, obsequiously served. Aquarius
      feebler than most of the series.

43. FEBRUARY.--Very fine; warming his feet and putting coals
      on fire. Fish above, elaborate but uninteresting.

44. MARCH.--At work in vine-furrows. Aries careful, but
      rather stupid.

45. APRIL.--Feeding his hawk--very pretty. Taurus above
      with charming leaves to eat.

46. MAY.--Very singularly, a middle-aged man sitting under
      the trees to hear the birds sing; and Gemini above, a
      bridegroom and bride. This quatrefoil joins the interior
      angle ones of Zephaniah.

52. JUNE.--Opposite, joining the interior angle ones of Haggai.
      Mowing. Note the lovely flowers sculptured all
      through the grass. Cancer above, with his shell superbly
      modelled.

51. JULY.--Reaping. Extremely beautiful. The smiling lion
      completes the evidence that all the seasons and signs
      are regarded as alike blessing and providentially kind.

50. AUGUST.--Threshing. Virgo above, holding a flower, her
      drapery very modern and confused for thirteenth-century
      work.

49. SEPTEMBER.--I am not sure of his action, whether pruning,
      or in some way gathering fruit from the full-leaved
      tree. Libra above; charming.

[Illustration: ST. MARY.]

48. OCTOBER.--Treading grapes. Scorpio, a very traditional
      and gentle form--forked in the tail indeed, but stingless.

47. NOVEMBER.--Sowing, with Sagittarius, half concealed
      when this photograph was taken by the beautiful
      arrangements always now going on for some job or
      other in French cathedrals:--they never can let them
      alone for ten minutes.

48. And now, last of all, if you care to see it, we will go into the
Madonna's porch--only, if you come at all, good Protestant feminine
reader--come civilly: and be pleased to recollect, if you have, in
known history, material for recollection, this (or if you cannot
recollect--be you very solemnly assured of this): that neither
Madonna-worship, nor Lady-worship of any sort, whether of dead ladies
or living ones, ever did any human creature any harm,--but that Money
worship, Wig worship, Cocked-Hat-and-Feather worship, Plate worship,
Pot worship and Pipe worship, have done, and are doing, a great
deal,--and that any of these, and all, are quite million-fold more
offensive to the God of Heaven and Earth and the Stars, than all the
absurdest and lovingest mistakes made by any generations of His simple
children, about what the Virgin-mother could, or would, or might do,
or feel for them.

49. And next, please observe this broad historical fact about the
three sorts of Madonnas.

There is first the Madonna Dolorosa; the Byzantine type, and
Cimabue's. It is the noblest of all; and the earliest, in distinct
popular influence.[68]

[Footnote 68: See the description of the Madonna of Murano, in second
volume of 'Stones of Venice.']

Secondly. The Madone Reine, who is essentially the Frank and Norman
one; crowned, calm, and full of power and gentleness. She is the one
represented in this porch.

Thirdly. The Madone Nourrice, who is the Raphaelesque and generally
late and decadence one. She is seen here in a good French type in the
south transept porch, as before noticed.

An admirable comparison will be found instituted by M. Viollet le Duc
(the article 'Vierge,' in his dictionary, is altogether deserving of
the most attentive study) between this statue of the Queen-Madonna of
the southern porch and the Nurse-Madonna of the transept. I may
perhaps be able to get a photograph made of his two drawings, side by
side: but, if I can, the reader will please observe that he has a
little flattered the Queen, and a little vulgarized the Nurse, which
is not fair. The statue in this porch is in thirteenth-century style,
extremely good: but there is no reason for making any fuss about
it--the earlier Byzantine types being far grander.

50. The Madonna's story, in its main incidents, is told in the series
of statues round the porch, and in the quatrefoils below--several of
which refer, however, to a legend about the Magi to which I have not
had access, and I am not sure of their interpretation.

The large statues are on the left hand, reading outwards as usual.

          29. The Angel Gabriel.
          30. Virgin Annunciate.
          31. Virgin Visitant.
          32. St. Elizabeth.
          33. Virgin in Presentation.
          34. St. Simeon.

On the right hand, reading outward,

          35, 36, 37, The three Kings.
          38. Herod.
          39. Solomon.
          40. The Queen of Sheba.

51. I am not sure of rightly interpreting the introduction of these two
last statues: but I believe the idea of the designer was that virtually
the Queen Mary visited Herod when she sent, or had sent for her, the
Magi to tell him of her presence at Bethlehem: and the contrast between
Solomon's reception of the Queen of Sheba, and Herod's driving out the
Madonna into Egypt, is dwelt on throughout this side of the porch, with
their several consequences to the two Kings and to the world.

The quatrefoils underneath the great statues run as follows:

29. Under Gabriel--
      A. Daniel seeing the stone cut out without hands.
      B. Moses and the burning bush.

30. Under Virgin Annunciate--
      A. Gideon and the dew on the fleece.
      B. Moses with written law, retiring; Aaron, dominant, points to
         his budding rod.

31. Under Virgin Visitant--
      A. The message to Zacharias: "Fear not, for thy prayer is heard."
      B. The dream of Joseph: "Fear not to take unto thee Mary thy
         wife." (?)

32. Under St. Elizabeth--
      A. The silence of Zacharias: "They perceived that he had seen a
         vision in the temple."
      B. "There is none of thy kindred that is called by this name."
         "He wrote saying, His name is John."

33. Under Virgin in Presentation--
      A. Flight into Egypt.
      B. Christ with the Doctors.

34. Under St. Simeon--
      A. Fall of the idols in Egypt.
      B. The return to Nazareth.

  These two last quatrefoils join the beautiful C and D of Amos.

Then on the opposite side, under the Queen of Sheba, and
joining the A and B of Obadiah--

40.   A. Solomon entertains the Queen of Sheba. The Grace cup.
      B. Solomon teaches the Queen of Sheba, "God is above."

39. Under Solomon--
      A. Solomon on his throne of judgment.
      B. Solomon praying before his temple-gate.

38. Under Herod--
      A. Massacre of Innocents.
      B. Herod orders the ship of the Kings to be burned.

37. Under the third King--
      A. Herod inquires of the Kings.
      B. Burning of the ship.

36. Under the second King--
      A. Adoration in Bethlehem?--not certain.
      B. The voyage of the Kings.

35. Under the first King--
      A. The Star in the East.
      B. "Being warned in a dream that they should not return to Herod."

I have no doubt of finding out in time the real sequence of these
subjects: but it is of little import,--this group of quatrefoils being
of less interest than the rest, and that of the Massacre of the
Innocents curiously illustrative of the incapability of the sculptor
to give strong action or passion.

But into questions respecting the art of these bas-reliefs I do not
here attempt to enter. They were never intended to serve as more than
signs, or guides to thought. And if the reader follows this guidance
quietly, he may create for himself better pictures in his heart; and
at all events may recognize these following general truths, as their
united message.

52. First, that throughout the Sermon on this Amiens Mount, Christ
never appears, or is for a moment thought of, as the Crucified, nor as
the Dead: but as the Incarnate Word--as the present Friend--as the
Prince of Peace on Earth,--and as the Everlasting King in Heaven. What
His life _is_, what His commands _are_, and what His judgment _will
be_, are the things here taught: not what He once did, nor what He
once suffered, but what He is now doing--and what He requires us to
do. That is the pure, joyful, beautiful lesson of Christianity; and
the fall from that faith, and all the corruptions of its abortive
practice, may be summed briefly as the habitual contemplation of
Christ's death instead of His Life, and the substitution of His past
suffering for our present duty.

53. Then, secondly, though Christ bears not _His_ cross, the mourning
prophets,--the persecuted apostles--and the martyred disciples _do_
bear theirs. For just as it is well for you to remember what your
undying Creator is _doing_ for you--it is well for you to remember
what your dying fellow-creatures _have done_: the Creator you may at
your pleasure deny or defy--the Martyr you can only forget; deny, you
cannot. Every stone of this building is cemented with his blood, and
there is no furrow of its pillars that was not ploughed by his pain.

54. Keeping, then, these things in your heart, look back now to the
central statue of Christ, and hear His message with understanding. He
holds the Book of the Eternal Law in His left hand; with His right He
blesses,--but blesses on condition. "This do, and thou shalt live";
nay, in stricter and more piercing sense, This _be_ and thou shalt
live: to show Mercy is nothing--thy soul must be full of mercy; to be
pure in act is nothing--thou shalt be pure in heart also.

And with this further word of the unabolished law--"This if thou do
_not_, this if thou art not, thou shalt die."

55. Die (whatever Death means)--totally and irrevocably. There is no
word in thirteenth-century Theology of the pardon (in our modern
sense) of sins; and there is none of the Purgatory of them. Above that
image of Christ with us, our Friend, is set the image of Christ over
us, our Judge. For this present life--here is His helpful Presence.
After this life--there is His coming to take account of our deeds, and
of our desires in them; and the parting asunder of the Obedient from
the Disobedient, of the Loving from the Unkind, with no hope given to
the last of recall or reconciliation. I do not know what commenting or
softening doctrines were written in frightened minuscule by the
Fathers, or hinted in hesitating whispers by the prelates of the early
Church. But I know that the language of every graven stone and every
glowing window,--of things daily seen and universally understood by
the people, was absolutely and alone, this teaching of Moses from
Sinai in the beginning, and of St. John from Patmos in the end, of the
Revelation of God to Israel.

This it was, simply--sternly--and continually, for the great three
hundred years of Christianity in her strength (eleventh, twelfth, and
thirteenth centuries), and over the whole breadth and depth of her
dominion, from Iona to Cyrene,--and from Calpe to Jerusalem. At what
time the doctrine of Purgatory was openly accepted by Catholic
Doctors, I neither know nor care to know. It was first formalized by
Dante, but never accepted for an instant by the sacred artist teachers
of his time--or by those of any great school or time whatsoever.[69]

[Footnote 69: The most authentic foundations of the Purgatorial scheme
in art-teaching are in the renderings, subsequent to the thirteenth
century, of the verse "by which also He went and preached unto the
spirits in prison," forming gradually into the idea of the deliverance
of the waiting saints from the power of the grave.

In literature and tradition, the idea is originally, I believe,
Platonic; certainly not Homeric. Egyptian possibly--but I have read
nothing yet of the recent discoveries in Egypt. Not, however, quite
liking to leave the matter in the complete emptiness of my own
resources, I have appealed to my general investigator, Mr. Anderson
(James R.), who writes as follows:--

"There is no possible question about the doctrine and universal
inculcation of it, ages before Dante. Curiously enough, though, the
statement of it in the Summa Theologiæ as we have it is a later
insertion; but I find by references that St. Thomas teaches it
elsewhere. Albertus Magnus developes it at length. If you refer to the
'Golden Legend' under All Souls' Day, you will see how the idea is
assumed as a commonplace in a work meant for popular use in the
thirteenth century. St. Gregory (the Pope) argues for it (Dial. iv.
38) on two scriptural quotations: (1), the sin that is forgiven
neither in hôc sæculo _nor in that which is to come_, and (2), the
fire which shall try every man's work. I think Platonic philosophy and
the Greek mysteries must have had a good deal to do with introducing
the idea originally; but with them--as to Virgil--it was part of the
Eastern vision of a circling stream of life from which only a few
drops were at intervals tossed to a definitely permanent Elysium or a
definitely permanent Hell. It suits that scheme better than it does
the Christian one, which attaches ultimately in all cases infinite
importance to the results of life in hôc sæculo.

"Do you know any representation of Heaven or Hell unconnected with the
Last Judgment? I don't remember any, and as Purgatory is by that time
past, this would account for the absence of pictures of it.

"Besides, Purgatory precedes the Resurrection--there is continual
question among divines what manner of purgatorial fire it may be that
affects spirits separate from the body--perhaps Heaven and Hell, as
opposed to Purgatory, were felt to be picturable because not only
spirits, but the risen bodies too are conceived in them.

"Bede's account of the Ayrshire seer's vision gives Purgatory in words
very like Dante's description of the second stormy circle in Hell; and
the angel which ultimately saves the Scotchman from the fiends comes
through hell, 'quasi fulgor stellæ micantis inter tenebras'--'qual sul
presso del mattino Per gli grossi vapor Marte rosseggia.' Bede's name
was great in the middle ages. Dante meets him in Heaven, and, I like
to hope, may have been helped by the vision of my fellow-countryman
more than six hundred years before."]

56. Neither do I know nor care to know--at what time the notion of
Justification by Faith, in the modern sense, first got itself
distinctively fixed in the minds of the heretical sects and schools of
the North. Practically its strength was founded by its first authors
on an asceticism which differed from monastic rule in being only able
to destroy, never to build; and in endeavouring to force what severity
it thought proper for itself on everybody else also; and so striving
to make one artless, letterless, and merciless monastery of all the
world. Its virulent effort broke down amidst furies of reactionary
dissoluteness and disbelief, and remains now the basest of popular
solders and plasters for every condition of broken law and bruised
conscience which interest can provoke, or hypocrisy disguise.

57. With the subsequent quarrels between the two great sects of the
corrupted church, about prayers for the Dead, Indulgences to the
Living, Papal supremacies, or Popular liberties, no man, woman, or
child need trouble themselves in studying the history of Christianity:
they are nothing but the squabbles of men, and laughter of fiends
among its ruins. The Life, and Gospel, and Power of it, are all
written in the mighty works of its true believers: in Normandy and
Sicily, on river islets of France and in the river glens of England,
on the rocks of Orvieto, and by the sands of Arno. But of all, the
simplest, completest, and most authoritative in its lessons to the
active mind of North Europe, is this on the foundation stones of
Amiens.

58. Believe it or not, reader, as you will: understand only how
thoroughly it _was_ once believed; and that all beautiful things were
made, and all brave deeds done in the strength of it--until what we may
call 'this present time,' in which it is gravely asked whether Religion
has any effect on morals, by persons who have essentially no idea
whatever of the meaning of either Religion or Morality.

Concerning which dispute, this much perhaps you may have the patience
finally to read, as the Flèche of Amiens fades in the distance, and
your carriage rushes towards the Isle of France, which now exhibits
the most admired patterns of European Art, intelligence, and
behaviour.

59. All human creatures, in all ages and places of the world, who have
had warm affections, common sense, and self-command, have been, and
are, Naturally Moral. Human nature in its fulness is necessarily
Moral,--without Love, it is inhuman, without sense,[70]
inhuman,--without discipline, inhuman.

[Footnote 70: I don't mean æsthesis,--but [Greek: nous], if you _must_
talk in Greek slang.]

In the exact proportion in which men are bred capable of these things,
and are educated to love, to think, and to endure, they become
noble,--live happily--die calmly: are remembered with perpetual honour
by their race, and for the perpetual good of it. All wise men know and
have known these things, since the form of man was separated from the
dust. The knowledge and enforcement of them have nothing to do with
religion: a good and wise man differs from a bad and idiotic one,
simply as a good dog from a cur, and as any manner of dog from a wolf
or a weasel. And if you are to believe in, or preach without half
believing in, a spiritual world or law--only in the hope that whatever
you do, or anybody else does, that is foolish or beastly, may be in
them and by them mended and patched and pardoned and worked up again
as good as new--the less you believe in--and most solemnly, the less
you talk about--a spiritual world, the better.

60. But if, loving well the creatures that are like yourself, you feel
that you would love still more dearly, creatures better than
yourself--were they revealed to you;--if striving with all your might
to mend what is evil, near you and around, you would fain look for a day
when some Judge of all the Earth shall wholly do right, and the little
hills rejoice on every side; if, parting with the companions that have
given you all the best joy you had on Earth, you desire ever to meet
their eyes again and clasp their hands,--where eyes shall no more be
dim, nor hands fail;--if, preparing yourselves to lie down beneath the
grass in silence and loneliness, seeing no more beauty, and feeling no
more gladness--you would care for the promise to you of a time when you
should see God's light again, and know the things you have longed to
know, and walk in the peace of everlasting Love--_then_, the Hope of
these things to you is religion, the Substance of them in your life is
Faith. And in the power of them, it is promised us, that the kingdoms of
this world shall yet become the kingdoms of our Lord and of His Christ.

[Illustration: Plan of West porches of Amiens Cathedral]




APPENDICES.


I.   CHRONOLOGICAL LIST OF THE PRINCIPAL EVENTS REFERRED TO IN
       THE 'BIBLE OF AMIENS.'

II.  REFERENCES EXPLANATORY OF THE PHOTOGRAPHS ILLUSTRATING
       CHAPTER IV.

III. GENERAL PLAN OF 'OUR FATHERS HAVE TOLD US.'

APPENDIX I.

_CHRONOLOGICAL LIST OF THE PRINCIPAL EVENTS
     REFERRED TO IN THE 'BIBLE OF AMIENS.'_


  A.D.                                                        PAGE

  250. Rise of the Franks                                       33
  301. St. Firmin comes to Amiens                                5
  332. St. Martin                                               15
  345. St. Jerome born                                          75
  350. First church at Amiens, over St. Firmin's grave          99
  358. Franks defeated by Julian near Strasburg                 44
  405. St. Jerome's Bible                                       50
  420. St. Jerome dies                                   78 _seq._
  421. St. Genevieve born. Venice founded                       27
  445. Franks cross the Rhine and take Amiens                    7
  447. Merovée king at Amiens                                 7, 8
  451. Battle of Chalons. Attila defeated by Aëtius              7
  457. Merovée dies. Childeric king at Amiens                    8
  466. Clovis born                                               7
  476. Roman Empire in Italy ended by Odoacer                    8
  481. Roman Empire ended in France                              9
       Clovis crowned at Amiens                              8, 27
       St. Benedict born                                        27
  485. Battle of Soissons. Clovis defeats Syagrius           8, 52
  486. Syagrius dies at the court of Alaric                     52
  489. Battle of Verona. Theodoric defeats Odoacer              54
  493. Clovis marries Clotilde                                   8
  496. Battle of Tolbiac. Clovis defeats the Alemanni           53
       Clovis crowned at Rheims by St. Rémy                      9
       Clovis baptized by St. Rémy                              13
  508. Battle of Poitiers. Clovis defeats the Visigoths
         under Alaric. Death of Alaric                           9




APPENDIX II.

_REFERENCES EXPLANATORY OF THE PHOTOGRAPHS
           ILLUSTRATING CHAPTER IV._


The quatrefoils on the foundation of the west front of Amiens
Cathedral, described in the course of the fourth chapter, had never
been engraved or photographed in any form accessible to the public
until last year, when I commissioned M. Kaltenbacher (6, Passage du
Commerce), who had photographed them for M. Viollet le Duc, to obtain
negatives of the entire series, with the central pedestal of the
Christ.

The proofs are entirely satisfactory to me, and extremely honourable
to M. Kaltenbacher's skill: and it is impossible to obtain any more
instructive and interesting, in exposition of the manner of central
thirteenth-century sculpture.

I directed their setting so that the entire succession of the
quatrefoils might be included in eighteen plates; the front and two
sides of the pedestal raise their number to twenty-one: the whole,
unmounted, sold by my agent Mr. Ward (the negatives being my own
property) for four guineas; or separately, each five shillings.

Besides these of my own, I have chosen four general views of the
cathedral from M. Kaltenbacher's formerly-taken negatives, which,
together with the first-named series, (twenty-five altogether,) will
form a complete body of illustrations for the fourth chapter of the
'BIBLE OF AMIENS'; costing in all five guineas, forwarded free by post
from Mr. Ward's (2, Church Terrace, Richmond, Surrey). In addition to
these, Mr. Ward will supply the photograph of the four scenes from the
life of St. Firmin, mentioned on page 5 of Chapter I.; price five
shillings.

For those who do not care to purchase the whole series, I have marked
with an asterisk the plates which are especially desirable.

       *       *       *       *       *

The two following lists will enable readers who possess the plates to
refer without difficulty both from the photographs to the text, and
from the text to the photographs, which will be found to fall into the
following groups:--

  Photographs.

          1-3. THE CENTRAL PEDESTAL.
                      DAVID.

          4-7. THE CENTRAL PORCH.
                      VIRTUES AND VICES.

          8-9. THE CENTRAL PORCH.
                      THE MAJOR PROPHETS, WITH MICAH AND NAHUM.

        10-13. THE FAÇADE.
                      THE MINOR PROPHETS.

        14-17. THE NORTHERN PORCH.
                      THE MONTHS AND ZODIACAL SIGNS, WITH ZEPHANIAH AND
                      HAGGAI.

        18-21. THE SOUTHERN PORCH.
                      SCRIPTURAL HISTORY, WITH OBADIAH AND AMOS.

        22-25. MISCELLANEOUS.


PART I.

LIST OF PHOTOGRAPHS WITH REFERENCE TO THE QUATREFOILS, ETC.


  Photographs.
  1-3. CENTRAL PEDASTAL. See pp. 109-110, §§ 32-33.

        *1. FRONT        David. Lion and Dragon. Vine.
        *2. NORTH SIDE   Lily and Cockatrice.
        *3. SOUTH SIDE   Rose and Adder.

  4-7. CENTRAL PORCH.
        _Virtues and Vices_ (pp. 114, 117, §§ 39 & 41).

        4.  1 A. Courage.    2 A. Patience.   3 A. Gentillesse.
            1 B. Cowardice.  2 B. Anger.      3 B. Churlishness.

        5.  4 A. Love.       5 A. Obedience.  6 A. Perseverance.
            4 B. Discord.    5 B. Rebellion.  6 B. Atheism.

        6.  9 A. Charity.    8 A. Hope.       7 A. Faith.
            9 B. Avarice     8 B. Despair.    7 B. Idolatry.

        7. 12 A. Humility.  11 A. Wisdom.    10 A. Chastity.
           12 B. Pride.     11 B. Folly.     10 B. Lust.

  8-9. CENTRAL PORCH.
        _The Major Prophets_ (pp. 114, 121, §§ 39, 42), _with
        Micah and Nahum_ (pp. 115, 127, §§ 40, 43).

       *8.   ISAIAH.     JEREMIAH.    MICAH.
              13 A.       14 A.        22 C.
              13 B.       14 B.        22 D.

        9.   NAHUM.      DANIEL.      EZEKIEL.
              23 A.       16 A.        15 A.
              23 B.       16 B.        15 B.

  10-13. THE FAÇADE.
          _The Minor Prophets_ (pp. 114, 127, §§ 40, 43).

      *10.   AMOS.       JOEL.        HOSEA.
              19 A.       18 A.        17 A.
              19 B.       18 B.        17 B.

      *11.   MICAH.      JONAH.       OBADIAH.
              22 A.       21 A.        20 C.
              22 B.       21 B.        20 D.

      *12.   ZEPHANIAH.  HABAKKUK.    NAHUM.
              25 A.       24 A.        23 C.
              25 B.       24 B.        23 D.

       13.   MALACHI.    ZECHARIAH.   HAGGAI.
              28 A.       27 A.        26 C.
              28 B.       27 B.        26 D.

  14-17. THE NORTHERN PORCH.
          _The Months and Zodiacal Signs_ (pp. 129-131, § 47),
          _with Zephaniah and Haggai_ (pp. 115, 127, §§ 40, 43).

                 41.          42.        43.       44.
         14.  CAPRICORN.   AQUARIUS.   PISCES.   ARIES.
               December.   January.   February.  March.

                45.              46.          25 C.
         15.  TAURUS.          GEMINI.      ZEPHANIAH.
               April.            May.         25 D.

                26 A.            52.            51.
         16.  HAGGAI.          CANCER.         LEO.
                26 B.           June.          July.

                50.          49.          48.        47.
         17.  VIRGO.        LIBRA.     SCORPIO.  SAGITTARIUS.
              August.     September.   October.   November.

  18-21. THE SOUTHERN PORCH.
          _Scriptural History_ (pp. 132-134, § 51), _with Obadiah
          and Amos_ (pp. 115, 127, §§ 40, 42, 43).

        *18. 29 A. Daniel and the stone.       30 A. Gideon and the fleece.
             29 B. Moses and the burning Bush. 30 B. Moses and Aaron.
             31 A. The message to Zacharias.   32 A. The silence of Zacharias.
             31 B. Dream of Joseph.            32 B. "His name is John."

         19. 33 A. The Flight      34 A. The Fall of      19 C. Amos.
                   into Egypt.           the Idols.
             33 B. Christ and      34 B. Return to Nazareth.     19 D. Amos.
                   the Doctors.

         20. 20 A. Obadiah.     40 A. Solomon and the      39 A. Solomon
                                      Queen of Sheba.            enthroned.
                                      The Grace Cup.
             20 B. Obadiah.     40 B. Solomon teaching     39 B. Solomon
                                      the Queen of Sheba.        in prayer.
                                      "God is above."

         21. 38 A. Holy Innocents.             37 A. Herod and the Kings.
             38 B. Herod orders the Kings'     37 B. The burning of the
                    ship to be burnt.                  ship.
             36 A. Adoration in Bethlehem (?)  35 A. The Star in the East.
             36 B. The voyage of the Kings.    35 B. The Kings warned in a
                                                       dream.

  22-25. MISCELLANEOUS.
        *22. THE WESTERN PORCHES.
        *23. THE PORCH OF ST. HONORÉ.
         24. THE SOUTH TRANSEPT AND FLÈCHE.
         25. GENERAL VIEW OF THE CATHEDRAL FROM THE OTHER BANK
                   OF THE SOMME.

       *       *       *       *       *

PART II.--LIST OF QUATREFOILS WITH REFERENCE TO THE
                    PHOTOGRAPHS.

Black                                                 Page and     No.
letter   Name of Statue.   Subject of Quatrefoil.      Section     of
No. in                                                  where     Photograph.
text.                                                 described.

       _The Apostles._   _Virtues and Vices._

                        {A. Courage                p. 114, § 39 }
1.     ST. PETER        {                          p. 117, § 41 }
                        {B. Cowardice                  "     "  }
                                                                }
                        {A. Patience               p. 114, § 39 }
2.     ST. ANDREW       {                          p. 118, § 41 }   4
                        {B. Anger                      "     "  }
                                                                }
                        {A. Gentillesse                "     "  }
3.     ST. JAMES        {                                       }
                        {B. Churlishness               "     "  }

                        {A. Love                       "     "  }
4.     ST. JOHN         {                          p. 114, § 39 }
                        {B. Discord                p. 118, § 41 }
                                                                }
                        {A. Obedience              p. 114, § 39 }
5.     ST. MATTHEW      {                          p. 118, § 41 }   5
                        {B. Rebellion              p. 119,   "  }
                                                                }
                        {A. Perseverance.              "     "  }
6.     ST. SIMON        {                         {p. 114, § 39 }
                        {B. Atheism               {p. 119, § 41 }

                        {A. Faith                 {p. 115, § 39 }
7.     ST. PAUL         {                         {p. 119, § 41 }
                        {B. Idolatry                 "     "    }
                                                                }
                        {A. Hope                   p. 115, § 39 }
8.     ST. JAMES THE    {                          p. 119, § 41 }   6
          BISHOP        {B. Despair                  "     "    }
                                                                }
                        {A. Charity                  "     "    }
9.     ST. PHILIP       {B. Avarice               {p. 115, § 39 }
                        {                         {p. 120, § 41 }

                        {A. Chastity                 "     "    }
10.    ST. BARTHOLEMEW  {                                       }
                        {B. Lust                     "     "    }
                                                                }
                        {A. Wisdom                   "     "    }
11.    ST. THOMAS       {                                       }   7
                        {B. Folly                    "     "    }
                                                                }
                        {A. Humility               p. 115, § 39 }
12.    ST. JUDE         {                          p. 121, § 41 }
                        {B. Pride                    "     "    }


       _The Major Prophets._

                        {A. The Lord enthroned     p. 115, § 39 }
13.    ISAIAH           {B. Lo! this hath touched               }
                            thy lips               p. 121, § 42 }
                                                                }   8
                        {A. The burial of the girdle p.115, § 39}
14.    JEREMIAH         {                                       }
                        {B. The breaking of the                 }
                            yoke                   p. 122, § 42 }

                        {A. Wheel within wheel     p. 115, § 39 }
15.    EZEKIEL          {                                       }
                        {B. Set thy face towards                }
                            Jerusalem                "     "    }
                                                                }
                        {A. He hath shut the lions'             }
                        {      mouths                "     "    }   9
16.    DANIEL           {                                       }
                        {B. Fingers of a man's hand p. 115, § 39}
                                                    p. 122, § 42}


       _The Minor Prophets._

                        {A. So I bought her to     {p. 116, § 40  }
                        {      me                  {p. 122, § 43  }
17.    HOSEA            {                                         }
                        {B. So will I also be for  {p. 116, § 40  }
                        {      thee                {p. 123, § 43  }
                                                                  }
                        {A. The sun and moon        {p. 116, § 40 }
                        {      lightless            {p. 123, § 48 }  10
18.    JOEL             {                                         }
                        {B. The fig-tree and vine                 }
                        {      leafless                "     "    }
                                                                  }
                        {A. The Lord will cry from                }
                        {      Zion                    "     "    }
                                                                  }
           {Façade      {B. The habitations of the                }
           {                shepherds                  "     "    }
           {
19.    AMOS{            {C. The Lord with the                     }
           {Porch       {      mason's line          p. 116, § 40 }
           {            {D. The place where it                    }  19
           {                   rained not            p. 123, § 43 }

                        {A. I hid them in a cave       "     "    }
              {Porch    {B. He fell on his face      p. 124, "    }  20
20.    OBADIAH{
              {         {C. The captain of fifty       "     "    }  11
              {Façade   {D. The messenger              "     "    }

                        {A. Escaped from the sea     p. 124, § 43 }
21.    JONAH            {                           {p. 116, § 40 }
                        {B. Under the gourd         {p. 124, § 43 }
                                                                  }
                        {A. The tower of the Flock     "     "    }  11
             {Façade    {                                         }
             {          {B. Each shall rest            "     "    }
22.    MICAH {
             {          {C. Swords into ploughshares              }
             {Porch     {                            p. 116, § 40 }   8
             {          {D. Spears into pruning-hooks             }
             {                                       p. 124, § 43 }

                        {A. None shall look back     p. 125, "    }   9
             {Porch     {B. The Burden of Nineveh      "     "    }
23.    NAHUM {          {
             {          {C. Thy Princes and great   {p. 116, §40  }
             {Façade    {      ones                 {p. 125, §43  }
                        {D. Untimely figs              "     "    }
                                                                  }
                        {A. I will watch               "     "    }
24.    HABAKKUK         {                                         }  12
                        {B. The ministry to Daniel     "     "    }
                                                                  }
                        {A. The Lord strikes        {p. 117, § 40 }
                {Façade {      Ethiopia             {p. 126, § 43 }
                {       {B. The beasts in Nineveh     "     "     }
25.    ZEPHANIAH{
                {       {C. The Lord visits Jerusalem "     "     }
                {Porch  {                                         }  15
                        {D. The Hedgehog and Bittern  "     "     }

                        {A. The houses of the                     }
                        {      princes               p. 117, § 40 }
             { Porch    {                                         }
             {          {B. The Heaven stayed                     }  16
26.    HAGGAI{          {      from dew              p. 126, § 43 }
             {
             {          {C. The temple desolate        "     "    }
             { Façade   {                                         }
                        {D. Thus saith the Lord.     p. 127, "    }
                                                                  }
                       {A. The lifting up of Iniquity p. 127, § 43}
27.    ZECHARIAH       {                                          }  13
                       {B. The angel that spake to me   "     "   }
                                                                  }
                       {A. Ye have wounded the      {p. 117, § 40 }
28.    MALACHI         {      Lord                  {p. 127, § 43 }
                       {B. This commandment is                    }
                              to _you_                 "     "    }

       SOUTHERN PORCH--_to the Virgin_.

                       {A. Daniel and the stone                   }
                       {      cut without hands      p. 133, § 51 }
29.    GABRIEL         {                                          }
                       {B. Moses and the burning bush  "     "    }
                                                                  }
                       {A. Gideon and the fleece       "     "    }
30.    VIRGIN          {                                          }
       ANNUNCIATE      {B. Moses and the law                      }
                            Aaron and his rod          "     "    }  13
                                                                  }
                       {A. The message to Zacharias!   "     "    }
31.    VIRGIN VISITANT {                                          }
                       {B. The dream of Joseph         "     "    }
                                                                  }
                       {A. The silence of Zacharias    "     "    }
32.    ST. ELIZABETH   {                                          }
                       {B. "His name is John"          "     "    }

                       {A. Flight into Egypt           "     "    }
33.    VIRGIN IN       {                                          }
       PRESENTATION    {B. Christ with the Doctors     "     "    }  19
                                                                  }
                       {A. Fall of idols in Egypt      "     "    }
34.    ST. SIMEON      {                                          }
                       {B. The Return to Nazareth      "     "    }

                       {A. The Star in the East.     p. 134, § 51 }
35.    THE FIRST KING  {                                          }
                       {B. "Warned in a dream"         "     "    }
                                                                  }
                       {A. Adoration in Bethlehem (?)  "     "    }
36.    THE SECOND KING {                                          }
                       {B. The voyage of the Kings     "     "    }
                                                                  }
                       {A. Herod inquires of the                  }  21
                       {      Kings                    "     "    }
37.    THE THIRD KING  {                                          }
                       {B. The burning of the ship     "     "    }
                                                                  }
                       {A. Massacre of the Innocents   "     "    }
38.    HEROD           {                                          }
                       {B. Herod orders the ship                  }
                            to be burnt                "     "    }

                       {A. Solomon enthroned         p. 133, § 51 }
39.    SOLOMON         {                                          }
                       {B. Solomon in prayer           "     "    }
                                                                  }  20
                       {A. The Grace cup               "     "    }
40.    QUEEN OF SHEBA  {                                          }
                       {B. "God is above"              "     "    }


       NORTHERN PORCH--_to St. Firmin_ (p. 127, § 44).

                       {A. Capricorn                 p. 130, § 47 }
41.    ST. FIRMIN      {                                          }
        CONFESSOR      {                                          }
                       {B. December                    "     "    }
                                                                  }
                       {A. Aquarius                    "     "    }
42.    ST. DOMICE      {                                          }
                       {B. January                     "     "    }
                                                                  }  14
                       {A. Pisces                      "     "    }
43.    ST. HONORÉ      {                                          }
                       {B. February                    "     "    }
                                                                  }
                       {A. Aries.                      "     "    }
44.    ST. SALVE       {                                          }
                       {B. March                       "     "    }

                       {A. Taurus                      "     "    }
45.    ST. QUENTIN     {                                          }
                       {B. April                       "     "    }
                                                                  }  15
                       {A. Gemini                      "     "    }
46.    ST. GENTIAN     {                                          }
                       {B. May                         "     "    }

                       {A. Sagittarius               p. 131, § 47 }
47.    ST. GEOFFREY    {                                          }
                       {B. November                    "     "    }
                                                                  }
                       {A. Scorpio                     "     "    }
48.    AN ANGEL        {                                          }
                       {B. October                     "     "    }
                                                                  }
                       {A. Libra                       "     "    }  17
49.    ST. FUSCIEN,    {                                          }
        MARTYR         {B. September                   "     "    }
                                                                  }
                       {A. Virgo                       "     "    }
50.    ST. VICTORIC,   {                                          }
        MARTYR         {B. August                      "     "    }

                       {A. Leo                       p. 130, § 47 }
51.    AN ANGEL        {                                          }
                       {B. July                        "     "    }
                                                                  }  16
                       {A. Cancer                      "     "    }
52.    ST. ULPHA       {                                          }
                       {B. June                        "     "    }




APPENDIX III.

_GENERAL PLAN OF 'OUR FATHERS HAVE TOLD US.'_[71]


[Footnote 71: Reprinted from the "Advice," issued with Chap. III
(March, 1882).]

The first part of 'Our Fathers have told us,' now submitted to the
public, is enough to show the proposed character and tendencies of the
work, to which, contrary to my usual custom, I now invite
subscription, because the degree in which I can increase its
usefulness by engraved illustration must greatly depend on the known
number of its supporters.

I do not recognize, in the present state of my health, any reason to
fear more loss of general power, whether in conception or industry,
than is the proper and appointed check of an old man's enthusiasm: of
which, however, enough remains in me to warrant my readers against the
abandonment of a purpose entertained already for twenty years.

The work, if I live to complete it, will consist of ten parts, each
taking up some local division of Christian history, and gathering,
towards their close, into united illustration of the power of the
Church in the Thirteenth Century.

The present volume completes the first part, descriptive of the early
Frank power, and of its final skill, in the Cathedral of Amiens.

The second part, "Ponte della Pietra," will, I hope, do more for
Theodoric and Verona than I have been able to do for Clovis and the
first capital of France.

The third, "Ara Celi," will trace the foundations of the Papal power.

The fourth, "Ponte-a-Mare," and fifth, "Ponte Vecchio," will only with
much difficulty gather into brief form what I have by me of scattered
materials respecting Pisa and Florence.

The sixth, "Valle Crucis," will be occupied with the monastic
architecture of England and Wales.

The seventh, "The Springs of Eure," will be wholly given to the
cathedral of Chartres.

The eighth, "Domrémy," to that of Rouen and the schools of
architecture which it represents.

The ninth, "The Bay of Uri," to the Pastoral forms of Catholicism,
reaching to our own times.

And the tenth, "The Bells of Cluse," to the pastoral Protestantism of
Savoy, Geneva, and the Scottish border.

Each part will consist of four sections only; and one of them, the
fourth, will usually be descriptive of some monumental city or
cathedral, the resultant and remnant of the religious power examined
in the preparatory chapters.

One illustration at least will be given with each chapter, and
drawings made for others, which will be placed at once in the
Sheffield museum for public reference, and engraved as I find support,
or opportunity for binding with the completed work.

As in the instance of Chapter IV. of this first part, a smaller
edition of the descriptive chapters will commonly be printed in
reduced form for travellers and non-subscribers; but otherwise, I
intend this work to be furnished to subscribers only.




INDEX.

[_Except in the case of Chapter 1., which is not divided into numbered
sections, the references in this index are to both page and section.
Thus_ 206. iv. 51 _is to page_ 206, _Chapter_ IV., § 51.]


Aaron's rod, 133. iv. 51.

Adder, the deaf, 110. iv. 33-4.

Admiration, test of, 96. iv. 8.

Afghan war, 48. ii. 43.

Agricola, 67. iii. 21.

Aisles of aspen and of stone, 97. iv. 10.

Alaric (son-in-law of Theodoric), defeated and killed by Clovis at
           Poitiers, 9; 52. ii. 49.

---- the younger, 52, ii. 49.

Albofleda, sister of Clovis, 51. ii. 48.

Alemannia (Germany) 34. ii. 19.

Alexander III. and Barbarossa, 111. iv. 35.

Alfred, King, of England, religious feeling under, 21.

Algeria, 63. iii. 13.

Alphabet, the, and Moesia, 68. iii. 22.

Alps, the, and climbing, 72. iii. 29.

Amiens. (1) History; (2) Town; (3) Cathedral.

  (1) _History of_:--
         early people of, and Roman gods, 4.
         taken by the Franks under Clodion, 445 A.D., 7.
         manufactures of, early, 2, 3.
               "   swords, 124. iv. 43.
               "   woollen, 118, 120. iv. 41.
         religion, and Christianity:--
           the Beau Christ d'Amiens, 90, 111. iv. 3, 36.
           S. Firmin the first to preach there, 300 A.D., 5.
           the first bishopric of France, 6.
           the first church there, 350 A.D., 5, 6; 99. iv. 14.
           under S. Geoffroy, 1104-50 A.D., 128-9. iv. 45.

  (2) _The Town_:--
         country round, 2.
         highest land near, 14.
         manufactory chimneys, 3.
         railway station, 1, 3.
         Roman gate near, 15.
         S. Acheul, chimney of, 6, 14.
         streams and rivers of, 1.
         the "Venice of France," 1.

  (3) _The Cathedral_:--
         (a) History,--
               books on, 93 n. iv. 1. 2. n.
               building of, 89. iv. 1. 2.
                  "  by whom? 97-8, iv. 12.
               completion of, rhyme on the, 99. sq. iv. 12.
               history of successive churches on its site, 99. iv. 14.
         (b) General aspect of,--
               as compared with other cathedrals, 88. iv. 1.
               the consummation of Frankish character, 46. ii. 38.
               the "Parthenon of Gothic architecture," 88. iv. 1.
         (c) Detailed examination of,--
               approaches to, which best, 92. sq. iv. 6.
               apse, the, its height, 96. iv. 9
                 " the first perfect piece of Northern architecture, 97.
                       iv. 11.
               choir, the, and wood-carving, 91 & n. iv. 5 & n.
               façade, 108 sq. iv. 28 sq.
                 " the central porch,
                 "       " apostles of, 108. iv. 29.
                 "       " Christ-Immanuel, David, 108. iv. 28.
                 "       " prophets of, 108. iv. 29.
                 " the northern porch (S. Firmin), 127 sq. iv. 44.
                 " the southern porch (Madonna), 131 sq. iv. 48.
               flêche, from station, 3, 4; 94. iv. 7; 138. iv. 58.
               foundation steps, the old, removed, 107. iv. 27.
               restoration of, 107. iv. 27; 123. iv. 43.
               rose moulding of, 107. iv. 27.
               sculptures of, 133-4. iv. 51.
                   "  of virtues less good than of prophets, 121. iv. 42.
               transepts of; North, rose window, 95-6. iv. 8.
                   "           "  sculpture of, 125. n. iv. 43 n.
                   "         South, Madonna on, 94. iv. 7.

Amos, figure and quatrefoils, Amiens Cathedral, 123. iv. 43.

Anchorites, early, 72, 73. iii. 29, 30.

Anderson, J. R., on purgatory, 136 n. iv. 55 n.

Angelico, scriptural teaching of, 81. iii. 46.

Anger, bides its time, 48. ii. 42.

Anger, a feminine vice, 118. iv. 41.
  "  sculpture of, Amiens Cathedral, 117. iv. 41.

Angoulême, legend of its walls falling, 50 n. ii. 47.

Aphrodite, 27. ii. 3.

Apocrypha, the, received by the Church, 78. iii. 40.

Apostles, the, and virtues, Amiens Cathedral, 112. iv. 37 sq.

Arab, Gothic and Classic, 63. iii. 13.

Arabia, 63. iii. 13.
  "  power of, 65. iii. 19.
  "  religion of, 66. iii. 19.
  "  Sir F. Palgrave's book on, 64-65. iii. 17-18.

Architecture, Egyptian, origin of, 71. iii. 27.
  "  literal character of early Christian, 90. iv. 4.
  "  and nature, 97. iv. 10.
  "  Northern gets as much light as possible, 89. iv. 2.
  "      "  passion of, 97. iv. 10.
  "  "Purity of style" in, 88. iv. 2.

Arianism of Visigoths, 9.

Arles, defeat of Clovis by Theodoric at, 50, 54. ii. 47, 53.

Armour, early Frankish, 43. ii. 33.

Art, the Bible as influencing and influenced by Christian, 80-81.
         iii. 45-6.
  "  all great, praise, pref. v.
  "  and literature, mental action of, 81. iii. 47.

Asceticism, our power of rightly estimating, 72. iii. 29.

Asia, seven churches of, 63. iii. 12.
  "  Minor, a misnomer, 62. iii. 12.
  "  religious feeling of Asiatics, 21 n.

Assyria, ancient kingdom of, and the Jews, 65. iii. 18.

Astronomy from Egypt, 71. iii. 27.

Atheism, barefoot figure of, Amiens Cathedral, 119. iv. 41.
  "  very wise men may be idolaters, cannot be atheists, 119. iv. 41.
  "  Modern: see "Infidelity."

Athena, 86. iii. 53.

Athens, influence of, on Europe, 62. iii. 12.

Atlantic cable, 61. iii. 8.

Attila, defeated at Chalons, 7.

Attuarii, 34, 38 n. ii. 18, 28 n.

Augurs, college of, 70 n. iii. 26 n.

Aurelian, the Emperor, a Dacian, 32 n. ii. 15.

Auroch herds, of Scythia, 31 n. ii. 11.

Author, the:--
        art teaching of, 85. iii. 52.
        Bible training of, 86. iii. 52.
        on his own books, 85. iii. 52.
        cathedrals, his love of, 88. iv. 1.
        conservative, pref. iii.

Author, the:
        discursiveness of, 47. ii. 40.
        on Greek myths, 86. iii. 52.
        on Homer and Horace, 86. iii. 52.
        religion of, 135 sq. iv. 55 sq.
        on Roman religion, 86. iii. 52.
        travels abroad; earliest tour on Continent, 99. iv. 13.
           "  at Amiens, in early life, 107. iv. 27.
           "  at Avallon, Aug. 28, 82. 87. iii. 54.
        books of quoted or referred to:--
        Ariadne Florentina, on "franchise," 39 n. ii. 28.
        Arrows of the Chace, letters to Glasgow, pref. iii.
        Fiction Fair and Foul, 111. iv. 35 n.
        Fors Clavigera, Letter 61, Vol. VI., p. --, 102 n. iv. 20 n.
          "    "          "    65, Vol. VI., p. --, 125 n. iv. 43 n.
        Laws of Fésolé, pref. v.
          "       "       "     60. iii. 7.
        Modern Painters, plate 73, 20.
        St. Mark's Rest, 27. ii. 2.
         "         "    83 n. iii. 48 n.
         "         "    113 n. iv. 36.
        Stones of Venice, 131 n. iv. 49 n.
        Two Paths, 95 n. iv. 8 n.
        Val d'Arno, 39 n. ii. 28 n.

Auvergnats, 10.

Avarice, modern, 111. iv. 35; 120. iv. 41.
  "  figure of, Amiens Cathedral, 120. iv. 41.


Bacteria, the, 13.

Baltic, tribes of the, 31. ii. 11, 12.

Baptism, not essential to salvation, 18.

Barbarossa, in the porch of St. Mark's, 111. iv. 35.

Batavians, 49. ii. 45.

Battle-axe, French, or Achon, 42. ii. 32.

Bayeux, Bishop of, surrender of Lord Salisbury to, 105. iv. 24.

Beauvais, cathedral of, 88. iv. 1.

Beggars, how to give to, 95. iv. 8.

Belshazzar's feast, 122. iv. 42.

"Bible of Amiens," meaning of title, 127. iv. 44

----, the Holy--
  art, as influenced by, 80. iii. 45.
  and Clovis, 50. ii. 47.
  contents and matchless compass of, 85. iii. 51.
  disobedience of accepting only what we like in it, 79. iii. 41.
  history of, and acceptance by the Church, 77-8. iii. 39, 40.
  influence of, sentimental, intellectual, moral, 79. iii. 42.

Bible, inspiration of the, 82. iii. 48.
  the "library of Europe," 76. iii. 36.
  literature and, 80. iii. 44.
  St. Jerome's, 70. iii. 26.
  study of, by the author as a child, 86. iii. 52.
    "  honest and dishonest, 79. iii. 42.
    "  one-sided, and its results, 79. iii. 41.
  teaching of, general and special, 84. iii. 49.
  Ulphilas' Gothic, 68. iii. 22.
  the word 'Bible,' its meaning, 77. iii. 37.
  quoted or referred to:--[72]
    Gen. xviii. 25, Shall not the Judge of all the earth do right? 139.
        iv. 60.
    Ex. xiv. 15, Speak unto the children of Israel, that they go forward,
        102 n. iv. 21 n.
    Deut. xxvi. 5, A Syrian ready to perish was my father, 63. iii. 14.
    1 Sam. xvii. 28, With whom hast thou left those few sheep in the
        wilderness? 70. iii. 26.
    Ps. xi. 4, The Lord is in His holy temple, 90. iv. 2.
    Ps. xiv. 1, The fool hath said (_Dixit insipiens_), 119, iv. 41.
    Ps. xxiv. Who is the King of Glory? 112. iv. 36.
    Ps. lxv. 12, The little hills rejoice on every side, 139. iv. 60.
    Song of Solomon vii. 1, How beautiful are thy feet with shoes, 119.
        iv. 41.
    Isa. xi. 9, Hurt nor destroy in all the holy mountain, 87. iii. 54.
    Matt. x. 37, He that loveth father or mother more than me, 76. iii. 36.
      "  xvi. 24, Let him take up his cross and follow me, 79. iii. 43.
      "  xvii. 5, This is my beloved Son ... hear ye Him, 109, iv. 30.
      "  xviii. 20, Where two or three are gathered together, 90. iv, 3.
      "  xxi. 9, Hosanna to the Son of David, 109. iv. 31.
    Luke i. 80, The child grew ... and was in the deserts, 70. iii. 26.
      "  x. 5, Peace be to this house, 114. iv. 38.
      "  x. 28, This do, and thou shalt live, 135. iv. 54.
      "  xvi. 31, If they hear not Moses and the prophets, 177. iii. 38.
    John vi. 29, This is the work of God, that ye believe him, 4.
      "  vi. 55, Except ye eat the flesh of the Son of man, 119. iv. 41.
      "  xvii. 23, I in them, and thou in me, 118. iv. 41.
      "  xxi. 16, Feed my sheep, 106. iv. 26.
    Rom. viii. 4, 6, 13, The righteousness of the law ... for to be
         carnally minded, is death, 84 n. iii. 48 n.
    1 Cor. xiii. 6, Rejoiceth not in iniquity, but in the truth, pref. v.
    2 Cor. vi. 16, I will be their God and they shall be my people, 90.
         iv. 3.
    Eph. iv. 26, Let not the sun go down upon your wrath, 48. iii. 42.
      "  vi. 15, Your feet shod with the preparation of the gospel of
         peace, 119. iv. 41.
    James v. 7, 8, Be ye also patient, 120. iv. 41.
    Rev. iii. 11, Hold fast that which thou hast, 119. iv. 41.
      "  xi. 15, The kingdoms of this world are become the kingdoms of our
         Lord and of his Christ, 139. iv. 60.

[Footnote 72: References merely descriptive of one of the sculptures of the
        façade of Amiens Cathedral are omitted in this index.]

Bibliotheca, 77. iii. 37.

Bishops, French, in battle, 105. iv. 24. _See_ Everard and S. Geoffrey.

Bittern and hedgehog, 126. iv. 43.

Black's atlas, 36. ii. 24.

Black Prince, the, his leopard coinage, 117. iv. 41.
  "    "       "  at Limoges, 118. iv. 41.

Blasphemy and slang, 105. iv. 25.

Blight, as a type of punishment, 123. iv. 43.

Boden see, the, 37. ii. 25.

Boulin, Arnold, carves choir of Amiens Cathedral, 92 n. iv. 5.

Bourges, cathedral of, 88. iv. 1.

Bouvines, battle of, 105. iv. 24.

Bretons, in France, 6, 8, 11.

Britain, gives Christianity its first deeds and final legends, 32. ii. 15.
  "  divisions of, 69. iii. 24.
  "  and Roman Empire, 29-30. ii. 9.

Brocken summit, the, 35. ii. 22.

Bructeri, 34. ii. 18.

Bunyan, John, 16.

Burgundy, and France distinct, 6, 8, 11.
  "  extent of kingdom, _temp._ Clotilde, 52 n. ii 49.
  "  king of, uncle of Clotilde, 52. ii. 50.

Bussey and Gaspey's History of France, 52 n. ii. 50.

Butler, Colonel, "Far out Rovings retold," pref. iv., 35.

Byron's "Cain," 80. iii. 44.

Byzantine Madonna, 131. iv. 49.
  "  scheme of the virtues, 112 n. iv. 36.

Byzantium, influence of on Europe, 62. iii. 12.


Calais, road from, to Paris, 10.

Callousness of modern public opinion, 48. ii. 42.

Camels, disobedient and ill-tempered, 118. iv. 41.

Canary Islands, 63. iii. 13.

Cancan, the, 118. iv. 41.

Canterbury, S. Martin's church at, and S. Augustine, 18.

Canute, 64. iii. 16.

Carlyle, T., description of Poland and Prussia, 30 n. ii. 10.
  "          "Frederick the Great" quoted, 81. iii. 47.

Carpaccio, draperies in the pictures of, 2.

Carthage, 63. iii. 13.

Cary's Dante, 112 n. iv. 36.
  "      "    120. iv. 41.
  "      "    See "Dante," 120.

Cassel, 36. ii. 24.

Cathedrals, author's love of, 88. iv. 1.
  "  custodians of, 88. iv. 1.
  "  different, French and English, compared with that of Amiens, 88.
         iv. 1.
  "  plan of mediæval, and its religious meaning, 91. iv. 4.
  "  points of compass in, 107. iv. 28.

Catti, the, 34, 38. ii. 18, 27.

Cattle, huge, of nomad tribes, 31 n. ii. 11.

Centuries, division of the, into four periods, 26. ii. 1.

Chalons, defeat of Attila at, 7.

Chamavi, 34. ii. 18.

Chapman, George, his last prayer, 102. iv. 20-21.

Charity, giving to beggars, 95. iv. 8.
  "  indiscriminate, 121. iv. 41.

Charlemagne, religion under, 21 n.

Chartres cathedral, 88. iv. 1.

Chastity, Amiens Cathedral, 120. iv. 41.

Chaucer, "Romaunt of Rose" quoted on franchise, 39 n. ii. 28.

Chauci, 34, 38. ii. 18, 27.

Childebert (son of Clovis), first Frank king of Paris, 51. ii. 48.
  "  meaning of the word, 51. ii. 48.

Childeric, son of Merovée, king of Franks, exiled 447 A.D., 7.

Chivalry, its dawn and darkening, 43 ii. 33.
  "  its Egyptian origin, 71. iii. 27.
  "  feudal, 54. ii. 54.

Chlodomir, second son of Clovis, 51. ii. 48.

Chlodowald, son of Chlodomir, 51. ii. 48.

Christ, the Beau Christ d'Amiens, 90. 111. iv. 3, 36.
  "  and the doctors, 133. iv. 51.
  "  His life, not His death, to be mainly contemplated, 134. iv. 52.
  "  His return to Nazareth, 133. iv. 51.
  "  realization of His presence by mediæval burghers, 90. iv. 3.
  "  statue of, Amiens Cathedral, 108. iv. 28.
  "    "          "      "        111. iv. 36.
  "    "          "      "        its conception and meaning, 134. iv. 52.

Christian," "The (newspaper), 83. iii. 48.

Christianity and the Bible, 70. iii. 26.
  "  of Clovis, 13.
  "  early, share of Britain, Gaul and Germany in, 33. ii. 15.
  "  fifth century, at end of, 54. ii. 54.
  "  Gentile, 77. iii 39.
  "  Gothic, Classic, Arab, 69. iii. 25.
  "  literature as influencing, 70. iii. 26.
  "  mediæval, Saxon and Frank, 21.
  "  modern, 17.
  "  modest minds, the best recipients of, 77. iii. 39.
  "  monastic life, 70. iii. 26.
  "  S. Jerome's Bible, and, 77. iii. 37.
  "  true, defined, 136. iv. 55.
  "    "      "     137. iv. 57.
  "  See "Religion."

Church, the first French, at Amiens, 5, 6.

Churlishness, figure of, Amiens Cathedral, 118. iv. 41.

Cimabue's Madonna, 131. iv. 49.

Cincinnatus, 67. iii. 21.

Circumstances, man the creature of, 58, 59. iii. 1, 3.

Classic countries of Europe, (Gothic, and Arab,) 62 sq. iii. 11.
  "  literature, there is a _sacred_, 86. iii. 53.

Claudius, the Emperor, a Dacian, 32 n. ii. 15.

Clergymen, modern, 17.
  "        protestant, 74. iii. 33.

Climate, and nationality, 9.
  "      races divided by, 61. iii. 9.
  "      and race, their influence on man, 61. iii. 9.

Cloak, legend of S. Martin's, 14, 15.

Clodion, leads Franks over Rhine and takes Amiens, 445 A.D., 7.

Clotaire, son of Clovis, 51. ii. 48.

Clotilde (wife of Clovis, daughter of Chilperic), 6, 21.
  "  education of, 52 n. ii. 49.
  "  the god of, 7, 9, 13.
  "    "  "  "   54. ii. 54.
  "  journeys to France, 52. ii. 50.
  "  marriage of, 13; 51. ii. 48.
  "  mother of, 52 n. ii. 49.
  "  name, meaning of the, 51. ii. 48.

----, daughter of Clovis and Clotilde, 51. ii. 48.

Clovis, King of the Franks, 7.
  "  birth of, 466 A.D., 52. ii. 49.
  "  character of, 13.
  "  death and last years of, 49 sq. ii. 44.
  "  family of, 51. ii. 48.
  "  name, meaning of the, 51. ii. 48.
  "  reign of, 13.
  "    crowned at Amiens, 481 A.D., 27. ii. 2.
  "      "     at Rheims, 9.
  "    defeat of by Ostrogoths, at Arles, 50. ii. 47.
  "    passes the Loire, at Tours, 20.
  "    and the Soissons vase, 47-8. ii. 41-3.
  "    summary of its events, 51. ii. 49.
  "    victories of, (Soissons, Poitiers, Tolbiac,) 9. 21. i. n.
  "       "      the Franks after his, 46. ii. 38.
  "  religion of:--
  "    prays to the God of Clotilde, 7, 9, 13; 54. ii. 54.
  "    conversion to Christianity by S. Remy, 13, 14.
  "    his previous respect for Christianity, 52 n. ii. 49 n.
  "    "      "        "    "   S. Martin's Abbey, 20.
  "    his Christianity, analysed, 50. ii. 47.
  "  Rheims enriched by, 52. ii. 49.
  "  S. Genevieve, Paris, founded by, 55. ii. 55.

----, son of Childeric, 7.
  "    "  "      "      invades Italy, 38 n. ii. 28 n.
  "    "  "      "      reign of, 7.

Cockatrice, sculpture of the, Amiens Cathedral, 110. iv. 33-4.

Cockneyism, history writing and, 13.

Cockneyism, 'Mossoo,' 38. ii. 27.
  "  priests and, 119. iv. 41.

Coinage, the Black Prince's leopard, 117. iv. 41.

Colchos, tribes of the lake of, 31. ii. 11.

Cologne, battlefield of Tolbiac from, 54. ii. 54.

Commerce and protestantism, 79. iii. 43.

Competition will not produce art, 90 n. iv. 4.
     "           "      and the Franks, 41 n. ii. 31.

Constantine, Emperor, power of, 54. ii. 54.
     "           "      lascivious court of, 67. iii. 20.

Constantius, Emperor, a Dacian, 32 n. ii. 15.

Courage, figure of, Amiens Cathedral, 117. iv. 41.

Covetousness, and atheism, 119. iv. 41.

Cowardice, figure of, Amiens Cathedral, 117. iv. 41.

Creasy, Sir E., "History of England," 59 iii. 5, 6.

Crecy, battle of, Edward II. fords the, 1.

Crime, the history of, its possible lessons, 12.

Cross, the power of the, in history, 79. iii. 42.
  "  protestant view of the, as a raft of salvation, 80. iii. 43.

Crown, the, of Hope, 119. iv. 41.

Cyrene, 63. iii. 13.


Dacia, contest of, with Rome, 30. ii. 9.
  "  five Roman emperors from, 32 n. ii. 15 n.

Dædalus, 101, iv. 19.

Dalmatia, 68. iii. 23.

Danes, the, 31. ii. 12.

Daniel, statue, etc., of, Amiens Cathedral, 114. iv. 38; 121. iv. 42.
        quatrefoils: 'traditional visit of Habakkuk to,' 125. iv. 43.
             "  the stone cut without hands, 133. iv. 51.

Dante, as a result of the Bible, 80. iii. 44.
  "  Christian-heathen poet, 102. iv. 20.
  "  Virgil's influence on, 86. iii. 53.
  "  quoted: "Paradise" (28), 111 n. iv. 36.
  "      "         "    (125), 120. iv. 41.

Danube, tribes of the, 31. ii. 1.

Darwinism, 40. ii. 30; 126. iv. 43.

Dates, recollection of exact, 26, 33. ii. 1, 2, 17.

David and monastic life, 70. iii. 26.
  "  statue of, Amiens Cathedral, 109 sq. iv. 31.

Dead, recognition of the, in a future life, 139. iv. 60.

Denmark, under Canute, 64. iii. 16.

Despair, figure of, Amiens Cathedral, 120. iv. 41.

Devil, St. Martin's answer to the, 17.

Diocletian, retirement of, 66. iii. 20.

Discipline, essential to man, 108. iv. 29.

Dniester, importance of the, 61. iii. 9-10.

Doctor, preaching at Matlock, 83 n. iii. 48 n.

Douglas, Bishop, translation of Virgil, 135; 86. iii. 53; 102. iv. 20.

Dove, the, a type of humility, 120. iv. 41.
 "     "   Isaac Walton's river, 1.

Dover cliff and parade, 96. iv. 9.

Drachenfels, district of the, 35. ii. 20, 22.

Dragon, under feet of the Christ, Amiens Cathedral, 111. iv. 34.

Druids, in France, 4.

Durham Cathedral, 89. iv. 1.

Dusevel's history of Amiens, 2 n.


East, geography of the, 64, 65. iii. 17, 18.

Eder, the, 36. ii. 24.

Egypt, 63. iii. 13.
  "    The Flight into, 132. iv. 51.
  "    Idols, the fall of, in, 133. iv. 51.
  "    influence of, 65. iii. 19.
  "    and the origin of learning, 71. iii. 27.
  "    theology of, and Greece, 71. iii. 27.

Eisenach, 36. ii. 24.

Elbe, tribes of the, 31. ii. 11.

Elijah, figure of, Amiens Cathedral, 124. iv. 43.

Engel-bach, 36. ii. 24.

England, dominions of (story of C. Fox and Frenchman), 59. iii. 5-6.
    "    modern politics of: Afghan war, 48. ii. 43.
    "      "         "       Ireland, pref. iii., iv.; 60. iii. 6.
    "      "         "       Scotch crofters, 6. iii. 6.
    "      "         "       Zulu land, 48. ii. 43; 60. iii. 6.
    "    pride of wealth, 60. iii. 7.
    "    St. Germain comes to, 28. ii. 5.
    "    streams of (Croydon, Guildford, Winchester), 3.

English cathedrals, 88. iv. 1.
    "   character, stolid, French active, 40. ii. 30.
    "   language, its virtues, nobler than Latin, 105. iv. 24.
    "   tourist, the, 72. iii. 29.
    "      "      "   initial-cutting by, 98. iv. 12.

Ethiopia, the Lord striking, 126. iv. 43.

Europe, condition and history of, 1-500 A.D., 31. 54. ii. 13, 54.
   "    countries of, twelve, 63. iii. 14.
   "    division of, into Gothic and Classic, 62 sq. iii. 11 sq.
   "       "     by Vistula and Dniester, 61. iii. 9-10.
   "    geography of, 61-65, 68, 69. iii. 9-18, 22-3 sq.
   "    Greek part of, 62. iii. 12.
   "       "  imagination, and Roman order, influence of, 66. iii. 20.
   "    nomad tribes of, 31 & n. ii. 11.

Europe, peasant life of early, 82. ii. 13.

Evangelical doctrine and commerce, 79. iii. 43.

Everard, Bishop of Amiens, his tomb, 104. iv. 24.

Executions, ancient and modern, 48. ii. 43.

Ezekiel, figure of, Amiens Cathedral, 122. iv. 42.


Faith, justification by, 137. iv. 56.
  "    mediæval, 90. iv. 3.
  "    sculpture of, Amiens Cathedral, 119. iv. 41.
  "    "the substance of things hoped for," 138. iv. 60.
  "    symbolism of, with cup and cross, 119. iv. 41.
  "    and works, 134. iv. 52 sq.

Fanaticism, and the Bible, 79. iii. 41.

Fathers, the, Scriptural commentaries of, 81. iii. 46.
  "      theology of the, 135. iv. 55.

Faust, Goethe's, 8; 35. ii. 21; 80. iii. 44.

Favine, André (historian, 1620) on Frankish character, 40. ii. 30, 32.

Feud, etymology of, 101 n. iv. 17 n.

Florence, Duomo of, 88. iv. 1.

Folly, sculpture of, Amiens Cathedral, 121. iv. 41.

Fortitude, sculpture of, Amiens Cathedral, 118. iv. 41.

Fox, Charles, his boast of England, 59. iii. 5.
 "   Dr., quaker, preaching at Matlock, 83 n. iii. 48.

France, Amiens and Calais, country between, 2.
  "     architecture of, no stone saw used, 89. iv. 2 n.
  "     books on: Pictorial History of, 48. ii. 43.
  "         "    "Villes de France," 52 n. ii. 50.
  "     cathedrals of, the, 88. iv. 1.
  "       their outside "the wrong side of the stuff," 96. iv. 8.
  "       restoration of, 130. iv. 47.
  "     churches of, the first, at Amiens, 6.
  "     colours of the shield of, 43. ii. 48.
  "     early tribes of, 6, 8.
  "     and the Franks, 7.
  "     geography and geology of northern, 10.
  "     the Isle of, Paris, 138. iv. 58.
  "     Kings of (Philip the Wise, Louis VIII., St. Louis), 100. iv. 16.
  "     map of, showing early divisions, 8.
  "     Merovingian dynasty, 21.
  "     peoples of, divided by climates, 10.
  "     provinces of, 10, 11.
  "     Prussia, war with, 33. ii. 17.
  "     rivers of, the five, 8.
                           (See below, "French").

Franchise, 38 n. ii. 28.

Francisca (Frankish weapon), 42. ii. 32.

Frank, meaning of the word, 'brave' rather than 'free,' 37-8. ii. 27-8.

Frankenberg, 36. ii. 24-5.

Frankness, meaning of, 6; 38. ii. 28.
  "        opposite of shyness, 39. ii. 28.

Franks, the, agriculture, sport, and trade of, 45. ii. 37.
  "     appearance of, 43. ii.
  "     character of, 32, 44, 45, ii. 15, 35, 38.
  "     etymology of word, 42. ii. 32.
  "     hair, manner of wearing the, by, 45, 125 n. ii. 36, iv. 43 n.
  "     and Holland, 40. ii. 30.
  "     and Julian (defeated by him, 358 A.D.), 41 n. 44. ii. 31, 35.
  "     Kings of the, 7.
  "     modern, 21.
  "     race of, originally German, from Waldeck, 33, 36. ii. 15, 17, 24.
  "     religion of, under S. Louis, 21.
  "     rise of, 250 A.D., 7, 8; 33. ii. 17.
  "       settled in France, 6.
  "       extension of power, to the Loire, 8.
  "          "          "    to the Pyrenees, 8.
  "       Gaul becomes France, 64. iii. 16.
  "       the Rhine refortified against them, 38 n., 41. ii. 28, 31.
  "     tribes of, Gibbon on the, 33-4. ii. 18.
  "     weapons of the, Achon and Francisca, 42. ii. 32, 33.

French character, early, 8.
  "        "      its activity, 40. ii. 29.
  "        "      its loyalty, "good subjects of a good king," 40. ii. 29.
  "        "      makes perfect servants, 39. ii. 28.
  "        "      its innate truth, 52. ii. 33.
  "  frogs, 41. ii. 30.
  "  liberty and activity, 30. ii. 29.
  "     "    equality, and fraternity, under Clovis, 47. ii. 42.
  "  politeness, 32. ii. 15.
  "  religion, old and new, 117. iv. 41.
  "  Revolution, "They may eat grass," 20.
  "     "       a revolt against lies, 33. ii. 16.
  "     "       and irreligion, 95-104. iv. 7, 23.

Froissart, quoted, 43. ii. 33.

Fulda, towns on the, 36. ii. 24.

Future life, recognition of the dead in a, 139. iv. 60.


Gabriel, the Angel, figure of, Amiens Cathedral, 132. iv. 50.

Gascons, the, not really French, 10.

Gauls, the, in France, 6.
  "  become French, 64. iii. 16.
  "  meaning of the word, 29 sq. ii. 8.
  "  and Rome, 29. ii. 9.

Gentillesse, figure of, Amiens Cathedral, 118. iv. 41.

Geoffrey, Bishop (see "S. Geoffrey").

Geometry, from Egypt, 71. iii. 27.

Germany, Alemannia, 34. ii. 19.
   "     and the Franks, 9; 32 n. 33. ii. 15, 17.
   "     and Rome, 29. ii. 9.
   "     domestic manners of, 38. ii. 23.
   "     dukedoms of, small, 34. ii. 19.
   "     geography of, 35. ii. 20.
   "     geology of, 37. ii. 25.
   "     maps of, 34. ii. 19.
   "     mountains of, 36. ii. 23.
   "     railroads of, 34. ii. 19.
   "     S. Martin, and the Emperor of, 19
   "     tribes, Germanic, 33. ii. 18.

Gibbon's "Roman Empire." (_a_) its general character; (_b_) references
              to it
    (_a_) its general character:--
         contempt for Christianity, 49. ii. 44.
         its errors, 72 n. iii. 29 n.
         inaccurate generalization, 66 n. iii. 23-4.
         its epithets always gratis, 44. ii. 34.
         no fixed opinion on anything, 41 n. ii. 31 n.
         not always consistent, 45. ii. 38.
         satisfied moral serenity of, 37. ii. 27.
         sneers of, 50. ii. 48.
         style, rhetorical, 44, 45, 50; 67. ii. 35, 37; 47. iii. 21.
    (_b_) references to, in present book:--
         on Angoulême, its walls falling (xxxviii. 53),[73] 50 n. ii. 47.
         on asceticism (xxxvii. 72), 72 n. iii. 29.
         Christianity (xv. 23, 33), 77. iii. 39.
         Clovis (xxxviii. 17), 49, 51. ii. 45-6, 49.
         Egypt and monasticism (xxxvii. 6), 71. iii. 27.
         Europe, divisions of (xxv.), 68. iii. 23.
           "     nations of (lvi.), 65 n. iii. 19.
         Franks, the:--
           "     their armour (xxxv. 18), 43. ii. 34-5.
           "       "   aspect (xxxv. 18), 45-46. ii. 36-8.
           "       "   character (xix. 79, 80), 45-46. ii. 36-8.
           "       "   freemen (x. 73), 41 n. ii. 31.
           "       "   rise (x. 69), 33. ii. 17.
           "     crossing the Rhine (xix. 64), 41 n. ii. 31.
         after Tolbiac (xxxviii. 24), 50. ii. 52.
         Gnostics (xv. 23, 33), 78 n. iii. 39.

[Footnote 73: The references to Gibbon in this index are to the chapters of
             his history, together with the number of the note nearest to
             which the quotation occurs.]

Gibbon's Justinian (xl. 2), 32 n. ii. 15.
         miracles (xxxviii. 53), 50 n. ii. 47,
         monasticism (xxxvii.), 70 sq. iii. 26.
         monkish character (xxxvii. 72), 72 n. iii. 29.
         Roman Empire and its divisions (xxv. 29), 67. iii. 21-2.
         Scots and Celts (xxv. 109, 111), 69 n. iii. 24 n.
         Theodobert's death (xli. 103), 31 n. ii. 11 n.
         Theodoric, government of (xxxix. 43), 54. ii. 53.
             "  at Verona (xxxix. 19), 54. ii. 54.
         Tolbiac, battle of (xxxviii. 24), 53. ii. 52.

Gideon and the dewy fleece, figure of, Amiens Cathedral, 133. iv. 51.

Gilbert, Mons., on Amiens Cathedral, 99. iv. 14.
   "       "         "        "  the bronze tombs in, 103. iv. 23.

Ginevra and Imogen, 27. ii. 3.

Giotto, scriptural teaching of, 81. iii. 46.

Globe, divisions of the, 61. iii. 8.

Gnostics, 78. iii. 39.

God's kingdom in our hearts, 87. iii. 54.

Godfrey (see "S. Geoffroy").

Gonfalon standard, the, 119. iv. 41.

Gothic architecture, aim of a builder of, 89. iv. 2.
   " cathedral, the five doors of a, 107. iv. 28.
   " classic and Arab, 63. iii. 19.
   " and Classic Europe, 62. iii. 11.
   " wars with Rome, 66. iii. 20.

Goths, the: see "Ostrogoths," "Visigoths."

Gourds, of Amiens, 124. iv. 43.

Government, and nationality, 64. iii. 15.

Goyer, Mons. (bookseller), Amiens, 120. iv. 41.

Grass, pillage of, and Clovis, 20.

Greek, the alphabet how far, 68. iii. 22.
  " all Europe south of Danube is, 62, 68. iii. 12, 22.
  " imagination in Europe, 66. iii. 20.
  " myths and Christian legends, 86. iii. 53.

Greeks, the, and Roman Empire, 31. ii. 12.

Greta and Tees, 36. ii. 24.

Guards, the Queen's (in Ireland, 1880), pref. i.

Guelph, etymology of, 129. iv. 46.

Guinevere, 27. ii. 3.


Habakkuk, figure of, Amiens Cathedral, 125. iv. 43.

Haggai,     "          "        "   126. iv. 43.

Hair, Frankish manner of wearing the, 45. ii. 36; 125 n. iv. 43.

Hartz mountains, 35. ii. 20.

Hedgehog and bittern, 126. iv. 43.

Heligoland, 31. ii. 12.

Henry VIII. and the Pope, 119. iv. 41.

Heraldry, English leopard from France, 42. ii. 31.
   "      Frankish, early, 40, ii. 30
   "      French colours, 27. ii. 3.
   "        "       "     42. ii. 32.
   "      Uri, shield of, 31 n. ii. 11.

Hercules and the Nemean Lion, 87. iii. 54.

Herod, and the three Kings (Amiens Cathedral), 132 sq. iv. 50-1.

Herodotus on Egyptian influence in Greece, 71. iii. 27.

Hilda, derivation of, 51. ii. 48.

Hildebert, derivation of, 51. ii. 48.

Hildebrandt, derivation of, 51. ii. 48.

History, division of, into four periods of 500 years each, 26. ii. 1.
   "     how it is usually written, 12-13.
   "     how it should be written, pref. i. 12.
   "     popular, its effect on youthful minds, 12.
   "     should record facts, not make reflections, 70. iii. 26.
   "       "      "     "      "   or suppositions, 74 n. iii. 33.

Holy Land, 63. iii. 14.

Honour, of son to father, 101. iv. 17.

Hope, figure of, Amiens Cathedral, 119. iv. 41.

Hosea,   "          "       "      122. iv. 43.

Huet. Alexander, and Amiens Cathedral choir, 91 n. iv. 5.

Humanity, its essentials (love, sense, discipline), 138. iv. 59.

Humility, no longer a virtue, 59. iii. 4.
    "     sculpture of, Amiens Cathedral, 121. iv. 41.

Huns, the, in France, 10.


Idolatry and Atheism, 119. iv. 41.
    "    figure of, Amiens Cathedral, 119. iv. 41.
    "    and symbolism, distinct, 112. iv. 36.

Illyria, 68. iii. 23.

Immortality, 32. ii. 13.

India and England, 64. iii. 16.

Indians, North American, 51. ii. 48.

Infidelity, modern, 20, 39. ii. 28.
     "         "    58. iii. 2.

Ingelow, Miss, quoted, "Songs of Seven," 28. ii. 4.

Innocents, the Holy (Amiens Cathedral), 134. iv. 51.

Inscription on tombs of Bishops Everard and Geoffroy, 104. iv. 24, 26.

Inspiration of acts and words, not distinct, 83. iii. 48.
    "       of Scripture, modern views of, 83. iii. 48.

Invasion is not possession of a country, 66. iii. 16.

Ireland and England, 1880, pref. iii., iv.; 60. iii 6.
    "   tribes of, in early Britain, 69 n. iii. 24.

Isaiah, figure of, Amiens Cathedral, 115, 121. iv. 38, 42.

Italy, under the Ostrogoths, 64. iii. 16.


Jacob's pillow, 70. iii. 26.

Jameson, Mrs., "Legendary Art" quoted, 17, 20.

Jeremiah, figure of, Amiens Cathedral, 115, 121. iv. 38, 42.

Jerusalem, fall of, 77. iii. 39.

Jews, the, and Assyria, 65. iii. 18.

Jews, the, return to Jerusalem, 77, iii. 39.
  "    "   substitute usury for prophecy, 66. iii. 19.

Joan of Arc, 29. ii. 7; 55. ii. 55; 95. iv. 7.

Joel, figure of, Amiens Cathedral, 123. iv. 43.

Johnson, Dr., 101 n. iv. 17.

Jonah, figure of, Amiens Cathedral, 124. iv. 43.

Julian, the Emperor, rejects auguries, 70 n. iii. 26.
  "      "  and Constantius, 41 n. ii. 31.
  "      "  death of, 363 A.D., 75, 76. iii. 34, 36.
  "      "  defeats the Franks, 358 A.D., 44. ii. 35.
  "      "  refortifies the Rhine against the Franks, 38 n. ii. 28.
  "      "  and S. Martin, 16.
  "      victory of, at Strasbourg, 44. ii. 35.

Justinian, a Dacian by birth, 32 n. ii. 15.
  "        means "upright," 32 n. ii. 15.


Kaltenbacher, Mons., photographs of Amiens Cathedral, 130. iv. 47.

Karr, Alphonse, his work and the author's sympathy with it, 22.
  "       "     his 'Grains de Bons Sens,' 'Bourdonnements,' 33.

Kempis, Thomas à, 80. iii, 44.

Kingliness, 48. ii. 43.

Kings, the three (Amiens Cathedral), 132-4. iv. 50-51.

Knighthood, belted, meaning of, 44. ii. 34.

Knowledge, true, is of virtue, pref. v.


Laon cathedral, legend of, and oxen, 118 n. iv. 41. n.

Latin and English compared, 104. iv. 24 sq.

Law, the force of, and government, 64. iii. 15.
 "   old and new forms of, 48. ii. 43.

Lear, King, story of, reduced to its bare facts, 11-12.

Legends, whether true or not, immaterial, 15, 16, 18; 86-87. iii. 54.
   "     modern contempt for, 129. iv. 46.
   "     rationalization of, its value, 50. n. ii. 47.

Leopard, English heraldic, 42. ii. 31.

Leucothea, 27. ii. 3.

Liberté, Egalité, Fraternité, 47. ii, 42.

Liberty, and activity, 40. ii. 29.
   "     and "franchise," 38, 38 n. ii. 27, 28 n.

Libya, 63. iii. 13.
  "    and Vandal invasion, 64. iii. 16.

Lily on statue of David, Amiens Cathedral, 110. iv. 32.

Limousins, 10.

Lion, under feet of Christ, Amiens Cathedral, 111. iv. 34.

Literature and art, distinct mental actions, 82. iii. 47.
    "      and the Bible, 85. iii. 51.
    "      cheap (penny edition of Scott), 60. iii. 7.

Louis, derivation of, 51. ii. 48.

---- I., of France, 47. ii. 40.

---- VIII., 100. iv. 16.
                 (See "St. Louis.")

Love, divine and human (Amiens Cathedral), 118. iv. 41.
  "   no humanity without it, 138. iv. 59.

Luca della Robbia, 81. iii. 46.

Luini, 81. iii. 46.

Lune, the river, 2.

Lust (Amiens Cathedral), 120. iv. 41.

Lydia, 62. iii. 12.


Madonna, figure of, Amiens Cathedral, 94. iv. 7.
   "     porch to,     "       "   107. iv. 28.
   "     three types of (Dolorosa, Reine, Nourrice), 131. iv. 49.
   "     worship of, and its modern substitutes, 131. iv. 48.

Malachi, figure of, Amiens Cathedral, 127. iv. 43.

Man, races of, divided by climate, 61. iii. 8.

Man's nature, 58. iii. 1.

Manchester, 59. iii. 3.

Map-drawing, 60. iii 7.
 "  of English dominions (Sir E. Creasy), 59-60. iii. 5-6.
 "  of France, 8.
 "  on Mercator's projection, 59-60. iii. 6.

Marquise, village near Calais, 10.

Martin's, John, "Belshazzar's feast," 122. iv. 42.

Martinmas, 18.

Martyrdom, the lessons of, 135. iv. 53.

Martyrs, female, many not in calendar, 29. ii. 7.

Meleager, 31. ii. 11.

Memory, "Memoria technica," 26. ii. 1.

Mercator, 60. iii. 6.

Merovée, seizes Amiens, on death of Clodion, 447 A.D., 7, 21.

Micah, figure of, Amiens Cathedral, 124. iv. 43.

Millennium, the, 86. iii. 54.

Milman's History of Christianity, 68-70 n., 73. iii. 22, 26, 32.
   "        "            "        on Rome in time of St. Jerome, 75-76.
                                      iii. 35.

Milton's "Paradise Lost," and the Bible, 80. iii. 44.
   "         "       "    quoted, 118. iv. 41.

Mind, disease of, noble and ignoble passion, 72. iii. 29.

Mines, coal, Plimsoll on, 48. ii. 42.

Missals, atheism represented as barefoot in, of 1100-1300, 119. ii. 41.

Modernism, avarice and pride of, 111. iv. 35. See "Christianity,"
  "Commerce," "England," "History," "Humility," "Infidelity,"
  "Philosophy," "Public Opinion," "Science."

Moesia, and the alphabet, 68. iii. 22.

Monasteries of Italy, made barracks of, 72 n. iii. 29.

Monasticism, its rise, 70-71. iii. 26-8.

Monks, type of character of, 72 n. iii. 29; 137. iv. 56.
  "    orders of, the main, 137. iii. 26.

Months, the, quatrefoils illustrative of (Amiens Cathedral), 130. iv. 47.

Morality, natural to man, 138. iv. 59.
   "      and religion, 138. iv. 58.

More, Sir Thomas, execution of, 48. ii. 43.

Morocco, extent of, 63. iii. 13.

Moses, 70. iii. 26.
  "    and Aaron, 133. iv. 51.
  "    and the burning bush, 133. iv. 51.

"Mysteries of Paris," 28. ii. 5.


Nahum, figure of, Amiens Cathedral, 125. & n. iv. 43 & n.

Names, Frankish, etymology of, 51. ii. 48.

Nanterre, village of S. Genevieve, 28, 29. ii. 5, 8.

Nationality, depends on race and climate, not on rule, 64. iii. 15-16.

Nemean Lion, 86. iii. 53.

Netherlands, the, 37. ii. 26.

Nineveh, the beasts in, 126. iv. 43.
   "     the burden of, 125. iv. 43.

Nitocris, 29. ii. 6.

Nogent, Benedictine abbey of, 52. ii. 49.

Nomad tribes of northern Europe, 30. ii. 10.

Normans, rise of the, 31. ii. 12.

[Greek: Nous], 138 n. iv. 59 n.


Obadiah, figure of, Amiens Cathedral, 123. iv. 43.

Obedience, figure of, Amiens Cathedral, 118. iv. 41.

Odoacer, ends Roman Empire in Italy, 8; 67. iii. 21.

Orcagna, 81. iii. 46.

Origen, 81. iii. 47.

Ostrogoths, 3. ii. 12.
    "       defeat Clovis at Aries, 50. ii. 47.

"Our Fathers have told us," how begun, its aim and plan, pref. iii.
        "        "          general plan of, Appendix iii.
        "        "          plan for notes to, 21.

Oxen, story of, and Laon Cathedral, 118. iv. 41.
  "   patience of, 118. iv. 41.

Oxford, the "happy valley," 92-93. iv. 6.


Palestine, 63. iii. 14.

Palgrave, Sir F., on Arabia, 64-65 & n. iii. 17-18 & n.
    "        "    on the camel, 118-119. iv. 41.

Papacy, origin of the, 76. n. iii. 35.

Paris, church of S. Genevieve at, 55. ii. 55.
  "    the Isle of France, 138. iv. 58.
  "    the model of manners, 138. iv. 58.
  "    print-shops at, 118. iv. 41.

Patience, figure of, Amiens Cathedral, 118. iv. 41.

Peasant life of early Europe, 32, sq. ii. 13.

Perseverance, figure of, Amiens Cathedral, 119. iv. 41.

Persia, the real power of the East, 65. iii. 18.

Philip the Wise, of France, 100-101. iv. 16-17.

Philistia, 63. iii. 14.

Philosophy, modern, its manner of history, 12.

Phoenix, the, and chastity, 120. iv. 41.

Photographs of Amiens Cathedral, 117 n. iv. 41 n.; 122 n. iv. 43 n.; 130.
      iv. 130. And see Appendix II.

"Pilgrim's Progress," 16.

Pillage of subjects, to punish kings, 53. ii. 51.

Plimsoll, on coal mines, 48. ii. 42.

Poets, the three Christian-heathen, 102. iv. 20.

Poitiers, battle of, 508 A.D., Clovis and Alaric, 9, 21.
    "        "       and the walls of Angoulême, 50 n. ii. 47.
    "        "       1356 A.D., Froissart on, 43. ii. 33.

Polacks, the, 31. ii. 12.

Politicians, their proper knowledge, pref. v.

Politics: see "England."

Posting days, Calais to Paris, 10.

Power, motive of desire for, 74. iii. 33.

Praise, all great art, act, and thought is, pref. v.

Prayer, George Chapman's last, 102. iv. 20.

Pride, and avarice, 111. iv. 35.
  "    faults and virtues of, 104-105. iv. 24.
  "    infidelity of, and the cockatrice, 110. iv. 33; 121. iv. 41.

Priestly ambition, 74. iii. 33.

Probus, the Emperor, 32 n. ii. 15; 67. iii, 21.

Prophets, figures of the, Amiens Cathedral, general view of, 114. iv. 39.
   "             "           "       "      in detail, 121-122. iv. 42-3.

Protestantism, and the study of the Bible, 80. iii. 45.
       "       and popular histories, 12.
       "       and priestly ambition, 74. iii. 33.
       "       and Roman Catholicism, 137. iv. 57.
       "       views of S. Jerome, 73. iii. 31.

Provence, early, 8, 9.

Providence, God's, and history, 13.

Psalms, the scope of the, 85, iii. 50.

Public opinion, callousness of modern, 48. ii. 42.

Purgatory, doctrine of, 136 n. iv. 55 n.

Puritan malice, 34. ii. 19.


Quaker, preaching at Matlock, 83 n. iii. 48.

Queen's Guards, in Ireland, 1880, pref. iii.


Races of Europe, divided by climate, 61. iii. 9. See "Climate."

Rachel, the Syrian, 63. iii. 14.

Railroads, modern, of Germany, 59. iii. 4.
    "      travelling by, I, 3.

Raphael's Madonnas, 131. iv. 49.

Rebellion, figure of, Amiens Cathedral, 119. iv. 41.

Religion, definition of true, 138-139. iv. 60. (And see "Bible,"
          "Christianity,"  "Inspiration," "Protestantism.")
    "     to desire the right, 82. iii. 48.
    "     common idea that our own enemies are God's also, 14.
    "     and morality, 138. iv. 58.
    "     natural, 102. iv. 20.
    "     of Arabia, 65. iii. 19.
    "     of Egypt, 63. iii. 13.
    "     Eastern and Western, Col. Butler on, 21 n.

Restoration, modern, 107 n. iv. 27 n.

Rheims, Clovis crowned at, 9.
   "       "   enriches church of, 52. ii. 49.

Rheims Cathedral, 88. iv. 1.
   "       "      its traceries, 97. iv. 11.

Rhine, the, refortified by Julian, 38 n., 41. ii. 31.
  "     "   tribes from Vistula to, 30. ii. 10.

Right and left, in description of cathedrals, 107. iv. 28.

Rivers, strength and straightness, 61 n. iii. 10.

Robert, of Luzarches, builder of Amiens Cathedral, 97. iv. 12.

Roman Catholics, half Wellington's army Irish, pref. iv.
  "      "       and Protestantism, 137. iv. 57.
  "      "       servants, 72. iii. 29.

Roman Emperors, five, from Dacia, 32 n. ii. 15.
  "      "      as supreme Pontiffs, 75. iii. 35.

Roman Empire, divisions of (Illyria, Italy, Gaul), 67. iii. 21-2.
  "     "     Eastern and Western division, 67. iii. 21.
  "     "     end of the, 66-67. iii. 20-21.
  "     "     fall of, 31. ii. 12.
  "     "         "    and Julian and the augurs, 70. iii. 26.
  "     "     its main foes, 30. ii. 9.
  "     "     its true importance, 66. iii. 20.
  "     "     a power, not a nation, 65. iii. 19 n.

Roman Empire, power of, in France, ended, 481 A.D., 4, 6-8 sq.
  "     "        "      in Italy, ended, 476 A.D., 8.

Roman gate of Twins, at Amiens, 14.

"Romaunt of Rose," quoted, 39. ii. 28 n.

Rome, aspect of the city, in time of S. Jerome, 75. iii. 35.
  "   gives order to Europe, as Greece imagination, 66. iii. 20.
  "   wild nations opposed to, 30. ii. 9.

Romsey, 3.

Rose, on statue of David, Amiens Cathedral, 109-110. iv. 32.

Rosin forest, 35. ii. 20-1.

Royalties, taxes and, 47. ii. 41.

Rozé, Père, on Amiens Cathedral, 98. iv. 13; 104 n. iv. 24 n.; 125. iv. 43.


S. Acheul, near Amiens, 128-129. iv. 45-6.

S. Agnes, character of, 27. ii. 3.

S. Ambrogio, Verona, plain of, 54, ii. 54.

S. Augustine, his first converts, 18.
      "       and S. Jerome, 81. iii. 47.
      "       town of Hippo, 63. iii. 13.

S. Benedict, born 481 A.D., 27. ii. 3; 70. iii. 26.

S. Clotilde, of France, 51. ii. 48.

S. Cloud, etymology of, 51. ii. 48.

S. Domice, 128. iv. 44.

S. Elizabeth, 132. iv. 50.

S. Elizabeth, of Marburg, 35-6. ii. 21-3.

S. Firmin, his history, 5; 99. iv. 14; 128. iv. 45.
     "     beheaded and buried, 5.
     "     his Roman disciple, 5.
     "     his grave, 5-6; 129. iv. 46.
     "     and S. Martin, compared, 17, 18.
     "     porch to, Amiens Cathedral, 107. iv. 28; 127 sq. iv. 44.
     "     sculpture of, Amiens Cathedral, 5.

---- Confessor, 128. iv. 44-6.

S. Fuscien, 128. iv. 44.

S. Genevieve, actually existed, 29. ii. 7.
      "       biographies of her, numerous, 29. ii. 7.
      "       birth of, 421 A.D., 27. ii. 3.
      "       birthplace of, Nanterre, 28. ii. 5.
      "       character of, 28, 29. ii. 5-7.
      "       church to, at Paris, 55. ii. 55.
      "       and Clovis and his father, 55. ii. 55.
      "       conversion of, by S. Germain, 28. ii. 5.
      "       a pure Gaul, 29, 33. ii. 8, 15.
      "       of what typical, 27. ii. 3.
      "           peacefulness, 29. ii. 6.
      "           quiet force, 29. ii. 7.

S. Genevieve, S. Phyllis, 28. ii. 5.

S. Gentian, 128. iv. 44.

S. Geoffroy, Bishop of Amiens, history of, 128. iv. 44-5.
       "        "         "    tomb of (Amiens), 104-105; iv. 24, 26.

S. Germain converts S. Genevieve, on his way to England, 28. ii. 6.

S. Hilda (Whitby Cliff), 51. ii. 48.

S. Honoré, 128. iv. 44-5.
     "     porch to, Amiens Cathedral, 95. iv. 7.

S. James, apostle of hope, 120. iv. 41.

S. Jerome, his Bible, 70, 76, 77, 78. iii. 26, 36, 37-40.
      "    gives the Bible to the West, 50. ii. 47.
      "    Galatians, commentary on Epistle to the, 81. iii. 47.
      "    character of, candour its basis, 76. iii. 36.
      "    childhood and early studies, 75. iii. 34-5.
      "    death of, at Bethlehem, 78. iii. 40.
      "    Hebrew, studied by, 77. iii. 38.
      "    not a mere hermit, 73. iii. 31.
      "    his lion, 86. iii. 53.
      "    Milman, Dean, on, 74. iii. 32 sq.
      "    protestant view of, 73. iii. 31.
      "    Queen Sophia's letter to Vota on, 81. iii. 47.
      "    scholarship, will not give up his, 76. iii. 36.
      "    style of writing shown, 81. iii. 47.

S. John, the apostle of love, 112. iv. 37.
     "   his greatness, 101. iv. 16.

S. Louis, religion under, 21 n.

S. Mark's, Venice, Baptistery of and the virtues, 112 n. iv. 36 n.

S. Martin, baptism and conversion of, 15.
     "     character of, gentle and cheerful, 17, 19.
     "         "         patient, 29. ii. 7.
     "         "         serene and sweet, 17.
     "     cloak given to the beggar by, 332 A.D., 15.
     "     Clovis and, 20.
     "     Devil, answer to the, 17.
     "     drinks to a beggar, 19.
     "     fame of, universal (places called after), 18.
     "     history of, how relevant to this book, 20.
     "     's Lane, London, 18.
     "     and Julian, 16.
     "     Tours, his abbey there, 20.
     "       "    and bishopric, 16, 20.
     "     vision of, 15.
     "     wine, the patron of, 18, 19.

S. Nicholas," "Journal de, 120 n. iv. 41.

S. Peter, Apostle of courage, 112. iv. 37.

S. Quentin, 128. iv. 44.

S. Remy crowns Clovis, 9.
    "   preaches to Clovis, 13.
    "   and the Soissons vase, 47. ii. 41.

S. Sauve 100, 128. iv. 14, 44.

S. Simeon, 132. iv. 50.

S. Ulpha, 128, 129. iv. 44, 46.

S. Victoric, 128. iv. 44.

Salian, epithet of the French, 40, 41. ii. 30-31.

Salii, the, 40. ii. 30.

Salique law, 40. ii. 30.

Salisbury Cathedral, 88. iv. 1.

"Salts," old and young, 41. ii. 31.

Salvation, Protestant theory of, 79. iii. 43.

Sands, English, 2.

Savage races, love of war in, 51. ii. 48.
   "   women, endurance a point of honour with, 51. ii. 48.

Saxons, the, 31, ii. 12.
   "    religion of, 21.

Scandinavia, 61. iii. 10.
      "      becomes Norman, 31. ii. 12.

Scepticism, modern, 13. See "Infidelity."

Science, modern, its view of man, 58. iii. 1.

Scotch crofters and England, 60. iii. 6.

Scots, Picts and, 69 n. iii. 24.

Scott, Sir Walter, his nomenclature deeply founded, 34. ii. 18.
  "         "      novels of, "Antiquary" (Martin Waldeck), 34. ii. 18.
  "         "      "Monastery," 72 n. iii. 29.
  "         "      penny edition of, 60. iii. 7.

Sculpture, of a Gothic cathedral, 89. iv. 2.
    "      no pathos in primary, 101 n. iv. 19 n.

Scythia, tribes of, 61, 65. iii. 10, 17.

Semiramis, 29. ii. 6.

Sense ([Greek: nous]), essential to humanity, 138. iv. 59.

Servants, catholic, character of, 72 n. iii. 29.
    "     French, perfect, 39. ii. 28.

Severn, the, 2.

Shakspeare's Imogen, 27. ii. 3.
      "      "King Lear," reduced to its bare facts, 11.
      "      "Winter's Tale"--"lilies of all kinds," 110. iv. 32.

Sheba, Queen of, and Solomon, Amiens sculptures, 132 sq. iv. 50-51.

Shield, the, of the Franks, 44. ii. 35. See "Heraldry," "Uri."

Shyness and frankness, 39 & n. ii. 28.

Siberian wilderness, 61. iii. 9, 10.

Sicambri, 34, 38. ii. 18. 27.

Sidney, Sir Philip, 15.

Sin, carnal, the most distinctly human, 111. iv. 34.

Sin, deceit, its essence, 49. ii. 44.
 "   pardon of, doctrine of, 135. iv. 55.

Slang, 105. iv. 25.
  "    Greek, 138. iv. 59.

Smith's Dictionary, _s_, "Gallia," 29. ii. 9.

Soissons, battle of, 485 A.D., 7 n.; 9, 20, 52. ii. 49.
    "     vase of, 47 sq. ii. 40 sq.
    "        "     and Clovis' revenge, 48. ii. 43.

Solomon and Queen of Sheba (Amiens Cathedral), 132 sq. iv. 50-1.

Solway, the, 2.

Sons, honour of fathers by, 101. iv. 17.

Spain, Theodoric in, 54. ii. 53.

Spiritual world, the, 138. iv. 59.

Staubbach, the, 96. iv. 9.

Stone saw, not used in France, 88 n. iv. 2 n.

Strigi, S. Jerome born at, 75. iii. 34.

Suicide and heroism, 120. iv. 41.

"Suisse Historique" quoted, 53 n. ii. 49.

Sword, belted, meaning of, 43. ii. 34.
  "    manufacture, Amiens, 124. iv. 43.

Syagrius defeated by Clovis, 52. ii. 49.
    "    dies, 486 A.D., 52. ii. 49.

Syria, 63. iii. 14.


Temperance, figure of, Amiens Cathedral, 120. iv. 41.

Teutonic nations and Roman Empire, 68. iii. 22.

Theodobert, the death of, 31 n. ii. 11.

Theodoric, king of Ostrogoths, 51. ii. 48.
    "      defeats Franks at Aries, 54. ii. 53.
    "      power of, in Europe, 54. ii. 53.
    "      at Verona, 54. ii. 54.

Thrace, 68. iii. 23.

Thuringia, 7.

Tolbiac, battle of, 9, 21 n.
   "     field of, 54. ii. 54.
   "     its real importance, 53. ii. 52.

Tombs, bronze, Amiens Cathedral, 103 sq. iv. 23.
  "       "    only two left in France, 103. iv. 23.

Tours, archbishop of, on war, 43. ii. 33.
  "    S. Martin, bishop of, 16.

Town, a modern, defined, 90. iv. 3.

Tripoli, 63. iii. 13.

Troy, 62. iii. 12.

Trupin, Jean, and choir of Amiens Cathedral, 91 n. iv. 5 n.

Truth, only, can be polished, 33. ii, 16.
  "    of French character, 33. ii. 16.

Tunis, 63. iii. 13.

Turner's "Loire side," 20.

Tyre, 63. iii. 13.


Ulphilas, Bible of, 68. iii. 22.

Ulverstone, etymology of, 129. iv. 46.

Uri, shield of, 31 n. ii. 11.

Usury and the church, 12.
  "   and the Jews, 66. iii. 19.

Utilitas, 8.


Valens, his prefecture of the East, 67. iii. 21.

Valentinian, and the division of the Empire, 67. iii. 21.

Vandals, invasion of Libya by, 64. iii. 16.

Venice, founded 421 A.D., 2.

Verona, cathedral of, 88. iv. 1.
   "    battle of, Theodoric defeats Odoacer, 490 A.D., 54. ii. 54.
   "    field of, from Fra Giocondo's bridge, 54. ii. 54.

Vestal Virgins, 70. iii. 26.

Violence, expression of, in sculptures of Amiens, 126. iv. 43.

Viollet le Duc, quoted, 88 n. iv. 1; 88 & n. iv. 2; 97. iv. 11; 103 n.
  iv. 23. n.; 111. iv. 36; 118 n. iv. 41 n.; 132. iv. 49.

Vine, on statue of David, Amiens Cathedral, 110. iv. 32.

Virgil's influence on Dante, 110. iii. 53.

Virgil quoted (Æneid vi. 27 sq.), 101 n. iv. 18-19 n.

Virgin, the: _see_ Madonna.

Virtue, to be known and recognized, pref. v.

Virtues, of Apostles (Amiens Cathedral), 112 sq. iv. 37 sq.
   "     Byzantine, rank of, 111. iv. 36 n.

Visigoths, the, 31. ii. 12.
     "      "   in France, 9, 10.
     "      "   at Poitiers, defeated by Clovis, 9.

Vistula, the, its importance, 61. iii. 9, 10.
   "       "  tribes of, from Rhine to, 30, 31. ii. 10, 12.
   "       "    "          "  Weser to, 37. ii. 26.

Vobiscum," a "Pax, 114 n. iv. 38 n.

Vota, the Jesuit, letter of Queen Sophia of Prussia to, on S. Jerome,
      81. iii. 47. (See Carlyle's "Frederick," Bk. I., cap. iv.)

Vulgate, Ps. xci. 13, "Inculcabis super leonem," 111. iv. 34.


Waldeck, 34, ii. 18.

Walter's houses, Germany, 37. ii. 25.

Walton, Isaac, 1.

Wandle, the, 1.

War, savage love of, 51. ii. 48.

Wartzburg, 37. ii. 24.

Wellington, Duke of, on Roman Catholic valour, pref. iv.

Weser, the course of the, 34, 37. ii. 19, 26.
  "    sources of the (Eder, Fulda, Werra), 36. ii. 24.
  "    tribes of the, up to Rhine and Vistula, 37. ii. 26.

Whitby Cliff, 51. ii. 48.

Wisdom, figure of, Amiens Cathedral, 120. iv. 41.

Women, endurance a point of honour with savage, 51. ii. 48.
  "    respect for, by Franks and Goths, 54. ii. 54.

Wood-carving of Picardy (Amiens Cathedral), 91 sq. iv. 5 sq.

Wool manufacture, Amiens, see _s_. "Amiens."

Wordsworth quoted, "Filling more and more with crystal light," 55. ii. 55.


Yonge, Miss, "History of Christian Names," Franks, 38. ii. 27.
  "      "      "            "       "     Ulpha, 129. iv. 46.


Zacharias, 133, iv. 51.

Zechariah, figure of, Amiens Cathedral, 127. iv. 43.

Zenobia, 29. ii. 6.

Zephaniah, figure of, Amiens Cathedral, 126. iv. 43.

Zodiac, signs of, sculptures, Amiens Cathedral, 130. iv. 47.

Zulu war, the, 48. ii. 43; 60. iii. 6.


THE END.




PROSERPINA.

STUDIES OF WAYSIDE FLOWERS,

WHILE THE AIR WAS YET PURE

_AMONG THE ALPS, AND IN THE SCOTLAND AND
ENGLAND WHICH MY FATHER KNEW_.

BY

JOHN RUSKIN, LL.D.,

HONORARY STUDENT OF CHRIST CHURCH, AND SLADE PROFESSOR OF FINE ART.

                     "Oh--Prosérpina!
  For the flowers now, which frighted, thou let'st fall
  From Dis's waggon."

VOLUME I.

New York:
JOHN WILEY & SONS,
15 Astor Place.

1888.

       *       *       *       *       *


Press of J. J. Little & Co.,
Astor Place, New York.

       *       *       *       *       *


CONTENTS OF VOL. I

  PAGE
  INTRODUCTION,                 1

  CHAPTER I.
  MOSS,                        12

  CHAPTER II.
  THE ROOT,                    26

  CHAPTER III.
  THE LEAF,                    40

  CHAPTER IV.
  THE FLOWER,                  64

  CHAPTER V.
  PAPAVER RHOEAS,              86

  CHAPTER VI.
  THE PARABLE OF JOASH,       106

  CHAPTER VII.
  THE PARABLE OF JOTHAM,      117

  CHAPTER VIII.
  THE STEM,                   127

  CHAPTER IX.
  OUTSIDE AND IN,             151

  CHAPTER X.
  THE BARK,                   170

  CHAPTER XI.
  GENEALOGY,                  176

  CHAPTER XII.
  CORA AND KRONOS,            205

  CHAPTER XIII.
  THE SEED AND HUSK,          219

  CHAPTER XIV.
  THE FRUIT GIFT,             227

  INDEX I.
  DESCRIPTIVE NOMENCLATURE,   239

  INDEX II.
  ENGLISH NAMES,              255

  INDEX III.
  LATIN OR GREEK NAMES,       258

       *       *       *       *       *


{1}

PROSERPINA.

INTRODUCTION.

BRANTWOOD, _14th March, 1874._

Yesterday evening I was looking over the first book in which I studied
Botany,--Curtis's Magazine, published in 1795 at No. 3, St. George's
Crescent, Blackfriars Road, and sold by the principal booksellers in Great
Britain and Ireland. Its plates are excellent, so that I am always glad to
find in it the picture of a flower I know. And I came yesterday upon what I
suppose to be a variety of a favourite flower of mine, called, in Curtis,
"the St. Bruno's Lily."

I am obliged to say "what I suppose to be a variety," because my pet lily
is branched,[1] while this is drawn as unbranched, and especially stated to
be so. And the page of text, in which this statement is made, is so
characteristic of botanical books, and botanical science, not to say all
science as hitherto taught for the blessing of mankind; {2} and of the
difficulties thereby accompanying its communication, that I extract the
page entire, printing it, opposite, as nearly as possible in facsimile.

Now you observe, in this instructive page, that you have in the first
place, nine names given you for one flower; and that among these nine
names, you are not even at liberty to make your choice, because the united
authority of Haller and Miller may be considered as an accurate balance to
the single authority of Linnæus; and you ought therefore for the present to
remain, yourself, balanced between the sides. You may be farther
embarrassed by finding that the Anthericum of Savoy is only described as
growing in Switzerland. And farther still, by finding that Mr. Miller
describes two varieties of it, which differ only in size, while you are
left to conjecture whether the one here figured is the larger or smaller;
and how great the difference is.

Farther, If you wish to know anything of the habits of the plant, as well
as its nine names, you are informed that it grows both at the bottoms of
the mountains, and the tops; and that, with us, it flowers in May and
June,--but you are not told when, in its native country.

The four lines of the last clause but one, may indeed be useful to
gardeners; but--although I know my good father and mother did the best they
could for me in buying this beautiful book; and though the admirable plates
of it did their work, and taught me much, I cannot wonder that neither my
infantine nor boyish mind was irresistibly attracted by the text of which
this page is one of the most favourable specimens; nor, in consequence,
that my botanical studies were--when I had attained the age of fifty--no
farther advanced than the reader will find them in the opening chapter of
this book.

{3}

       *       *       *       *       *

                  [318]

    ANTHERICUM LILIASTRUM, SAVOY ANTHERICUM,
    or ST. BRUNO'S LILY.

    _Class and Order._

    HEXANDRIA MONOGYNIA.

    _Generic Character._

    _Cor._ 6-petala, patens. _Caps._ ovata.

    _Specific Character and Synonyms._

    ANTHERICUM _Liliastrum_ foliis planis, scapo simplicissimo, corollis
    campanulatis, staminibus declinatis. _Linn.    Syst. Vegetab. ed. 14.
    Murr. p. 330._ _Ait. Kew. v. _I._    p. 449._

    HEMEROCALLIS floribus patulis secundis. _Hall. Hist. n. 1230._

    PHALANGIUM magno flore. _Bauh. Pin. 29._

    PHALANGIUM Allobrogicum majus. _Clus. cur. app. alt._

    PHALANGIUM Allobrogicum. The Savoye Spider-wort. _Park.    Parad. p.
    150. tab. 151. f. 1._

       *       *       *       *       *

    Botanists are divided in their opinions respecting the genus of this
    plant; LINNÆUS considers it as an _Anthericum_, HALLER and MILLER make
    it an _Hemerocallis_.

    It is a native of Switzerland, where, HALLER informs us it grows
    abundantly in the Alpine meadows, and even on the summits of the
    mountains; with us it flowers in May and June.

    It is a plant of great elegance, producing on an unbranched stem about
    a foot and a half high, numerous flowers of a delicate white colour,
    much smaller but resembling in form those of the common white lily,
    possessing a considerable degree of fragrance, their beauty is
    heightened by the rich orange colour of their antheræ; unfortunately
    they are but of short duration.

    MILLER describes two varieties of it differing merely in size.

    A loamy soil, a situation moderately moist, with an eastern or western
    exposure, suits this plant best; so situated, it will increase by its
    roots, though not very fast, and by parting of these in the autumn, it
    is usually propagated.

    PARKINSON describes and figures it in his _Parad. Terrest._, observing
    that "divers allured by the beauty of its flowers, had brought it into
    these parts."

       *       *       *       *       *

{4}

Which said book was therefore undertaken, to put, if it might be, some
elements of the science of botany into a form more tenable by ordinary
human and childish faculties; or--for I can scarcely say I have yet any
tenure of it myself--to make the paths of approach to it more pleasant. In
fact, I only know, of it, the pleasant distant effects which it bears to
simple eyes; and some pretty mists and mysteries, which I invite my young
readers to pierce, as they may, for themselves,--my power of guiding them
being only for a little way.

Pretty mysteries, I say, as opposed to the vulgar and ugly mysteries of the
so-called science of botany,--exemplified sufficiently in this chosen page.
Respecting which, please observe farther;--Nobody--I can say this very
boldly--loves Latin more dearly than I; but, precisely because I do love it
(as well as for other reasons), I have always insisted that books, whether
scientific or not, ought to be written either in Latin, or English; and not
in a doggish mixture of the refuse of both.

Linnæus wrote a noble book of universal Natural History in Latin. It is one
of the permanent classical treasures of the world. And if any scientific
man thinks his labors are worth the world's attention, let him, also, write
{5} what he has to say in Latin, finishedly and exquisitely, if it take him
a month to a page.[2]

But if--which, unless he be one chosen of millions, is assuredly the
fact--his lucubrations are only of local and temporary consequence, let him
write, as clearly as he can, in his native language.

This book, accordingly, I have written in English; (not, by the way, that I
_could_ have written it in anything else--so there are small thanks to me);
and one of its purposes is to interpret, for young English readers, the
necessary European Latin or Greek names of flowers, and to make them vivid
and vital to their understandings. But two great difficulties occur in
doing this. The first, that there are generally from three or four, up to
two dozen, Latin names current for every flower; and every new botanist
thinks his eminence only to be properly asserted by adding another.

The second, and a much more serious one, is of the Devil's own
contriving--(and remember I am always quite serious when I speak of the
Devil,)--namely, that the most current and authoritative names are apt to
be founded on some unclean or debasing association, so that to interpret
them is to defile the reader's mind. I will give no instance; too many will
at once occur to any {6} learned reader, and the unlearned I need not vex
with so much as one: but, in such cases, since I could only take refuge in
the untranslated word by leaving other Greek or Latin words also
untranslated, and the nomenclature still entirely senseless,--and I do not
choose to do this,--there is only one other course open to me, namely, to
substitute boldly, to my own pupils, other generic names for the plants
thus faultfully hitherto titled.

As I do not do this for my own pride, but honestly for my reader's service,
I neither question nor care how far the emendations I propose may be now or
hereafter adopted. I shall not even name the cases in which they have been
made for the serious reason above specified; but even shall mask those
which there was real occasion to alter, by sometimes giving new names in
cases where there was no necessity of such kind. Doubtless I shall be
accused of doing myself what I violently blame in others. I do so; but with
a different motive--of which let the reader judge as he is disposed. The
practical result will be that the children who learn botany on the system
adopted in this book will know the useful and beautiful names of plants
hitherto given, in all languages; the useless and ugly ones they will not
know. And they will have to learn one Latin name for each plant, which,
when differing from the common one, I trust may yet by some scientific
persons be accepted, and with ultimate advantage.

The learning of the one Latin name--as, for instance, Gramen striatum--I
hope will be accurately enforced {7} always;--but not less carefully the
learning of the pretty English one--"Ladielace Grass"--with due observance
that "Ladies' laces hath leaves like unto Millet in fashion, with many
white vaines or ribs, and silver strakes running along through the middest
of the leaves, fashioning the same like to laces of white and green silk,
very beautiful and faire to behold."

I have said elsewhere, and can scarcely repeat too often, that a day will
come when men of science will think their names disgraced, instead of
honoured, by being used to barbarise nomenclature; I hope therefore that my
own name may be kept well out of the way; but, having been privileged to
found the School of Art in the University of Oxford, I think that I am
justified in requesting any scientific writers who may look kindly upon
this book, to add such of the names suggested in it as they think deserving
of acceptance, to their own lists of synonyms, under the head of "Schol.
Art. Oxon."

The difficulties thrown in the way of any quiet private student by existing
nomenclature may be best illustrated by my simply stating what happens to
myself in endeavouring to use the page above facsimile'd. Not knowing how
far St. Bruno's Lily might be connected with my own pet one, and not having
any sufficient book on Swiss botany, I take down Loudon's Encyclopædia of
Plants, (a most useful book, as far as any book in the present state of the
science _can_ be useful,) and find, under the head of Anthericum, the Savoy
Lily indeed, but only the {8} following general information:--"809.
Anthericum. A name applied by the Greeks to the stem of the asphodel, and
not misapplied to this set of plants, which in some sort resemble the
asphodel. Plants with fleshy leaves, and spikes of bright _yellow_ flowers,
easily cultivated if kept dry."

Hunting further, I find again my Savoy lily called a spider-plant, under
the article Hemerocallis, and the only information which the book gives me
under Hemerocallis, is that it means 'beautiful day' lily; and then, "This
is an ornamental genus of the easiest culture. The species are remarkable
among border flowers for their fine _orange_, _yellow_, or _blue_ flowers.
The Hemerocallis coerulea has been considered a distinct genus by Mr.
Salisbury, and called Saussurea." As I correct this sheet for press,
however, I find that the Hemerocallis is now to be called 'Funkia,' "in
honour of Mr. Funk, a Prussian apothecary."

All this while, meantime, I have a suspicion that my pet Savoy Lily is not,
in existing classification, an Anthericum, nor a Hemerocallis, but a
Lilium. It is, in fact, simply a Turk's cap which doesn't curl up. But on
trying 'Lilium' in Loudon, I find no mention whatever of any wild branched
white lily.

I then try the next word in my specimen page of Curtis; but there is no
'Phalangium' at all in Loudon's index. And now I have neither time nor mind
for more search, but will give, in due place, such account as I can {9} of
my own dwarf branched lily, which I shall call St. Bruno's, as well as this
Liliastrum--no offence to the saint, I hope. For it grows very gloriously
on the limestones of Savoy, presumably, therefore, at the Grande
Chartreuse; though I did not notice it there, and made a very unmonkish use
of it when I gathered it last:--There was a pretty young English lady at
the table-d'hôte, in the Hotel du Mont Blanc at St. Martin's,[3] and I
wanted to get speech of her, and didn't know how. So all I could think of
was to go half-way up the Aiguille de Varens, to gather St. Bruno's lilies;
and I made a great cluster of them, and put wild roses all around them as I
came down. I never saw anything so lovely; and I thought to present this to
her before dinner,--but when I got down, she had gone away to Chamouni. My
Fors always treated me like that, in affairs of the heart.

I had begun my studies of Alpine botany just eighteen years before, in
1842, by making a careful drawing of wood-sorrel at Chamouni; and bitterly
sorry I am, now, that the work was interrupted. For I drew, then, very
delicately; and should have made a pretty book if I could have got peace.
Even yet, I can manage my point a little, and would far rather be making
outlines of flowers, than writing; and I meant to have drawn every English
and Scottish wild flower, like this cluster of bog heather
opposite,[4]--back, and profile, and front. But 'Blackwood's {10}
Magazine,' with its insults to Turner, dragged me into controversy; and I
have not had, properly speaking, a day's peace since; so that in 1868 my
botanical studies were advanced only as far as the reader will see in next
chapter; and now, in 1874, must end altogether, I suppose, heavier thoughts
and work coming fast on me. So that, finding among my notebooks, two or
three, full of broken materials for the proposed work on flowers; and,
thinking they may be useful even as fragments, I am going to publish them
in their present state,--only let the reader note that while my other books
endeavour, and claim, so far as they reach, to give trustworthy knowledge
of their subjects, this one only shows how such knowledge may be obtained;
and it is little more than a history of efforts and plans,--but of both, I
believe, made in right methods.

One part of the book, however, will, I think, be found of permanent value.
Mr. Burgess has engraved on wood, in reduced size, with consummate skill,
some of the excellent old drawings in the Flora Danica, and has
interpreted, and facsimile'd, some of his own and my drawings from nature,
with a vigour and precision unsurpassed in woodcut illustration, which
render these outlines the best exercises in black and white I have yet been
able to {11} prepare for my drawing pupils. The larger engravings by Mr.
Allen may also be used with advantage as copies for drawings with pen or
sepia.

ROME, _10th May_ (_my father's birthday_).

I found the loveliest blue asphodel I ever saw in my life, yesterday, in
the fields beyond Monte Mario,--a spire two feet high, of more than two
hundred stars, the stalks of them all deep blue, as well as the flowers.
Heaven send all honest people the gathering of the like, in Elysian fields,
some day!

       *       *       *       *       *

{12}

CHAPTER I.

MOSS.

DENMARK HILL, _3rd November, 1868._

1. It is mortifying enough to write,--but I think thus much ought to be
written,--concerning myself, as 'the author of Modern Painters.' In three
months I shall be fifty years old: and I don't at this hour--ten o'clock in
the morning of the two hundred and sixty-eighth day of my forty-ninth
year--know what 'moss' is.

There is nothing I have more _intended_ to know--some day or other. But the
moss 'would always be there'; and then it was so beautiful, and so
difficult to examine, that one could only do it in some quite separated
time of happy leisure--which came not. I never was like to have less
leisure than now, but I _will_ know what moss is, if possible, forthwith.

2. To that end I read preparatorily, yesterday, what account I could find
of it in all the botanical books in the house. Out of them all, I get this
general notion of a moss,--that it has a fine fibrous root,--a stem
surrounded with spirally set leaves,--and produces its fruit in a small
case, under a cap. I fasten especially, however, on a {13} sentence of
Louis Figuier's, about the particular species, Hypnum:--

"These mosses, which often form little islets of verdure at the feet of
poplars and willows, are robust vegetable organisms, which do not
decay."[5]

3. "Qui ne pourrissent point." What do they do with themselves, then?--it
immediately occurs to me to ask. And, secondly,--If this immortality
belongs to the Hypnum only?

It certainly does not, by any means: but, however modified or limited, this
immortality is the first thing we ought to take note of in the mosses. They
are, in some degree, what the "everlasting" is in flowers. Those minute
green leaves of theirs do not decay, nor fall.

But how do they die, or how stop growing, then?--it is the first thing I
want to know about them. And from all the books in the house, I can't as
yet find out this. Meanwhile I will look at the leaves themselves.

4. Going out to the garden, I bring in a bit of old brick, emerald green on
its rugged surface,[6] and a thick piece of mossy turf.

First, for the old brick: To think of the quantity of pleasure one has had
in one's life from that emerald green velvet,--and yet that for the first
time to-day I am verily going to look at it! Doing so, through a pocket
{14} lens of no great power, I find the velvet to be composed of small
star-like groups of smooth, strong, oval leaves,--intensely green, and much
like the young leaves of any other plant, except in this;--they all have a
long brown spike, like a sting, at their ends.

[Illustration: FIG. 1.]

5. Fastening on that, I take the Flora Danica,[7] and look through its
plates of mosses, for their leaves only; and I find, first, that this
spike, or strong central rib, is characteristic;--secondly, that the said
leaves are apt to be not only spiked, but serrated, and otherwise
angry-looking at the points;--thirdly, that they have a tendency to fold
together in the centre (Fig. 1[8]); and at last, after an hour's work at
them, it strikes me suddenly that they are more like pineapple leaves than
anything else.

And it occurs to me, very unpleasantly, at the same time, that I don't know
what a pineapple is!

Stopping to ascertain that, I am told that a pineapple belongs to the
'Bromeliaceæ'--(can't stop to find out what that means)--nay, that of these
plants "the pineapple is the representative" (Loudon); "their habit is
acid, their leaves rigid, and toothed with spines, their {15} bracteas
often coloured with scarlet, and their flowers either white or blue"--(what
are their flowers like?) But the two sentences that most interest me, are,
that in the damp forests of Carolina, the Tillandsia, which is an
'epiphyte' (_i.e._, a plant growing on other plants,) "forms dense festoons
among the branches of the trees, vegetating among the black mould that
collects upon the bark of trees in hot damp countries; other species are
inhabitants of deep and gloomy forests, and others form, with their spring
leaves, an impenetrable herbage in the Pampas of Brazil." So they really
seem to be a kind of moss, on a vast scale.

6. Next, I find in Gray,[9] Bromeliaceæ, and--the very thing I
want--"Tillandsia, the black _moss_, or long moss, which, _like most
Bromelias_, grows on the branches of trees." So the pineapple is really a
moss; only it is a moss that flowers but 'imperfectly.' "The fine fruit is
caused by the consolidation of the imperfect flowers." (I wish we could
consolidate some imperfect English moss-flowers into little pineapples
then,--though they were only as big as filberts.) But we cannot follow that
farther now; nor consider when a flower is perfect, and when it is not, or
we should get into morals, and I don't know where else; we will go back to
the moss I have gathered, for I begin to see my way, a little, to
understanding it.

{16}

7. The second piece I have on the table is a cluster--an inch or two
deep--of the moss that grows everywhere, and that the birds use for
nest-building, and we for packing, and the like. It is dry, since
yesterday, and its fibres define themselves against the dark ground in warm
green, touched with a glittering light. Note that burnished lustre of the
minute leaves; they are necessarily always relieved against dark hollows,
and this lustre makes them much clearer and brighter than if they were of
dead green. In that lustre--and it is characteristic of them--they differ
wholly from the dead, aloe-like texture of the pineapple leaf; and remind
me, as I look at them closely, a little of some conditions of chaff, as on
heads of wheat after being threshed. I will hunt down that clue presently;
meantime there is something else to be noticed on the old brick.

[Illustration: FIG. 2.]

8. Out of its emerald green cushions of minute leaves, there rise, here and
there, thin red threads, each with a little brown cap, or something like a
cap, at the top of it. These red threads shooting up out of the green
tufts, are, I believe, the fructification of the moss; fringing its surface
in the woods, and on the rocks, with the small forests of brown stems, each
carrying its pointed cap or crest--of infinitely varied 'mode,' as we shall
see presently; and, which is one of their most blessed functions, carrying
high the dew in the morning; every spear balancing its own crystal globe.

9. And now, with my own broken memories of moss {17} and this unbroken,
though unfinished, gift of the noble labour of other people, the Flora
Danica, I can generalize the idea of the precious little plant, for myself,
and for the reader.

All mosses, I believe, (with such exceptions and collateral groups as we
may afterwards discover, but they are not many,) that is to say, some
thousands of species, are, in their strength of existence, composed of
fibres surrounded by clusters of dry _spinous_ leaves, set close to the
fibre they grow on. Out of this leafy stern descends a fibrous root, and
ascends in its season, a capped seed.

We must get this very clearly into our heads. Fig. 2, A, is a little tuft
of a common wood moss of Norway,[10] in its fruit season, of its real size;
but at present I want to look at the central fibre and its leaves
accurately, and understand that first.

10. Pulling it to pieces, we find it composed of seven little
company-keeping fibres, each of which, by itself, appears as in Fig. 2, B:
but as in this, its real size, it {18} is too small, not indeed for our
respect, but for our comprehension, we magnify it, Fig. 2, C, and thereupon
perceive it to be indeed composed of, _a_, the small fibrous root which
sustains the plant; _b_, the leaf-surrounded stem which is the actual
being, and main creature, moss; and, _c_, the aspirant pillar, and cap, of
its fructification.

11. But there is one minor division yet. You see I have drawn the central
part of the moss plant (_b_, Fig. 2,) half in outline and half in black;
and that, similarly, in the upper group, which is too small to show the
real roots, the base of the cluster is black. And you remember, I doubt
not, how often in gathering what most invited gathering, of deep green,
starry, perfectly soft and living wood-moss, you found it fall asunder in
your hand into multitudes of separate threads, each with its bright green
crest, and long root of blackness.

That blackness at the root--though only so notable in this wood-moss and
collateral species, is indeed a general character of the mosses, with rare
exceptions. It is their funeral blackness;--that, I perceive, is the way
the moss leaves die. They do not fall--they do not visibly decay. But they
decay _in_visibly, in continual secession, beneath the ascending crest.
They rise to form that crest, all green and bright, and take the light and
air from those out of which they grew;--and those, their ancestors, darken
and die slowly, and at last become a mass of mouldering ground. In fact, as
I perceive farther, their final duty is so to die. The main work of other
leaves is {19} in their life,--but these have to form the earth out of
which all other leaves are to grow. Not to cover the rocks with golden
velvet only, but to fill their crannies with the dark earth, through which
nobler creatures shall one day seek their being.

12. "Grant but as many sorts of mind as moss." Pope could not have known
the hundredth part of the number of 'sorts' of moss there are; and I
suppose he only chose the word because it was a monosyllable beginning with
m, and the best English general expression for despised and minute
structures of plants. But a fate rules the words of wise men, which makes
their words truer, and worth more, than the men themselves know. No other
plants have so endless variety on so similar a structure as the mosses; and
none teach so well the humility of Death. As for the death of our bodies,
we have learned, wisely, or unwisely, to look the fact of that in the face.
But none of us, I think, yet care to look the fact of the death of our
minds in the face. I do not mean death of our souls, but of our mental
work. So far as it is good _art_, indeed, and done in realistic form, it
may perhaps not die; but so far as it was only good _thought_--good, for
its time, and apparently a great achievement therein--that good, useful
thought may yet in the future become a foolish thought, and then die quite
away,--it, and the memory of it,--when better thought and knowledge come.
But the better thought could not have come if the weaker thought had not
come first, and died in sustaining the {20} better. If we think honestly,
our thoughts will not only live usefully, but even perish usefully--like
the moss--and become dark, not without due service. But if we think
dishonestly, or malignantly, our thoughts will die like evil
fungi,--dripping corrupt dew.

13. But farther. If you have walked moorlands enough to know the look of
them, you know well those flat spaces or causeways of bright green or
golden ground between the heathy rock masses; which signify winding pools
and inlets of stagnant water caught among the rocks;--pools which the deep
moss that covers them--_blanched_, not black, at the root,--is slowly
filling and making firm; whence generally the unsafe ground in the moorland
gets known by being _mossy_ instead of heathy; and is at last called by its
riders, briefly, 'the Moss': and as it is mainly at these same mossy places
that the riding is difficult, and brings out the gifts of horse and rider,
and discomfits all followers not similarly gifted, the skilled crosser of
them got his name, naturally, of 'moss-rider,' or moss-trooper. In which
manner the moss of Norway and Scotland has been a taskmaster and Maker of
Soldiers, as yet, the strongest known among natural powers. The lightning
may kill a man, or cast down a tower, but these little tender leaves of
moss--they and their progenitors--have trained the Northern Armies.

14. So much for the human meaning of that decay of the leaves. Now to go
back to the little creatures themselves. It seems that the upper part of
the moss fibre is {21} especially _un_decaying among leaves; and the lower
part, especially decaying. That, in fact, a plant of moss-fibre is a kind
of persistent state of what is, in other plants, annual. Watch the year's
growth of any luxuriant flower. First it comes out of the ground all fresh
and bright; then, as the higher leaves and branches shoot up, those first
leaves near the ground get brown, sickly, earthy,--remain for ever degraded
in the dust, and under the dashed slime in rain, staining, and grieving,
and loading them with obloquy of envious earth, half-killing them,--only
life enough left in them to hold on the stem, and to be guardians of the
rest of the plant from all they suffer;--while, above them, the happier
leaves, for whom they are thus oppressed, bend freely to the sunshine, and
drink the rain pure.

The moss strengthens on a diminished scale, intensifies, and makes
perpetual, these two states,--bright leaves above that never wither, leaves
beneath that exist only to wither.

15. I have hitherto spoken only of the fading moss as it is needed for
change into earth. But I am not sure whether a yet more important office,
in its days of age, be not its use as a colour.

We are all thankful enough--as far as we ever are so--for green moss, and
yellow moss. But we are never enough grateful for black moss. The golden
would be nothing without it, nor even the grey.

It is true that there are black lichens enough, and {22} brown ones:
nevertheless, the chief use of lichens is for silver and gold colour on
rocks; and it is the dead moss which gives the leopard-like touches of
black. And yet here again--as to a thing I have been looking at and
painting all my life--I am brought to pause, the moment I think of it
carefully. The black moss which gives the precious Velasquez touches, lies,
much of it, flat on the rocks; radiating from its centres--powdering in the
fingers, if one breaks it off, like dry tea. Is it a black species?--or a
black-parched state of other species, perishing for the sake of Velasquez
effects, instead of accumulation of earth? and, if so, does it die of
drought, accidentally, or, in a sere old age, naturally? and how is it
related to the rich green bosses that grow in deep velvet? And there again
is another matter not clear to me. One calls them 'velvet' because they are
all brought to an even surface at the top. Our own velvet is reduced to
such trimness by cutting. But how is the moss trimmed? By what scissors?
Carefullest Elizabethan gardener never shaped his yew hedge more daintily
than the moss fairies smooth these soft rounded surfaces of green and gold.
And just fancy the difference, if they were ragged! If the fibres had every
one of them leave to grow at their own sweet will, and to be long or short
as they liked, or, worse still, urged by fairy prizes into laboriously and
agonizingly trying which could grow longest. Fancy the surface of a spot of
competitive moss!

16. But how is it that they are subdued into that {23} spherical obedience,
like a crystal of wavellite?[11] Strange--that the vegetable creatures
growing so fondly on rocks should form themselves in that mineral-like
manner. It is true that the tops of all well-grown trees are rounded, on a
large scale, as equally; but that is because they grow from a central stem,
while these mossy mounds are made out of independent filaments, each
growing to exactly his proper height in the sphere--short ones outside,
long in the middle. Stop, though; _is_ that so? I am not even sure of that;
perhaps they are built over a little dome of decayed moss below.[12] I must
find out how every {24} filament grows, separately--from root to cap,
through the spirally set leaves. And meanwhile I don't know very clearly so
much as what a root is--or what a leaf is. Before puzzling myself any
farther in examination either of moss or any other grander vegetable, I had
better define these primal forms of all vegetation, as well as I can--or
rather begin the definition of them, for future completion and correction.
For, as my reader must already sufficiently perceive, this book is
literally to be one of studies--not of statements. Some one said of me
once, very shrewdly, When he wants to work out a subject, he writes a book
on it. That is a very true saying in the main,--I work down or up to my
mark, and let the reader see process and progress, not caring to conceal
them. But this book will be nothing but process. I don't mean to assert
anything positively in it from the first page to the last. Whatever I say,
is to be understood only as a conditional statement--liable to, and
inviting, correction. And this the more because, as on the whole, I am at
war with the botanists, I can't ask them to help me, and then {25} call
them names afterwards. I hope only for a contemptuous heaping of coals on
my head by correction of my errors from them;--in some cases, my scientific
friends will, I know, give me forgiving aid;--but, for many reasons, I am
forced first to print the imperfect statement, as I can independently shape
it; for if once I asked for, or received help, every thought would be
frostbitten into timid expression, and every sentence broken by apology. I
should have to write a dozen of letters before I could print a line, and
the line, at last, would be only like a bit of any other botanical
book--trustworthy, it might be, perhaps; but certainly unreadable. Whereas
now, it will rather put things more forcibly in the reader's mind to have
them retouched and corrected as we go on; and our natural and honest
mistakes will often be suggestive of things we could not have discovered
but by wandering.

On these guarded conditions, then, I proceed to study, with my reader, the
first general laws of vegetable form.

       *       *       *       *       *

{26}

CHAPTER II.

THE ROOT.

1. Plants in their perfect form consist of four principal parts,--the Root,
Stem, Leaf, and Flower. It is true that the stem and flower are parts, or
remnants, or altered states, of the leaves; and that, speaking with close
accuracy, we might say, a perfect plant consists of leaf and root. But the
division into these four parts is best for practical purposes, and it will
be desirable to note a few general facts about each, before endeavouring to
describe any one kind of plant. Only, because the character of the stem
depends on the nature of the leaf and flower, we must put it last in order
of examination; and trace the development of the plant first in root and
leaf; then in the flower and its fruit; and lastly in the stem.

2. First, then, the Root.

Every plant is divided, as I just said, in the main, into two parts, and
these have opposite natures. One part seeks the light; the other hates it.
One part feeds on the air; the other on the dust.

The part that loves the light is called the Leaf. It is an old Saxon word;
I cannot get at its origin. The part that hates the light is called the
Root. {27}

In Greek, [Greek: rhiza], Rhiza.[13]

In Latin, Radix, "the growing thing," which shortens, in French, into Race,
and then they put on the diminutive 'ine,' and get their two words, Race,
and Racine, of which we keep Race for animals, and use for vegetables a
word of our own Saxon (and Dutch) dialect,--'root'; (connected with
Rood--an image of wood; whence at last the Holy Rood, or Tree).

3. The Root has three great functions:

  1st. To hold the plant in its place.
  2nd. To nourish it with earth.
  3rd. To receive vital power for it from the earth.

With this last office is in some degree,--and especially in certain
plants,--connected, that of reproduction.

But in all plants the root has these three essential functions.

First, I said, to hold the Plant in its place. The Root is its Fetter.

You think it, perhaps, a matter of course that a plant is not to be a
crawling thing? It is not a matter of course at all. A vegetable might be
just what it is now, as compared with an animal;--might live on earth and
water instead of on meat,--might be as senseless in life, as calm in death,
and in all its parts and apparent structure {28} unchanged; and yet be a
crawling thing. It is quite as easy to conceive plants moving about like
lizards, putting forward first one root and then another, as it is to think
of them fastened to their place. It might have been well for them, one
would have thought, to have the power of going down to the streams to
drink, in time of drought;--of migrating in winter with grim march from
north to south of Dunsinane Hill side. But that is not their appointed
Fate. They are--at least all the noblest of them, rooted to their spot.
Their honour and use is in giving immoveable shelter,--in remaining
landmarks, or lovemarks, when all else is changed:

 "The cedars wave on Lebanon,
  But Judah's statelier maids are gone."

4. Its root is thus a form of fate to the tree. It condemns, or indulges
it, in its place. These semi-living creatures, come what may, shall abide,
happy, or tormented. No doubt concerning "the position in which Providence
has placed _them_" is to trouble their minds, except so far as they can
mend it by seeking light, or shrinking from wind, or grasping at support,
within certain limits. In the thoughts of men they have thus become twofold
images,--on the one side, of spirits restrained and half destroyed, whence
the fables of transformation into trees; on the other, of spirits patient
and continuing, having root in themselves and in good ground, capable of
all persistent {29} effort and vital stability, both in themselves, and for
the human States they form.

5. In this function of holding fast, roots have a power of grasp quite
different from that of branches. It is not a grasp, or clutch by
contraction, as that of a bird's claw, or of the small branches we call
'tendrils' in climbing plants. It is a dead, clumsy, but inevitable grasp,
by swelling, _after_ contortion. For there is this main difference between
a branch and root, that a branch cannot grow vividly but in certain
directions and relations to its neighbour branches; but a root can grow
wherever there is earth, and can turn in any direction to avoid an
obstacle.[14]

6. In thus contriving access for itself where it chooses, a root contorts
itself into more serpent-like writhing than branches can; and when it has
once coiled partly round a rock, or stone, it grasps it tight, necessarily,
merely by swelling. Now a root has force enough sometimes to split rocks,
but not to crush them; so it is compelled to grasp by _flattening_ as it
thickens; and, as it must have room somewhere, it alters its own shape as
if it were made of {30} dough, and holds the rock, not in a claw, but in a
wooden cast or mould, adhering to its surface. And thus it not only finds
its anchorage in the rock, but binds the rocks of its anchorage with a
constrictor cable.

7. Hence--and this is a most important secondary function--roots bind
together the ragged edges of rocks as a hem does the torn edge of a dress:
they literally stitch the stones together; so that, while it is always
dangerous to pass under a treeless edge of overhanging crag, as soon as it
has become beautiful with trees, it is safe also. The rending power of
roots on rocks has been greatly overrated. Capillary attraction in a willow
wand will indeed split granite, and swelling roots sometimes heave
considerable masses aside, but on the whole, roots, small and great, bind,
and do not rend.[15] The surfaces of mountains are dissolved and
disordered, by rain, and frost, and chemical decomposition, into mere heaps
of loose stones on their desolate summits; but, where the forests grow,
soil accumulates and disintegration ceases. And by cutting down forests on
great mountain slopes, not only is the climate destroyed, but the danger of
superficial landslip fearfully increased.

8. The second function of roots is to gather for the plant the nourishment
it needs from the ground. This is {31} partly water, mixed with some kinds
of air (ammonia, etc.,) but the plant can get both water and ammonia from
the atmosphere; and, I believe, for the most part does so; though, when it
cannot get water from the air, it will gladly drink by its roots. But the
things it cannot receive from the air at all are certain earthy salts,
essential to it (as iron is essential in our own blood), and of which when
it has quite exhausted the earth, no more such plants can grow in that
ground. On this subject you will find enough in any modern treatise on
agriculture; all that I want you to note here is that this feeding function
of the root is of a very delicate and discriminating kind, needing much
searching and mining among the dust, to find what it wants. If it only
wanted water, it could get most of that by spreading in mere soft senseless
limbs, like sponge, as far, and as far down, as it could--but to get the
_salt_ out of the earth it has to _sift_ all the earth, and taste and touch
every grain of it that it can, with fine fibres. And therefore a root is
not at all a merely passive sponge or absorbing thing, but an infinitely
subtle tongue, or tasting and eating thing. That is why it is always so
fibrous and divided and entangled in the clinging earth.

9. "Always fibrous and divided"? But many roots are quite hard and solid!

No; the active part of the root is always, I believe, a fibre. But there is
often a provident and passive part--a savings bank of root--in which
nourishment is laid up for the plant, and which, though it may be
underground, is no {32} more to be considered its real root than the kernel
of a seed is. When you sow a pea, if you take it up in a day or two, you
will find the fibre below, which is root; the shoot above, which is plant;
and the pea as a now partly exhausted storehouse, looking very woful, and
like the granaries of Paris after the fire. So, the round solid root of a
cyclamen, or the conical one which you know so well as a carrot, are not
properly roots, but permanent storehouses,--only the fibres that grow from
them are roots. Then there are other apparent roots which are not even
storehouses, but refuges; houses where the little plant lives in its
infancy, through winter and rough weather. So that it will be best for you
at once to limit your idea of a root to this,--that it is a group of
growing fibres which taste and suck what is good for the plant out of the
ground, and by their united strength hold it in its place; only remember
the thick limbs of roots do not feed, but only the fine fibres at the ends
of them which are something between tongues and sponges, and while they
absorb moisture readily, are yet as particular about getting what they
think nice to eat as any dainty little boy or girl; looking for it
everywhere, and turning angry and sulky if they don't get it.

10. But the root has, it seems to me, one more function, the most important
of all. I say, it seems to me, for observe, what I have hitherto told you
is all (I believe) ascertained and admitted; this that I am going to tell
you has not yet, as far as I know, been asserted by men of {33} science,
though I believe it to be demonstrable. But you are to examine into it, and
think of it for yourself.

There are some plants which appear to derive all their food from the
air--which need nothing but a slight grasp of the ground to fix them in
their place. Yet if we were to tie them into that place, in a framework,
and cut them from their roots, they would die. Not only in these, but in
all other plants, the vital power by which they shape and feed themselves,
whatever that power may be, depends, I think, on that slight touch of the
earth, and strange inheritance of its power. It is as essential to the
plant's life as the connection of the head of an animal with its body by
the spine is to the animal. Divide the feeble nervous thread, and all life
ceases. Nay, in the tree the root is even of greater importance. You will
not kill the tree, as you would an animal, by dividing its body or trunk.
The part not severed from the root will shoot again. But in the root, and
its touch of the ground, is the life of it. My own definition of a plant
would be "a living creature whose source of vital energy is in the earth"
(or in the water, as a form of the earth; that is, in inorganic substance).
There is, however, one tribe of plants which seems nearly excepted from
this law. It is a very strange one, having long been noted for the
resemblance of its flowers to different insects; and it has recently been
proved by Mr. Darwin to be dependent on insects for its existence. Doubly
strange therefore, it seems, that in some cases this race of plants all but
reaches the independent life of {34} insects. It rather _settles_ upon
boughs than roots itself in them; half of its roots may wave in the air.

11. What vital power is, men of science are not a step nearer knowing than
they were four thousand years ago. They are, if anything, farther from
knowing now than then, in that they imagine themselves nearer. But they
know more about its limitations and manifestations than they did. They have
even arrived at something like a proof that there is a fixed quantity of it
flowing out of things and into them. But, for the present, rest content
with the general and sure knowledge that, fixed or flowing, measurable or
immeasurable--one with electricity or heat or light, or quite distinct from
any of them--life is a delightful, and its negative, death, a dreadful
thing, to human creatures; and that you can give or gather a certain
quantity of life into plants, animals, and yourself by wisdom and courage,
and by their reverses can bring upon them any quantity of death you please,
which is a much more serious point for you to consider than what life and
death are.

12. Now, having got a quite clear idea of a root properly so called, we may
observe what those storehouses, refuges, and ruins are, which we find
connected with roots. The greater number of plants feed and grow at the
same time; but there are some of them which like to feed first and grow
afterwards. For the first year, or, at all events, the first period of
their life, they gather material for their future life out of the ground
and out {35} of the air, and lay it up in a storehouse as bees make combs.
Of these stores--for the most part rounded masses tapering downwards into
the ground--some are as good for human beings as honeycombs are; only not
so sweet. We steal them from the plants, as we do from the bees, and these
conical upside-down hives or treasuries of Atreus, under the names of
carrots, turnips, and radishes, have had important influence on human
fortunes. If we do not steal the store, next year the plant lives upon it,
raises its stem, flowers and seeds out of that abundance, and having
fulfilled its destiny, and provided for its successor, passes away, root
and branch together.

13. There is a pretty example of patience for us in this; and it would be
well for young people generally to set themselves to grow in a carrotty or
turnippy manner, and lay up secret store, not caring to exhibit it until
the time comes for fruitful display. But they must not, in after-life,
imitate the spendthrift vegetable, and blossom only in the strength of what
they learned long ago; else they soon come to contemptible end. Wise people
live like laurels and cedars, and go on mining in the earth, while they
adorn and embalm the air.

14. Secondly, Refuges. As flowers growing on trees have to live for some
time, when they are young in their buds, so some flowers growing on the
ground have to live for a while, when they are young, _in_ what we call
their {36} roots. These are mostly among the Drosidæ[16] and other humble
tribes, loving the ground; and, in their babyhood, liking to live quite
down in it. A baby crocus has literally its own little dome--domus, or
duomo--within which in early spring it lives a delicate convent life of its
own, quite free from all worldly care and dangers, exceedingly ignorant of
things in general, but itself brightly golden and perfectly formed before
it is brought out. These subterranean palaces and vaulted cloisters, which
we call bulbs, are no more roots than the blade of grass is a root, in
which the ear of corn forms before it shoots up.

15. Thirdly, Ruins. The flowers which have these subterranean homes form
one of many families whose roots, as well as seeds, have the power of
reproduction. The succession of some plants is trusted much to their seeds:
a thistle sows itself by its down, an oak by its acorns; the companies of
flying emigrants settle where they may; and the shadowy tree is content to
cast down its showers of nuts for swines' food with the chance that here
and there one may become a ship's bulwark. But others among plants are less
careless, or less proud. Many are anxious for their children to grow in the
place where they grew themselves, and secure this not merely by letting
their fruit fall at their feet, on the chance of its growing up {37} beside
them, but by closer bond, bud springing forth from root, and the young
plant being animated by the gradually surrendered life of its parent.
Sometimes the young root is formed above the old one, as in the crocus, or
beside it, as in the amaryllis, or beside it in a spiral succession, as in
the orchis; in these cases the old root always perishes wholly when the
young one is formed; but in a far greater number of tribes, one root
connects itself with another by a short piece of intermediate stem; and
this stem does not at once perish when the new root is formed, but grows on
at one end indefinitely, perishing slowly at the other, the scars or ruins
of the past plants being long traceable on its sides. When it grows
entirely underground it is called a root-stock. But there is no essential
distinction between a root-stock and a creeping stem, only the root-stock
may be thought of as a stem which shares the melancholy humour of a root in
loving darkness, while yet it has enough consciousness of better things to
grow towards, or near, the light. In one family it is even fragrant where
the flower is not, and a simple houseleek is called 'rhodiola rosea,'
because its root-stock has the scent of a rose.

16. There is one very unusual condition of the root-stock which has become
of much importance in economy, though it is of little in botany; the
forming, namely, of knots at the ends of the branches of the underground
stem, where the new roots are to be thrown out. Of these knots, or
'tubers,' (swollen things,) one kind, belonging to {38} the tobacco tribe,
has been singularly harmful, together with its pungent relative, to a
neighbouring country of ours, which perhaps may reach a higher destiny than
any of its friends can conceive for it, if it can ever succeed in living
without either the potato, or the pipe.

17. Being prepared now to find among plants many things which are like
roots, yet are not; you may simplify and make fast your true idea of a root
as a fibre or group of fibres, which fixes, animates, and partly feeds the
leaf. Then practically, as you examine plants in detail, ask first
respecting them: What kind of root have they? Is it large or small in
proportion to their bulk, and why is it so? What soil does it like, and
what properties does it acquire from it? The endeavour to answer these
questions will soon lead you to a rational inquiry into the plant's
history. You will first ascertain what rock or earth it delights in, and
what climate and circumstances; then you will see how its root is fitted to
sustain it mechanically under given pressures and violences, and to find
for it the necessary sustenance under given difficulties of famine or
drought. Lastly you will consider what chemical actions appear to be going
on in the root, or its store; what processes there are, and elements, which
give pungency to the radish, flavour to the onion, or sweetness to the
liquorice; and of what service each root may be made capable under
cultivation, and by proper subsequent treatment, either to animals or men.

18. I shall not attempt to do any of this for you; I {39} assume, in giving
this advice, that you wish to pursue the science of botany as your chief
study; I have only broken moments for it, snatched from my chief
occupations, and I have done nothing myself of all this I tell you to do.
But so far as you can work in this manner, even if you only ascertain the
history of one plant, so that you know that accurately, you will have
helped to lay the foundation of a true science of botany, from which the
mass of useless nomenclature,[17] now mistaken for science, will fall away,
as the husk of a poppy falls from the bursting flower.

       *       *       *       *       *

{40}

CHAPTER III.

THE LEAF.

1. In the first of the poems of which the English Government has appointed
a portion to be sung every day for the instruction and pleasure of the
people, there occurs this curious statement respecting any person who will
behave himself rightly: "He shall be like a tree planted by the river side,
that bears its fruit in its season. His leaf also shall not wither; and you
will see that whatever he does will prosper."

I call it a curious statement, because the conduct to which this prosperity
is promised is not that which the English, as a nation, at present think
conducive to prosperity: but whether the statement be true or not, it will
be easy for you to recollect the two eastern figures under which the
happiness of the man is represented,--that he is like a tree bearing fruit
"in its season;" (not so hastily as that the frost pinch it, nor so late
that no sun ripens it;) and that "his leaf shall not fade." I should like
you to recollect this phrase in the Vulgate--"folium ejus non
defluet"--shall not fall _away_,--that is to say, shall not fall so as to
leave any visible bareness in winter time, but {41} only that others may
come up in its place, and the tree be always green.

2. Now, you know, the fruit of the tree is either for the continuance of
its race, or for the good, or harm, of other creatures. In no case is it a
good to the tree itself. It is not indeed, properly, a part of the tree at
all, any more than the egg is part of the bird, or the young of any
creature part of the creature itself. But in the leaf is the strength of
the tree itself. Nay, rightly speaking, the leaves _are_ the tree itself.
Its trunk sustains; its fruit burdens and exhausts; but in the leaf it
breathes and lives. And thus also, in the eastern symbolism, the fruit is
the labour of men for others; but the leaf is their own life. "He shall
bring forth fruit, in his time; and his own joy and strength shall be
continual."

3. Notice next the word 'folium.' In Greek, [Greek: phullon], 'phyllon.'

"The thing that is born," or "put forth." "When the branch is tender, and
putteth forth her leaves, ye know that summer is nigh." The botanists say,
"The leaf is an expansion of the bark of the stem." More accurately, the
bark is a contraction of the tissue of the leaf. For every leaf is born out
of the earth, and breathes out of the air; and there are many leaves that
have no stems, but only roots. It is 'the springing thing'; this thin film
of life; rising, with its _edge_ out of the ground--infinitely feeble,
infinitely fair. With Folium, in Latin, is rightly associated the word
Flos; for the flower is only a group of {42} singularly happy leaves. From
these two roots come foglio, feuille, feuillage, and fleur;--blume,
blossom, and bloom; our foliage, and the borrowed foil, and the connected
technical groups of words in architecture and the sciences.

4. This _thin_ film, I said. That is the essential character of a leaf; to
be thin,--widely spread out in proportion to its mass. It is the opening of
the substance of the earth to the air, which is the giver of life. The
Greeks called it, therefore, not only the born or blooming thing, but the
spread or expanded thing--"[Greek: petalon]." Pindar calls the beginnings
of quarrel, "petals of quarrel." Recollect, therefore, this form, Petalos;
and connect it with Petasos, the expanded cap of Mercury. For one great use
of both is to give shade. The root of all these words is said to be [GREEK:
PET] (Pet), which may easily be remembered in Greek, as it sometimes occurs
in no unpleasant sense in English.

5. But the word 'petalos' is connected in Greek with another word, meaning,
to fly,--so that you may think of a bird as spreading its petals to the
wind; and with another, signifying Fate in its pursuing flight, the
overtaking thing, or overflying Fate. Finally, there is another Greek word
meaning 'wide,' [Greek: platus] (platys); whence at last our 'plate'--a
thing made broad or extended--but especially made broad or 'flat' out of
the solid, as in a lump of clay extended on the wheel, or a lump of metal
extended by the hammer. So the first we call Platter; the second Plate,
when of the precious metals. Then putting _b_ for {43} _p_, and _d_ for
_t_, we get the blade of an oar, and blade of grass.

6. Now gather a branch of laurel, and look at it carefully. You may read
the history of the being of half the earth in one of those green oval
leaves--the things that the sun and the rivers have made out of dry ground.
Daphne--daughter of Enipeus, and beloved by the Sun,--that fable gives you
at once the two great facts about vegetation. Where warmth is, and
moisture--there, also, the leaf. Where no warmth--there is no leaf; where
there is no dew--no leaf.

7. Look, then, to the branch you hold in your hand. That you _can_ so hold
it, or make a crown of it, if you choose, is the first thing I want you to
note of it;--the proportion of size, namely, between the leaf and _you_.
Great part of your life and character, as a human creature, has depended on
that. Suppose all leaves had been spacious, like some palm leaves; solid,
like cactus stem; or that trees had grown, as they might of course just as
easily have grown, like mushrooms, all one great cluster of leaf round one
stalk. I do not say that they are divided into small leaves only for your
delight, or your service, as if you were the monarch of everything--even in
this atom of a globe. You are made of your proper size; and the leaves of
theirs: for reasons, and by laws, of which neither the leaves nor you know
anything. Only note the harmony between both, and the joy we may have in
this division and mystery of the frivolous and tremulous petals, {44} which
break the light and the breeze,--compared to what with the frivolous and
tremulous mind which is in us, we could have had out of domes, or
penthouses, or walls of leaf.

8. Secondly; think awhile of its dark clear green, and the good of it to
you. Scientifically, you know green in leaves is owing to 'chlorophyll,'
or, in English, to 'greenleaf.' It may be very fine to know that; but my
advice to you, on the whole, is to rest content with the general fact that
leaves are green when they do not grow in or near smoky towns; and not by
any means to rest content with the fact that very soon there will not be a
green leaf in England, but only greenish-black ones. And thereon resolve
that you will yourself endeavour to promote the growing of the green wood,
rather than of the black.

9. Looking at the back of your laurel-leaves, you see how the central rib
or spine of each, and the lateral branchings, strengthen and carry it. I
find much confused use, in botanical works, of the words Vein and Rib. For,
indeed, there are veins _in_ the ribs of leaves, as marrow in bones; and
the projecting bars often gradually depress themselves into a transparent
net of rivers. But the _mechanical_ force of the framework in carrying the
leaf-tissue is the point first to be noticed; it is that which admits,
regulates, or restrains the visible motions of the leaf; while the system
of circulation can only be studied through the microscope. But the ribbed
leaf bears itself to the wind, as the webbed foot of a bird does to the
{45} water, and needs the same kind, though not the same strength, of
support; and its ribs always are partly therefore constituted of strong
woody substance, which is knit out of the tissue; and you can extricate
this skeleton framework, and keep it, after the leaf-tissue is dissolved.
So I shall henceforward speak simply of the leaf and its ribs,--only
specifying the additional veined structure on necessary occasions.

10. I have just said that the ribs--and might have said, farther, the stalk
that sustains them--are knit out of the _tissue_ of the leaf. But what is
the leaf tissue itself knit out of? One would think that was nearly the
first thing to be discovered, or at least to be thought of, concerning
plants,--namely, how and of what they are made. We say they 'grow.' But you
know that they can't grow out of nothing;--this solid wood and rich tracery
must be made out of some previously existing substance. What is the
substance?--and how is it woven into leaves.--twisted into wood?

11. Consider how fast this is done, in spring. You walk in February over a
slippery field, where, through hoar-frost and mud, you perhaps hardly see
the small green blades of trampled turf. In twelve weeks you wade through
the same field up to your knees in fresh grass; and in a week or two more,
you mow two or three solid haystacks off it. In winter you walk by your
currant-bush, or your vine. They are shrivelled sticks--like bits of black
tea in the canister. You pass again in May, and {46} the currant-bush looks
like a young sycamore tree; and the vine is a bower: and meanwhile the
forests, all over this side of the round world, have grown their foot or
two in height, with new leaves--so much deeper, so much denser than they
were. Where has it all come from? Cut off the fresh shoots from a single
branch of any tree in May. Weigh them; and then consider that so much
weight has been added to every such living branch, everywhere, this side
the equator, within the last two months. What is all that made of?

12. Well, this much the botanists really know, and tell us,--It is made
chiefly of the breath of animals: that is to say, of the substance which,
during the past year, animals have breathed into the air; and which, if
they went on breathing, and their breath were not made into trees, would
poison them, or rather suffocate them, as people are suffocated in
uncleansed pits, and dogs in the Grotta del Cane. So that you may look upon
the grass and forests of the earth as a kind of green hoar-frost, frozen
upon it from our breath, as, on the window-panes, the white arborescence of
ice.

13. But how is it made into wood?

The substances that have been breathed into the air are charcoal, with
oxygen and hydrogen,--or, more plainly, charcoal and water. Some necessary
earths,--in smaller quantity, but absolutely essential,--the trees get from
the ground; but, I believe all the charcoal they want, and most of the
water, from the air. Now the question is, where and how do they take it in,
and digest it into wood? {47}

14. You know, in spring, and partly through all the year, except in frost,
a liquid called 'sap' circulates in trees, of which the nature, one should
have thought, might have been ascertained by mankind in the six thousand
years they have been cutting wood. Under the impression always that it _had
been_ ascertained, and that I could at any time know all about it, I have
put off till to-day, 19th October, 1869, when I am past fifty, the knowing
anything about it at all. But I will really endeavour now to ascertain
something, and take to my botanical books, accordingly, in due order.

(1) Dresser's "Rudiments of Botany." 'Sap' not in the index; only Samara,
and Sarcocarp,--about neither of which I feel the smallest curiosity. (2)
Figuier's "Histoire des Plantes."[18] 'Sêve,' not in index; only Serpolet,
and Sherardia arvensis, which also have no help in them for me. (3)
Balfour's "Manual of Botany." 'Sap,'--yes, at last. "Article 257. Course of
fluids in exogenous stems." I don't care about the course just now: I want
to know where the fluids come from. "If a plant be plunged into a weak
solution of acetate of lead,"--I don't in the least want to know what
happens. "From the minuteness of the tissue, it is not easy to determine
the vessels through which the sap moves." Who said it was? If it had been
easy, I should have done it myself. "Changes take place in the composition
of the {48} sap in its upward course." I dare say; but I don't know yet
what its composition is before it begins going up. "The Elaborated Sap by
Mr. Schultz has been called 'latex.'" I wish Mr. Schultz were in a hogshead
of it, with the top on. "On account of these movements in the latex, the
laticiferous vessels have been denominated cinenchymatous." I do not
venture to print the expressions which I here mentally make use of.

15. Stay,--here, at last, in Article 264, is something to the purpose: "It
appears then that, in the case of Exogenous plants, the fluid matter in the
soil, containing different substances in solution, is sucked up by the
extremities of the roots." Yes, but how of the pine trees on yonder
rock?--Is there any sap in the rock, or water either? The moisture must be
seized during actual rain on the root, or stored up from the snow; stored
up, any way, in a tranquil, not actively sappy, state, till the time comes
for its change, of which there is no account here.

16. I have only one chance left now. Lindley's "Introduction to Botany."
'Sap,'--yes,--'General motion of.' II. 325. "The course which is taken by
the sap, after entering a plant, is the first subject for consideration."
My dear doctor, I have learned nearly whatever I know of plant structure
from you, and am grateful; and that it is little, is not your fault, but
mine. But this--let me say it with all sincere respect--is not what you
should have told me here. You know, far better than I, that 'sap' never
does enter a plant at all; but only salt, or earth and water, {49} and that
the roots alone could not make it; and that, therefore, the course of it
must be, in great part, the result or process of the actual making. But I
will read now, patiently; for I know you will tell me much that is worth
hearing, though not perhaps what I want.

Yes; now that I have read Lindley's statement carefully, I find it is full
of precious things; and this is what, with thinking over it, I can gather
for you.

17. First, towards the end of January,--as the light enlarges, and the
trees revive from their rest,--there is a general liquefaction of the blood
of St. Januarius in their stems; and I suppose there is really a great deal
of moisture rapidly absorbed from the earth in most cases; and that this
absorption is a great help to the sun in drying the winter's damp out of it
for us: then, with that strange vital power,--which scientific people are
usually as afraid of naming as common people are afraid of naming
Death,--the tree gives the gathered earth and water a changed existence;
and to this new-born liquid an upward motion from the earth, as our blood
has from the heart; for the life of the tree is out of the earth; and this
upward motion has a mechanical power in pushing on the growth. "_Forced
onward_ by the current of sap, the plumule ascends," (Lindley, p.
132,)--this blood of the tree having to supply, exactly as our own blood
has, not only the forming powers of substance, but a continual evaporation,
"approximately seventeen times more than that of the human body," while the
force of motion in the sap "is {50} sometimes five times greater than that
which impels the blood in the crural artery of the horse."

18. Hence generally, I think we may conclude thus much,--that at every pore
of its surface, under ground and above, the plant in the spring absorbs
moisture, which instantly disperses itself through its whole system "by
means of some permeable quality of the membranes of the cellular tissue
invisible to our eyes even by the most powerful glasses" (p. 326); that in
this way subjected to the vital power of the tree, it becomes sap, properly
so called, which passes downwards through this cellular tissue, slowly and
secretly; and then upwards, through the great vessels of the tree,
violently, stretching out the supple twigs of it as yon see a flaccid
waterpipe swell and move when the cock is turned to fill it. And the tree
becomes literally a fountain, of which the springing streamlets are clothed
with new-woven garments of green tissue, and of which the silver spray
stays in the sky,--a spray, now, of leaves.

19. That is the gist of the matter; and a very wonderful gist it is, to my
mind. The secret and subtle descent--the violent and exulting resilience of
the tree's blood,--what guides it?--what compels? The creature has no heart
to beat like ours; one cannot take refuge from the mystery in a 'muscular
contraction.' Fountain without supply--playing by its own force, for ever
rising and falling all through the days of Spring, spending itself at last
in gathered clouds of leaves, and iris of blossom.

Very wonderful; and it seems, for the present, that {51} we know nothing
whatever about its causes;--nay, the strangeness of the reversed arterial
and vein motion, without a heart, does not seem to strike anybody. Perhaps,
however, it may interest you, as I observe it does the botanists, to know
that the cellular tissue through which the motion is effected is called
Parenchym, and the woody tissue, Bothrenchym; and that Parenchym is
divided, by a system of nomenclature which "has some advantages over that
more commonly in use,"[19] into merenchyma, conenchyma, ovenchyma,
atractenchyma, cylindrenchyma, colpenchyma, cladenchyma, and prismenchyma.

20. Take your laurel branch into your hand again. There are, as you must
well know, innumerable shapes and orders of leaves;--there are some like
claws; some like fingers, and some like feet; there are endlessly cleft
ones, and endlessly clustered ones, and inscrutable divisions within
divisions of the fretted verdure; and wrinkles, and ripples, and
stitchings, and hemmings, and pinchings, and gatherings, and crumplings,
and clippings, and what not. But there is nothing so constantly noble as
the pure leaf of the laurel, bay, orange, and olive; numerable, sequent,
perfect in setting, divinely simple and serene. I shall call these noble
leaves 'Apolline' leaves. They characterize many orders of plants, great
and small,--from the magnolia to the myrtle, and exquisite 'myrtille' {52}
of the hills, (bilberry); but wherever you find them, strong, lustrous,
dark green, simply formed, richly scented or stored,--you have nearly
always kindly and lovely vegetation, in healthy ground and air.

21. The gradual diminution in rank beneath the Apolline leaf, takes place
in others by the loss of one or more of the qualities above named. The
Apolline leaf, I said, is strong, lustrous, full in its green, rich in
substance, simple in form. The inferior leaves are those which have lost
strength, and become thin, like paper; which have lost lustre, and become
dead by roughness of surface, like the nettle,--(an Apolline leaf may
become dead by _bloom_, like the olive, yet not lose beauty); which have
lost colour and become feeble in green, as in the poplar, or _crudely_
bright, like rice; which have lost substance and softness, and have nothing
to give in scent or nourishment; or become flinty or spiny; finally, which
have lost simplicity, and become cloven or jagged. Many of these losses are
partly atoned for by gain of some peculiar loveliness. Grass and moss, and
parsley and fern, have each their own delightfulness; yet they are all of
inferior power and honour, compared to the Apolline leaves.

[Illustration: FIG. 3.]

22. You see, however, that though your laurel leaf has a central stem, and
traces of ribs branching from it, in a vertebrated manner, they are so
faint that we cannot take it for a type of vertebrate structure. But the
two figures of elm and alisma leaf, given in Modern Painters (vol. iii.),
and now here repeated, Fig. 3, will clearly enough {53} show the opposition
between this vertebrate form, branching again usually at the edges, _a_,
and the softly opening lines diffused at the stem, and gathered at the
point of the leaf _b_, which, as you almost without doubt know already are
characteristic of a vast group of plants, including especially all the
lilies, grasses, and palms, which for the most part are the signs of local
or temporary moisture in hot countries;--local, as of fountains and
streams; temporary, as of rain or inundation.

But temporary, still more definitely in the day, than in the year. When you
go out, delighted, into the dew of the morning, have you ever considered
why it is so rich upon the grass;--why it is _not_ upon the trees? It _is_
partly on the trees, but yet your memory of it will be always chiefly of
its gleam upon the lawn. On many {54} trees you will find there is none at
all. I cannot follow out here the many inquiries connected with this
subject, but, broadly, remember the branched trees are fed chiefly by
rain,--the unbranched ones by dew, visible or invisible; that is to say, at
all events by moisture which they can gather for themselves out of the air;
or else by streams and springs. Hence the division of the verse of the song
of Moses: "My doctrine shall drop as the rain; my speech shall distil as
the dew: as the _small_ rain upon the tender _herb_, and as the showers
upon the grass."

23. Next, examining the direction of the veins in the leaf of the alisma,
_b_, Fig. 3, you see they all open widely, as soon as they can, towards the
thick part of the leaf; and then taper, apparently with reluctance, pushing
each other outwards, to the point. If the leaf were a lake of the same
shape, and its stem the entering river, the lines of the currents passing
through it would, I believe, be nearly the same as that of the veins in the
aquatic leaf. I have not examined the fluid law accurately, and I do not
suppose there is more real correspondence than may be caused by the leaf's
expanding in every permitted direction, as the water would, with all the
speed it can; but the resemblance is so close as to enable you to fasten
the relation of the unbranched leaves to streams more distinctly in your
mind,--just as the toss of the palm leaves from their stem may, I think, in
their likeness to the springing of a fountain, remind you of their relation
to the desert, and their necessity, therein, to life of man and beast. {55}

24. And thus, associating these grass and lily leaves always with
fountains, or with dew, I think we may get a pretty general name for them
also. You know that Cora, our Madonna of the flowers, was lost in Sicilian
Fields: you know, also, that the fairest of Greek fountains, lost in
Greece, was thought to rise in a Sicilian islet; and that the real
springing of the noble fountain in that rock was one of the causes which
determined the position of the greatest Greek city of Sicily. So I think,
as we call the fairest branched leaves 'Apolline,' we will call the fairest
flowing ones 'Arethusan.' But remember that the Apolline leaf represents
only the central type of land leaves, and is, within certain limits, of a
fixed form; while the beautiful Arethusan leaves, alike in flowing of their
lines, change their forms indefinitely,--some shaped like round pools, and
some like winding currents, and many like arrows, and many like hearts, and
otherwise varied and variable, as leaves ought to be,--that rise out of the
waters, and float amidst the pausing of their foam.

25. Brantwood, _Easter Day_, 1875.--I don't like to spoil my pretty
sentence, above; but on reading it over, I suspect I wrote it confusing the
water-lily leaf, and other floating ones of the same kind, with the
Arethusan forms. But the water-lily and water-ranunculus leaves, and such
others, are to the orders of earth-loving leaves what ducks and swans are
to birds; (the swan is the water-lily of birds;) they are _swimming_
leaves; not properly watery creatures, or able to live under water like
fish, (unless {56} when dormant), but just like birds that pass their lives
on the surface of the waves--though they must breathe in the air.

And these natant leaves, as they lie on the water surface, do not want
strong ribs to carry them,[20] but have very delicate ones beautifully
branching into the orbed space, to keep the tissue nice and flat; while, on
the other hand, leaves that really have to grow under water, sacrifice
their tissue, and keep only their ribs, like coral animals; ('Ranunculus
heterophyllus,' 'other-leaved Frog-flower,' and its like,) just as, if you
keep your own hands too long in water, they shrivel at the finger-ends.

26. So that you must not attach any great botanical importance to the
characters of contrasted aspects in leaves, which I wish you to express by
the words 'Apolline' and 'Arethusan'; but their mythic importance is very
great, and your careful observance of it will help you completely to
understand the beautiful Greek fable of Apollo and Daphne. There are indeed
several Daphnes, and the first root of the name is far away in another
field of thought altogether, connected with the Gods of Light. But
etymology, the best of servants, is an unreasonable master; and Professor
Max Müller trusts his deep-reaching knowledge of the first ideas connected
with the names of Athena {57} and Daphne, too implicitly, when he supposes
this idea to be retained in central Greek theology. 'Athena' originally
meant only the dawn, among nations who knew nothing of a Sacred Spirit. But
the Athena who catches Achilles by the hair, and urges the spear of Diomed,
has not, in the mind of Homer, the slightest remaining connection with the
mere beauty of daybreak. Daphne chased by Apollo, may perhaps--though I
doubt even this much of consistence in the earlier myth--have meant the
Dawn pursued by the Sun. But there is no trace whatever of this first idea
left in the fable of Arcadia and Thessaly.

27. The central Greek Daphne is the daughter of one of the great _river_
gods of Arcadia; her mother is the Earth. Now Arcadia is the Oberland of
Greece; and the crests of Cyllene, Erymanthus, and Mænalus[21] surround it,
like the Swiss forest cantons, with walls of rock, and shadows of pine. And
it divides itself, like the Oberland, into three regions: first, the region
of rock and snow, sacred to Mercury and Apollo, in which Mercury's birth on
Cyllene, his construction of the lyre, and his stealing the oxen of Apollo,
are all expressions of the enchantments of cloud and sound, mingling with
the sunshine, on the cliffs of Cyllene.

                 "While the mists
  Flying, and rainy vapours, call out shapes
  {58}
  And phantoms from the crags and solid earth
  As fast as a musician scatters sounds
  Out of his instrument."

Then came the pine region, sacred especially to Pan and Mænalus, the son of
Lycaon and brother of Callisto; and you had better remember this
relationship carefully, for the sake of the meaning of the constellations
of Ursa Major and the Mons Mænalius, and of their wolf and bear traditions;
(compare also the strong impression on the Greek mind of the wild
leafiness, nourished by snow, of the Boeotian Cithæron,--"Oh, thou
lake-hollow, full of divine leaves, and of wild creatures, nurse of the
snow, darling of Diana," (Phoenissæ, 801)). How wild the climate of this
pine region is, you may judge from the pieces in the note below[22] out of
Colonel Leake's diary in {59} crossing the Mænalian range in spring. And
then, lastly, you have the laurel and vine region, full of sweetness and
Elysian beauty.

28. Now as Mercury is the ruling power of the hill enchantment, so Daphne
of the leafy peace. She is, in her first life, the daughter of the mountain
river, the mist of it filling the valley; the Sun, pursuing, and effacing
it, from dell to dell, is, literally, Apollo pursuing Daphne, and _adverse_
to her; (not, as in the earlier tradition, the Sun pursuing only his own
light). Daphne, thus hunted, cries to her mother, the Earth, which opens,
and receives her, causing the laurel to spring up in her stead. That is to
say, wherever the rocks protect the mist from the sunbeam, and suffer it to
water the earth, there the laurel and other richest vegetation fill the
hollows, giving a better glory to the sun itself. For sunshine, on the
torrent spray, {60} on the grass of its valley, and entangled among the
laurel stems, or glancing from their leaves, became a thousandfold lovelier
and more sacred than the same sunbeams, burning on the leafless
mountain-side.

And farther, the leaf, in its connection with the river, is typically
expressive, not, as the flower was, of human fading and passing away, but
of the perpetual flow and renewal of human mind and thought, rising "like
the rivers that run among the hills"; therefore it was that the youth of
Greece sacrificed their hair--the sign of their continually renewed
strength,--to the rivers, and to Apollo. Therefore, to commemorate Apollo's
own chief victory over death--over Python, the corrupter,--a laurel branch
was gathered every ninth year in the vale of Tempe; and the laurel leaf
became the reward or crown of all beneficent and enduring work of man--work
of inspiration, born of the strength of the earth, and of the dew of
heaven, and which can never pass away.

29. You may doubt at first, even because of its grace, this meaning in the
fable of Apollo and Daphne; you will not doubt it, however, when you trace
it back to its first eastern origin. When we speak carelessly of the
traditions respecting the Garden of Eden, (or in Hebrew, remember, Garden
of Delight,) we are apt to confuse Milton's descriptions with those in the
book of Genesis. Milton fills his Paradise with flowers; but no flowers are
spoken of in Genesis. We may indeed conclude that in speaking of every herb
of the field, flowers are included. But they {61} are not named. The things
that are _named_ in the Garden of Delight are trees only.

The words are, "every tree that was pleasant to the sight and good for
food;" and as if to mark the idea more strongly for us in the Septuagint,
even the ordinary Greek word for tree is not used, but the word [Greek:
xulon],--literally, every 'wood,' every piece of _timber_ that was pleasant
or good. They are indeed the "vivi travi,"--living rafters, of Dante's
Apennine.

Do you remember how those trees were said to be watered? Not by the four
rivers only. The rivers could not supply the place of rain. No rivers do;
for in truth they are the refuse of rain. No storm-clouds were there, nor
hidings of the blue by darkening veil; but there went up a _mist_ from the
earth, and watered the face of the ground,--or, as in Septuagint and
Vulgate, "There went forth a fountain from the earth, and gave the earth to
drink."

30. And now, lastly, we continually think of that Garden of Delight, as if
it existed, or could exist, no longer; wholly forgetting that it is spoken
of in Scripture as perpetually existent; and some of its fairest trees as
existent also, or only recently destroyed. When Ezekiel is describing to
Pharaoh the greatness of the Assyrians, do you remember what image he gives
of them? "Behold, the Assyrian was a cedar in Lebanon, with fair branches;
and his top was among the thick boughs; the waters nourished him, and the
deep brought him up, with her rivers {62} running round about his plants.
Under his branches did all the beasts of the field bring forth their young;
and under his shadow dwelt all great nations."

31. Now hear what follows. "The cedars _in the Garden of God_ could not
hide _him_. The fir trees were not like his boughs, and the chestnut trees
were not like his branches; nor any tree in the Garden of God was like unto
him in beauty."

So that you see, whenever a nation rises into consistent, vital, and,
through many generations, enduring power, _there_ is still the Garden of
God; still it is the water of life which feeds the roots of it; and still
the succession of its people is imaged by the perennial leafage of trees of
Paradise. Could this be said of Assyria, and shall it not be said of
England? How much more, of lives such as ours should be,--just, laborious,
united in aim, beneficent in fulfilment, may the image be used of the
leaves of the trees of Eden! Other symbols have been given often to show
the evanescence and slightness of our lives--the foam upon the water, the
grass on the housetop, the vapour that vanishes away; yet none of these are
images of true human life. That life, when it is real, is _not_ evanescent;
is _not_ slight; does _not_ vanish away. Every noble life leaves the fibre
of it interwoven for ever in the work of the world; by so much, evermore,
the strength of the human race has gained; more stubborn in the root,
higher towards heaven in the branch; and, "as a teil tree, and as an
oak,--whose substance is in them {63} when they cast their leaves,--so the
holy seed is in the midst thereof."

32. Only remember on what conditions. In the great Psalm of life, we are
told that everything that a man doeth shall prosper, so only that he
delight in the law of his God, that he hath not walked in the counsel of
the wicked, nor sat in the seat of the scornful. Is it among these leaves
of the perpetual Spring,--helpful leaves for the healing of the
nations,--that we mean to have our part and place, or rather among the
"brown skeletons of leaves that lag, the forest brook along"? For other
leaves there are, and other streams that water them,--not water of life,
but water of Acheron. Autumnal leaves there are that strew the brooks, in
Vallombrosa. Remember you how the name of the place was changed: "Once
called 'Sweet water' (Aqua bella), now, the Shadowy Vale." Portion in one
or other name we must choose, all of us,--with the living olive, by the
living fountains of waters, or with the wild fig trees, whose leafage of
human soul is strewed along the brooks of death, in the eternal
Vallombrosa.

       *       *       *       *       *

{64}

CHAPTER IV.

THE FLOWER.

ROME, _Whit Monday, 1874_.

1. On the quiet road leading from under the Palatine to the little church
of St. Nereo and Achilleo, I met, yesterday morning, group after group of
happy peasants heaped in pyramids on their triumphal carts, in Whit-Sunday
dress, stout and clean, and gay in colour; and the women all with bright
artificial roses in their hair, set with true natural taste, and well
becoming them. This power of arranging wreath or crown of flowers for the
head, remains to the people from classic times. And the thing that struck
me most in the look of it was not so much the cheerfulness, as the
dignity;--in a true sense, the _becomingness_ and decorousness of the
ornament. Among the ruins of the dead city, and the worse desolation of the
work of its modern rebuilders, here was one element at least of honour, and
order;--and, in these, of delight.

And these are the real significances of the flower itself. It is the utmost
purification of the plant, and the utmost discipline. Where its tissue is
blanched fairest, dyed purest, set in strictest rank, appointed to most
chosen office, {65} there--and created by the fact of this purity and
function--is the flower.

2. But created, observe, by the purity and order, more than by the
function. The flower exists for its own sake,--not for the fruit's sake.
The production of the fruit is an added honour to it--is a granted
consolation to us for its death. But the flower is the end of the
seed,--not the seed of the flower. You are fond of cherries, perhaps; and
think that the use of cherry blossom is to produce cherries. Not at all.
The use of cherries is to produce cherry blossoms; just as the use of bulbs
is to produce hyacinths,--not of hyacinths to produce bulbs. Nay, that the
flower can multiply by bulb, or root, or slip, as well as by seed, may show
you at once how immaterial the seed-forming function is to the flower's
existence. A flower is to the vegetable substance what a crystal is to the
mineral. "Dust of sapphire," writes my friend Dr. John Brown to me, of the
wood hyacinths of Scotland in the spring. Yes, that is so,--each bud more
beautiful, itself, than perfectest jewel--_this_, indeed, jewel "of purest
ray serene;" but, observe you, the glory is in the purity, the serenity,
the radiance,--not in the mere continuance of the creature.

3. It is because of its beauty that its continuance is worth Heaven's
while. The glory of it is in being,--not in begetting; and in the spirit
and substance,--not the change. For the earth also has its flesh and
spirit. Every day of spring is the earth's Whit Sunday--Fire {66} Sunday.
The falling fire of the rainbow, with the order of its zones, and the
gladness of its covenant,--you may eat of it, like Esdras; but you feed
upon it only that you may see it. Do you think that flowers were born to
nourish the blind?

Fasten well in your mind, then, the conception of order, and purity, as the
essence of the flower's being, no less than of the crystal's. A ruby is not
made bright to scatter round it child-rubies; nor a flower, but in
collateral and added honour, to give birth to other flowers.

Two main facts, then, you have to study in every flower: the symmetry or
order of it, and the perfection of its substance; first, the manner in
which the leaves are placed for beauty of form; then the spinning and
weaving and blanching of their tissue, for the reception of purest colour,
or refining to richest surface.

4. First, the order: the proportion, and answering to each other, of the
parts; for the study of which it becomes necessary to know what its parts
are; and that a flower consists essentially of--Well, I really don't know
what it consists essentially of. For some flowers have bracts, and stalks,
and toruses, and calices, and corollas, and discs, and stamens, and
pistils, and ever so many odds and ends of things besides, of no use at
all, seemingly; and others have no bracts, and no stalks, and no toruses,
and no calices, and no corollas, and nothing recognizable for stamens or
pistils,--only, when they come to be reduced to this kind of poverty, one
doesn't call {67} them flowers; they get together in knots, and one calls
them catkins, or the like, or forgets their existence altogether;--I
haven't the least idea, for instance, myself, what an oak blossom is like;
only I know its bracts get together and make a cup of themselves
afterwards, which the Italians call, as they do the dome of St. Peter's,
'cupola'; and that it is a great pity, for their own sake as well as the
world's, that they were not content with their ilex cupolas, which were
made to hold something, but took to building these big ones upside-down,
which hold nothing--_less_ than nothing,--large extinguishers of the flame
of Catholic religion. And for farther embarrassment, a flower not only is
without essential consistence of a given number of parts, but it rarely
consists, alone, of _itself_. One talks of a hyacinth as of a flower; but a
hyacinth is any number of flowers. One does not talk of 'a heather'; when
one says 'heath,' one means the whole plant, not the blossom,--because
heath-bells, though they grow together for company's sake, do so in a
voluntary sort of way, and are not fixed in their places; and yet, they
depend on each other for effect, as much as a bunch of grapes.

5. And this grouping of flowers, more or less waywardly, is the most subtle
part of their order, and the most difficult to represent. Take that cluster
of bog-heather bells, for instance, Line-study 1. You might think at first
there were no lines in it worth study; but look at it more carefully. There
are twelve bells in the {68} cluster. There may be fewer, or more; but the
bog-heath is apt to run into something near that number. They all grow
together as close as they can, and on one side of the supporting branch
only. The natural effect would be to bend the branch down; but the branch
won't have that, and so leans back to carry them. Now you see the use of
drawing the profile in the middle figure: it shows you the exactly balanced
setting of the group,--not drooping, nor erect; but with a disposition to
droop, tossed up by the leaning back of the stem. Then, growing as near as
they can to each other, those in the middle get squeezed. Here is another
quite special character. Some flowers don't like being squeezed at all
(fancy a squeezed convolvulus!); but these heather bells like it, and look
all the prettier for it,--not the squeezed ones exactly, by themselves, but
the cluster altogether, by their patience.

Then also the outside ones get pushed into a sort of star-shape, and in
front show the colour of all their sides, and at the back the rich green
cluster of sharp leaves that hold them; all this order being as essential
to the plant as any of the more formal structures of the bell itself.

6. But the bog-heath has usually only one cluster of flowers to arrange on
each branch. Take a spray of ling (Frontispiece), and you will find that
the richest piece of Gothic spire-sculpture would be dull and graceless
beside the grouping of the floral masses in their various life. But it is
difficult to give the accuracy of attention {69} necessary to see their
beauty without drawing them; and still more difficult to draw them in any
approximation to the truth before they change. This is indeed the fatallest
obstacle to all good botanical work. Flowers, or leaves,--and especially
the last,--can only be rightly drawn as they grow. And even then, in their
loveliest spring action, they grow as you draw them, and will not stay
quite the same creatures for half an hour.

7. I said in my inaugural lectures at Oxford, § 107, that real botany is
not so much the description of plants as their biography. Without entering
at all into the history of its fruitage, the life and death of the blossom
_itself_ is always an eventful romance, which must be completely told, if
well. The grouping given to the various states of form between bud and
flower is always the most important part of the design of the plant; and in
the modes of its death are some of the most touching lessons, or
symbolisms, connected with its existence. The utter loss and far-scattered
ruin of the cistus and wild rose,--the dishonoured and dark contortion of
the convolvulus,--the pale wasting of the crimson heath of Apennine, are
strangely opposed by the quiet closing of the brown bells of the ling, each
making of themselves a little cross as they die; and so enduring into the
days of winter. I have drawn the faded beside the full branch, and know not
which is the more beautiful.

8. This grouping, then, and way of treating each other in their gathered
company, is the first and most subtle {70} condition of form in flowers;
and, observe, I don't mean, just now, the appointed and disciplined
grouping, but the wayward and accidental. Don't confuse the beautiful
consent of the cluster in these sprays of heath with the legal strictness
of a foxglove,--though that also has its divinity; but of another kind.
That legal order of blossoming--for which we may wisely keep the accepted
name, 'inflorescence,'--is itself quite a separate subject of study, which
we cannot take up until we know the still more strict laws which are set
over the flower itself.

9. I have in my hand a small red poppy which I gathered on Whit Sunday on
the palace of the Cæsars. It is an intensely simple, intensely floral,
flower. All silk and flame: a scarlet cup, perfect-edged all round, seen
among the wild grass far away, like a burning coal fallen from Heaven's
altars. You cannot have a more complete, a more stainless, type of flower
absolute; inside and outside, _all_ flower. No sparing of colour
anywhere--no outside coarsenesses--no interior secrecies; open as the
sunshine that creates it; fine-finished on both sides, down to the
extremest point of insertion on its narrow stalk; and robed in the purple
of the Cæsars.

Literally so. That poppy scarlet, so far as it could be painted by mortal
hand, for mortal King, stays yet, against the sun, and wind, and rain, on
the walls of the house of Augustus, a hundred yards from the spot where I
gathered the weed of its desolation.

10. A pure _cup_, you remember it is; that much at least {71} you cannot
but remember, of poppy-form among the cornfields; and it is best, in
beginning, to think of every flower as essentially a cup. There are flat
ones, but you will find that most of these are really groups of flowers,
not single blossoms; and there are out-of-the-way and quaint ones, very
difficult to define as of any shape; but even these have a cup to begin
with, deep down in them. You had better take the idea of a cup or vase, as
the first, simplest, and most general form of true flower.

The botanists call it a corolla, which means a garland, or a kind of crown;
and the word is a very good one, because it indicates that the flower-cup
is made, as our clay cups are, on a potter's wheel; that it is essentially
a _revolute_ form--a whirl or (botanically) 'whorl' of leaves; in reality
successive round the base of the urn they form.

11. Perhaps, however, you think poppies in general are not much like cups.
But the flower in my hand is a--poverty-_stricken_ poppy, I was going to
write,--poverty-_strengthened_ poppy, I mean. On richer ground, it would
have gushed into flaunting breadth of untenable purple--flapped its
inconsistent scarlet vaguely to the wind--dropped the pride of its petals
over my hand in an hour after I gathered it. But this little rough-bred
thing, a Campagna pony of a poppy, is as bright and strong to-day as
yesterday. So that I can see exactly where the leaves join or lap over each
other; and when I look down into the cup, find it to be composed of four
leaves altogether,--two smaller, set within two larger. {72}

[Illustration: FIG. 4.]

12. Thus far (and somewhat farther) I had written in Rome; but now, putting
my work together in Oxford, a sudden doubt troubles me, whether all poppies
have two petals smaller than the other two. Whereupon I take down an
excellent little school-book on botany--the best I've yet found, thinking
to be told quickly; and I find a great deal about opium; and, apropos of
opium, that the juice of common celandine is of a bright orange colour; and
I pause for a bewildered five minutes, wondering if a celandine is a poppy,
and how many petals _it_ has: going on again--because I must, without
making up my mind, on either question--I am told to "observe the floral
receptacle of the Californian genus Eschscholtzia." Now I can't observe
anything of the sort, and I don't want to; and I wish California and all
that's in it were at the deepest bottom of the Pacific. Next I am told to
compare the poppy and waterlily; and I can't do that, neither--though I
should like to; and there's the end of the article; and it never tells me
whether one pair of petals is always smaller than the other, or not. Only I
see it says the corolla has four petals. Perhaps a celandine may be a
double poppy, and have eight, I know they're tiresome irregular things, and
I mustn't be stopped by them;[23]--at {73} any rate, my Roman poppy knew
what it was about, and had its two couples of leaves in clear
subordination, of which at the time I went on to inquire farther, as
follows.

13. The next point is, what shape are the petals of? And that is easier
asked than answered; for when you pull them off, you find they won't lie
flat, by any means, but are each of them cups, or rather shells,
themselves; and that it requires as much conchology as would describe a
cockle, before you can properly give account of a single poppy leaf. Or of
a single _any_ leaf--for all leaves are either shells, or boats, (or solid,
if not hollow, masses,) and cannot be represented in flat outline. But,
laying these as flat as they will lie on a sheet of paper, you will find
the piece they hide of the paper they lie on can be drawn; giving
approximately the shape of the outer leaf as at A, that of the inner as at
B, Fig. 4; which you will find very difficult lines to draw, for they are
each composed of two curves, joined, as in Fig. 5; all above the line _a b_
being the outer edge of the leaf, but joined so subtly to the side that the
least break in drawing the line spoils the form.

14. Now every flower petal consists essentially of these two parts,
variously proportioned and outlined. It {74} expands from C to _a b_; and
closes in the external line, and for this reason.

[Illustration: FIG. 5.]

Considering every flower under the type of a cup, the first part of the
petal is that in which it expands from the bottom to the rim; the second
part, that in which it terminates itself on reaching the rim. Thus let the
three circles, A B C, Fig 6., represent the undivided cups of the three
great geometrical orders of flowers--trefoil, quatrefoil and cinquefoil.

[Illustration: FIG. 6.]

Draw in the first an equilateral triangle, in the second a square, in the
third a pentagon; draw the dark lines from centres to angles; (D E F): then
(_a_) the third part of D; (_b_) the fourth part of E, (_c_) the fifth part
of F, are the normal outline forms of the petals of the three {75}
families; the relations between the developing angle and limiting curve
being varied according to the depth of cup, and the degree of connection
between the petals. Thus a rose folds them over one another, in the bud; a
convolvulus twists them,--the one expanding into a flat cinquefoil of
separate petals, and the other into a deep-welled cinquefoil of connected
ones.

I find an excellent illustration in Veronica Polita, one of the most
perfectly graceful of field plants because of the light alternate flower
stalks, each with its leaf at the base; the flower itself a quatrefoil, of
which the largest and least petals are uppermost. Pull one off its calyx
(draw, if you can, the outline of the striped blue upper petal with the
jagged edge of pale gold below), and then examine the relative shapes of
the lateral, and least upper {76} petal. Their under surface is very
curious, as if covered with white paint; the blue stripes above, in the
direction of their growth, deepening the more delicate colour with
exquisite insistence.

A lilac blossom will give you a pretty example of the expansion of the
petals of a quatrefoil above the edge of the cup or tube; but I must get
back to our poppy at present.

15. What outline its petals really have, however, is little shown in their
crumpled fluttering; but that very crumpling arises from a fine floral
character which we do not enough value in them. We usually think of the
poppy as a coarse flower; but it is the most transparent and delicate of
all the blossoms of the field. The rest--nearly all of them--depend on the
_texture_ of their surfaces for colour. But the poppy is painted _glass_;
it never glows so brightly as when the sun shines through it. Wherever it
is seen--against the light or with the light--always, it is a flame, and
warms the wind like a blown ruby.

In these two qualities, the accurately balanced form, and the perfectly
infused colour of the petals, you have, as I said, the central being of the
flower. All the other parts of it are necessary, but we must follow them
out in order.

16. Looking down into the cup, you see the green boss divided by a black
star,--of six rays only,--and surrounded by a few black spots. My
rough-nurtured poppy contents itself with these for its centre; a rich one
would have had the green boss divided by a dozen of rays, and surrounded by
a dark crowd of crested threads. {77}

This green boss is called by botanists the pistil, which word consists of
the two first syllables of the Latin pistillum, otherwise more familiarly
Englished into 'pestle.' The meaning of the botanical word is of course,
also, that the central part of a flower-cup has to it something of the
relations that a pestle has to a mortar! Practically, however, as this
pestle has no pounding functions, I think the word is misleading as well as
ungraceful; and that we may find a better one after looking a little closer
into the matter. For this pestle is divided generally into three very
distinct parts: there is a storehouse at the bottom of it for the seeds of
the plant; above this, a shaft, often of considerable length in deep cups,
rising to the level of their upper edge, or above it; and at the top of
these shafts an expanded crest. This shaft the botanists call 'style,' from
the Greek word for a pillar; and the crest of it--I do not know
why--stigma, from the Greek word for 'spot.' The storehouse for the seeds
they call the 'ovary,' from the Latin ovum, an egg. So you have two-thirds
of a Latin word, (pistil)--awkwardly and disagreeably edged in between
pestle and pistol--for the whole thing; you have an English-Latin word
(ovary) for the bottom of it; an English-Greek word (style) for the middle;
and a pure Greek word (stigma) for the top.

17. This is a great mess of language, and all the worse that the words
style and stigma have both of them quite different senses in ordinary and
scholarly English from this forced botanical one. And I will venture
therefore, {78} for my own pupils, to put the four names altogether into
English. Instead of calling the whole thing a pistil, I shall simply call
it the pillar. Instead of 'ovary,' I shall say 'Treasury' (for a seed isn't
an egg, but it _is_ a treasure). The style I shall call the 'Shaft,' and
the stigma the 'Volute.' So you will have your entire pillar divided into
the treasury, at its base, the shaft, and the volute; and I think you will
find these divisions easily remembered, and not unfitted to the sense of
the words in their ordinary use.

18. Round this central, but, in the poppy, very stumpy, pillar, you find a
cluster of dark threads, with dusty pendants or cups at their ends. For
these the botanists' name 'stamens,' may be conveniently retained, each
consisting of a 'filament,' or thread, and an 'anther,' or blossoming part.

And in this rich corolla, and pillar, or pillars, with their treasuries,
and surrounding crowd of stamens, the essential flower consists. Fewer than
these several parts, it cannot have, to be a flower at all; of these, the
corolla leads, and is the object of final purpose. The stamens and the
treasuries are only there in order to produce future corollas, though often
themselves decorative in the highest degree.

These, I repeat, are all the essential parts of a flower. But it would have
been difficult, with any other than the poppy, to have shown you them
alone; for nearly all other flowers keep with them, all their lives, their
nurse {79} or tutor leaves,--the group which, in stronger and humbler
temper, protected them in their first weakness, and formed them to the
first laws of their being. But the poppy casts these tutorial leaves away.
It is the finished picture of impatient and luxury-loving youth,--at first
too severely restrained, then casting all restraint away,--yet retaining to
the end of life unseemly and illiberal signs of its once compelled
submission to laws which were only pain,--not instruction.

19. Gather a green poppy bud, just when it shows the scarlet line at its
side; break it open and unpack the poppy. The whole flower is there
complete in size and colour,--its stamens full-grown, but all packed so
closely that the fine silk of the petals is crushed into a million of
shapeless wrinkles. When the flower opens, it seems a deliverance from
torture: the two imprisoning green leaves are shaken to the ground; the
aggrieved corolla smooths itself in the sun, and comforts itself as it can;
but remains visibly crushed and hurt to the end of its days.

[Illustration: FIG. 7.]

20. Not so flowers of gracious breeding. Look at these four stages in the
young life of a primrose, Fig. 7. First confined, as strictly as the poppy
within five pinching green leaves, whose points close over it, the little
thing is content to remain a child, and finds its nursery large enough. The
green leaves unclose their points,--the little yellow ones peep out, like
ducklings. They find the light delicious, and open wide to it; and grow,
and grow, {80} and throw themselves wider at last into their perfect rose.
But they never leave their old nursery for all that; it and they live on
together; and the nursery seems a part of the flower.

21. Which is so, indeed, in all the loveliest flowers; and, in usual
botanical parlance, a flower is said to consist of its calyx, (or _hiding_
part--Calypso having rule over it,) and corolla, or garland part,
Proserpina having rule over it. But it is better to think of them always as
separate; for this calyx, very justly so named from its main function of
concealing the flower, in its youth is usually green, not coloured, and
shows its separate nature by pausing, or at least greatly lingering, in its
growth, and modifying itself very slightly, while the corolla is forming
{81} itself through active change. Look at the two, for instance, through
the youth of a pease blossom, Fig. 8.

[Illustration: FIG. 8.]

The entire cluster at first appears pendent in this manner, the stalk
bending round on purpose to put it into that position. On which all the
little buds, thinking themselves ill-treated, determine not to submit to
anything of the sort, turn their points upward persistently, and determine
that--at any cost of trouble--they will get nearer the sun. Then they begin
to open, and let out their corollas. I give the process of one only (Fig.
9).[24] It chances to be engraved the reverse way from the bud; but that is
of no consequence.

[Illustration: FIG. 9.]

At first, you see the long lower point of the calyx thought that _it_ was
going to be the head of the family, and curls upwards eagerly. Then the
little corolla steals out; and soon does away with that impression on the
mind of the calyx. The corolla soars up with widening wings, the abashed
calyx retreats beneath; and finally the great upper leaf of corolla--not
pleased at having its back still {82} turned to the light, and its face
down--throws itself entirely back, to look at the sky, and nothing
else;--and your blossom is complete.

Keeping, therefore, the ideas of calyx and corolla entirely distinct, this
one general point you may note of both: that, as a calyx is originally
folded tight over the flower, and has to open deeply to let it out, it is
nearly always composed of sharp pointed leaves like the segments of a
balloon; while corollas, having to open out as wide as possible to show
themselves, are typically like cups or plates, only cut into their edges
here and there, for ornamentation's sake.

22. And, finally, though the corolla is essentially the floral group of
leaves, and usually receives the glory of colour for itself only, this
glory and delight may be given to any other part of the group; and, as if
to show us that there is no really dishonoured or degraded membership, the
stalks and leaves in some plants, near the blossom, flush in sympathy with
it, and become themselves a part of the {83} effectively visible
flower;--Eryngo--Jura hyacinth, (comosus,) and the edges of upper stems and
leaves in many plants; while others, (Geranium lucidum,) are made to
delight us with their leaves rather than their blossoms; only I suppose, in
these, the scarlet leaf colour is a kind of early autumnal glow,--a
beautiful hectic, and foretaste, in sacred youth, of sacred death.

I observe, among the speculations of modern science, several, lately, not
uningenious, and highly industrious, on the subject of the relation of
colour in flowers, to insects--to selective development, etc., etc. There
_are_ such relations, of course. So also, the blush of a girl, when she
first perceives the faltering in her lover's step as he draws near, is
related essentially to the existing state of her stomach; and to the state
of it through all the years of her previous existence. Nevertheless,
neither love, chastity, nor blushing, are merely exponents of digestion.

All these materialisms, in their unclean stupidity, are essentially the
work of human bats; men of semi-faculty or semi-education, who are more or
