
"Better than I thought I should. She is well-bred, unassuming, and very
entertaining when she likes. She has told us some of the wittiest
stories I've heard for a long time. Didn't our laughter wake you?"
replied Lucia.

"Yes. Now atone for it by amusing me with a repetition of these
witty tales."

"That is impossible; her accent and manner are half the charm," said
Ned. "I wish you had kept away ten minutes longer, for your appearance
spoilt the best story of all."

"Why didn't she go on?" asked Coventry, with a ray of curiosity.

"You forget that she overheard us last night, and must feel that you
consider her a bore. She has pride, and no woman forgets speeches like
those you made," answered Lucia.

"Or forgives them, either, I believe. Well, I must be resigned to
languish under her displeasure then. On Sydney's account I take a slight
interest in her; not that I expect to learn anything from her, for a
woman with a mouth like that never confides or confesses anything. But I
have a fancy to see what captivated him; for captivated he was, beyond a
doubt, and by no lady whom he met in society. Did you ever hear anything
of it, Ned?" asked Gerald.

"I'm not fond of scandal or gossip, and never listen to either." With
which remark Edward left the room.

Lucia was called out by the housekeeper a moment after, and Coventry
left to the society most wearisome to him, namely his own. As he
entered, he had caught a part of the story which Miss Muir had been
telling, and it had excited his curiosity so much that he found himself
wondering what the end could be and wishing that he might hear it.

What the deuce did she run away for, when I came in? he thought. If she
_is_ amusing, she must make herself useful; for it's intensely dull, I
own, here, in spite of Lucia. Hey, what's that?

It was a rich, sweet voice, singing a brilliant Italian air, and singing
it with an expression that made the music doubly delicious. Stepping out
of the French window, Coventry strolled along the sunny terrace,
enjoying the song with the relish of a connoisseur. Others followed, and
still he walked and listened, forgetful of weariness or tune. As one
exquisite air ended, he involuntarily applauded. Miss Muir's face
appeared for an instant, then vanished, and no more music followed,
though Coventry lingered, hoping to hear the voice again. For music was
the one thing of which he never wearied, and neither Lucia nor Bella
possessed skill enough to charm him. For an hour he loitered on the
terrace or the lawn, basking in the sunshine, too indolent to seek
occupation or society. At length Bella came out, hat in hand, and nearly
stumbled over her brother, who lay on the grass.

"You lazy man, have you been dawdling here all this time?" she said,
looking down at him.

"No, I've been very busy. Come and tell me how you've got on with the
little dragon."

"Can't stop. She bade me take a run after my French, so that I might be
ready for my drawing, and so I must."

"It's too warm to run. Sit down and amuse your deserted brother, who has
had no society but bees and lizards for an hour."

He drew her down as he spoke, and Bella obeyed; for, in spite of his
indolence, he was one to whom all submitted without dreaming of refusal.

"What have you been doing? Muddling your poor little brains with all
manner of elegant rubbish?"

"No, I've been enjoying myself immensely. Jean is _so_ interesting, so
kind and clever. She didn't bore me with stupid grammar, but just talked
to me in such pretty French that I got on capitally, and like it as I
never expected to, after Lucia's dull way of teaching it."

"What did you talk about?"

"Oh, all manner of things. She asked questions, and I answered, and she
corrected me."

"Questions about our affairs, I suppose?"

"Not one. She don't care two sous for us or our affairs. I thought she
might like to know what sort of people we were, so I told her about
Papa's sudden death, Uncle John, and you, and Ned; but in the midst of
it she said, in her quiet way, 'You are getting too confidential, my
dear. It is not best to talk too freely of one's affairs to strangers.
Let us speak of something else.'"

"What were you talking of when she said that, Bell?"

"You."

"Ah, then no wonder she was bored."

"She was tired of my chatter, and didn't hear half I said; for she was
busy sketching something for me to copy, and thinking of something more
interesting than the Coventrys."

"How do you know?"

"By the expression of her face. Did you like her music, Gerald?"

"Yes. Was she angry when I clapped?"

"She looked surprised, then rather proud, and shut the piano at once,
though I begged her to go on. Isn't Jean a pretty name?"

"Not bad; but why don't you call her Miss Muir?"

"She begged me not. She hates it, and loves to be called Jean, alone.
I've imagined such a nice little romance about her, and someday I shall
tell her, for I'm sure she has had a love trouble."

"Don't get such nonsense into your head, but follow Miss Muir's
well-bred example and don't be curious about other people's affairs. Ask
her to sing tonight; it amuses me."

"She won't come down, I think. We've planned to read and work in my
boudoir, which is to be our study now. Mamma will stay in her room, so
you and Lucia can have the drawing room all to yourselves."

"Thank you. What will Ned do?"

"He will amuse Mamma, he says. Dear old Ned! I wish you'd stir about and
get him his commission. He is so impatient to be doing something and yet
so proud he won't ask again, after you have neglected it so many times
and refused Uncle's help."

"I'll attend to it very soon; don't worry me, child. He will do very
well for a time, quietly here with us."

"You always say that, yet you know he chafes and is unhappy at being
dependent on you. Mamma and I don't mind; but he is a man, and it frets
him. He said he'd take matters into his own hands soon, and then you may
be sorry you were so slow in helping him."

"Miss Muir is looking out of the window. You'd better go and take your
run, else she will scold."

"Not she. I'm not a bit afraid of her, she's so gentle and sweet. I'm
fond of her already. You'll get as brown as Ned, lying here in the
sun. By the way, Miss Muir agrees with me in thinking him handsomer
than you."

"I admire her taste and quite agree with her."

"She said he was manly, and that was more attractive than beauty in a
man. She does express things so nicely. Now I'm off." And away danced
Bella, humming the burden of Miss Muir's sweetest song.

"'Energy is more attractive than beauty in a man.' She is right, but how
the deuce _can_ a man be energetic, with nothing to expend his energies
upon?" mused Coventry, with his hat over his eyes.

A few moments later, the sweep of a dress caught his ear. Without
stirring, a sidelong glance showed him Miss Muir coming across the
terrace, as if to join Bella. Two stone steps led down to the lawn. He
lay near them, and Miss Muir did not see him till close upon him. She
started and slipped on the last step, recovered herself, and glided on,
with a glance of unmistakable contempt as she passed the recumbent
figure of the apparent sleeper. Several things in Bella's report had
nettled him, but this look made him angry, though he would not own it,
even to himself.

"Gerald, come here, quick!" presently called Bella, from the rustic seat
where she stood beside her governess, who sat with her hand over her
face as if in pain.

Gathering himself up, Coventry slowly obeyed, but involuntarily
quickened his pace as he heard Miss Muir say, "Don't call him; _he_ can
do nothing"; for the emphasis on the word "he" was very significant.

"What is it, Bella?" he asked, looking rather wider awake than usual.

"You startled Miss Muir and made her turn her ankle. Now help her to the
house, for she is in great pain; and don't lie there anymore to frighten
people like a snake in the grass," said his sister petulantly.

"I beg your pardon. Will you allow me?" And Coventry offered his arm.

Miss Muir looked up with the expression which annoyed him and answered
coldly, "Thank you, Miss Bella will do as well."

"Permit me to doubt that." And with a gesture too decided to be
resisted, Coventry drew her arm through his and led her into the house.
She submitted quietly, said the pain would soon be over, and when
settled on the couch in Bella's room dismissed him with the briefest
thanks. Considering the unwonted exertion he had made, he thought she
might have been a little more grateful, and went away to Lucia, who
always brightened when he came.

No more was seen of Miss Muir till teatime; for now, while the family
were in retirement, they dined early and saw no company. The governess
had excused herself at dinner, but came down in the evening a little
paler than usual and with a slight limp in her gait. Sir John was there,
talking with his nephew, and they merely acknowledged her presence by
the sort of bow which gentlemen bestow on governesses. As she slowly
made her way to her place behind the urn, Coventry said to his brother,
"Take her a footstool, and ask her how she is, Ned." Then, as if
necessary to account for his politeness to his uncle, he explained how
he was the cause of the accident.

"Yes, yes. I understand. Rather a nice little person, I fancy. Not
exactly a beauty, but accomplished and well-bred, which is better for
one of her class."

"Some tea, Sir John?" said a soft voice at his elbow, and there was Miss
Muir, offering cups to the gentlemen.

"Thank you, thank you," said Sir John, sincerely hoping she had
overheard him.

As Coventry took his, he said graciously, "You are very forgiving, Miss
Muir, to wait upon me, after I have caused you so much pain."

"It is my duty, sir" was her reply, in a tone which plainly said, "but
not my pleasure." And she returned to her place, to smile, and chat, and
be charming, with Bella and her brother.

Lucia, hovering near her uncle and Gerald, kept them to herself, but
was disturbed to find that their eyes often wandered to the cheerful
group about the table, and that their attention seemed distracted by
the frequent bursts of laughter and fragments of animated conversation
which reached them. In the midst of an account of a tragic affair which
she endeavored to make as interesting and pathetic as possible, Sir
John burst into a hearty laugh, which betrayed that he had been
listening to a livelier story than her own. Much annoyed, she said
hastily, "I knew it would be so! Bella has no idea of the proper manner
in which to treat a governess. She and Ned will forget the difference
of rank and spoil that person for her work. She is inclined to be
presumptuous already, and if my aunt won't trouble herself to give Miss
Muir a hint in time, I shall."

"Wait until she has finished that story, I beg of you," said Coventry,
for Sir John was already off.

"If you find that nonsense so entertaining, why don't you follow Uncle's
example? I don't need you."

"Thank you. I will." And Lucia was deserted.

But Miss Muir had ended and, beckoning to Bella, left the room, as if
quite unconscious of the honor conferred upon her or the dullness she
left behind her. Ned went up to his mother, Gerald returned to make his
peace with Lucia, and, bidding them good-night, Sir John turned
homeward. Strolling along the terrace, he came to the lighted window of
Bella's study, and wishing to say a word to her, he half pushed aside
the curtain and looked in. A pleasant little scene. Bella working
busily, and near her in a low chair, with the light falling on her fair
hair and delicate profile, sat Miss Muir reading aloud. "Novels!"
thought Sir John, and smiled at them for a pair of romantic girls. But
pausing to listen a moment before he spoke, he found it was no novel,
but history, read with a fluency which made every fact interesting,
every sketch of character memorable, by the dramatic effect given to it.
Sir John was fond of history, and failing eyesight often curtailed his
favorite amusement. He had tried readers, but none suited him, and he
had given up the plan. Now as he listened, he thought how pleasantly the
smoothly flowing voice would wile away his evenings, and he envied Bella
her new acquisition.

A bell rang, and Bella sprang up, saying, "Wait for me a minute. I must
run to Mamma, and then we will go on with this charming prince."

Away she went, and Sir John was about to retire as quietly as he came,
when Miss Muir's peculiar behavior arrested him for an instant. Dropping
the book, she threw her arms across the table, laid her head down upon
them, and broke into a passion of tears, like one who could bear
restraint no longer. Shocked and amazed, Sir John stole away; but all
that night the kindhearted gentleman puzzled his brains with conjectures
about his niece's interesting young governess, quite unconscious that
she intended he should do so.




_chapter III_


PASSION AND PIQUE

For several weeks the most monotonous tranquillity seemed to reign at
Coventry House, and yet, unseen, unsuspected, a storm was gathering.
The arrival of Miss Muir seemed to produce a change in everyone, though
no one could have explained how or why. Nothing could be more
unobtrusive and retiring than her manners. She was devoted to Bella,
who soon adored her, and was only happy when in her society. She
ministered in many ways to Mrs. Coventry's comfort, and that lady
declared there never was such a nurse. She amused, interested and won
Edward with her wit and womanly sympathy. She made Lucia respect and
envy her for her accomplishments, and piqued indolent Gerald by her
persistent avoidance of him, while Sir John was charmed with her
respectful deference and the graceful little attentions she paid him in
a frank and artless way, very winning to the lonely old man. The very
servants liked her; and instead of being, what most governesses are, a
forlorn creature hovering between superiors and inferiors, Jean Muir
was the life of the house, and the friend of all but two.

Lucia disliked her, and Coventry distrusted her; neither could exactly
say why, and neither owned the feeling, even to themselves. Both watched
her covertly yet found no shortcoming anywhere. Meek, modest, faithful,
and invariably sweet-tempered--they could complain of nothing and
wondered at their own doubts, though they could not banish them.

It soon came to pass that the family was divided, or rather that two
members were left very much to themselves. Pleading timidity, Jean Muir
kept much in Bella's study and soon made it such a pleasant little nook
that Ned and his mother, and often Sir John, came in to enjoy the music,
reading, or cheerful chat which made the evenings so gay. Lucia at first
was only too glad to have her cousin to herself, and he too lazy to care
what went on about him. But presently he wearied of her society, for she
was not a brilliant girl, and possessed few of those winning arts which
charm a man and steal into his heart. Rumors of the merry-makings that
went on reached him and made him curious to share them; echoes of fine
music went sounding through the house, as he lounged about the empty
drawing room; and peals of laughter reached him while listening to
Lucia's grave discourse.

She soon discovered that her society had lost its charm, and the more
eagerly she tried to please him, the more signally she failed. Before
long Coventry fell into a habit of strolling out upon the terrace of an
evening, and amusing himself by passing and repassing the window of
Bella's room, catching glimpses of what was going on and reporting the
result of his observations to Lucia, who was too proud to ask admission
to the happy circle or to seem to desire it.

"I shall go to London tomorrow, Lucia," Gerald said one evening, as he
came back from what he called "a survey," looking very much annoyed.

"To London?" exclaimed his cousin, surprised.

"Yes, I must bestir myself and get Ned his commission, or it will be all
over with him."

"How do you mean?"

"He is falling in love as fast as it is possible for a boy to do it.
That girl has bewitched him, and he will make a fool of himself very
soon, unless I put a stop to it."

"I was afraid she would attempt a flirtation. These persons always do,
they are such a mischief-making race."

"Ah, but there you are wrong, as far as little Muir is concerned. She
does not flirt, and Ned has too much sense and spirit to be caught by a
silly coquette. She treats him like an elder sister, and mingles the
most attractive friendliness with a quiet dignity that captivates the
boy. I've been watching them, and there he is, devouring her with his
eyes, while she reads a fascinating novel in the most fascinating
style. Bella and Mamma are absorbed in the tale, and see nothing; but
Ned makes himself the hero, Miss Muir the heroine, and lives the love
scene with all the ardor of a man whose heart has just waked up. Poor
lad! Poor lad!"

Lucia looked at her cousin, amazed by the energy with which he spoke,
the anxiety in his usually listless face. The change became him, for it
showed what he might be, making one regret still more what he was.
Before she could speak, he was gone again, to return presently,
laughing, yet looking a little angry.

"What now?" she asked.

"'Listeners never hear any good of themselves' is the truest of
proverbs. I stopped a moment to look at Ned, and heard the following
flattering remarks. Mamma is gone, and Ned was asking little Muir to
sing that delicious barcarole she gave us the other evening.

"'Not now, not here,' she said.

"'Why not? You sang it in the drawing room readily enough,' said Ned,
imploringly.

"'That is a very different thing,' and she looked at him with a little
shake of the head, for he was folding his hands and doing the
passionate pathetic.

"'Come and sing it there then,' said innocent Bella. 'Gerald likes your
voice so much, and complains that you will never sing to him.'

"'He never asks me,' said Muir, with an odd smile.

"'He is too lazy, but he wants to hear you.'

"'When he asks me, I will sing--if I feel like it.' And she shrugged her
shoulders with a provoking gesture of indifference.

"'But it amuses him, and he gets so bored down here,' began stupid
little Bella. 'Don't be shy or proud, Jean, but come and entertain the
poor old fellow.'

"'No, thank you. I engaged to teach Miss Coventry, not to amuse Mr.
Coventry' was all the answer she got.

"'You amuse Ned, why not Gerald? Are you afraid of him?' asked Bella.

"Miss Muir laughed, such a scornful laugh, and said, in that
peculiar tone of hers, 'I cannot fancy anyone being _afraid_ of your
elder brother.'

"'I am, very often, and so would you be, if you ever saw him angry,' And
Bella looked as if I'd beaten her.

"'Does he ever wake up enough to be angry?' asked that girl, with an air
of surprise. Here Ned broke into a fit of laughter, and they are at it
now, I fancy, by the sound."

"Their foolish gossip is not worth getting excited about, but I
certainly would send Ned away. It's no use trying to get rid of 'that
girl,' as you say, for my aunt is as deluded about her as Ned and Bella,
and she really does get the child along splendidly. Dispatch Ned, and
then she can do no harm," said Lucia, watching Coventry's altered face
as he stood in the moonlight, just outside the window where she sat.

"Have you no fears for me?" he asked smiling, as if ashamed of his
momentary petulance.

"No, have you for yourself?" And a shade of anxiety passed over her
face.

"I defy the Scotch witch to enchant me, except with her music," he
added, moving down the terrace again, for Jean was singing like a
nightingale.

As the song ended, he put aside the curtain, and said, abruptly, "Has
anyone any commands for London? I am going there tomorrow."

"A pleasant trip to you," said Ned carelessly, though usually his
brother's movements interested him extremely.

"I want quantities of things, but I must ask Mamma first." And Bella
began to make a list.

"May I trouble you with a letter, Mr. Coventry?"

Jean Muir turned around on the music stool and looked at him with the
cold keen glance which always puzzled him.

He bowed, saying, as if to them all, "I shall be off by the early train,
so you must give me your orders tonight."

"Then come away, Ned, and leave Jean to write her letter."

And Bella took her reluctant brother from the room.

"I will give you the letter in the morning," said Miss Muir, with a
curious quiver in her voice, and the look of one who forcibly suppressed
some strong emotion.

"As you please." And Coventry went back to Lucia, wondering who Miss
Muir was going to write to. He said nothing to his brother of the
purpose which took him to town, lest a word should produce the
catastrophe which he hoped to prevent; and Ned, who now lived in a sort
of dream, seemed to forget Gerald's existence altogether.

With unwonted energy Coventry was astir seven next morning. Lucia gave
him his breakfast, and as he left the room to order the carriage, Miss
Muir came gliding downstairs, very pale and heavy-eyed (with a
sleepless, tearful night, he thought) and, putting a delicate little
letter into his hand, said hurriedly, "Please leave this at Lady
Sydney's, and if you see her, say 'I have remembered.'"

Her peculiar manner and peculiar message struck him. His eye
involuntarily glanced at the address of the letter and read young
Sydney's name. Then, conscious of his mistake, he thrust it into his
pocket with a hasty "Good morning," and left Miss Muir standing with
one hand pressed on her heart, the other half extended as if to recall
the letter.

All the way to London, Coventry found it impossible to forget the
almost tragical expression of the girl's face, and it haunted him
through the bustle of two busy days. Ned's affair was put in the way of
being speedily accomplished, Bella's commissions were executed, his
mother's pet delicacies provided for her, and a gift for Lucia, whom
the family had given him for his future mate, as he was too lazy to
choose for himself.

Jean Muir's letter he had not delivered, for Lady Sydney was in the
country and her townhouse closed. Curious to see how she would receive
his tidings, he went quietly in on his arrival at home. Everyone had
dispersed to dress for dinner except Miss Muir, who was in the garden,
the servant said.

"Very well, I have a message for her"; and, turning, the "young master,"
as they called him, went to seek her. In a remote corner he saw her
sitting alone, buried in thought. As his step roused her, a look of
surprise, followed by one of satisfaction, passed over her face, and,
rising, she beckoned to him with an almost eager gesture. Much amazed,
he went to her and offered the letter, saying kindly, "I regret that I
could not deliver it. Lady Sydney is in the country, and I did not like
to post it without your leave. Did I do right?"

"Quite right, thank you very much--it is better so." And with an air of
relief, she tore the letter to atoms, and scattered them to the wind.

More amazed than ever, the young man was about to leave her when she
said, with a mixture of entreaty and command, "Please stay a moment. I
want to speak to you."

He paused, eyeing her with visible surprise, for a sudden color dyed her
cheeks, and her lips trembled. Only for a moment, then she was quite
self-possessed again. Motioning him to the seat she had left, she
remained standing while she said, in a low, rapid tone full of pain and
of decision:

"Mr. Coventry, as the head of the house I want to speak to you, rather
than to your mother, of a most unhappy affair which has occurred during
your absence. My month of probation ends today; your mother wishes me to
remain; I, too, wish it sincerely, for I am happy here, but I ought not.
Read this, and you will see why."

She put a hastily written note into his hand and watched him intently
while he read it. She saw him flush with anger, bite his lips, and knit
his brows, then assume his haughtiest look, as he lifted his eyes and
said in his most sarcastic tone, "Very well for a beginning. The boy has
eloquence. Pity that it should be wasted. May I ask if you have replied
to this rhapsody?"

"I have."

"And what follows? He begs you 'to fly with him, to share his fortunes,
and be the good angel of his life.' Of course you consent?"

There was no answer, for, standing erect before him, Miss Muir regarded
him with an expression of proud patience, like one who expected
reproaches, yet was too generous to resent them. Her manner had its
effect. Dropping his bitter tone, Coventry asked briefly, "Why do you
show me this? What can I do?"

"I show it that you may see how much in earnest 'the boy' is, and how
open I desire to be. You can control, advise, and comfort your brother,
and help me to see what is my duty."

"You love him?" demanded Coventry bluntly.

"No!" was the quick, decided answer.

"Then why make him love you?"

"I never tried to do it. Your sister will testify that I have endeavored
to avoid him as I--" And he finished the sentence with an unconscious
tone of pique, "As you have avoided me."

She bowed silently, and he went on:

"I will do you the justice to say that nothing can be more blameless
than your conduct toward myself; but why allow Ned to haunt you evening
after evening? What could you expect of a romantic boy who had nothing
to do but lose his heart to the first attractive woman he met?"

A momentary glisten shone in Jean Muir's steel-blue eyes as the last
words left the young man's lips; but it was gone instantly, and her
voice was full of reproach, as she said, steadily, impulsively, "If the
'romantic boy' had been allowed to lead the life of a man, as he longed
to do, he would have had no time to lose his heart to the first
sorrowful girl whom he pitied. Mr. Coventry, the fault is yours. Do not
blame your brother, but generously own your mistake and retrieve it in
the speediest, kindest manner."

For an instant Gerald sat dumb. Never since his father died had anyone
reproved him; seldom in his life had he been blamed. It was a new
experience, and the very novelty added to the effect. He saw his fault,
regretted it, and admired the brave sincerity of the girl in telling him
of it. But he did not know how to deal with the case, and was forced to
confess not only past negligence but present incapacity. He was as
honorable as he was proud, and with an effort he said frankly, "You are
right, Miss Muir. I _am_ to blame, yet as soon as I saw the danger, I
tried to avert it. My visit to town was on Ned's account; he will have
his commission very soon, and then he will be sent out of harm's way.
Can I do more?"

"No, it is too late to send him away with a free and happy heart. He
must bear his pain as he can, and it may help to make a man of him," she
said sadly.

"He'll soon forget," began Coventry, who found the thought of gay Ned
suffering an uncomfortable one.

"Yes, thank heaven, that is possible, for men."

Miss Muir pressed her hands together, with a dark expression on her
half-averted face. Something in her tone, her manner, touched Coventry;
he fancied that some old wound bled, some bitter memory awoke at the
approach of a new lover. He was young, heart-whole, and romantic, under
all his cool nonchalance of manner. This girl, who he fancied loved his
friend and who was, beloved by his brother, became an object of interest
to him. He pitied her, desired to help her, and regretted his past
distrust, as a chivalrous man always regrets injustice to a woman. She
was happy here, poor, homeless soul, and she should stay. Bella loved
her, his mother took comfort in her, and when Ned was gone, no one's
peace would be endangered by her winning ways, her rich accomplishments.
These thoughts swept through his mind during a brief pause, and when he
spoke, it was to say gently:

"Miss Muir, I thank you for the frankness which must have been painful
to you, and I will do my best to be worthy of the confidence which you
repose in me. You were both discreet and kind to speak only to me. This
thing would have troubled my mother extremely, and have done no good. I
shall see Ned, and try and repair my long neglect as promptly as
possible. I know you will help me, and in return let me beg of you to
remain, for he will soon be gone."

She looked at him with eyes full of tears, and there was no coolness in
the voice that answered softly, "You are too kind, but I had better go;
it is not wise to stay."

"Why not?"

She colored beautifully, hesitated, then spoke out in the clear, steady
voice which was her greatest charm, "If I had known there were sons in
this family, I never should have come. Lady Sydney spoke only of your
sister, and when I found two gentlemen, I was troubled, because--I am so
unfortunate--or rather, people are so kind as to like me more than I
deserve. I thought I could stay a month, at least, as your brother spoke
of going away, and you were already affianced, but--"

"I am not affianced."

Why he said that, Coventry could not tell, but the words passed his lips
hastily and could not be recalled. Jean Muir took the announcement oddly
enough. She shrugged her shoulders with an air of extreme annoyance, and
said almost rudely, "Then you should be; you will be soon. But that is
nothing to me. Miss Beaufort wishes me gone, and I am too proud to
remain and become the cause of disunion in a happy family. No, I will
go, and go at once."

She turned away impetuously, but Edward's arm detained her, and Edward's
voice demanded, tenderly, "Where will you go, my Jean?"

The tender touch and name seemed to rob her of her courage and calmness,
for, leaning on her lover, she hid her face and sobbed audibly.

"Now don't make a scene, for heaven's sake," began Coventry impatiently,
as his brother eyed him fiercely, divining at once what had passed, for
his letter was still in Gerald's hand and Jean's last words had reached
her lover's ear.

"Who gave you the right to read that, and to interfere in my affairs?"
demanded Edward hotly.

"Miss Muir" was the reply, as Coventry threw away the paper.

"And you add to the insult by ordering her out of the house," cried Ned
with increasing wrath.

"On the contrary, I beg her to remain."

"The deuce you do! And why?"

"Because she is useful and happy here, and I am unwilling that your
folly should rob her of a home which she likes."

"You are very thoughtful and devoted all at once, but I beg you will not
trouble yourself. Jean's happiness and home will be my care now."

"My dear boy, do be reasonable. The thing is impossible. Miss Muir sees
it herself; she came to tell me, to ask how best to arrange matters
without troubling my mother. I've been to town to attend to your
affairs, and you may be off now very soon."

"I have no desire to go. Last month it was the wish of my heart. Now
I'll accept nothing from you." And Edward turned moodily away from
his brother.

"What folly! Ned, you _must_ leave home. It is all arranged and cannot
be given up now. A change is what you need, and it will make a man of
you. We shall miss you, of course, but you will be where you'll see
something of life, and that is better for you than getting into
mischief here."

"Are you going away, Jean?" asked Edward, ignoring his brother entirely
and bending over the girl, who still hid her face and wept. She did not
speak, and Gerald answered for her.

"No, why should she if you are gone?"

"Do you mean to stay?" asked the lover eagerly of Jean.

"I wish to remain, but--" She paused and looked up. Her eyes went from
one face to the other, and she added, decidedly, "Yes, I must go, it is
not wise to stay even when you are gone."

Neither of the young men could have explained why that hurried glance
affected them as it did, but each felt conscious of a willful desire to
oppose the other. Edward suddenly felt that his brother loved Miss Muir,
and was bent on removing her from his way. Gerald had a vague idea that
Miss Muir feared to remain on his account, and he longed to show her
that he was quite safe. Each felt angry, and each showed it in a
different way, one being violent, the other satirical.

"You are right, Jean, this is not the place for you; and you must let me
see you in a safer home before I go," said Ned, significantly.

"It strikes me that this will be a particularly safe home when your
dangerous self is removed," began Coventry, with an aggravating smile of
calm superiority.

"And _I_ think that I leave a more dangerous person than myself behind
me, as poor Lucia can testify."

"Be careful what you say, Ned, or I shall be forced to remind you that I
am master here. Leave Lucia's name out of this disagreeable affair, if
you please."

"You _are_ master here, but not of me, or my actions, and you have no
right to expect obedience or respect, for you inspire neither. Jean, I
asked you to go with me secretly; now I ask you openly to share my
fortune. In my brother's presence I ask, and _will_ have an answer."

He caught her hand impetuously, with a defiant look at Coventry, who
still smiled, as if at boy's play, though his eyes were kindling and his
face changing with the still, white wrath which is more terrible than
any sudden outburst. Miss Muir looked frightened; she shrank away from
her passionate young lover, cast an appealing glance at Gerald, and
seemed as if she longed to claim his protection yet dared not.

"Speak!" cried Edward, desperately. "Don't look to him, tell me truly,
with your own lips, do you, can you love me, Jean?"

"I have told you once. Why pain me by forcing another hard reply," she
said pitifully, still shrinking from his grasp and seeming to appeal to
his brother.

"You wrote a few lines, but I'll not be satisfied with that. You shall
answer; I've seen love in your eyes, heard it in your voice, and I know
it is hidden in your heart. You fear to own it; do not hesitate, no one
can part us--speak, Jean, and satisfy me."

Drawing her hand decidedly away, she went a step nearer Coventry, and
answered, slowly, distinctly, though her lips trembled, and she
evidently dreaded the effect of her words, "I will speak, and speak
truly. You have seen love in my face; it is in my heart, and I do not
hesitate to own it, cruel as it is to force the truth from me, but this
love is not for you. Are you satisfied?"

He looked at her with a despairing glance and stretched his hand toward
her beseechingly. She seemed to fear a blow, for suddenly she clung to
Gerald with a faint cry. The act, the look of fear, the protecting
gesture Coventry involuntarily made were too much for Edward, already
excited by conflicting passions. In a paroxysm of blind wrath, he caught
up a large pruning knife left there by the gardener, and would have
dealt his brother a fatal blow had he not warded it off with his arm.
The stroke fell, and another might have followed had not Miss Muir with
unexpected courage and strength wrested the knife from Edward and flung
it into the little pond near by. Coventry dropped down upon the seat,
for the blood poured from a deep wound in his arm, showing by its rapid
flow that an artery had been severed. Edward stood aghast, for with the
blow his fury passed, leaving him overwhelmed with remorse and shame.

Gerald looked up at him, smiled faintly, and said, with no sign of
reproach or anger, "Never mind, Ned. Forgive and forget. Lend me a hand
to the house, and don't disturb anyone. It's not much, I dare say." But
his lips whitened as he spoke, and his strength failed him. Edward
sprang to support him, and Miss Muir, forgetting her terrors, proved
herself a girl of uncommon skill and courage.

"Quick! Lay him down. Give me your handkerchief, and bring some water,"
she said, in a tone of quiet command. Poor Ned obeyed and watched her
with breathless suspense while she tied the handkerchief tightly around
the arm, thrust the handle of his riding whip underneath, and pressed it
firmly above the severed artery to stop the dangerous flow of blood.

"Dr. Scott is with your mother, I think. Go and bring him here" was
the next order; and Edward darted away, thankful to do anything to
ease the terror which possessed him. He was gone some minutes, and
while they waited Coventry watched the girl as she knelt beside him,
bathing his face with one hand while with the other she held the
bandage firmly in its place. She was pale, but quite steady and
self-possessed, and her eyes shone with a strange brilliancy as she
looked down at him. Once, meeting his look of grateful wonder, she
smiled a reassuring smile that made her lovely, and said, in a soft,
sweet tone never used to him before, "Be quiet. There is no danger. I
will stay by you till help comes."

Help did come speedily, and the doctor's first words were "Who
improvised that tourniquet?"

"She did," murmured Coventry.

"Then you may thank her for saving your life. By Jove! It was capitally
done"; and the old doctor looked at the girl with as much admiration as
curiosity in his face.

"Never mind that. See to the wound, please, while I ran for bandages,
and salts, and wine."

Miss Muir was gone as she spoke, so fleetly that it was in vain to call
her back or catch her. During her brief absence, the story was told by
repentant Ned and the wound examined.

"Fortunately I have my case of instruments with me," said the doctor,
spreading on the bench a long array of tiny, glittering implements of
torture. "Now, Mr. Ned, come here, and hold the arm in that way, while I
tie the artery. Hey! That will never do. Don't tremble so, man, look
away and hold it steadily."

"I can't!" And poor Ned turned faint and white, not at the sight but
with the bitter thought that he had longed to kill his brother.

"I will hold it," and a slender white hand lifted the bare and bloody
arm so firmly, steadily, that Coventry sighed a sigh of relief, and Dr.
Scott fell to work with an emphatic nod of approval.

It was soon over, and while Edward ran in to bid the servants beware of
alarming their mistress, Dr. Scott put up his instruments and Miss Muir
used salts, water, and wine so skillfully that Gerald was able to walk
to his room, leaning on the old man, while the girl supported the
wounded arm, as no sling could be made on the spot. As he entered the
chamber, Coventry turned, put out his left hand, and with much feeling
in his fine eyes said simply, "Miss Muir, I thank you."

The color came up beautifully in her pale cheeks as she pressed the hand
and without a word vanished from the room. Lucia and the housekeeper
came bustling in, and there was no lack of attendance on the invalid. He
soon wearied of it, and sent them all away but Ned, who remorsefully
haunted the chamber, looking like a comely young Cain and feeling like
an outcast.

"Come here, lad, and tell me all about it. I was wrong to be
domineering. Forgive me, and believe that I care for your happiness more
sincerely than for my own."

These frank and friendly words healed the breach between the two
brothers and completely conquered Ned. Gladly did he relate his love
passages, for no young lover ever tires of that amusement if he has a
sympathizing auditor, and Gerald _was_ sympathetic now. For an hour did
he lie listening patiently to the history of the growth of his brother's
passion. Emotion gave the narrator eloquence, and Jean Muir's character
was painted in glowing colors. All her unsuspected kindness to those
about her was dwelt upon; all her faithful care, her sisterly interest
in Bella, her gentle attentions to their mother, her sweet forbearance
with Lucia, who plainly showed her dislike, and most of all, her
friendly counsel, sympathy, and regard for Ned himself.

"She would make a man of me. She puts strength and courage into me as no
one else can. She is unlike any girl I ever saw; there's no
sentimentality about her; she is wise, and kind, and sweet. She says
what she means, looks you straight in the eye, and is as true as steel.
I've tried her, I know her, and--ah, Gerald, I love her so!"

Here the poor lad leaned his face into his hands and sighed a sigh that
made his brother's heart ache.

"Upon my soul, Ned, I feel for you; and if there was no obstacle on her
part, I'd do my best for you. She loves Sydney, and so there is nothing
for it but to bear your fate like a man."

"Are you sure about Sydney? May it not be some one else?" and Ned eyed
his brother with a suspicious look.

Coventry told him all he knew and surmised concerning his friend, not
forgetting the letter. Edward mused a moment, then seemed relieved, and
said frankly, "I'm glad it's Sydney and not you. I can bear it better."

"Me!" ejaculated Gerald, with a laugh.

"Yes, you; I've been tormented lately with a fear that you cared for
her, or rather, she for you."

"You jealous young fool! We never see or speak to one another scarcely,
so how could we get up a tender interest?"

"What do you lounge about on that terrace for every evening? And why
does she get fluttered when your shadow begins to come and go?"
demanded Edward.

"I like the music and don't care for the society of the singer, that's
why I walk there. The fluttering is all your imagination; Miss Muir
isn't a woman to be fluttered by a man's shadow." And Coventry glanced
at his useless arm.

"Thank you for that, and for not saying 'little Muir,' as you generally
do. Perhaps it was my imagination. But she never makes fun of you now,
and so I fancied she might have lost her heart to the 'young master.'
Women often do, you know."

"She used to ridicule me, did she?" asked Coventry, taking no notice of
the latter part of his brother's speech, which was quite true
nevertheless.

"Not exactly, she was too well-bred for that. But sometimes when Bella
and I joked about you, she'd say something so odd or witty that it was
irresistible. You're used to being laughed at, so you don't mind, I
know, just among ourselves."

"Not I. Laugh away as much as you like," said Gerald. But he did mind,
and wanted exceedingly to know what Miss Muir had said, yet was too
proud to ask. He turned restlessly and uttered a sigh of pain.

"I'm talking too much; it's bad for you. Dr. Scott said you must be
quiet. Now go to sleep, if you can."

Edward left the bedside but not the room, for he would let no one take
his place. Coventry tried to sleep, found it impossible, and after a
restless hour called his brother back.

"If the bandage was loosened a bit, it would ease my arm and then I
could sleep. Can you do it, Ned?"

"I dare not touch it. The doctor gave orders to leave it till he came in
the morning, and I shall only do harm if I try."

"But I tell you it's too tight. My arm is swelling and the pain is
intense. It can't be right to leave it so. Dr. Scott dressed it in a
hurry and did it too tight. Common sense will tell you that," said
Coventry impatiently.

"I'll call Mrs. Morris; she will understand what's best to be done." And
Edward moved toward the door, looking anxious.

"Not she, she'll only make a stir and torment me with her chatter. I'll
bear it as long as I can, and perhaps Dr. Scott will come tonight. He
said he would if possible. Go to your dinner, Ned. I can ring for Neal
if I need anything. I shall sleep if I'm alone, perhaps."

Edward reluctantly obeyed, and his brother was left to himself. Little
rest did he find, however, for the pain of the wounded arm grew
unbearable, and, taking a sudden resolution, he rang for his servant.

"Neal, go to Miss Coventry's study, and if Miss Muir is there, ask her
to be kind enough to come to me. I'm in great pain, and she understand
wounds better than anyone else in the house."

With much surprise in his face, the man departed and a few moments after
the door noiselessly opened and Miss Muir came in. It had been a very
warm day, and for the first time she had left off her plain black dress.
All in white, with no ornament but her fair hair, and a fragrant posy of
violets in her belt, she looked a different woman from the meek, nunlike
creature one usually saw about the house. Her face was as altered as her
dress, for now a soft color glowed in her cheeks, her eyes smiled shyly,
and her lips no longer wore the firm look of one who forcibly repressed
every emotion. A fresh, gentle, and charming woman she seemed, and
Coventry found the dull room suddenly brightened by her presence. Going
straight to him, she said simply, and with a happy, helpful look very
comforting to see, "I'm glad you sent for me. What can I do for you?"

He told her, and before the complaint was ended, she began loosening the
bandages with the decision of one who understood what was to be done and
had faith in herself.

"Ah, that's relief, that's comfort!" ejaculated Coventry, as the last
tight fold fell away. "Ned was afraid I should bleed to death if he
touched me. What will the doctor say to us?"

"I neither know nor care. I shall say to him that he is a bad surgeon to
bind it so closely, and not leave orders to have it untied if necessary.
Now I shall make it easy and put you to sleep, for that is what you
need. Shall I? May I?"

"I wish you would, if you can."

And while she deftly rearranged the bandages, the young man watched her
curiously. Presently he asked, "How came you to know so much about
these things?"

"In the hospital where I was ill, I saw much that interested me, and
when I got better, I used to sing to the patients sometimes."

"Do you mean to sing to me?" he asked, in the submissive tone men
unconsciously adopt when ill and in a woman's care.

"If you like it better than reading aloud in a dreamy tone," she
answered, as she tied the last knot.

"I do, much better," he said decidedly.

"You are feverish. I shall wet your forehead, and then you will be quite
comfortable." She moved about the room in the quiet way which made it a
pleasure to watch her, and, having mingled a little cologne with water,
bathed his face as unconcernedly as if he had been a child. Her
proceedings not only comforted but amused Coventry, who mentally
contrasted her with the stout, beer-drinking matron who had ruled over
him in his last illness.

"A clever, kindly little woman," he thought, and felt quite at his ease,
she was so perfectly easy herself.

"There, now you look more like yourself," she said with an approving nod
as she finished, and smoothed the dark locks off his forehead with a
cool, soft hand. Then seating herself in a large chair near by, she
began to sing, while tidily rolling up the fresh bandages which had been
left for the morning. Coventry lay watching her by the dim light that
burned in the room, and she sang on as easily as a bird, a dreamy,
low-toned lullaby, which soothed the listener like a spell. Presently,
looking up to see the effect of her song, she found the young man wide
awake, and regarding her with a curious mixture of pleasure, interest,
and admiration.

"Shut your eyes, Mr. Coventry," she said, with a reproving shake of the
head, and an odd little smile.

He laughed and obeyed, but could not resist an occasional covert glance
from under his lashes at the slender white figure in the great velvet
chair. She saw him and frowned.

"You are very disobedient; why won't you sleep?"

"I can't, I want to listen. I'm fond of nightingales."

"Then I shall sing no more, but try something that has never failed yet.
Give me your hand, please."

Much amazed, he gave it, and, taking it in both her small ones, she sat
down behind the curtain and remained as mute and motionless as a statue.
Coventry smiled to himself at first, and wondered which would tire
first. But soon a subtle warmth seemed to steal from the soft palms that
enclosed his own, his heart beat quicker, his breath grew unequal, and a
thousand fancies danced through his brain. He sighed, and said dreamily,
as he turned his face toward her, "I like this." And in the act of
speaking, seemed to sink into a soft cloud which encompassed him about
with an atmosphere of perfect repose. More than this he could not
remember, for sleep, deep and dreamless, fell upon him, and when he
woke, daylight was shining in between the curtains, his hand lay alone
on the coverlet, and his fair-haired enchantress was gone.




_chapter IV_


A DISCOVERY

For several days Coventry was confined to his room, much against his
will, though everyone did their best to lighten his irksome captivity.
His mother petted him, Bella sang, Lucia read, Edward was devoted, and
all the household, with one exception, were eager to serve the young
master. Jean Muir never came near him, and Jean Muir alone seemed to
possess the power of amusing him. He soon tired of the others, wanted
something new; recalled the piquant character of the girl and took a
fancy into his head that she would lighten his ennui. After some
hesitation, he carelessly spoke of her to Bella, but nothing came of
it, for Bella only said Jean was well, and very busy doing something
lovely to surprise Mamma with. Edward complained that he never saw
her, and Lucia ignored her existence altogether. The only intelligence
the invalid received was from the gossip of two housemaids over their
work in the next room. From them he learned that the governess had
been "scolded" by Miss Beaufort for going to Mr. Coventry's room; that
she had taken it very sweetly and kept herself carefully out of the
way of both young gentlemen, though it was plain to see that Mr. Ned
was dying for her.

Mr. Gerald amused himself by thinking over this gossip, and quite
annoyed his sister by his absence of mind.

"Gerald, do you know Ned's commission has come?"

"Very interesting. Read on, Bella."

"You stupid boy! You don't know a word I say," and she put down the book
to repeat her news.

"I'm glad of it; now we must get him off as soon as possible--that is, I
suppose he will want to be off as soon as possible." And Coventry woke
up from his reverie.

"You needn't check yourself, I know all about it. I think Ned was very
foolish, and that Miss Muir has behaved beautifully. It's quite
impossible, of course, but I wish it wasn't, I do so like to watch
lovers. You and Lucia are so cold you are not a bit interesting."

"You'll do me a favor if you'll stop all that nonsense about Lucia and
me. We are not lovers, and never shall be, I fancy. At all events, I'm
tired of the thing, and wish you and Mamma would let it drop, for the
present at least."

"Oh Gerald, you know Mamma has set her heart upon it, that Papa desired
it, and poor Lucia loves you so much. How can you speak of dropping what
will make us all so happy?"

"It won't make me happy, and I take the liberty of thinking that this is
of some importance. I'm not bound in any way, and don't intend to be
till I am ready. Now we'll talk about Ned."

Much grieved and surprised, Bella obeyed, and devoted herself to Edward,
who very wisely submitted to his fate and prepared to leave home for
some months. For a week the house was in a state of excitement about his
departure, and everyone but Jean was busied for him. She was scarcely
seen; every morning she gave Bella her lessons, every afternoon drove
out with Mrs. Coventry, and nearly every evening went up to the Hall to
read to Sir John, who found his wish granted without exactly knowing how
it had been done.

The day Edward left, he came down from bidding his mother good-bye,
looking very pale, for he had lingered in his sister's little room with
Miss Muir as long as he dared.

"Good-bye, dear. Be kind to Jean," he whispered as he kissed his sister.

"I will, I will," returned Bella, with tearful eyes.

"Take care of Mamma, and remember Lucia," he said again, as he touched
his cousin's beautiful cheek.

"Fear nothing. I will keep them apart," she whispered back, and
Coventry heard it.

Edward offered his hand to his brother, saying, significantly, as he
looked him in the eye, "I trust you, Gerald."

"You may, Ned."

Then he went, and Coventry tired himself with wondering what Lucia
meant. A few days later he understood.

Now Ned is gone, little Muir will appear, I fancy, he said to himself;
but "little Muir" did not appear, and seemed to shun him more carefully
than she had done her lover. If he went to the drawing room in the
evening hoping for music, Lucia alone was there. If he tapped at Bella's
door, there was always a pause before she opened it, and no sign of Jean
appeared though her voice had been audible when he knocked. If he went
to the library, a hasty rustle and the sound of flying feet betrayed
that the room was deserted at his approach. In the garden Miss Muir
never failed to avoid him, and if by chance they met in hall or
breakfast room, she passed him with downcast eyes and the briefest,
coldest greeting. All this annoyed him intensely, and the more she
eluded him, the more he desired to see her--from a spirit of opposition,
he said, nothing more. It fretted and yet it entertained him, and he
found a lazy sort of pleasure in thwarting the girl's little maneuvers.
His patience gave out at last, and he resolved to know what was the
meaning of this peculiar conduct. Having locked and taken away the key
of one door in the library, he waited till Miss Muir went in to get a
book for his uncle. He had heard her speak to Bella of it, knew that she
believed him with his mother, and smiled to himself as he stole after
her. She was standing in a chair, reaching up, and he had time to see a
slender waist, a pretty foot, before he spoke.

"Can I help you, Miss Muir?"

She started, dropped several books, and turned scarlet, as she said
hurriedly, "Thank you, no; I can get the steps."

"My long arm will be less trouble. I've got but one, and that is tired
of being idle, so it is very much at your service. What will you have?"

"I--I--you startled me so I've forgotten." And Jean laughed, nervously,
as she looked about her as if planning to escape.

"I beg your pardon, wait till you remember, and let me thank you for the
enchanted sleep you gave me ten days ago. I've had no chance yet, you've
shunned me so pertinaciously."

"Indeed I try not to be rude, but--" She checked herself, and turned her
face away, adding, with an accent of pain in her voice, "It is not my
fault, Mr. Coventry. I only obey orders."

"Whose orders?" he demanded, still standing so that she could not
escape.

"Don't ask; it is one who has a right to command where you are
concerned. Be sure that it is kindly meant, though it may seem folly
to us. Nay, don't be angry, laugh at it, as I do, and let me run
away, please."

She turned, and looked down at him with tears in her eyes, a smile on
her lips, and an expression half sad, half arch, which was altogether
charming. The frown passed from his face, but he still looked grave and
said decidedly, "No one has a right to command in this house but my
mother or myself. Was it she who bade you avoid me as if I was a madman
or a pest?"

"Ah, don't ask. I promised not to tell, and you would not have me break
my word, I know." And still smiling, she regarded him with a look of
merry malice which made any other reply unnecessary. It was Lucia, he
thought, and disliked his cousin intensely just then. Miss Muir moved as
if to step down; he detained her, saying earnestly, yet with a smile,
"Do you consider me the master here?"

"Yes," and to the word she gave a sweet, submissive intonation which
made it expressive of the respect, regard, and confidence which men find
pleasantest when women feel and show it. Unconsciously his face
softened, and he looked up at her with a different glance from any he
had ever given her before.

"Well, then, will you consent to obey me if I am not tyrannical or
unreasonable in my demands?"

"I'll try."

"Good! Now frankly, I want to say that all this sort of thing is very
disagreeable to me. It annoys me to be a restraint upon anyone's liberty
or comfort, and I beg you will go and come as freely as you like, and
not mind Lucia's absurdities. She means well, but hasn't a particle of
penetration or tact. Will you promise this?"

"No."

"Why not?"

"It is better as it is, perhaps."

"But you called it folly just now."

"Yes, it seems so, and yet--" She paused, looking both confused and
distressed.

Coventry lost patience, and said hastily, "You women are such enigmas I
never expect to understand you! Well, I've done my best to make you
comfortable, but if you prefer to lead this sort of life, I beg you
will do so."

"I _don't_ prefer it; it is hateful to me. I like to be myself, to have
my liberty, and the confidence of those about me. But I cannot think it
kind to disturb the peace of anyone, and so I try to obey. I've promised
Bella to remain, but I will go rather than have another scene with Miss
Beaufort or with you."

Miss Muir had burst out impetuously, and stood there with a sudden fire
in her eyes, sudden warmth and spirit in her face and voice that amazed
Coventry. She was angry, hurt, and haughty, and the change only made her
more attractive, for not a trace of her former meek self remained.
Coventry was electrified, and still more surprised when she added,
imperiously, with a gesture as if to put him aside, "Hand me that book
and move away. I wish to go."

He obeyed, even offered his hand, but she refused it, stepped lightly
down, and went to the door. There she turned, and with the same
indignant voice, the same kindling eyes and glowing cheeks, she said
rapidly, "I know I have no right to speak in this way. I restrain myself
as long as I can, but when I can bear no more, my true self breaks
loose, and I defy everything. I am tired of being a cold, calm machine;
it is impossible with an ardent nature like mine, and I shall try no
longer. I cannot help it if people love me. I don't want their love. I
only ask to be left in peace, and why I am tormented so I cannot see.
I've neither beauty, money, nor rank, yet every foolish boy mistakes my
frank interest for something warmer, and makes me miserable. It is my
misfortune. Think of me what you will, but beware of me in time, for
against my will I may do you harm."

Almost fiercely she had spoken, and with a warning gesture she hurried
from the room, leaving the young man feeling as if a sudden thunder-gust
had swept through the house. For several minutes he sat in the chair she
left, thinking deeply. Suddenly he rose, went to his sister, and said,
in his usual tone of indolent good nature, "Bella, didn't I hear Ned ask
you to be kind to Miss Muir?"

"Yes, and I try to be, but she is so odd lately."

"Odd! How do you mean?"

"Why, she is either as calm and cold as a statue, or restless and queer;
she cries at night, I know, and sighs sadly when she thinks I don't
hear. Something is the matter."

"She frets for Ned perhaps," began Coventry.

"Oh dear, no; it's a great relief to her that he is gone. I'm afraid
that she likes someone very much, and someone don't like her. Can it be
Mr. Sydney?"

"She called him a 'titled fool' once, but perhaps that didn't mean
anything. Did you ever ask her about him?" said Coventry, feeling rather
ashamed of his curiosity, yet unable to resist the temptation of
questioning unsuspecting Bella.

"Yes, but she only looked at me in her tragical way, and said, so
pitifully, 'My little friend, I hope you will never have to pass through
the scenes I've passed through, but keep your peace unbroken all your
life.' After that I dared say no more. I'm very fond of her, I want to
make her happy, but I don't know how. Can you propose anything?"

"I was going to propose that you make her come among us more, now Ned is
gone. It must be dull for her, moping about alone. I'm sure it is for
me. She is an entertaining little person, and I enjoy her music very
much. It's good for Mamma to have gay evenings; so you bestir yourself,
and see what you can do for the general good of the family."

"That's all very charming, and I've proposed it more than once, but
Lucia spoils all my plans. She is afraid you'll follow Ned's example,
and that is so silly."

"Lucia is a--no, I won't say fool, because she has sense enough when she
chooses; but I wish you'd just settle things with Mamma, and then Lucia
can do nothing but submit," said Gerald angrily.

"I'll try, but she goes up to read to Uncle, you know, and since he has
had the gout, she stays later, so I see little of her in the evening.
There she goes now. I think she will captivate the old one as well as
the young one, she is so devoted."

Coventry looked after her slender black figure, just vanishing through
the great gate, and an uncomfortable fancy took possession of him, born
of Bella's careless words. He sauntered away, and after eluding his
cousin, who seemed looking for him, he turned toward the Hall, saying to
himself, I will see what is going on up here. Such things have happened.
Uncle is the simplest soul alive, and if the girl is ambitious, she can
do what she will with him.

Here a servant came running after him and gave him a letter, which he
thrust into his pocket without examining it. When he reached the Hall,
he went quietly to his uncle's study. The door was ajar, and looking in,
he saw a scene of tranquil comfort, very pleasant to watch. Sir John
leaned in his easy chair with one foot on a cushion. He was dressed with
his usual care and, in spite of the gout, looked like a handsome,
well-preserved old gentleman. He was smiling as he listened, and his
eyes rested complacently on Jean Muir, who sat near him reading in her
musical voice, while the sunshine glittered on her hair and the soft
rose of her cheek. She read well, yet Coventry thought her heart was not
in her task, for once when she paused, while Sir John spoke, her eyes
had an absent expression, and she leaned her head upon her hand, with an
air of patient weariness.

Poor girl! I did her great injustice; she has no thought of captivating
the old man, but amuses him from simple kindness. She is tired. I'll put
an end to her task; and Coventry entered without knocking.

Sir John received him with an air of polite resignation, Miss Muir with
a perfectly expressionless face.

"Mother's love, and how are you today, sir?"

"Comfortable, but dull, so I want you to bring the girls over this
evening, to amuse the old gentleman. Mrs. King has got out the
antique costumes and trumpery, as I promised Bella she should have
them, and tonight we are to have a merrymaking, as we used to do when
Ned was here."

"Very well, sir, I'll bring them. We've all been out of sorts since the
lad left, and a little jollity will do us good. Are you going back, Miss
Muir?" asked Coventry.

"No, I shall keep her to give me my tea and get things ready. Don't read
anymore, my dear, but go and amuse yourself with the pictures, or
whatever you like," said Sir John; and like a dutiful daughter she
obeyed, as if glad to get away.

"That's a very charming girl, Gerald," began Sir John as she left the
room. "I'm much interested in her, both on her own account and on her
mother's."

"Her mother's! What do you know of her mother?" asked Coventry, much
surprised.

"Her mother was Lady Grace Howard, who ran away with a poor Scotch
minister twenty years ago. The family cast her off, and she lived and
died so obscurely that very little is known of her except that she left
an orphan girl at some small French pension. This is the girl, and a
fine girl, too. I'm surprised that you did not know this."

"So am I, but it is like her not to tell. She is a strange, proud
creature. Lady Howard's daughter! Upon my word, that is a discovery,"
and Coventry felt his interest in his sister's governess much increased
by this fact; for, like all wellborn Englishmen, he valued rank and
gentle blood even more than he cared to own.

"She has had a hard life of it, this poor little girl, but she has a
brave spirit, and will make her way anywhere," said Sir John admiringly.

"Did Ned know this?" asked Gerald suddenly.

"No, she only told me yesterday. I was looking in the _Peerage_ and
chanced to speak of the Howards. She forgot herself and called Lady
Grace her mother. Then I got the whole story, for the lonely little
thing was glad to make a confidant of someone."

"That accounts for her rejection of Sydney and Ned: she knows she is
their equal and will not snatch at the rank which is hers by right. No,
she's not mercenary or ambitious."

"What do you say?" asked Sir John, for Coventry had spoken more to
himself than to his uncle.

"I wonder if Lady Sydney was aware of this?" was all Gerald's answer.

"No, Jean said she did not wish to be pitied, and so told nothing to the
mother. I think the son knew, but that was a delicate point, and I asked
no questions."

"I shall write to him as soon as I discover his address. We have been so
intimate I can venture to make a few inquiries about Miss Muir, and
prove the truth of her story."

"Do you mean to say that you doubt it?" demanded Sir John angrily.

"I beg your pardon, Uncle, but I must confess I have an instinctive
distrust of that young person. It is unjust, I dare say, yet I cannot
banish it."

"Don't annoy me by expressing it, if you please. I have some penetration
and experience, and I respect and pity Miss Muir heartily. This dislike
of yours may be the cause of her late melancholy, hey, Gerald?" And Sir
John looked suspiciously at his nephew.

Anxious to avert the rising storm, Coventry said hastily as he turned
away, "I've neither time nor inclination to discuss the matter now, sir,
but will be careful not to offend again. I'll take your message to
Bella, so good-bye for an hour, Uncle."

And Coventry went his way through the park, thinking within himself, The
dear old gentleman is getting fascinated, like poor Ned. How the deuce
does the girl do it? Lady Howard's daughter, yet never told us; I don't
understand that.




_chapter V_


HOW THE GIRL DID IT

At home he found a party of young friends, who hailed with delight the
prospect of a revel at the Hall. An hour later, the blithe company
trooped into the great saloon, where preparations had already been made
for a dramatic evening.

Good Sir John was in his element, for he was never so happy as when his
house was full of young people. Several persons were chosen, and in a
few moments the curtains were withdrawn from the first of these
impromptu tableaux. A swarthy, darkly bearded man lay asleep on a tiger
skin, in the shadow of a tent. Oriental arms and drapery surrounded him;
an antique silver lamp burned dimly on a table where fruit lay heaped in
costly dishes, and wine shone redly in half-emptied goblets. Bending
over the sleeper was a woman robed with barbaric splendor. One hand
turned back the embroidered sleeve from the arm which held a scimitar;
one slender foot in a scarlet sandal was visible under the white tunic;
her purple mantle swept down from snowy shoulders; fillets of gold bound
her hair, and jewels shone on neck and arms. She was looking over her
shoulder toward the entrance of the tent, with a steady yet stealthy
look, so effective that for a moment the spectators held their breath,
as if they also heard a passing footstep.

"Who is it?" whispered Lucia, for the face was new to her.

"Jean Muir," answered Coventry, with an absorbed look.

"Impossible! She is small and fair," began Lucia, but a hasty "Hush, let
me look!" from her cousin silenced her.

Impossible as it seemed, he was right nevertheless; for Jean Muir it
was. She had darkened her skin, painted her eyebrows, disposed some wild
black locks over her fair hair, and thrown such an intensity of
expression into her eyes that they darkened and dilated till they were
as fierce as any southern eyes that ever flashed. Hatred, the deepest
and bitterest, was written on her sternly beautiful face, courage glowed
in her glance, power spoke in the nervous grip of the slender hand that
held the weapon, and the indomitable will of the woman was
expressed--even the firm pressure of the little foot half hidden in the
tiger skin.

"Oh, isn't she splendid?" cried Bella under her breath.

"She looks as if she'd use her sword well when the time comes," said
someone admiringly.

"Good night to Holofernes; his fate is certain," added another.

"He is the image of Sydney, with that beard on."

"Doesn't she look as if she really hated him?"

"Perhaps she does."

Coventry uttered the last exclamation, for the two which preceded it
suggested an explanation of the marvelous change in Jean. It was not all
art: the intense detestation mingled with a savage joy that the object
of her hatred was in her power was too perfect to be feigned; and having
the key to a part of her story, Coventry felt as if he caught a glimpse
of the truth. It was but a glimpse, however, for the curtain dropped
before he had half analyzed the significance of that strange face.

"Horrible! I'm glad it's over," said Lucia coldly.

"Magnificent! Encore! Encore!" cried Gerald enthusiastically.

But the scene was over, and no applause could recall the actress. Two or
three graceful or gay pictures followed, but Jean was in none, and each
lacked the charm which real talent lends to the simplest part.

"Coventry, you are wanted," called a voice. And to everyone's surprise,
Coventry went, though heretofore he had always refused to exert himself
when handsome actors were in demand.

"What part am I to spoil?" he asked, as he entered the green room, where
several excited young gentlemen were costuming and attitudinizing.

"A fugitive cavalier. Put yourself into this suit, and lose no time
asking questions. Miss Muir will tell you what to do. She is in the
tableau, so no one will mind you," said the manager pro tem, throwing a
rich old suit toward Coventry and resuming the painting of a moustache
on his own boyish face.

A gallant cavalier was the result of Gerald's hasty toilet, and when
he appeared before the ladies a general glance of admiration was
bestowed upon him.

"Come along and be placed; Jean is ready on the stage." And Bella ran
before him, exclaiming to her governess, "Here he is, quite splendid.
Wasn't he good to do it?"

Miss Muir, in the charmingly prim and puritanical dress of a Roundhead
damsel, was arranging some shrubs, but turned suddenly and dropped the
green branch she held, as her eye met the glittering figure advancing
toward her.

"You!" she said with a troubled look, adding low to Bella, "Why did you
ask _him?_ I begged you not."

"He is the only handsome man here, and the best actor if he likes. He
won't play usually, so make the most of him." And Bella was off to
finish powdering her hair for "The Marriage  la Mode."

"I was sent for and I came. Do you prefer some other person?" asked
Coventry, at a loss to understand the half-anxious, half-eager
expression of the face under the little cap.

It changed to one of mingled annoyance and resignation as she said, "It
is too late. Please kneel here, half behind the shrubs; put down your
hat, and--allow me--you are too elegant for a fugitive."

As he knelt before her, she disheveled his hair, pulled his lace collar
awry, threw away his gloves and sword, and half untied the cloak that
hung about his shoulders.

"That is better; your paleness is excellent--nay, don't spoil it. We are
to represent the picture which hangs in the Hall. I need tell you no
more. Now, Roundheads, place yourselves, and then ring up the curtain."

With a smile, Coventry obeyed her; for the picture was of two lovers,
the young cavalier kneeling, with his arm around the waist of the girl,
who tries to hide him with her little mantle, and presses his head to
her bosom in an ecstasy of fear, as she glances back at the approaching
pursuers. Jean hesitated an instant and shrank a little as his hand
touched her; she blushed deeply, and her eyes fell before his. Then, as
the bell rang, she threw herself into her part with sudden spirit. One
arm half covered him with her cloak, the other pillowed his head on the
muslin kerchief folded over her bosom, and she looked backward with such
terror in her eyes that more than one chivalrous young spectator longed
to hurry to the rescue. It lasted but a moment; yet in that moment
Coventry experienced another new sensation. Many women had smiled on
him, but he had remained heart-whole, cool, and careless, quite
unconscious of the power which a woman possesses and knows how to use,
for the weal or woe of man. Now, as he knelt there with a soft arm about
him, a slender waist yielding to his touch, and a maiden heart throbbing
against his cheek, for the first time in his life he felt the
indescribable spell of womanhood, and looked the ardent lover to
perfection. Just as his face assumed this new and most becoming aspect,
the curtain dropped, and clamorous encores recalled him to the fact that
Miss Muir was trying to escape from his hold, which had grown painful in
its unconscious pressure. He sprang up, half bewildered, and looking as
he had never looked before.

"Again! Again!" called Sir John. And the young men who played the
Roundheads, eager to share in the applause begged for a repetition in
new attitudes.

"A rustle has betrayed you, we have fired and shot the brave girl, and
she lies dying, you know. That will be effective; try it, Miss Muir,"
said one. And with a long breath, Jean complied.

The curtain went up, showing the lover still on his knees, unmindful of
the captors who clutched him by the shoulder, for at his feet the girl
lay dying. Her head was on his breast, now, her eyes looked full into
his, no longer wild with fear, but eloquent with the love which even
death could not conquer. The power of those tender eyes thrilled
Coventry with a strange delight, and set his heart beating as rapidly as
hers had done. She felt his hands tremble, saw the color flash into his
cheek, knew that she had touched him at last, and when she rose it was
with a sense of triumph which she found it hard to conceal. Others
thought it fine acting; Coventry tried to believe so; but Lucia set her
teeth, and, as the curtain fell on that second picture, she left her
place to hurry behind the scenes, bent on putting an end to such
dangerous play. Several actors were complimenting the mimic lovers. Jean
took it merrily, but Coventry, in spite of himself, betrayed that he was
excited by something deeper than mere gratified vanity.

As Lucia appeared, his manner changed to its usual indifference; but he
could not quench the unwonted fire of his eyes, or keep all trace of
emotion out of his face, and she saw this with a sharp pang.

"I have come to offer my help. You must be tired, Miss Muir. Can I
relieve you?" said Lucia hastily.

"Yes, thank you. I shall be very glad to leave the rest to you, and
enjoy them from the front."

So with a sweet smile Jean tripped away, and to Lucia's dismay
Coventry followed.

"I want you, Gerald; please stay," she cried.

"I've done my part--no more tragedy for me tonight." And he was gone
before she could entreat or command.

There was no help for it; she must stay and do her duty, or expose her
jealousy to the quick eyes about her. For a time she bore it; but the
sight of her cousin leaning over the chair she had left and chatting
with the governess, who now filled it, grew unbearable, and she
dispatched a little girl with a message to Miss Muir.

"Please, Miss Beaufort wants you for Queen Bess, as you are the only
lady with red hair. Will you come?" whispered the child, quite
unconscious of any hidden sting in her words.

"Yes, dear, willingly though I'm not stately enough for Her Majesty, nor
handsome enough," said Jean, rising with an untroubled face, though she
resented the feminine insult.

"Do you want an Essex? I'm all dressed for it," said Coventry, following
to the door with a wistful look.

"No, Miss Beaufort said _you_ were not to come. She doesn't want you
both together," said the child decidedly.

Jean gave him a significant look, shrugged her shoulders, and went away
smiling her odd smile, while Coventry paced up and down the hall in a
curious state of unrest, which made him forgetful of everything till the
young people came gaily out to supper.

"Come, bonny Prince Charlie, take me down, and play the lover as
charmingly as you did an hour ago. I never thought you had so much
warmth in you," said Bella, taking his arm and drawing him on
against his will.

"Don't be foolish, child. Where is--Lucia?"

Why he checked Jean's name on his lips and substituted another's, he
could not tell; but a sudden shyness in speaking of her possessed him,
and though he saw her nowhere, he would not ask for her. His cousin came
down looking lovely in a classical costume; but Gerald scarcely saw her,
and, when the merriment was at its height, he slipped away to discover
what had become of Miss Muir.

Alone in the deserted drawing room he found her, and paused to watch her
a moment before he spoke; for something in her attitude and face struck
him. She was leaning wearily back in the great chair which had served
for a throne. Her royal robes were still unchanged, though the crown was
off and all her fair hair hung about her shoulders. Excitement and
exertion made her brilliant, the rich dress became her wonderfully, and
an air of luxurious indolence changed the meek governess into a charming
woman. She leaned on the velvet cushions as if she were used to such
support; she played with the jewels which had crowned her as carelessly
as if she were born to wear them; her attitude was full of negligent
grace, and the expression of her face half proud, half pensive, as if
her thoughts were bittersweet.

One would know she was wellborn to see her now. Poor girl, what a
burden a life of dependence must be to a spirit like hers! I wonder
what she is thinking of so intently. And Coventry indulged in another
look before he spoke.

"Shall I bring you some supper, Miss Muir?"

"Supper!" she ejaculated, with a start. "Who thinks of one's body when
one's soul is--" She stopped there, knit her brows, and laughed faintly
as she added, "No, thank you. I want nothing but advice, and that I dare
not ask of anyone."

"Why not?"

"Because I have no right."

"Everyone has a right to ask help, especially the weak of the strong.
Can I help you? Believe me, I most heartily offer my poor services."

"Ah, you forget! This dress, the borrowed splendor of these jewels, the
freedom of this gay evening, the romance of the part you played, all
blind you to the reality. For a moment I cease to be a servant, and for
a moment you treat me as an equal."

It was true; he _had_ forgotten. That soft, reproachful glance touched
him, his distrust melted under the new charm, and he answered with real
feeling in voice and face, "I treat you as an equal because you _are_
one; and when I offered help, it is not to my sister's governess alone,
but to Lady Howard's daughter."

"Who told you that?" she demanded, sitting erect.

"My uncle. Do not reproach him. It shall go no further, if you forbid
it. Are you sorry that I know it?"

"Yes."

"Why?"

"Because I will not be pitied!" And her eyes flashed as she made a
half-defiant gesture.

"Then, if I may not pity the hard fate which has befallen an innocent
life, may I admire the courage which meets adverse fortune so bravely,
and conquers the world by winning the respect and regard of all who see
and honor it?"

Miss Muir averted her face, put up her hand, and answered hastily, "No,
no, not that! Do not be kind; it destroys the only barrier now left
between us. Be cold to me as before, forget what I am, and let me go on
my way, unknown, unpitied, and unloved!"

Her voice faltered and failed as the last word was uttered, and she bent
her face upon her hand. Something jarred upon Coventry in this speech,
and moved him to say, almost rudely, "You need have no fears for me.
Lucia will tell you what an iceberg I am."

"Then Lucia would tell me wrong. I have the fatal power of reading
character; I know you better than she does, and I see--" There she
stopped abruptly.

"What? Tell me and prove your skill," he said eagerly.

Turning, she fixed her eyes on him with a penetrating power that made
him shrink as she said slowly, "Under the ice I see fire, and warn you
to beware lest it prove a volcano."

For a moment he sat dumb, wondering at the insight of the girl; for she
was the first to discover the hidden warmth of a nature too proud to
confess its tender impulses, or the ambitions that slept till some
potent voice awoke them. The blunt, almost stern manner in which she
warned him away from her only made her more attractive; for there was no
conceit or arrogance in it, only a foreboding fear emboldened by past
suffering to be frank. Suddenly he spoke impetuously:

"You are right! I am not what I seem, and my indolent indifference is
but the mask under which I conceal my real self. I could be as
passionate, as energetic and aspiring as Ned, if I had any aim in
life. I have none, and so I am what you once called me, a thing to
pity and despise."

"I never said that!" cried Jean indignantly.

"Not in those words, perhaps; but you looked it and thought it, though
you phrased it more mildly. I deserved it, but I shall deserve it no
longer. I am beginning to wake from my disgraceful idleness, and long
for some work that shall make a man of me. Why do you go? I annoy you
with my confessions. Pardon me. They are the first I ever made; they
shall be the last."

"No, oh no! I am too much honored by your confidence; but is it wise, is
it loyal to tell _me_ your hopes and aims? Has not Miss Beaufort the
first right to be your confidante?"

Coventry drew back, looking intensely annoyed, for the name recalled
much that he would gladly have forgotten in the novel excitement of the
hour. Lucia's love, Edward's parting words, his own reserve so strangely
thrown aside, so difficult to resume. What he would have said was
checked by the sight of a half-open letter which fell from Jean's dress
as she moved away. Mechanically he took it up to return it, and, as he
did so, he recognized Sydney's handwriting. Jean snatched it from him,
turning pale to the lips as she cried, "Did you read it? What did you
see? Tell me, tell me, on your honor!"

"On my honor, I saw nothing but this single sentence, 'By the love I
bear you, believe what I say.' No more, as I am a gentleman. I know the
hand, I guess the purport of the letter, and as a friend of Sydney, I
earnestly desire to help you, if I can. Is this the matter upon which
you want advice?"

"Yes."

"Then let me give it?"

"You cannot, without knowing all, and it is so hard to tell!"

"Let me guess it, and spare you the pain of telling. May I?" And
Coventry waited eagerly for her reply, for the spell was still upon him.

Holding the letter fast, she beckoned him to follow, and glided before
him to a secluded little nook, half boudoir, half conservatory. There
she paused, stood an instant as if in doubt, then looked up at him with
confiding eyes and said decidedly, "I will do it; for, strange as it may
seem, you are the only person to whom I _can_ speak. You know Sydney,
you have discovered that I am an equal, you have offered your help. I
accept it; but oh, do not think me unwomanly! Remember how alone I am,
how young, and how much I rely upon your sincerity, your sympathy!"

"Speak freely. I am indeed your friend." And Coventry sat down beside
her, forgetful of everything but the soft-eyed girl who confided in him
so entirely.

Speaking rapidly, Jean went on, "You know that Sydney loved me, that I
refused him and went away. But you do not know that his importunities
nearly drove me wild, that he threatened to rob me of my only treasure,
my good name, and that, in desperation, I tried to kill myself. Yes,
mad, wicked as it was, I did long to end the life which was, at best, a
burden, and under his persecution had become a torment. You are shocked,
yet what I say is the living truth. Lady Sydney will confirm it, the
nurses at the hospital will confess that it was not a fever which
brought me there; and here, though the external wound is healed, my
heart still aches and burns with the shame and indignation which only a
proud woman can feel."

She paused and sat with kindling eyes, glowing cheeks, and both hands
pressed to her heaving bosom, as if the old insult roused her spirit
anew. Coventry said not a word, for surprise, anger, incredulity, and
admiration mingled so confusedly in his mind that he forgot to speak,
and Jean went on, "That wild act of mine convinced him of my indomitable
dislike. He went away, and I believed that this stormy love of his would
be cured by absence. It is not, and I live in daily fear of fresh
entreaties, renewed persecution. His mother promised not to betray where
I had gone, but he found me out and wrote to me. The letter I asked you
to take to Lady Sydney was a reply to his, imploring him to leave me in
peace. You failed to deliver it, and I was glad, for I thought silence
might quench hope. All in vain; this is a more passionate appeal than
ever, and he vows he will never desist from his endeavors till I give
another man the right to protect me. I _can_ do this--I am sorely
tempted to do it, but I rebel against the cruelty. I love my freedom, I
have no wish to marry at this man's bidding. What can I do? How cart I
free myself? Be my friend, and help me!"

Tears streamed down her cheeks, sobs choked her words, and she clasped
her hands imploringly as she turned toward the young man in all the
abandonment of sorrow, fear, and supplication. Coventry found it hard to
meet those eloquent eyes and answer calmly, for he had no experience in
such scenes and knew not how to play his part. It is this absurd dress
and that romantic nonsense which makes me feel so unlike myself, he
thought, quite unconscious of the dangerous power which the dusky room,
the midsummer warmth and fragrance, the memory of the "romantic
nonsense," and, most of all, the presence of a beautiful, afflicted
woman had over him. His usual self-possession deserted him, and he could
only echo the words which had made the strongest impression upon him:

"You _can_ do this, you are tempted to do it. Is Ned the man who can
protect you?"

"No" was the soft reply.

"Who then?"

"Do not ask me. A good and honorable man; one who loves me well, and
would devote his life to me; one whom once it would have been happiness
to marry, but now--"

There her voice ended in a sigh, and all her fair hair fell down about
her face, hiding it in a shining veil.

"Why not now? This is a sure and speedy way of ending your distress. Is
it impossible?"

In spite of himself, Gerald leaned nearer, took one of the little hands
in his, and pressed it as he spoke, urgently, compassionately, nay,
almost tenderly. From behind the veil came a heavy sigh, and the brief
answer, "It is impossible."

"Why, Jean?"

She flung her hair back with a sudden gesture, drew away her hand, and
answered, almost fiercely, "Because I do not love him! Why do you
torment me with such questions? I tell you I am in a sore strait and
cannot see my way. Shall I deceive the good man, and secure peace at the
price of liberty and truth? Or shall I defy Sydney and lead a life of
dread? If he menaced my life, I should not fear; but he menaces that
which is dearer than life--my good name. A look, a word can tarnish it;
a scornful smile, a significant shrug can do me more harm than any blow;
for I am a woman--friendless, poor, and at the mercy of his tongue. Ah,
better to have died, and so have been saved the bitter pain that has
come now!"

She sprang up, clasped her hands over her head, and paced despairingly
through the little room, not weeping, but wearing an expression more
tragical than tears. Still feeling as if he had suddenly stepped into a
romance, yet finding a keen pleasure in the part assigned him, Coventry
threw himself into it with spirit, and heartily did his best to console
the poor girl who needed help so much. Going to her, he said as
impetuously as Ned ever did, "Miss Muir--nay, I will say Jean, if that
will comfort you--listen, and rest assured that no harm shall touch you
if I can ward it off. You are needlessly alarmed. Indignant you may well
be, but, upon my life, I think you wrong Sydney. He is violent, I know,
but he is too honorable a man to injure you by a light word, an unjust
act. He did but threaten, hoping to soften you. Let me see him, or write
to him. He is my friend; he will listen to me. Of that I am sure."

"Be sure of nothing. When a man like Sydney loves and is thwarted in his
love, nothing can control his headstrong will. Promise me you will not
see or write to him. Much as I fear and despise him, I will submit,
rather than any harm should befall you--or your brother. You promise me,
Mr. Coventry?"

He hesitated. She clung to his arm with unfeigned solicitude in her
eager, pleading face, and he could not resist it.

"I promise; but in return you must promise to let me give what help I
can; and, Jean, never say again that you are friendless."

"You are so kind! God bless you for it. But I dare not accept
your friendship; she will not permit it, and I have no right to
mar her peace."

"Who will not permit it?" he demanded hotly.

"Miss Beaufort."

"Hang Miss Beaufort!" exclaimed Coventry, with such energy that Jean
broke into a musical laugh, despite her trouble. He joined in it, and,
for an instant they stood looking at one another as if the last barrier
were down, and they were friends indeed. Jean paused suddenly, with the
smile on her lips, the tears still on her cheek, and made a warning
gesture. He listened: the sound of feet mingled with calls and laughter
proved that they were missed and sought.

"That laugh betrayed us. Stay and meet them. I cannot." And Jean darted
out upon the lawn. Coventry followed; for the thought of confronting so
many eyes, so many questions, daunted him, and he fled like a coward.
The sound of Jean's flying footsteps guided him, and he overtook her
just as she paused behind a rose thicket to take breath.

"Fainthearted knight! You should have stayed and covered my retreat.
Hark! they are coming! Hide! Hide!" she panted, half in fear, half in
merriment, as the gay pursuers rapidly drew nearer.

"Kneel down; the moon is coming out and the glitter of your embroidery
will betray you," whispered Jean, as they cowered behind the roses.

"Your arms and hair will betray you. 'Come under my plaiddie,' as the
song says." And Coventry tried to make his velvet cloak cover the white
shoulders and fair locks.

"We are acting our parts in reality now. How Bella will enjoy the thing
when I tell her!" said Jean as the noises died away.

"Do not tell her," whispered Coventry.

"And why not?" she asked, looking up into the face so near her own, with
an artless glance.

"Can you not guess why?"

"Ah, you are so proud you cannot bear to be laughed at."

"It is not that. It is because I do not want you to be annoyed by silly
tongues; you have enough to pain you without that. I am your friend,
now, and I do my best to prove it."

"So kind, so kind! How can I thank you?" murmured Jean. And she
involuntarily nestled closer under the cloak that sheltered both.

Neither spoke for a moment, and in the silence the rapid beating of two
hearts was heard. To drown the sound, Coventry said softly, "Are you
frightened?"

"No, I like it," she answered, as softly, then added abruptly, "But why
do we hide? There is nothing to fear. It is late. I must go. You are
kneeling on my train. Please rise."

"Why in such haste? This flight and search only adds to the charm of the
evening. I'll not get up yet. Will you have a rose, Jean?"

"No, I will not. Let me go, Mr. Coventry, I insist. There has been
enough of this folly. You forget yourself."

She spoke imperiously, flung off the cloak, and put him from her. He
rose at once, saying, like one waking suddenly from a pleasant dream, "I
do indeed forget myself."

Here the sound of voices broke on them, nearer than before. Pointing to
a covered walk that led to the house, he said, in his usually cool, calm
tone, "Go in that way; I will cover your retreat." And turning, he went
to meet the merry hunters.

Half an hour later, when the party broke up, Miss Muir joined them in
her usual quiet dress, looking paler, meeker, and sadder than usual.
Coventry saw this, though he neither looked at her nor addressed her.
Lucia saw it also, and was glad that the dangerous girl had fallen back
into her proper place again, for she had suffered much that night. She
appropriated her cousin's arm as they went through the park, but he was
in one of his taciturn moods, and all her attempts at conversation were
in vain. Miss Muir walked alone, singing softly to herself as she
followed in the dusk. Was Gerald so silent because he listened to that
fitful song? Lucia thought so, and felt her dislike rapidly deepening
to hatred.

When the young friends were gone, and the family were exchanging
good-nights among themselves, Jean was surprised by Coventry's offering
his hand, for he had never done it before, and whispering, as he held
it, though Lucia watched him all the while, "I have not given my
advice, yet."

"Thanks, I no longer need it. I have decided for myself."

"May I ask how?"

"To brave my enemy."

"Good! But what decided you so suddenly?"

"The finding of a friend." And with a grateful glance she was gone.




_chapter VI_


ON THE WATCH

"If you please, Mr. Coventry, did you get the letter last night?" were
the first words that greeted the "young master" as he left his room
next morning.

"What letter, Dean? I don't remember any," he answered, pausing, for
something in the maid's manner struck him as peculiar.

"It came just as you left for the Hall, sir. Benson ran after you with
it, as it was marked 'Haste.' Didn't you get it, sir?" asked the woman,
anxiously.

"Yes, but upon my life, I forgot all about it till this minute. It's in
my other coat, I suppose, if I've not lost it. That absurd masquerading
put everything else out of my head." And speaking more to himself than
to the maid, Coventry turned back to look for the missing letter.

Dean remained where she was, apparently busy about the arrangement of
the curtains at the hall window, but furtively watching meanwhile with a
most unwonted air of curiosity.

"Not there, I thought so!" she muttered, as Coventry impatiently thrust
his hand into one pocket after another. But as she spoke, an expression
of amazement appeared in her face, for suddenly the letter was
discovered.

"I'd have sworn it wasn't there! I don't understand it, but she's a deep
one, or I'm much deceived." And Dean shook her head like one perplexed,
but not convinced.

Coventry uttered an exclamation of satisfaction on glancing at the
address and, standing where he was, tore open the letter.

    _Dear C:

    I'm off to Baden. Come and join me, then you'll be out of harm's way;
    for if you fall in love with J.M. (and you can't escape if you stay
    where she is), you will incur the trifling inconvenience of having
    your brains blown out by

    Yours truly, F.R. Sydney_

"The man is mad!" ejaculated Coventry, staring at the letter while an
angry flush rose to his face. "What the deuce does he mean by writing to
me in that style? Join him--not I! And as for the threat, I laugh at it.
Poor Jean! This headstrong fool seems bent on tormenting her. Well,
Dean, what are you waiting for?" he demanded, as if suddenly conscious
of her presence.

"Nothing, sir; I only stopped to see if you found the letter. Beg
pardon, sir."

And she was moving on when Coventry asked, with a suspicious look, "What
made you think it was lost? You seem to take an uncommon interest in my
affairs today."

"Oh dear, no, sir. I felt a bit anxious, Benson is so forgetful, and it
was me who sent him after you, for I happened to see you go out, so I
felt responsible. Being marked that way, I thought it might be important
so I asked about it."

"Very well, you can go, Dean. It's all right, you see."

"I'm not so sure of that," muttered the woman, as she curtsied
respectfully and went away, looking as if the letter had _not_
been found.

Dean was Miss Beaufort's maid, a grave, middle-aged woman with keen eyes
and a somewhat grim air. Having been long in the family, she enjoyed all
the privileges of a faithful and favorite servant. She loved her young
mistress with an almost jealous affection. She watched over her with the
vigilant care of a mother and resented any attempt at interference on
the part of others. At first she had pitied and liked Jean Muir, then
distrusted her, and now heartily hated her, as the cause of the
increased indifference of Coventry toward his cousin. Dean knew the
depth of Lucia's love, and though no man, in her eyes, was worthy of her
mistress, still, having honored him with her regard, Dean felt bound to
like him, and the late change in his manner disturbed the maid almost as
much as it did the mistress. She watched Jean narrowly, causing that
amiable creature much amusement but little annoyance, as yet, for Dean's
slow English wit was no match for the subtle mind of the governess. On
the preceding night, Dean had been sent up to the Hall with costumes and
had there seen something which much disturbed her. She began to speak of
it while undressing her mistress, but Lucia, being in an unhappy mood,
had so sternly ordered her not to gossip that the tale remained untold,
and she was forced to bide her tune.

Now I'll see how _she_ looks after it; though there's not much to be got
out of _her_ face, the deceitful hussy, thought Dean, marching down the
corridor and knitting her black brows as she went.

"Good morning, Mrs. Dean. I hope you are none the worse for last night's
frolic. You had the work and we the play," said a blithe voice behind
her; and turning sharply, she confronted Miss Muir. Fresh and smiling,
the governess nodded with an air of cordiality which would have been
irresistible with anyone but Dean.

"I'm quite well, thank you, miss," she returned coldly, as her keen eye
fastened on the girl as if to watch the effect of her words. "I had a
good rest when the young ladies and gentlemen were at supper, for while
the maids cleared up, I sat in the 'little anteroom.'"

"Yes, I saw you, and feared you'd take cold. Very glad you didn't. How
is Miss Beaufort? She seemed rather poorly last night" was the tranquil
reply, as Jean settled the little frills about her delicate wrists. The
cool question was a return shot for Dean's hint that she had been where
she could oversee the interview between Coventry and Miss Muir.

"She is a bit tired, as any _lady_ would be after such an evening.
People who are _used_ to _play-acting_ wouldn't mind it, perhaps, but
Miss Beaufort don't enjoy _romps_ as much as _some_ do."

The emphasis upon certain words made Dean's speech as impertinent as she
desired. But Jean only laughed, and as Coventry's step was heard behind
them, she ran downstairs, saying blandly, but with a wicked look, "I
won't stop to thank you now, lest Mr. Coventry should bid me
good-morning, and so increase Miss Beaufort's indisposition."

Dean's eyes flashed as she looked after the girl with a wrathful face,
and went her way, saying grimly, "I'll bide my time, but I'll get the
better of her yet."

Fancying himself quite removed from "last night's absurdity," yet
curious to see how Jean would meet him, Coventry lounged into the
breakfast room with his usual air of listless indifference. A languid
nod and murmur was all the reply he vouchsafed to the greetings of
cousin, sister, and governess as he sat down and took up his paper.

"Have you had a letter from Ned?" asked Bella, looking at the note which
her brother still held.

"No" was the brief answer.

"Who then? You look as if you had received bad news."

There was no reply, and, peeping over his arm, Bella caught sight of the
seal and exclaimed, in a disappointed tone, "It is the Sydney crest. I
don't care about the note now. Men's letters to each other are not
interesting."

Miss Muir had been quietly feeding one of Edward's dogs, but at the name
she looked up and met Coventry's eyes, coloring so distressfully that he
pitied her. Why he should take the trouble to cover her confusion, he
did not stop to ask himself, but seeing the curl of Lucia's lip, he
suddenly addressed her with an air of displeasure, "Do you know that
Dean is getting impertinent? She presumes too much on her age and your
indulgence, and forgets her place."

"What has she done?" asked Lucia coldly.

"She troubles herself about my affairs and takes it upon herself to keep
Benson in order."

Here Coventry told about the letter and the woman's evident curiosity.

"Poor Dean, she gets no thanks for reminding you of what you had
forgotten. Next time she will leave your letters to their fate, and
perhaps it will be as well, if they have such a bad effect upon your
temper, Gerald."

Lucia spoke calmly, but there was an angry color in her cheek as she
rose and left the room. Coventry looked much annoyed, for on Jean's face
he detected a faint smile, half pitiful, half satirical, which disturbed
him more than his cousin's insinuation. Bella broke the awkward silence
by saying, with a sigh, "Poor Ned! I do so long to hear again from him.
I thought a letter had come for some of us. Dean said she saw one
bearing his writing on the hall table yesterday."

"She seems to have a mania for inspecting letters. I won't allow it. Who
was the letter for, Bella?" said Coventry, putting down his paper.

"She wouldn't or couldn't tell, but looked very cross and told me
to ask you."

"Very odd! I've had none," began Coventry.

"But I had one several days ago. Will you please read it, and my reply?"
And as she spoke, Jean laid two letters before him.

"Certainly not. It would be dishonorable to read what Ned intended for
no eyes but your own. You are too scrupulous in one way, and not enough
so in another, Miss Muir." And Coventry offered both the letters with
an air of grave decision, which could not conceal the interest and
surprise he felt.

"You are right. Mr. Edward's note _should_ be kept sacred, for in it the
poor boy has laid bare his heart to me. But mine I beg you will read,
that you may see how well I try to keep my word to you. Oblige me in
this, Mr. Coventry; I have a right to ask it of you."

So urgently she spoke, so wistfully she looked, that he could not refuse
and, going to the window, read the letter. It was evidently an answer to
a passionate appeal from the young lover, and was written with
consummate skill. As he read, Gerald could not help thinking, If this
girl writes in this way to a man whom she does _not_ love, with what a
world of power and passion would she write to one whom she _did_ love.
And this thought kept returning to him as his eye went over line after
line of wise argument, gentle reproof, good counsel, and friendly
regard. Here and there a word, a phrase, betrayed what she had already
confessed, and Coventry forgot to return the letter, as he stood
wondering who was the man whom Jean loved.

The sound of Bella's voice recalled him, for she was saying, half
kindly, half petulantly, "Don't look so sad, Jean. Ned will outlive it,
I dare say. You remember you said once men never died of love, though
women might. In his one note to me, he spoke so beautifully of you, and
begged me to be kind to you for his sake, that I try to be with all my
heart, though if it was anyone but you, I really think I should hate
them for making my dear boy so unhappy."

"You are too kind, Bella, and I often think I'll go away to relieve you
of my presence; but unwise and dangerous as it is to stay, I haven't the
courage to go. I've been so happy here." And as she spoke, Jean's head
dropped lower over the dog as it nestled to her affectionately.

Before Bella could utter half the loving words that sprang to her lips,
Coventry came to them with all languor gone from face and mien, and
laying Jean's letter before her, he said, with an undertone of deep
feeling in his usually emotionless voice, "A right womanly and eloquent
letter, but I fear it will only increase the fire it was meant to
quench. I pity my brother more than ever now."

"Shall I send it?" asked Jean, looking straight up at him, like one who
had entire reliance on his judgment.

"Yes, I have not the heart to rob him of such a sweet sermon upon
self-sacrifice. Shall I post it for you?"

"Thank you; in a moment." And with a grateful look, Jean dropped her
eyes. Producing her little purse, she selected a penny, folded it in a
bit of paper, and then offered both letter and coin to Coventry, with
such a pretty air of business, that he could not control a laugh.

"So you won't be indebted to me for a penny? What a proud woman you are,
Miss Muir."

"I am; it's a family failing." And she gave him a significant glance,
which recalled to him the memory of who she was. He understood her
feeling, and liked her the better for it, knowing that he would have
done the same had he been in her place. It was a little thing, but if
done for effect, it answered admirably, for it showed a quick insight
into his character on her part, and betrayed to him the existence of a
pride in which he sympathized heartily. He stood by Jean a moment,
watching her as she burnt Edward's letter in the blaze of the spirit
lamp under the urn.

"Why do you do that?" he asked involuntarily.

"Because it is my duty to forget" was all her answer.

"Can you always forget when it becomes a duty?"

"I wish I could! I wish I could!"

She spoke passionately, as if the words broke from her against her will,
and, rising hastily, she went into the garden, as if afraid to stay.

"Poor, dear Jean is very unhappy about something, but I can't discover
what it is. Last night I found her crying over a rose, and now she runs
away, looking as if her heart was broken. I'm glad I've got no lessons."

"What kind of a rose?" asked Coventry from behind his paper as
Bella paused.

"A lovely white one. It must have come from the Hall; we have none like
it. I wonder if Jean was ever going to be married, and lost her lover,
and felt sad because the flower reminded her of bridal roses."

Coventry made no reply, but felt himself change countenance as he
recalled the little scene behind the rose hedge, where he gave Jean the
flower which she had refused yet taken. Presently, to Bella's surprise,
he flung down the paper, tore Sydney's note to atoms, and rang for his
horse with an energy which amazed her.

"Why, Gerald, what has come over you? One would think Ned's restless
spirit had suddenly taken possession of you. What are you going to do?"

"I'm going to work" was the unexpected answer, as Coventry turned toward
her with an expression so rarely seen on his fine face.

"What has waked you up all at once?" asked Bella, looking more and
more amazed.

"You did," he said, drawing her toward him.

"I! When? How?"

"Do you remember saying once that energy was better than beauty in a
man, and that no one could respect an idler?"

"I never said anything half so sensible as that. Jean said something
like it once, I believe, but I forgot. Are you tired of doing nothing,
at last, Gerald?"

"Yes, I neglected my duty to Ned, till he got into trouble, and now I
reproach myself for it. It's not too late to do other neglected tasks,
so I'm going at them with a will. Don't say anything about it to anyone,
and don't laugh at me, for I'm in earnest, Bell."

"I know you are, and I admire and love you for it, my dear old boy,"
cried Bella enthusiastically, as she threw her arms about his neck and
kissed him heartily. "What will you do first?" she asked, as he stood
thoughtfully smoothing the bright head that leaned upon his shoulder,
with that new expression still clear and steady in his face.

"I'm going to ride over the whole estate, and attend to things as a
master should; not leave it all to Bent, of whom I've heard many
complaints, but have been too idle to inquire about them. I shall
consult Uncle, and endeavor to be all that my father was in his time. Is
that a worthy ambition, dear?"

"Oh, Gerald, let me tell Mamma. It will make her so happy. You are her
idol, and to hear you say these things, to see you look so like dear
Papa, would do more for her spirits than all the doctors in England."

"Wait till I prove what my resolution is worth. When I have really done
something, then I'll surprise Mamma with a sample of my work."

"Of course you'll tell Lucia?"

"Not on any account. It is a little secret between us, so keep it till I
give you leave to tell it."

"But Jean will see it at once; she knows everything that happens, she is
so quick and wise. Do you mind her knowing?"

"I don't see that I can help it if she is so wonderfully gifted. Let her
see what she can, I don't mind her. Now I'm off." And with a kiss to his
sister, a sudden smile on his face, Coventry sprang upon his horse and
rode away at a pace which caused the groom to stare after him in blank
amazement.

Nothing more was seen of him till dinnertime, when he came in so
exhilarated by his brisk ride and busy morning that he found some
difficulty in assuming his customary manner, and more than once
astonished the family by talking animatedly on various subjects which
till now had always seemed utterly uninteresting to him. Lucia was
amazed, his mother delighted, and Bella could hardly control her desire
to explain the mystery; but Jean took it very calmly and regarded him
with the air of one who said, "I understand, but you will soon tire of
it." This nettled him more than he would confess, and he exerted himself
to silently contradict that prophecy.

"Have you answered Mr. Sydney's letter?" asked Bella, when they were all
scattered about the drawing room after dinner.

"No," answered her brother, who was pacing up and down with restless
steps, instead of lounging near his beautiful cousin.

"I ask because I remembered that Ned sent a message for him in my last
note, as he thought you would know Sydney's address. Here it is,
something about a horse. Please put it in when you write," and Bella
laid the note on the writing table nearby.

"I'll send it at once and have done with it," muttered Coventry and,
seating himself, he dashed off a few lines, sealed and sent the letter,
and then resumed his march, eyeing the three young ladies with three
different expressions, as he passed and repassed. Lucia sat apart,
feigning to be intent upon a book, and her handsome face looked almost
stern in its haughty composure, for though her heart ached, she was too
proud to own it. Bella now lay on the sofa, half asleep, a rosy little
creature, as unconsciously pretty as a child. Miss Muir sat in the
recess of a deep window, in a low lounging chair, working at an
embroidery frame with a graceful industry pleasant to see. Of late she
had worn colors, for Bella had been generous in gifts, and the pale blue
muslin which flowed in soft waves about her was very becoming to her
fair skin and golden hair. The close braids were gone, and loose curls
dropped here and there from the heavy coil wound around her well-shaped
head. The tip of one dainty foot was visible, and a petulant little
gesture which now and then shook back the falling sleeve gave glimpses
of a round white arm. Ned's great hound lay nearby, the sunshine
flickered on her through the leaves, and as she sat smiling to herself,
while the dexterous hands shaped leaf and flower, she made a charming
picture of all that is most womanly and winning; a picture which few
men's eyes would not have liked to rest upon.

Another chair stood near her, and as Coventry went up and down, a strong
desire to take it possessed him. He was tired of his thoughts and wished
to be amused by watching the changes of the girl's expressive face,
listening to the varying tones of her voice, and trying to discover the
spell which so strongly attracted him in spite of himself. More than
once he swerved from his course to gratify his whim, but Lucia's
presence always restrained him, and with a word to the dog, or a glance
from the window, as pretext for a pause, he resumed his walk again.
Something in his cousin's face reproached him, but her manner of late
was so repellent that he felt no desire to resume their former
familiarity, and, wishing to show that he did not consider himself
bound, he kept aloof. It was a quiet test of the power of each woman
over this man; they instinctively felt it, and both tried to conquer.
Lucia spoke several times, and tried to speak frankly and affably; but
her manner was constrained, and Coventry, having answered politely,
relapsed into silence. Jean said nothing, but silently appealed to eye
and ear by the pretty picture she made of herself, the snatches of song
she softly sang, as if forgetting that she was not alone, and a shy
glance now and then, half wistful, half merry, which was more alluring
than graceful figure or sweet voice. When she had tormented Lucia and
tempted Coventry long enough, she quietly asserted her supremacy in a
way which astonished her rival, who knew nothing of the secret of her
birth, which knowledge did much to attract and charm the young man.
Letting a ball of silk escape from her lap, she watched it roll toward
the promenader, who caught and returned it with an alacrity which added
grace to the trifling service. As she took it, she said, in the frank
way that never failed to win him, "I think you must be tired; but if
exercise is necessary, employ your energies to some purpose and put your
mother's basket of silks in order. They are in a tangle, and it will
please her to know that you did it, as your brother used to do."

"Hercules at the distaff," said Coventry gaily, and down he sat in the
long-desired seat. Jean put the basket on his knee, and as he surveyed
it, as if daunted at his task, she leaned back, and indulged in a
musical little peal of laughter charming to hear. Lucia sat dumb with
surprise, to see her proud, indolent cousin obeying the commands of a
governess, and looking as if he heartily enjoyed it. In ten minutes she
was as entirely forgotten as if she had been miles away; for Jean seemed
in her wittiest, gayest mood, and as she now treated the "young master"
like an equal, there was none of the former meek timidity. Yet often her
eyes fell, her color changed, and the piquant sallies faltered on her
tongue, as Coventry involuntarily looked deep into the fine eyes which
had once shone on him so tenderly in that mimic tragedy. He could not
forget it, and though neither alluded to it, the memory of the previous
evening seemed to haunt both and lend a secret charm to the present
moment. Lucia bore this as long as she could, and then left the room
with the air of an insulted princess; but Coventry did not, and Jean
feigned not to see her go. Bella was fast asleep, and before he knew how
it came to pass, the young man was listening to the story of his
companion's life. A sad tale, told with wonderful skill, for soon he was
absorbed in it. The basket slid unobserved from his knee, the dog was
pushed away, and, leaning forward, he listened eagerly as the girl's low
voice recounted all the hardships, loneliness, and grief of her short
life. In the midst of a touching episode she started, stopped, and
looked straight before her, with an intent expression which changed to
one of intense contempt, and her eye turned to Coventry's, as she said,
pointing to the window behind him, "We are watched."

"By whom?" he demanded, starting up angrily.

"Hush, say nothing, let it pass. I am used to it."

"But _I_ am not, and I'll not submit to it. Who was it, Jean?" he
answered hotly.

She smiled significantly at a knot of rose-colored ribbon, which a
little gust was blowing toward them along the terrace. A black frown
darkened the young man's face as he sprang out of the long window and
went rapidly out of sight, scrutinizing each green nook as he passed.
Jean laughed quietly as she watched him, and said softly to herself,
with her eyes on the fluttering ribbon, "That was a fortunate accident,
and a happy inspiration. Yes, my dear Mrs. Dean, you will find that
playing the spy will only get your mistress as well as yourself into
trouble. You would not be warned, and you must take the consequences,
reluctant as I am to injure a worthy creature like yourself."

Soon Coventry was heard returning. Jean listened with suspended breath
to catch his first words, for he was not alone.

"Since you insist that it was you and not your mistress, I let it pass,
although I still have my suspicions. Tell Miss Beaufort I desire to see
her for a few moments in the library. Now go, Dean, and be careful for
the future, if you wish to stay in my house."

The maid retired, and the young man came in looking both ireful
and stern.

"I wish I had said nothing, but I was startled, and spoke involuntarily.
Now you are angry, and I have made fresh trouble for poor Miss Lucia.
Forgive me as I forgive her, and let it pass. I have learned to bear
this surveillance, and pity her causeless jealousy," said Jean, with a
self-reproachful air.

"I will forgive the dishonorable act, but I cannot forget it, and I
intend to put a stop to it. I am not betrothed to my cousin, as I told
you once, but you, like all the rest, seem bent on believing that I am.
Hitherto I have cared too little about the matter to settle it, but now
I shall prove beyond all doubt that I am free."

As he uttered the last word, Coventry cast on Jean a look that affected
her strangely. She grew pale, her work dropped on her lap, and her eyes
rose to his, with an eager, questioning expression, which slowly changed
to one of mingled pain and pity, as she turned her face away, murmuring
in a tone of tender sorrow, "Poor Lucia, who will comfort her?"

For a moment Coventry stood silent, as if weighing some fateful purpose
in his mind. As Jean's rapt sigh of compassion reached his ear, he had
echoed it within himself, and half repented of his resolution; then his
eye rested on the girl before him looking so lonely in her sweet
sympathy for another that his heart yearned toward her. Sudden fire shot
into his eye, sudden warmth replaced the cold sternness of his face, and
his steady voice faltered suddenly, as he said, very low, yet very
earnestly, "Jean, I have tried to love her, but I cannot. Ought I to
deceive her, and make myself miserable to please my family?"

"She is beautiful and good, and loves you tenderly; is there no hope for
her?" asked Jean, still pale, but very quiet, though she held one hand
against her heart, as if to still or hide its rapid beating.

"None," answered Coventry.

"But can you not learn to love her? Your will is strong, and most men
would not find it a hard task."

"I cannot, for something stronger than my own will controls me."

"What is that?" And Jean's dark eyes were fixed upon him, full of
innocent wonder.

His fell, and he said hastily, "I dare not tell you yet."

"Pardon! I should not have asked. Do not consult me in this matter; I am
not the person to advise you. I can only say that it seems to me as if
any man with an empty heart would be glad to have so beautiful a woman
as your cousin."

"My heart is not empty," began Coventry, drawing a step nearer, and
speaking in a passionate voice. "Jean, I _must_ speak; hear me. I cannot
love my cousin, because I love you."

"Stop!" And Jean sprang up with a commanding gesture. "I will not hear
you while any promise binds you to another. Remember your mother's
wishes, Lucia's hopes, Edward's last words, your own pride, my humble
lot. You forget yourself, Mr. Coventry. Think well before you speak,
weigh the cost of this act, and recollect who I am before you insult me
by any transient passion, any false vows."

"I have thought, I do weigh the cost, and I swear that I desire to woo
you as humbly, honestly as I would any lady in the land. You speak of my
pride. Do I stoop in loving my equal in rank? You speak of your lowly
lot, but poverty is no disgrace, and the courage with which you bear it
makes it beautiful. I should have broken with Lucia before I spoke, but
I could not control myself. My mother loves you, and will be happy in my
happiness. Edward must forgive me, for I have tried to do my best, but
love is irresistible. Tell me, Jean, is there any hope for me?"

He had seized her hand and was speaking impetuously, with ardent face
and tender tone, but no answer came, for as Jean turned her eloquent
countenance toward him, full of maiden shame and timid love, Dean's prim
figure appeared at the door, and her harsh voice broke the momentary
silence, saying, sternly, "Miss Beaufort is waiting for you, sir."

"Go, go at once, and be kind, for my sake, Gerald," whispered Jean, far
he stood as if deaf and blind to everything but her voice, her face.

As she drew his head down to whisper, her cheek touched his, and
regardless of Dean, he kissed it, passionately, whispering back, "My
little Jean! For your sake I can be anything."

"Miss Beaufort is waiting. Shall I say you will come, sir?" demanded
Dean, pale and grim with indignation.

"Yes, yes, I'll come. Wait for me in the garden, Jean." And Coventry
hurried away, in no mood for the interview but anxious to have it over.

As the door closed behind him, Dean walked up to Miss Muir, trembling
with anger, and laying a heavy hand on her arm, she said below her
breath, "I've been expecting this, you artful creature. I saw your game
and did my best to spoil it, but you are too quick for me. You think
you've got him. There you are mistaken; for as sure as my name is Hester
Dean, I'll prevent it, or Sir John shall."

"Take your hand away and treat me with proper respect, or you will be
dismissed from this house. Do you know who I am?" And Jean drew herself
up with a haughty air, which impressed the woman more deeply than her
words. "I am the daughter of Lady Howard and, if I choose it, can be the
wife of Mr. Coventry."

Dean drew back amazed, yet not convinced. Being a well-trained servant,
as well as a prudent woman, she feared to overstep the bounds of
respect, to go too far, and get her mistress as well as herself into
trouble. So, though she still doubted Jean, and hated her more than
ever, she controlled herself. Dropping a curtsy, she assumed her usual
air of deference, and said, meekly, "I beg pardon, miss. If I'd known, I
should have conducted myself differently, of course, but ordinary
governesses make so much mischief in a house, one can't help mistrusting
them. I don't wish to meddle or be overbold, but being fond of my dear
young lady, I naturally take her part, and must say that Mr. Coventry
has not acted like a gentleman."

"Think what you please, Dean, but I advise you to say as little as
possible if you wish to remain. I have not accepted Mr. Coventry yet,
and if he chooses to set aside the engagement his family made for him, I
think he has a right to do so. Miss Beaufort would hardly care to marry
him against his will, because he pities her for her unhappy love," and
with a tranquil smile, Miss Muir walked away.




_chapter VII_


THE LAST CHANCE

"She will tell Sir John, will she? Then I must be before her, and hasten
events. It will be as well to have all sure before there can be any
danger. My poor Dean, you are no match for me, but you may prove
annoying, nevertheless."

These thoughts passed through Miss Muir's mind as she went down the
hall, pausing an instant at the library door, for the murmur of voices
was heard. She caught no word, and had only time for an instant's
pause as Dean's heavy step followed her. Turning, Jean drew a chair
before the door, and, beckoning to the woman, she said, smiling still,
"Sit here and play watchdog. I am going to Miss Bella, so you can nod
if you will."

"Thank you, miss. I will wait for my young lady. She may need me when
this hard time is over." And Dean seated herself with a resolute face.

Jean laughed and went on; but her eyes gleamed with sudden malice, and
she glanced over her shoulder with an expression which boded ill for the
faithful old servant.

"I've got a letter from Ned, and here is a tiny note for you," cried
Bella as Jean entered the boudoir. "Mine is a very odd, hasty letter,
with no news in it, but his meeting with Sydney. I hope yours is better,
or it won't be very satisfactory."

As Sydney's name passed Bella's lips, all the color died out of Miss
Muir's face, and the note shook with the tremor of her hand. Her very
lips were white, but she said calmly, "Thank you. As you are busy,
I'll go and read my letter on the lawn." And before Bella could speak,
she was gone.

Hurrying to a quiet nook, Jean tore open the note and read the few
blotted lines it contained.

_I have seen Sydney; he has told me all; and, hard as I found it to
believe, it was impossible to doubt, for he has discovered proofs which
cannot be denied. I make no reproaches, shall demand no confession or
atonement, for I cannot forget that I once loved you. I give you three
days to find another home, before I return to tell the family who you
are. Go at once, I beseech you, and spare me the pain of seeing your
disgrace._

Slowly, steadily she read it twice over, then sat motionless, knitting
her brows in deep thought. Presently she drew a long breath, tore up the
note, and rising, went slowly toward the Hall, saying to herself, "Three
days, only three days! Can it be accomplished in so short a time? It
shall be, if wit and will can do it, for it is my last chance. If this
fails, I'll not go back to my old life, but end all at once."

Setting her teeth and clenching her hands, as if some memory stung her,
she went on through the twilight, to find Sir John waiting to give her a
hearty welcome.

"You look tired, my dear. Never mind the reading tonight; rest yourself,
and let the book go," he said kindly, observing her worn look.

"Thank you, sir. I am tired, but I'd rather read, else the book will not
be finished before I go."

"Go, child! Where are you going?" demanded Sir John, looking anxiously
at her as she sat down.

"I will tell you by-and-by, sir." And opening the book, Jean read for a
little while.

But the usual charm was gone; there was no spirit in the voice of the
reader, no interest in the face of the listener, and soon he said,
abruptly, "My dear, pray stop! I cannot listen with a divided mind. What
troubles you? Tell your friend, and let him comfort you."

As if the kind words overcame her, Jean dropped the book, covered up her
face, and wept so bitterly that Sir John was much alarmed; for such a
demonstration was doubly touching in one who usually was all gaiety and
smiles. As he tried to soothe her, his words grew tender, his solicitude
full of a more than paternal anxiety, and his kind heart overflowed with
pity and affection for the weeping girl. As she grew calmer, he urged
her to be frank, promising to help and counsel her, whatever the
affliction or fault might be.

"Ah, you are too kind, too generous! How can I go away and leave my one
friend?" sighed Jean, wiping the tears away and looking up at him with
grateful eyes.

"Then you do care a little for the old man?" said Sir John with an eager
look, an involuntary pressure of the hand he held.

Jean turned her face away, and answered, very low, "No one ever was
so kind to me as you have been. Can I help caring for you more than I
can express?"

Sir John was a little deaf at times, but he heard that, and looked well
pleased. He had been rather thoughtful of late, had dressed with unusual
care, been particularly gallant and gay when the young ladies visited
him, and more than once, when Jean paused in the reading to ask a
question, he had been forced to confess that he had not been listening;
though, as she well knew, his eyes had been fixed upon her. Since the
discovery of her birth, his manner had been peculiarly benignant, and
many little acts had proved his interest and goodwill. Now, when Jean
spoke of going, a panic seized him, and desolation seemed about to fall
upon the old Hall. Something in her unusual agitation struck him as
peculiar and excited his curiosity. Never had she seemed so interesting
as now, when she sat beside him with tearful eyes, and some soft trouble
in her heart which she dared not confess.

"Tell me everything, child, and let your friend help you if he can."
Formerly he said "father" or "the old man," but lately he always spoke
of himself as her "friend."

"I will tell you, for I have no one else to turn to. I must go away
because Mr. Coventry has been weak enough to love me."

"What, Gerald?" cried Sir John, amazed.

"Yes; today he told me this, and left me to break with Lucia; so I ran
to you to help me prevent him from disappointing his mother's hopes
and plans."

Sir John had started up and paced down the room, but as Jean paused he
turned toward her, saying, with an altered face, "Then you do not love
him? Is it possible?"

"No, I do not love him," she answered promptly.

"Yet he is all that women usually find attractive. How is it that you
have escaped, Jean?"

"I love someone else" was the scarcely audible reply.

Sir John resumed his seat with the air of a man bent on getting at a
mystery, if possible.

"It will be unjust to let you suffer for the folly of these boys, my
little girl. Ned is gone, and I was sure that Gerald was safe; but now
that his turn has come, I am perplexed, for he cannot be sent away."

"No, it is I who must go; but it seems so hard to leave this safe and
happy home, and wander away into the wide, cold world again. You have
all been too kind to me, and now separation breaks my heart."

A sob ended the speech, and Jean's head went down upon her hands again.
Sir John looked at her a moment, and his fine old face was full of
genuine emotion, as he said slowly, "Jean, will you stay and be a
daughter to the solitary old man?"

"No, sir" was the unexpected answer.

"And why not?" asked Sir John, looking surprised, but rather pleased
than angry.

"Because I could not be a daughter to you; and even if I could, it would
not be wise, for the gossips would say you were not old enough to be the
adopted father of a girl like me. Sir John, young as I am, I know much
of the world, and am sure that this kind plan is impractical; but I
thank you from the bottom of my heart."

"Where will you go, Jean?" asked Sir John, after a pause.

"To London, and try to find another situation where I can do no harm."

"Will it be difficult to find another home?"

"Yes. I cannot ask Mrs. Coventry to recommend me, when I have innocently
brought so much trouble into her family; and Lady Sydney is gone, so I
have no friend."

"Except John Coventry. I will arrange all that. When will you go, Jean?"

"Tomorrow."

"So soon!" And the old man's voice betrayed the trouble he was trying
to conceal.

Jean had grown very calm, but it was the calmness of desperation. She
had hoped that the first tears would produce the avowal for which she
waited. It had not, and she began to fear that her last chance was
slipping from her. Did the old man love her? If so, why did he not
speak? Eager to profit by each moment, she was on the alert for any
hopeful hint, any propitious word, look, or act, and every nerve was
strung to the utmost.

"Jean, may I ask one question?" said Sir John.

"Anything of me, sir."

"This man whom you love--can he not help you?"

"He could if he knew, but he must not."

"If he knew what? Your present trouble?"

"No. My love."

"He does not know this, then?"

"No, thank heaven! And he never will."

"Why not?"

"Because I am too proud to own it."

"He loves you, my child?"

"I do not know--I dare not hope it," murmured Jean.

"Can I not help you here? Believe me, I desire to see you safe and
happy. Is there nothing I can do?"

"Nothing, nothing."

"May I know the name?"

"No! No! Let me go; I cannot bear this questioning!" And Jean's
distressful face warned him to ask no more.

"Forgive me, and let me do what I may. Rest here quietly. I'll write a
letter to a good friend of mine, who will find you a home, if you
leave us."

As Sir John passed into his inner study, Jean watched him with
despairing eyes and wrung her hands, saying to herself, Has all my
skill deserted me when I need it most? How can I make him understand,
yet not overstep the bounds of maiden modesty? He is so blind, so
timid, or so dull he will not see, and time is going fast. What shall I
do to open his eyes?

Her own eyes roved about the room, seeking for some aid from inanimate
things, and soon she found it. Close behind the couch where she sat hung
a fine miniature of Sir John. At first her eye rested on it as she
contrasted its placid comeliness with the unusual pallor and disquiet of
the living face seen through the open door, as the old man sat at his
desk trying to write and casting covert glances at the girlish figure he
had left behind him. Affecting unconsciousness of this, Jean gazed on as
if forgetful of everything but the picture, and suddenly, as if obeying
an irresistible impulse, she took it down, looked long and fondly at it,
then, shaking her curls about her face, as if to hide the act, pressed
it to her lips and seemed to weep over it in an uncontrollable paroxysm
of tender grief. A sound startled her, and like a guilty thing, she
turned to replace the picture; but it dropped from her hand as she
uttered a faint cry and hid her face, for Sir John stood before her,
with an expression which she could not mistake.

"Jean, why did you do that?" he asked, in an eager, agitated voice.

No answer, as the girl sank lower, like one overwhelmed with shame.
Laying his hand on the bent head, and bending his own, he whispered,
"Tell me, is the name John Coventry?"

Still no answer, but a stifled sound betrayed that his words had
gone home.

"Jean, shall I go back and write the letter, or may I stay and tell you
that the old man loves you better than a daughter?"

She did not speak, but a little hand stole out from under the falling
hair, as if to keep him. With a broken exclamation he seized it, drew
her up into his arms, and laid his gray head on her fan: one, too happy
for words. For a moment Jean Muir enjoyed her success; then, fearing
lest some sudden mishap should destroy it, she hastened to make all
secure. Looking up with well-feigned timidity and half-confessed
affection, she said softly, "Forgive me that I could not hide this
better. I meant to go away and never tell it, but you were so kind it
made the parting doubly hard. Why did you ask such dangerous questions?
Why did you look, when you should have been writing my dismissal?"

"How could I dream that you loved me, Jean, when you refused the only
offer I dared make? Could I be presumptuous enough to fancy you would
reject young lovers for an old man like me?" asked Sir John,
caressing her.

"You are not old, to me, but everything I love and honor!" interrupted
Jean, with a touch of genuine remorse, as this generous, honorable
gentleman gave her both heart and home, unconscious of deceit. "It is I
who am presumptuous, to dare to love one so far above me. But I did not
know how dear you were to me till I felt that I must go. I ought not to
accept this happiness. I am not worthy of it; and you will regret your
kindness when the world blames you for giving a home to one so poor, and
plain, and humble as I."

"Hush, my darling. I care nothing for the idle gossip of the world. If
you are happy here, let tongues wag as they will. I shall be too busy
enjoying the sunshine of your presence to heed anything that goes on
about me. But, Jean, you are sure you love me? It seems incredible
that I should win the heart that has been so cold to younger, better
men than I."

"Dear Sir John, be sure of this, I love you truly. I will do my best to
be a good wife to you, and prove that, in spite of my many faults, I
possess the virtue of gratitude."

If he had known the strait she was in, he would have understood the
cause of the sudden fervor of her words, the intense thankfulness that
shone in her face, the real humility that made her stoop and kiss the
generous hand that gave so much. For a few moments she enjoyed and let
him enjoy the happy present, undisturbed. But the anxiety which devoured
her, the danger which menaced her, soon recalled her, and forced her to
wring yet more from the unsuspicious heart she had conquered.

"No need of letters now," said Sir John, as they sat side by side, with
the summer moonlight glorifying all the room. "You have found a home for
life; may it prove a happy one."

"It is not mine yet, and I have a strange foreboding that it never will
be," she answered sadly.

"Why, my child?"

"Because I have an enemy who will try to destroy my peace, to poison
your mind against me, and to drive me out from my paradise, to suffer
again all I have suffered this last year."

"You mean that mad Sydney of whom you told me?"

"Yes. As soon as he hears of this good fortune to poor little Jean, he
will hasten to mar it. He is my fate; I cannot escape him, and wherever
he goes my friends desert me; for he has the power and uses it for my
destruction. Let me go away and hide before he comes, for, having shared
your confidence, it will break my heart to see you distrust and turn
from me, instead of loving and protecting."

"My poor child, you are superstitious. Be easy. No one can harm you now,
no one would dare attempt it. And as for my deserting you, that will
soon be out of my power, if I have my way."

"How, dear Sir John?" asked Jean, with a flutter of intense relief at
her heart, for the way seemed smoothing before her.

"I will make you my wife at once, if I may. This will free you from
Gerald's love, protect you from Sydney's persecution, give you a safe
home, and me the right to cherish and defend with heart and hand. Shall
it be so, my child?"

"Yes; but oh, remember that I have no friend but you! Promise me to be
faithful to the last--to believe in me, to trust me, protect and love
me, in spite of all misfortunes, faults, and follies. I will be true as
steel to you, and make your life as happy as it deserves to be. Let us
promise these things now, and keep the promises unbroken to the end."

Her solemn air touched Sir John. Too honorable and upright himself to
suspect falsehood in others, he saw only the natural impulse of a lovely
girl in Jean's words, and, taking the hand she gave him in both of his,
he promised all she asked, and kept that promise to the end. She paused
an instant, with a pale, absent expression, as if she searched herself,
then looked up clearly in the confiding face above her, and promised
what she faithfully performed in afteryears.

"When shall it be, little sweetheart? I leave all to you, only let it be
soon, else some gay young lover will appear, and take you from me," said
Sir John, playfully, anxious to chase away the dark expression which had
stolen over Jean's face.

"Can you keep a secret?" asked the girl, smiling up at him, all her
charming self again.

"Try me."

"I will. Edward is coming home in three days. I must be gone before he
comes. Tell no one of this; he wishes to surprise them. And if you love
me, tell nobody of your approaching marriage. Do not betray that you
care for me until I am really yours. There will be such a stir, such
remonstrances, explanations, and reproaches that I shall be worn out,
and run away from you all to escape the trial. If I could have my wish,
I would go to some quiet place tomorrow and wait till you come for me. I
know so little of such things, I cannot tell how soon we may be married;
not for some weeks, I think."

"Tomorrow, if we like. A special license permits people to marry when
and where they please. My plan is better than yours. Listen, and tell me
if it can be carried out. I will go to town tomorrow, get the license,
invite my friend, the Reverend Paul Fairfax, to return with me, and
tomorrow evening you come at your usual time, and, in the presence of my
discreet old servants, make me the happiest man in England. How does
this suit you, my little Lady Coventry?"

The plan which seemed made to meet her ends, the name which was the
height of her ambition, and the blessed sense of safety which came to
her filled Jean Muir with such intense satisfaction that tears of real
feeling stood in her eyes, and the glad assent she gave was the truest
word that had passed her lips for months.

"We will go abroad or to Scotland for our honeymoon, till the storm
blows over," said Sir John, well knowing that this hasty marriage would
surprise or offend all his relations, and feeling as glad as Jean to
escape the first excitement.

"To Scotland, please. I long to see my father's home," said Jean, who
dreaded to meet Sydney on the continent.

They talked a little longer, arranging all things, Sir John so intent on
hurrying the event that Jean had nothing to do but give a ready assent
to all his suggestions. One fear alone disturbed her. If Sir John went
to town, he might meet Edward, might hear and believe his statements.
Then all would be lost. Yet this risk must be incurred, if the marriage
was to be speedily and safely accomplished; and to guard against the
meeting was Jean's sole care. As they went through the park--for Sir
John insisted upon taking her home--she said, clinging to his arm:

"Dear friend, bear one thing in mind, else we shall be much annoyed, and
all our plans disarranged. Avoid your nephews; you are so frank your
face will betray you. They both love me, are both hot-tempered, and in
the first excitement of the discovery might be violent. You must incur
no danger, no disrespect for my sake; so shun them both till we are
safe--particularly Edward. He will feel that his brother has wronged
him, and that you have succeeded where he failed. This will irritate
him, and I fear a stormy scene. Promise to avoid both for a day or two;
do not listen to them, do not see them, do not write to or receive
letters from them. It is foolish, I know; but you are all I have, and I
am haunted by a strange foreboding that I am to lose you."

Touched and flattered by her tender solicitude, Sir John promised
everything, even while he laughed at her fears. Love blinded the good
gentleman to the peculiarity of the request; the novelty, romance, and
secrecy of the affair rather bewildered though it charmed him; and the
knowledge that he had outrivaled three young and ardent lovers
gratified his vanity more than he would confess. Parting from the girl
at the garden gate, he turned homeward, feeling like a boy again, and
loitered back, humming a love lay, quite forgetful of evening damps,
gout, and the five-and-fifty years which lay so lightly on his
shoulders since Jean's arms had rested there. She hurried toward the
house, anxious to escape Coventry; but he was waiting for her, and she
was forced to meet him.

"How could you linger so long, and keep me in suspense?" he said
reproachfully, as he took her hand and tried to catch a glimpse of her
face in the shadow of her hat brim. "Come and rest in the grotto. I have
so much to say, to hear and enjoy."

"Not now; I am too tired. Let me go in and sleep. Tomorrow we will talk.
It is damp and chilly, and my head aches with all this worry." Jean
spoke wearily, yet with a touch of petulance, and Coventry, fancying
that she was piqued at his not coming for her, hastened to explain with
eager tenderness.

"My poor little Jean, you do need rest. We wear you out, among us, and
you never complain. I should have come to bring you home, but Lucia
detained me, and when I got away I saw my uncle had forestalled me. I
shall be jealous of the old gentleman, if he is so devoted. Jean, tell
me one thing before we part; I am free as air, now, and have a right to
speak. Do you love me? Am I the happy man who has won your heart? I
dare to think so, to believe that this telltale face of yours has
betrayed you, and to hope that I have gained what poor Ned and wild
Sydney have lost."

"Before I answer, tell me of your interview with Lucia. I have a right
to know," said Jean.

Coventry hesitated, for pity and remorse were busy at his heart when he
recalled poor Lucia's grief. Jean was bent on hearing the humiliation of
her rival. As the young man paused, she frowned, then lifted up her face
wreathed in softest smiles, and laying her hand on his arm, she said,
with most effective emphasis, half shy, half fond, upon his name,
"Please tell me, Gerald!"

He could not resist the look, the touch, the tone, and taking the little
hand in his, he said rapidly, as if the task was distasteful to him, "I
told her that I did not, could not love her; that I had submitted to my
mother's wish, and, for a time, had felt tacitly bound to her, though no
words had passed between us. But now I demanded my liberty, regretting
that the separation was not mutually desired."

"And she--what did she say? How did she bear it?" asked Jean, feeling
in her own woman's heart how deeply Lucia's must have been wounded by
that avowal.

"Poor girl! It was hard to bear, but her pride sustained her to the end.
She owned that no pledge tied me, fully relinquished any claim my past
behavior had seemed to have given her, and prayed that I might find
another woman to love me as truly, tenderly as she had done. Jean, I
felt like a villain; and yet I never plighted my word to her, never
really loved her, and had a perfect right to leave her, if I would."

"Did she speak of me?"

"Yes."

"What did she say?"

"Must I tell you?"

"Yes, tell me everything. I know she hates me and I forgive her, knowing
that I should hate any woman whom _you_ loved."

"Are you jealous, dear?"

"Of you, Gerald?" And the fine eyes glanced up at him, full of a
brilliancy that looked like the light of love.

"You make a slave of me already. How do you do it? I never obeyed a
woman before. Jean, I think you are a witch. Scotland is the home of
weird, uncanny creatures, who take lovely shapes for the bedevilment of
poor weak souls. Are you one of those fair deceivers?"

"You are complimentary," laughed the girl. "I _am_ a witch, and one
day my disguise will drop away and you will see me as I am, old, ugly,
bad and lost. Beware of me in time. I've warned you. Now love me at
your peril."

Coventry had paused as he spoke, and eyed her with an unquiet look,
conscious of some fascination which conquered yet brought no happiness.
A feverish yet pleasurable excitement possessed him; a reckless mood,
making him eager to obliterate the past by any rash act, any new
experience which his passion brought. Jean regarded him with a wistful,
almost woeful face, for one short moment; then a strange smile broke
over it, as she spoke in a tone of malicious mockery, under which lurked
the bitterness of a sad truth. Coventry looked half bewildered, and his
eye went from the girl's mysterious face to a dimly lighted window,
behind whose curtains poor Lucia hid her aching heart, praying for him
the tender prayers that loving women give to those whose sins are all
forgiven for love's sake. His heart smote him, and a momentary feeling
of repulsion came over him, as he looked at Jean. She saw it, felt
angry, yet conscious of a sense of relief; for now that her own safety
was so nearly secured, she felt no wish to do mischief, but rather a
desire to undo what was already done, and be at peace with all the
world. To recall him to his allegiance, she sighed and walked on, saying
gently yet coldly, "Will you tell me what I ask before I answer your
question, Mr. Coventry?"

"What Lucia said of you? Well, it was this. 'Beware of Miss Muir. We
instinctively distrusted her when we had no cause. I believe in
instincts, and mine have never changed, for she has not tried to delude
me. Her art is wonderful; I feel yet cannot explain or detect it, except
in the working of events which her hand seems to guide. She has brought
sorrow and dissension into this hitherto happy family. We are all
changed, and this girl has done it. Me she can harm no further; you she
will ruin, if she can. Beware of her in tune, or you win bitterly repent
your blind infatuation!'"

"And what answer did you make?" asked Jean, as the last words came
reluctantly from Coventry's lips.

"I told her that I loved you in spite of myself, and would make you my
wife in the face of all opposition. Now, Jean, your answer."

"Give me three days to think of it. Good night." And gliding from him,
she vanished into the house, leaving him to roam about half the night,
tormented with remorse, suspense, and the old distrust which would
return when Jean was not there to banish it by her art.




_chapter VIII_


SUSPENSE

All the next day, Jean was in a state of the most intense anxiety, as
every hour brought the crisis nearer, and every hour might bring defeat,
for the subtlest human skill is often thwarted by some unforeseen
accident. She longed to assure herself that Sir John was gone, but no
servants came or went that day, and she could devise no pretext for
sending to glean intelligence. She dared not go herself, lest the
unusual act should excite suspicion, for she never went till evening.
Even had she determined to venture, there was no time, for Mrs. Coventry
was in one of her nervous states, and no one but Miss Muir could amuse
her; Lucia was ill, and Miss Muir must give orders; Bella had a studious
fit, and Jean must help her. Coventry lingered about the house for
several hours, but Jean dared not send him, lest some hint of the truth
might reach him. He had ridden away to his new duties when Jean did not
appear, and the day dragged on wearisomely. Night came at last, and as
Jean dressed for the late dinner, she hardly knew herself when she stood
before her mirror, excitement lent such color and brilliancy to her
countenance. Remembering the wedding which was to take place that
evening, she put on a simple white dress and added a cluster of white
roses in bosom and hair. She often wore flowers, but in spite of her
desire to look and seem as usual, Bella's first words as she entered the
drawing room were "Why, Jean, how like a bride you look; a veil and
gloves would make you quite complete!"

"You forget one other trifle, Bell," said Gerald, with eyes that
brightened as they rested on Miss Muir.

"What is that?" asked his sister.

"A bridegroom."

Bella looked to see how Jean received this, but she seemed quite
composed as she smiled one of her sudden smiles, and merely said, "That
trifle will doubtless be found when the time comes. Is Miss Beaufort too
ill for dinner?"

"She begs to be excused, and said you would be willing to take her
place, she thought."

As innocent Bella delivered this message, Jean glanced at Coventry, who
evaded her eye and looked ill at ease.

A little remorse will do him good, and prepare him for repentance after
the grand _coup_, she said to herself, and was particularly gay at
dinnertime, though Coventry looked often at Lucia's empty seat, as if he
missed her. As soon as they left the table, Miss Muir sent Bella to her
mother; and, knowing that Coventry would not linger long at his wine,
she hurried away to the Hall. A servant was lounging at the door, and of
him she asked, in a tone which was eager in spite of all efforts to be
calm, "Is Sir John at home?"

"No, miss, he's just gone to town."

"Just gone! When do you mean?" cried Jean, forgetting the relief she
felt in hearing of his absence in surprise at his late departure.

"He went half an hour ago, in the last train, miss."

"I thought he was going early this morning; he told me he should be back
this evening."

"I believe he did mean to go, but was delayed by company. The steward
came up on business, and a load of gentlemen called, so Sir John could
not get off till night, when he wasn't fit to go, being worn out, and
far from well."

"Do you think he will be ill? Did he look so?" And as Jean spoke, a
thrill of fear passed over her, lest death should rob her of her prize.

"Well, you know, miss, hurry of any kind is bad for elderly gentlemen
inclined to apoplexy. Sir John was in a worry all day, and not like
himself. I wanted him to take his man, but he wouldn't; and drove off
looking flushed and excited like. I'm anxious about him, for I know
something is amiss to hurry him off in this way."

"When will he be back, Ralph?"

"Tomorrow noon, if possible; at night, certainly, he bid me tell anyone
that called."

"Did he leave no note or message for Miss Coventry, or someone of
the family?"

"No, miss, nothing."

"Thank you." And Jean walked back to spend a restless night and rise to
meet renewed suspense.

The morning seemed endless, but noon came at last, and under the
pretense of seeking coolness in the grotto, Jean stole away to a slope
whence the gate to the Hall park was visible. For two long hours she
watched, and no one came. She was just turning away when a horseman
dashed through the gate and came galloping toward the Hall. Heedless of
everything but the uncontrollable longing to gain some tidings, she ran
to meet him, feeling assured that he brought ill news. It was a young
man from the station, and as he caught sight of her, he drew bridle,
looking agitated and undecided.

"Has anything happened?" she cried breathlessly.

"A dreadful accident on the railroad, just the other side of
Croydon. News telegraphed half an hour ago," answered the man,
wiping his hot face.

"The noon train? Was Sir John in it? Quick, tell me all!"

"It was that train, miss, but whether Sir John was in it or not, we
don't know; for the guard is killed, and everything is in such confusion
that nothing can be certain. They are at work getting out the dead and
wounded. We heard that Sir John was expected, and I came up to tell Mr.
Coventry, thinking he would wish to go down. A train leaves in fifteen
minutes; where shall I find him? I was told he was at the Hall."

"Ride on, ride on! And find him if he is there. I'll run home and look
for him. Lose no time. Ride! Ride!" And turning, Jean sped back like a
deer, while the man tore up the avenue to rouse the Hall.

Coventry was there, and went off at once, leaving both Hall and house in
dismay. Fearing to betray the horrible anxiety that possessed her, Jean
shut herself up in her room and suffered untold agonies as the day wore
on and no news came. At dark a sudden cry rang through the house, and
Jean rushed down to learn the cause. Bella was standing in the hall,
holding a letter, while a group of excited servants hovered near her.

"What is it?" demanded Miss Muir, pale and steady, though her heart
died within her as she recognized Gerald's handwriting. Bella gave
her the note, and hushed her sobbing to hear again the heavy tidings
that had come.

    _Dear Bella:

    Uncle is safe; he did not go in the noon train. But several persons
    are sure that Ned was there. No trace of him as yet, but many bodies
    are in the river, under the ruins of the bridge, and I am doing my
    best to find the poor lad, if he is there. I have sent to all his
    haunts in town, and as he has not been seen, I hope it is a false
    report and he is safe with his regiment. Keep this from my mother
    till we are sure. I write you, because Lucia is ill. Miss Muir will
    comfort and sustain you. Hope for the best, dear.

    Yours, G.C._

Those who watched Miss Muir as she read these words wondered at the
strange expressions which passed over her face, for the joy which
appeared there as Sir John's safety was made known did not change to
grief or horror at poor Edward's possible fate. The smile died on her
lips, but her voice did not falter, and in her downcast eyes shone an
inexplicable look of something like triumph. No wonder, for if this
was true, the danger which menaced her was averted for a time, and the
marriage might be consummated without such desperate haste. This sad
and sudden event seemed to her the mysterious fulfilment of a secret
wish; and though startled she was not daunted but inspirited, for fate
seemed to favor her designs. She did comfort Bella, control the
excited household, and keep the rumors from Mrs. Coventry all that
dreadful night.

At dawn Gerald came home exhausted, and bringing no tiding of the
missing man. He had telegraphed to the headquarters of the regiment and
received a reply, stating that Edward had left for London the previous
day, meaning to go home before returning. The fact of his having been at
the London station was also established, but whether he left by the
train or not was still uncertain. The ruins were still being searched,
and the body might yet appear.

"Is Sir John coming at noon?" asked Jean, as the three sat together in
the rosy hush of dawn, trying to hope against hope.

"No, he had been ill, I learned from young Gower, who is just from town,
and so had not completed his business. I sent him word to wait till
night, for the bridge won't be passable till then. Now I must try and
rest an hour; I've worked all night and have no strength left. Call me
the instant any messenger arrives."

With that Coventry went to his room, Bella followed to wait on him, and
Jean roamed through house and grounds, unable to rest. The morning was
far spent when the messenger arrived. Jean went to receive his tidings,
with the wicked hope still lurking at her heart.

"Is he found?" she asked calmly, as the man hesitated to speak.

"Yes, ma'am."

"You are sure?"

"I am certain, ma'am, though some won't say till Mr. Coventry
comes to look."

"Is he alive?" And Jean's white lips trembled as she put the question.

"Oh no, ma'am, that warn't possible, under all them stones and water.
The poor young gentleman is so wet, and crushed, and torn, no one
would know him, except for the uniform, and the white hand with the
ring on it."

Jean sat down, very pale, and the man described the finding of the poor
shattered body. As he finished, Coventry appeared, and with one look of
mingled remorse, shame, and sorrow, the elder brother went away, to find
and bring the younger home. Jean crept into the garden like a guilty
thing, trying to hide the satisfaction which struggled with a woman's
natural pity, for so sad an end for this brave young life.

"Why waste tears or feign sorrow when I must be glad?" she muttered, as
she paced to and fro along the terrace. "The poor boy is out of pain,
and I am out of danger."

She got no further, for, turning as she spoke, she stood face to face
with Edward! Bearing no mark of peril on dress or person, but stalwart
and strong as ever, he stood there looking at her, with contempt and
compassion struggling in his face. As if turned to stone, she remained
motionless, with dilated eyes, arrested breath, and paling cheek. He did
not speak but watched her silently till she put out a trembling hand, as
if to assure herself by touch that it was really he. Then he drew back,
and as if the act convinced as fully as words, she said slowly, "They
told me you were dead."

"And you were glad to believe it. No, it was my comrade, young Courtney,
who unconsciously deceived you all, and lost his life, as I should have
done, if I had not gone to Ascot after seeing him off yesterday."

"To Ascot?" echoed Jean, shrinking back, for Edward's eye was on her,
and his voice was stern and cold.

"Yes; you know the place. I went there to make inquiries concerning you
and was well satisfied. Why are you still here?"

"The three days are not over yet. I hold you to your promise. Before
night I shall be gone; till then you will be silent, if you have honor
enough to keep your word."

"I have." Edward took out his watch and, as he put it back, said with
cool precision, "It is now two, the train leaves for London at half-past
six; a carriage will wait for you at the side door. Allow me to advise
you to go then, for the instant dinner is over I shall speak." And with
a bow he went into the house, leaving Jean nearly suffocated with a
throng of contending emotions.

For a few minutes she seemed paralyzed; but the native energy of the
woman forbade utter despair, till the last hope was gone. Frail as that
now was, she still clung to it tenaciously, resolving to win the game in
defiance of everything. Springing up, she went to her room, packed her
few valuables, dressed herself with care, and then sat down to wait. She
heard a joyful stir below, saw Coventry come hurrying back, and from a
garrulous maid learned that the body was that of young Courtney. The
uniform being the same as Edward's and the ring, a gift from him, had
caused the men to believe the disfigured corpse to be that of the
younger Coventry. No one but the maid came near her; once Bella's voice
called her, but some one checked the girl, and the call was not
repeated. At five an envelope was brought her, directed in Edward's
hand, and containing a check which more than paid a year's salary. No
word accompanied the gift, yet the generosity of it touched her, for
Jean Muir had the relics of a once honest nature, and despite her
falsehood could still admire nobleness and respect virtue. A tear of
genuine shame dropped on the paper, and real gratitude filled her heart,
as she thought that even if all else failed, she was not thrust out
penniless into the world, which had no pity for poverty.

As the clock struck six, she heard a carriage drive around and went down
to meet it. A servant put on her trunk, gave the order, "To the station,
James," and she drove away without meeting anyone, speaking to anyone,
or apparently being seen by anyone. A sense of utter weariness came over
her, and she longed to lie down and forget. But the last chance still
remained, and till that failed, she would not give up. Dismissing the
carriage, she seated herself to watch for the quarter-past-six train
from London, for in that Sir John would come if he came at all that
night. She was haunted by the fear that Edward had met and told him. The
first glimpse of Sir John's frank face would betray the truth. If he
knew all, there was no hope, and she would go her way alone. If he knew
nothing, there was yet time for the marriage; and once his wife, she
knew she was safe, because for the honor of his name he would screen and
protect her.

Up rushed the train, out stepped Sir John, and Jean's heart died within
her. Grave, and pale, and worn he looked, and leaned heavily on the arm
of a portly gentleman in black. The Reverend Mr. Fairfax, why has he
come, if the secret is out? thought Jean, slowly advancing to meet them
and fearing to read her fate in Sir John's face. He saw her, dropped his
friend's arm, and hurried forward with the ardor of a young man,
exclaiming, as he seized her hand with a beaming face, a glad voice, "My
little girl! Did you think I would never come?"

She could not answer, the reaction was too strong, but she clung to him,
regardless of time or place, and felt that her last hope had not failed.
Mr. Fairfax proved himself equal to the occasion. Asking no questions,
he hurried Sir John and Jean into a carriage and stepped in after them
with a bland apology. Jean was soon herself again, and, having told her
fears at his delay, listened eagerly while he related the various
mishaps which had detained him.

"Have you seen Edward?" was her first question.

"Not yet, but I know he has come, and have heard of his narrow escape. I
should have been in that train, if I had not been delayed by the
indisposition which I then cursed, but now bless. Are you ready, Jean?
Do you repent your choice, my child?"

"No, no! I am ready, I am only too happy to become your wife, dear,
generous Sir John," cried Jean, with a glad alacrity, which touched the
old man to the heart, and charmed the Reverend Mr. Fairfax, who
concealed the romance of a boy under his clerical suit.

They reached the Hall. Sir John gave orders to admit no one and after a
hasty dinner sent for his old housekeeper and his steward, told them of
his purpose, and desired them to witness his marriage. Obedience had
been the law of their lives, and Master could do nothing wrong in their
eyes, so they played their parts willingly, for Jean was a favorite at
the Hall. Pale as her gown, but calm and steady, she stood beside Sir
John, uttering her vows in a clear tone and taking upon herself the vows
of a wife with more than a bride's usual docility. When the ring was
fairly on, a smile broke over her face. When Sir John kissed and called
her his "little wife," she shed a tear or two of sincere happiness; and
when Mr. Fairfax addressed her as "my lady," she laughed her musical
laugh, and glanced up at a picture of Gerald with eyes full of
exultation. As the servants left the room, a message was brought from
Mrs. Coventry, begging Sir John to come to her at once.

"You will not go and leave me so soon?" pleaded Jean, well knowing why
he was sent for.

"My darling, I must." And in spite of its tenderness, Sir John's manner
was too decided to be withstood.

"Then I shall go with you," cried Jean, resolving that no earthly power
should part them.




_chapter IX_


LADY COVENTRY

When the first excitement of Edward's return had subsided, and before
they could question him as to the cause of this unexpected visit, he
told them that after dinner their curiosity should be gratified, and
meantime he begged them to leave Miss Muir alone, for she had received
bad news and must not be disturbed. The family with difficulty
restrained their tongues and waited impatiently. Gerald confessed his
love for Jean and asked his brother's pardon for betraying his trust. He
had expected an outbreak, but Edward only looked at him with pitying
eyes, and said sadly, "You too! I have no reproaches to make, for I know
what you will suffer when the truth is known."

"What do you mean?" demanded Coventry.

"You will soon know, my poor Gerald, and we will comfort one another."

Nothing more could be drawn from Edward till dinner was over, the
servants gone, and all the family alone together. Then pale and grave,
but very self-possessed, for trouble had made a man of him, he produced
a packet of letters, and said, addressing himself to his brother, "Jean
Muir has deceived us all. I know her story; let me tell it before I read
her letters."

"Stop! I'll not listen to any false tales against her. The poor girl has
enemies who belie her!" cried Gerald, starting up.

"For the honor of the family, you must listen, and learn what fools she
has made of us. I can prove what I say, and convince you that she has
the art of a devil. Sit still ten minutes, then go, if you will."

Edward spoke with authority, and his brother obeyed him with a
foreboding heart.

"I met Sydney, and he begged me to beware of her. Nay, listen, Gerald! I
know she has told her story, and that you believe it; but her own
letters convict her. She tried to charm Sydney as she did us, and nearly
succeeded in inducing him to marry her. Rash and wild as he is, he is
still a gentleman, and when an incautious word of hers roused his
suspicions, he refused to make her his wife. A stormy scene ensued, and,
hoping to intimidate him, she feigned to stab herself as if in despair.
She did wound herself, but failed to gain her point and insisted upon
going to a hospital to die. Lady Sydney, good, simple soul, believed the
girl's version of the story, thought her son was in the wrong, and when
he was gone, tried to atone for his fault by finding Jean Muir another
home. She thought Gerald was soon to marry Lucia, and that I was away,
so sent her here as a safe and comfortable retreat."

"But, Ned, are you sure of all this? Is Sydney to be believed?" began
Coventry, still incredulous.

"To convince you, I'll read Jean's letters before I say more. They
were written to an accomplice and were purchased by Sydney. There was
a compact between the two women, that each should keep the other
informed of all adventures, plots and plans, and share whatever good
fortune fell to the lot of either. Thus Jean wrote freely, as you
shall judge. The letters concern us alone. The first was written a few
days after she came.

    _"Dear Hortense:

    "Another failure. Sydney was more wily than I thought. All was going
    well, when one day my old fault beset me, I took too much wine, and
    I carelessly owned that I had been an actress. He was shocked, and
    retreated. I got up a scene, and gave myself a safe little wound, to
    frighten him. The brute was not frightened, but coolly left me to my
    fate. I'd have died to spite him, if I dared, but as I didn't, I
    lived to torment him. As yet, I have had no chance, but I will not
    forget him. His mother is a poor, weak creature, whom I could use as
    I would, and through her I found an excellent place. A sick mother,
    silly daughter, and two eligible sons. One is engaged to a handsome
    iceberg, but that only renders him more interesting in my eyes,
    rivalry adds so much to the charm of one's conquests. Well, my dear,
    I went, got up in the meek style, intending to do the pathetic; but
    before I saw the family, I was so angry I could hardly control
    myself. Through the indolence of Monsieur the young master, no
    carriage was sent for me, and I intend he shall atone for that
    rudeness by-and-by. The younger son, the mother, and the girl
    received me patronizingly, and I understood the simple souls at
    once. Monsieur (as I shall call him, as names are unsafe) was
    unapproachable, and took no pains to conceal his dislike of
    governesses. The cousin was lovely, but detestable with her pride,
    her coldness, and her very visible adoration of Monsieur, who let
    her worship him, like an inanimate idol as he is. I hated them both,
    of course, and in return for their insolence shall torment her with
    jealousy, and teach him how to woo a woman by making his heart ache.
    They are an intensely proud family, but I can humble them all, I
    think, by captivating the sons, and when they have committed
    themselves, cast them off, and marry the old uncle, whose title
    takes my fancy."_

"She never wrote that! It is impossible. A woman could not do it," cried
Lucia indignantly, while Bella sat bewildered and Mrs. Coventry
supported herself with salts and fan. Coventry went to his brother,
examined the writing, and returned to his seat, saying, in a tone of
suppressed wrath, "She did write it. I posted some of those letters
myself. Go on, Ned."

    _"I made myself useful and agreeable to the amiable ones, and
    overheard the chat of the lovers. It did not suit me, so I fainted
    away to stop it, and excite interest in the provoking pair. I
    thought I had succeeded, but Monsieur suspected me and showed me
    that he did. I forgot my meek role and gave him a stage look. It had
    a good effect, and I shall try it again. The man is well worth
    winning, but I prefer the title, and as the uncle is a hale,
    handsome gentleman, I can't wait for him to die, though Monsieur is
    very charming, with his elegant languor, and his heart so fast
    asleep no woman has had power to wake it yet. I told my story, and
    they believed it, though I had the audacity to say I was but
    nineteen, to talk Scotch, and bashfully confess that Sydney wished
    to marry me. Monsieur knows S. and evidently suspects something. I
    must watch him and keep the truth from him, if possible.

    "I was very miserable that night when I got alone. Something in the
    atmosphere of this happy home made me wish I was anything but what I
    am. As I sat there trying to pluck up my spirits, I thought of the
    days when I was lovely and young, good and gay. My glass showed me
    an old woman of thirty, for my false locks were off, my paint gone,
    and my face was without its mask. Bah! how I hate sentiment! I drank
    your health from your own little flask, and went to bed to dream
    that I was playing Lady Tartuffe--as I am. Adieu, more soon."_

No one spoke as Edward paused, and taking up another letter, he read on:

    _"My Dear Creature:

    "All goes well. Next day I began my task, and having caught a hint
    of the character of each, tried my power over them. Early in the
    morning I ran over to see the Hall. Approved of it highly, and took
    the first step toward becoming its mistress, by piquing the
    curiosity and flattering the pride of its master. His estate is his
    idol; I praised it with a few artless compliments to himself, and he
    was charmed. The cadet of the family adores horses. I risked my neck
    to pet his beast, and_ he _was charmed. The little girl is romantic
    about flowers; I made a posy and was sentimental, and_ she _was
    charmed. The fair icicle loves her departed mamma, I had raptures
    over an old picture, and she thawed. Monsieur is used to being
    worshipped. I took no notice of him, and by the natural perversity
    of human nature, he began to take notice of me. He likes music; I
    sang, and stopped when he'd listened long enough to want more. He is
    lazily fond of being amused; I showed him my skill, but refused to
    exert it in his behalf. In short, I gave him no peace till he began
    to wake up. In order to get rid of the boy, I fascinated him, and he
    was sent away. Poor lad, I rather liked him, and if the title had
    been nearer would have married him._

"Many thanks for the honor." And Edward's lip curled with intense scorn.
But Gerald sat like a statue, his teeth set, his eyes fiery, his brows
bent, waiting for the end.

    _"The passionate boy nearly killed his brother, but I turned the
    affair to good account, and bewitched Monsieur by playing nurse,
    till Vashti (the icicle) interfered. Then I enacted injured virtue,
    and kept out of his way, knowing that he would miss me, I mystified
    him about S. by sending a letter where S. would not get it, and got
    up all manner of soft scenes to win this proud creature. I get on
    well and meanwhile privately fascinate Sir J. by being daughterly
    and devoted. He is a worthy old man, simple as a child, honest as
    the day, and generous as a prince. I shall be a happy woman if I win
    him, and you shall share my good fortune; so wish me success._

"This is the third, and contains something which will surprise you,"
Edward said, as he lifted another paper.

    _"Hortense:

    "I've done what I once planned to do on another occasion. You know
    my handsome, dissipated father married a lady of rank for his second
    wife. I never saw Lady H----d but once, for I was kept out of the
    way. Finding that this good Sir J. knew something of her when a
    girl, and being sure that he did not know of the death of her little
    daughter, I boldly said I was the child, and told a pitiful tale of
    my early life. It worked like a charm; he told Monsieur, and both
    felt the most chivalrous compassion for Lady Howard's daughter,
    though before they had secretly looked down on me, and my real
    poverty and my lowliness. That boy pitied me with an honest warmth
    and never waited to learn my birth. I don't forget that and shall
    repay it if I can. Wishing to bring Monsieur's affair to a
    successful crisis, I got up a theatrical evening and was in my
    element. One little event I must tell you, because I committed an
    actionable offense and was nearly discovered. I did not go down to
    supper, knowing that the moth would return to flutter about the
    candle, and preferring that the fluttering should be done in
    private, as Vashti's jealousy is getting uncontrollable. Passing
    throught the gentlemen's dressing room, my quick eye caught sight of
    a letter lying among the costumes. It was no stage affair, and an
    odd sensation of fear ran through me as I recognized the hand of S.
    I had feared this, but I believe in chance; and having found the
    letter, I examined it. You know I can imitate almost any hand. When
    I read in this paper the whole story of my affair with S., truly
    told, and also that he had made inquiries into my past life and
    discovered the truth, I was in a fury. To be so near success and
    fail was terrible, and I resolved to risk everything. I opened the
    letter by means of a heated knife blade under the seal, therefore
    the envelope was perfect; imitating S.'s hand, I penned a few lines
    in his hasty style, saying he was at Baden, so that if Monsieur
    answered, the reply would not reach him, for he is in London, it
    seems. This letter I put into the pocket whence the other must have
    fallen, and was just congratulating myself on this narrow escape,
    when Dean, the maid of Vashti, appeared as if watching me. She had
    evidently seen the letter in my hand, and suspected something. I
    took no notice of her, but must be careful, for she is on the watch.
    After this the evening closed with strictly private theatricals, in
    which Monsieur and myself were the only actors. To make sure that he
    received my version of the story first, I told him a romantic story
    of S.'s persecution, and he believed it. This I followed up by a
    moonlight episode behind a rose hedge, and sent the young gentleman
    home in a half-dazed condition. What fools men are!"_

"She is right!" muttered Coventry, who had flushed scarlet with
shame and anger, as his folly became known and Lucia listened in
astonished silence.

"Only one more, and my distasteful task will be nearly over," said
Edward, unfolding the last of the papers. "This is not a letter, but a
copy of one written three nights ago. Dean boldly ransacked Jean Muir's
desk while she was at the Hall, and, fearing to betray the deed by
keeping the letter, she made a hasty copy which she gave me today,
begging me to save the family from disgrace. This makes the chain
complete. Go now, if you will, Gerald. I would gladly spare you the pain
of hearing this."

"I will not spare myself; I deserve it. Read on," replied Coventry,
guessing what was to follow and nerving himself to hear it. Reluctantly
his brother read these lines:

    _"The enemy has surrendered! Give me joy, Hortense; I can be the
    wife of this proud monsieur, if I will. Think what an honor for the
    divorced wife of a disreputable actor. I laugh at the farce and
    enjoy it, for I only wait till the prize I desire is fairly mine, to
    turn and reject this lover who has proved himself false to brother,
    mistress, and his own conscience. I resolved to be revenged on both,
    and I have kept my word. For my sake he cast off the beautiful woman
    who truly loved him; he forgot his promise to his brother, and put
    by his pride to beg of me the worn-out heart that is not worth a
    good man's love. Ah well, I am satisfied, for Vashti has suffered
    the sharpest pain a proud woman can endure, and will feel another
    pang when I tell her that I scorn her recreant lover, and give him
    back to her, to deal with as she will."_

Coventry started from his seat with a fierce exclamation, but Lucia
bowed her face upon her hands, weeping, as if the pang had been sharper
than even Jean foresaw.

"Send for Sir John! I am mortally afraid of this creature. Take her
away; do something to her. My poor Bella, what a companion for you! Send
for Sir John at once!" cried Mrs. Coventry incoherently, and clasped her
daughter in her arms, as if Jean Muir would burst in to annihilate the
whole family. Edward alone was calm.

"I have already sent, and while we wait, let me finish this story. It is
true that Jean is the daughter of Lady Howard's husband, the pretended
clergyman, but really a worthless man who married her for her money. Her
own child died, but this girl, having beauty, wit and a bold spirit,
took her fate into her own hands, and became an actress. She married an
actor, led a reckless life for some years; quarreled with her husband,
was divorced, and went to Paris; left the stage, and tried to support
herself as governess and companion. You know how she fared with the
Sydneys, how she has duped us, and but for this discovery would have
duped Sir John. I was in time to prevent this, thank heaven. She is
gone; no one knows the truth but Sydney and ourselves; he will be
silent, for his own sake; we will be for ours, and leave this dangerous
woman to the fate which will surely overtake her."

"Thank you, it has overtaken her, and a very happy one she finds it."

A soft voice uttered the words, and an apparition appeared at the door,
which made all start and recoil with amazement--Jean Muir leaning on the
arm of Sir John.

"How dare you return?" began Edward, losing the self-control so long
preserved. "How dare you insult us by coming back to enjoy the mischief
you have done? Uncle, you do not know that woman!"

"Hush, boy, I will not listen to a word, unless you remember where you
are," said Sir John with a commanding gesture.

"Remember your promise: love me, forgive me, protect me, and do not
listen to their accusations," whispered Jean, whose quick eye had
discovered the letters.

"I will; have no fears, my child," he answered, drawing her nearer as he
took his accustomed place before the fire, always lighted when Mrs.
Coventry was down.

Gerald, who had been pacing the room excitedly, paused behind Lucia's
chair as if to shield her from insult; Bella clung to her mother; and
Edward, calming himself by a strong effort, handed his uncle the
letters, saying briefly, "Look at those, sir, and let them speak."

"I will look at nothing, hear nothing, believe nothing which can in any
way lessen my respect and affection for this young lady. She has
prepared me for this. I know the enemy who is unmanly enough to belie
and threaten her. I know that you both are unsuccessful lovers, and this
explains your unjust, uncourteous treatment now. We all have committed
faults and follies. I freely forgive Jean hers, and desire to know
nothing of them from your lips. If she has innocently offended, pardon
it for my sake, and forget the past."

"But, Uncle, we have proofs that this woman is not what she seems. Her
own letters convict her. Read them, and do not blindly deceive
yourself," cried Edward, indignant at his uncle's words.

A low laugh startled them all, and in an instant they saw the cause of
it. While Sir John spoke, Jean had taken the letters from the hand which
he had put behind him, a favorite gesture of his, and, unobserved, had
dropped them on the fire. The mocking laugh, the sudden blaze, showed
what had been done. Both young men sprang forward, but it was too late;
the proofs were ashes, and Jean Muir's bold, bright eyes defied them, as
she said, with a disdainful little gesture. "Hands off, gentlemen! You
may degrade yourselves to the work of detectives, but I am not a
prisoner yet. Poor Jean Muir you might harm, but Lady Coventry is beyond
your reach."

"Lady Coventry!" echoed the dismayed family, in varying tones of
incredulity, indignation, and amazement.

"Aye, my dear and honored wife," said Sir John, with a protecting arm
about the slender figure at his side; and in the act, the words, there
was a tender dignity that touched the listeners with pity and respect
for the deceived man. "Receive her as such, and for my sake, forbear all
further accusation," he continued steadily. "I know what I have done. I
have no fear that I shall repent it. If I am blind, let me remain so
till time opens my eyes. We are going away for a little while, and when
we return, let the old life return again, unchanged, except that Jean
makes sunshine for me as well as for you."

No one spoke, for no one knew what to say. Jean broke the silence,
saying coolly, "May I ask how those letters came into your possession?"

"In tracing out your past life, Sydney found your friend Hortense. She
was poor, money bribed her, and your letters were given up to him as
soon as received. Traitors are always betrayed in the end," replied
Edward sternly.

Jean shrugged her shoulders, and shot a glance at Gerald, saying with
her significant smile, "Remember that, monsieur, and allow me to hope
that in wedding you will be happier than in wooing. Receive my
congratulations, Miss Beaufort, and let me beg of you to follow my
example, if you would keep your lovers."

Here all the sarcasm passed from her voice, the defiance from her eye,
and the one unspoiled attribute which still lingered in this woman's
artful nature shone in her face, as she turned toward Edward and Bella
at their mother's side.

"You have been kind to me," she said, with grateful warmth. "I thank you
for it, and will repay it if I can. To you I will acknowledge that I am
not worthy to be this good man's wife, and to you I will solemnly
promise to devote my life to his happiness. For his sake forgive me, and
let there be peace between us."

There was no reply, but Edward's indignant eyes fell before hers. Bella
half put out her hand, and Mrs. Coventry sobbed as if some regret
mingled with her resentment. Jean seemed to expect no friendly
demonstration, and to understand that they forbore for Sir John's sake,
not for hers, and to accept their contempt as her just punishment.

"Come home, love, and forget all this," said her husband, ringing the
bell, and eager to be gone. "Lady Coventry's carriage."

And as he gave the order, a smile broke over her face, for the sound
assured her that the game was won. Pausing an instant on the threshold
before she vanished from their sight, she looked backward, and fixing on
Gerald the strange glance he remembered well, she said in her
penetrating voice, "Is not the last scene better than the first?"



COMIC TRAGEDIES

Jo and Meg



                       [Illustration: JO AND MEG.

                    COPIES OF EARLY DAGUERREOTYPES.

"It was at this period of her life that she was violently attacked by a
mania for the stage, and writing and enacting dramas. Her older sister,
Anna, had the same taste, and assisted her in carrying out all her
plans."
                               _Mrs. Cheney's Life of Louisa M. Alcott._]




                            COMIC TRAGEDIES


                       WRITTEN BY "JO" AND "MEG"
                              AND ACTED BY
                           THE "LITTLE WOMEN"


                                 BOSTON
                            ROBERTS BROTHERS
                                  1893




                           _Copyright, 1893_,
                           By Anna B. Pratt.


                           University Press:
                 John Wilson and Son, Cambridge, U.S.A.




                               CONTENTS.
                                                                Page

    A Foreword, by Meg .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   7

    Norna; or, The Witch's Curse   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .  17

    The Captive of Castile; or, The Moorish
        Maiden's Vow   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .  97

    The Greek Slave    .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .     149

    Ion    .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .     211

    Bianca: an Operatic Tragedy    .   .   .   .   .   .   .     261

    The Unloved Wife; or, Woman's Faith    .   .   .   .   .     279




                           A FOREWORD BY MEG.

In the good old times, when "Little Women" worked and played together,
the big garret was the scene of many dramatic revels. After a long day
of teaching, sewing, and "helping mother," the greatest delight of the
girls was to transform themselves into queens, knights, and cavaliers of
high degree, and ascend into a world of fancy and romance. Cinderella's
godmother waved her wand, and the dismal room became a fairy-land.
Flowers bloomed, forests arose, music sounded, and lovers exchanged
their vows by moonlight. Nothing was too ambitious to attempt; armor,
gondolas, harps, towers, and palaces grew as if by magic, and wonderful
scenes of valor and devotion were enacted before admiring audiences.

Jo, of course, played the villains, ghosts, bandits, and disdainful
queens; for her tragedy-loving soul delighted in the lurid parts, and no
drama was perfect in her eyes without a touch of the demonic or
supernatural. Meg loved the sentimental rles, the tender maiden with
the airy robes and flowing locks, who made impossible sacrifices for
ideal lovers, or the cavalier, singing soft serenades and performing
lofty acts of gallantry and prowess. Amy was the fairy sprite, while
Beth enacted the page or messenger when the scene required their aid.

But the most surprising part of the performance was the length of the
cast and the size of the company; for Jo and Meg usually acted the whole
play, each often assuming five or six characters, and with rapid change
of dress becoming, in one scene, a witch, a soldier, a beauteous lady,
and a haughty noble. This peculiar arrangement accounts for many queer
devices, and the somewhat singular fact that each scene offers but two
actors, who vanish and reappear at most inopportune moments, and in a
great variety of costume. Long speeches were introduced to allow a
ruffian to become a priest, or a lovely damsel to disguise herself in
the garb of a sorceress; while great skill was required to preserve the
illusion, and astonish the audience by these wonderful transformations.

The young amateur of to-day, who can easily call to her aid all the arts
of the costumer and scene-maker, will find it hard to understand the
difficulties of this little company; for not only did they compose
their plays, but they were also their own carpenters, scene-painters,
property-men, dress-makers, and managers. In place of a well-appointed
stage, with the brilliant lights and inspiring accessories of a mimic
theatre, the "Little Women" had a gloomy garret or empty barn, and were
obliged to exercise all their ingenuity to present the scenes of their
ambitious dramas.

But it is surprising what fine effects can be produced with old sheets,
bright draperies, and a judicious arrangement of lights, garlands, and
picturesque properties; and Jo's dramatic taste made her an admirable
stage-manager. Meg was especially handy with saw and hammer, and acted
as stage-carpenter,--building balconies, thrones, boats, and towers
after peculiar designs of her own. Bureaus, tables, and chairs, piled
aloft and arched with dark shawls, made dungeon walls and witch's cave,
or formed a background for haunted forest and lonely glen. Screens of
white cloth furnished canvas on which little Amy's skilful hand depicted
palace halls, or romantic scene for lovers' tryst; and Beth's deft
fingers were most apt in constructing properties for stage adornment,
and transforming the frailest material into dazzling raiment. For the
costumes were a serious consideration. No money could be spared from the
slender purse to supply the wardrobes of these aspiring actors, and many
were the devices to clothe the little company.

Thus a robe in one scene became a cloak in the next, and the drapery of
a couch in the third; while a bit of lace served as mantle, veil, or
turban, as best suited the turn of the play. Hats covered with old
velvet, and adorned with feathers plucked from the duster, made most
effective headgear for gay cavalier or tragic villain. From colored
cotton were manufactured fine Greek tunics and flowing trains; and
remarkable court costumes were evolved from an old sofa-covering, which
had seen better days, and boasted a little gold thread and embroidery.

Stars of tin, sewed upon dark cambric, made a suit of shining armor.
Sandals were cut from old boots. Strips of wood and silver paper were
fashioned into daggers, swords, and spears, while from cardboard were
created helmets, harps, guitars, and antique lamps, that were considered
masterpieces of stage art.

Everything available was pressed into service; colored paper, odds and
ends of ribbon, even tin cans and their bright wrappings were treasures
to the young actors, and all reappeared as splendid properties.

At first a store of red curtains, some faded brocades, and ancient
shawls comprised the stage wardrobe; but as the fame of the performances
spread abroad, contributions were made to the little stock, and the
girls became the proud possessors of a velvet robe, a plumed hat adorned
with silver, long yellow boots, and a quantity of mock pearls and tinsel
ornaments.

Such wealth determined them to write a play which should surpass all
former efforts, give Jo a chance to stalk haughtily upon the stage in
the magnificent boots, and Meg to appear in gorgeous train and diadem of
jewels.

"The Witch's Curse" was the result, and it was produced with astounding
effect, quite paralyzing the audience by its splendid gloom. Jo called
it the "lurid drama," and always considered it her masterpiece. But it
cost hours of thought and labor; for to construct a dungeon, a haunted
chamber, a cavern, and a lonely forest taxed to the uttermost the
ingenuity of the actors. To introduce into one short scene a bandit, two
cavaliers, a witch, and a fairy spirit--all enacted by two
people--required some skill, and lightning change of costume. To call
up the ghostly visions and mysterious voices which should appall the
guilty Count Rodolpho, was a task of no small difficulty. But inspired
by the desire to outshine themselves, the children accomplished a play
full of revenge, jealousy, murder, and sorcery, of all which indeed they
knew nothing but the name.

Hitherto their dramas had been of the most sentimental description,
given to the portrayal of woman's devotion, filial affection, heroism,
and self-sacrifice. Indeed, these "Comic Tragedies" with their highflown
romance and fantastic ideas of love and honor, are most characteristic
of the young girls whose lives were singularly free from the experiences
of many maidens of their age.

Of the world they knew nothing; lovers were ideal beings, clothed with
all the beauty of their innocent imaginations. Love was a blissful
dream; constancy, truth, courage, and virtue quite every-day affairs of
life. Their few novels furnished the romantic element; the favorite
fairy-tales gave them material for the supernatural; and their strong
dramatic taste enabled them to infuse both fire and pathos into their
absurd situations.

Jo revelled in catastrophe, and the darker scenes were her delight; but
she usually required Meg to "do the love-part," which she considered
quite beneath her pen. Thus their productions were a queer mixture of
sentiment and adventure, with entire disregard of such matters as
grammar, history, and geography,--all of which were deemed of no
importance by these aspiring dramatists.

From the little stage library, still extant, the following plays have
been selected as fair examples of the work of these children of sixteen
and seventeen. With some slight changes and omissions, they remain as
written more than forty years ago by Meg and Jo, so dear to the hearts
of many other "Little Women."

    Concord, Mass., 1893.




                  [Illustration: THE THEATRE OF 1848.

"Those Concord days were the happiest of my life. Plays in the barn were
a favorite amusement."
                                                    _L. M. Alcott._]




  NORNA; OR, THE WITCH'S CURSE.

                              CHARACTERS.

    Count Rodolpho .   .   .   .   .    _A Haughty Noble._

    Count Louis    .   .   .   .   .    _Lover of Leonore._

    Adrian .   .   .   .   .   .   .    _The Black Mask._

    Hugo   .   .   .   .   .   .   .    _A Bandit._

    Gaspard    .   .   .   .   .   .    _Captain of the Guard._

    Angelo     .   .   .   .   .   .    _A Page._

    Theresa    .   .   .   .   .   .    _Wife to Rodolpho._

    Leonore    .   .   .   .   .   .    _In love with Louis._

    Norna      .   .   .   .   .   .    _A Witch._


                            COMIC TRAGEDIES.


                     NORNA; OR, THE WITCH'S CURSE.


                              SCENE FIRST.

    [_A room in the castle of_ Rodolpho. Theresa _discovered alone,
    and in tears._]

Theresa. I cannot pray; my aching heart finds rest alone in tears. Ah,
what a wretched fate is mine! Forced by a father's will to wed a
stranger ere I learned to love, one short year hath taught me what a
bitter thing it is to wear a chain that binds me unto one who hath
proved himself both jealous and unkind. The fair hopes I once cherished
are now gone, and here a captive in my splendid home I dwell forsaken,
sorrowing and alone [_weeps_]. [_Three taps upon the wall are heard._]
Ha, my brother's signal! What can bring him hither at this hour? Louis,
is it thou? Enter; "all's well."

    [_Enter_ Count Louis _through a secret panel in the wall,
    hidden by a curtain. He embraces_ Theresa.

Theresa. Ah, Louis, what hath chanced? Why art thou here? Some danger
must have brought thee; tell me, dear brother. Let me serve thee.

Louis. Sister dearest, thy kindly offered aid is useless now. Thou canst
not help me; and I must add another sorrow to the many that are thine. I
came to say farewell, Theresa.

Theresa. Farewell! Oh, brother, do not leave me! Thy love is all now
left to cheer my lonely life. Wherefore must thou go? Tell me, I beseech
thee!

Louis. Forgive me if I grieve thee. I will tell thee all. Thy husband
hates me, for I charged him with neglect and cruelty to thee; and he
hath vowed revenge for my bold words. He hath whispered false tales to
the king, he hath blighted all my hopes of rank and honor. I am banished
from the land, and must leave thee and Leonore, and wander forth an
outcast and alone. But--let him beware!--I shall return to take a deep
revenge for thy wrongs and my own. Nay, sister, grieve not thus. I have
sworn to free thee from his power, and I will keep my vow. Hope on and
bear a little longer, dear Theresa, and ere long I will bear thee to a
happy home [_noise is heard without_]. Ha! what is that? Who comes?

Theresa. 'Tis my lord returning from the court. Fly, Louis, fly! Thou
art lost if he discover thee. Heaven bless and watch above thee.
Remember poor Theresa, and farewell.

Louis. One last word of Leonore. I have never told my love, yet she hath
smiled on me, and I should have won her hand. Ah, tell her this, and bid
her to be true to him who in his exile will hope on, and yet return to
claim the heart he hath loved so faithfully. Farewell, my sister.
Despair not,--I shall return.

             [_Exit_ Louis _through the secret panel; drops his dagger._

Theresa. Thank Heaven, he is safe!--but oh, my husband, this last deed
of thine is hard to bear. Poor Louis, parted from Leonore, his fair
hopes blighted, all by thy cruel hand. Ah, he comes! I must be calm.

                                                      [_Enter_ Rodolpho.

Rod. What, weeping still? Hast thou no welcome for thy lord save tears
and sighs? I'll send thee to a convent if thou art not more gay!

Theresa. I'll gladly go, my lord. I am weary of the world. Its gayeties
but make my heart more sad.

Rod. Nay, then I will take thee to the court, and there thou _must_ be
gay. But I am weary; bring me wine, and smile upon me as thou used to
do. Dost hear me? Weep no more. [_Seats himself._ Theresa _brings wine
and stands beside him. Suddenly he sees the dagger dropped by_ Louis.]
Ha! what is that? 'Tis none of mine. How came it hither? Answer, I
command thee!

Theresa. I cannot. I must not, dare not tell thee.

Rod. Darest thou refuse to answer? Speak! Who hath dared to venture
hither? Is it thy brother? As thou lovest life, I bid thee speak.

Theresa. I am innocent, and will not betray the only one now left me on
the earth to love. Oh, pardon me, my lord; I will obey in all but this.

Rod. Thou _shalt_ obey. I'll take thy life but I will know. Thy brother
must be near,--this dagger was not here an hour ago. Thy terror hath
betrayed him. I leave thee now to bid them search the castle. But if I
find him not, I shall return; and if thou wilt not then confess, I'll
find a way to make thee. Remember, I have vowed,--thy secret or thy
life!

                                                       [_Exit_ Rodolpho.

Theresa. My life I freely yield thee, but my secret--never. Oh, Louis, I
will gladly die to save thee. Life hath no joy for me; and in the grave
this poor heart may forget the bitter sorrows it is burdened with
[_sinks down weeping_].

                                                      [_Enter_ Rodolpho.

Rod. The search is vain. He hath escaped. Theresa, rise, and answer me.
To whom belonged the dagger I have found? Thy tears avail not; I will be
obeyed. Kneel not to me, I will not pardon. Answer, or I swear I'll make
thee dumb forever.

Theresa. No, no! I will not betray. Oh, husband, spare me! Let not the
hand that led me to the altar be stained with blood I would so gladly
shed for thee. I cannot answer thee.

Rod. [_striking her_]. Then die: thy constancy is useless. I will find
thy brother and take a fearful vengeance yet.

Theresa. I am faithful to the last. Husband, I forgive thee.

                                                        [Theresa _dies._

Rod. 'Tis done, and I am rid of her forever; but 'tis an ugly deed. Poor
fool, there was a time when I could pity thee, but thou hast stood
'twixt me and Lady Leonore, and now I am free. I must conceal the form,
and none shall ever know the crime.

                                                       [_Exit_ Rodolpho.

                [_The panel opens and_ Norna _enters._]

Norna. Heaven shield us! What is this? His cruel hand hath done the
deed, and I am powerless to save. Poor, murdered lady, I had hoped to
spare thee this, and lead thee to a happier home. Perchance, 'tis better
so. The dead find rest, and thy sad heart can ache no more. Rest to thy
soul, sweet lady. But for _thee_, thou cruel villain, I have in store a
deep revenge for all thy sinful deeds. If there be power in spell or
charm, I'll conjure fearful dreams upon thy head. I'll follow thee
wherever thou mayst go, and haunt thy sleep with evil visions. I'll
whisper strange words that shall appall thee; dark phantoms shall rise
up before thee, and wild voices ringing in thine ear shall tell thee of
thy sins. By all these will I make life like a hideous dream, and death
more fearful still. Like a vengeful ghost I will haunt thee to thy
grave, and so revenge thy wrongs, poor, murdered lady. Beware, Rodolpho!
Old Norna's curse is on thee.

    [_She bears away_ Theresa's _body through the secret door, and
        vanishes._

                                CURTAIN.


                         NOTE TO SCENE SECOND.

The mysterious cave was formed of old furniture, covered with dark
draperies, an opening being left at the back wherein the spirits called
up by Norna might appear. A kitchen kettle filled with steaming water
made an effective caldron over which the sorceress should murmur her
incantations; flaming pine-knots cast a lurid glare over the scene; and
large boughs, artfully arranged about the stage, gave it the appearance
of a "gloomy wood."

When Louis "retires within," he at once arrays himself in the white
robes of the vision, and awaits the witch's call to rise behind the
aperture in true dramatic style. He vanishes, quickly resumes his own
attire, while Norna continues to weave her spells, till she sees he is
ready to appear once more as the disguised Count Louis.


                             SCENE SECOND.

    [_A wood._ Norna's _cave among the rocks._ _Enter_ Louis
            _masked._]

Louis. Yes; 'tis the spot. How dark and still! She is not here. Ho,
Norna, mighty sorceress! I seek thy aid.

Norna [_rising from the cave_]. I am here.

Louis. I seek thee, Norna, to learn tidings of one most dear to me. Dost
thou know aught of Count Rodolpho's wife? A strange tale hath reached me
that not many nights ago she disappeared, and none know whither she hath
gone. Oh, tell me, is this true?

Norna. It is most true.

Louis. And canst thou tell me whither she hath gone? I will reward thee
well.

Norna. I can. She lies within her tomb, in the chapel of the castle.

Louis. Dead!--it cannot be! They told me she had fled away with some
young lord who had won her love. Was it not true?

Norna. It is false as the villain's heart who framed the tale. _I_ bore
the murdered lady to her tomb, and laid her there.

Louis. Murdered? How? When? By whom? Oh, tell me I beseech thee!

Norna. Her husband's cruel hand took the life he had made a burden. I
heard him swear it ere he dealt the blow.

Louis. Wherefore did he kill her? Oh, answer quickly or I shall go mad
with grief and hate.

_Norna._ I can tell thee little. From my hiding-place I heard her vow
never to confess whose dagger had been found in her apartment, and her
jealous lord, in his wild anger, murdered her.

Louis. 'Twas mine. Would it had been sheathed in mine own breast ere it
had caused so dark a deed! Ah, Theresa, why did I leave thee to a fate
like this?

Norna. Young man, grieve not; it is too late to save, but there is left
to thee a better thing than grief.

Louis. Oh, what?

Norna. Revenge!

Louis. Thou art right. I'll weep no more. Give me thine aid, O mighty
wizard, and I will serve thee well.

Norna. Who art thou? The poor lady's lover?

Louis. Ah, no; far nearer and far deeper was the love I bore her, for I
am her brother.

Norna. Ha, that's well! Thou wilt join me, for I have made a vow to rest
not till that proud, sinful lord hath well atoned for this deep crime.
Spirits shall haunt him, and the darkest phantoms that my art can raise
shall scare his soul. Wilt thou join me in my work?

Louis. I will,--but stay! thou hast spoken of spirits. Dread sorceress,
is it in thy power to call them up?

Norna. It is. Wilt see my skill. Stand back while I call up a phantom
which thou canst not doubt.

    [Louis _retires within the cave._ Norna _weaves a spell above
        her caldron._

    Norna. O spirit, from thy quiet tomb,
    I bid thee hither through the gloom,
    In winding-sheet, with bloody brow,
    Rise up and hear our solemn vow.
    I bid thee, with my magic power,
    Tell the dark secret of that hour
    When cruel hands, with blood and strife,
    Closed the sad dream of thy young life.
    Hither--appear before our eyes.
    Pale spirit, I command thee _rise_.

                                           [_Spirit of_ Theresa _rises._

    Shadowy spirit, I charge thee well,
    By my mystic art's most potent spell,
    To haunt throughout his sinful life,
    The mortal who once called thee wife.
    At midnight hour glide round his bed,
    And lay thy pale hand on his head.
    Whisper wild words in his sleeping ear,
    And chill his heart with a deadly fear.
    Rise at his side in his gayest hour,
    And his guilty soul shall feel thy power.
    Stand thou before him in day and night,
    And cast o'er his life a darksome blight;
    For with all his power and sin and pride,
    He shall ne'er forget his murdered bride.
    Pale, shadowy form, wilt thou obey?
                                            [_The spirit bows its head._
    To thy ghostly work away--away!
                                                 [_The spirit vanishes._
    The spell is o'er, the vow is won,
    And, sinful heart, _thy_ curse begun.
                                                      [_Re-enter_ Louis.

Louis. 'Tis enough! I own thy power, and by the spirit of my murdered
sister I have looked upon, I swear to aid thee in thy dark work.

Norna. 'Tis well; and I will use my power to guard thee from the danger
that surrounds thee. And now, farewell. Remember,--thou hast sworn.


                                                          [_Exit_ Louis.

                                CURTAIN.


                              SCENE THIRD.

                      [_Another part of the wood.
                           Enter_ Rodolpho.]

Rod. They told me that old Norna's cave was 'mong these rocks, and yet I
find it not. By her I hope to learn where young Count Louis is
concealed. Once in my power, he shall not escape to whisper tales of
evil deeds against me. Stay! some one comes. I'll ask my way.

                                                [_Enter_ Louis _masked._

Ho, stand, good sir. Canst guide me to the cell of Norna, the old
sorceress?

Louis. It were little use to tell thee; thou wouldst only win a deeper
curse than that she hath already laid upon thee.

Rod. Hold! who art thou that dare to speak thus to Count Rodolpho?

Louis. That thou canst never know; but this I tell thee: I am thy
deadliest foe, and, aided by the wizard Norna, seek to work thee evil,
and bring down upon thy head the fearful doom thy sin deserves. Wouldst
thou know more,--then seek the witch, and learn the hate she bears thee.

Rod. Fool! thinkst thou I fear thee or thy enchantments? Draw, and
defend thyself! Thou shalt pay dearly for thine insolence to me!
                                                     [_Draws his sword._

Louis. I will not stain my weapon with a murderer's blood. I leave thee
to the fate that gathers round thee.

                                                         [_Exit_ Louis.

Rod. "Murderer," said he. I am betrayed,--yet no one saw the deed. Yet,
stay! perchance 'twas he who bore Theresa away. He has escaped me, and
will spread the tale. Nay, why should I fear? Courage! One blow, and I
am safe! [_Rushes forward. Spirit of_ Theresa _rises._] What's
that?--her deathlike face,--the wound my hand hath made! Help! help!
help!

                                     [_Rushes out. The spirit vanishes._

                                CURTAIN.


                             SCENE FOURTH.

                 [_Room in the castle of_ Rodolpho.
                           Rodolpho _alone._]

Rod. I see no way save that. Were young Count Louis dead she would
forget the love that had just begun, and by sweet words and gifts I may
yet win her. The young lord must die [_a groan behind the curtain_]. Ha!
what is that? 'Tis nothing; fie upon my fear! I'll banish all
remembrance of the fearful shape my fancy conjured up within the forest.
I'll not do the deed myself,--I have had enough of blood. Hugo the
bandit: he is just the man,--bold, sure of hand, and secret. I will
bribe him well, and when the deed is done, find means to rid me of him
lest he should play me false. I saw him in the courtyard as I entered.
Perchance he is not yet gone. Ho, without there! Bid Hugo here if he be
within the castle.--He is a rough knave, but gold will make all sure.

                                                          [_Enter_ Hugo.

Hugo. What would my lord with me?

Rod. I ask a favor of thee. Nay, never fear, I'll pay thee well. Wouldst
earn a few gold pieces?

Hugo. Ay, my lord, most gladly would I.

Rod. Nay, sit, good Hugo. Here is wine; drink, and refresh thyself.

Hugo. Thanks, my lord. How can I serve you?

            [Rodolpho _gives wine,_ Hugo _sits and drinks._]

Rod. Dost thou know Count Louis, whom the king lately banished?

Hugo. Nay, my lord; I never saw him.

Rod. [_aside_]. Ha! that is well. It matters not; 'tis not of him I
speak. Take more wine, good Hugo. Listen, there is a certain lord,--one
whom I hate. I seek his life. Here is gold--thou hast a dagger, and can
use it well. Dost understand me?

Hugo. Ay, my lord, most clearly. Name the place and hour; count out the
gold,--I and my dagger then are thine.

Rod. 'Tis well. Now harken. In the forest, near old Norna's cave, there
is a quiet spot. Do thou go there to-night at sunset. Watch well, and
when thou seest a tall figure wrapped in a dark cloak, and masked,
spring forth, and do the deed. Then fling the body down the rocks, or
hide it in some secret place. Here is one half the gold; more shall be
thine when thou shalt show some token that the deed is done.

Hugo. Thanks, Count; I'll do thy bidding. At sunset in the forest,--I'll
be there, and see he leaves it not alive. Good-even, then, my lord.

Rod. Hugo, use well thy dagger, and gold awaits thee. Yet, stay! I'll
meet thee in the wood, and pay thee there. They might suspect if they
should see thee here again so soon. I'll meet thee there, and so
farewell.

Hugo. Adieu, my lord.

                                                          [_Exit_ Hugo].

Rod. Yes; all goes well. My rival dead, and Leonore is mine. With her I
may forget the pale face that now seems ever looking into mine. I can
almost think the deep wound shows in her picture yonder. But this is
folly! Shame on thee, Rodolpho. I'll think of it no more. [_Turns to
drink._ Theresa's _face appears within the picture, the wound upon her
brow._] Ha! what is that? Am I going mad? See the eyes move,--it is
Theresa's face! Nay, I will not look again. Yes, yes; 'tis there! Will
this sad face haunt me forever?

Theresa. Forever! Forever!

Rod. Fiends take me,--'tis her voice! It is no dream. Ah, let me go
away--away!

                    [Rodolpho _rushes wildly out._]

                                CURTAIN.


                          NOTE TO SCENE FIFTH.

The apparently impossible transformations of this scene (when played by
two actors only) may be thus explained:--

The costumes of Louis and Norna, being merely loose garments, afford
opportunities for rapid change; and the indulgent audience overlooking
such minor matters as boots and wigs, it became an easy matter for Jo to
transform herself into either of the four characters which she assumed
on this occasion.

Beneath the flowing robes of the sorceress Jo was fully dressed as Count
Rodolpho. Laid conveniently near were the black cloak, hat, and mask of
Louis,--also the white draperies required for the ghostly Theresa.

Thus, Norna appears in long, gray robe, to which are attached the hood
and elf-locks of the witch. Seeing Hugo approach she conceals herself
among the trees, thus gaining time to don the costume of Louis, and
appear to Hugo who awaits him.

Hugo stabs and drags him from the stage. Louis then throws off his
disguise and becomes Rodolpho, fully dressed for his entrance a moment
later.

As Hugo does not again appear, it is an easy matter to assume the
character of the spectre and produce the sights and sounds which terrify
the guilty Count; then slipping on the witch's robe, be ready to glide
forth and close the scene with dramatic effect.


                            SCENE FIFTH.

                  [_The wood near_ Norna's _cave._
                          _Enter_ Norna.]

Norna. It is the hour I bid him come with the letter for Lady Leonore.
Poor youth, his sister slain, his life in danger, and the lady of his
love far from him, 'tis a bitter fate. But, if old Norna loses not her
power, he shall yet win his liberty, his love, and his revenge. Ah, he
comes,--nay, 'tis the ruffian Hugo. I will conceal myself,--some evil is
afoot [_hides among the trees_].

                                                          [_Enter_ Hugo.

Hugo. This is the spot. Here will I hide, and bide my time [_conceals
himself among the rocks_].

                                                         [_Enter_ Louis.

Louis. She is not here. I'll wait awhile and think of Leonore. How will
she receive this letter? Ah, could she know how, 'mid all my grief and
danger, her dear face shines in my heart, and cheers me on. [Hugo
_steals out, and as he turns, stabs him._] Ha, villain, thou hast killed
me! I am dying! God bless thee, Leonore! Norna, remember, vengeance on
Rodolpho! [_Falls_]

Hugo. Nay, nay, thou wilt take no revenge; thy days are ended, thanks to
this good steel. Now, for the token [_takes letter from_ Louis's
_hand_]. Ah, this he cannot doubt. I will take this ring too; 'tis a
costly one. I'll hide the body in the thicket yonder, ere my lord
arrives [_drags out the body_].

                                                      [_Enter_ Rodolpho.

Rod. Not here? Can he have failed? Here is blood--it may be his. I'll
call. Hugo, good Hugo, art thou here?

Hugo [_stealing from the trees_]. Ay, my lord, I am here. All is safely
done: the love-sick boy lies yonder in the thicket, dead as steel can
make him. And here is the token if you doubt me, and the ring I just
took from his hand [_gives letter_].

Rod. Nay, nay, I do not doubt thee; keep thou the ring. I am content
with this. Tell me, did he struggle with thee when thou dealt the blow?

Hugo. Nay, my lord; he fell without a groan, and murmuring something of
revenge on thee, he died. Hast thou the gold?

Rod. Yes, yes, I have it. Take it, and remember I can take thy life as
easily as thou hast his, if thou shouldst whisper what hath been this
day done. Now go; I've done with thee.

Hugo. And I with thee. Adieu, my lord.

                                                           [_Exit_ Hugo.

Rod. Now am I safe,--no mortal knows of Theresa's death by my hand, and
Leonore is mine.

Voice [_within the wood]._ Never--never!

Rod. Curses on me! Am I bewitched? Surely, I heard a voice; perchance
'twas but an echo [_a wild laugh rings through the trees_]. Fiends take
the wood! I'll stay no longer! [_Turns to fly._ Theresa's _spirit
rises._] 'Tis there,--help, help--[_Rushes wildly out._]

                                                         [_Enter_ Norna.

Norna. Ha, ha! fiends shall haunt thee, thou murderer! Another sin upon
thy soul,--another life to be avenged! Poor, murdered youth, now gone to
join thy sister. I will lay thee by her side and then to my work. He
hath raised another ghost to haunt him. Let him beware!

                                                          [_Exit_ Norna.

                                CURTAIN.


                              SCENE SIXTH.

                 [_Chamber in the castle of_ Lady Leonore.
                           _Enter_ Leonore.]

Leonore. Ah, how wearily the days go by. No tidings of Count Louis, and
Count Rodolpho urges on his suit so earnestly. I must accept his hand
to-day, or refuse his love, and think no more of Louis. I know not how
to choose. Rodolpho loves me: I am an orphan and alone, and in his
lovely home I may be happy. I have heard it whispered that he is both
stern and cruel, yet methinks it cannot be,--he is so tender when with
me. Ah, would I could forget Count Louis! He hath never told his love,
and doubtless thinks no more of her who treasures up his gentle words,
and cannot banish them, even when another offers a heart and home few
would refuse. How shall I answer Count Rodolpho when he comes? I do not
love him as I should, and yet it were no hard task to learn with so fond
a teacher. Shall I accept his love, or shall I reject?

                                              [Norna _suddenly appears._

Norna. Reject.

Leonore. Who art thou? Leave me, or I call for aid.

Norna. Nay, lady, fear not. I come not here to harm thee, but to save
thee from a fate far worse than death. I am old Norna of the forest, and
though they call me witch and sorceress, I am a woman yet, and with a
heart to pity and to love. I would save thy youth and beauty from the
blight I fear will fall upon thee.

Leonore. Save me! from what? How knowest thou I am in danger; and from
what wouldst thou save me, Norna?

Norna. From Lord Rodolpho, lady.

Leonore. Ah! and why from him? Tell on, I'll listen to thee now. He hath
offered me his heart and hand. Why should I not accept them, Norna?

Norna. That heart is filled with dark and evil passions, and that hand
is stained with blood. Ay, lady, well mayst thou start. I will tell thee
more. The splendid home he would lead thee to is darkened by a fearful
crime, and his fair palace haunted by the spirit of a murdered wife.

                                                   [Leonore _starts up._

Leonore. Wife, sayest thou? He told me he was never wed. Mysterious
woman, tell me more! How dost thou know 'tis true, and wherefore was it
done? I have a right to know. Oh, speak, and tell me all!

Norna. For that have I come hither. He hath been wed to a lady, young
and lovely as thyself. He kept her prisoner in his splendid home, and by
neglect and cruelty he broke as warm and true a heart as ever beat in
woman's breast. Her brother stole unseen to cheer and comfort her, and
this aroused her lord's suspicions, and he bid her to confess who was
her unknown friend. She would not yield her brother to his hate, and he
in his wild anger murdered her. I heard his cruel words, her prayers for
mercy, and I stood beside the lifeless form and marked the blow his evil
hand had given her. And there I vowed I would avenge the deed, and for
this have I come hither to warn thee of thy danger. He loves thee only
for thy wealth, and when thou art his, will wrong thee as he hath the
meek Theresa.

Leonore. How shall I ever thank thee for this escape from sorrow and
despair? I did not love him, but I am alone, and his kind words were
sweet and tender. I thought with him I might be happy yet, but--Ah, how
little did I dream of sin like this! Thank Heaven, 'tis not too late!

Norna. How wilt thou answer Lord Rodolpho now?

Leonore. I will answer him with all the scorn and loathing that I feel.
I fear him not, and he shall learn how his false vows are despised, and
his sins made known.

Norna. 'Tis well; but stay,--be thou not too proud. Speak fairly, and
reject him courteously; for he will stop at nought in his revenge if
thou but rouse his hatred. And now, farewell. I'll watch above thee, and
in thy hour of danger old Norna will be nigh. Stay, give me some token,
by which thou wilt know the messenger I may find cause to send thee. The
fierce Count will seek to win thee, and repay thy scorn by all the evil
his cruel heart can bring.

Leonore. Take this ring, and I will trust whoever thou mayst send with
it. I owe thee much, and, believe me, I am grateful for thy care, and
will repay thee by my confidence and truth. Farewell, old Norna; watch
thou above the helpless, and thine old age shall be made happy by my
care.

Norna. Heaven bless thee, gentle lady. Good angels guard thee. Norna
will not forget.

                                                          [_Exit_ Norna.

Leonore. 'Tis like a dream, so strange, so terrible,--he whom I thought
so gentle, and so true is stained with fearful crimes! Poor, murdered
lady! Have I escaped a fate like thine? Ah, I hear his step! Now, heart,
be firm and he shall enter here no more.

                                                      [_Enter_ Rodolpho.

Rod. Sweet lady, I am here to learn my fate. I have told my love, and
thou hast listened; I have asked thy hand, and thou hast not refused it.
I have offered all that I possess,--my home, my heart. Again I lay them
at thy feet, beloved Leonore. Oh, wilt thou but accept them, poor tho'
they be, and in return let me but claim this fair hand as mine own?

                                [_Takes her hand and kneels before her._

Leonore [_withdrawing her hand_]. My lord, forgive me, but I cannot
grant it. When last we met thou didst bid me ask my heart if it could
love thee. It hath answered, "Nay." I grieve I cannot make a fit return
for all you offer, but I have no love to give, and without it this poor
hand were worthless. There are others far more fit to grace thy home
than I. Go, win thyself a loving bride, and so forget Leonore.

Rod. What hath changed thee thus since last we met. Then wert thou kind,
and listened gladly to my love. Now there is a scornful smile upon thy
lips, and a proud light in thine eye. What means this? Why dost thou
look so coldly on me, Leonore? Who has whispered false tales in thine
ear? Believe them not. I am as true as Heaven to thee; then do not cast
away the heart so truly thine. Smile on me, dearest; thou art my first,
last, only love.

Leonore. 'Tis false, my lord! Hast thou so soon forgot _Theresa_?

Rod. What! Who told thee that accursed tale? What dost thou mean,
Leonore?

Leonore. I mean thy sinful deeds are known. Thou hast asked me why I
will not wed thee, and I answer, I will not give my hand unto a
murderer.

Rod. Murderer! No more of this! Thy tale is false; forget it, and I will
forgive the idle words. Now listen; I came hither to receive thy answer
to my suit. Think ere thou decide. Thou art an orphan, unprotected and
alone. I am powerful and great. Wilt thou take my love, and with it
honor, wealth, happiness, and ease, or my hate, which will surely follow
thee and bring down desolation on thee and all thou lovest? Now choose,
my hatred, or my love.

Leonore. My lord, I scorn thy love, and I defy thy hate. Work thy will,
I fear thee not. I am not so unprotected as thou thinkest. There are
unseen friends around me who will save in every peril, and who are sworn
to take revenge on thee for thy great sins. This is my answer;
henceforth we are strangers; now leave me. I would be alone.

Rod. Not yet, proud lady. If thou wilt not love, I'll make thee learn to
fear the heart thou hast so scornfully cast away. Let thy friends guard
thee well; thou wilt need their care when I begin my work of vengeance.
Thou mayst smile, but thou shalt rue the day when Count Rodolpho asked
and was refused. But I will yet win thee, and then beware! And when thou
dost pray for mercy on thy knees, remember the haughty words thou hast
this day spoken.

Leonore. Do thy worst, murderer; spirits will watch above me, and thou
canst not harm. Adieu, my lord.

                                                        [_Exit_ Leonore.

Rod. Foiled again! Some demon works against me. Who could have told her
of Theresa? A little longer, and I should have won a rich young bride,
and now this tale of murder mars it all. But I will win her yet, and
wring her proud heart till she shall bend her haughty head and sue for
mercy.

How shall it be done? Stay! Ha, I see a way!--the letter Louis would
have sent her ere he died. She knows not of his death, and I will send
this paper bidding her to meet her lover in the forest. She cannot doubt
the lines his own hand traced. She will obey,--and I'll be there to lead
her to my castle. I'll wed her, and she may scorn, weep, and pray in
vain. Ha, ha! proud Leonore, spite of thy guardian spirits thou shalt be
mine, and then for my revenge!

                                                       [_Exit_ Rodolpho.

                                CURTAIN.


                             SCENE SEVENTH.

                           [Leonore's _room_.
                   _Enter_ Leonore _with a letter_.]

Leonore. 'Tis strange; an unknown page thrust this into my hand while
kneeling in the chapel. Ah, surely, I should know this hand! 'Tis
Louis's, and at last he hath returned, and still remembers Leonore
[_opens letter and reads_].

     Dearest Lady,--I am banished from the land by Count Rodolpho's
     false tales to the king; and thus I dare not venture near thee.
     But by the love my lips have never told, I do conjure thee to
     bestow one last look, last word, on him whose cruel fate it is
     to leave all that he most fondly loves. If thou wilt grant this
     prayer, meet me at twilight in the glen beside old Norna's
     cave. She will be there to guard thee. Dearest Leonore, before
     we part, perchance forever, grant this last boon to one who in
     banishment, in grief and peril, is forever thy devoted
                                                          Louis.

He loves me, and mid danger still remembers. Ah, Louis, there is nothing
thou canst ask I will not gladly grant. I'll go; the sun is well-nigh
set, and I can steal away unseen to whisper hope and comfort ere we part
forever. Now, Count Rodolpho, thou hast given me another cause for hate.
Louis, I can love thee tho' thou art banished and afar.

Hark! 'tis the vesper-bell. Now, courage, heart, and thou shalt mourn no
longer.

                                                        [_Exit_ Leonore.

                                CURTAIN.


                             SCENE EIGHTH.

                      [_Glen near_ Norna's _cave.
                            Enter_ Leonore.]

Leonore. Norna is not here, nor Louis. Why comes he not? Surely 'tis the
place. Norna! Louis! art thou here?

                                            [_Enter_ Rodolpho, _masked_.

Rod. I am here, dear lady. Do not fear me; I may not unmask even to
thee, for spies may still be near me. Wilt thou pardon, and still trust
me tho' thou canst not see how fondly I am looking on thee. See! here is
my ring, my dagger. Oh, Leonore, do not doubt me!

Leonore. I do trust thee; canst thou doubt it now? Oh, Louis! I feared
thou wert dead. Why didst thou not tell me all before. And where wilt
thou go, and how can I best serve thee? Nought thou canst ask my love
shall leave undone.

Rod. Wilt thou let me guide thee to yonder tower? I fear to tell thee
here, and old Norna is there waiting for thee. Come, love, for thy
Louis's sake, dare yet a little more, and I will tell thee how thou
canst serve me. Wilt thou not put thy faith in me, Leonore?

Leonore. I will. Forgive me, if I seem to fear thee; but thy voice
sounds strangely hollow, and thine eyes look darkly on me from behind
this mask. Thou wilt lay it by when we are safe, and then I shall forget
this foolish fear that hangs upon me.

Rod. Thine own hands shall remove it, love. Come, it is not far. Would I
might guide thee thus through life! Come, dearest!

                                                                [_Exit._

                                CURTAIN.


                              SCENE NINTH.

              [_Castle of_ Rodolpho. _The haunted chamber.
                  Enter_ Rodolpho _leading_ Leonore.]

Leonore. Where art thou leading me, dear Louis? Thy hiding-place is a
pleasant one, but where is Norna? I thought she waited for us.

Rod. She will soon be here. Ah, how can I thank thee for this joyful
hour, Leonore. I can forget all danger and all sorrow now.

Leonore. Nay, let me cast away this mournful mask! I long to look upon
thy face once more. Wilt thou let me, Louis?

Rod. Ay, look upon me if thou wilt;--dost like it, lady? [_Drops his
disguise._ Leonore _shrieks, and rushes to the door, but finds it
locked_.] 'Tis useless; there are none to answer to thy call. All here
are my slaves, and none dare disobey. Where are thy proud words now?
hast thou no scornful smile for those white lips, no anger in those
beseeching eyes? Where are thy friends? Why come they not to aid thee?
Said I not truly my revenge was sure?

Leonore. Oh, pardon me, and pity! See, I will kneel to thee, pray, weep,
if thou wilt only let me go. Forgive my careless words! Oh, Count
Rodolpho, take me home, and I will forget this cruel jest [_kneels_].

Rod. Ha, ha! It is no jest, and thou hast no home but this. Didst thou
not come willingly? I used no force; and all disguise is fair in love.
Nay, kneel not to me. Did I not say thou wouldst bend thy proud head,
and sue for mercy, and I would deny it? Where is thy defiance now?

Leonore [_rising_]. I'll kneel no more to thee. The first wild fear is
past, and thou shalt find me at thy feet no more. As I told thee _then_,
I tell thee _now_,--thine I will never be; and think not I will fail or
falter at thy threats. Contempt of thee is too strong for fear.

Rod. Not conquered yet. Time will teach thee to speak more courteously
to thy master. Ah, thou mayst well look upon these bawbles. They were
thy lover's once. This ring was taken from his lifeless hand; this
dagger from his bleeding breast, as he lay within the forest whence I
led thee. This scroll I found next his heart when it had ceased to beat.
I lured thee hither with it, and won my sweet revenge. [Leonore _sinks
down weeping._] Now rest thee; for when the castle clock strikes ten, I
shall come to lead thee to the altar. The priest is there,--this ring
shall wed thee. Farewell, fair bride; remember,--there is no escape, and
thou art mine forever.

Leonore [_starting up_]. Never! I shall be free when thou mayst think
help past forever. There is a friend to help me, and an arm to save,
when earthly aid is lost. Thine I shall never be! Thou mayst seek me; I
shall be gone.

Rod. Thou wilt need thy prayers. I shall return,--remember, when the
clock strikes ten, I come to win my bride.

                                                                [_Exit._

Leonore. He has gone, and now a few short hours of life are left to me;
for if no other help shall come, death can save me from a fate I loathe.
Ah, Louis, Louis, thou art gone forever! Norna, where is thy promise now
to guard me? Is there no help? Nor tears nor prayers can melt that cruel
heart, and I am in his power. Ha! what is that?--_his_ dagger, taken
from his dying breast. How gladly would he have drawn it forth to save
his poor Leonore! Alas, that hand is cold forever! But I must be calm.
He shall see how a weak woman's heart can still defy him, and win
liberty by death [_takes the dagger; clock strikes ten_]. It is the
hour,--the knell of my young life. Hark! they come. Louis, thy Leonore
ere long will join thee, never more to part.

          [_The secret panel opens._ Adrian _enters masked._]

Adrian. Stay, lady! stay thy hand! I come to save thee. Norna sends
me,--see, thy token; doubt not, nor delay; another moment, we are lost.
Oh, fly, I do beseech thee!

Leonore. Heaven bless thee; I will come. Kind friend, I put a helpless
maiden's trust in thee.

Adrian. Stay not! away, away!

          [_Exit through the secret panel, which disappears._
              Enter_ Rodolpho.

Rod. Is my fair bride ready? Ha! Leonore, where art thou?

Voice. Gone,--gone forever!

Rod. Girl, mock me not; come forth, I say. Thou shalt not escape me.
Leonore, answer! Where is my bride?

Voice [_behind the curtains_]. Here--

Rod. Why do I fear? She is there concealed [_lifts the curtain; spirit
of_ Theresa _rises_]. The fiends! what is that? The spirit haunts me
still!

Voice. Forever, forever--

Rod. [_rushes to the door but finds it locked_]. What ho! without
there! Beat down the door! Pedro! Carlos! let me come forth! They do not
come! Nay, 'tis my fancy; I will forget it all. Still, the door is fast;
Leonore is gone. _Who_ groans so bitterly? Wild voices are sounding in
the air, ghastly faces are looking on me as I turn, unseen hands bar the
door, and dead men are groaning in mine ears. I'll not look, not listen;
'tis some spell set on me. Let it pass!

                             [_Throws himself down and covers his face._

Voice.  The spell will not cease,
        The curse will not fly,
        And spirits shall haunt
        Till the murderer shall die.

Rod. Again, spirit or demon, wherefore dost thou haunt me, and what art
thou? [Theresa's _spirit rises._] Ha! am I gone mad? Unbar the door!
Help! help! [_Falls fainting to the floor._]

                                                         [_Enter_ Norna.

Norna. Lie there, thou sinful wretch! Old Norna's curse ends but with
thy life.

                                                             [_Tableau._

                                CURTAIN.


                              SCENE TENTH.

                  [_A room in the castle of_ Rodolpho.
                           _Enter_ Rodolpho.]

Rod. Dangers seem thickening round me. Some secret spy is watching me
unseen,--I fear 'tis Hugo, spite the gold I gave him, and the vows he
made. A higher bribe may win the secret from him, and then I am undone.
Pedro hath told me that a stranger, cloaked and masked, was lurking near
the castle on the night when Leonore so strangely vanished [_a laugh_].
Ha!--what's that?--methought I heard that mocking laugh again! I am
grown fearful as a child since that most awful night. Well, well, let it
pass! If Hugo comes to-night, obedient to the message I have sent, I'll
see he goes not hence alive. This cup shalt be thy last, good Hugo!
[_Puts poison in the wine-cup._] He comes,--now for my revenge!
[_Enter_ Hugo.] Ah, Hugo, welcome! How hath it fared with thee since
last we met? Thou lookest weary,--here is wine; sit and refresh thyself.

Hugo. I came not hither, Count Rodolpho, to seek wine, but gold. Hark
ye! I am poor; thou art rich, but in my power, for proud and noble
though thou art, the low-born Hugo can bring death and dishonor on thy
head by whispering one word to the king. Ha!--now give me gold or I will
betray thee.

Rod. Thou bold villain, what means this? I paid thee well, and thou
didst vow to keep my secret. Threaten me not. Thou art in my power, and
shall never leave this room alive. I fear thee not. My menials are at
hand,--yield thyself; thou art fairly caught, and cannot now escape me.

Hugo. Nay, not so fast, my lord. One blast upon my horn, and my brave
band, concealed below, will answer to my call. Ha! ha! thou art caught,
my lord. Thy life is in my hands, and thou must purchase it by fifty
good pistoles paid down to me; if not, I will charge thee with the crime
thou didst bribe me to perform, and thus win a rich reward. Choose,--thy
life is nought to me.

Rod. Do but listen, Hugo. I have no gold; smile if thou wilt, but I am
poor. This castle only is mine own, and I am seeking now a rich young
bride whose wealth will hide my poverty. Be just, good Hugo, and forgive
the harsh words I have spoken. Wait till I am wed, and I will pay thee
well.

Hugo. That will I not. I'll have no more of thee, false lord! The king
will well reward me, and thou mayst keep thy gold. Farewell! Thou wilt
see me once again.

Rod. Stay, Hugo, stay! Give me but time; I may obtain the gold. Wait a
little, and it shall be thine. Wilt thou not drink? 'Tis the wine thou
likest so well. See! I poured it ready for thee.

Hugo. Nay; I will serve myself. Wine of thy mixing would prove too
strong for me [_sits down and drinks._ Rodolpho _paces up and down
waiting a chance to stab him_]. Think quickly, my good lord; I must be
gone [_turns his head._ R. _raises his dagger._ Hugo _rising_]. I'll
wait no more; 'tis growing late, and I care not to meet the spirits
which I hear now haunt thy castle. Well, hast thou the gold?

Rod. Not yet; but if thou wilt wait--

Hugo. I tell thee I will not. I'll be deceived no longer. Thou art mine,
and I'll repay thy scornful words and sinful deeds by a prisoner's cell.
And so, adieu, my lord. Escape is useless, for thou wilt be watched.
Hugo is the master now!

                                                           [_Exit_ Hugo.

Rod. Thou cunning villain, I'll outwit thee yet. I will disguise myself,
and watch thee well, and when least thou thinkest it, my dagger shall be
at thy breast. And now one thing remains to me, and that is flight. I
must leave all and go forth poor, dishonored, and alone; sin on my
head, and fear within my heart. Will the sun never set? How slow the
hours pass! In the first gloom of night, concealed in yonder old monk's
robe, I'll silently glide forth, and fly from Hugo and this haunted
house. Courage, Rodolpho, thou shalt yet win a name and fortune for
thyself. Now let me rest awhile; I shall need strength for the perils of
the night [_lies down and sleeps_].

                                                         [_Enter_ Norna.

Norna. Poor fool! thy greatest foe is here,--her thou shalt not escape.
Hugo shall be warned, and thou alone shalt fall.

                        [_She makes signs from the window and vanishes._

Rod. [_awakes and rises_]. Ah, what fearful dreams are mine!
Theresa--Louis--still they haunt me! Whither shall I turn? Who comes?
[_Enter_ Gaspard.] Art thou another phantom sent to torture me?

Gasp. 'Tis I, leader of the king's brave guards, sent hither to arrest
thee, my lord; for thou art charged with murder.

Rod. Who dares to cast so foul a stain on Count Rodolpho's name.

Gasp. My lord, yield thyself. The king may show thee mercy yet--

Rod. I will yield, and prove my innocence, and clear mine honor to the
king. Reach me my cloak yonder, and I am ready.

    [Gaspard _turns to seek the cloak._ Rodolpho _leaps from the
        window and disappears._

Gasp. Ha! he hath escaped,--curses on my carelessness! [_Rushes to the
window._] Ho, there! surround the castle, the prisoner hath fled! We'll
have him yet, the blood-stained villain!

                 [_Exit_ Gaspard. _Shouts and clashing of swords heard._

                                CURTAIN.


                            SCENE ELEVENTH.

                            [Norna's _cave._
                        Leonore _and_ _Adrian_.]

Adrian. Dear lady, can I do nought to while away the lonely hours? Shall
I go forth and bring thee flowers, or seek thy home and bear away thy
bird, thy lute, or aught that may beguile thy solitude? It grieves me
that I can do so little for thee.

Leonore. Nay, 'tis I should grieve that I can find no way to show my
gratitude to thee, my brave deliverer. But wilt thou not tell me who
thou art? I would fain know to whom I owe my life and liberty.

Adrian. Nay, that I may not tell thee. I have sworn a solemn vow, and
till that is fulfilled I may not cast aside this sorrowful disguise.
Meanwhile, thou mayst call me Adrian. Wilt thou pardon and trust me
still?

Leonore. Canst thou doubt my faith in thee? Thou and old Norna are the
only friends now left to poor Leonore. I put my whole heart's trust in
thee. But if thou canst not tell me of thyself, wilt tell me why thou
hast done so much for me, a friendless maiden?

Adrian. I fear it will cause thee sorrow, lady; and thou hast grief
enough to bear.

Leonore. Do not fear. I would so gladly know--

Adrian. Forgive me if I make thee weep: I had a friend,--most dear to
me. He loved a gentle lady, but ere he could tell her this, he died, and
bid me vow to watch above her whom he loved, and guard her with my life.
I took the vow: that lady was thyself, that friend Count Louis.

Leonore. Ah, Louis! Louis! that heart thou feared to ask is buried with
thee.

Adrian. Thou didst love him, lady?

Leonore. Love him? Most gladly would I lie down within my grave
tonight, could I but call him back to life again.

Adrian. Grieve not; thou hast one friend who cannot change,--one who
through joy and sorrow will find his truest happiness in serving thee.
Hist! I hear a step: I will see who comes.

                                                        [_Exit_ Adrian.

Leonore. Kind, watchful friend, how truly do I trust thee!

                                                     [_Re-enter_ Adrian.

Adrian. Conceal thyself, dear lady, with all speed. 'Tis Count Rodolpho.
Let me lead thee to the inner cave,--there thou wilt be safe.

             [_They retire within; noise heard without. Enter_ Rodolpho.

Rod. At last I am safe. Old Norna will conceal me till I can find means
to leave the land. Ha!--voices within there. Ho, there! old wizard,
hither! I have need of thee!

                                                        [_Enter_ Adrian.

Adrian. What wouldst thou?

Rod. Nought. Get thee hence! I seek old Norna.

Adrian. Thou canst not see her; she is not here.

Rod. Not here? 'Tis false,--I heard a woman's voice within there. Let me
pass!

Adrian. 'Tis not old Norna, and thou canst not pass.

Rod. Ah, then, who might it be, my most mysterious sir?

Adrian. The Lady Leonore.

Rod. Ha!--how came she hither? By my soul, thou liest! Stand back and
let me go. She is mine!

Adrian. Thou canst only enter here above my lifeless body. Leonore is
here, and I am her protector and thy deadliest foe. 'Tis for thee to
yield and leave this cell.

Rod. No more of this,--thou hast escaped me once. Draw and defend
thyself, if thou hast courage to meet a brave man's sword!

Adrian. But for Leonore I would not stoop so low, or stain my sword; but
for her sake I'll dare all, and fight thee to the last.

                            [_They fight their way out. Enter_ Rodolpho.

Rod. At length fate smiles upon me. I am the victor,--and now for
Leonore! All danger is forgotten in the joy of winning my revenge on
this proud girl! Thou art mine at last, Leonore, and mine forever!
[_Rushes towards the inner cave. Spirit of_ Theresa _rises._] There 'tis
again! I will not fly,--I do defy it! [_Attempts to pass. Spirit touches
him; he drops his sword and rushes wildly away._] 'Tis vain: I
cannot--dare not pass. It comes, it follows me. Whither shall I fly?

                                        [_Exit. Enter_ Adrian _wounded._

Adrian. I have saved her once again,--but oh, this deathlike faintness
stealing o'er me robs me of my strength. Thou art safe, Leonore, and I
am content. [_Falls fainting._]

                                                       [_Enter_ Leonore.

Leonore. They are gone. Ah, what has chanced? I heard his voice, and now
'tis still as death. Where is my friend? God grant he be not hurt! I'll
venture forth and seek him [_sees_ Adrian _unconscious before her_]. Oh,
what is this? Adrian, kind friend, dost thou not hear me? There is blood
upon his hand! Can he be dead? No, no! he breathes, he moves; this mask,
I will remove it,--surely he will forgive.

                             [_Attempts to unmask him; he prevents her._

Adrian [_reviving_]. Nay, nay; it must not be. I am better now. The blow
but stunned me,--it will pass away. And thou art safe?

Leonore. I feared not for myself, but thee. Come, rest thee here, thy
wound is bleeding; let me bind it with my kerchief, and bring thee wine.
Let me serve thee who hath done so much for me. Art better now! Can I do
aught else for thee?

Adrian. No more, dear lady. Think not of me, and listen while I tell
thee of the dangers that surround thee. Count Rodolpho knows thou art
here, and may return with men and arms to force thee hence. My single
arm could then avail not, though I would gladly die for thee. Where then
can I lead thee,--no place can be too distant, no task too hard for him
whose joy it is to serve thee.

Leonore. Alas! I know not. I dare not seek my home while Count Rodolpho
is my foe; my servants would be bribed,--they would betray me, and thou
wouldst not be there to save. Adrian, I have no friend but thee. Oh,
pity and protect me!

Adrian. Most gladly will I, dearest lady. Thou canst never know the joy
thy confidence hath wakened in my heart. I will save and guard thee with
my life. I will guide thee to a peaceful home where no danger can
approach, and only friends surround thee. Thy Louis dwelt there once,
and safely mayst thou rest till danger shall be past. Will this please
thee?

Leonore. Oh, Adrian, thou kind, true friend, how can I tell my
gratitude, and where find truer rest than in _his_ home, where gentle
memories of him will lighten grief. Then take me there, and I will prove
my gratitude by woman's fondest friendship, and my life-long trust.

Adrian. Thanks, dear lady. I need no other recompense than the joy 'tis
in my power to give thee. I will watch faithfully above thee, and when
thou needest me no more, I'll leave thee to the happiness thy gentle
heart so well deserves. Now rest, while I seek out old Norna, and
prepare all for our flight. The way we have to tread is long and weary.
Rest thee, dear lady.

Leonore. Adieu, dear friend. I will await thee ready for our pilgrimage,
and think not I shall fail or falter, though the path be long, and
dangers gather round us. I shall not fear, for thou wilt be there. God
bless thee, Adrian.

                                                             [_Tableau._

                                CURTAIN.


                             SCENE TWELFTH.

                    [_Room in the castle of_ Louis.
                    Leonore _singing to her lute._]

    The weary bird mid stormy skies,
      Flies home to her quiet nest,
    And 'mid the faithful ones she loves,
      Finds shelter and sweet rest.

    And thou, my heart, like to tired bird,
      Hath found a peaceful home,
    Where love's soft sunlight gently falls,
      And sorrow cannot come.

Leonore. 'Tis strange that I can sing, but in this peaceful home my
sorrow seems to change to deep and quiet joy. Louis seems ever near, and
Adrian's silent acts of tenderness beguile my solitary hours, and daily
grow more dear to me. He guards me day and night, seeking to meet my
slightest wish, and gather round me all I hold most dear. [_Enter a_
Page.] Angelo, what wouldst thou?

Page. My master bid me bring these flowers and crave thee to accept them
lady.

Leonore. Bear him my thanks, and tell him that his gift is truly
welcome. [_Exit_ Page.] These are the blossoms he was gathering but now
upon the balcony; he hath sent the sweetest and the fairest [_a letter
falls from the nosegay_]. But what is here? He hath never sent me aught
like this before [_opens and reads the letter_].

    Dearest Lady,--Wilt thou pardon the bold words I here address
    to thee, and forgive me if I grieve one on whom I would bestow
    only the truest joy. In giving peace to thy heart I have lost
    mine own. I was thy guide and comforter, and soon, unknown to
    thee, thy lover. I love thee, Leonore, fondly and truly; and
    here I ask, wilt thou accept the offering of a heart that will
    forever cherish thee. If thou canst grant this blessed boon,
    fling from the casement the white rose I send thee; but if thou
    canst not accept my love, forgive me for avowing it, and drop
    the cypress bough I have twined about the rose. I will not pain
    thee to refuse in words,--the mournful token is enough. Ask
    thine own heart if thou, who hast loved Louis, can feel aught
    save friendship for the unknown, nameless stranger, who through
    life and death is ever
        Thy loving                                       Adrian.

Oh, how shall I reply to this,--how blight a love so tender and so true?
I have longed to show my gratitude, to prove how I have revered this
noble friend. The hour has come when I may make his happiness, and prove
my trust. And yet my heart belongs to Louis, and I cannot love another.
Adrian was his friend; he loved him, and confided me to him. Nobly hath
he fulfilled that trust, and where could I find a truer friend than he
who hath saved me from danger and from death, and now gives me the power
to gladden and to bless his life. Adrian, if thou wilt accept a sister's
love and friendship, they shall be thine. Louis, forgive me if I wrong
thee; for though I yield my hand, my heart is thine forever. This rose,
Adrian, to thee; this mournful cypress shall be mine in memory of my
blighted hopes [_goes to the_ _window and looks out_]. See! he is
waiting yonder by the fountain for the token that shall bring him joy or
sorrow. Thou noble friend, thy brave, true heart shall grieve no longer,
for thus will Leonore repay the debt of gratitude she owes thee [_flings
the rose from the window_]. He hath placed it in his bosom, and is
coming hither to pour forth his thanks for the poor gift bestowed. I
will tell him all, and if he will accept, then I am his.

                                        [_Enter_ Adrian _with the rose_.

Adrian. Dear lady, how can I tell thee the joy thou hast given me. This
blessed flower from thy dear hand hath told thy pardon and consent. Oh,
Leonore, canst thou love a nameless stranger who is so unworthy the
great boon thou givest.

Leonore. Listen, Adrian, ere thou dost thank me for a divided heart.
Thou hast been told my love for Louis; he was thy friend, and well thou
knowest how true and tender was the heart he gave me. He hath gone, and
with him rests my first deep love. Thou art my only friend and my
protector; thou hast won my gratitude and warmest friendship. I can
offer thee a sister's pure affection,--my hand is thine; and here I
pledge thee that as thou hast watched o'er me, so now thy happiness
shall be my care, thy love my pride and joy. Here is my hand,--wilt thou
accept it, Adrian?

Adrian. I will. I would not seek to banish from thy heart the silent
love thou bearest Louis. I am content if thou wilt trust me with thy
happiness, and give me the sweet right to guide and guard thee through
the pilgrimage of life. God bless thee, dearest.

Leonore. Dear Adrian, can I do nought for thee? I have now won the right
to cheer thy sorrows. Have faith in thy Leonore.

Adrian. Thou hast a right to know all, and ere long thou shalt. My
mysterious vow will now soon be fulfilled, and then no doubt shall part
us. Thou hast placed thy trust in me, and I have not betrayed it, and
now I ask a greater boon of thy confiding heart. Wilt thou consent to
wed me ere I cast aside this mask forever? Believe me, thou wilt not
regret it,--'tis part of my vow; one last trial, and I will prove to
thee thou didst not trust in vain. Forgive if I have asked too much.
Nay, thou canst not grant so strange a boon.

Leonore. I can--I will. I did but pause, for it seemed strange thou
couldst not let me look upon thy face. But think not that I fear to
grant thy wish. Thy heart is pure and noble, and that thou canst not
mask. As I trusted thee through my despair, so now I trust thee in my
joy. Canst thou ask more, dear friend?

Adrian. Ever trust me thus! Ah, Leonore, how can I repay thee? My love,
my life, are all I can give thee for the blessed gift thou hast
bestowed. A time will come when all this mystery shall cease and we
shall part no more. Now must I leave thee, dearest. Farewell! Soon will
I return.

                                                         [_Exit_ Adrian.

Leonore. I will strive to be a true and loving wife to thee, dear
Adrian; for I have won a faithful friend in thee forever.


                                CURTAIN.


                           SCENE THIRTEENTH.

                 [_Hall in the castle of_ Count Louis.
                 _Enter_ Leonore, _in bridal robes_.]

Leonore. At length the hour hath come, when I shall look upon the face
of him whom I this day have sworn to love and honor as a wife. I have,
perchance, been rash in wedding one I know not, but will not cast a
doubt on him who hath proved the noble heart that beats within his
breast. I am his, and come what may, the vows I have this day made shall
be unbroken. Ah, he comes; and now shall I gaze upon my husband's face!

                                                        [_Enter_ Adrian.

Adrian. Dearest, fear not. Thou wilt not trust me less when thou hast
looked upon the face so long concealed. My vow is ended, thou art won.
Thy hand is mine; Leonore, I claim thy heart.

                [_Unmasks._ Leonore _screams and falls upon his breast_.

Leonore. Louis, Louis! 'Tis a blessed dream!

Louis. No dream, my Leonore; it is thy living Louis who hath watched
above thee, and now claims thee for his own. Ah, dearest, I have tried
thee too hardly,--pardon me!

Leonore. Oh, Louis, husband, I have nought to pardon; my life, my
liberty, my happiness,--all, all, I owe to thee. How shall I repay thee?
[_Weeps upon his bosom._]

Louis. By banishing these tears, dear love, and smiling on me as you
used to do. Here, love, sit beside me while I tell thee my most strange
tale, and then no longer shalt thou wonder. Art happy now thy Adrian
hath flung by his mask?

Leonore. Happy! What deeper joy can I desire than that of seeing thy
dear face once more? But tell me, Louis, how couldst thou dwell so long
beside me and not cheer my bitter sorrow when I grieved for thee.

Louis. Ah, Leonore, thou wouldst not reproach me, didst thou know how
hard I struggled with my heart, lest I should by some tender word, some
fond caress, betray myself when thou didst grieve for me.

Leonore. Why didst thou fear to tell thy Leonore? She would have aided
and consoled thee. Why didst thou let me pine in sorrow at thy side,
when but a word had filled my heart with joy?

Louis. Dearest, I dared not. Thou knowest I was banished by the hate of
that fiend Rodolpho. I had a fair and gentle sister, whom he wed, and
after cruelty and coldness that I dread to think of now, he murdered
her. I sought old Norna's aid. She promised it, and well hath kept her
word. When Count Rodolpho's ruffian left me dying in the forest, she
saved, and brought me back to life. She bade me take a solemn vow not to
betray myself, and to aid her in her vengeance on the murderer of
Theresa. Nor could I own my name and rank, lest it should reach the king
who had banished me. The vow I took, and have fulfilled.

Leonore. And is there no danger now? Art thou safe, dear Louis, from the
Count?

Louis. Fear not, my love. He will never harm us more; his crimes are
known. The king hath pardoned me. I have won thee back. He is an
outcast, and old Norna's spells have well-nigh driven him mad. My
sister, thou art well avenged! Alas! alas! would I could have saved, and
led thee hither to this happy home.

Leonore. Ah, grieve not, Louis; she is happy now, and thy Leonore will
strive to fill her place. Hast thou told me all?

Louis. Nay, love. Thou knowest how I watched above thee, but thou canst
never know the joy thy faithful love for one thou mourned as dead hath
brought me. I longed to cast aside the dark disguise I had vowed to
wear, but dared not while Rodolpho was at liberty. Now all is safe. I
have tried thy love, and found it true. Oh, may I prove most worthy of
it, dearest.

Leonore. Louis, how can I love too faithfully the friend who, 'mid his
own grief and danger, loved and guarded me. I trusted thee as Adrian; as
Louis I shall love thee until death.

Louis. And I shall prize most tenderly the faithful heart that trusted
me through doubt and mystery. Now life is bright and beautiful before
us, and may you never sorrow that thou gav'st thy heart to Louis, and
thy hand to Adrian the "Black Mask."

                                CURTAIN.


                           SCENE FOURTEENTH.

                           [_A dungeon cell._
                       Rodolpho _chained, asleep.
                             Enter_ Norna.]

    Norna. Thy fate is sealed, thy course is run,
           And Norna's work is well-nigh done.

                                                [_Vanishes. Enter_ Hugo.

Rod. [_awaking_]. Mine eyes are bewildered by the forms I have looked
upon in sleep. Methought old Norna stood beside me, whispering evil
spells, calling fearful phantoms to bear me hence.

Hugo [_coming forward_]. Thy evil conscience gives thee little rest, my
lord.

Rod. [_starting up_]. Who is there? Stand back! I'll sell my life most
dearly. Ah, 'tis no dream,--I am fettered! Where is my sword?

Hugo. In my safe keeping, Count Rodolpho, lest in thy rage thou may'st
be tempted to add another murder to thy list of sins. [Rodolpho _sinks
down in despair._] Didst think thou couldst escape? Ah, no; although
most swift of foot and secret, Hugo hath watched and followed thee. I
swore to win both gold and vengeance. The king hath offered high reward
for thy poor head, and it is mine. Methinks it may cheer your solitude
my lord, so I came hither on my way to bear thy death warrant to the
captain of the guard. What wilt thou give for this? Hark ye! were this
destroyed, thou might'st escape ere another were prepared. How dost thou
like the plot?

Rod. And wilt thou save me, Hugo? Give me not up to the king! I'll be
thy slave. All I possess is thine. I'll give thee countless gold. Ah,
pity, and save me, Hugo!

Hugo. Ha, ha! I did but jest. Thinkest thou I could forego the joy of
seeing thy proud head laid low? Where was thy countless gold when I did
ask it of thee? No, no; thou canst not tempt me to forget my vengeance.
'Tis Hugo's turn to play the master now. Mayst thou rest well, and so,
good even, my lord.

                                                            [_Exit_ Hugo.

Rod. Thus end my hopes of freedom. My life is drawing to a close, and
all my sins seem rising up before me. The forms of my murdered victims
flit before me, and their dying words ring in mine ears,--Leonore
praying for mercy at my feet; old Norna whispering curses on my soul.
How am I haunted and betrayed! Oh, fool, fool that I have been! My
pride, my passion, all end in this! Hated, friendless, and alone, the
proud Count Rodolpho dies a felon's death. 'Tis just, 'tis just!
[_Enter_ Louis _masked._] What's that? Who spoke? Ah, 'tis mine unknown
foe. What wouldst thou here?

Louis. Thou didst bribe one Hugo to murder the young Count Louis, whom
thou didst hate. He did thy bidding, and thy victim fell; but Norna
saved, and healed his wounds. She told him of his murdered sister's
fate, and he hath joined her in her work of vengeance, and foiled thee
in thy sinful plots. I saved Leonore, and guarded her till I had won her
heart and hand, and in her love find solace for the sorrow thou hast
caused. Dost doubt the tale? Look on thine unknown foe, and find it true
[_unmasks_].

Rod. Louis, whom I hated, and would kill,--thou here, thou husband of
Leonore, happy and beloved! It is too much, too much! If thou lovest
life, depart. I'm going mad: I see wild phantoms whirling round me,
voices whispering fearful words within mine ears. Touch me not,--there
is blood upon my hands! Will this dream last forever?

Louis. May Heaven pity thee! Theresa, thou art avenged.

                                                          [_Exit_ Louis.

Rod. Ah, these are fearful memories for a dying hour! [_Casts himself
upon the floor._]

                                                         [_Enter_ Norna.

Norna. Sinful man, didst think thy death-bed could be peaceful? As they
have haunted thee in life, so shall spirits darken thy last hour. _I_
bore thy murdered wife to a quiet grave, and raised a spirit to affright
and haunt thee to thy death. _I_ freed the Lady Leonore; _I_ mocked and
haunted thee in palace, wood, and cell; _I_ warned Hugo, and betrayed
thee to his power; and _I_ brought down this awful doom upon thee. As
thou didst refuse all mercy to thy victims, so shall mercy be denied to
thee. Remorse and dark despair shall wring thy heart, and thou shalt die
unblessed, unpitied, unforgiven. Thy victims are avenged, and Norna's
work is done.

                                                      [Norna _vanishes._

Rod. Ha! ha! 'tis gone,--yet stay, 'tis Louis' ghost! How darkly his
eyes shine on me! See, see,--the demons gather round me! How fast they
come! Old Norna is there, muttering her spells. Let me go free! Unbind
these chains! Hugo, Louis, Leonore, Theresa,--thou art avenged!

                 [_Falls dead._ Norna _glides in and stands beside him._

                                                             [_Tableau._


                                CURTAIN.




                           CAPTIVE OF CASTILE;

                                   OR,

                       THE MOORISH MAIDEN'S VOW.


                              CHARACTERS.
    Bernardo   .   .   .   .   .   .    _Lord of Castile._

    Ernest L'Estrange  .   .   .   .    _An English Lord._

    Hernando   .   .   .   .   .   .    _A Priest._

    Selim  .   .   .   .   .   .   .    _A Slave._

    Zara   .   .   .   .   .   .   .    _Daughter to Bernardo._


                          CAPTIVE OF CASTILE;

                                   OR

                       THE MOORISH MAIDEN'S VOW.


                              SCENE FIRST.

                     [_A thick wood. Storm coming on.
                            Enter_ Ernest.]

Ernest. This summer sky, darkened by storm, is a fit emblem of my life.
O happy England, why did I leave thee; why let dreams of fame and honor
win me from a home, to wander now a lonely and bewildered fugitive? But
why do I repine? Life, health, and a brave heart yet are mine; and 'mid
all my peril, God may send some joy to cheer me on to happiness and
honor. Hist! a footstep. 'Tis a light one, but a Moorish foe steals
like a serpent on his prey. I'll hide me here, and if need be I'll sell
my life as a brave man should [_conceals himself among the trees_].

                                               [_Enter_ Zara, _weeping._

Zara. Heaven shield me! Whither shall I turn? Alone in this wild forest,
where may I find a friend to help. The dark storm gathers fast, and I am
shelterless. The fierce Spaniard may be wandering nigh, and I dare not
call for aid. Mistress of a hundred slaves, here must I perish for one
to lead me. Father, the faint heart turns to thee when earthly help is
past; hear and succor thy poor child now, who puts her trust in thee.

Ernest [_coming forward_]. Lady, thy prayer is heard. God hath not sent
me here in vain. How may I best serve thee?

Zara. Gentle stranger, pity and protect a hapless maid who puts her
faith in thee. Guide me from this wild wood, and all the thanks a
grateful heart can give are thine.

Ernest. I ask no higher honor than to shield so fair a flower from the
storm, or from rude hands that may harm it. But how chanced it, lady,
that thou art wandering thus unattended? 'Tis unsafe for youth and
beauty while the Spanish army is so near.

Zara. It was a foolish fancy led me hither, and dearly am I punished.
Journeying from a distant convent to my father's home, while my
attendants rested by a spring I wandered through the wood, unthinking of
the danger, till turning to retrace my steps, I found myself lost and
alone. I feared to call, and but for thee, kind stranger, might have
never seen my home again. Ask not my name, but tell me thine, that in my
prayers I may remember one who has so aided me.

Ernest. It were uncourteous to refuse thy bidding, lady. Ernest
L'Estrange is the name now honored by the poor service I may do thee. In
the Spanish army I came hither, and fear I have seen the last of home
or friends. The Moors now seek my life, and ere I can rejoin my ranks, I
may be a slave. But the storm draws nearer. Let me lead thee to some
shelter, lady.

Zara. Methinks I see a glimmer yonder. Let us seek it, for with thee I
fear no longer. I can only give thee thanks, most noble stranger; yet a
day may come when she for whom thou dost now risk thy life may find a
fit return, worthy thy courtesy to one so helpless and forlorn.

                                              [_Exit_ Ernest _and_ Zara.

                                CURTAIN.


                             SCENE SECOND.

            [_Room in the castle of_ Bernardo. Zara _alone_].

Zara. 'Tis strange how the thought haunts me still. Long months have
passed since last I saw that noble face, and yet those gentle eyes look
on me! Ernest!--'tis a sweet English name, and 'twas a noble English
heart that felt such tender pity for a helpless maid. Hark! my father's
step! He comes to tell of victories gained, of kingdoms won. Oh, would
he might bring some word of him I have so longed to see and thank once
more!

                                      [_Enter_ Bernardo _with a casket._

Ber. Joyful tidings, Zara! Grenada is free. Here, love, are gems for
thee; they have shone on many a fair lady's neck, but none more fair
than thine. And here are things more precious far to me than all their
gold and gems,--a goodly list of prisoners taken in the fight, and sent
to cool their Spanish blood in our deepest cells. Ah, many a proud name
is here,--Ferdinand Navarre, Carlos of Arragon, Lord L'Estrange, and
Baron Lisle. But, child, what ails thee?

Zara [_starting up_]. L'Estrange! Is he a prisoner too? Hast thou read
aright? Father, Father, it was he who saved me from a bitter death in
yonder forest. I never told his name lest it should anger thee. For my
sake spare him, and let the gratitude thou hast felt for that kind deed
soften thy heart to the brave stranger.

Ber. Nay, Zara! He is thy country's foe, and must be sacrificed to save
her honor. 'Twas a simple deed thou hast spoken of. What brave man but
would save a fair girl from storms or danger? 'Tis a foolish thought,
love; let it pass.

Zara. Oh, Father! I who never bent the knee to man before, implore thee
thus [_kneels_]. Be merciful! Leave not the English lord to the dark and
fearful doom that waits him. I know too well the life-long captivity,
more terrible than death itself, that is his fate. Oh, speak! Say he is
forgiven, Father!

Ber. Nay, what wild dream is this? Listen, child! I tell thee he must
suffer the captivity he merits as thy country's foe. He hath borne arms
against thy king, slain thy kindred, brought woe and desolation thro'
the land our fathers gave us. And thou wouldst plead for him! Shame on
thee! Thou art no true daughter of thy suffering country if thou canst
waste one tear on those who were well lodged in our most dreary
dungeons. Call thy pride to aid thee, Zara, and be worthy of thy noble
name.

Zara. Father, thou hast often told me woman's lot was 'mid the quiet
scenes of home, and that no thoughts of fame or glory should lie within
a heart where only gentleness and love should dwell; but I have learned
to honor bravery and noble deeds, and I would pledge my troth for the
noble stranger. See the English knight, and if he win thee not to
gratitude, thou art not the tender father who, through long years, hath
so loved and cherished thy motherless child.

Ber. Nay, Zara, nay; honor is a sterner master than a father's love. I
cannot free the captive till the king who hath sealed his doom shall
pardon also. The prisoners are men of rank, and for thy country's sake
must die. Forget thy foolish fancy, child, and set thy young heart on
some fairer toys than these false English lords. Adieu, love; I must to
the council.

                                                       [_Exit_ Bernardo.

Zara. Ah, there was a time when Zara's lightest wish was gladly granted.
This cruel war hath sadly changed my father; he hath forgotten all his
generous pity for suffering and sorrow. But my work is yet undone, and
the stranger is a captive. He _shall_ be free, and I will pay the debt
of gratitude I owe him. I will brave my father's anger; but whom can I
trust to aid me? Ha! Selim! He is old and faithful, and will obey
[_claps her hands_].

                                                         [_Enter_ Selim.

Selim. Your bidding, lady.

Zara. Selim, thou hast known me from my birth, and served me well. I
have done thee many a kindness. Wilt thou grant me one that shalt repay
all that I have ever shown to thee?

Selim. Lady, thou hast made a slave's life happy by thy care, and
through the long years I have served thee, hast never bid me do aught
that was not right. If my poor services can aid thee now, they are most
gladly thine.

Zara. Listen, Selim, while I tell thee what I seek. Thou knowest an
English soldier saved and led me from the forest yonder, and thou
knowest how my father thanked and blessed the unknown friend who had so
aided me. Yet now, when it is in his power to show the gratitude he
felt, he will not, and has doomed the man he once longed to honor to a
lonely cell to pine away a brave heart's life in sorrow and captivity. I
would show that gentle stranger that a woman never can forget. I would
free him. Thou hast the keys. This is the service I now crave of thee.

Selim. Lady, canst thou ask me to betray the trust my lord, thy father,
hath been pleased to place in me? Ask anything but this, and gladly will
I obey thee.

Zara. Ah, must I ever ask and be refused? Selim, listen! Thou hast a
daughter; she is fair and young, and thou hast often sighed that she
should be a slave. If thou wilt aid me now, the hour the chains fall
from the English captive's limbs, that hour shalt see thy daughter free,
and never more a slave. If thou wilt win this joy for her, then grant my
prayer, and she is free.

Selim. Oh, lady, lady, tempt me not! much as I love my child, I love
mine honor more. I cannot aid thee to deceive thy father.

Zara. Nay, Selim, I do not ask it of thee. The proud name my father
bears shall ne'er be stained by one false deed of mine. I ask thee but
to lead me to the prisoner's cell, that I may offer freedom, and tell
him woman's gratitude can never fail, nor woman's heart forget. And if
my father ask thee aught of this, thou shalt answer freely. Tell him
all, and trust his kindness to forgive; and if evil come _I_ will bear
it bravely,--thou shalt not suffer. Thou shalt win thy fair child's
freedom, and my fadeless thanks.

Selim. Thou hast conquered, lady; and for the blessed gift that is my
reward, I will brave all but treachery and dishonor. Thou shalt find thy
truest slaves in the old man and his daughter [_kneels and gives the
keys_].

Zara. Thanks, good Selim, thanks; thou shalt find a grateful friend in
her thou hast served so well. I will disguise me as a female slave, and
thou shalt lead me to the cell. Now go; I will join thee anon. [_Exit_
Selim.] Oh, Ernest, Ernest! thy brave heart shall pine no longer.
Another hour, and thou art free. Chains cannot bind, nor dungeons hold
when woman's love and gratitude are thine.

                                                               [_Exit._

                                CURTAIN.


                              SCENE THIRD.

                [_Dungeon in the castle of_ Bernardo.
                   Ernest L'Estrange, _chained._]

Ernest. So end my dreams of fame and honor! A life-long captive, or a
sultan's slave are all that fate has left me now. Yet, 'mid disgrace and
sorrow, one thought can cheer me yet, and one sweet vision brighten e'en
my dreary lot. I have served my country well, and won the thanks of
Spain's most lovely daughter. Sweet lady, little does she dream amid her
happiness that memories of her are all now left to cheer a captive's
heart. But hist!--a footstep on the stair. Perchance they come to lead
me forth to new captivity or death. [_Enter_ Zara, _disguised as a
slave_] Ah, who comes here to cheer the cell of the poor captive?

Zara. Captive no longer, if life and liberty be dear to thee. Say but
the word, and ere the sun sets thou shalt be free amid the hills of
Spain.

Ernest. Who art thou, coming like a spirit to my lonely cell, bringing
hopes of freedom? Tell me, what hath moved thee to such pity for an
unknown stranger?

Zara. Not unknown to her I serve. She hath not forgot thee, noble
stranger. When thou didst lead her from the dim wood, she said a day
might come when she, so weak and helpless then, might find some fit
reward for one who risked his life for her. That hour hath come, and she
hath sent her poor slave hither, and with her thanks and blessing to
speed thee on thy way.

Ernest. And is she near, and did she send thee to repay my simple deed
with one like this? Ah, tell her name! Where doth she dwell, and whence
the power to set me free?

Zara. I may not tell thee more than this. Her father is Bernardo of
Castile. She heard thy name among the captives doomed, and seeks to save
thee; for if thou dost not fly, a most cruel death awaits thee. Listen
to her prayer, and cast these chains away.

Ernest. It cannot be. Much as I love my freedom, I love my honor more;
and I am bound until my conqueror shall give back my plighted word, to
seek no freedom till he shall bid me go. Nay, do not sigh, kind friend;
I am no longer sad. From this day forth captivity is sweet. Tell thy
fair mistress all my thanks are hers; but I may not take the gift she
offers, for with freedom comes dishonor, and I cannot break my word to
her stern father. Tell her she hath made my fetters light, this cell a
happy home, by the sweet thought that she is near and still remembers
one who looks upon the hour when first we met as the happiest he hath
known.

Zara. If there be power in woman's gratitude, thou shalt yet be free,
and with thine honor yet unstained. She will not rest till all the debt
she owes thee is repaid. Farewell, and think not Zara will forget
[_turns to go; her veil falls_].

Ernest [_starting_]. Lady!--and is it thou? Ah, leave me not! Let me
thank thee for the generous kindness which has made a lone heart happy
by the thought that even in this wild land there is still one to
remember the poor stranger.

Zara. Pardon what may seem to thee unmaidenly and bold; but thou wert in
danger; there were none whom I could trust. Gratitude hath bid me come,
and I am here. Again I ask, nay, I implore thee, let me have the joy of
giving freedom to one brave English heart. England is thy home: wouldst
thou not tread its green shores once again? Are there no fond hearts
awaiting thy return? Ah, can I not tempt thee by all that man most
loves, to fly?

Ernest. Lady, my own heart pleads more earnestly than even thy sweet
voice; but those kind eyes were better dimmed with tears for my sad
death than be turned coldly from me as one who had stained the high name
he bore. And liberty were dearly purchased if I left mine honor here
behind. Ask me no more; for till thy father sets me free, I am his
prisoner here. Ah, dearest lady, thou hast made this lone cell bright,
and other chains than these now hold me here.

Zara. Then it must be. Much as I grieve for thy captivity, I shall honor
thee the more for thy unfailing truth, more prized than freedom, home,
or friends. And though I cannot save thee now, thou shalt find a Moorish
maiden true and fearless as thyself. Farewell! May happy thoughts of
home cheer this dark cell till I have won the power to set thee free.

                                                           [_Exit_ Zara.

Ernest. Liberty hath lost its charms since thou art near me, lovely
Zara. These chains are nothing now, for the fetters that thy beauty,
tenderness, and grace have cast about my heart are stronger far.


                                CURTAIN.


                             SCENE FOURTH.

                           [Zara's _chamber_.
                           _Enter_ Bernardo.]

Ber. [_unfolding a scroll_]. At length 't is done, and here I hold the
doom of those proud lords who have so scorned my race. The hour has
come, and Bernardo is revenged. What, ho! Zara, where art thou?

                                                          [_Enter_ Zara.

Zara. Dear father, what hath troubled thee, and how can Zara cheer and
comfort thee?

Ber. 'Tis joy, not sorrow, Zara, gives this fierce light to mine eye. I
have hated, and am avenged. This one frail scroll is dearer far to me
than all the wealth of Spain, for 'tis the death-knell of the English
lords.

Zara. Must they all die, my father?

Ber. Ay, Zara,--all; ere to-morrow's sun shall set they will sleep
forever, and a good deed will be well done. I hate them, and their
paltry lives can ill repay the sorrow they have wrought.

Zara. Let me see the fatal paper. [_Takes the scroll; aside._] Yes,
_his_ name is here. Ah, how strange that these few lines can doom brave
hearts to such a death! [_Aloud._] Father, 'tis a fearful thing to hold
such power over human life. Ah, bid me tear the scroll, and win for thee
the thanks of those thy generous pity saves.

Ber. [_seizing the paper_]. Not for thy life, child! Revenge is sweet,
and I have waited long for mine. The king hath granted this; were it
destroyed, the captives might escape ere I could win another. Nay, Zara,
this is dearer to me than thy most priceless gems. To-night it shall be
well guarded 'neath my pillow. Go to thy flowers, child. These things
are not for thee,--thou art growing pale and sad. Remember, Zara, thou
art nobly born, and let no foolish pity win thee to forget it.

                                                       [_Exit_ Bernardo.

Zara. Oh, Father, Father, whom I have so loved and honored, now so cold,
so pitiless. The spirit of revenge hath entered thy kind heart, and
spread an evil blight o'er all the flowers that blossomed there. I
cannot win him back to tenderness, and Ernest, thou must perish. I
cannot save thee,--perhaps 'tis better so; but oh, 'twill be a bitter
parting! [_Weeps._] Nay, nay, it shall _not_ be! When this wild hate
hath passed, my father will repent. Alas! 't will be too late. _I_ will
save him from that sorrow when he shall find he hath wronged a noble
heart, and slain the friend he should have saved. But stay! how shall I
best weave my plot? That fatal paper, once destroyed, I will implore and
plead so tenderly, my father will repent; and ere another scroll can
reach his hands, I will have won thy freedom, Ernest! This night
beneath his pillow it will be; and I, like a midnight thief, must steal
to that couch, and take it hence. Yet, it shall be done, for it will
save thee, Father, from a cruel deed, and gain a brave heart's freedom.
Ernest, 'tis for thee! for thee!


                                CURTAIN.


                              SCENE FIFTH.

                       [_Chamber in the castle._
                  Bernardo _sleeping_. _Enter_ Zara.]

Zara. He sleeps calmly as a child. Why do I tremble? 'T is a deed of
mercy I would do, and thou wilt thank me that I dared to disobey, and
spare thee from life-long regret. The paper,--yes, 'tis here! Forgive
me, Father; 'tis to save thee from an evil deed thy child comes stealing
thus at dead of night to take what thou hast toiled so long to win.
Sleep on! no dark dream can break thy slumber now; the spirit of revenge
shall pass away, and I will win thee back to pity and to love once more.
Now, Ernest, thou art saved, and ere to-morrow's sun shall rise this
warrant for thy death shall be but ashes, and my task be done.

                                                           [_Exit_ Zara.


                                CURTAIN.


                              SCENE SIXTH.

                           [Zara's _chamber_.
                             Zara _alone_].

Zara. The long, sleepless night at length hath passed. The paper is
destroyed, and now nought remains but to confess the deed, and brave my
father's anger.

                                                      [_Enter_ Bernardo.

Ber. Zara!

Zara [_starts_]. Why so stern, my father? Hath thy poor Zara angered
thee?

Ber. I have trusted thee as few would trust a child. Thou art fair and
gentle, and I had thought true. Never, Zara, till now hast thou deceived
me; and if thou wouldst keep thy father's love and trust, I bid thee
answer truly. Didst thou, in the dead of night steal to my pillow, and
bear hence the paper I had told thee would be there? Thy slave girl,
Zillah, missed thee from thy couch, and saw thee enter there. She
feared to follow, but none other came within my chamber, and this morn
the scroll is gone. Now answer, Zara! Didst thou take the warrant, and
where is it now?

Zara. Burnt to ashes, and scattered to the winds. I have never stained
my soul with falsehood, and I will not now. Oh, Father! I have loved and
honored thee through the long years thou hast watched above me. How
could I love on when thou hadst stained with blood that hand that
blessed me when a child, how honor when thou hadst repaid noble deeds
with death? Forgive me that I plead for those thou hast doomed! I alone
am guilty,--let thine anger fall on me; but, Father, I implore thee,
leave this evil deed undone. [_Kneels._]

Ber. Thou canst plead well for thy father's and thy country's foe. What
strange fancy hath possessed thee, Zara? Thou hast never wept, tho' many
a Christian knight hath pined and died within these walls; and even
now, methinks, thou speakest more of gratitude than mercy, and seem
strangely earnest for the English lord who did thee some small service
long ago. Speak, Zara! wouldst thou save them _all_? Were I to grant
thee all their lives save his, wouldst thou be content to let _him_ die?

Zara. Nay, Father; but for his tender care thou wouldst have no daughter
now to stand before thee, pleading for the life he bravely risked in
saving mine. Oh, would I had died amid the forest leaves ere I had
brought such woe to him, and lived to lose my father's love! [_Weeps._]

Ber. Listen, Zara! Little as I know of woman's heart, I have learned to
read thine own; and if I err not, thou hast dared to love this stranger.
Ha! is it so? Girl, I command thee to forget that love, and leave him to
his fate!

Zara. Never! I will not forget the love that like a bright star hath
come to cheer my lonely heart. I will _not_ forget the noble friend
who, 'mid his fiercest foes, could brave all dangers to restore an
unknown maiden to her home. And when I offered liberty (for I have
disobeyed and dared to seek his cell), he would not break the word he
had plighted, Father, unto thee. He bade me tempt him not, for death
were better than dishonor. Ah, canst thou doom him to a felon's death?
Then do it; and the hour that sees that true heart cease to beat, that
hour thou hast lost the child who would have loved and clung to thee
through life.

Ber. Child, thou hast moved me strangely. I would grant thy prayer, but
thou shalt never wed one of that accursed race. I bear no hate to the
young lord, save that he is thy country's foe; and if he gains his
freedom, he will win thee too. By Allah! it shall never be. Yet, listen,
Zara! If I grant his life wilt thou ask no more?

Zara. 'T is all I ask; grant me but this, and I will give thee all the
gratitude and love this poor heart can bestow.

Ber. Then 'tis done. Yet hold! the price that thou must pay for this
dear boon is large. Thou must swear never to see him more; must banish
love, nay, even memory of that fatal hour when first he saw and saved
thee. If thou wilt vow to wed none but one of thine own race, his life
and liberty are thine to give. Speak, Zara! Wilt thou do all this?

Zara. Oh, Father, Father, anything but this! Pity, gratitude, and love
have bound me to him, and the fetters thou hast cast around him are not
stronger than the deep affection he hath wakened in my heart. Ah, why
wilt thou not give life and liberty to him, and joy to thy child? I will
not take the vow.

Ber. Then his fate is sealed. Thy girl's heart is too selfish to forego
its own joy for his sake. Thou dost not love enough to sacrifice thy
happiness to win his freedom. I had thought more nobly of thee, Zara.

Zara. I _will_ be worthy all thou mayst have thought me; but thou canst
little know the desolation thou hast brought me. Thou shalt see how
deeply thou hast wronged me, and my love. I will bear all, suffer all,
if it will win the life and liberty of him I love so deeply and so well.

Ber. Would to Heaven thou hadst never seen this English stranger! Again,
and for the last time, Zara, I ask thee, Wilt thou leave the captive to
his fate, and seek another heart to love?

Zara. Never! I could mourn his death with bitter tears; but oh, my love
is worthy a deeper sacrifice! He shall never suffer one sad hour if I
may spare him, and never know that liberty to him will bring such
life-long sorrow unto me.

Ber. Then thou wilt take the vow I bid thee?

Zara. I will.

Ber. Then swear by all thou dost hold most dear, and by thy mother's
spirit, to wed one only of thy father's race; and through joy and
sorrow, thro' youth and age, to keep thy vow unbroken until death.

Zara. I swear; and may the spirit of that mother look in pity on the
child whose love hath made her life so dark a path to tread.

Ber. May thou find comfort, Zara! I would have spared thee this, but now
it cannot be. Yet thy reward shall well repay thee for thy sacrifice.
The English knight is free, and thou shalt restore him unto life and
liberty. May Allah bless thee, child!

                                                       [_Exit_ Bernardo.

Zara. 'Tis over! The bright dream is past. Oh, Ernest! few will love
thee as I have done; few suffer for thee all that I so gladly bear; and
none can honor thy true, noble heart more tenderly than she whose hard
lot it is to part from thee forever. Still amid my blighted hopes one
thought can brighten my deep sorrow,--this sacrifice but renders me
more worthy of thee, Ernest. Now farewell, love; my poor heart may
grieve for its lost joy, and look for comfort but in Heaven.


                                CURTAIN.


                             SCENE SEVENTH.

                              [_The cell._
                    Ernest _chained_. _Enter_ Zara.]

Zara. My lord, I seek thee with glad tidings.

Ernest. Why so pale, dear lady? Let no care for me dim thine eye, or
chase the roses from thy cheek. I would not barter this dark cell while
thou art here for a monarch's fairest home.

Zara. Thou wilt gladly leave it when I tell thee thy captivity is o'er,
and I am here to set thee free. I have won thy liberty, and thou mayst
fly with honor all unstained; for here my father grants thy pardon, and
now bids thee go.

Ernest. How can I thank thee for thy tenderness and pity; how may I best
show the gratitude I owe thee for the priceless boon of freedom thou
hast this day given?

Zara. Nay, spare thy thanks! I have but paid the debt I owed thee, and
'tis but life for life. Now haste; for ere the sunset hour thou must be
beyond the city gates, and on thy way to home and happiness [_takes off
his chains_]. And now, brave heart, thou art free, and Zara's task is
done [_turns to go_].

Ernest. Stay, lady! thou hast loosed the chains that bound these hands,
but oh, thou hast cast a stronger one around my heart; and with my
liberty comes love, and thoughts of thee, thy beauty, tenderness, and
all thou hast done for me. Lady, thou hast cast away my fetters, but I
am captive still [_he kneels_]. Ah, listen, Zara, while I tell thee of
the love that like a sweet flower hath blossomed in this dreary cell,
and made e'en liberty less precious than one word, one smile from thee.

Zara. I may not listen,--'tis too late, and 'tis a sin for me to hear
thee. Ah, ask me not why, but hasten hence, and leave me to the fate
thou canst not lighten.

Ernest. Never! I will not leave thee till I have won the right to cheer
and comfort her who has watched so fearlessly o'er me. Tell me all, and
let me share thy sorrow, Zara.

Zara. Ah, no! It cannot be! Thou canst not break my solemn vow. Go!
leave me! Heaven bless thee, and farewell!

Ernest. A solemn vow! Hast thou bound thyself to win my freedom? Then
never will I leave this cell till thou hast told me all. I swear it, and
I will keep the oath.

Zara. Ernest, I implore thee, fly, or it may be too late. Thou canst not
help me, and I will not tell thee. Ah, leave me! I cannot save thee if
thou tarry now.

Ernest. Never, till thou hast told me by what noble sacrifice thou hast
saved this worthless life of mine. Let me free thee from thy sorrow,
Zara, or help thee bear it. Thou hast won my pardon, and I will not go
till thou hast told me how.

Zara. And wilt thou promise to go hence when I have told thee all, and
let me have the joy of knowing thou art safe?

Ernest. I _will_ leave thee, Zara, if thou canst bid me go. Now tell me
all thy sorrow, love, and let me share it with thee.

Zara. Ernest, I sought to save thee; for I had learned to love the noble
stranger who had done so kind a deed for me. I sought to win my father
back to gratitude. I wept and sued in vain,--he would not grant thy
life, the boon for which I prayed. Alone I watched above thee, and when
the warrant for thy death was sent, I took it from his pillow and
destroyed it. Thou wast safe. My father charged me with the deed; and
when I told him all, he bid me love no more, and leave thee to thy fate.
He bid me show how strong my woman's heart could be, and told me if I
yet desired thy freedom, I might win it if I took a solemn vow to wed
none but of my father's race. I took the vow, and thou art free. Ah, no
more!--and let us part while yet I have the strength to say farewell.

Ernest. And is it yet too late? Canst thou not take back the vow, and
yet be mine? I cannot leave thee,--rather be a captive here till thou
shalt set me free. Come, Zara, fly with me, and leave the father who
would blight thy life to satisfy a fierce revenge. Ah, come and let me
win thee back to love and happiness.

Zara. Ernest, tempt me not. By that sad vow I swore by all my future
hopes, and by my dead mother's spirit, I would never listen to thy words
of love. And stern and cruel tho' my father be, I cannot leave him now.
Deep and bitter though this sorrow be, 'tis nobler far to bear the
burden than to cast it down and seek in idle joys to banish penitence;
for thorns would lie amid the flowers. Farewell! Forget me, and in happy
England find some other heart to gladden with thy love. Oh, may she
prove as fond and faithful as thy Moorish Zara.

Ernest. I will plead no more, nor add to that sad heart another sorrow.
I will be worthy such true love, and though we meet no more on earth, in
all my wanderings sweet tender thoughts of thee shall dwell within my
heart. I will bear my sorrow as a brave man should. The life thou hast
saved and brightened by thy love shall yet be worthy thee. Farewell! May
all the blessings a devoted heart can give rest on thee, dearest. Heaven
bless thee, and grant that we shall meet again.

                                                                [_Exit._

Zara. Gone, gone, forever! Oh, Father, couldst thou know the deep grief
and despair thy cruelty has brought two loving hearts, thou wouldst
relent, and call them back to happiness. Where can I look for comfort
now? [_Weeps._] I will seek the good priest who hath so long watched
above the motherless child. I must find rest in some kind heart, and he
will cheer, and teach me how to suffer silently. I will seek old
Hernando's cell.

                                                           [_Exit_ Zara.


                                CURTAIN.


                             SCENE EIGHTH.

                         [_Cell of the priest._
                   Hernando _reading_. _Enter_ Zara.]

Zara. Father, I have come for help and counsel. Wilt thou give it now as
thou hast ever done to her who comes to learn of thee how best to bear a
sorrow cheerfully and well?

Her. Speak on, dear child. I know thy sorrow. Thou hast loved, and
sacrificed thy own life's joy to win a brave heart's freedom. Thou hast
done nobly and well; thy sorrow will but render thee more worthy of the
happiness thou hast so truly won.

Zara. No, no; we shall never meet again on earth. Ah, holy father, they
who told thee of my love for one who well might win the noblest heart,
have told thee but the lightest part of the deep grief that bears me
down. Listen to me, Father, and then give me comfort if thou canst. To
win my lover's freedom, I have sworn a solemn oath to wed none but of my
father's race. Ernest came from sunny England, and I am the daughter of
a Moorish lord. Alas, 'tis vain to hope! The vow is given, and must be
kept.

Her. Ay, Zara, and it may be kept; but these sad tears will change to
sighs of joy when I have told thee all. Then thou wilt bless the vow
which brings thee sorrow now.

Zara. Oh, speak! Tell me what joy canst thou give to lighten grief like
mine! Give me not too much hope; for if it fail, despair thou canst not
banish will cast a deeper gloom o'er this poor heart. Now, tell me all.

Her. Calm thyself, poor child; it will be well with thee, and thou shalt
yet blossom in thy loveliness beside the heart thou hast won. I will
tell thee the true tale of thy fair mother's life. She loved and wed a
stranger, and thus won the hatred of her Moorish kindred, who sought to
win her for their prince's bride. And when she fled away with him to
whom her true heart's love was given, they vowed a fierce revenge. Years
passed away; she drooped and died. Thy father perished bravely on the
field of battle, and left his child to me. I stood beside thy mother's
dying bed, and vowed to guard her babe till thou wert safe among thy
Moorish kindred. I have watched thee well, and thou art worthy all the
happiness thy true heart hath won. Bernardo of Castile is but thy
mother's friend; thy father was an English lord, and thou canst keep thy
vow, and yet wed the brave young Englishman who hath won thy love.

Zara. Heaven pardon this wild, wilful heart that should mourn the sorrow
sent, when such deep joy as this is given. Ah, Father, how can I best
thank thee for the blessed comfort thou hast given?

Her. Thy joy, dear child, is my reward. When thou art safe with him
thou lovest, my task on earth is done, and I shall pass away with happy
thoughts of the sweet flower that bloomed beside the old man's path
through life, and cheered it with her love. Bless thee, my Zara, and may
the spirit of thy mother watch above thee in the happy home thou hast
gained by thy noble sacrifice.

Zara. Oh, Father, may the joy thy words have brought me brighten thine
own life as they have mine. The blessings of a happy heart be on thee.
Farewell, Father!

                                       [_Kneels, kisses his hand. Exit._


                                CURTAIN.


                              SCENE NINTH.

                         [_Hall in the castle._
                             _Enter_ Zara.]

Zara. Selim said the packet would be here [_takes the paper_]. Ah, 'tis
from Ernest! He is near me,--we may meet again [_opens letter and
reads_].

    Lady,--Thy father will this night betray the city to the
    Spanish king, who hath promised his life and liberty for this
    treachery. He will not keep his oath, and thy father will be
    slain. Then bid him fly, and save all he most loves, for no
    mercy will be shown to those within the walls when once the
    Spanish army enters there. Save thyself. Heaven bless thee.
                                                            Ernest.

Brave and true unto the last! O heart! thou mayst well beat proudly, for
thou hast won a noble prize in the love of Ernest L'Estrange. Time
flies; this night the city is betrayed, and we must fly. Bernardo, lord
of fair Castile, is a traitor. Ah, thank Heaven he is _not_ my father!
Yet for the love I bore him as a child, he shall be saved; and I will
cheer and comfort him now that the dark hour of his life has come.

                                                      [_Enter_ Bernardo.

Ber. Zara, why dost thou look thus on me? I come to bid thee gather all
thou dost most prize, for the army is before the city, and we may be
conquered ere to-morrow's sun shall set.

Zara. Seek not to deceive me. I know all; and the love I bore thee as my
father is now turned to pity and contempt for the traitor who will this
night betray Castile.

Ber. Girl, beware, lest thy wild folly anger me too far! What meanest
thou? Who has dared to tell thee this?

Zara. Thou wouldst betray, and art thyself betrayed; and were it not for
him whom thou hast wronged and hunted, ere to-morrow's dawn thou wouldst
be no more, and I a homeless wanderer. Here! read the scroll, and see
how well the false king keeps his word he plighted thee for thy deed of
treachery.

Ber. [_reads, and drops the paper_]. Lost! lost! Fool that I was to
trust the promise of a king! Disgraced, dishonored, and betrayed! Where
find a friend to help me now? [_Weeps._]

Zara. Here,--in the child who clings to thee through danger, treachery,
and death. Trust to the love of one whom once thou loved, and who still
longs to win thee back to happiness and honor.

Ber. Nay, child, I trust thee not. I have deceived thee and blighted all
thy hopes of love. Thou canst not care for the dishonored traitor. Go!
tell my guilt to those I would this night deliver up to death, and win a
deep revenge for all the wrong I have done thee. I am in thy power now.

Zara [_tearing the paper_]. And thus do I use it! No eye shall ever read
these words that do betray thee; no tongue call down dishonor on thy
head. Thy plot is not yet known, and ere to-night the gates may be well
guarded. Thou mayst fly in safety, and none ever know the stain upon thy
name. Thou whom I once called father, this is my revenge. I know all the
wrong thou hast done me,--the false vow I made to save the life of him I
loved. Zara's pity and forgiveness are thine, freely given; and her
prayer is that thou mayst find happiness in some fair land where only
gentle thoughts and loving memories may be thine.

Ber. Thou hast conquered, Zara; my proud heart is won by thy tender pity
and most generous pardon to one who hath so deeply wronged thee. But I
will repay the debt I owe thee. Thou shalt find again the loving father
and the faithful friend of thy young life. Thou shalt know how well
Bernardo can atone for all the sorrow he hath brought thee.

Zara. And I will be again thy faithful child.

Ber. 'Tis well; and now, my Zara, ere the dawn of another day we must
be far beyond the city gates. Selim shall guide us, and once free,
together we will seek another and a happier home. Courage, my child, and
haste thee. I will prepare all for our flight. Remember, when the turret
bell strikes seven, we meet again.

                                           [_Embraces_ Zara, _and exit_.

Zara. Farewell! I will not fail thee. Love, joy, and hope may fade, but
duty still remains. Oh, Ernest, couldst thou but see thy own true Zara
now! Wouldst thou could aid me! [_Enter_ Ernest _disguised_.] Ah, who
comes? A stranger. Speak! thine errand!

Ernest [_kneeling, presents a scroll_]. An English knight without the
gates did bid me seek thee with this scroll. May it please thee, read.

Zara [_opens and reads_].

    Lady,--Thou mayst trust the messenger. He will lead thee in
    safety to one who waits for thee. Delay not; danger is around
    thee.
        Thine,                                           Ernest.

Ah, here! so near me! Hope springs anew within my heart. Yes, I will go.
Homeless, friendless no more! Happy Zara! joy now awaits thee. Yet
stay!--my promise to Bernardo! I cannot leave him thus in danger, and
alone. What shall I do? Oh, Ernest, where art thou now?

Ernest [_throwing off disguise, and kneeling before her_]. Here, dearest
Zara! here at thy feet, to offer thee a true heart's fond devotion. To
thee I owe life, liberty, and happiness. Ah, let me thus repay the debt
of gratitude. Thy love shalt be my bright reward; my heart thy refuge
from all danger now. Wilt thou not trust me?

Zara. Ernest, thou knowest my heart is thine, and that to thee I trust
with joy my life and happiness. No vow stands now between us. I am
thine.

Ernest. Then let us hence. All is prepared; thy father shall be saved.
This night shall see us on our way to liberty; and in a fairer land we
may forget the danger, sorrow, and captivity that have been ours. Come,
dearest, let me lead thee.

Zara. I come; and, Ernest, 'mid the joy and bright hopes of the future,
let us not forget the sorrow and the sacrifice that hath won for us this
happiness; and mayst thou ne'er regret the hour that gave to thee the
love of the Moorish maiden, Zara.


                                CURTAIN.




                            THE GREEK SLAVE.


                              CHARACTERS.

    Constantine    .   .   .   .   .    _Prince betrothed to Irene._

    Queen Zelneth  .   .   .   .   .    _His Mother._

    Irene  .   .   .   .   .   .   .    _The Greek Princess._

    Ione   .   .   .   .   .   .   .    _The Greek Slave._

    Helon  .   .   .   .   .   .   .    _A Priest._

    Rienzi .   .   .   .   .   .   .    _A Traitor._


                            THE GREEK SLAVE.


                              SCENE FIRST.

                  [_Apartment in the palace of_ Irene.
                   Irene, _reclining upon a divan._]

Irene. How strange a fate is mine! Young, fair, and highborn, I may not
choose on whom I will bestow my love! Betrothed to a prince whom I have
never seen; compelled to honor and obey one whom my heart perchance can
never love, alas! alas!

And yet, they tell me that Constantine is noble, brave, and good. What
more can I desire? Ah, if he do but love me I shall be content [_noise
without; she rises_]. Hark! 'tis his messenger approaching with letters
from the queen, his mother. I will question this ambassador, and learn
yet more of this young prince, my future husband [_seats herself with
dignity_].

                         [_Enter_ Rienzi. _Kneels, presenting a letter._

Rienzi. The queen, my mistress, sends thee greeting, lady, and this
scroll. May it please thee, read. I await your pleasure.

Irene [_takes the letter and reads_]. My lord, with a woman's curiosity,
I fain would ask thee of thy prince, whose fate the gods have linked
with mine. Tell me, is he tender, true, and noble? Answer truly, I do
command thee.

Rienzi. Lady, he is tender as a woman, gentle as thy heart could wish,
just and brave as a king should ever be. The proudest lady in all Greece
were well matched with our noble Constantine.

Irene. And is he fair to look upon? Paint me his likeness, if thou
canst.

Rienzi. I can but ill perform that office. Thou must see if thou wouldst
rightly know him. The gods have blessed him with a fair and stately
form, a noble face, dark locks, and a king-like brow that well befits
the crown that rests upon it. This is he, our brave young prince; one to
honor, lady; one to trust and--love.

Irene. 'Tis a noble man thou hast painted. One more question and thou
mayst retire. Hath he ever spoken of her who is to be his wife? Nay, why
do I fear to ask thee? Does he love her?

Rienzi. Lady, I beg thee ask me not. Who could fail to love when once he
had looked upon thee?

Irene. Thou canst not thus deceive me. Answer truly: What doth he think
of this betrothal and approaching marriage?

Rienzi. He hath not seen thee, princess, knows of thee nothing save that
thou art beautiful, and one day to become his wife. But he is young, and
hath no wish to wed, and even his mother's prayers have failed to win
his free consent to this most cherished plan, that by uniting thy fair
kingdom unto his, he can gain power over other lands and beautify our
own.

Irene. Perchance his heart is given to another. Has no fair Grecian
maiden won the love he cannot offer me?

Rienzi. Nay, lady. He loves nought but his mother, his subjects, and his
native land. But soon we trust, when thou art by his side, a deeper love
will wake within him, and thou wilt be dearer than country, home, or
friends.

Irene. 'Tis well; thou mayst retire. I will send answer by thee to thy
queen, and seek some gift that may be worthy her acceptance. And now,
adieu! [Rienzi _bows and retires._] He does not love me, then, and I
must wed a cold and careless lord. And yet--so tender to all others, he
could not be unkind to me alone.

Oh, that I could win his love unknown, and then when truly mine, to cast
away the mask, and be myself again. Stay! let me think. Ah, yes; I see a
way. Surely the gods have sent the thought! I will disguise me as a
slave, and as a gift sent to his mother, I can see and learn to know
him well. I will return with the ambassador, Rienzi. I spake to him of a
gift. He little thinks in the veiled slave he shall bear away, the
princess is concealed. Yes, Constantine, as a nameless girl will Irene
win thy heart; and when as a wife she stands beside thee, thou shalt
love her for herself alone.

                                                             [_Tableau._

                                CURTAIN.


                             SCENE SECOND.

                 [_A room in the palace of_ The Queen.
                          The Queen _alone._]

Queen. Why comes he not? They told me that our ambassador to the
Princess Irene had returned, and bore a gift for me. Would that it were
a picture of herself! They say she is wondrous fair; and could my
wayward son but gaze upon her, his heart might yet be won. [_Enter_
Irene, _disguised as the slave,_ Ione.] Ah, a stranger! Who art thou?

                                   [Ione _kneels and presents a letter._

Queen [_reads the letter_]. Ah, welcome! Thy mistress tells me she hath
chosen from among her train the fairest and most faithful of her slaves,
as a gift for me. With thanks do I accept thee. Lift thy veil, child,
that I may see how our maidens do compare with thee. [Ione _lifts her
veil._ The Queen _gazes in surprise at her beauty._] Thou art too
beautiful to be a slave. What is thy name?

Ione. Ione; may it please thee, lady.

Queen. 'Tis a fit name for one so fair; and thy country, maiden?

Ione. With the princess, my kind mistress, have I dwelt for many happy
years; and honored by her choice now offer my poor services to thee.

Queen. What canst thou do, Ione? Thou art too fair and delicate to bear
the heavy water-urn or gather fruit.

Ione. I can weave garlands, lady; touch the harp, and sing sweet songs;
can bear thee wine, and tend thy flowers. I can be true and faithful,
and no task will be too hard for thy grateful slave, Ione.

Queen. Thou shalt find a happy home with me, and never grieve for thy
kind mistress. And now, listen while I tell thee what thy hardest task
shall be. I will confide in thee, Ione, for thou art no common slave,
but a true and gentle woman whom I can trust and love. Thou hath heard
thy lady is betrothed to my most noble son; and yet, I grieve to say, he
loves her not. Nay, in the struggle 'gainst his heart, hath lost all
gayety and strength, and even the name Irene will chase the smile away.
He loves no other, yet will not offer her his hand when the heart that
should go with it feels no love for her who is to be his wife. I honor
this most noble feeling; yet could he know the beauty and the worth of
thy fair lady, he yet might love. Thou shalt tell him this: all the kind
deeds she hath done, the gentle words she hath spoken; all her
loveliness and truth thou shalt repeat; sing thou the songs she loved;
weave round his cups the flowers she wears; and strive most steadfastly
to gain a place within his heart for love and Lady Irene. Canst thou,
wilt thou do this, Ione?

Ione. Dear lady, all that my poor skill can do shall yet be tried. I
will not rest till he shall love my mistress as she longs to be
beloved.

Queen. If thou canst win my son to health and happiness again, thou
shalt be forever my most loved, most trusted friend. The gods bless
thee, child, and give thy work success! Now rest thee here. I will come
ere long to lead thee to the prince.

                                                      [_Exit_ The Queen.

Ione. All goes well; and what an easy task is mine! To minister to him
whom I already love; to sing to him, weave garlands for his brow, and
tell him of the thoughts stirring within my heart. Yes, I most truly
long to see him whom all love and honor. The gods be with me, and my
task will soon be done.

                                CURTAIN.


                              SCENE THIRD.

                     [_Another room in the palace._
                     Constantine, _sad and alone._]

Con. Another day is well-nigh passed, and nearer draws the fate I dread.
Why must I give up all the bright dreams of my youth, and wed a woman
whom I cannot love?

They tell me she is young and fair, but I seek more than that in her who
is to pass her life beside me. Youth and beauty fade, but a noble
woman's love can never die. Oh, Irene, if thou couldst know how hard a
thing it is to take thee, princess though thou art! [_Enter_ Ione.] Ah,
lady, thou hast mistaken thy way! Let me lead thee to the queen's
apartments.

Ione. Nay, my lord; I have come from her. She bid me say it was her will
that I, her slave, should strive with my poor skill to while away the
time till she could join thee.

Con. Thou, a slave? By the gods! methought it was some highborn
lady,--nay, even the Princess Irene herself, seeking the queen, my
mother.

Ione. She was my mistress, and bestowed me as a gift upon the queen.
This scroll is from her hand. May it please thee, read it [_kneels and
presents letter_].

Con. Rise, fair maiden! I would rather listen to thy voice. May I ask
thee to touch yon harp? I am weary, and a gentle strain will sooth my
troubled spirit. Stay! let me place it for thee.

    [_Prince moves the harp and gazes upon_ Ione _as she sings and
        plays._

    The wild birds sing in the orange groves,
      And brightly bloom the flowers;
    The fair earth smiles 'neath a summer sky
      Through the joyous fleeting hours.
    But oh! in the slave girl's lonely heart,
      Sad thoughts and memories dwell,
    And tears fall fast as she mournfully sings,
      Home, dear home, farewell!

    Though the chains they bind be all of flowers,
      Where no hidden thorn may be,
    Still the free heart sighs 'neath its fragrant bonds,
      And pines for its liberty.
    And sweet, sad thoughts of the joy now gone,
      In the slave girl's heart shall dwell,
    As she mournfully sings to her sighing harp,
      Native land, native land, farewell!

Con. 'Tis a plaintive song. Is it thine own lot thou art mourning? If
so, thou art a slave no longer.

Ione. Nay, my lord. It was one my Lady Irene loved, and thus I thought
would please thee.

Con. Then never sing it more,--speak not her name! Nay, forgive me if I
pain thee. She was thy mistress, and thou didst love her. Was she kind
to thee? By what name shall I call thee?

Ione. Ione, your Highness. Ah, yes; she was too kind. She never spake a
cruel word, nor chid me for my many faults. Never can I love another as
I loved my gentle mistress.

Con. And is she very fair? Has she no pride, no passion or disdain to
mar her loveliness? She is a princess; is she a true and tender woman
too?

Ione. Though a princess, 'neath her royal robes there beats a warm, true
heart, faithful and fond, longing to be beloved and seeking to be worthy
such great joy when it shall come. Thou ask'st me of her beauty.
Painters place her face among their fairest works, and sculptors carve
her form in marble. Yes, she is beautiful; but 'tis not that thou
wouldst most care for. Couldst thou only know her!--pardon, but I think
thou couldst not bear so cold a heart within thy breast as now.

Con. Ah, do not cease! say on! There is that in the music of thy voice
that soothes and comforts me. Come, sit beside me, fair Ione, and I will
tell thee why I do not love thy princess.

Ione. You do forget, my lord, I am a slave; I will kneel here.

    [_Prince reclines upon a couch._ Ione _kneels beside him._

Con. Listen! From a boy I have been alone; no loving sister had I, no
gentle friend,--only cold councillors or humble slaves. My mother was a
queen, and 'mid the cares of State, tho' fondly loving me, her only son,
could find no time to win me from my lonely life.

Thus, tho' dwelling 'neath a palace roof with every wish supplied, I
longed most fondly for a friend. And now, ere long, a crown will rest
upon my head, a nation bend before me as their king. And now more
earnestly than ever do I seek one who can share with me the joys and
cares of my high lot,--a woman true and noble, to bless me with her
love.

Ione. And could not the Princess Irene be to thee all thou hast dreamed?

Con. I fear I cannot love her. They told me she was beautiful and
highborn; and when I sought to learn yet more, 'twas but to find she
was a cold, proud woman, fit to be a queen, but not a loving wife. Thus
I learned to dread the hour when I must wed. Yet 'tis my mother's will;
my country's welfare calls for the sacrifice, and I must yield myself.

Ione. They who told thee she was proud and cold do all speak falsely.
Proud she is to those who bow before her but to gain some honor for
themselves, and cold to such as love her for her royalty alone. But if a
fond and faithful heart, and a soul that finds its happiness in noble
deeds can make a queen, Irene is worthy of the crown she will wear. And
now, if it please thee, I will seek the garden; for thy mother bid me
gather flowers for the feast. Adieu, my lord! [_She bows, her veil
falls_; Constantine _hands it to her._] Nay, kings should not bend to
serve a slave, my lord.

Con. I do forget myself most strangely. There, take thy veil, and leave
me [_turns_ _aside_]. Nay, forgive me if I seem unkind, but I cannot
treat thee as a slave. Come, I will go with thee to the garden; thou art
too fair to wander unprotected and alone. Come, Ione [_leads her out_].

                                CURTAIN.


                             SCENE FOURTH.

                      [_The gardens of the palace._
                       Ione _weaving a garland._]

Ione. The rose is Love's own flower, and I will place it in the wreath I
weave for thee, O Constantine! Would I could bring it to thy heart as
easily! And yet, methinks, if all goes on as now, the slave Ione will
ere long win a prince's love. He smiles when I approach, and sighs when
I would leave him; listens to my songs, and saves the withered flowers I
gave him days ago. How gentle and how kind! Ah, noble Constantine, thou
little thinkest the slave thou art smiling on is the "proud, cold"
Princess Irene, who will one day show thee what a fond, true wife she
will be to thee [_sings_].

                                       [_Enter_ Helon; _kneels to_ Ione.

Ione. Helon, my father's friend! thou here! Ah, hush! Betray me not! I
am no princess now. Rise, I do beseech thee! Kneel not to me.

Helon. Dear lady, why this secrecy? What dost thou here, disguised, in
the palace where thou art soon to reign a queen?

Ione. Hark! is all still? Yes; none are nigh! Speak low. I'll tell thee
all. Thou knowest the young prince loves me not,--nay, do not sigh; I
mean the princess, not the slave Ione, as I now call myself. Well, I
learned this, and vowed to win the heart he could not give; and so in
this slave's dress I journeyed hither with Rienzi, the ambassador, as a
gift unto the queen.

Thus, as a poor and nameless slave, I seek to win the noble Constantine
to life and love. Dost understand my plot, and wilt thou aid me, Father
Helon?

Helon. 'Tis a strange thought! None but a woman would have planned it.
Yes, my child, I will aid thee, and thou yet shall gain the happiness
thy true heart well deserves. We will talk of this yet more anon. I
came hither to see the prince. They told me he was pale and ill, in
sorrow for his hated lot. Say, is this so?

Ione. Ah, yes, most true; and I am cause of all this sorrow. Father,
tell me, cannot I by some great deed give back his health, and never
have the grief of knowing that he suffered because I was his bride? How
can I avert this fate? I will do all, bear all, if he may be saved.

Helon. Grieve not, my child; he will live, and learn to love thee
fondly. The cares of a kingdom are too much for one so young; but he
would have happiness throughout his native land, and toiling for the
good of others he hath hidden his sorrow in his own heart, and pined for
tenderness and love. Thou hast asked if thou couldst save him. There is
one hope, if thou canst find a brave friend that fears no danger when a
good work leads him on. Listen, my daughter! In a deep and lonely glen,
far beyond the palace gates, there grows an herb whose magic power 'tis
said brings new life and strength to those who wreathe it round their
head in slumber. Yet none dare seek the spot, for spirits are said to
haunt the glen, and not a slave in all the palace but grows pale at
mention of the place. I am old and feeble, or I had been there long ere
this. And now, my child, who canst thou send?

Ione. I will send one who fears not spirit or demon; one who will gladly
risk e'en life itself for the brave young prince.

Helon. Blessed be the hand that gathers, thrice blessed be he who dares
the dangers of the way. Bring hither him thou speakest of. I would see
him.

Ione. She stands before thee. Nay, start not, Father. _I_ will seek the
dreaded glen and gather there the magic flowers that may bring health to
Constantine and happiness to me. I will away; bless, and let me go.

Helon. Thou, a woman delicate and fair! Nay, nay, it must not be, my
child! Better he should die than thou shouldst come to harm. I cannot
let thee go.

Ione. Thou canst not keep me now. Thou hast forgot I am a slave, and
none may guess beneath this veil a princess is concealed. I will take my
water-urn, and with the other slaves pass to the spring beyond the city
gates; then glide unseen into the haunted glen. Now, tell me how looks
the herb, that I may know it.

Helon. 'Tis a small, green plant that blossoms only by the broad, dark
stream, dashing among the rocks that fill the glen. But let me once
again implore thee not to go. Ah, fatal hour when first I told thee!
'Tis sending thee to thy death! Stay, stay, my child, or let me go with
thee.

Ione. It cannot be; do thou remain, and if I come not back ere set of
sun, do thou come forth to seek me. Tell Constantine I loved him, and so
farewell. I return successful, or I return no more.

                                                     [Ione _rushes out._

Helon. Thou brave and noble one to dare so much for one who loves thee
not! I'll go and pray the gods to watch above thee, and bring thee
safely back.

                                                          [_Exit_ Helon.

                                CURTAIN.


                              SCENE FIFTH.

                     [_A terrace beside the palace.
                          Enter_ Constantine.]

Con. Why comes she not? I watched her slender form when with the other
slaves she went forth to the fountain yonder. I knew her by the rosy
veil and snow-white arm that bore the water-urn. The morning sun shone
brightly on the golden hair, and seemed more beautiful for resting
there; and now 'tis nearly set, and yet she comes not. Why should I
grieve because my mother's slave forgets me? Shame on thee, Constantine!
How weak and childish have I grown! This fever gives no rest when Ione
is not here to sing sweet songs, and cheer the weary hours. Ah, she
comes! [_Enter_ Ione _with basket of flowers._] Where hast thou been,
Ione? The long day passed so slowly, and I missed thee sadly from my
side. But thou art pale; thy locks are damp! What has chanced to thee?
Speak, I beseech thee!

Ione. 'Tis nothing; calm thyself, my lord. I am well, and bring thee
from the haunted glen the magic flowers whose power I trust will win
thee health and happiness. May it please thee to accept them [_kneels,
and gives the flowers_].

Con. Thou, thou, Ione? Hast thou been to that fearful spot, where mortal
foot hath feared to tread? The gods be blessed, thou art safe again! How
can I thank thee? Ah, why didst thou risk so much for my poor life? It
were not worth the saving if thine were lost.

Ione. My lord, a loving nation looks to thee for safety and protection.
I am but a feeble woman, and none would grieve if I were gone; none weep
for the friendless slave, Ione.

Con. Oh, say not thus! Tears would be shed for thee, and one heart
would grieve for her who risked so much for him. Speak not of death or
separation, for I cannot let thee go.

Ione. I will not leave thee yet, till I have won thy lost health back.
The old priest, Helon, bid me seek the herbs, and bind them in a garland
for thy brow. If thou wilt place it there, and rest awhile, I am repaid.

Con. If thy hand gave it, were it deadly poison I would place it there.
Now sing, Ione; thy low sweet voice will bring me pleasant dreams, and
the healing sleep will be the deeper with thy music sounding in mine
ears.

    [_The prince reclines upon the terrace._ Ione _weaves a garland
        and sings._

    Flowers, sweet flowers, I charge thee well,
    O'er the brow where ye bloom cast a healing spell;
    From the shadowy glen where spirits dwell,
    I have borne thee here, thy power to tell.
    Flowers, pale flowers, o'er the brow where ye lie,
    Cast thy sweetest breath ere ye fade and die.

    [Ione _places the garland on the head of the prince, who falls
        asleep. She sits beside him softly singing._

                                CURTAIN.


                              SCENE SIXTH.

                       [The Queen's _apartment._
                          The Queen _alone._]

Queen. 'Tis strange what power this slave hath gained o'er Constantine.
She hath won him back to health again, and never have I seen so gay a
smile upon his lips as when she stood beside him in the moonlight
singing to her harp. And yet, tho' well and strong again, he takes no
interest in his native land. He comes no more to council hall or feast,
but wanders 'mong his flowers with Ione. How can I rouse him to the
danger that is near! The Turkish sultan and his troops are on their way
to conquer Greece, and he, my Constantine, who should be arming for the
fight, sits weaving garlands with the lovely slave girl! Ah, a thought
hath seized me! Why cannot she who hath such power o'er him rouse up
with noble words the brave heart slumbering in his breast? I hear her
light step in the hall. Ione, Ione,--come hither! I would speak with
thee.

                                                          [_Enter_ Ione.

Ione. Your pleasure, dearest lady.

Queen. Ione, thou knowest how I love thee for the brave deeds thou hast
done. Thou hast given health unto my son, hath won him back to
happiness. Thou hast conquered his aversion to the princess, and he will
gladly wed her when the hour shall come. Is it not so?

Ione. Dear lady, that I cannot tell thee. He never breathes her name,
and if I speak of her as thou hast bid me, he but sighs, and grows more
sad; and yet I trust, nay, I well know that when he sees her he will
gladly give his hand to one who loves him as the princess will. Then do
not grieve, but tell thy slave how she may serve thee.

Queen. Oh, Ione, if thou couldst wake him from the quiet dream that
seems to lie upon his heart. His country is in danger, and he should be
here to counsel and command. Go, tell him this in thine own gentle
words; rouse him to his duty, and thou shalt see how brave a heart is
there. Thou hast a wondrous power to sadden or to cheer. Oh, use it
well, and win me back my noble Constantine! Canst thou do this, Ione?

Ione. I will; and strive most earnestly to do thy bidding. But of what
danger didst thou speak? No harm to him, I trust?

Queen. The Turkish troops are now on their way to carry woe and
desolation into Greece, and he, the prince, hath taken no part in the
councils. His nobles mourn at his strange indifference, and yet he heeds
them not.

I know not why, but some new happiness hath come to him, and all else is
forgot. But time is passing. I will leave thee to thy work, and if thou
art successful, thou wilt have won a queen's most fervent gratitude.
Adieu, my child!

                                                      [_Exit_ The Queen.

Ione. Yes, Constantine, thy brave heart shall awake; and when thy
country is once safe again, I'll come to claim the love that now I feel
is mine.

                                                           [_Exit_ Ione.

                                CURTAIN.


                            SCENE SEVENTH.

                       [_Apartment in the palace.
                 Enter_ Ione _with sword and banner._]

Ione. Now may the gods bless and watch above thee, Constantine; give
strength to thine arm, courage to thy heart, and victory to the cause
for which thou wilt venture all. Ah, could I but go with thee, thy
shield would then be useless, for with mine own breast would I shelter
thee, and welcome there the arrows meant for thee.

He comes; now let me rouse him from this dream, and try my power o'er
his heart.

                                                   [_Enter_ Constantine.

Con. What high thoughts stirring in thy heart hath brought the clear
light to thine eye, Ione, the bright glow to thy cheek? What mean these
arms? Wouldst thou go forth to meet the Turks? Thy beauty would subdue
them sooner than the sword thou art gazing on so earnestly.

Ione. Thou hast bade me speak, my lord, and I obey; but pardon thy slave
if in her wish to serve she seem too bold. Thy mother and thy subjects
wonder at thy seeming indifference when enemies are nigh. Thine army
waits for thee to lead them forth; thy councillors sit silent, for their
prince is gone. While grief and terror reign around, he is wandering
'mong his flowers, or listening to the music of his harp. Ah, why is
this? What hath befallen thee? Thou art no longer pale and feeble, yet
there seems a spell set on thee. Ah, cast it off, and show them that
thou hast no fear.

Con. I am no coward, Ione; but there is a spell upon me. 'Tis a holy
one, and the chain that holds me here I cannot break,--for it is _love_.
I have lost the joy I once took in my subjects and my native land, and
am content to sit beside thee, and listen to the music of thy voice.

Ione. Then let that voice arouse thee. Oh, fling away the chain that
keeps thee from thy duty, and be again the noble prince who thought but
of his people. Oh, let me plead for those who sorrow for thy care, and
here let me implore thee to awaken from thy dream and be thyself again
[_she kneels_].

Con. Oh, not to me! Rise, I beseech thee, rise! Thou hast led me to my
duty; I will obey thee.

Ione. I would have thee gird on thy sword, and with shield upon thine
arm, and banner in thy hand, go forth and conquer like a king. Show
those who doubt thee that their fears are false,--that thou art worthy
of their love. Lead forth thy troops, and save thy country from the woe
that now draws nigh. Victory surely will be theirs when thou shalt lead
them on.

Con. Give me my sword, unfurl my banner, and say farewell. I will return
victorious, or no more. Thy voice hath roused me from my idle but most
lovely dream, and thy brave words shall cheer me on till I have won the
honor of my people back. Pity and forgive my fault; and ah, remember in
thy prayers one who so passionately loves thee. Farewell! farewell!

    [_Kisses her robe and rushes out._ Ione _sinks down._

                                CURTAIN.


                             SCENE EIGHTH.

                         [_On the battlements._
                     Ione, _watching the battle._]

Ione. The battle rages fiercely at the city gates, and the messengers
are fearful of defeat. I cannot rest while Constantine is in such peril.
Let me watch here and pray for him. Ah, I can see his white plume waving
in the thickest of the fight, where the blows fall heaviest and the
danger is most great. The gods guard him in this fearful hour! See how
small the brave band grows; they falter and retreat. One blow now
bravely struck may turn the tide of battle. It shall be done! I will arm
the slaves now in the palace, and lead them on to victory or death. We
may win--and if _not_, I shall die in saving thee, Constantine!

                                                    [Ione _rushes out._

                                CURTAIN.


                             SCENE NINTH.

                         [_The castle terrace.
                          Enter_ Constantine.]

Con. The victory is ours, and Greece again is free, thanks to the gods,
and to the brave unknown who led on my slaves, and saved us when all
hope seemed gone. Who could have been the fearless stranger? Like an
avenging spirit came the mysterious leader, carrying terror and
destruction to the Turkish ranks. My brave troops rallied and we won the
day. Yet when I sought him, he was gone, and none could tell me where.
He hath won my deepest gratitude, and the honor of all Greece for this
brave deed.

But where is Ione? Why comes she not to bid me welcome home? Ah, could
she know that thoughts of her gave courage to my heart, and strength to
my weak arm, and led me on that I might be more worthy her! Ah, yonder
comes the stranger; he may not think to see me here. I will step aside.

           [Constantine _retires. Enter_ Ione _in armor, bearing sword._

Ione. The gods be thanked! the brave young prince hath conquered. From
the flying Turk I won his banner back, and now my task is done. I must
fling by this strange disguise and be myself again. I must bind up my
wound and seek to rest, for I am faint and weary. Ah, what means this
sudden dimness of mine eyes, this faintness--can it be death? 'T is
welcome,--Constantine, it is for thee!

                                [Ione _faints_; Constantine _rushes in._

Con. Ione, Ione, look up and listen to the blessings of my grateful
heart for all thou hast dared and done for me. So pale, so still! Ah,
must she die now I have learned to love so fervently and well? Ione,
awake!

                                                         [Ione _rouses._

Ione. Pardon this weakness; I will retire, my lord.

Con. Ah, do not leave me till I have poured out my gratitude. My country
owes its liberty to thee: then let me here before thee offer up my
country's thanks, and tell thee what my heart hath striven to hide. Dear
Ione, listen, I do beseech thee! [_Kneels._]

Ione. My lord, remember Lady Irene.

Con. [_starting up_]. Why comes she thus between my happiness and me?
Why did she send thee hither? Thou hast made the chain that binds her to
me heavier to be borne; the sorrow of my heart more bitter still. Nay,
do not weep. I will be calm. Thou art pale and faint, Ione,--lean thus
on me.

Ione. Nay, leave me; I cannot listen to thee. Go, I pray thee, go!

Con. Not till thou hast pardoned me. I have made thee weep, and every
tear that falls reproaches me for my rash words. Forget them, and
forgive me.

Ione. Ask not forgiveness of thy slave, my lord. 'Tis I who have
offended. And think not thus of Lady Irene, who in her distant home hath
cherished tender thoughts of one whom all so honored. Think of her grief
when she shall find thee cold and careless, and shall learn that he who
should most love and cherish, deems her but a burden, and hates the wife
whom he hath vowed to wed. Ah, think of this, and smile no more upon the
slave who may not listen to her lord.

Con. Thou art right, Ione. I will obey thee, and seek to hide my sorrow
within my lonely breast. Teach me to love thy mistress as I ought, and I
will sacrifice each selfish wish, and be more worthy thy forgiveness,
and a little place within thy heart. Trust me, I will speak no more of
my unhappy love, and will seek thee only when thine own voice bids me
come.

The sunlight of thy presence is my truest joy, and banishment from thee
the punishment my wilful heart deserves. Rest here, Ione, and weep for
me no more. I am happy if thou wilt but smile again. Farewell, and may
the gods forever bless thee! [_Kisses her robe, and rushes out._]

                                CURTAIN.


                             SCENE TENTH.

                      [_A gallery in the palace._
                     _Enter_ Ione _with flowers._]

Ione. How desolate and dreary all hath grown! The garden once so bright
hath lost its beauty now, for Constantine no longer walks beside me. The
palace rooms seem sad and lonely, for his voice no longer echoes there,
and the music of his harp is never heard. His pale face haunts me
through all my waking hours, and his mournful eyes look on me in my
dreams. But soon his sorrow all shall cease, for nearer draws the day
when Princess Irene comes to claim the heart so hardly won, and will by
constancy and love so faithfully reward. Hark! I hear a step. It is
Rienzi. How shall I escape,--my veil is in the garden! He knows me and
will discover all. Stay! this curtain shall conceal me [_hides within
the drapery_].

                                       [_Enter_ Rienzi _stealthily._

Rienzi. How! not here? I told the messenger to meet me in the gallery
that leads from the garden. Curses on him! he hath delayed, and were I
discovered in this part of the palace, all might be betrayed. I'll wait,
and if he comes not, I'll bear the message to the friends myself, and
tell the bold conspirators we meet to-night near the haunted glen, to
lay yet farther plans. We must rid the kingdom of the prince, who will
be made ere long our king, for his bridal with the Princess Irene draws
more near. But ere the royal crown shall rest upon his brow, that head
shall be laid low. The queen will soon follow her young son, and then
we'll seize the kingdom and rule it as we will. Hark! methought I heard
a sound. I may be watched. I'll stay no longer, but seek the place
myself [_steals out and disappears in the garden_].

                                    [Ione _comes from her hiding-place._

Ione. Surely the gods have sent me to watch above thee, Constantine, and
save thee from the danger that surrounds thee. I will haste to tell him
all I have discovered. Yet, no! Rienzi may escape, and I can charge none
other with the crime. They meet near the haunted glen, and not a slave
would follow even his brave prince to that dark spot. How can I aid him
to discover those who seek to do him harm? Stay! I will go alone. Once
have I dared the dangers of the way to save thy life, Constantine; again
I'll tread the fearful path, and watch the traitors at their evil work.
It shall be done! I will dare all, and fail not, falter not, till thou
who art dearer to me than life itself art safe again.

                                                   [_Exit._

                                CURTAIN.


                            SCENE ELEVENTH.

            [_A wood near the haunted glen._ Ione _shrouded
             in white glides in and conceals herself among
                       the trees. Enter_ Rienzi.]

Rienzi [_looking fearfully about_]. 'Tis a wild and lonely spot, and
'tis said strange spirits have been seen to wander here. Why come they
not? 'Tis past the hour, and I who stand undaunted when the fiercest
battle rages round me, now tremble with strange fear in this dim spot.
Shame on thee, Rienzi, there is nought to fear [_opens a scroll and
reads_]. Here are their names, all pledged to see the deed accomplished.
'Tis a goodly list and Constantine must fall when foes like these are
round him. [Ione _appears within the glen._

Ha! methought I heard a sound! Nay, 'twas my foolish fancy. Spirits, I
defy thee!

Ione. Beware! Beware!

Rienzi. Ye gods, what's that? It was a voice. [_Rushes wildly towards
the glen, sees_ Ione, _drops scroll and dagger._] 'Tis a spirit! The
gods preserve me, I will not stay! [_Exit in terror._]

                                                          [_Enter_ Ione.

Ione. Saved! saved! Here are the traitors' names, and here Rienzi's
dagger to prove my story true. Now hence with all my speed, no time is
to be lost! These to thee, Constantine, and joy unfailing to my own fond
heart.

                                                           [_Exit_ Ione.

                                CURTAIN.


                             SCENE TWELFTH.

                       [_Apartment in the palace.
                          Enter_ Constantine.]

Con. This little garland of pale, withered flowers is all now left me of
Ione, faded like my own bright hopes, broken like my own sad heart. Yet
still I cherish it, for her dear hand wove the wreath, and her soft eyes
smiled above the flowers as she twined them for my brow. Those happy
days are passed; she comes no more, but leaves me sorrowing and alone.
And yet 'tis better so. The princess comes to claim my hand, and then
'twill be a sin to watch Ione, to follow her unseen, and listen to her
voice when least she thinks me near. The gods give me strength to bear
my trial worthily, and suffer silently the greatest sorrow life can
give,--that of losing her [_leans sadly upon the harp_].

                                                          [_Enter_ Ione.

Ione. My lord--He does not hear me, how bitter and how deep must be his
grief, when the voice that most he loves falls thus unheeded on his ear.
My lord--

Con. [_starting_]. And thou art really here? Ah, Ione, I have longed for
thee most earnestly. Ah, forgive me! In my joy I have disobeyed, and
told the happiness thy presence brings. What wouldst thou with me?

Ione. My lord, I have strange tidings for thine ear.

Con. Oh, tell me not the Princess Irene hath arrived!

Ione. Nay, 'tis not that. I have learned the secret of a fearful plot
against thy life. Rienzi, and a band of other traitors, seek to win thy
throne and take the life of their kind prince.

Con. It cannot be, Ione! They could not raise their hands 'gainst one
who hath striven for their good. They cannot wish the life I would so
gladly have lain down to save them. Who told thee this, Ione? I
cannot--no, I will not think they could prove so ungrateful unto their
prince.

Ione. I cannot doubt the truth of this, my lord, for one whose word I
trust learned it, and followed to the haunted glen, there saw Rienzi,
whose guilty conscience drove him from the place, leaving behind this
scroll whereon are all the traitors' names. And this dagger,--'tis his
own, as thou mayst see [_shows dagger and scroll_].

Con. I can no longer doubt; but I had rather have felt the dagger in my
heart than such a wound as this. The names are few; I fear them not, and
will ere long show them a king may pardon all save treachery like this.
But tell the name of thy brave friend who hath discovered this deep
treason, and let me offer some reward to one who hath watched above me
with such faithful care.

Ione. Nay, my lord, no gift, no thanks are needed. 'Tis a true and
loving subject, who is well rewarded if his king be safe.

Con. Thou canst not thus deceive me. It was thine own true heart that
dared so much to save my life. Oh, Ione, why wilt thou make me love thee
more by deeds like these,--why make the sorrow heavier to bear, the
parting sadder still?

Ione. Thou dost forget, my lord, I have but done my duty. May it please
thee, listen to a message I bear thee from the queen.

Con. Say on. I will gladly listen to thy voice while yet I may.

Ione. She bid me tell thee that to-morrow, ere the sun shall set, the
Princess Irene will be here. [Constantine _starts and turns aside._]
Forgive me that I pain thee, but I must obey. Yet, farther: thy bride
hath sent her statue as a gift to thee, and thou wilt find it in the
queen's pavilion. She bid me say she prayed thee to go look upon it, and
remember there thy solemn vow.

Con. Oh, Ione, could she send none but thee to tell me this? To hear it
from thy lips but makes the tidings heavier to bear. Canst thou bid me
go, and vow to love one whom I have learned to hate? Canst thou bid me
leave thee for a fate like this?

Ione. My lord, thou art soon to be a king; then for thy country's sake,
remember thy hand is plighted to the princess, and let no kindly
thoughts of a humble slave keep thy heart from its solemn duty.

Con. I am no king,--'tis I who am the slave, and thou, Ione, are more to
me than country, home, or friends. Nay, do not turn away,--think only of
the love I bear thee, and listen to my prayer.

Ione. I must not listen. Hast thou so soon forgot the vow thou made that
no word of love should pass thy lips? Remember, 'tis a slave who stands
before thee.

Con. Once more thou shalt listen to me, Ione, and then I will be still
forever. Thou shalt be my judge, thy lips _shall_ speak my fate. I
cannot love the princess. Wouldst thou bid me vow to cherish her while
my heart is wholly thine? Wouldst thou ask me to pass through life
beside her with a false vow on my lips, and, with words of love I do not
feel, conceal from her the grief of my divided heart? Must I give up all
the bright dreams of a happier lot, and feel that life is but a bitter
struggle, a ceaseless longing but for thee? Rather bid me to forget the
princess and bind with Love's sweet chains the slave unto my side,--my
bride forever.

Ione. The _slave_ Ione can never be thy bride, and thou art bound by
solemn vows to wed the Princess Irene. My duty and thine honor are more
precious than a poor slave's love. Banish all thoughts of her, and prove
thyself a faithful lord unto the wife who comes now trustingly to thee.
Ask thine own heart if life could be a bitter pilgrimage, when a
sacrifice like this had been so nobly made. A tender wife beside thee,
a mother's blessing on thy head,--oh, were not this a happier fate than
to enjoy a short, bright dream of love, but to awake and find thy
heart's peace gone, thy happiness forever fled; to see the eyes that
once looked reverently upon thee now turned aside, and lips that spoke
but tender words now whisper scornfully of broken vows thou wert not
brave enough to keep. Forgive me, but I cannot see the prince so false
to his own noble heart. Cast off this spell; forget me, and Irene shall
win thee back to happiness.

Con. Never! All her loveliness can never banish the pure, undying love I
bear to thee. Oh, Ione, canst thou doubt its truth, when I obey thee now
and prove how great thy power o'er my heart hath grown? Oh, let the
sacrifice win from _thee_ one gentle thought, one kind remembrance of
him whose life thou hast made so beautiful for a short hour. And in my
loneliness, sweet memories of thee shall cheer and gladden, and I will
bear all for thy dear sake. And now farewell. Forgive if I have grieved
thee, and at parting grant me one token to the silent love that
henceforth must lie unseen within my heart. Farewell, Ione! [_He kisses
her._]

Ione [_falling at his feet_]. Ah, forgive me,--here let me seek thy
pardon for the grief I have brought thee. May all the happiness that
earth can bring be ever thine. But, if all others should forsake thee,
in thine hour of sorrow remember there is one true heart that cannot
change. Oh, may the gods bless thee! 'Tis my last wish, last prayer
[_weeps_]. Farewell!

Con. Stay! I would claim from thee one little word which hath the power
to brighten e'en my sorrow. I have never asked thee, for I thought my
heart had read it in thine eyes that looked so kindly on me; in the lips
that spoke such gentle words of hope. But ah! tell me now at parting
dost thou _love_ me, dear Ione?

Ione. I do, most fondly, truly love thee.

Con. Ione, thy voice hath been a holy spell to win me to my duty. Thy
love shall keep me pure and faithful, till we meet above. Farewell!

Ione. Farewell!--and oh, remember how I have loved thee; and may the
memory of all I have borne for thee win thy pardon for any wrong I may
have done thee. The princess will repay the grief the slave hath caused
thy noble heart. Remember Ione, and be true.

                                                                [_Exit._

Con. Gone, gone, now lost to me forever! Remember thee! Ah, how can I
ever banish thy dear image from this heart that now hath grown so
desolate? I will be true. None shall ever know how hard a struggle hath
been mine, that I might still be worthy thee. Yes, Irene, I will strive
to love thee, and may the gods give me strength; but Ione, Ione, how can
I give thee up! [_Picks up a flower_ Ione _has dropped, and puts it in
his bosom and goes sadly out._]

                                CURTAIN.


                           SCENE THIRTEENTH.

                [The Queen's _pavilion. A dark curtain
              hangs before an alcove. Enter_ Constantine.]

Con. The hour hath come when I shall gaze upon the form of her who hath
cast so dark a shadow o'er my life. Beautiful and young, and blessed
with all that makes her worthy to be loved, and yet I fear I have not
taught my wilful heart the tenderness I ought.

I fear to draw aside the veil that hides her from me, for I cannot
banish the sweet image that forever floats before mine eyes. Ione's soft
gaze is on me, and the lips are whispering, "I love thee!" But I have
promised to be true,--no thoughts of her must lead me now astray. My
fate is here [_approaches the curtain_]. Let me gaze upon it, and think
gently of the wife so soon to be mine own. Why do I fear? Courage, my
heart! [_He draws aside the curtain, and_ Ione, _veiled, appears as a
statue upon its pedestal._] Another veil to raise! How hard the simple
deed hath grown. One last sweet thought of thee, Ione, and then I will
no longer falter. [_He turns away and bows his head._]

Ione. Constantine! [_He starts, and gazes in wonder as the statue,
casting aside the veil, comes down and kneels._] Here at thy feet kneels
thy hated bride,--the "proud, cold princess," asking thee to pardon all
the sorrow she hath given thee. Ah, smile upon me, and forget Ione, who
as a slave hath won thy love, but as the princess will repay
it,--forgive, and love me still!

Con. Thou, thou Irene,--she whom I so feared to look upon? Ah, no!--thou
art Ione, the gentle slave. Say am I dreaming? Why art thou here to make
another parting the harder to be borne? Fling by thy crown and be Ione
again.

Irene [_rising_]. Listen, Constantine, and I will tell thee all. I am
Irene. In my distant home I learned thou didst not love me, and I vowed
to win thy heart before I claimed it. Thus, unknown, the proud princess
served thee as a slave, and learned to love thee with a woman's fondest
faith. I watched above thee that no harm should fall; I cheered and
gladdened life for thee, and won the heart I longed for. I knew the
sorrow thou wouldst feel, but tried thy faith by asking thee to
sacrifice thy love and keep thine honor stainless. Here let me offer up
a woman's fondest trust and most undying love. Wilt thou believe, and
pardon mine offence? [_Kneels again before him._]

Con. Not at my feet, Irene!--'tis I who should bend low before thee,
asking thy forgiveness. For all thou hast dared for me; for every
fearless deed; for every loving thought, all I can lay before thee is a
fond and faithful heart, whose reverence and love can never die, but
through the pilgrimage of life shall be as true and tender as when I
gave it to the slave Ione [_embraces_ Irene].

                                                             [_Tableau._

                                CURTAIN.




                                  ION.


                              NOTE TO ION.

This play was found too uninteresting for presentation, and was left
unfinished, but is here given as a specimen of what the young authors
considered _very fine_ writing.

The drama was, of course, to end well. Cleon, being free, at once
assembles a noble army, returns to conquer Mohammed and release Ion, who
weds the lovely Zuleika, becomes king, and "lives happily forever
after."


                              CHARACTERS.


    Mohammed   .   .   .   .   .   .    _The Turk._

    Cleon  .   .   .   .   .   .   .    _Prince of Greece._

    Ion    .   .   .   .   .   .   .    _Son of Cleon._

    Adrastus   .   .   .   .   .   .    _A Priest._

    Hafiz  .   .   .   .   .   .   .    _Turkish Envoy._

    Hassan .   .   .   .   .   .   .    _A Slave._

    Murad  .   .   .   .   .   .   .    _A Slave._

    Abdallah   .   .   .   .   .   .    _A Slave._

    Iantha .   .   .   .   .   .   .    _Wife of Cleon._

    Zuleika    .   .   .   .   .   .    _Daughter of Mohammed._

    Medon  .   .   .   .   .   .   .    _A Slave._

    Selim  .   .   .   .   .   .   .    _A Slave._


                                  ION.


                              SCENE FIRST.

                    [_Room in the palace of_ Cleon.
                        Iantha _and_ Adrastus.]

Iantha. How wearily the days wear on, and the heavy hours so fraught
with doubt press like death upon my aching heart. To the young, the
fair, the happy, life is a blissful dream, filled with bright joys; for
hope like a star beams on their pathway. But to the grief-worn heart,
worn with weary watching, vexed with sad cares, whose hours are filled
with fear, and ever thronging sorrows, whose star burns with a dim
uncertain light,--oh, weary, weary is the pilgrimage; joyless the
present, dark the future; and the sooner all is o'er, the better.

Adrastus. Daughter, thou hast forgot. The radiant star may pale and
fade, but He who giveth it its light still liveth. Turn unto Him thy
worn and bleeding heart, and comfortless thou shalt not be.

Iantha. Father, I cannot. When I would pray for resignation, words fail
me, and my soul is filled with murmuring, while round me throng visions
of battle-fields and death. Ever comes before me the form of Cleon,--no
longer bright and beautiful as when, burning with hope and confidence in
his high calling, he went forth to conquer or to die; but fallen,
bleeding, perhaps dead, or a captive in the dungeon of the pagan, doomed
to waste in hopeless misery the long years of his manhood. And my
boy,--what will be his fate? Father, can I think on this and pray?

Adrastus. 'Tis hard, Iantha; but to His aid alone canst thou look up to
save thy husband from the horrors of a bloody war. Call on Him, and He,
the merciful, will in thy great need be near thee.

                                                         [_Enter_ Medon.

Medon. A stranger craveth audience.

Iantha [_rushing forward_]. A stranger! Cometh he from my lord?

Medon. I know not, lady; but as a messenger is he clad, and with great
haste demandeth speech of thee, saying he bore tidings of great import.

Iantha. Admit him instantly. [_Exit_ Medon.] Father, do thou follow, and
speed him hither.

Adrastus. I hasten to obey thee. Bear a brave heart, my daughter. I feel
that hope is near.

                                                       [_Exit_ Adrastus.

Iantha [_joyfully_]. Hope,--thrice blessed word!--wilt thou indeed visit
this doubting heart once more, and sweeten the cup thou hast so long
forsaken? [_Enter_ Hafiz.] Welcome! comest thou from my lord? Thy
tidings speedily!

Hafiz. To the wife of Cleon, late commander of the rebel Greeks, am I
sent to bear tidings of their defeat by Mohammed, now master of all
Greece.

Adrastus. And my lord,--the noble Cleon?

Hafiz. Betrayed, defeated, and now lying under sentence of immediate
death in the dungeon of the Sultan.

Iantha. Lost! lost! lost! [_Falls fainting on a couch._]

                                                      [_Enter_ Adrastus.

Adrastus. Daughter, look up!--there is yet hope. There is no time for
rest. Up! rouse thy brave, till now, unconquered heart and cast off this
spell. And thou, slave, hence,--away!

                                                          [_Exit_ Hafiz.

Iantha [_rousing_]. Defeated, imprisoned, condemned,--words unto one
heart fraught with such dire despair. Tell me, Father, oh, tell me
truly, do I dream?

                                   [_Enter_ Ion, _who stands listening._

Adrastus. 'Tis no dream. The rough soldier did but tell thee in rude
speech, what I was hastening in more guarded words to bear thee. 'Tis
true; thy lord is in Mohammed's power, a victim to the perfidy of
pagans, and doomed unto a speedy death. Nay, Iantha, shrink not, but as
a soldier's wife, glory in the death of thy brave knight, dying for his
country; and in his martyrdom take to thy soul sweet comfort.

Iantha. Comfort! Oh, man, thou little knowest woman's heart! What to her
is glory, when him she loveth is torn from her forever? What to the
orphan is the crown of martyrdom, the hero's fame, the praise of
nations, the homage of the great? Will they give back the noble dead,
heal the broken heart, tear bitter memories from the wounded soul to
whom earth is desolate? Nay, Father, nay. Oh, Cleon, would I could die
with thee!

Adrastus. This mighty sorrow o'erpowers her reason and will destroy all
hope. Iantha, daughter, rouse thyself; let the love thou dost bear thy
lord now aid in his deliverance. From the wealth of thy heart's true
affection, devise thou some way to save him.

Iantha. Aid me, Father; I have no power of thought. I will trust all to
_thee_.

                                                      [Ion _approaches._

Adrastus. I know not what to counsel thee; my life hath ill fitted me to
deal with soldiers and with kings. But if some messenger--

Iantha. Nay, it will not serve. None will dare brave the anger of the
pagan, and death were the doom of such as approach him other than as a
slave. And yet,--perchance he might relent. Oh, were there some true
heart, fearless and loving, to aid me now in mine hour of distress!
Where can I look for help?

Ion [_coming forward_]. Here, Mother,--_I_ will seek the camp of
Mohammed.

Iantha. Thou!--my Ion, my only one. No, no; it may not be,--thy tender
youth, thy gentle, untried spirit. 'Tis madness e'en to think on!

Ion. Mother, am I not a soldier's son, cradled 'mid warriors? Runs not
the blood of heroes in these veins? Are not my father's deeds, his
bright, untarnished name, my proud inheritance? What though this tender
form is yet untried; what though these arms have never borne the
knightly armor? No victor's laurels rest on this youthful brow, and I
bear no honored name among the great and glorious of our land; yet,
Mother, have I not a father, for whose dear sake I may yet purchase that
knighthood for which this young heart glows? Am I not the son of Cleon?

Adrastus. Verily doth a spirit move the boy. Look on him now, Iantha,
and let no weak, unworthy doubt of thine curb the proud spirit that
proves him worthy of his sire.

Iantha. My son, my fair, young Ion, thou art all now left my widowed
heart. How can I bid thee go! The barbarous pagan will doom thee to a
cruel death. How canst thou, an unknown youth, move the fierce heart
that hath slain thy sire?

Ion. Fear not, Mother; he who calls me to this glorious mission will
protect me. Shall I stand weeping while my father still breathes the air
of pagan dungeons; while the base fetters of the infidel rest on his
limbs, and his brave followers lie unavenged in their cold, bloody
graves; while my country's banner, torn, dishonored, is trampled in the
dust,--and he the proud, the brave, till now unconquered defender of
that country's honor, lies doomed to an ignominious death? Oh, Mother,
bid me go!

Adrastus. Iantha, speak to the boy! Let him not say his _mother_ taught
him fear.

Iantha. My Ion, go,--strong in thine innocence and faith, go forth upon
thy holy mission; and surely He who looketh ever with a loving face on
those who put their trust in Him, will in His mercy guard and guide thee
[_girds on his sword_]. Farewell! Go,--with thy mother's blessing on
thee!

Ion. Now is my heart filled all anew with hope and courage, and I go
forth trustingly. Father, thy blessing [_kneels before_ Adrastus].

Adrastus. Go, thou self-anointed victim on the altar of thy love. Bless
thy pure, faithful heart!

Ion [_rising_]. Farewell! Embrace me, Mother.

Iantha [_pressing_ Ion _to her breast_]. Farewell, my Ion. And if the
great Father wills it that I look not again on thee in life, into His
care do I commit thee. Farewell!

Ion. Mother, farewell! And if I fall, mourn not, but glory that I died
as best became the son of Cleon [_draws his sword_]. And now leap forth,
my sword!--henceforth is there no rest nor honor till we have conquered.
Father, I come, I come! [Ion _rushes out;_ Iantha _rushes to the window,
tears off her veil and waves it to_ Ion.]

                                CURTAIN.


                             SCENE SECOND.

                 [_Tent of_ Mohammed; _maps and arms lying
                       about._ Mohammed _and_ Hafiz.]

Moh'd. And spake they no word of ransom or of hostage?

Hafiz. None, sire. The lady lay as one struck dead; and the priest, foul
Christian dog, bade me go hence, and tarry not.

Moh'd. And held you no speech with those about the princess. Sure, there
were some to listen to thy master's word.

Hafiz. Great master, I sought in vain to set before them the royal will.
At first it were as though a spell had fallen on them. Nay, some did
turn aside and weep, rending their hair, as though all hope were lost.
Then, when I strove to win them to some counsel, they woke to such an
uproar, cursing thy perfidy, and vowing most dire and speedy vengeance
on thee, clashing their weapons and crying, "Down with the pagan dogs!"
Then, drawing forth their lances with fierce oaths, they drove me from
the gates in such warlike manner, I could but strive with haste to make
good mine escape, and without rest have I journeyed hither to bring thee
tidings.

Moh'd. By the prophet! and is it thus they serve the royal messenger.
But they shall rue it dearly. Cleon shall die. To-morrow's sun shall
never shine for him. The proud Greeks shall learn to dread Mohammed's
ire, and bend their haughty heads before him in the dust. I offer
ransom, and they will not harken. I send them honorable terms, and they
thrust my messenger rudely from their gates. They have dared to brave
me,--they shall feel my power!

Hafiz. Mighty Mohammed, if thy poor slave might offer counsel, were it
not wise to tarry till the Greeks on cooler thought shall seek thee with
some treaty which may avail thee better than such hasty vengeance. How
much more worthy were a heavy ransom than the life of a single miserable
prince.

Moh'd. Peace, slave! I have said Cleon shall die, and, by Allah! so I
have not word from these rebel dogs ere three days shall wear away, his
body swung from the battlements shall bear them tidings of Mohammed's
power. [_Enter_ Selim.] What hath befallen, Selim, that thou comest in
such haste?

Selim. Most mighty king, there waits without a youth, demanding speech
of thee.

Moh'd. A youth! Who may he be, and what seeks he with us?

Selim. Most gracious sire, I know not. Our guard surprised him wandering
without the camp,--alone, unarmed, save with a single sword; young, and
I think a Greek. Abdallah seized him as a spy, and led him hither to
await thy royal will. He doth refuse all question, demanding to be led
before thee, where he will unfold his errand.

Moh'd. A Greek! Bring him before us, an he prove a spy he shall hang
before the day waxeth older by an hour. Hence,--bring him hither!
[_Exit_ Selim.] By Allah! my proud foes have deigned to send us
messengers, and seek to win the favor so rudely scorned. They know not
Mohammed, and, so they humble not themselves, will sue in vain.

                                         [_Enter_ Selim, _dragging_ Ion.

Selim. Your Mightiness doth behold the youth. [_To_ Ion, _who stands
proudly._] Kneel, slave!

Ion. I kneel not unto tyrants.

Moh'd. How, bold stripling! Weigh with more care thy speech, and forget
not before whom thou dost stand. [_To_ Selim.] Go, slave, and stand
without; see that none enter here unbidden. [_Exit_ Selim.] Speak, boy!
Who art thou, and why dost thou seek thus fearlessly the presence of thy
foe?--and beware thou speakest truly if it is as a friend to treat in
honorable fashion, or as a spy, thou now standest before us.

Ion. I am a Greek, son to the noble Cleon, now thy captive; I seek his
rescue.

Moh'd. Son to Cleon! Now, by the Prophet, 'tis wondrous strange! And
thou hast ventured alone into the camp amid thy deadly foes? Speak,
boy,--thine errand!

Ion. To offer hostage; to treat with Mohammed for a father's life; to
move to pity or to justice the heart that hath doomed a noble soldier
unto an unjust death.

Moh'd. And where, my bold prince, are thy followers, thy slaves, thy
royal train?

Ion. On yonder plain, cold in their graves.

Moh'd. Hast thou brought ransom? Where is thy gold?

Ion. In the coffers of the Turkish Mohammed, plundered from his
slaughtered foes.

Moh'd. Thou spakest of hostage,--I see it not.

Ion. 'Tis here,--the son of Cleon.

Moh'd. Thou! and thinkest thou thy young, worthless life were a fit
hostage for the leader of a rebel band, the enemy of all true followers,
whose capture hath cost blood and slaves and gold? By Allah! boy, thou
must name a higher price to win the life thou doth seek.

Ion. I have nought else to offer. Thy hand hath rent from me friends,
followers, gold, a sire. But if this young life hath any worth to thee,
if these arms may toil for thee, this form bear burdens to thy royalty,
take them,--take all, O king, but render unto me that life without which
Greece is lost.

Moh'd. Peace! Thy speech is vain; thy life is nought to me.

Ion. I will serve thee as a slave; in all things do thy
bidding,--faithful, unwearied, unrepining. Grant but my boon, and
monarch shall never have a truer vassal than I will be to thee. Great
Mohammed, let me not plead in vain.

Moh'd. Peace, I say; anger me not.

Ion. O king, hast thou no heart? Think of the ruined home, the mourning
people, the land made desolate by thee; of her who now counts the weary
hours for tidings of those dear to her,--tidings fraught with life or
death as thou shalt decree; of the son by thee doomed to see his honored
sire, hero of a hundred battles dragged like a slave unto a shameful
death. As thou wilt have mercy shown to thee, that mercy show thou unto
me. Oh, say to me, "Thy father lives!"

Moh'd. Away! I will not listen.

Ion. Nay, I _will_ kneel to thee. I who never knelt to man before, now
implore thee with earnest supplication. 'Tis for a father's life.

Moh'd. Kneel not to me,--it is in vain. Thy father is my captive, my
deadliest foe, whom I hate, and curse,--ay, and will slay. Boy, dost
thou know to whom thou dost bow?

Ion [_rising proudly_]. To the pagan Mohammed,--he who with murderous
hand hath bathed in blood the smiling plains of Greece; profaned her
altars, enslaved her people, and filled the land with widows' tears and
orphans' cries; he who by perfidy makes captives of his foes, refusing
hostage and scorning honorable treaty; turns from all supplicants,
closes his heart to mercy, and tramples under foot all pity and all
justice,--the murderer, and the tyrant. Yes, king, I know to whom I
plead.

Moh'd. [_in great anger_]. Ho, without there, guards!--Selim! [_Enter_
Selim _and soldiers._] Away with the prisoner! Bind him fast; see he
escape not. Mohammed stands not to be braved by a beardless boy! Hence!
[_Guards approach with chains._]

Ion. Lay not hands upon me,--I am no slave! One more appeal: May a son
look once more upon his father ere death parts them forever? May I but
for an hour speak with Cleon?

Moh'd. Once more thou mayst look upon the rebel Greek. When he hangs
from yonder battlement thou mayst gaze unbidden as thou will. Away! With
to-morrow's sun, he dies.

Ion. So soon, O king!--nay, the son of Cleon kneels not to thee again
[_turns to go_].

Moh'd. Stay,--yield up thy sword! Bend thy proud knee, and surrender
unto me the arms thou art unworthy now to bear.

Ion [_drawing his sword_]. This, my sword, girded on by a mother's hand,
pledged to the deliverance of a captive sire, dedicated to the service
of my country, unstained, unconquered,--_thus_ do I surrender thee. [_He
breaks the sword, and flings it down._]

Moh'd. Again dost thou brave me! Away with the rebel! Bind him hand and
foot. He shall learn what it is to be Mohammed's slave. Hence, I say!

Ion. I am thy captive, but thy slave--never! Thou mayst chain my limbs,
thou canst _not_ bind my freeborn soul! Lead on,--I follow.

                                               [_Exit_ Ion _and guards_.

                                CURTAIN.


                              SCENE THIRD.

              [_Tent of_ Zuleika; _guitar, ottoman, etc._]

Zuleika [_pacing up and down_]. Night draweth on apace, and ever nearer
comes the fatal hour. With to-morrow's dawn all hope is o'er, for
Mohammed hath sworn the Greek shall die, and when was _he_ ere known to
fail in his dread purpose? In vain have I wept before him, imploring him
to have some mercy; in vain have I sought with golden promises to move
the stony-hearted Hafiz,--all, all hath failed, and I am in despair. And
that brave youth, his true heart filled with love's pure devotion,
seeking by the sacrifice of his own life to save a father! And now each
moment bringeth nearer the death-hour of that father, and he is mourning
in solitude that he may not say farewell. Where can I turn for help? Ah,
Hassan! my faithful slave. He is true, and loveth me like his own. He
must aid me [_claps her hands_; _enter_ Hassan]. Hassan, thou lovest me,
and would not see me grieve?

Hassan. Allah, forbid! Thou art dear to old Hassan as the breath of
life, and while life lingers he will serve thee.

Zuleika. Then must thou aid me in a deed of mercy. Who doth keep watch
to-night before the tent of the young Greek?

Hassan. Mine is the watch. Wherefore dost thou seek to know?

Zuleika. Hassan, thou hast sworn to serve me. I have a boon to ask of
thee.

Hassan. Speak, lady! thy slave doth listen.

Zuleika. Thou knowest that with the morning sun Mohammed hath sworn
Cleon shall die. Such is the fierce anger he doth bear his foe he hath
refused all mercy and scorned to listen to the prayers of the young
prince who hath journeyed hither at peril of his own life to place
himself in the power of the king as hostage for his father.

Hassan. It is indeed most true. Poor youth!

Zuleika. 'Tis of him I would speak to thee. Mohammed, angered at his
boldness, hath, as thou knowest, guarded him in yonder tent, denying him
his last sad prayer to speak once more in life with his father. Oh,
Hassan, what must be the agony of that young heart to see the hours
swift speeding by, and know no hope.

Hassan. What wouldst thou have me do?

Zuleika. Lead him to his father; give him the consolation of folding to
his breast the beloved one to save whose life he hath sacrificed his
own.

Hassan. Dear mistress, thou art dreaming, and cannot know the danger of
so rash a deed. Bethink thee of Mohammed's anger, the almost certain
doom of such as dare to brave his mighty will. I pray thee let not thy
noble heart lead thee astray. Thou canst not save him, and will but harm
thyself.

Zuleika. Hassan, thy love and true devotion, I well know, doth prompt
thee to thus counsel, and in thy fear for me thou dost forget to think
of mercy or of pity. I thank thee; but thou canst not move me from my
firm resolve. Again I ask thee, Wilt thou aid me?

Hassan [_falling at her feet_]. Pardon, but I cannot. Heed, I implore
thee, the counsel of thy faithful servant, and trust to the wisdom these
gray hairs have brought. Thou art young and brave, but believe me,
maiden, dangers of which thou dost not dream beset the path, and I were
no true friend did I not warn thee to beware. Do not tempt me; I cannot
aid thee to thy ruin.

Zuleika. Then will I go alone. I will brave the peril, and carry comfort
to a suffering soul [_turns to go_; Hassan _catches her robe_].

Hassan. Maiden! once more let thy slave entreat. Thy father places faith
in me. I am the captive's guard.

Zuleika. Peace, Hassan, peace; if life be then so dear to thee, and thy
duty to thy king greater than that thou dost owe to thy fellow-man,
Allah forbid that I should tempt thee to forget it. But did death look
me in the face, I would not tarry now.

Hassan. And thou wouldst seek the captive's cell?

Zuleika. This very hour. Soon it will be too late.

Hassan. Thou knowest not the way,--soldiers guard every turn. Oh, tarry
till the dawn, I do implore thee.

Zuleika. The darkness shall be my guide, Allah my guard; shrouded in yon
dark mantle none will deem me other than a slave. Again I ask thee, Wilt
thou go?

Hassan. I go. I were no true man to tremble when a woman fears not. I
will guide thee, and may Allah in his mercy shield us both. Say thy
prayers, Hassan, for thy head no longer rests in safety.

Zuleika. Come, let us on! The moments speed. The darkening gloom
befriends us. First to the tent of the young prince, and while I in
brief speech do acquaint him with mine errand, thou shalt keep guard
without. Then will we guide him to his father, and unto Allah leave the
rest [_shrouds herself in dark mantle and veil_]. Lead on, good Hassan.
Let us away!

Hassan. Fold thy veil closer, that none may know the daughter of
Mohammed walks thus late abroad. Come, and Allah grant we sleep not in
paradise to-morrow!

                                               [_Exit, leading_ Zuleika.

                                CURTAIN.


                             SCENE FOURTH.

                             [Ion's _tent_.
           Ion _chained, in an attitude of deep despair, upon
            a miserable couch. He does not see the entrance
                       of_ Zuleika _and_ Hassan.]

Zuleika. Stand thou without as watch, good Hassan, and warn me if any
shall approach. [_Exit_ Hassan.] Young Greek, despair not; hope is nigh.

Ion [_starting up_]. Bright vision, whence comest thou? Art thou the
phantom of a dream, or some blest visitant from that better land, come
to bear me hence? What art thou?

Zuleika. I am no vision, but a mortal maiden, come to bring thee
consolation.

Ion. Consolation! ah, then indeed thou art no mortal; for unto grief
like mine there is no consolation, save that which cometh from above.

Zuleika. Nay, believe it not. Human hearts are at this moment hoping,
and human hands are striving earnestly to spare thee the agony thou dost
dread.

Ion. Are there then hearts to feel for the poor Greek? I had thought I
was alone,--alone 'mid mine enemies. Sure, those fetters are no dream,
this dark cell, the words "Thy father dies!" No, no! it is a dread
reality. The words are burned into my brain.

Zuleika. Is death, then, so dread a thing unto a warrior? I had thought
it brought him fame and glory.

Ion. Death! Oh, maiden! To the soldier on the battle-field, fighting for
his father-land 'mid the clash of arms, the fierce blows of foemen, the
shouts of victory; 'neath the banner of his country, the gratitude of a
nation, the glory of a hero round his brow,--death were a happy, ay, a
welcome friend. But alone, 'mid foes, disgraced by fetters, dragged to a
dishonored grave, with none to whisper of hope or comfort, death is a
cruel, a most bitter foe.

Zuleika. Mine errand is to take from that death the bitterness thou dost
mourn, to give a parting joy to the life now passing.

Ion. Oh, hast thou the power to save my father's life! Oh, use it now,
and Greece shall bless thee for thy mercy!

Zuleika. Oh, that the power _were_ mine, how gladly would I use it in a
cause so glorious! I am but a woman, and tho' the heart is strong, the
arm is very weak. I cannot save thy father, but trust I may still cheer
the parting hours with a brief happiness.

Ion. Lady, thy words of kindly sympathy fall like sweet music on my
troubled heart, and at thy magic call hope springeth up anew. Thou art
unknown, and yet there is that within that doth whisper I may trust
thee.

Zuleika. Thou mayst indeed. Heaven were not more true than I will be
unto my word. [Hassan _pauses before the door_.]

Hassan. Lady, the hours are fleeting. It were best to make good speed.

Zuleika. Hassan, thou dost counsel aright; morn must not find me here.
[_To_ Ion.] Young Greek, thou knowest with the coming dawn thy father
dies.

Ion. Ay, ere another moon doth rise that life, so dear to Greece, shall
be no more; the heart that beat so nobly at his country's call be still
forever,--I know it well!

Zuleika. And hast thou no last word for him, no parting wish?

Ion. O maiden, my life were a glad sacrifice, so that I might for a
single hour look on him,--for the last time say, "My father, bless thy
Ion."

Zuleika. That hour shall be thine. Fold thyself in yonder cloak, and
follow me.

Ion. Follow thee,--and whither?

Zuleika. To thy father's presence. Thou shalt spend with him the last
hours of his earthly life. Stay not; this friendly gloom will ere long
pass away.

Ion [_falling on his knees and catching her robe_]. Art thou my guardian
angel? Oh, may the consolation thou hath poured into a suffering soul,
fall like heaven's dew upon thine own; and if the prayers of a grateful
heart bring hope and joy and peace, thy life shall bloom with choicest
blessings. O maiden, how do I bless thee! [_Kisses her robe._]

Zuleika. Speak not of that,--kneel not to me, a mortal maiden. Thy
gratitude is my best reward. Hassan, lead on!

Hassan. Lady, I do thy bidding. First let me lead thee to a place of
safety.

Zuleika. Nay, Hassan, I tarry here,--thou canst return; I will await
thee. Now make all speed,--away!

Ion. Let us hence; my heart can ill contain its joy. Oh, my father,
shall I see thee, hear thy voice, feel thine arms once more about me,
and die with thy blessing on my head. Heaven hath blessed my mission.

Zuleika. Shall we depart? The hour wanes.

Ion. I will follow whither thou shalt lead. But, stay! is there no
danger unto thee? Will thy deed of mercy bring suffering to thee, my
kind deliverer?

Zuleika. Fear not for me. Yet one pledge must I ask of thee on which my
safety doth depend. 'Tis this: Swear that from the moment thou dost
leave me until thou art again a prisoner here, though the path lie plain
before thee thou wilt not fly.

Ion. I swear. Thou mayst trust me.

Zuleika. Yet once again. Breathe not to mortal ear the _means_ by which
thou sought'st thy sire, and let the memory of this hour fade from thy
heart forever. [Ion _bows assent_.] What pledge have I of thy secrecy,
and of thy truth?

Ion. The word of a Greek is sacred, and were not my gratitude my surest
pledge to _thee_?

Zuleika. Pardon, I do trust. Now haste thee.

Ion [_pointing to his fetters_]. Thou dost forget I am a prisoner still.

Zuleika. Hassan, unloose these fetters, and give the Greek his freedom.
[Hassan _takes off the chains_; Ion _springs joyfully forward_.]

Ion. Now am I free again, and with the Turk's base fetters have I cast
off my fears and my despair. Hope smiles upon me, and my father calls.
Oh, let us tarry not.

Zuleika [_folding a dark mantle round him_]. Thus shrouded, in safety
thou mayst reach his cell; this ring will spare thee question. Hassan
will guide thee, and I--will pray for thy success. Farewell! May Allah
aid thee!

Ion. Lady, though I may never know thee, never look on thee again, the
memory of this brief hour will never fade. The blessed gift of mercy
thou dost bestow will I ever treasure with the deepest gratitude, and my
fervent prayer that all Heaven's blessings may rest upon thee cease but
with my life [_falls on his knee and kisses her hand_]. Pardon,--'tis my
only thanks. Spirit of mercy, farewell! farewell! [_Follows_ Hassan;
Zuleika _gazes after him, then sinks down weeping_.]


                                CURTAIN.


                              SCENE FIFTH.

                     [_Tent of_ Cleon _the Greek_.
                 Cleon, _chained, pacing to and fro_.]

Cleon. A few short hours and all is o'er,--Cleon sleeps with his
fathers. I could have wished to die like a hero in my harness, and have
known my grave were watered by my loved one's tears; to take my wife
once more unto my bosom; once more bless my noble Ion; and pass hence
with the blest consciousness of victory won. 'Tis bitter thus to die,
ingloriously and alone. [_Proudly raising his head._] But the name of
Cleon is too dear unto his people e'er to be forgotten. The memory that
he strove ever for his country's welfare shall strew with tearful
blessings his unhonored grave. [_Steps approach; voices are heard._] Ah,
they come! They shall find me ready. [_Enter_ Ion.] Has mine hour come?
I am here.

           [Ion _casts off his cloak, and springs forward_.]

Ion. Father! O my father!

Cleon [_starting back wildly_]. Thou? Here!

Ion. Yes, thy Ion; bless me, Father [_kneels_].

Cleon [_raising and clasping_ Ion _to his breast_]. Here, on my heart,
dear one. I turn to meet my executioners, and see thee, my boy. Great
Heaven, I bless thee! [_They embrace tenderly and weep._] Thou camest
thither--how?

Ion. Alone, with my good sword.

Cleon. Thy guide through the perils of the way, my child?

Ion. The good Father who doth guide all who trust in him.

Cleon. And thine errand?

Ion. To behold thee, my father, and with my life to strive for thy
release.

Cleon. My noble boy, thou hast come unto thy death. Oh, who could bid
thee thus brave the doom that must await thee?

Ion. My mother bid me forth; and as she girded on my sword, she bid me
seek my father, with her blessing on my mission.

Cleon. My brave Iantha, thus for thy country's sake to doom thine own
heart to so deep a sorrow [_looks sadly upon_ Ion]. Tell me, my son, did
thy mother bear bravely up against the fatal tidings? I had feared her
tender heart might but ill meet a blow so fearful. Speak to me of her.

Ion. When the rude Turk did in rough speech acquaint her with thy fell
defeat, she sank as one o'erpowered by her grief, praying the friendly
hand of death might take her hence; but soon the spirit of the Greek
rose high within her, and, banishing her fears, with brave and trusting
heart she sent me forth to seek, and if it might be, save thee. Ah, my
father, that I might die for thee!

Cleon. And thou hath come to see me die! Dost thou not know that with
the night thy father passeth hence, and when the stars again look forth
it will be upon his grave?

Ion. Father, 'tis because thou art doomed that I am here. And if my
heart speak truly, those same bright stars shall serve to guide thee
back to freedom.

Cleon. Thou doth speak wildly. What wilt thou do? Wilt _thou_ brave the
king?

Ion [_proudly_]. Nay, I have knelt for the last time unto Mohammed. I
have offered him my liberty, my service, ay, my life itself, and he hath
scorned me. I have deigned to bow before him as a suppliant, and he hath
spurned me; I have sought by all the power love and despair could teach
to move him, and his ear was closed to me. I seek him not again.

Cleon. Child, what hath led thee to the presence of the king? How didst
thou brave the frown of him before whom even armed men do tremble? Didst
thou dream thy feeble voice could reach a heart so cruel, that thy
prayers could soften one who knoweth not the name of mercy?

Ion. Love can brave all dangers. It giveth wisdom to the untaught,
strength to the weak, hope to the despairing, comfort to the mourner.
Love hath been my guide, my guard.

Cleon. My boy! my Ion! Truly doth God place in the pure heart of such as
thou his truest wisdom, his deepest faith [_embraces him with deep
emotion_]. But--art not thou in danger? Did not thy bold speech anger
the proud king? Art thou still free?

Ion. Let not thy heart be vexed with fears for me,--I am unharmed.

Cleon. Ion, deceive me not, but as thou hopest for thy father's love,
speak truly. Art thou in danger from the Turk, and in thy devotion to
thy father dost thou seek to be thyself the sacrifice? Answer me, Ion.

Ion. Father, I sought to spare thy too o'erburdened heart another grief.
I _am_ a prisoner in Mohammed's power, and know not if my fate be life
or death.

Cleon. 'Tis as I feared; and thou, the last hope of thy country, must
fall,--all, all, for me! Oh, mine own disgrace were bitter, but to see
thee die! Oh, woe is me!

Ion. Father, were it not better thus to die, than in disgraceful peace
to pass away with no thought for our fatherland, no proud consciousness
of having at the call of duty sacrificed all we held most dear, and
leave a name held sacred as one who yielded life and liberty on the
altar of his country?

Cleon. But that thou in thine innocence and bloom should meet death at
the hands of heartless foemen; and for _my_ sake! 'Tis this that tears
my heart.

Ion. The purer the victim the more acceptable the sacrifice. But fear
not, dear father. The Turk is yet a man; 'tis 'gainst thee he wars, and
he will not wreak his vengeance on a child. He may relent, and for my
love's sake, pardon mine offence.

Cleon. Child, thou knowest not Mohammed. He pardons none; all fall
before him, with relentless hand,--all strew his pathway unto victory.
Will he then spare and pity thee? Nay, sire and son must fall! [_Stands
sorrowfully._ Ion _suddenly sees_ Zuleika's _ring upon his hand, and
springs forward_.]

Ion. Father, thou shalt yet breathe the air of freedom, shall clasp my
mother to thy heart; once more shall lead thy gallant band onward to
victory.

Cleon. Raise not bright hopes to crush them at their birth; wake not to
dreams of triumph the heart that hath striven to drive hence all save
the solemn thoughts meet for one so soon to pass away.

Ion [_pointing to the door_]. See, the gray morning 'gins to glimmer in
the east. 'Tis no time for despair. Haste, Father, freedom is near!

Cleon. What doth thus move thee, Ion? Dost thou forget these chains,
the guards, the perils at each step? Thou art dreaming!

Ion. I tell thee 'tis no dream. Thou shalt be free. This mantle will
disguise thee; this ring open a pathway through the guards; these stars
shall be thy silent guide. Wilt thou go?

Cleon. 'Tis strange! Whence then that ring? How dost thou, a captive,
wander thus freely, and offer liberty with such a bounteous hand?

Ion. A solemn oath doth forbid me to reveal to living man the secret of
this hour; but if ever angels do leave their homes to minister to
suffering souls, 'twas one most bright and beautiful who hath this night
led me unto thee, and placed in mine hand the power to set thee free.

Cleon. Truth speaketh in thine earnest eye and pleading voice, and yet I
dare not listen to thy tale.

Ion. Oh, Father, heed not thy fears, thy doubts! Take thy liberty,
believing it heaven-sent. No oath binds thee to Mohammed; thou art no
rightful prisoner of war,--neither duty nor honor doth demand thy stay.
Thy country calls, and Heaven doth point the way.

Cleon. 'Tis true; no oath doth bind me to the Turk, and yet to fly--My
soldier's spirit doth ill brook such retreat.

Ion. Then stay not, my father, but whilst thou may, depart.

Cleon. Bright hopes call me hence. Life, love, fame, beckon me away.

                                                    [Hassan _looks in_.]

Hassan. The promised hour hath well-nigh gone. Prepare, young Greek; we
must away.

Ion. A moment more. [_Exit_ Hassan.] Father, time wanes. Once more I do
entreat thee,--go!

Cleon. Heaven grant I choose aright! Come Ion, we will forth together.
[Ion _folds the cloak about_ Cleon; _gives him the ring_.] Come, let us
go.

Ion. Nay, but one can pass forth. Thou goest. I await the morning here.

Cleon. Then do I tarry also. Nay, Ion, I will not go hence without thee.

Ion. Then all is lost. Father, thy stay can nought avail me. It cannot
save, and thou wilt but sacrifice thine own priceless life.

Cleon. Then fly with me; let me bear thee to thy mother. Alone, I will
not go.

Ion. I cannot go; a vow doth bid me stay,--a vow that nought shall tempt
me from the camp to-night; and when did a Greek e'er break his plighted
word?

Cleon. If thine honor bid thee stay, thy father will not tempt thee
hence; but he may stay and suffer with thee the fate of the faithful
[_throws off the mantle_].

Ion. Oh, my father, do not cast from thee the priceless boon of liberty.
Think of thy broken-hearted wife, thy faithful followers, thy
unconquered foes; think, Father, of thy country calling on thee for
deliverance. What were my worthless life weighed 'gainst her freedom.
And what happier fate for a hero's son than for a hero's sake to fall!

Cleon. Thou true son of Greece! Mayst thou yet live to wield a sword for
thine oppressed land, and gird with laurels that brow so worthy them.

                                                       [Hassan _enters_.

Hassan. No longer may I stay: thine hour is past.

Ion. I come,--yet one moment more, good Hassan; it is my last. [_Exit_
Hassan.] Once more, my father, do I entreat thee,--go. Thou dost forget
a guardian spirit watcheth over me, and the power that led me hither may
yet accomplish my deliverance. If nought else can move thee, for my sake
go, and win for me that freedom mine honor doth now forbid me to seek.
Break not my heart, nor let me plead in vain.

Cleon. My boy, for thy dear sake do I consent. I _will_ earn thy
deliverance bravely, as a soldier should; and thy dear image shall be
to me the star that leads me on to victory.

Ion [_joyfully_]. Away! Hassan will guide thee past the guards. Then
fly,--and Heaven guide thee, O my father! [Ion _again shrouds_ Cleon _in
the mantle, concealing his chains in the thick folds_.] Thus muffle thy
tell-tale fetters, that no sound may whisper to the Turks there walks a
Greek under the free heavens forth to freedom.

Cleon. My Ion, one last embrace! God grant 'tis not our last on earth!
Bless thee, thou true young heart! Heaven guard thee!

                                              [Hassan _enters in haste_.

Hassan. Art ready? We must depart. [Cleon _bows his head and follows_.
Ion _rushes after, looking from the tent_.]

Ion. Saved! saved! The morning sun that was to shine upon his grave,
will smile upon him far, far from foemen's power. And Mohammed, thinking
to look upon a dying slave, shall waken to the sound of his victorious
war-trump. Ion, thy mission is accomplished. Thou hast given a saviour
to thy fatherland, and mayst fall thyself without a murmur [_looks up
thankfully; a loud noise without_].

                                         [_Enter_ Abdallah _and_ Murad.

Abd. Where is the prisoner? Come forth!

Ion. I am here [_comes forward_].

Abd. Ha!--here is treason! Without there!--the prisoner hath escaped!

Murad. Who flieth yonder, past the camp?

Abd. 'Tis he! Forth, call for aid! Search without delay! Here is foul
work abroad. First, seize yon boy; fetter the base spy; bear him before
the king. Speed hence!

Murad [_to_ Ion]. Infidel dog, thou shalt learn what it is to brave
Mohammed's ire!

                [_They seize_ Ion, _and drag him away_.]


                                CURTAIN.




                                BIANCA.

                            OPERATIC TRAGEDY.


                            NOTE TO BIANCA.


The peculiarity of this opera was that while the words were committed to
memory, the music was _composed_ and _sung_ as the scene proceeded.

In spite of its absurdity, this play was a great favorite; for Jo was
truly superb as the hapless Bianca, while her trills and tragic agonies
were considered worthy of the famous Grisi herself.


                              CHARACTERS.


    Adelbert   .   .   .   .   .   .    _Betrothed to Bianca._

    Huon   .   .   .   .   .   .   .    _His Rival._

    Juan   .   .   .   .   .   .   .    _A Page._

    Bianca .   .   .   .   .   .   .    _A Spanish Lady._

    Hilda  .   .   .   .   .   .   .    _A Witch._


                                BIANCA.

                           OPERATIC TRAGEDY.

                              SCENE FIRST.

                               [_A wood._
                             _Enter_ Huon.]

Huon. Hist! All is still. They are not yet here. On this spot will the
happy lovers meet. O wretched Huon! she whom thou so passionately doth
love will here speak tender words to thy thrice hated rival. Yet I,
unseen, will watch them, and ere long my fierce revenge shall change
their joy to deepest woe. Hark! they come! Now, jealous heart, be still!
[_Hides among the trees._]

                                        [_Enter_ Bianca _and_ Adelbert.

Adel. Nay, dearest love, fear not; no mortal eye beholds us now, and yon
bright moon looks kindly down upon our love.

                              [_They seat themselves beneath the trees._

Bianca. Ah, dearest Adelbert, with thee I feel no fear, but thy fierce
rival Huon did vow vengeance on thee, for I did reject his suit for
thine. Beware! for his wild heart can feel no pity, tenderness, or love.

Adel. I fear him not. Ere long thou wilt be mine, and then in our fair
home we will forget all but our love. Think not, dearest, of that dark,
revengeful man; he does not truly love thee.

Bianca. Near thee I cannot fear; but when thou art far from me, my fond
heart will ever dread some danger for thee. Ah, see the moon is waning;
dear love, thou must away.

Adel. Ah, sweet moments, why so quickly fled? 'Tis hard to leave thee,
thou bright star in my life's sky, and yet I must, or all may be
betrayed. Fare thee well, dear love. One sweet kiss ere we part! [_They
embrace._]

Bianca. Farewell! Ah, when shall I again behold thee? Oh, be not long
away, for like a caged bird I pine for thee.

Adel. When next yon moon doth rise beneath thy lattice, thou shalt hear
my light guitar.

Bianca. Fail not to come. I shall watch for thee the live-long night,
and if thou comest not, this fond heart will grieve.

Both. Farewell, till yon bright moon doth rise,
      Farewell, dear love, farewell!
      Farewell, farewell, farewell!
      Farewell, dear love, farewell!

                                                       [_Exit_ Adelbert.

Bianca. Ah, love, thou magic power, thus ever make my breast thy home.
Adieu, dear spot! I fly to happiness and--

Huon. _Me_--[Bianca _shrieks, and seeks to fly_. Huon _detains her_.]

Bianca. Unmanly villain, touch me not. What dost thou here concealed?

Huon. I listen to thy lover's fond and heartless vows. What is his love
to mine? Ah, lady, he loves thee for thy wealth alone. Again I ask, nay,
I implore thee to be mine! Oh, grant me now my prayer!

Bianca. Never! never! I will not listen to thee more. My heart is all
another's; my hatred and contempt are thine.

                                                         [_Exit_ Bianca.

Huon. Now, by yon moon 'neath which thy tender vows were plighted, do I
swear to win thee, proud and haughty lady, to these arms. Thou shalt
curse the day when thou didst cast away my love, and wake my deep
revenge.

                                                           [_Exit_ Huon.

                                CURTAIN.


                             SCENE SECOND.

            [_A cave in the forest._ Hilda _leaning over a
                     boiling caldron. Enter_ Huon.]

Hilda. Ha! who art thou, and what wouldst thou with old Hilda? Speak,
and be obeyed.

Huon. O mighty wizard, I have sought thee for a charm to win a proud and
scornful woman's love,--some mystic potion that shall make her cold
heart burn for me. Ah, give me this, and gold uncounted shall be thine.

Hilda. I will give to thee a draught that shall chase her coldness and
her pride away, and make the heart now beating for another all thine
own. Hold! 'tis here,--three crimson drops when mingled in her wine,
will bring the boon thou askest [_gives_ Huon _a tiny phial_].

Huon. Oh, blessed draught that wins for me the love I seek. Proud
Bianca, now art thou in my power, and shalt ere long return the love of
the once hated and despised Huon. Great sorceress, say how can I repay
thee? Fear not to claim thy just reward.

Hilda. I ask no gold. But when thy prize is won, remember thou old
Hilda's warning. Woman's heart is a fragile thing, and they who trifle
with it should beware. Now go; I would be alone.

Huon. Farewell! When my love and my revenge are won, I'll bless this
hour and Hilda's charm.

                                                           [_Exit_ Huon.

Hilda. Poor fool! thou little thinkest thy love-charm is a deadly
draught, and they who quaff it die. When thou shalt seek thy lady,
hoping for her love, a dead bride thou wilt win. Ha! ha! old Hilda's
spells work silently and well.

                                CURTAIN.


                              SCENE THIRD.

               [_Room in the castle of_ Bianca. _Evening.
                             Enter_ Huon.]

Huon. How can I best give the draught that none may see the deed? Ha!
yonder comes her page, bearing wine. Now in her cup will I mingle these
enchanted drops, and she shall smile on me when next I plead my suit.
Ho, Juan, my boy! come hither; I would speak with thee. [_Enter_ Juan
_with wine._] Where is thy lady now?

Juan. At her lattice, watching for Lord Adelbert, and gazing on the
flowers he hath sent.

Huon [_aside_]. She shall never watch and wait for him again. [_Aloud._]
Whence bearest thou the wine, Juan? Is it to thy lady?

Juan. Yes, my lord. She bid me haste. I must away.

Huon. Stay! clasp my sandal, boy; I will repay thee if thy mistress
chide. [Juan _stoops;_ Huon _drops the potion into the wine cup._]
Thanks; here is gold for thee. Away, and tell thy lady I will be here
anon.

                                                           [_Exit_ Juan.

    Ha, ha! 'tis done! 'tis done!
    My vengeance now is won,
    And ere to-morrow's sun shall set,
    Thou, haughty lady, shalt forget
    The lover who now hastes to thee,
    And smile alone, alone on me.

                                                           [_Exit_ Huon.

                                CURTAIN.


                             SCENE FOURTH.

                  [Bianca's _castle. A moonlit balcony.
                            Enter_ Bianca.]

Bianca. He comes not. Yon bright moon will ere long set, and still I
hear not the dear voice 'neath my lattice singing. Adelbert! Ah, come!
Hist! I hear his light boat on the lake. 'Tis he! 'tis he! [_Leans over
the balcony._]

                                  [Adelbert _sings in the garden below._

    The moon is up, wake, lady, wake!
    My bark is moored on yonder lake.
    The stars' soft eyes alone can see
    My meeting, dear one, here with thee.

    Wake, dearest, wake! lean from thy bower,
    The moonlight gleams on tree and flower.
    The summer sky smiles soft above;
    Look down on me, thou star of love!

Bianca. Adelbert, dear love, now haste thee quickly up to me.

                                   [_Enter_ Adelbert _upon the balcony._

Adel. Sweet love, why fearest thou? None dare stay me when I fly to
thee. Ah, sit thee here, and I will rest beside thee. [Bianca _seats
herself;_ Adelbert _lies at her feet._]

Bianca. Thou art weary, love. I'll bring thee wine, and thou shalt rest
while I do sing to thee. [_She gives him wine; he drinks._]

Adel. Thanks to thee, dearest love, I am weary now no longer. When here
beside thee, pain, sorrow, time are all forgot. Ah! what is this?--a
deadly pang hath seized me. All grows dark before mine eyes. I cannot
see thee. Yon cup,--'twas poisoned! I am dying, dying!

Bianca. Ah, nay, thou art faint! Speak not of dying, love. [Adelbert
_falls._] Adelbert, Adelbert, speak!--speak! It is thine own Bianca
calls thee! [_Throws herself beside him._]

Adel. Farewell, dear love, farewell! Huon hath won his vengeance now.
God bless thee, dearest. Oh, farewell! [_Dies._]

Bianca. Awake! awake! All, cold and still! Thou true, brave heart, thou
art hushed forever. Huon! yes! 'twas he; and he hath sought to win me
thus. But 'tis in vain! Where is the poisoned cup that I may join thee,
Adelbert? [_Takes the cup._] Ah, 'tis gone: there is no more. Yet I will
be with thee, my murdered love. For me life hath no joy, and I will find
thee even in death [_falls fainting to the ground_].

                                CURTAIN.


                              SCENE FIFTH.

                           [Bianca's _castle.
                    The garden._ Bianca _singing._]

    Faded flowers, faded flowers,
      They are all now left to cherish;
    For the hopes and joys of my young life's spring
      I have seen so darkly perish.

    Cold, ah, cold, in the lone, dark grave,
      My murdered love lies low,
    And death alone can bring sure rest
      To this broken heart's deep woe.

    Faded flowers, faded flowers,
      They are all now left to cherish;
    For ah, his dear hand gathered them,
      And my love can never perish.

                                                               [_Weeps._

                                 [_Enter_ Huon _and kneels at her feet._

Bianca [_starting up_]. Fiend! demon! touch me not with hands that
murdered him! Hence! out of my sight,--away!

Huon. Nay, lady, nay! I swear by Heaven it was not I. The spell I
mingled in thy cup was but to win thy love. The old witch hath deceived
me, and given that deadly poison. Forgive me, I implore thee, and here
let me offer thee my love once more.

Bianca [_repulsing him_]. _Love!_ darest thou to speak of love to me,
whose bright dream of life thou hast destroyed? _Love!_ I who loathe,
scorn, hate thee with a deep and burning hate that death alone can
still! Oh, Heaven, have mercy on my tortured heart, and let it break.

Huon [_aside_]. His death hath well-nigh driven her mad. Dear lady,
grieve not thus. Let me console thee. Forget thy love, and seek in mine
the joy thou hast lost.

Bianca. Forget! Ah, never, never, till in death I join him! Forgive
thee? Not till I have told thy crime. Yes, think not I will rest till
thou, my murdered Adelbert, art well avenged. And thou!--ah, sinful
man, tremble, for thou art in my power, and my wronged heart can feel no
pity now.

Huon [_fiercely_]. Wouldst thou betray me? Never! Yield thou to my love,
or I will sheathe my dagger in thy heart, and silence thee forever!

Bianca. I will not yield. The world shall know thy guilt, and then sweet
death shall be a blessing.

Huon. Then die, and free me from the love and fear that hang like clouds
above me [_stabs her_].

Bianca. Thy sin will yet be known, and may God pardon thee! O earth,
farewell! My Adelbert, I come, I come! [_Dies._]

Huon. Dead! dead! Oh, wretched Huon! Where now seek rest from bitter
memories and remorse. Ha, a step! I must fly. Angel, fare thee well!

                                                           [_Exit_ Huon.

                                CURTAIN.


                              SCENE SIXTH.

               [Huon's _room._ Huon _asleep upon a couch.
               Enter_ Bianca's _spirit. She lays her hand
                              upon him._]

Huon [_starting in affright_]. Ha! spirit of the dead, what wouldst thou
now? For long, long nights why hast thou haunted me? Cannot my agony,
remorse, and tears win thee to forget? Ah, touch me not! Away! away! See
how the vision follows. It holds me fast. Bianca, save me! save me!
[_Falls and dies._]

                                                             [_Tableau._

                                CURTAIN.




                           THE UNLOVED WIFE;

                                  OR,

                             WOMAN'S FAITH.


                              CHARACTERS.


    Count Adrian   .   .   .   .   .    _Nina's Husband._

    Don Felix  .   .   .   .   .   .    _His Secret Rival._

    Nina   .   .   .   .   .   .   .    _The Unloved Wife._

    Hagar  .   .   .   .   .   .   .    _A Fortune Teller._


                           THE UNLOVED WIFE;

                                  OR,

                             WOMAN'S FAITH.


                              SCENE FIRST.

                 [_Room in the palace of_ Count Adrian.
                             _Enter_ Nina.]

Nina. 'Tis a fair and lovely home and well befits a gay young bride; but
ah, not if she bear a sad and weary heart like mine beneath her bridal
robes. All smile on me and call me happy, blessed with such a home and
husband; and yet 'mid all my splendor I could envy the poor cottage
maiden at her spinning-wheel. For ah, 'mid all her poverty one sweet
thought comes ever like a sunny sky to brighten e'en her darkest hours,
for she is loved; while I yet sigh in vain for one kind word, one
tender glance, from him I love so fondly. Ah, he comes, no sad tears
now, sorrow is for my lonely hours and I will smile on _him_ e'en though
my heart is breaking.

                                                  [_Enter_ Count Adrian.

Adrian [_coldly_]. Good-even, madam, I trust all things are placed
befitting a fair lady's bower and thou hast found thy home a pleasant
one.

Nina. Adrian, husband, speak not thus to me. I could find more joy in
some poor cell with thee, than all the wealth that kings could give if
thou wert gone. Look kindly on me and I ask no more. One smile from thee
can brighten all the world to these fond eyes. Oh, turn not away, but
tell me how have I angered thee, and grant thy pardon for thy young
wife's first offence.

Adrian. The pardon I could give were worthless for the time is past.
'Tis too late to ask forgiveness now. It matters not, then say no more
[_turns away_].

Nina. My lord, I charge thee tell me of what dark crime thou dost think
me guilty! Fear not to tell me; innocence is strong to bear and happy to
forgive. Ah, leave me not, I cannot rest till I know all, and if the
deep devotion of a woman's heart can still repair the wrong, it shall be
thine--but answer me.

Adrian. Canst thou unsay the solemn words that bound us at the altar
three short days ago? Canst thou give back the freedom thou hast taken,
break the vows thou hast plighted, cast away that ring and tell me I am
free? Do it, and my full forgiveness shall be thine.

Nina. Give thee back thy freedom; am I a chain to bind thee to what thou
dost not love? Take back the vows I made to honor thee; what dost thou
mean? I am thy wife and dost thou hate me?

Adrian. I do.

Nina. God help me now. Tell me, Adrian, I implore thee, tell me what
have I done to tempt such cruel words from thee? I loved thee and left
all to be thy wife, and now when my poor heart is longing for one tender
word to cheer its sorrow, thou, the husband who hath vowed to love and
cherish me, hath said thou dost hate me. Ah, am I sleeping? Wake me or
the dream will drive me mad.

Adrian. 'Tis a dream I cannot banish. We must part.

Nina. Part--go on, the blow hath fallen, I can feel no more. Go on.

Adrian. Thou knowest I wooed thee. Thou wert fair and wondrous rich; I
sought thy gold, not _thee_, for with thy wealth I would carve out a
path through life that all should honor. Well, we were wed, and when I
sought to take thy fortune it was gone, and not to me, but to thy
father's friend, Don Felix. It was all left to him, and thou wert
penniless; and thus I won a wife I loved not, and lost the gold I would
have died to gain. Thinkest thou not I am well angered? But for thee I
might yet win a noble bride whose golden fetters I would gladly wear.

Nina. And this is he to whom I gave my heart so filled with boundless
love and trust. Oh, Adrian, art thou so false? What is gold to a woman's
deathless love? Can it buy thee peace and all the holy feelings human
hearts can give? Can it cheer and comfort thee in sorrow, or weep fond,
happy tears when thou hast won the joy and honor thou dost seek? No,
none of these, the golden chains will bind thee fast till no sweet
thought, no tender hope can come to thee. I plead not now for my poor
self, but for thine own heart thou doth wrong so cruelly by such vain
dreams.

Adrian. Enough. Thou hast a noble name and men will honor thee, thou
wilt suffer neither pain nor want. I will leave thee and wander forth to
seek mine own sad lot. Farewell, and when they ask thee for thy husband,
tell them thou hast none, and so be happy [_turns to go_].

Nina. Oh, Adrian, I implore thee stay. I will bear all thy coldness, ay
even thy contempt. I will toil for thee and seek to win the gold for
which thou dost sigh, I will serve thee well and truly, for with all my
heart I love thee still. Leave me not now or I shall die! [_Kneels and
clasps his hand._]

Adrian. I am a slave till death shall set me free. We shall not meet
again. Nay, kneel not to me. I do forgive thee, but I cannot love thee
[_rushes out_].

Nina. This is more than I can bear. Oh, Father, take thy poor child
home, and still the sorrow of this broken heart.

                                CURTAIN.


                             SCENE SECOND.

                     [_Home of_ Hagar, _the gypsy.
                     Enter_ Hagar _and_ Nina.]

Hagar. What brings thee hither, gentle lady, and how can the wanderer
serve the high-born and the fair?

Nina [_sadly_]. There is often deeper sorrow in the palace than the cot,
good Hagar, and I seek thee for some counsel that will cure the pain of
a lonely heart. I have tried all others' skill in vain, and come to thee
so learned in mystic lore to give me help. I am rich and can repay thee
well.

Hagar. I can read a sad tale in thy pale and gentle face, dear lady.
Thou art young and loving, but the hope of youth is gone; and thou art
sorrowing with no fond heart whereon to lean, no tender voice to comfort
and to cheer. Ah, have I read aright? Then the only charm to still thy
pain is death.

Nina. 'Tis death I long for. That still, dreamless sleep would bring me
peace. But 'tis a fearful thing to take the life God gave, and I dare
not. Canst thou not give me help?

Hagar. Within this tiny casket there is that which brings a quiet sleep
filled with happy dreams, and they who drink the draught lie down and
slumber, and if not awakened it will end in death. But thou, sweet lady,
wouldst not leave this fair world yet. Tell me more, for this old heart
is warm and tender still, and perchance I can help thee.

Nina. 'Tis strange that I can feel such faith in thee, kind friend, but
I am young and lonely and I seek some heart for counsel. Thou art from
my own fair land and I will tell thee of my sorrow. 'Tis a short, sad
tale. I loved, was wed, and then--oh, darksome day--I learned my husband
felt no love, and sought me only for my gold. I was penniless, and thus
he cast me off; and now for long, long weeks I have not seen him, for he
would not dwell with her who loved him more than life itself. Now give
me some sweet charm to win that lost heart back. Ah, Hagar, help me.

Hagar. I can give thee no truer charm than that fair face and noble
soul, dear lady. Be thou but firm and faithful in thy love and it will
win thy husband back. God bless and grant all happiness to one who doth
so truly need it.

Nina. Give me the casket; and when life hath grown too bitter to be
borne then will I gladly lay the burden down, and blessing him I love so
well sleep that calm slumber that knows no awaking. Farewell, Hagar,
thou hast given me comfort and I thank thee.

                                                           [_Exit_ Nina.

                                CURTAIN.


                              SCENE THIRD.

              [_One year is supposed to have elapsed._ _A
              room in the palace of_ Nina. _Enter_ Adrian
                             _disguised_.]

Adrian. Here last I saw her one long year ago. How the wild, sweet voice
still rings in my ear imploring me to stay. I can find no rest save
here; and thus do I seek my home, worn out by my long wandering, and
trusting to learn tidings of poor Nina. If she be true and love me still
I will cast away my pride, my coldness, and all vain hopes of wealth,
and let the sunlight of that pure, young life brighten my life
henceforth. I hear a step, and will hide here, perchance I may thus see
her [_hides behind curtain_].

                                                          [_Enter_ Nina.

Nina. No rest for thee poor heart, ever whispering that dear name, ever
sorrowing for those hard words that gave so deep a wound. All is dark
and lonely, for he is gone. Only these withered flowers, dearer by far
than my most costly gems, for his hand hath touched them, and he smiled
on me when they were given. Oh, Adrian, wilt thou never give one tender
thought to her who still loves and prays for thee? Death will soon free
thee from thy hated wife.

                                                           [_Exit_ Nina.

Adrian [_stealing forth_]. And this is she, whose pure young love I have
cast away, the fond, trusting bride I left alone and friendless. She
still loves on, and offers up her prayers for one who sought to break
that tender heart so cruelly. I will watch well and guard thee, Nina;
and if thou art truly mine thou shalt find a happy home with him thy
patient love hath won.

                                     [_Exit_ Adrian _and re-enter_ Nina.

Nina [_with_ Adrian's _picture_]. Ah, these cold eyes smile kindly on me
here, and the lips seem speaking tender words. Other faces are
perchance more fair, but none so dear to me. Oh, husband, thou hast cast
me off; and yet, though lonely and forsaken, I still can cherish loving
thoughts of thee, and round thy image gather all the tender feelings
that a woman's heart can know. Thy cruel words I can forgive, and the
trusting love I gave thee glows as warmly now as when thou didst cast it
by and left me broken-hearted [_weeps_; _enter_ Don Felix]. My lord,
what seekest thou with me? Thou dost smile. Ah, hast thou tidings of my
husband? Tell me quickly, I beseech thee.

Don Felix. Nay, dear lady--But sit thee down and let me tell thee why I
came. [_He leads her to a sofa._] Thou knowest I have been with thee
from a child. I stood beside thee at the altar, and was the first to
cheer and comfort thee when thou wast left deserted and alone. Let me
now ask thee, Wouldst thou not gladly change thy sad lot here for a gay
and joyous life with one who loves thee fondly?

Nina. It were indeed a happy lot to be so loved and cherished; but
where, alas, is he who could thus feel for one so lonely and forsaken?

Don Felix [_kneeling_]. Here at thy feet, dear Nina. Nay, do not turn
away, but let me tell thee of the love that hath grown within my heart.
[_Nina starts up._] Thy wedded lord hath cast thee off. The law can free
thee. Ah, then be mine, and let me win and wear the lovely flower which
he hath cast away.

Nina. Lord Felix, as the wife of him thou dost so wrong, I answer thee.
Dost thou not know the more a woman's heart is crushed and wounded the
more tenderly it clings where first it loved; and though deserted, ay,
though hated, I had rather be the slighted wife of him, than the honored
bride of the false Costella. Now leave me--I would be alone.

Don Felix. A time will come, proud woman, when thou shalt bend the knee
to him whom now thou dost so scorn. Beware, for I will have a fierce
revenge for the proud words thou hast spoken.

Nina. I am strong in mine own heart and fear thee not. Work thy will and
thou shalt find the wife of Adrian de Mortemar needs no protector save
her own fearless hand.

                                                           [_Exit_ Nina.

Don Felix. Now, by my faith, thou shalt bow that haughty head, and sue
to me for mercy, and I will deny it. I'll win her yet, she shall not
idly brave my anger. Now to my work,--revenge.

                                                      [_Exit_ Don Felix.

                                CURTAIN.


                             SCENE FOURTH.

                    [_Apartment in palace of_ Nina.
                             Nina _alone_.]

Nina. Ever thus alone, mourning for him who loves me not; was ever heart
so sad as mine. Oh, Adrian, couldst thou but return even for one short
hour to thy poor Nina. [_Enter_ Adrian, _disguised_.] Ha, who art thou
that dares to enter here in such mysterious guise? Thine errand,
quickly,--speak.

Adrian. Forgive me, lady, if I cause thee fear; I would have thee know
me as a friend, one who will watch above thee, and seek to spare thee
every sorrow. Dear lady, think me not too bold, for I have known thee
long and have a right to all thy confidence. Thy husband was my nearest
friend; and, when he left thee friendless and alone, I vowed to guard
and save thee in all peril. Wilt thou trust me? See, I bear his
ring,--thou knowest it?

Nina. 'Tis indeed his ring. Whence came it? Ah, hast thou seen him? Tell
me, and I will give thee all my confidence and thanks [_takes the ring
and gazes beseechingly upon_ Adrian, _who turns aside_].

Adrian. He is well, lady, and happy as one can be who bears a cold,
proud heart within his breast. He has cast away an angel who could have
cheered and blessed his life, and sought to find in gold the happiness
thy love alone could bring. He has suffered, as he well deserves to do.
Spend not thy pity upon him.

Nina [_proudly_]. And who art thou to speak thus of him? Thou canst not
judge till thou also hast been tried and like him deceived. He sought
for wealth to bring him fame and honor; and when he found it not, what
wonder that he cast aside the love that could not bring him happiness.
Thou art no true friend to speak thus of one so worthy to be loved. And
think not I reproach him for my lonely lot. Ah, no, I still love on; and
if he wins the wealth he covets I can give my heart's best blessing, and
so pass away that he shall never know whose hand hath crushed the flower
that would have clung about his life and shed its perfume there [_turns
away weeping_].

Adrian [_aside_]. She loves me still. I'll try her further [_aloud_].
Lady, idle tongues have whispered that when thy lord deserted thee thou
didst find a solace for thy grief in a new lover's smiles. Perchance yon
picture may be some gay lord who hath cheered thy solitude and won thy
heart. I fain would ask thee.

Nina. Sir stranger, little dost thou know a woman's heart. I have found
a comfort for my lonely hours in weeping o'er the face whose smiles
could brighten life for me, or dim it by disdain and coldness. The face
is there; my first, last, only love is given to him who thinks it
worthless and hath cast it by.

Adrian [_taking the picture_]. 'Tis the Count, thy husband. Lady, he is
unworthy such true love; leave him to his fate, and let not thy life be
darkened by his cruelty and hate.

Nina. Thou canst not tempt me to forget. No other love can win me from
the only one who hath a place within my heart. Let me cherish all the
memories of him, and till life shall cease be true unto my husband. Now
leave me, unknown friend; I trust thee for his sake, and will accept thy
friendship and protection. I offer thee my gratitude and thanks for thy
kind service, and will gladly seek how best I may repay it.

Adrian. Thanks, lady. Thou shalt find me true and faithful, and my best
reward will be the joy I labor to restore to thee [_kneels and kisses
her hand_].

Nina. Farewell, again I thank thee.

                                                           [_Exit_ Nina.

Adrian. So young, so lovely, so forsaken, who would not pity and
protect. I will guard her well, and ere long claim the treasure I so
madly cast away ere I had learned its priceless value. Nina, thou shalt
yet be happy on the bosom of thy erring and repentant husband.

                                                         [_Exit_ Adrian.

                                CURTAIN.


                              SCENE FIFTH.

                     [_Hall in the palace of_ Nina.
                     _Enter_ Nina _and_ Don Felix.]

Nina. I tell thee, my lord, I will not listen, naught thou canst say
will change my firm resolve. I cannot wed thee.

Don Felix. Nay, then listen. Thy cruel husband left thee and for one
long year thou hast sorrowed in thy lonely home, and would not be
comforted. He hath returned.

Nina. Ah--[_Rushes forward._]

Don Felix. Thou may'st well start, but think not he will come to thee,
chains hold him fast and--mark ye--'twas _I_ who bound those chains.

Nina. Do I dream, my husband here and in captivity; nay, I believe thee
not. 'Tis a false tale to anger me. I heed thee not [_turns away
haughtily_].

Don Felix. Thou wilt heed me ere I am done. What thinkest thou of this
thy husband's dagger? See, here his name. 'Twas taken from his hands ere
the cold chains bound them. Ah, thou dost believe me now!

Nina. Oh, tell on. I _will_ listen now. Why hast thou done this cruel
deed? Why make this his welcome home? Thou hast fettered and imprisoned
him and now art here to tell me of it? Ah, dost thou hate him? Then give
all thy hate to me; but oh, I pray thee, comfort him.

Don Felix. When thou didst reject my suit, I told thee I would be
revenged; I said a day would come when thou, so cold and haughty then,
would kneel to me imploring mercy and I would deny thee. That time hath
come, and I am deaf to all thy prayers.

Nina. For his sake will I kneel to thee beseeching liberty for _him_. I
had no love to give thee. Ah, pardon if I spake with scorn, and pity me.
What can I do to win thee back to mercy? Ah, listen and be generous.

Don Felix. 'Tis now too late. He is in my power; and a dagger can soon
rid thee of a cruel husband, me of a hated rival.

Nina. God have pity on me now. Don Felix, let me plead once more. Set
Adrian free, and I will take his place in yon dark cell and welcome
there the dagger that shall set me free.

Don Felix. And wilt _thou_ wear the chains? Wilt enter that lone cell
and perish there? Canst thou do this?

Nina. Ay, gladly will I suffer pain, captivity, and death, for thee,
Adrian, for thee.

Don Felix. Then woman's love is stronger than man's hate, and I envy him
you would die for, Nina.

Nina. Ah, love alone can make home blest, and here it dwells not. I can
free him from his fetters and his hated wife. Tell him I loved him to
the last, and blessed him ere I died. Lead on, my lord, I am ready.

Don Felix [_aside_]. I thought I had steeled my heart with hatred and
revenge; but oh, they pass away before such holy love as this. Would I
could win her to myself, for she would lead me on to virtue and to
happiness. Yet one more trial and she may be mine at last.

                                                            [_Tableaux._

                                CURTAIN.


                              SCENE SIXTH.

                   [_Street near_ Adrian's _palace_.
                            _Enter_ Adrian.]

Adrian. 'Tis all discovered, my mysterious captivity and my release. Don
Felix, whom I trusted, wove the dark plot and sought by false words to
win Nina from me. He has dared to love her; and he shall dearly pay for
his presumption. He knows not that I watched above her in disguise; and
now while I was in captivity he hath taken her from her home. Let him
beware. If aught of harm hath come to her, woe betide him who hath
caused one tear to fall, or one sad fear to trouble her. I must seek and
save her. No peril will be too great to win her back to this heart that
longs so fondly for her now.

                                                        [_Exit_ Adrian.

                                CURTAIN.


                             SCENE SEVENTH.

                 [_A cell in the palace of_ Don Felix.
                            Nina _chained_.]

Nina. 'T is strange; here in this dark cell, tho' fettered and alone, I
feel a deeper joy than when a proud and envied bride I dwelt in my
deserted home. For here his foot hath trod; these walls have echoed to
the voice I love; these chains so cold and heavy I more gladly wear than
e'en the costly gems once clasped upon these arms, for they were his.
Here his sad tears fell perchance for his captivity; but I can smile and
bless the hour when I could win thy freedom, Adrian, with my poor
liberty. Hark--they come. Is it to claim the vow I made to yield my
bosom to the dagger meant for his? I am ready. [_Enter_ Don Felix.]
Alone, my lord; methought it were too sad a task for thee to take my
life. Well, be it so; you claim my vow. I can die still blessing thee,
my Adrian [_kneels before_ Don Felix].

Don Felix. Rise, Nina; ah, kneel not to me, nor think this hand could
take the life it prizes more than happiness or honor. I came not here to
harm thee; Heaven forbid! I came once more to offer thee my heart, my
home, and all the boundless love you have so scorned. Thy husband hath
deserted thee; no ties too fast to sever bind thee to him. Thou art
alone, a captive, and I alone can free thee. Think of the love I bear
thee, Nina, and be mine [_takes her hand_].

Nina. Where is thy boasted honor now? Where the solemn vow thou didst
make me that my lonely cell should be as sacred to thee as my palace
halls? Where is thy pity for the helpless wife of him whom thou didst
call thy friend? I never loved thee, now I scorn thee. A true and pure
affection never binds such chains as these, nor causes bitter tears like
mine to flow. Rather suffer death than cherish in my heart one tender
thought of thee. Thou hast my answer, now leave me.

Don Felix. Not yet, proud captive. I have sought to win thee gently; but
now, beware. Think not to escape me, thou shalt feel how deep a
vengeance I can bring on thee and him thou lovest. Thou shalt suffer all
the sorrow I can inflict,--shalt know thy proud lord forsaken and in
danger when a word from me can save, and _that_ word I will not speak.
All the grief and pain and hatred that my jealous heart can give will I
heap upon his head, and thus through him I will revenge myself on thee.

Nina. Thou canst not harm him, he is safe and free. Do thy worst, I care
not what fate thou hast for me, a fearless hand soon finds a way to free
a soul from sorrow and captivity. This heart thou canst not reach. It
fears thee not.

Don Felix. Can I not make thee tremble, haughty woman? I love thee
still, and I will win thee. I go to work thee sorrow; and when next we
meet I will bring thee token of thy husband's death or, what may touch
thee nearer, his hate of thee.

                                                      [_Exit_ Don Felix.

Nina. 'Tis a dark and fearful dream,--Adrian in danger, and I cannot
save him. Oh, that I were free again, naught should stay me; and I would
win him back by the power of woman's love and faith. Lord Felix will
return, he hath vowed revenge; where then can I look for a true heart to
comfort and protect me [_sinks down in despair_].

                                   [_Enter_ Adrian, _still in disguise_.]

Adrian. Here is a friend to aid thee.

Nina [_starting up_]. Who--who art thou?

Adrian. Thy guardian. Lady, thou hast said thou wouldst trust me, and I
am here to save.

Nina. Forgive me that I doubt thee; yet I do fear to trust, for I am
well-nigh crazed with sorrow. Art thou my husband's friend?

Adrian. I am true as Heaven to thee, poor lady. I have watched above
thee and can save. Here, here is the ring thou knowest; ah, do not doubt
me.

Nina. I know thee now and put all my faith in thee. Take me hence. Ah,
save me! Lead me to my home, and the thanks of a broken heart are thine.
Lead on, kind friend, I will follow thee.

Adrian [_aside_]. Oh, this is a bitter punishment for me. It breaks my
heart. [Aloud.] This way, dear lady, a secret door doth let us forth;
step thou lightly. Thus let me shroud thee.

    [_He wraps_ Nina _in a dark robe, and they disappear thro' the
        secret door_.

                                CURTAIN.


                             SCENE EIGHTH.

                           [Nina's _chamber_.
                       _Enter_ Nina _and_ Hagar.]

Nina. Welcome to thee, Hagar; sit thee down and tell me why hast thou
come to seek me in my lonely home?

Hagar. Sweet lady, fear not; no evil tidings do I bring, but a wondrous
tale of happiness in store for thee. When thy father died, few doubted
but his wealth would come to thee; and it would, indeed, have all been
thine had not that false Don Felix stolen the will away. He took the
paper that left all to thee, and thus he won the orphan's gold. But
three short days ago, a dreadful crime which he had done was brought to
light, and he hath fled. He told me all and bid me give thee, this, thy
father's will. [Hagar _gives paper to_ Nina.]

Nina. 'Tis strange, most strange. But tell me, Hagar, how didst thou
come to know that evil man?

Hagar. I knew him when he came from Italy with thee and thy father years
ago. And as I watched thy path through life so I watched his, and thus
he learned to trust me. 'Tis thus I gained for thee that wealth so long
withheld; and now my work is done. Thou wilt win thy husband's love, and
so be happy. God bless thee, gentle lady, and farewell.

Nina. Ah, stay and tell me how can I best show the gratitude I deeply
feel. Thou hast brought me wealth and happiness, how can I repay thee?

Hagar. I ask no other joy than that I see in thy fair face. I go now to
my own dear land, and we shall not meet again; but old Hagar will
remember thee, and pray that life may be one long, bright dream of love
with the husband thou hast won. Farewell.

                                                          [_Exit_ Hagar.

Nina. The clouds have passed away and I am happy now; and the wealth
_he_ longed for it is mine to give. Oh, Adrian, come back to her thou
hast cast aside. [_An arrow bearing a letter is thrown in at the window
and falls at her feet._] What means this letter? Stay, let me see what
it may tell me. 'Tis from Adrian. Ah, does an angel watch above me that
such joy is mine? [_Opens the letter and reads._]

    Think not to win me back with thy new wealth; I cannot love
    thee. Be happy with thy gold; it cannot buy the heart of the
    unhappy
                                                         Adrian.

Nina. This from him! No, no, it cannot be; he would not speak such words
to me; his wife. Yet, 't is his hand--I must believe--and a deeper
darkness gathers round me. No joy, no hope, is left to bind me unto
life. If I were gone he might be happy with another. I can never win his
love, then why live on to dim his pathway. I will leave my gold to him,
for it is worthless now; and when, with her he loves in some fair home,
he sends perchance one thought of her who died to free him, I shall be
repaid for this last sacrifice. Ah, Hagar, little didst thou think the
joy foretold would end so soon, and this thy gift would win for me the
rest I long for now [_takes from her bosom the phial and drinks_]. It
will soon be past. Now, till sleep steals o'er me, I will send one last
word, Adrian, to thee. [_She writes, then sinks upon the couch._] My
heart grows faint, and my eyes are heavy with the last slumber they
shall ever know. The poison does its work too soon; but I am done with
life, and the soft, sweet sleep of death is holding me. Oh, my husband,
may this last deed of mine give thee all the joy it could not bring to
her who could only die for thee. Farewell life, farewell love; my latest
prayer is for thee, Adrian. [_She lies down and falls gently asleep._]


                                CURTAIN.


                              SCENE NINTH.

                      [_Terrace in_ Nina's _garden_.
                      _Enter_ Adrian _with letter_.]

Adrian. What means this letter from her hand? 'Twas given me by her
servant while she slept. Does she call me home again? Ah, little can she
know how fondly now her cold, proud husband longs to fold her in his
arms and bless the hour when he lost wealth and won her noble love.
[_Opens the letter and reads._]

    I send thee back the cruel words that have banished all the
    hopes of happiness with thee. I cannot win thy heart; and this
    sad truth hath broken mine. And now, upon my dying bed, I leave
    thee all the wealth that could not win one tender smile for her
    who pined for it in vain. Thou hast scorned my love, take thou
    the gold which is worthless to me now. Farewell, my husband; I
    am faithful to the last, and my lips blessed thee ere they
    drank the draught that soon will free me from my sorrow, and
    thee from thy unloved but loving
                                                               Nina.

Adrian. My cruel words? What means this? Stay, there is another paper,
and it may tell me more. [_Reads_ Felix's _forged letter and dashes it
down_.] 'Tis false, false as the villain's heart who forged the lie and
brought agony like this to that pure, loving heart. Oh, Nina, Nina, now
when I so fondly love thee, thou hast been deceived, and died still
blessing him thou deemed so cruel and so cold. Oh, that I could but win
thee back for one short hour, that I might tell my penitence and my deep
sorrow for the grief I have brought thee. Yet, blessed thought, it may
not be too late. She slept but one short hour ago, when this was taken
from her hand. She may yet linger at the gates of death, and I may call
her back to happiness and life once more. Oh, if I may but win this
blessing to my heart, my life shall be one prayer of thankfulness for
the great boon [_rushes out_].


                                CURTAIN.


                              SCENE TENTH.

                           [Nina's _chamber_.
              Nina _lies in a deep trance upon her couch_.
                          Adrian _rushes in_.]

Adrian. Nina! Nina! wake, love, it is I thy husband who doth call thee.
Oh, can I not win thee back to life now when I have learned to love with
all my heart's faith and fondness. [_He kisses her hands and weeps._]
Calm and still she lies, all my tender words cannot awake her, and these
bitter tears but fall unheeded and in vain. Was it for this I won that
warm young heart,--for this short sorrowing life, this lonely death? Ah,
couldst thou see this proud heart humbled now, and these repentant tears
that wet thy quiet brow. Nina, wife, oh, wake and tell me I am forgiven!
[_Kneels beside her._]

Nina [_rousing_]. Adrian!

Adrian [_starting up_]. She breathes, she lives, my prayer is heard.
'Tis not too late.

Nina [_still dreaming_]. Methought I was in heaven, for Adrian bent o'er
me; the face I loved smiled lovingly upon me, sweet tender words were
spoken, and the joy of that short moment well repaid the sorrow I had
borne ere that last sleep came. I am happy now for Adrian hath said he
loves me.

Adrian. Thy deathlike sleep still hangs about thee, thou art still on
earth, and I am here to bring thee joy. Ah, waken and learn thy dream is
true. Thy husband loves thee.

Nina. So the sweet vision said, but it hath passed, and this will vanish
too. Ah, why hast thou called me back? Life is but a chain that binds me
unto sorrow, then let me sleep again and dream that Adrian is true.

Adrian. Nina! Nina! rouse thyself, it is no dream; he hath bent above
thee weeping bitter tears and pouring forth his whole heart's love,
remorse, and sorrow. His voice hath called thee back to life, and he is
here. [Nina _rises and looks wildly about her_.] Here, love, at thy feet
seeking thy pardon for the deep wrong he hath done thee, praying thy
forgiveness! [_Throws himself at her feet._ Nina _stretches forth her
arms, and they embrace with tears of joy_.]

Nina. Adrian, husband, I have naught to pardon. Thou hast won me from
the sleep of death, I am thine, thy heart is my home, and I am only
happy there.

Adrian. I am unworthy such great happiness. Oh, Nina, thou art the true
angel of my life; and thou hast led me on to win a deeper joy than all
the wealth of earth could give. I cast thy pure affection by, and sought
in selfish sorrow to forget thee; but I could not. Thy dear face shone
in all my dreams, and thy voice still lingered in mine ear, imploring me
to love thee. Then I returned to find thee drooping like a blighted
flower. All loved and honored thee; and I vowed to watch, and, if I
found thee true and loving still, to tell thee all, and give my heart to
thee forever. I have now won thee, and I love thee, dearest.

Nina. Oh, I am too blest! Life is a flower-strewn path henceforth, where
I will gladly journey if thou wilt be my guide; and here upon thy
breast, dear love, now smiles the happy wife,--no longer the lonely and
unloved one.

                                                             [_Tableau._

                                CURTAIN.




                    LOUISA M. ALCOTT'S FAMOUS BOOKS.

                [Illustration: Walton Bucketson. Sculp.

                          _Louisa May Alcott_]

                   *       *       *       *       *

JO'S BOYS, AND HOW THEY TURNED OUT. A sequel to "Little Men." With a new
portrait of "Aunt Jo." Price, $1.50.

                                    ROBERTS BROTHERS. Publishers, Boston.




                            SUSAN COOLIDGE'S

                          POPULAR STORY BOOKS.


Susan Coolidge has always possessed the affection of her young readers,
for it seems as if she had the happy instinct of planning stories that
each girl would like to act out in reality.--_The Critic._

Not even Miss Alcott apprehends child nature with finer sympathy, or
pictures its nobler traits with more skill.--_Boston Daily Advertiser._


=THE NEW YEAR'S BARGAIN.= A Christmas Story for Children. With
    Illustrations by Addie Ledyard. 16mo. $1.25.

=WHAT KATY DID.= A Story. With Illustrations by Addie Ledyard. 16mo.
    $1.25.

=WHAT KATY DID AT SCHOOL.= Being more about "What Katy Did." With
    Illustrations. 16mo. $1.25.

=MISCHIEF'S THANKSGIVING=, and other Stories. With Illustrations by
    Addie Ledyard. 16mo. $1.25.

=NINE LITTLE GOSLINGS.= With Illustrations by J. A. Mitchell. 16mo.
    $1.25.

=EYEBRIGHT.= A Story. With Illustrations. 16mo. $1.25.

=CROSS PATCH.= With Illustrations. 16mo. $1.25.

=A ROUND DOZEN.= With Illustrations. 16mo. $1.25.

=A LITTLE COUNTRY GIRL.= With Illustrations. 16mo. $1.25.

=WHAT KATY DID NEXT.= With Illustrations. 16mo. $1.25.

=CLOVER.= A Sequel to the Katy Books. With Illustrations by Jessie
    McDermott. 16mo. $1.25.

=JUST SIXTEEN.= With Illustrations. 16mo. $1.25.

=IN THE HIGH VALLEY.= With Illustrations. 16mo. $1.25.

=A GUERNSEY LILY=; or, How the Feud was Healed. A Story of the
    Channel Islands. Profusely Illustrated. 16mo. $1.25.

=THE BARBERRY BUSH=, and Seven Other Stories about Girls for Girls.
    With Illustrations by Jessie McDermott. 16mo. $1.25.


_Sold by all Booksellers. Mailed, post-paid, on receipt of price, by the
Publishers._

                                               ROBERTS BROTHERS, Boston.






EIGHT COUSINS

By Louisa M. Alcott




Preface

The Author is quite aware of the defects of this little story, many of
which were unavoidable, as it first appeared serially. But, as Uncle
Alec's experiment was intended to amuse the young folks, rather than
suggest educational improvements for the consideration of the elders,
she trusts that these shortcomings will be overlooked by the friends of
the Eight Cousins, and she will try to make amends in a second volume,
which shall attempt to show The Rose in Bloom.

L.M.A.




Chapter 1--Two Girls

Rose sat all alone in the big best parlor, with her little handkerchief
laid ready to catch the first tear, for she was thinking of her
troubles, and a shower was expected. She had retired to this room as a
good place in which to be miserable; for it was dark and still, full of
ancient furniture, sombre curtains, and hung all around with portraits
of solemn old gentlemen in wigs, severe-nosed ladies in top-heavy caps,
and staring children in little bob-tailed coats or short-waisted frocks.
It was an excellent place for woe; and the fitful spring rain that
pattered on the window-pane seemed to sob, "Cry away: I'm with you."

Rose really did have some cause to be sad; for she had no mother, and
had lately lost her father also, which left her no home but this with
her great-aunts. She had been with them only a week, and, though the
dear old ladies had tried their best to make her happy, they had not
succeeded very well, for she was unlike any child they had ever seen,
and they felt very much as if they had the care of a low-spirited
butterfly.

They had given her the freedom of the house, and for a day or two
she had amused herself roaming all over it, for it was a capital old
mansion, and was full of all manner of odd nooks, charming rooms, and
mysterious passages. Windows broke out in unexpected places, little
balconies overhung the garden most romantically, and there was a long
upper hall full of curiosities from all parts of the world; for the
Campbells had been sea-captains for generations.

Aunt Plenty had even allowed Rose to rummage in her great china closet
a spicy retreat, rich in all the "goodies" that children love; but Rose
seemed to care little for these toothsome temptations; and when that
hope failed, Aunt Plenty gave up in despair.

Gentle Aunt Peace had tried all sorts of pretty needle-work, and planned
a doll's wardrobe that would have won the heart of even an older child.
But Rose took little interest in pink satin hats and tiny hose, though
she sewed dutifully till her aunt caught her wiping tears away with the
train of a wedding-dress, and that discovery put an end to the sewing
society.

Then both old ladies put their heads together and picked out the model
child of the neighbourhood to come and play with their niece. But
Ariadne Blish was the worst failure of all, for Rose could not bear the
sight of her, and said she was so like a wax doll she longed to give
her a pinch and see if she would squeak. So prim little Ariadne was sent
home, and the exhausted aunties left Rose to her own devices for a day
or two.

Bad weather and a cold kept her in-doors, and she spent most of her time
in the library where her father's books were stored. Here she read a
great deal, cried a little, and dreamed many of the innocent bright
dreams in which imaginative children find such comfort and delight. This
suited her better than anything else, but it was not good for her, and
she grew pale, heavy-eyed and listless, though Aunt Plenty gave her iron
enough to make a cooking-stove, and Aunt Peace petted her like a poodle.

Seeing this, the poor aunties racked their brains for a new amusement
and determined to venture a bold stroke, though not very hopeful of its
success. They said nothing to Rose about their plan for this Saturday
afternoon, but let her alone till the time came for the grand surprise,
little dreaming that the odd child would find pleasure for herself in a
most unexpected quarter.

Before she had time to squeeze out a single tear a sound broke the
stillness, making her prick up her ears. It was only the soft twitter
of a bird, but it seemed to be a peculiarly gifted bird, for while she
listened the soft twitter changed to a lively whistle, then a trill, a
coo, a chirp, and ended in a musical mixture of all the notes, as if the
bird burst out laughing. Rose laughed also, and, forgetting her woes,
jumped up, saying eagerly,

"It is a mocking-bird. Where is it?"

Running down the long hall, she peeped out at both doors, but saw
nothing feathered except a draggle-tailed chicken under a burdock leaf.
She listened again, and the sound seemed to be in the house. Away she
went, much excited by the chase, and following the changeful song, it
led her to the china-closet door.

"In there? How funny!" she said. But when she entered, not a bird
appeared except the everlastingly kissing swallows on the Canton china
that lined the shelves. All of a sudden Rose's face brightened, and,
softly opening the slide, she peered into the kitchen. But the music
had stopped, and all she saw was a girl in a blue apron scrubbing the
hearth. Rose stared about her for a minute, and then asked abruptly,

"Did you hear that mocking-bird?"

"I should call it a phebe-bird," answered the girl, looking up with a
twinkle in her black eyes.

"Where did it go?"

"It is here still."

"Where?"

"In my throat. Do you want to hear it?"

"Oh, yes! I'll come in." And Rose crept through the slide to the wide
shelf on the other side, being too hurried and puzzled to go round by
the door.

The girl wiped her hands, crossed her feet on the little island of
carpet where she was stranded in a sea of soap-suds, and then, sure
enough, out of her slender throat came the swallow's twitter, the
robin's whistle, the blue-jay's call, the thrush's song, the wood-dove's
coo, and many another familiar note, all ending as before with the
musical ecstacy of a bobolink singing and swinging among the meadow
grass on a bright June day.

Rose was so astonished that she nearly fell off her perch, and when the
little concert was over clapped her hands delightedly.

"Oh, it was lovely! Who taught you?"

"The birds," answered the girl, with a smile, as she fell to work again.

"It is very wonderful! I can sing, but nothing half so fine as that.
What is your name, please?"

"Phebe Moore."

"I've heard of phebe-birds; but I don't believe the real ones could do
that," laughed Rose, adding, as she watched with interest the scattering
of dabs of soft soap over the bricks, "May I stay and see you work? It
is very lonely in the parlor."

"Yes, indeed, if you want to," answered Phebe, wringing out her cloth in
a capable sort of way that impressed Rose very much.

"It must be fun to swash the water round and dig out the soap. I'd love
to do it, only aunt wouldn't like it, I suppose," said Rose, quite taken
with the new employment.

"You'd soon get tired, so you'd better keep tidy and look on."

"I suppose you help your mother a good deal?"

"I haven't got any folks."

"Why, where do you live, then?"

"I'm going to live here, I hope. Debby wants some one to help round, and
I've come to try for a week."

"I hope you will stay, for it is very dull," said Rose, who had taken a
sudden fancy to this girl, who sung like a bird and worked like a woman.

"Hope I shall; for I'm fifteen now, and old enough to earn my own
living. You have come to stay a spell, haven't you?" asked Phebe,
looking up at her guest and wondering how life could be dull to a girl
who wore a silk frock, a daintily frilled apron, a pretty locket, and
had her hair tied up with a velvet snood.

"Yes, I shall stay till my uncle comes. He is my guardian now, and I
don't know what he will do with me. Have you a guardian?"

"My sakes, no! I was left on the poor-house steps a little mite of
a baby, and Miss Rogers took a liking to me, so I've been there ever
since. But she is dead now, and I take care of myself."

"How interesting! It is like Arabella Montgomery in the 'Gypsy's Child.'
Did you ever read that sweet story?" asked Rose, who was fond of tales
of found-lings, and had read many.

"I don't have any books to read, and all the spare time I get I run off
into the woods; that rests me better than stories," answered Phebe, as
she finished one job and began on another.

Rose watched her as she got out a great pan of beans to look over, and
wondered how it would seem to have life all work and no play. Presently
Phebe seemed to think it was her turn to ask questions, and said,
wistfully,

"You've had lots of schooling, I suppose?"

"Oh, dear me, yes! I've been at boarding school nearly a year, and I'm
almost dead with lessons. The more I got, the more Miss Power gave me,
and I was so miserable that I 'most cried my eyes out. Papa never gave
me hard things to do, and he always taught me so pleasantly I loved to
study. Oh, we were so happy and so fond of one another! But now he is
gone, and I am left all alone."

The tear that would not come when Rose sat waiting for it came now of
its own accord two of them in fact and rolled down her cheeks, telling
the tale of love and sorrow better than any words could do it.

For a minute there was no sound in the kitchen but the little daughter's
sobbing and the sympathetic patter of the rain. Phebe stopped rattling
her beans from one pan to another, and her eyes were full of pity as
they rested on the curly head bent down on Rose's knee, for she saw that
the heart under the pretty locket ached with its loss, and the dainty
apron was used to dry sadder tears than any she had ever shed.

Somehow, she felt more contented with her brown calico gown and
blue-checked pinafore; envy changed to compassion; and if she had dared
she would have gone and hugged her afflicted guest.

Fearing that might not be considered proper, she said, in her cheery
voice,

"I'm sure you ain't all alone with such a lot of folks belonging to
you, and all so rich and clever. You'll be petted to pieces, Debby says,
because you are the only girl in the family."

Phebe's last words made Rose smile in spite of her tears, and she looked
out from behind her apron with an April face, saying in a tone of comic
distress,

"That's one of my troubles! I've got six aunts, and they all want
me, and I don't know any of them very well. Papa named this place the
Aunt-hill, and now I see why."

Phebe laughed with her as she said encouragingly,

"Everyone calls it so, and it's a real good name, for all the Mrs.
Campbells live handy by, and keep coming up to see the old ladies."

"I could stand the aunts, but there are dozens of cousins, dreadful
boys all of them, and I detest boys! Some of them came to see me last
Wednesday, but I was lying down, and when auntie came to call me I went
under the quilt and pretended to be asleep. I shall have to see them
some time, but I do dread it so." And Rose gave a shudder, for, having
lived alone with her invalid father, she knew nothing of boys, and
considered them a species of wild animal.

"Oh! I guess you'll like 'em. I've seen 'em flying round when they
come over from the Point, sometimes in their boats and sometimes
on horseback. If you like boats and horses, you'll enjoy yourself
first-rate."

"But I don't! I'm afraid of horses, and boats make me ill, and I hate
boys!" And poor Rose wrung her hands at the awful prospect before her.
One of these horrors alone she could have borne, but all together were
too much for her, and she began to think of a speedy return to the
detested school.

Phebe laughed at her woe till the beans danced in the pan, but tried to
comfort her by suggesting a means of relief.

"Perhaps your uncle will take you away where there ain't any boys. Debby
says he is a real kind man, and always bring heaps of nice things when
he comes."

"Yes, but you see that is another trouble, for I don't know Uncle Alec
at all. He hardly ever came to see us, though he sent me pretty things
very often. Now I belong to him, and shall have to mind him, till I am
eighteen. I may not like him a bit, and I fret about it all the time."

"Well, I wouldn't borrow trouble, but have a real good time. I'm sure I
should think I was in clover if I had folks and money, and nothing to
do but enjoy myself," began Phebe, but got no further, for a sudden rush
and tumble outside made them both jump.

"It's thunder," said Phebe.

"It's a circus!" cried Rose, who from her elevated perch had caught
glimpses of a gay cart of some sort and several ponies with flying manes
and tails.

The sound died away, and the girls were about to continue their
confidences when old Debby appeared, looking rather cross and sleepy
after her nap.

"You are wanted in the parlor, Miss Rose."

"Has anybody come?"

"Little girls shouldn't ask questions, but do as they are bid," was all
Debby would answer.

"I do hope it isn't Aunt Myra; she always scares me out of my wits
asking how my cough is, and groaning over me as if I was going to die,"
said Rose, preparing to retire the way she came, for the slide, being
cut for the admission of bouncing Christmas turkeys and puddings, was
plenty large enough for a slender girl.

"Guess you'll wish it was Aunt Myra when you see who has come. Don't
never let me catch you coming into my kitchen that way again, or I'll
shut you up in the big b'iler," growled Debby, who thought it her duty
to snub children on all occasions.



Chapter 2--The Clan

Rose scrambled into the china-closet as rapidly as possible, and there
refreshed herself by making faces at Debby, while she settled her
plumage and screwed up her courage. Then she crept softly down the hall
and peeped into the parlor. No one appeared, and all was so still she
felt sure the company was upstairs. So she skipped boldly through the
half-open folding-doors, to behold on the other side a sight that nearly
took her breath away.

Seven boys stood in a row all ages, all sizes, all yellow-haired and
blue-eyed, all in full Scotch costume, and all smiling, nodding, and
saying as with one voice, "How are you, cousin?"

Rose gave a little gasp, and looked wildly about her as if ready to fly,
for fear magnified the seven and the room seemed full of boys. Before
she could run, however, the tallest lad stepped out of the line, saying
pleasantly,

"Don't be frightened. This is the Clan come to welcome you; and I'm the
chief, Archie, at your service."

He held out his hand as he spoke, and Rose timidly put her own into a
brown paw, which closed over the white morsel and held it as the chief
continued his introductions.

"We came in full rig, for we always turn out in style on grand
occasions. Hope you like it. Now I'll tell you who these chaps are, and
then we shall be all right. This big one is Prince Charlie, Aunt Clara's
boy. She has but one, so he is an extra good one. This old fellow is
Mac, the bookworm, called Worm for short. This sweet creature is Steve
the Dandy. Look at his gloves and top-knot, if you please. They are Aunt
Jane's lads, and a precious pair you'd better believe. These are the
Brats, my brothers, Geordie and Will, and Jamie the Baby. Now, my men,
step out and show your manners."

At this command, to Rose's great dismay, six more hands were offered,
and it was evident that she was expected to shake them all. It was a
trying moment to the bashful child; but, remembering that they were her
kinsmen come to welcome her, she tried her best to return the greeting
cordially.

This impressive ceremony being over, the Clan broke ranks, and both
rooms instantly appeared to be pervaded with boys. Rose hastily retired
to the shelter of a big chair and sat there watching the invaders and
wondering when her aunt would come and rescue her.

As if bound to do their duty manfully, yet rather oppressed by it, each
lad paused beside her chair in his wanderings, made a brief remark,
received a still briefer answer, and then sheered off with a relieved
expression.

Archie came first, and, leaning over the chair-back, observed in a
paternal tone,

"I'm glad you've come, cousin, and I hope you'll find the Aunt-hill
pretty jolly."

"I think I shall."

Mac shook his hair out of his eyes, stumbled over a stool, and asked
abruptly,

"Did you bring any books with you?"

"Four boxes full. They are in the library."

Mac vanished from the room, and Steve, striking an attitude which
displayed his costume effectively, said with an affable smile,

"We were sorry not to see you last Wednesday. I hope your cold is
better."

"Yes, thank you." And a smile began to dimple about Rose's mouth, as she
remembered her retreat under the bed-cover.

Feeling that he had been received with distinguished marks of attention,
Steve strolled away with his topknot higher than ever, and Prince
Charlie pranced across the room, saying in a free and easy tone,

"Mamma sent her love and hopes you will be well enough to come over for
a day next week. It must be desperately dull here for a little thing
like you."

"I'm thirteen and a half, though I do look small," cried Rose,
forgetting her shyness in indignation at this insult to her newly
acquired teens.

"Beg pardon, ma'am; never should have guessed it." And Charlie went off
with a laugh, glad to have struck a spark out of his meek cousin.

Geordie and Will came together, two sturdy eleven and twelve year
olders, and, fixing their round blue eyes on Rose, fired off a question
apiece, as if it was a shooting match and she the target.

"Did you bring your monkey?"

"No; he is dead."

"Are you going to have a boat?"

"I hope not."

Here the two, with a right-about-face movement, abruptly marched away,
and little Jamie demanded with childish frankness,

"Did you bring me anything nice?"

"Yes, lots of candy," answered Rose, whereupon Jamie ascended into her
lap with a sounding kiss and the announcement that he liked her very
much.

This proceeding rather startled Rose, for the other lads looked and
laughed, and in her confusion she said hastily to the young usurper,

"Did you see the circus go by?"

"When? Where?" cried all the boys in great excitement at once.

"Just before you came. At least I thought it was a circus, for I saw a
red and black sort of cart and ever so many little ponies, and--"

She got no farther, for a general shout made her pause suddenly, as
Archie explained the joke by saying in the middle of his laugh,

"It was our new dog-cart and the Shetland ponies. You'll never hear the
last of your circus, cousin."

"But there were so many, and they went so fast, and the cart was so very
red," began Rose, trying to explain her mistake.

"Come and see them all!" cried the Prince. And before she knew what was
happening, she was borne away to the barn and tumultuously introduced to
three shaggy ponies and the gay new dog-cart.

She had never visited these regions before, and had her doubts as to the
propriety of her being there now, but when she suggested that "Auntie
might not like it," there was a general cry of,

"She told us to amuse you, and we can do it ever so much better out here
than poking round in the house."

"I'm afraid I shall get cold without my sacque," began Rose, who wanted
to stay, but felt rather out of her element.

"No, you won't! We'll fix you," cried the lads, as one clapped his cap
on her head, another tied a rough jacket round her neck by the sleeves,
a third neatly smothered her in a carriage blanket, and a fourth threw
open the door of the old barouche that stood there, saying with a
flourish,

"Step in, ma'am, and make yourself comfortable while we show you some
fun."

So Rose sat in state enjoying herself very much, for the lads proceeded
to dance a Highland Fling with a spirit and skill that made her clap her
hands and laugh as she had not done for weeks.

"How is that, my lassie?" asked the Prince, coming up all flushed and
breathless when the ballet was over.

"It was splendid! I never went to the theatre but once, and the dancing
was not half so pretty as this. What clever boys you must be!" said
Rose, smiling upon her kinsmen like a little queen upon her subjects.

"Ah, we're a fine lot, and that is only the beginning of our larks. We
haven't got the pipes here or we'd,

    'Sing for you, play for you
     A dulcy melody,'"

answered Charlie, looking much elated at her praise.

"I did not know we were Scotch; papa never said anything about it, or
seemed to care about Scotland, except to have me sing the old ballads,"
said Rose, beginning to feel as if she had left America behind her
somewhere.

"Neither did we till lately. We've been reading Scott's novels, and all
of a sudden we remembered that our grandfather was a Scotchman. So we
hunted up the old stories, got a bagpipe, put on our plaids, and went
in, heart and soul, for the glory of the Clan. We've been at it some
time now, and it's great fun. Our people like it, and I think we are a
pretty canny set."

Archie said this from the other coach-step, where he had perched,
while the rest climbed up before and behind to join in the chat as they
rested.

"I'm Fitzjames and he's Roderick Dhu, and we'll give you the broadsword
combat some day. It's a great thing, you'd better believe," added the
Prince.

"Yes, and you should hear Steve play the pipes. He makes 'em skirl like
a good one," cried Will from the box, eager to air the accomplishments
of his race.

"Mac's the fellow to hunt up the old stories and tell us how to dress
right, and pick out rousing bits for us to speak and sing," put in
Geordie, saying a good word for the absent Worm.

"And what do you and Will do?" asked Rose of Jamie, who sat beside her
as if bound to keep her in sight till the promised gift had been handed
over.

"Oh, I'm the little foot-page, and do errands, and Will and Geordie are
the troops when we march, and the stags when we hunt, and the traitors
when we want to cut any heads off."

"They are very obliging, I'm sure," said Rose, whereat the "utility men"
beamed with modest pride and resolved to enact Wallace and Montrose as
soon as possible for their cousin's special benefit.

"Let's have a game of tag," cried the Prince, swinging himself up to a
beam with a sounding slap on Stevie's shoulder.

Regardless of his gloves, Dandy tore after him, and the rest swarmed in
every direction as if bent on breaking their necks and dislocating their
joints as rapidly as possible.

It was a new and astonishing spectacle to Rose, fresh from a prim
boarding-school, and she watched the active lads with breathless
interest, thinking their antics far superior to those of Mops, the dear
departed monkey.

Will had just covered himself with glory by pitching off a high loft
head first and coming up all right, when Phebe appeared with a cloak,
hood, and rubbers, also a message from Aunt Plenty that "Miss Rose was
to come in directly."

"All right; we'll bring her!" answered Archie, issuing some mysterious
order, which was so promptly obeyed that, before Rose could get out of
the carriage, the boys had caught hold of the pole and rattled her out
of the barn, round the oval and up to the front door with a cheer that
brought two caps to an upper window, and caused Debby to cry aloud from
the back porch,

"Them harum-scarum boys will certainly be the death of that delicate
little creter!"

But the "delicate little creter" seemed all the better for her trip, and
ran up the steps looking rosy, gay, and dishevelled, to be received with
lamentation by Aunt Plenty, who begged her to go and lie down at once.

"Oh, please don't! We have come to tea with our cousin, and we'll be as
good as gold if you'll let us stay, auntie," clamoured the boys, who
not only approved of "our cousin" but had no mind to lose their tea, for
Aunt Plenty's name but feebly expressed her bountiful nature.

"Well, dears, you can; only be quiet, and let Rose go and take her iron
and be made tidy, and then we will see what we can find for supper,"
said the old lady as she trotted away, followed by a volley of
directions for the approaching feast.

"Marmalade for me, auntie."

"Plenty of plum-cake, please."

"Tell Debby to trot out the baked pears."

"I'm your man for lemon-pie, ma'am."

"Do have fritters; Rose will like 'em."

"She'd rather have tarts, I know."

When Rose came down, fifteen minutes later, with every curl smoothed and
her most beruffled apron on, she found the boys loafing about the long
hall, and paused on the half-way landing to take an observation, for
till now she had not really examined her new-found cousins.

There was a strong family resemblance among them, though some of the
yellow heads were darker than others, some of the cheeks brown instead
of rosy, and the ages varied all the way from sixteen-year-old Archie
to Jamie, who was ten years younger. None of them were especially
comely but the Prince, yet all were hearty, happy-looking lads, and Rose
decided that boys were not as dreadful as she had expected to find them.

They were all so characteristically employed that she could not help
smiling as she looked. Archie and Charlie, evidently great cronies, were
pacing up and down, shoulder to shoulder, whistling "Bonnie Dundee"; Mac
was reading in a corner, with his book close to his near-sighted eyes;
Dandy was arranging his hair before the oval glass in the hat-stand;
Geordie and Will investigating the internal economy of the moon-faced
clock; and Jamie lay kicking up his heels on the mat at the foot of the
stairs, bent on demanding his sweeties the instant Rose appeared.

She guessed his intention, and forestalled his demand by dropping a
handful of sugar-plums down upon him.

At his cry of rapture the other lads looked up and smiled involuntarily,
for the little kinswoman standing there above was a winsome sight with
her shy, soft eyes, bright hair, and laughing face. The black frock
reminded them of her loss, and filled the boyish hearts with a kindly
desire to be good to "our cousin," who had no longer any home but this.

"There she is, as fine as you please," cried Steve, kissing his hand to
her.

"Come on, Missy; tea is ready," added the Prince encouragingly.

"I shall take her in." And Archie offered his arm with great dignity, an
honour that made Rose turn as red as a cherry and long to run upstairs
again.

It was a merry supper, and the two elder boys added much to the fun by
tormenting the rest with dark hints of some interesting event which was
about to occur. Something uncommonly fine, they declared it was, but
enveloped in the deepest mystery for the present.

"Did I ever see it?" asked Jamie.

"Not to remember it; but Mac and Steve have, and liked it immensely,"
answered Archie, thereby causing the two mentioned to neglect Debby's
delectable fritters for several minutes, while they cudgelled their
brains.

"Who will have it first?" asked Will, with his mouth full of marmalade.

"Aunt Plenty, I guess."

"When will she have it?" demanded Geordie, bouncing in his seat with
impatience.

"Sometime on Monday."

"Heart alive! what is the boy talking about?" cried the old lady from
behind the tall urn, which left little to be seen but the topmost bow of
her cap.

"Doesn't auntie know?" asked a chorus of voices.

"No; and that's the best of the joke, for she is desperately fond of
it."

"What colour is it?" asked Rose, joining in the fun.

"Blue and brown."

"Is it good to eat?" asked Jamie.

"Some people think so, but I shouldn't like to try it," answered
Charlie, laughing so he split his tea.

"Who does it belong to?" put in Steve.

Archie and the Prince stared at one another rather blankly for a minute,
then Archie answered with a twinkle of the eye that made Charlie explode
again,

"To Grandfather Campbell."

This was a poser, and they gave up the puzzle, though Jamie confided
to Rose that he did not think he could live till Monday without knowing
what this remarkable thing was.

Soon after tea the Clan departed, singing "All the blue bonnets are over
the border," at the tops of their voices.

"Well, dear, how do you like your cousins?" asked Aunt Plenty, as the
last pony frisked round the corner and the din died away.

"Pretty well, ma'am; but I like Phebe better." An answer which caused
Aunt Plenty to hold up her hands in despair and trot away to tell sister
Peace that she never should understand that child, and it was a mercy
Alec was coming soon to take the responsibility off their hands.

Fatigued by the unusual exertions of the afternoon, Rose curled herself
up in the sofa corner to rest and think about the great mystery, little
guessing that she was to know it first of all.

Right in the middle of her meditations she fell asleep and dreamed she
was at home again in her own little bed. She seemed to wake and see her
father bending over her; to hear him say, "My little Rose"; to answer,
"Yes, papa"; and then to feel him take her in his arms and kiss her
tenderly. So sweet, so real was the dream, that she started up with a
cry of joy to find herself in the arms of a brown, bearded man, who held
her close, and whispered in a voice so like her father's that she clung
to him involuntarily,

"This is my little girl, and I am Uncle Alec."



Chapter 3--Uncles

When Rose woke next morning, she was not sure whether she had dreamed
what occurred the night before, or it had actually happened. So she
hopped up and dressed, although it was an hour earlier than she usually
rose, for she could not sleep any more, being possessed with a strong
desire to slip down and see if the big portmanteau and packing cases
were really in the hall. She seemed to remember tumbling over them when
she went to bed, for the aunts had sent her off very punctually, because
they wanted their pet nephew all to themselves.

The sun was shining, and Rose opened her window to let in the soft May
air fresh from the sea. As she leaned over her little balcony, watching
an early bird get the worm, and wondering how she should like Uncle
Alec, she saw a man leap the garden wall and come whistling up the path.
At first she thought it was some trespasser, but a second look showed
her that it was her uncle returning from an early dip into the sea. She
had hardly dared to look at him the night before, because whenever she
tried to do so she always found a pair of keen blue eyes looking at her.
Now she could take a good stare at him as he lingered along, looking
about him as if glad to see the old place again.

A brown, breezy man, in a blue jacket, with no hat on the curly head,
which he shook now and then like a water dog; broad-shouldered, alert in
his motions, and with a general air of strength and stability about him
which pleased Rose, though she could not explain the feeling of comfort
it gave her. She had just said to herself, with a sense of relief, "I
guess I shall like him, though he looks as if he made people mind," when
he lifted his eyes to examine the budding horse-chestnut overhead,
and saw the eager face peering down at him. He waved his hand to her,
nodded, and called out in a bluff, cheery voice,

"You are on deck early, little niece."

"I got up to see if you had really come, uncle."

"Did you? Well, come down here and make sure of it."

"I'm not allowed to go out before breakfast, sir."

"Oh, indeed!" with a shrug. "Then I'll come aboard and salute," he
added; and, to Rose's great amazement, Uncle Alec went up one of the
pillars of the back piazza hand over hand, stepped across the roof,
and swung himself into her balcony, saying, as he landed on the wide
balustrade: "Have you any doubts about me now, ma'am?"

Rose was so taken aback, she could only answer with a smile as she went
to meet him.

"How does my girl do this morning?" he asked, taking the little cold
hand she gave him in both his big warm ones.

"Pretty well, thank you, sir."

"Ah, but it should be very well. Why isn't it?"

"I always wake up with a headache, and feel tired."

"Don't you sleep well?"

"I lie awake a long time, and then I dream, and my sleep does not seem
to rest me much."

"What do you do all day?"

"Oh, I read, and sew a little, and take naps, and sit with auntie."

"No running about out of doors, or house-work, or riding, hey?"

"Aunt Plenty says I'm not strong enough for much exercise. I drive out
with her sometimes, but I don't care for it."

"I'm not surprised at that," said Uncle Alec, half to himself, adding,
in his quick way: "Who have you had to play with?"

"No one but Ariadne Blish, and she was such a goose I couldn't bear
her. The boys came yesterday, and seemed rather nice; but, of course, I
couldn't play with them."

"Why not?"

"I'm too old to play with boys."

"Not a bit of it; that's just what you need, for you've been
molly-coddled too much. They are good lads, and you'll be mixed up with
them more or less for years to come, so you may as well be friends and
playmates at once. I will look you up some girls also, if I can find a
sensible one who is not spoilt by her nonsensical education."

"Phebe is sensible, I'm sure, and I like her, though I only saw her
yesterday," cried Rose, waking up suddenly.

"And who is Phebe, if you please?"

Rose eagerly told all she knew, and Uncle Alec listened, with an odd
smile lurking about his mouth, though his eyes were quite sober as he
watched the face before him.

"I'm glad to see that you are not aristocratic in your tastes, but I
don't quite make out why you like this young lady from the poor-house."

"You may laugh at me, but I do. I can't tell why, only she seems so
happy and busy, and sings so beautifully, and is strong enough to scrub
and sweep, and hasn't any troubles to plague her," said Rose, making a
funny jumble of reasons in her efforts to explain.

"How do you know that?"

"Oh, I was telling her about mine, and asked if she had any, and she
said, 'No, only I'd like to go to school, and I mean to some day."

"So she doesn't call desertion, poverty, and hard work, troubles? She's
a brave little girl, and I shall be proud to know her." And Uncle Alec
gave an approving nod, that made Rose wish she had been the one to earn
it.

"But what are these troubles of yours, child?" he asked, after a minute
of silence.

"Please don't ask me, uncle."

"Can't you tell them to me as well as to Phebe?"

Something in his tone made Rose feel that it would be better to speak
out and be done with it, so she answered, with sudden colour and averted
eyes,

"The greatest one was losing dear papa."

As she said that, Uncle Alec's arm came gently round her, and he drew
her to him, saying, in the voice so like papa's,

"That is a trouble which I cannot cure, my child; but I shall try to
make you feel it less. What else, dear?"

"I am so tired and poorly all the time, I can't do anything I want to,
and it makes me cross," sighed Rose, rubbing the aching head like a
fretful child.

"That we can cure and we will," said her uncle, with a decided nod
that made the curls bob on his head, to that Rose saw the gray ones
underneath the brown.

"Aunt Myra says I have no constitution, and never shall be strong,"
observed Rose, in a pensive tone, as if it was rather a nice thing to be
an invalid.

"Aunt Myra is a ahem! an excellent woman, but it is her hobby to believe
that everyone is tottering on the brink of the grave; and, upon my life,
I believe she is offended if people don't fall into it! We will show her
how to make constitutions and turn pale-faced little ghosts into rosy,
hearty girls. That's my business, you know," he added, more quietly, for
his sudden outburst had rather startled Rose.

"I had forgotten you were a doctor. I'm glad of it, for I do want to be
well, only I hope you won't give me much medicine, for I've taken quarts
already, and it does me no good."

As she spoke, Rose pointed to a little table just inside the window, on
which appeared a regiment of bottles.

"Ah, ha! Now we'll see what mischief these blessed women have been at."
And, making a long arm, Dr. Alec set the bottles on the wide railing
before him, examined each carefully, smiled over some, frowned over
others, and said, as he put down the last: "Now I'll show you the best
way to take these messes." And, as quick as a flash, he sent one after
another smashing down into the posy-beds below.

"But Aunt Plenty won't like it; and Aunt Myra will be angry, for she
sent most of them!" cried Rose, half frightened and half pleased at such
energetic measures.

"You are my patient now, and I'll take the responsibility. My way of
giving physic is evidently the best, for you look better already," he
said, laughing so infectiously that Rose followed suit, saying saucily,

"If I don't like your medicines any better than those, I shall throw
them into the garden, and then what will you do?"

"When I prescribe such rubbish, I'll give you leave to pitch it
overboard as soon as you like. Now what is the next trouble?"

"I hoped you would forget to ask."

"But how can I help you if I don't know them? Come, let us have No. 3."

"It is very wrong, I suppose, but I do sometimes wish I had not quite so
many aunts. They are all very good to me, and I want to please them; but
they are so different, I feel sort of pulled to pieces among them," said
Rose, trying to express the emotions of a stray chicken with six hens
all clucking over it at once.

Uncle Alec threw back his head and laughed like a boy, for he could
entirely understand how the good ladies had each put in her oar and
tried to paddle her own way, to the great disturbance of the waters and
the entire bewilderment of poor Rose.

"I intend to try a course of uncles now, and see how that suits your
constitution. I'm going to have you all to myself, and no one is to give
a word of advice unless I ask it. There is no other way to keep order
aboard, and I am captain of this little craft, for a time at least. What
comes next?"

But Rose stuck there, and grew so red, her uncle guessed what that
trouble was.

"I don't think I can tell this one. It wouldn't be polite, and I feel
pretty sure that it isn't going to be a trouble any more."

As she blushed and stammered over these words, Dr. Alec turned his eyes
away to the distant sea, and said so seriously, so tenderly, that she
felt every word and long remembered them,

"My child, I don't expect you to love and trust me all at once, but I do
want you to believe that I shall give my whole heart to this new duty;
and if I make mistakes, as I probably shall, no one will grieve over
them more bitterly than I. It is my fault that I am a stranger to you,
when I want to be your best friend. That is one of my mistakes, and I
never repented it more deeply than I do now. Your father and I had a
trouble once, and I thought I could never forgive him; so I kept away
for years. Thank God, we made it all up the last time I saw him, and he
told me then, that if he was forced to leave her he should bequeath his
little girl to me as a token of his love. I can't fill his place, but
I shall try to be a father to her; and if she learns to love me half as
well as she did the good one she has lost, I shall be a proud and happy
man. Will she believe this and try?"

Something in Uncle Alec's face touched Rose to the heart, and when he
held out his hand with that anxious troubled look in his eyes, she was
moved to put up her innocent lips and seal the contract with a confiding
kiss. The strong arm held her close a minute, and she felt the broad
chest heave once as if with a great sigh of relief; but not a word was
spoken till a tap at the door made both start.

Rose popped her head through the window to say "come in," while Dr. Alec
hastily rubbed the sleeve of his jacket across his eyes and began to
whistle again.

Phebe appeared with a cup of coffee.

"Debby told me to bring this and help you get up," she said, opening her
black eyes wide, as if she wondered how on earth "the sailor man" got
there.

"I'm all dressed, so I don't need any help. I hope that is good and
strong," added Rose, eyeing the steaming cup with an eager look.

But she did not get it, for a brown hand took possession of it as her
uncle said quickly,

"Hold hard, my lass, and let me overhaul that dose before you take it.
Do you drink all this strong coffee every morning, Rose?"

"Yes, sir, and I like it. Auntie says it 'tones' me up, and I always
feel better after it."

"This accounts for the sleepless nights, the flutter your heart gets
into at the least start, and this is why that cheek of yours is pale
yellow instead of rosy red. No more coffee for you, my dear, and by and
by you'll see that I am right. Any new milk downstairs, Phebe?"

"Yes, sir, plenty right in from the barn."

"That's the drink for my patient. Go bring me a pitcherful, and another
cup; I want a draught myself. This won't hurt the honeysuckles, for they
have no nerves to speak of." And, to Rose's great discomfort, the coffee
went after the medicine.

Dr. Alec saw the injured look she put on, but took no notice, and
presently banished it by saying pleasantly,

"I've got a capital little cup among my traps, and I'll give it to you
to drink your milk in, as it is made of wood that is supposed to improve
whatever is put into it something like a quassia cup. That reminds me;
one of the boxes Phebe wanted to lug upstairs last night is for you.
Knowing that I was coming home to find a ready-made daughter, I picked
up all sorts of odd and pretty trifles along the way, hoping she would
be able to find something she liked among them all. Early to-morrow
we'll have a grand rummage. Here's our milk! I propose the health of
Miss Rose Campbell and drink it with all my heart."

It was impossible for Rose to pout with the prospect of a delightful
boxful of gifts dancing before her eyes; so, in spite of herself, she
smiled as she drank her own health, and found that fresh milk was not a
hard dose to take.

"Now I must be off, before I am caught again with my wig in a toss,"
said Dr. Alec, preparing to descend the way he came.

"Do you always go in and out like a cat, uncle?" asked Rose, much amused
at his odd ways.

"I used to sneak out of my window when I was a boy, so I need not
disturb the aunts, and now I rather like it, for it's the shortest road,
and it keeps me limber when I have no rigging to climb. Good-bye till
breakfast." And away he went down the water-spout, over the roof, and
vanished among the budding honey-suckles below.

"Ain't he a funny guardeen?" exclaimed Phebe, as she went off with the
cups.

"He is a very kind one, I think," answered Rose, following, to prowl
round the big boxes and try to guess which was hers.

When her uncle appeared at sound of the bell, he found her surveying
with an anxious face a new dish that smoked upon the table.

"Got a fresh trouble, Rosy?" he asked, stroking her smooth head.

"Uncle, are you going to make me eat oatmeal?" asked Rose, in a tragic
tone.

"Don't you like it?"

"I de-test it!" answered Rose, with all the emphasis which a turned-up
nose, a shudder, and a groan could give to the three words.

"You are not a true Scotchwoman, if you don't like the 'parritch.' It's
a pity, for I made it myself, and thought we'd have such a good time
with all that cream to float it in. Well, never mind." And he sat down
with a disappointed air.

Rose had made up her mind to be obstinate about it, because she did
heartily "detest" the dish; but as Uncle Alec did not attempt to make
her obey, she suddenly changed her mind and thought she would.

"I'll try to eat it to please you, uncle; but people are always saying
how wholesome it is, and that makes me hate it," she said, half-ashamed
at her silly excuse.

"I do want you to like it, because I wish my girl to be as well and
strong as Jessie's boys, who are brought up on this in the good old
fashion. No hot bread and fried stuff for them, and they are the biggest
and bonniest lads of the lot. Bless you, auntie, and good morning!"

Dr. Alec turned to greet the old lady, and, with a firm resolve to eat
or die in the attempt, Rose sat down.

In five minutes she forgot what she was eating, so interested was she in
the chat that went on. It amused her very much to hear Aunt Plenty call
her forty-year-old nephew "my dear boy"; and Uncle Alec was so full
of lively gossip about all creation in general, and the Aunt-hill in
particular, that the detested porridge vanished without a murmur.

"You will go to church with us, I hope, Alec, if you are not too tired,"
said the old lady, when breakfast was over.

"I came all the way from Calcutta for that express purpose, ma'am. Only
I must send the sisters word of my arrival, for they don't expect me
till to-morrow, you know, and there will be a row in church if those
boys see me without warning."

"I'll send Ben up the hill, and you can step over to Myra's yourself; it
will please her, and you will have plenty of time."

Dr. Alec was off at once, and they saw no more of him till the old
barouche was at the door, and Aunt Plenty just rustling downstairs in
her Sunday best, with Rose like a little black shadow behind her.

Away they drove in state, and all the way Uncle Alec's hat was more off
his head than on, for everyone they met smiled and bowed, and gave him
as blithe a greeting as the day permitted.

It was evident that the warning had been a wise one, for, in spite of
time and place, the lads were in such a ferment that their elders sat
in momentary dread of an unseemly outbreak somewhere. It was simply
impossible to keep those fourteen eyes off Uncle Alec, and the dreadful
things that were done during sermon-time will hardly be believed.

Rose dared not look up after a while, for these bad boys vented their
emotions upon her till she was ready to laugh and cry with mingled
amusement and vexation. Charlie winked rapturously at her behind his
mother's fan; Mac openly pointed to the tall figure beside her; Jamie
stared fixedly over the back of his pew, till Rose thought his round
eyes would drop out of his head; George fell over a stool and dropped
three books in his excitement; Will drew sailors and Chinamen on his
clean cuffs, and displayed them, to Rose's great tribulation; Steve
nearly upset the whole party by burning his nose with salts, as he
pretended to be overcome by his joy; even dignified Archie disgraced
himself by writing in his hymn book, "Isn't he blue and brown?" and
passing it politely to Rose.

Her only salvation was trying to fix her attention upon Uncle Mac
a portly, placid gentleman, who seemed entirely unconscious of the
iniquities of the Clan, and dozed peacefully in his pew corner. This was
the only uncle Rose had met for years, for Uncle Jem and Uncle Steve,
the husbands of Aunt Jessie and Aunt Clara, were at sea, and Aunt Myra
was a widow. Uncle Mac was a merchant, very rich and busy, and as quiet
as a mouse at home, for he was in such a minority among the women folk
he dared not open his lips, and let his wife rule undisturbed.

Rose liked the big, kindly, silent man who came to her when papa died,
was always sending her splendid boxes of goodies at school, and often
invited her into his great warehouse, full of teas and spices, wines and
all sorts of foreign fruits, there to eat and carry away whatever she
liked. She had secretly regretted that he was not to be her guardian;
but since she had seen Uncle Alec she felt better about it, for she did
not particularly admire Aunt Jane.

When church was over, Dr. Alec got into the porch as quickly as
possible, and there the young bears had a hug all round, while the
sisters shook hands and welcomed him with bright faces and glad hearts.
Rose was nearly crushed flat behind a door in that dangerous passage
from pew to porch; but Uncle Mac rescued her, and put her into the
carriage for safe keeping.

"Now, girls, I want you to come and dine with Alec; Mac also, of course.
But I cannot ask the boys, for we did not expect this dear fellow till
tomorrow, you know, so I made no preparations. Send the lads home, and
let them wait till Monday, for really I was shocked at their behaviour
in church," said Aunt Plenty, as she followed Rose.

In any other place the defrauded boys would have set up a howl; as it
was, they growled and protested till Dr. Alec settled the matter by
saying,

"Never mind, old chaps, I'll make it up to you to-morrow, if you sheer
off quietly; if you don't, not a blessed thing shall you have out of my
big boxes."



Chapter 4--Aunts

All dinner-time Rose felt that she was going to be talked about, and
afterward she was sure of it, for Aunt Plenty whispered to her as they
went into the parlour,

"Run up and sit awhile with Sister Peace, my dear. She likes to have you
read while she rests, and we are going to be busy."

Rose obeyed, and the quiet rooms above were so like a church that she
soon composed her ruffled feelings, and was unconsciously a little
minister of happiness to the sweet old lady, who for years had sat there
patiently waiting to be set free from pain.

Rose knew the sad romance of her life, and it gave a certain tender
charm to this great-aunt of hers, whom she already loved. When Peace was
twenty, she was about to be married; all was done, the wedding dress lay
ready, the flowers were waiting to be put on, the happy hour at hand,
when word came that the lover was dead. They thought that gentle Peace
would die, too; but she bore it bravely, put away her bridal gear, took
up her life afresh, and lived on a beautiful, meek woman, with hair as
white as snow and cheeks that never bloomed again. She wore no black,
but soft, pale colours, as if always ready for the marriage that had
never come.

For thirty years she had lived on, fading slowly, but cheerful, busy,
and full of interest in all that went on in the family; especially the
joys and sorrows of the young girls growing up about her, and to them
she was adviser, confidante, and friend in all their tender trials and
delights. A truly beautiful old maiden, with her silvery hair, tranquil
face, and an atmosphere of repose about her that soothed whoever came to
her!

Aunt Plenty was utterly dissimilar, being a stout, brisk old lady, with
a sharp eye, a lively tongue, and a face like a winter-apple. Always
trotting, chatting, and bustling, she was a regular Martha, cumbered
with the cares of this world and quite happy in them.

Rose was right; and while she softly read psalms to Aunt Peace, the
other ladies were talking about her little self in the frankest manner.

"Well, Alec, how do you like your ward?" began Aunt Jane, as they all
settled down, and Uncle Mac deposited himself in a corner to finish his
doze.

"I should like her better if I could have begun at the beginning, and
so got a fair start. Poor George led such a solitary life that the child
has suffered in many ways, and since he died she has been going on worse
than ever, judging from the state I find her in."

"My dear boy, we did what we thought best while waiting for you to wind
up your affairs and get home. I always told George he was wrong to bring
her up as he did; but he never took my advice, and now here we are with
this poor dear child upon our hands. I, for one, freely confess that
I don't know what to do with her any more than if she was one of those
strange, outlandish birds you used to bring home from foreign parts."
And Aunt Plenty gave a perplexed shake of the head which caused great
commotion among the stiff loops of purple ribbon that bristled all over
the cap like crocus buds.

"If my advice had been taken, she would have remained at the excellent
school where I placed her. But our aunt thought best to remove her
because she complained, and she has been dawdling about ever since she
came. A most ruinous state of things for a morbid, spoilt girl like
Rose," said Mrs. Jane, severely.

She had never forgiven the old ladies for yielding to Rose's pathetic
petition that she might wait her guardian's arrival before beginning
another term at the school, which was a regular Blimber hot-bed, and
turned out many a feminine Toots.

"I never thought it the proper school for a child in good circumstances
an heiress, in fact, as Rose is. It is all very well for girls who are
to get their own living by teaching, and that sort of thing; but all
she needs is a year or two at a fashionable finishing school, so that at
eighteen she can come out with eclat," put in Aunt Clara, who had been a
beauty and a belle, and was still a handsome woman.

"Dear, dear! how short-sighted you all are to be discussing education
and plans for the future, when this unhappy child is so plainly marked
for the tomb," sighed Aunt Myra, with a lugubrious sniff and a solemn
wag of the funereal bonnet, which she refused to remove, being afflicted
with a chronic catarrh.

"Now, it is my opinion that the dear thing only wants freedom, rest, and
care. There is look in her eyes that goes to my heart, for it shows that
she feels the need of what none of us can give her a mother," said Aunt
Jessie, with tears in her own bright eyes at the thought of her boys
being left, as Rose was, to the care of others.

Uncle Alec, who had listened silently as each spoke, turned quickly
towards the last sister, and said, with a decided nod of approval,

"You've got it, Jessie; and, with you to help me, I hope to make the
child feel that she is not quite fatherless and motherless."

"I'll do my best, Alec; and I think you will need me, for, wise as you
are, you cannot understand a tender, timid little creature like Rose as
a woman can," said Mrs. Jessie, smiling back at him with a heart full of
motherly goodwill.

"I cannot help feeling that I, who have had a daughter of my own, can
best bring up a girl; and I am very much surprised that George did
not entrust her to me," observed Aunt Myra, with an air of melancholy
importance, for she was the only one who had given a daughter to
the family, and she felt that she had distinguished herself, though
ill-natured people said that she had dosed her darling to death.

"I never blamed him in the least, when I remember the perilous
experiments you tried with poor Carrie," began Mrs. Jane, in her hard
voice.

"Jane Campbell, I will not hear a word! My sainted Caroline is a sacred
object," cried Aunt Myra, rising as if to leave the room.

Dr. Alec detained her, feeling that he must define his position at once,
and maintain it manfully if he hoped to have any success in his new
undertaking.

"Now, my dear souls, don't let us quarrel and make Rose a bone of
contention though, upon my word, she is almost a bone, poor little lass!
You have had her among you for a year, and done what you liked. I cannot
say that your success is great, but that is owing to too many fingers in
the pie. Now, I intend to try my way for a year, and if at the end of it
she is not in better trim than now, I'll give up the case, and hand her
over to someone else. That's fair, I think."

"She will not be here a year hence, poor darling, so no one need dread
future responsibility," said Aunt Myra, folding her black gloves as if
all ready for the funeral.

"By Jupiter! Myra, you are enough to damp the ardour of a saint!" cried
Dr. Alec, with a sudden spark in his eyes. "Your croaking will worry
that child out of her wits, for she is an imaginative puss, and will
fret and fancy untold horrors. You have put it into her head that she
has no constitution, and she rather likes the idea. If she had not had a
pretty good one, she would have been 'marked for the tomb' by this
time, at the rate you have been going on with her. I will not have any
interference please understand that; so just wash your hands of her, and
let me manage till I want help, then I'll ask for it."

"Hear, hear!" came from the corner where Uncle Mac was apparently wrapt
in slumber.

"You were appointed guardian, so we can do nothing. But I predict that
the girl will be spoilt, utterly spoilt," answered Mrs. Jane, grimly.

"Thank you, sister. I have an idea that if a woman can bring up two boys
as perfectly as you do yours, a man, if he devotes his whole mind to it,
may at least attempt as much with one girl," replied Dr. Alec, with a
humorous look that tickled the others immensely, for it was a well-known
fact in the family that Jane's boys were more indulged than all the
other lads put together.

"I am quite easy, for I really do think that Alec will improve the
child's health; and by the time his year is out, it will be quite soon
enough for her to go to Madame Roccabella's and be finished off," said
Aunt Clara, settling her rings, and thinking, with languid satisfaction,
of the time when she could bring out a pretty and accomplished niece.

"I suppose you will stay here in the old place, unless you think of
marrying, and it's high time you did," put in Mrs. Jane, much nettled at
her brother's last hit.

"No, thank you. Come and have a cigar, Mac," said Dr. Alec, abruptly.

"Don't marry; women enough in the family already," muttered Uncle Mac;
and then the gentlemen hastily fled.

"Aunt Peace would like to see you all, she says," was the message Rose
brought before the ladies could begin again.

"Hectic, hectic! dear me, dear me!" murmured Aunt Myra, as the shadow
of her gloomy bonnet fell upon Rose, and the stiff tips of a black glove
touched the cheek where the colour deepened under so many eyes.

"I am glad these pretty curls are natural; they will be invaluable by
and by," said Aunt Clara, taking an observation with her head on one
side.

"Now that your uncle has come, I no longer expect you to review the
studies of the past year. I trust your time will not be entirely wasted
in frivolous sports, however," added Aunt Jane, sailing out of the room
with the air of a martyr.

Aunt Jessie said not a word, but kissed her little niece, with a look
of tender sympathy that made Rose cling to her a minute, and follow her
with grateful eyes as the door closed behind her.

After everybody had gone home, Dr. Alec paced up and down the lower
hall in the twilight for an hour, thinking so intently that sometimes
he frowned, sometimes he smiled, and more than once he stood still in a
brown study. All of a sudden he said, half aloud, as if he had made up
his mind,

"I might as well begin at once, and give the child something new to
think about, for Myra's dismals and Jane's lectures have made her as
blue as a little indigo bag."

Diving into one of the trunks that stood in a corner, he brought up,
after a brisk rummage, a silken cushion, prettily embroidered, and a
quaint cup of dark carved wood.

"This will do for a start," he said, as he plumped up the cushion and
dusted the cup. "It won't do to begin too energetically, or Rose will be
frightened. I must beguile her gently and pleasantly along till I've won
her confidence, and then she will be ready for anything."

Just then Phebe came out of the dining-room with a plate of brown bread,
for Rose had been allowed no hot biscuit for tea.

"I'll relieve you of some of that," said Dr. Alec, and, helping himself
to a generous slice, he retired to the study, leaving Phebe to wonder at
his appetite.

She would have wondered still more if she had seen him making that brown
bread into neat little pills, which he packed into an attractive ivory
box, out of which he emptied his own bits of lovage.

"There! if they insist on medicine, I'll order these, and no harm will
be done. I will have my own way, but I'll keep the peace, if possible,
and confess the joke when my experiment has succeeded," he said to
himself, looking very much like a mischievous boy, as he went on with
his innocent prescriptions.

Rose was playing softly on the small organ that stood in the upper hall,
so that Aunt Peace could enjoy it; and all the while he talked with the
old ladies, Uncle Alec was listening to the fitful music of the child,
and thinking of another Rose who used to play for him.

As the clock struck eight, he called out,

"Time for my girl to be abed, else she won't be up early, and I'm full
of jolly plans for to-morrow. Come and see what I've found for you to
begin upon."

Rose ran in and listened with bright attentive face, while Dr. Alec said
impressively,

"In my wanderings over the face of the earth, I have picked up some
excellent remedies, and, as they are rather agreeable ones, I think you
and I will try them. This is a herb-pillow, given to me by a wise old
woman when I was ill in India. It is filled with saffron, poppies, and
other soothing plants; so lay your little head on it to-night, sleep
sweetly without a dream, and wake to-morrow without a pain."

"Shall I really? How nice it smells." And Rose willingly received
the pretty pillow, and stood enjoying its faint, sweet odour, as she
listened to the doctor's next remedy.

"This is the cup I told you of. Its virtue depends, they say, on the
drinker filling it himself; so you must learn to milk. I'll teach you."

"I'm afraid I never can," said Rose; but she surveyed the cup with
favour, for a funny little imp danced on the handle, as if all ready to
take a header into the white sea below.

"Don't you think she ought to have something more strengthening than
milk, Alec? I really shall feel anxious if she does not have a tonic of
some sort," said Aunt Plenty, eyeing the new remedies suspiciously, for
she had more faith in her old-fashioned doses than all the magic cups
and poppy pillows of the East.

"Well, ma'am, I'm willing to give her a pill, if you think best. It is
a very simple one, and very large quantities may be taken without harm.
You know hasheesh is the extract of hemp? Well, this is a preparation of
corn and rye, much used in old times, and I hope it will be again."

"Dear me, how singular!" said Aunt Plenty, bringing her spectacles to
bear upon the pills, with a face so full of respectful interest that it
was almost too much for Dr. Alec's gravity.

"Take one in the morning, and a good-night to you, my dear," he said,
dismissing his patient with a hearty kiss.

Then, as she vanished, he put both hands into his hair, exclaiming, with
a comical mixture of anxiety and amusement,

"When I think what I have undertaken, I declare to you, aunt, I feel
like running away and not coming back till Rose is eighteen!"



Chapter 5--A Belt and a Box

When Rose came out of her chamber, cup in hand, next morning, the first
person she saw was Uncle Alec standing on the threshold of the room
opposite, which he appeared to be examining with care. When he heard her
step, he turned about and began to sing,

"Where are you going, my pretty maid?"

"I'm going a-milking, sir, she said," answered Rose, waving the cup; and
then they finished the verse together in fine style.

Before either spoke, a head, in a nightcap so large and beruffled that
it looked like a cabbage, popped out of a room farther down the hall,
and an astonished voice exclaimed,

"What in the world are you doing about so early?"

"Clearing our pipes for the day, ma'am. Look here, auntie, can I have
this room?" said Dr. Alec, making her a sailor's bow.

"Any room you like, except sister's."

"Thanks. And may I go rummaging round in the garrets and glory-holes to
furnish it as I like?"

"My dear boy, you may turn the house upside down if you will only stay
in it."

"That's a handsome offer, I'm sure. I'll stay, ma'am; here's my little
anchor, so you will get more than you want of me this time."

"That's impossible! Put on your jacket, Rose. Don't tire her out
with antics, Alec. Yes, sister, I'm coming!" and the cabbage vanished
suddenly.

The first milking lesson was a droll one; but after several scares and
many vain attempts, Rose at last managed to fill her cup, while Ben
held Clover's tail so that it could not flap, and Dr. Alec kept her
from turning to stare at the new milkmaid, who objected to both these
proceedings very much.

"You look chilly in spite of all this laughing. Take a smart run round
the garden and get up a glow," said the doctor, as they left the barn.

"I'm too old for running, uncle; Miss Power said it was not lady-like
for girls in their teens," answered Rose, primly.

"I take the liberty of differing from Madame Prunes and Prisms, and, as
your physician, I order you to run. Off with you!" said Uncle Alec, with
a look and a gesture that made Rose scurry away as fast as she could go.

Anxious to please him, she raced round the beds till she came back to
the porch where he stood, and, dropping down upon the steps, she sat
panting, with cheeks as rosy as the rigolette on her shoulders.

"Very well done, child; I see you have not lost the use of your limbs
though you are in your teens. That belt is too tight; unfasten it, then
you can take a long breath without panting so."

"It isn't tight, sir; I can breathe perfectly well," began Rose, trying
to compose herself.

Her uncle's only answer was to lift her up and unhook the new belt of
which she was so proud. The moment the clasp was open the belt flew
apart several inches, for it was impossible to restrain the involuntary
sigh of relief that flatly contradicted her words.

"Why, I didn't know it was tight! it didn't feel so a bit. Of course it
would open if I puff like this, but I never do, because I hardly ever
run," explained Rose, rather discomfited by this discovery.

"I see you don't half fill your lungs, and so you can wear this absurd
thing without feeling it. The idea of cramping a tender little waist
in a stiff band of leather and steel just when it ought to be growing,"
said Dr. Alec, surveying the belt with great disfavour as he put the
clasp forward several holes, to Rose's secret dismay, for she was proud
of her slender figure, and daily rejoiced that she wasn't as stout
as Luly Miller, a former schoolmate, who vainly tried to repress her
plumpness.

"It will fall off if it is so loose," she said anxiously, as she stood
watching him pull her precious belt about.

"Not if you keep taking long breaths to hold it on. That is what I want
you to do, and when you have filled this out we will go on enlarging it
till your waist is more like that of Hebe, goddess of health, and less
like that of a fashion-plate the ugliest thing imaginable."

"How it does look!" and Rose gave a glance of scorn at the loose belt
hanging round her trim little waist. "It will be lost, and then I shall
feel badly, for it cost ever so much, and is real steel and Russia
leather. Just smell how nice."

"If it is lost I'll give you a better one. A soft silken sash is much
fitter for a pretty child like you than a plated harness like this; and
I've got no end of Italian scarfs and Turkish sashes among my traps. Ah!
that makes you feel better, doesn't it?" and he pinched the cheek that
had suddenly dimpled with a smile.

"It is very silly of me, but I can't help liking to know that" here she
stopped and blushed and held down her head, ashamed to add, "you think I
am pretty."

Dr. Alec's eyed twinkled, but he said very soberly,

"Rose, are you vain?"

"I'm afraid I am," answered a very meek voice from behind the veil of
hair that hid the red face.

"That is a sad fault." And he sighed as if grieved at the confession.

"I know it is, and I try not to be; but people praise me, and I can't
help liking it, for I really don't think I am repulsive."

The last word and the funny tone in which it was uttered were too
much for Dr. Alec, and he laughed in spite of himself, to Rose's great
relief.

"I quite agree with you; and in order that you may be still less
repulsive, I want you to grow as fine a girl as Phebe."

"Phebe!" and Rose looked so amazed that her uncle nearly went off again.

"Yes, Phebe; for she has what you need health. If you dear little girls
would only learn what real beauty is, and not pinch and starve and
bleach yourselves out so, you'd save an immense deal of time and money
and pain. A happy soul in a healthy body makes the best sort of beauty
for man or woman. Do you understand that, my dear?"

"Yes, sir," answered Rose, much taken down by this comparison with the
girl from the poor-house. It nettled her sadly, and she showed that it
did by saying quickly,

"I suppose you would like to have me sweep and scrub, and wear an old
brown dress, and go round with my sleeves rolled up, as Phebe does?"

"I should very much, if you could work as well as she does, and show as
strong a pair of arms as she can. I haven't seen a prettier picture for
some time than she made of herself this morning, up to the elbows in
suds, singing like a blackbird whilst she scrubbed on the back stoop."

"Well, I do think you are the queerest man that ever lived!" was all
Rose could find to say after this display of bad taste.

"I haven't begun to show you my oddities yet, so you must make up your
mind to worse shocks than this," he said, with such a whimsical look
that she was glad the sound of a bell prevented her showing more plainly
what a blow her little vanities had already received.

"You will find your box all open up in auntie's parlor, and there you
can amuse her and yourself by rummaging to your heart's content; I've
got to be cruising round all the morning getting my room to rights,"
said Dr. Alec, as they rose from breakfast.

"Can't I help you, uncle?" asked Rose, quite burning to be useful.

"No, thank you, I'm going to borrow Phebe for a while, if Aunt Plenty
can spare her."

"Anybody anything, Alec. You will want me, I know, so I'll give orders
about dinner and be all ready to lend a hand"; and the old lady bustled
away full of interest and good-will.

"Uncle will find that I can do some things that Phebe can't, so now!"
thought Rose, with a toss of the head as she flew to Aunt Peace and the
long-desired box.

Every little girl can easily imagine what an extra good time she had
diving into a sea of treasures and fishing up one pretty thing after
another, till the air was full of the mingled odours of musk and
sandalwood, the room gay with bright colours, and Rose in a rapture of
delight. She began to forgive Dr. Alec for the oatmeal diet when she saw
a lovely ivory workbox; became resigned to the state of her belt when
she found a pile of rainbow-coloured sashes; and when she came to some
distractingly pretty bottles of attar of rose, she felt that they almost
atoned for the great sin of thinking Phebe the finer girl of the two.

Dr. Alec meanwhile had apparently taken Aunt Plenty at her word, and was
turning the house upside down. A general revolution was evidently going
on in the green-room, for the dark damask curtains were seen bundling
away in Phebe's arms; the air-tight stove retiring to the cellar on
Ben's shoulder; and the great bedstead going up garret in a fragmentary
state, escorted by three bearers. Aunt Plenty was constantly on the trot
among her store-rooms, camphor-chests, and linen-closets, looking as if
the new order of things both amazed and amused her.

Half the peculiar performances of Dr. Alec cannot be revealed; but as
Rose glanced up from her box now and then she caught glimpses of him
striding by, bearing a bamboo chair, a pair of ancient andirons, a queer
Japanese screen, a rug or two, and finally a large bathing-pan upon his
head.

"What a curious room it will be," she said, as she sat resting and
refreshing herself with "Lumps of Delight," all the way from Cairo.

"I fancy you will like it, deary," answered Aunt Peace, looking up with
a smile from some pretty trifle she was making with blue silk and white
muslin.

Rose did not see the smile, for just at that moment her uncle paused
at the door, and she sprang up to dance before him, saying, with a face
full of childish happiness,

"Look at me! look at me! I'm splendid I don't know myself. I haven't put
these things on right, I dare say, but I do like them so much!"

"You look as gay as a parrot in your fez and cabaja, and it does my
heart good to see the little black shadow turned into a rainbow,"
said Uncle Alec, surveying the bright figure before him with great
approbation.

He did not say it, but he thought she made a much prettier picture than
Phebe at the wash-tub, for she had stuck a purple fez on her blonde
head, tied several brilliant scarfs about her waist, and put on a truly
gorgeous scarlet jacket with a golden sun embroidered on the back, a
silver moon on the front, and stars of all sizes on the sleeves. A pair
of Turkish slippers adorned her feet, and necklaces of amber, coral, and
filigree hung about her neck, while one hand held a smelling-bottle, and
the other the spicy box of oriental sweetmeats.

"I feel like a girl in the 'Arabian Nights,' and expect to find a magic
carpet or a wonderful talisman somewhere. Only I don't see how I ever
can thank you for all these lovely things," she said, stopping her
dance, as if suddenly oppressed with gratitude.

"I'll tell you how by leaving off the black clothes, that never should
have been kept so long on such a child, and wearing the gay ones I've
brought. It will do your spirits good, and cheer up this sober old
house. Won't it, auntie?"

"I think you are right, Alec, and it is fortunate that we have not
begun on her spring clothes yet, for Myra thought she ought not to wear
anything brighter than violet, and she is too pale for that."

"You just let me direct Miss Hemming how to make some of these things.
You will be surprised to see how much I know about piping hems and
gathering arm-holes and shirring biases," began Dr. Alec, patting a pile
of muslin, cloth and silk with a knowing air.

Aunt Peace and Rose laughed so that he could not display his knowledge
any farther, till they stopped, when he said good-naturedly,

"That will go a great way toward filling out the belt, so laugh away,
Morgiana, and I'll go back to my work, or I never shall be done."

"I couldn't help it, 'shirred biases' were so very funny!" Rose said,
as she turned to her box after the splendid laugh. "But really, auntie,"
she added soberly, "I feel as if I ought not to have so many nice
things. I suppose it wouldn't do to give Phebe some of them? Uncle might
not like it."

"He would not mind; but they are not suitable for Phebe. Some of the
dresses you are done with would be more useful, if they can be made over
to fit her," answered Aunt Peace in the prudent, moderate tone which is
so trying to our feelings when we indulge in little fits of charitable
enthusiasm.

"I'd rather give her new ones, for I think she is a little bit proud
and might not like old things. If she was my sister it would do, because
sisters don't mind, but she isn't, and that makes it bad, you see. I
know how I can manage beautifully; I'll adopt her!" and Rose looked
quite radiant with this new idea.

"I'm afraid you could not do it legally till you are older, but you
might see if she likes the plan, and at any rate you can be very kind to
her, for in one sense we are all sisters, and should help one another."

The sweet old face looked at her so kindly that Rose was fired with a
desire to settle the matter at once, and rushed away to the kitchen,
just as she was. Phebe was there, polishing up the antique andirons so
busily that she started when a voice cried out: "Smell that, taste this,
and look at me!"

Phebe sniffed attar of rose, crunched the "Lump of Delight" tucked into
her mouth, and stared with all her eyes at little Morgiana prancing
about the room like a brilliant paroquet.

"My stars, ain't you splendid!" was all she could say, holding up two
dusty hands.

"I've got heaps of lovely things upstairs, and I'll show them all to
you, and I'd go halves, only auntie thinks they wouldn't be useful, so
I shall give you something else; and you won't mind, will you? because I
want to adopt you as Arabella was in the story. Won't that be nice?"

"Why, Miss Rose, have you lost your wits?"

No wonder Phebe asked, for Rose talked very fast, and looked so odd in
her new costume, and was so eager she could not stop to explain. Seeing
Phebe's bewilderment, she quieted down and said, with a pretty air of
earnestness,

"It isn't fair that I should have so much and you so little, and I want
to be as good to you as if you were my sister, for Aunt Peace says we
are all sisters really. I thought if I adopted you as much as I can now,
it would be nicer. Will you let me, please?"

To Rose's great surprise, Phebe sat down on the floor and hid her face
in her apron for a minute without answering a word.

"Oh, dear, now she's offended, and I don't know what to do," thought
Rose, much discouraged by this reception of her offer.

"Please, forgive me; I didn't mean to hurt your feelings, and hope you
won't think--" she faltered presently, feeling that she must undo the
mischief, if possible.

But Phebe gave her another surprise, by dropping the apron and showing
a face all smiles, in spite of tears in the eyes, as she put both arms
round Rose and said, with a laugh and sob,

"I think you are the dearest girl in the world, and I'll let you do
anything you like with me."

"Then you do like the plan? You didn't cry because I seemed to be kind
of patronising? I truly didn't mean to be," cried Rose, delighted.

"I guess I do like it! and cried because no one was ever so good to me
before, and I couldn't help it. As for patronising, you may walk on me
if you want to, and I won't mind," said Phebe, in a burst of gratitude,
for the words, "we are sisters" went straight to her lonely heart and
nestled there.

"Well, now, we can play I'm a good sprite out of the box, or, what is
better, a fairy godmother come down the chimney, and you are Cinderella,
and must say what you want," said Rose, trying to put the question
delicately.

Phebe understood that, for she had a good deal of natural refinement,
though she did come from the poor-house.

"I don't feel as if I wanted anything now, Miss Rose, but to find some
way of thanking you for all you've done," she said, rubbing off a tear
that went rolling down the bridge of her nose in the most unromantic
way.

"Why, I haven't done anything but given you a bit of candy! Here, have
some more, and eat 'em while you work, and think what I can do. I must
go and clear up, so good-bye, and don't forget I've adopted you."

"You've given me sweeter things than candy, and I'm not likely to forget
it." And carefully wiping off the brick-dust, Phebe pressed the little
hand Rose offered warmly in both her hard ones, while the black eyes
followed the departing visitor with a grateful look that made them very
soft and bright.



Chapter 6--Uncle Alec's Room

Soon after dinner, and before she had got acquainted with half her
new possessions, Dr. Alec proposed a drive, to carry round the first
instalment of gifts to the aunts and cousins. Rose was quite ready to
go, being anxious to try a certain soft burnous from the box, which
not only possessed a most engaging little hood, but had funny tassels
bobbing in all directions.

The big carriage was full of parcels, and even Ben's seat was loaded
with Indian war clubs, a Chinese kite of immense size, and a pair of
polished ox-horns from Africa. Uncle Alec, very blue as to his clothes,
and very brown as to his face, sat bolt upright, surveying well
known places with interest, while Rose, feeling unusually elegant and
comfortable, leaned back folded in her soft mantle, and played she was
an Eastern princess making a royal progress among her subjects.

At three of the places their calls were brief, for Aunt Myra's catarrh
was unusually bad; Aunt Clara had a room full of company; and Aunt
Jane showed such a tendency to discuss the population, productions, and
politics of Europe, Asia and Africa, that even Dr. Alec was dismayed,
and got away as soon as possible.

"Now we will have a good time! I do hope the boys will be at home," said
Rose, with a sigh of relief, as they wound yet higher up the hill to
Aunt Jessie's.

"I left this for the last call, so that we might find the lads just in
from school. Yes, there is Jamie on the gate watching for us; now you'll
see the Clan gather; they are always swarming about together."

The instant Jamie saw the approaching guests he gave a shrill whistle,
which was answered by echoes from meadow, house and barn, as the cousins
came running from all directions, shouting, "Hooray for Uncle Alec!"
They went at the carriage like highwaymen, robbed it of every parcel,
took the occupants prisoners, and marched them into the house with great
exultation.

"Little Mum! little Mum! here they are with lots of goodies! Come down
and see the fun right away! Quick!" bawled Will and Geordie amidst a
general ripping off of papers and a reckless cutting of strings that
soon turned the tidy room into a chaos.

Down came Aunt Jessie with her pretty cap half on, but such a beaming
face below it that one rather thought the fly-away head-gear an
improvement than otherwise. She had hardly time to greet Rose and the
doctor before the boys were about her, each clamouring for her to see
his gift and rejoice over it with him, for "little Mum" went halves in
everything. The great horns skirmished about her as if to toss her to
the ceiling; the war clubs hurtled over her head as if to annihilate
her; an amazing medley from the four quarters of the globe filled her
lap, and seven excited boys all talked to her at once.

But she liked it; oh dear, yes! and sat smiling, admiring, and
explaining, quite untroubled by the din, which made Rose cover up her
ears and Dr. Alec threaten instant flight if the riot was not quelled.
That threat produced a lull, and while the uncle received thanks in one
corner, the aunt had some little confidences made to her in the other.

"Well, dear, and how are things going with you now? Better, I hope, than
they were a week ago."

"Aunt Jessie, I think I'm going to be very happy, now uncle has come.
He does the queerest things, but he is so good to me I can't help
loving him"; and, nestling closer to little Mum, Rose told all that had
happened, ending with a rapturous account of the splendid box.

"I am very glad, dear. But, Rose, I must warn you of one thing; don't
let uncle spoil you."

"But I like to be spoilt, auntie."

"I don't doubt it; but if you turn out badly when the year is over he
will be blamed, and his experiment prove a failure. That would be a
pity, wouldn't it? when he wants to do so much for you, and can do it if
his kind heart does not get in the way of his good judgment."

"I never thought of that, and I'll try not to be spoilt. But how can I
help it?" asked Rose anxiously.

"By not complaining of the wholesome things he wants you to do; by
giving him cheerful obedience as well as love; and even making some
small sacrifices for his sake."

"I will, I truly will! and when I get in a worry about things may I come
to you? Uncle told me to, and I feel as if I shouldn't be afraid."

"You may, darling; this is the place where little troubles are best
cured, and this is what mothers are for, I fancy"; and Aunt Jessie drew
the curly head to her shoulder with a tender look that proved how well
she knew what medicine the child most needed.

It was so sweet and comfortable that Rose sat still enjoying it till a
little voice said,

"Mamma, don't you think Pokey would like some of my shells? Rose gave
Phebe some of her nice things, and it was very good of her. Can I?"

"Who is Pokey?" asked Rose, popping up her head, attracted by the odd
name.

"My dolly; do you want to see her?" asked Jamie, who had been much
impressed by the tale of adoption he had overheard.

"Yes; I'm fond of dollies, only don't tell the boys, or they will laugh
at me."

"They don't laugh at me, and they play with my dolly a great deal; but
she likes me best"; and Jamie ran away to produce his pet.

"I brought my old doll, but I keep her hidden because I am too big to
play with her, and yet I can't bear to throw her away, I'm so fond of
her," said Rose, continuing her confidences in a whisper.

"You can come and play with Jamie's whenever you like, for we believe in
dollies up here," began Aunt Jessie, smiling to herself as if something
amused her.

Just then Jamie came back, and Rose understood the smile, for his dolly
proved to be a pretty four-year-old little girl, who trotted in as fast
as her fat legs would carry her, and making straight for the shells,
scrambled up an armful, saying, with a laugh that showed her little
white teeth,

"All for Dimmy and me, for Dimmy and me!"

"That's my dolly; isn't she a nice one?" asked Jamie, proudly surveying
his pet with his hands behind him and his short legs rather far apart a
manly attitude copied from his brothers.

"She is a dear dolly. But why call her Pokey?" asked Rose, charmed with
the new plaything.

"She is such an inquisitive little body she is always poking that mite
of a nose into everything; and as Paul Pry did not suit, the boys fell
to calling her Pokey. Not a pretty name, but very expressive."

It certainly was, for, having examined the shells, the busy tot laid
hold of everything she could find, and continued her researches till
Archie caught her sucking his carved ivory chessmen to see if they were
not barley sugar. Rice paper pictures were also discovered crumpled up
in her tiny pocket, and she nearly smashed Will's ostrich egg by trying
to sit upon it.

"Here, Jim, take her away; she's worse than the puppies, and we can't
have her round," commanded the elder brother, picking her up and handing
her over to the little fellow, who received her with open arms and the
warning remark,

"You'd better mind what you do, for I'm going to 'dopt Pokey like
Rose did Phebe, and then you'll have to be very good to her, you big
fellows."

"'Dopt away, baby, and I'll give you a cage to keep her in, or you won't
have her long, for she is getting worse than a monkey"; and Archie went
back to his mates, while Aunt Jessie, foreseeing a crisis, proposed that
Jamie should take his dolly home, as she was borrowed, and it was time
her visit ended.

"My dolly is better than yours, isn't she? 'cause she can walk and talk
and sing and dance, and yours can't do anything, can she?" asked Jamie
with pride, as he regarded his Pokey, who just then had been moved to
execute a funny little jig and warble the well-known couplet,

    "'Puss-tat, puss-tat, where you been?'
     'I been Lunnin, to saw a Tween."'

After which superb display she retired, escorted by Jamie, both making a
fearful din blowing on conch shells.

"We must tear ourselves away, Rose, because I want to get you home
before sunset. Will you come for a drive, Jessie?" said Dr. Alec, as the
music died away in the distance.

"No, thank you; but I see the boys want a scamper, so, if you don't
mind, they may escort you home, but not go in. That is only allowed on
holidays."

The words were hardly out of Aunt Jessie's mouth when Archie said, in a
tone of command,

"Pass the word, lads. Boot and saddle, and be quick about it."

"All right!" And in a moment not a vestige of boy remained but the
litter on the floor.

The cavalcade went down the hill at a pace that made Rose cling to her
uncle's arm, for the fat old horses got excited by the antics of the
ponies careering all about them, and went as fast as they could pelt,
with the gay dog-cart rattling in front, for Archie and Charlie scorned
shelties since this magnificent equipage had been set up. Ben enjoyed
the fun, and the lads cut up capers till Rose declared that "circus" was
the proper name for them after all.

When they reached the house they dismounted, and stood, three on each
side the steps, in martial attitudes, while her ladyship was handed out
with great elegance by Uncle Alec. Then the Clan saluted, mounted at
word of command, and with a wild whoop tore down the avenue in what they
considered the true Arab style.

"That was splendid, now it is safely ended," said Rose, skipping up
the steps with her head over her shoulder to watch the dear tassels bob
about.

"I shall get you a pony as soon as you are a little stronger," said Dr.
Alec, watching her with a smile.

"Oh, I couldn't ride one of those horrid, frisky little beasts! They
roll their eyes and bounce about so, I should die of fright," cried
Rose, clasping her hands tragically.

"Are you a coward?"

"About horses I am."

"Never mind, then; come and see my new room"; and he led the way
upstairs without another word.

As Rose followed she remembered her promise to Aunt Jessie, and was
sorry she had objected so decidedly. She was a great deal more sorry
five minutes later, and well she might be.

"Now, take a good look, and tell me what you think of it," said Dr.
Alec, opening the door and letting her enter before him, while Phebe was
seen whisking down the backstairs with a dust-pan.

Rose walked to the middle of the room, stood still, and gazed about her
with eyes that brightened as they looked, for all was changed.

This chamber had been built out over the library to suit some fancy, and
had been unused for years, except at Christmas times, when the old house
overflowed. It had three windows one to the east, that overlooked the
bay; one to the south, where the horse-chestnuts waved their green
fans; and one to the west, towards the hill and the evening sky. A ruddy
sunset burned there now, filling the room with an enchanted glow; the
soft murmur of the sea was heard, and a robin chirped "Good-night!"
among the budding trees.

Rose saw and heard these things first, and felt their beauty with a
child's quick instinct; then her eye took in the altered aspect of the
room, once so shrouded, still and solitary, now so full of light and
warmth and simple luxury.

India matting covered the floor, with a gay rug here and there;
the antique andirons shone on the wide hearth, where a cheery blaze
dispelled the dampness of the long-closed room. Bamboo lounges and
chairs stood about, and quaint little tables in cosy corners; one
bearing a pretty basket, one a desk, and on a third lay several
familiar-looking books. In a recess stood a narrow white bed, with a
lovely Madonna hanging over it. The Japanese screen half-folded back
showed a delicate toilet service of blue and white set forth on a marble
slab, and near by was the great bath-pan, with Turkish towels and a
sponge as big as Rose's head.

"Uncle must love cold water like a duck," she thought, with a shiver.

Then her eye went on to the tall cabinet, where a half-open door
revealed a tempting array of the drawers, shelves and "cubby holes,"
which so delight the hearts of children.

"What a grand place for my new things," she thought, wondering what her
uncle kept in that cedar retreat.

"Oh me, what a sweet toilet table!" was her next mental exclamation, as
she approached this inviting spot.

A round old-fashioned mirror hung over it, with a gilt eagle a-top,
holding in his beak the knot of blue ribbon that tied up a curtain
of muslin falling on either side of the table, where appeared little
ivory-handled brushes, two slender silver candle-sticks, a porcelain
match-box, several pretty trays for small matters, and, most imposing of
all, a plump blue silk cushion, coquettishly trimmed with lace, and pink
rose-buds at the corners.

That cushion rather astonished Rose; in fact, the whole table did, and
she was just thinking, with a sly smile,

"Uncle is a dandy, but I never should have guessed it," when he opened
the door of a large closet, saying, with a careless wave of the hand,

"Men like plenty of room for their rattle-traps; don't you think that
ought to satisfy me?"

Rose peeped in and gave a start, though all she saw was what one usually
finds in closets clothes and boots, boxes and bags. Ah! but you see
these clothes were small black and white frocks; the row of little boots
that stood below had never been on Dr. Alec's feet; the green bandbox
had a gray veil straying out of it, and yes! the bag hanging on the door
was certainly her own piece-bag, with a hole in one corner. She gave
a quick look round the room and understood now why it had seemed too
dainty for a man, why her Testament and Prayer Book were on the table
by the bed, and what those rose-buds meant on the blue cushion. It came
upon her in one delicious burst that this little paradise was all for
her, and, not knowing how else to express her gratitude, she caught Dr.
Alec round the neck, saying impetuously,

"O uncle, you are too good to me! I'll do anything you ask me; ride wild
horses and take freezing baths and eat bad-tasting messes, and let my
clothes hang on me, to show how much I thank you for this dear, sweet,
lovely room!"

"You like it, then? But why do you think it is yours, my lass?" asked
Dr. Alec, as he sat down looking well pleased, and drew his excited
little niece to his knee.

"I don't think, I know it is for me; I see it in your face, and I feel
as if I didn't half deserve it. Aunt Jessie said you would spoil me, and
I must not let you. I'm afraid this looks like it, and perhaps oh me!
perhaps I ought not to have this beautiful room after all!" and Rose
tried to look as if she could be heroic enough to give it up if it was
best.

"I owe Mrs. Jessie one for that," said Dr. Alec, trying to frown, though
in his secret soul he felt that she was quite right. Then he smiled that
cordial smile, which was like sunshine on his brown face, as he said,

"This is part of the cure, Rose, and I put you here that you might take
my three great remedies in the best and easiest way. Plenty of sun,
fresh air, and cold water; also cheerful surroundings, and some work;
for Phebe is to show you how to take care of this room, and be your
little maid as well as friend and teacher. Does that sound hard and
disagreeable to you, dear?"

"No, sir; very, very pleasant, and I'll do my best to be a good patient.
But I really don't think anyone could be sick in this delightful
room," she said, with a long sigh of happiness as her eye went from one
pleasant object to another.

"Then you like my sort of medicine better than Aunt Myra's, and don't
want to throw it out of the window, hey?"



Chapter 7--A Trip to China

"Come, little girl, I've got another dose for you. I fancy you won't
take it as well as you did the last, but you will like it better after a
while," said Dr. Alec, about a week after the grand surprise.

Rose was sitting in her pretty room, where she would gladly have spent
all her time if it had been allowed; but she looked up with a smile, for
she had ceased to fear her uncle's remedies, and was always ready to try
a new one. The last had been a set of light gardening tools, with which
she had helped him put the flower-beds in order, learning all sorts of
new and pleasant things about the plants as she worked, for, though she
had studied botany at school, it seemed very dry stuff compared with
Uncle Alec's lively lesson.

"What is it now?" she asked, shutting her work-box without a murmur.

"Salt-water."

"How must I take it?"

"Put on the new suit Miss Hemming sent home yesterday, and come down to
the beach; then I'll show you."

"Yes, sir," answered Rose obediently, adding to herself, with a shiver,
as he went off: "It is too early for bathing, so I know it is something
to do with a dreadful boat."

Putting on the new suit of blue flannel, prettily trimmed with white,
and the little sailor-hat with long streamers, diverted her mind from
the approaching trial, till a shrill whistle reminded her that her uncle
was waiting. Away she ran through the garden, down the sandy path, out
upon the strip of beach that belonged to the house, and here she found
Dr. Alec busy with a slender red and white boat that lay rocking on the
rising tide.

"That is a dear little boat; and 'Bonnie Belle' is a pretty name," she
said, trying not to show how nervous she felt.

"It is for you; so sit in the stern and learn to steer, till you are
ready to learn to row."

"Do all boats wiggle about in that way?" she asked, lingering as if to
tie her hat more firmly.

"Oh, yes, pitch about like nutshells when the sea is a bit rough,"
answered her sailor uncle, never guessing her secret woe.

"Is it rough to-day?"

"Not very; it looks a trifle squally to the eastward, but we are all
right till the wind changes. Come."

"Can you swim, uncle?" asked Rose, clutching at his arm as he took her
hand.

"Like a fish. Now then."

"Oh, please hold me very tight till I get there! Why do you have the
stern so far away?" and, stifling several squeaks of alarm in her
passage, Rose crept to the distant seat, and sat there holding on with
both hands and looking as if she expected every wave to bring a sudden
shipwreck.

Uncle Alec took no notice of her fear, but patiently instructed her in
the art of steering, till she was so absorbed in remembering which was
starboard and which larboard, that she forgot to say "OW!" every time a
big wave slapped against the boat.

"Now where shall we go?" she asked, as the wind blew freshly in her
face, and a few, long swift strokes sent them half across the little
bay.

"Suppose we go to China?"

"Isn't that rather a long voyage?"

"Not as I go. Steer round the Point into the harbour, and I'll give you
a glimpse of China in twenty minutes or so."

"I should like that!" and Rose sat wondering what he meant, while she
enjoyed the new sights all about her.

Behind them the green Aunt-hill sloped gently upward to the grove at
the top, and all along the seaward side stood familiar houses, stately,
cosy, or picturesque. As they rounded the Point, the great bay opened
before them full of shipping, and the city lay beyond, its spires rising
above the tall masts with their gay streamers.

"Are we going there?" she asked, for she had never seen this aspect of
the rich and busy old city before.

"Yes. Uncle Mac has a ship just in from Hong Kong, and I thought you
would like to go and see it."

"Oh, I should. I love dearly to go poking about in the warehouses with
Uncle Mac; everything is so curious and new to me; and I'm specially
interested in China because you have been there."

"I'll show you two genuine Chinamen who have just arrived. You will like
to welcome Whang Lo and Fun See, I'm sure."

"Don't ask me to speak to them, uncle; I shall be sure to laugh at the
odd names and the pig-tails and the slanting eyes. Please let me just
trot round after you; I like that best."

"Very well; now steer toward the wharf where the big ship with the queer
flag is. That's the 'Rajah,' and we will go aboard if we can."

In among the ships they went, by the wharves where the water was green
and still, and queer barnacles grew on the slippery piles. Odd smells
saluted her nose, and odd sights met her eyes, but Rose liked it all,
and played she was really landing in Hong Kong when they glided up to
the steps in the shadow of the tall "Rajah." Boxes and bales were rising
out of the hold and being carried into the warehouse by stout porters,
who tugged and bawled and clattered about with small trucks, or worked
cranes with iron claws that came down and clutched heavy weights,
whisking them aloft to where wide doors like mouths swallowed them up.

Dr. Alec took her aboard the ship, and she had the satisfaction of
poking her inquisitive little nose into every available corner, at the
risk of being crushed, lost, or drowned.

"Well, child, how would you like to take a voyage round the world with
me in a jolly old craft like this?" asked her uncle, as they rested a
minute in the captain's cabin.

"I should like to see the world, but not in such a small, untidy, smelly
place as this. We would go in a yacht all clean and comfortable;
Charlie says that is the proper way," answered Rose, surveying the close
quarters with little favour.

"You are not a true Campbell if you don't like the smell of tar and
salt-water, nor Charlie either, with his luxurious yacht. Now come
ashore and chin-chin with the Celestials."

After a delightful progress through the great warehouse, peeping and
picking as they went, they found Uncle Mac and the yellow gentlemen in
his private room, where samples, gifts, curiosities, and newly arrived
treasures of all sorts were piled up in pleasing pro-fusion and
con-fusion.

As soon as possible Rose retired to a corner, with a porcelain god
on one side, a green dragon on the other, and, what was still more
embarrassing, Fun See sat on a tea-chest in front, and stared at her
with his beady black eyes till she did not know where to look.

Mr. Whang Lo was an elderly gentleman in American costume, with his
pig-tail neatly wound round his head. He spoke English, and was talking
busily with Uncle Mac in the most commonplace way so Rose considered him
a failure. But Fun See was delightfully Chinese from his junk-like shoes
to the button on his pagoda hat; for he had got himself up in style, and
was a mass of silk jackets and slouchy trousers. He was short and fat,
and waddled comically; his eyes were very "slanting," as Rose said; his
queue was long, so were his nails; his yellow face was plump and shiny,
and he was altogether a highly satisfactory Chinaman.

Uncle Alec told her that Fun See had come out to be educated and could
only speak a little pigeon English; so she must be kind to the poor
fellow, for he was only a lad, though he looked nearly as old as Mr.
Whang Lo. Rose said she would be kind; but had not the least idea how to
entertain the queer guest, who looked as if he had walked out of one of
the rice-paper landscapes on the wall, and sat nodding at her so like a
toy Mandarin that she could hardly keep sober.

In the midst of her polite perplexity, Uncle Mac saw the two young
people gazing wistfully at one another, and seemed to enjoy the joke
of this making acquaintance under difficulties. Taking a box from his
table, he gave it to Fun See, with an order that seemed to please him
very much.

Descending from his perch, he fell to unpacking it with great neatness
and despatch, while Rose watched him, wondering what was going to
happen. Presently, out from the wrappings came a teapot, which caused
her to clasp her hands with delight, for it was made in the likeness of
a plump little Chinaman. His hat was the cover, his queue the handle,
and his pipe the nose. It stood upon feet in shoes turned up at the
toes, and the smile on the fat, sleepy face was so like that on Fun's
when he displayed the teapot, that Rose couldn't help laughing, which
pleased him much.

Two pretty cups with covers, and a fine scarlet tray completed the
set, and made one long to have a "dish of tea," even in Chinese style,
without cream or sugar.

When he had arranged them on a little table before her, Fun signified in
pantomime that they were hers, from her uncle. She returned her thanks
in the same way, whereupon he returned to his tea-chest, and, having
no other means of communication, they sat smiling and nodding at one
another in an absurd sort of way till a new idea seemed to strike
Fun. Tumbling off his seat, he waddled away as fast as his petticoats
permitted, leaving Rose hoping that he had not gone to get a roasted
rat, a stewed puppy, or any other foreign mess which civility would
oblige her to eat.

While she waited for her funny new friend, she improved her mind in a
way that would have charmed Aunt Jane. The gentlemen were talking over
all sorts of things, and she listened attentively, storing up much
of what she heard, for she had an excellent memory, and longed to
distinguish herself by being able to produce some useful information
when reproached with her ignorance.

She was just trying to impress upon her mind that Amoy was two hundred
and eighty miles from Hong Kong, when Fun came scuffling back, bearing
what she thought was a small sword, till he unfurled an immense fan, and
presented it with a string of Chinese compliments, the meaning of
which would have amused her even more than the sound, if she could have
understood it.

She had never seen such an astonishing fan, and at once became absorbed
in examining it. Of course, there was no perspective whatever, which
only gave it a peculiar charm to Rose, for in one place a lovely lady,
with blue knitting-needles in her hair, sat directly upon the spire of a
stately pagoda. In another charming view a brook appeared to flow in at
the front door of a stout gentleman's house, and out at his chimney. In
a third a zig-zag wall went up into the sky like a flash of lightning,
and a bird with two tails was apparently brooding over a fisherman whose
boat was just going aground upon the moon.

It was altogether a fascinating thing, and she would have sat wafting it
to and fro all the afternoon, to Fun's great satisfaction, if Dr. Alec's
attention had not suddenly been called to her by a breeze from the big
fan that blew his hair into his eyes, and reminded him that they must
go. So the pretty china was repacked, Rose furled her fan, and with
several parcels of choice teas for the old ladies stowed away in Dr.
Alec's pockets, they took their leave, after Fun had saluted them with
"the three bendings and the nine knockings," as they salute the Emperor,
or "Son of Heaven," at home.

"I feel as if I had really been to China, and I'm sure I look so," said
Rose, as they glided out of the shadow of the "Rajah."

She certainly did, for Mr. Whang Lo had given her a Chinese umbrella;
Uncle Alec had got some lanterns to light up her balcony; the great fan
lay in her lap, and the tea-set reposed at her feet.

"This is not a bad way to study geography, is it?" asked her uncle, who
had observed her attention to the talk.

"It is a very pleasant way, and I really think I have learned more about
China to-day than in all the lessons I had at school, though I used to
rattle off the answers as fast as I could go. No one explained anything
to us, so all I remember is that tea and silk come from there, and the
women have little bits of feet. I saw Fun looking at mine, and he must
have thought them perfectly immense," answered Rose, surveying her stout
boots with sudden contempt.

"We will have out the maps and the globe, and I'll show you some of my
journeys, telling stories as we go. That will be next best to doing it
actually."

"You are so fond of travelling, I should think it would be very dull for
you here, uncle. Do you know, Aunt Plenty says she is sure you will be
off in a year or two."

"Very likely."

"Oh, me! what shall I do then?" sighed Rose, in a tone of despair that
made Uncle Alec's face brighten with a look of genuine pleasure as he
said significantly,

"Next time I go I shall take my little anchor with me. How will that
suit?"

"Really, uncle?"

"Really, niece."

Rose gave a little bounce of rapture which caused the boat to "wiggle"
in a way that speedily quieted her down. But she sat beaming joyfully
and trying to think which of some hundred questions she would ask first,
when Dr. Alec said, pointing to a boat that was coming up behind them in
great style,

"How well those fellows row! Look at them, and take notes for your own
use by and by."

The "Stormy Petrel" was manned by half a dozen jaunty looking sailors,
who made a fine display of blue shirts and shiny hats, with stars and
anchors in every direction.

"How beautifully they go, and they are only boys. Why, I do believe they
are our boys! Yes, I see Charlie laughing over his shoulder. Row, uncle,
row! Oh, please do, and not let them catch up with us!" cried Rose, in
such a state of excitement that the new umbrella nearly went overboard.

"All right, here we go!" and away they did go with a long steady sweep
of the oars that carried the "Bonnie Belle" through the water with a
rush.

The lads pulled their prettiest, but Dr. Alec would have reached the
Point first, if Rose, in her flurry, had not retarded him by jerking the
rudder ropes in a most unseamanlike way, and just as she got right again
her hat blew off. That put an end to the race, and while they were still
fishing for the hat the other boat came alongside, with all the oars in
the air, and the jolly young tars ready for a frolic.

"Did you catch a crab, uncle?"

"No, a blue-fish," he answered, as the dripping hat was landed on a seat
to dry.

"What have you been doing?"

"Seeing Fun."

"Good for you, Rose! I know what you mean. We are going to have him up
to show us how to fly the big kite, for we can't get the hang of it.
Isn't he great fun, though?"

"No, little Fun."

"Come, stop joking, and show us what you've got."

"You'd better hoist that fan for a sail."

"Lend Dandy your umbrella; he hates to burn his pretty nose."

"I say, uncle, are you going to have a Feast of Lanterns?"

"No, I'm going to have a feast of bread and butter, for it's tea-time.
If that black cloud doesn't lie, we shall have a gust before long,
so you had better get home as soon as you can, or your mother will be
anxious, Archie."

"Ay, ay, skipper. Good-night, Rose; come out often, and we'll teach you
all there is to know about rowing," was Charlie's modest invitation.

Then the boats parted company, and across the water from the "Petrel's"
crew came a verse from one of the Nonsense songs in which the boys
delighted.

    "Oh, Timballoo! how happy we are,
     We live in a sieve and a crockery jar!
     And all night long, in the starlight pale,
     We sail away, with a pea-green sail,
     And whistle and warble a moony song
     To the echoing sound of a coppery gong.
     Far and few, far and few
     Are the lands where the Jumblies live;
     Their heads are green, and their hands are blue,
     And they went to sea in a sieve."



Chapter 8--And what came of it

"Uncle, could you lend me a ninepence? I'll return it as soon as I get
my pocket-money," said Rose, coming into the library in a great hurry
that evening.

"I think I could, and I won't charge any interest for it, so you need
not be in any hurry to repay me. Come back here and help me settle these
books if you have nothing pleasanter to do," answered Dr. Alec, handing
out the money with that readiness which is so delightful when we ask
small loans.

"I'll come in a minute; I've been longing to fix my books, but didn't
dare to touch them, because you always shake your head when I read."

"I shall shake my head when you write, if you don't do it better than
you did in making out this catalogue."

"I know it's bad, but I was in a hurry when I did it, and I am in one
now." And away went Rose, glad to escape a lecture.

But she got it when she came back, for Uncle Alec was still knitting
his brows over the list of books, and sternly demanded, pointing to a
tipsy-looking title staggering down the page,

"Is that meant for 'Pulverized Bones,' ma'am?"

"No, sir; it's 'Paradise Lost.'"

"Well, I'm glad to know it, for I began to think you were planning to
study surgery or farming. And what is this, if you please? 'Babies'
Aprons' is all I can make of it."

Rose looked hard at the scrawl, and presently announced, with an air of
superior wisdom,

"Oh, that's 'Bacon's Essays.'"

"Miss Power did not teach anything so old-fashioned as writing, I see.
Now look at this memorandum Aunt Plenty gave me, and see what a handsome
plain hand that is. She went to a dame-school and learnt a few useful
things well; that is better than a smattering of half a dozen so-called
higher branches, I take the liberty of thinking."

"Well, I'm sure I was considered a bright girl at school, and learned
everything I was taught. Luly and me were the first in all our classes,
and 'specially praised for our French and music and those sort of
things," said Rose, rather offended at Uncle Alec's criticism.

"I dare say; but if your French grammar was no better than your English,
I think the praise was not deserved, my dear."

"Why, uncle, we did study English grammar, and I could parse
beautifully. Miss Power used to have us up to show off when people came.
I don't see but I talk as right as most girls."

"I dare say you do, but we are all too careless about our English. Now,
think a minute, and tell me if these expressions are correct 'Luly and
me,' 'those sort of things,' and 'as right as most girls.'"

Rose pulled her pet curl and put up her lip, but had to own that she was
wrong, and said meekly, after a pause which threatened to be sulky,

"I suppose I should have said 'Luly and I,' in that case, and 'that sort
of things' and 'rightly,' though 'correctly' would have been a better
word, I guess."

"Thank you; and if you will kindly drop 'I guess,' I shall like my
little Yankee all the better. Now, see here, Rosy, I don't pretend
to set myself up for a model in anything, and you may come down on my
grammar, manners or morals as often as you think I'm wrong, and I'll
thank you. I've been knocking about the world for years, and have got
careless, but I want my girl to be what I call well-educated, even if
she studies nothing but the three 'Rs' for a year to come. Let us be
thorough, no matter how slowly we go."

He spoke so earnestly and looked so sorry to have ruffled her that
Rose went and sat on the arm of his chair, saying, with a pretty air of
penitence,

"I'm sorry I was cross, uncle, when I ought to thank you for taking
so much interest in me. I guess no, I think you are right about being
thorough, for I used to understand a great deal better when papa taught
me a few lessons than when Miss Power hurried me through so many. I
declare my head used to be such a jumble of French and German, history
and arithmetic, grammar and music, I used to feel sometimes as if it
would split. I'm sure I don't wonder it ached." And she held on to it as
if the mere memory of the "jumble" made it swim.

"Yet that is considered an excellent school, I find, and I dare say it
would be if the benighted lady did not think it necessary to cram her
pupils like Thanks-giving turkeys, instead of feeding them in a natural
and wholesome way. It is the fault with most American schools, and the
poor little heads will go on aching till we learn better."

This was one of Dr. Alec's hobbies, and Rose was afraid he was off for
a gallop, but he reined himself in and gave her thoughts a new turn by
saying suddenly, as he pulled out a fat pocket-book,

"Uncle Mac has put all your affairs into my hands now, and here is your
month's pocket money. You keep your own little accounts, I suppose?"

"Thank you. Yes, Uncle Mac gave me an account book when I went to
school, and I used to put down my expenses, but I couldn't make them go
very well, for figures are the one thing I am not at all clever about,"
said Rose, rummaging in her desk for a dilapidated little book, which
she was ashamed to show when she found it.

"Well, as figures are rather important things to most of us, and you may
have a good many accounts to keep some day, wouldn't it be wise to
begin at once and learn to manage your pennies before the pounds come to
perplex you?"

"I thought you would do all that fussy part and take care of the pounds,
as you call them. Need I worry about it? I do hate sums, so!"

"I shall take care of things till you are of age, but I mean that you
shall know how your property is managed, and do as much of it as you can
by and by; then you won't be dependent on the honesty of other people."

"Gracious me! as if I wouldn't trust you with millions of billions if I
had them," cried Rose, scandalised at the mere suggestion.

"Ah, but I might be tempted; guardians are sometimes; so you'd better
keep your eye on me, and in order to do that you must learn all about
these affairs," answered Dr. Alec, as he made an entry in his own very
neat account-book.

Rose peeped over his shoulder at it, and then turned to the arithmetical
puzzle in her hand with a sigh of despair.

"Uncle, when you add up your expenses do you ever find you have got more
money than you had in the beginning?"

"No; I usually find that I have a good deal less than I had in the
beginning. Are you troubled in the peculiar way you mention?"

"Yes; it is very curious, but I never can make things come out square."

"Perhaps I can help you," began Uncle Alec, in the most respectful tone.

"I think you had better, for if I have got to keep accounts I may as
well begin in the right way. But please don't laugh! I know I'm very
stupid, and my book is a disgrace, but I never could get it straight."
And with great trepidation, Rose gave up her funny little accounts.

It really was good in Dr. Alec not to laugh, and Rose felt deeply
grateful when he said in a mildly suggestive tone,

"The dollars and cents seem to be rather mixed, perhaps if I just
straightened them out a bit we should find things all right."

"Please do, and then show me on a fresh leaf how to make mine look nice
and ship-shape as yours do."

As Rose stood by him watching the ease with which he quickly brought
order out of chaos, she privately resolved to hunt up her old arithmetic
and perfect herself in the four first rules, with a good tug at
fractions, before she read any more fairy tales.

"Am I a rich girl, uncle?" she asked suddenly, as he was copying a
column of figures.

"Rather a poor one, I should say, since you had to borrow a ninepence."

"That was your fault, because you forgot my pocket-money. But, really,
shall I be rich by and by?"

"I am afraid you will."

"Why afraid, uncle?"

"Too much money is a bad thing."

"But I can give it away, you know; that is always the pleasantest part
of having it I think."

"I'm glad you feel so, for you can do much good with your fortune if you
know how to use it well."

"You shall teach me, and when I am a woman we will set up a school where
nothing but the three R's shall be taught, and all the children live
on oatmeal, and the girls have waists a yard round," said Rose, with a
sudden saucy smile dimpling her cheeks.

"You are an impertinent little baggage, to turn on me in that way right
in the midst of my first attempt at teaching. Never mind, I'll have an
extra bitter dose for you next time, miss."

"I knew you wanted to laugh, so I gave you a chance. Now, I will be
good, master, and do my lesson nicely."

So Dr. Alec had his laugh, and then Rose sat down and took a lesson in
accounts which she never forgot.

"Now come and read aloud to me; my eyes are tired, and it is pleasant to
sit here by the fire while the rain pours outside and Aunt Jane lectures
upstairs," said Uncle Alec, when last month's accounts had been put in
good order and a fresh page neatly begun.

Rose liked to read aloud, and gladly gave him the chapter in "Nicholas
Nickleby" where the Miss Kenwigses take their French lesson. She did her
very best, feeling that she was being criticised, and hoping that she
might not be found wanting in this as in other things.

"Shall I go on, sir?" she asked very meekly, when the chapter ended.

"If you are not tired, dear. It is a pleasure to hear you, for you read
remarkably well," was the answer that filled her heart with pride and
pleasure.

"Do you really think so, uncle? I'm so glad! Papa taught me, and I read
for hours to him, but I thought perhaps, he liked it because he was fond
of me."

"So am I; but you really do read unusually well, and I'm very glad of
it, for it is a rare accomplishment, and one I value highly. Come here
in this cosy, low chair; the light is better, and I can pull these curls
if you go too fast. I see you are going to be a great comfort as well
as a great credit to your old uncle, Rosy." And Dr. Alec drew her close
beside him with such a fatherly look and tone that she felt it would
be very easy to love and obey him, since he knew how to mix praise and
blame so pleasantly together.

Another chapter was just finished, when the sound of a carriage warned
them that Aunt Jane was about to depart. Before they could go to meet
her, however, she appeared in the doorway looking like an unusually tall
mummy in her waterproof, with her glasses shining like cat's eyes from
the depths of the hood.

"Just as I thought! petting that child to death and letting her sit up
late reading trash. I do hope you feel the weight of the responsibility
you have taken upon yourself, Alec," she said, with a certain grim sort
of satisfaction at seeing things go wrong.

"I think I have a very realising sense of it, sister Jane," answered
Dr. Alec, with a comical shrug of the shoulders and a glance at Rose's
bright face.

"It is sad to see a great girl wasting these precious hours so. Now, my
boys have studied all day, and Mac is still at his books, I've no doubt,
while you have not had a lesson since you came, I suspect."

"I've had five to-day, ma'am," was Rose's very unexpected answer.

"I'm glad to hear it; and what were they, pray?" Rose looked very demure
as she replied,

"Navigation, geography, grammar, arithmetic, and keeping my temper."

"Queer lessons, I fancy; and what have you learned from this remarkable
mixture, I should like to know?"

A naughty sparkle came into Rose's eyes as she answered, with a droll
look at her uncle,

"I can't tell you all, ma'am, but I have collected some useful
information about China, which you may like, especially the teas. The
best are Lapsing Souchong, Assam Pekoe, rare Ankoe, Flowery Pekoe,
Howqua's mixture, Scented Caper, Padral tea, black Congou, and green
Twankey. Shanghai is on the Woosung River. Hong Kong means 'Island of
Sweet waters.' Singapore is 'Lion's Town.' 'Chops' are the boats they
live in; and they drink tea out of little saucers. Principal productions
are porcelain, tea, cinnamon, shawls, tin, tamarinds and opium. They
have beautiful temples and queer gods; and in Canton is the Dwelling of
the Holy Pigs, fourteen of them, very big, and all blind."

The effect of this remarkable burst was immense, especially the fact
last mentioned. It entirely took the wind out of Aunt Jane's sails; it
was so sudden, so varied and unexpected, that she had not a word to say.
The glasses remained fixed full upon Rose for a moment, and then, with
a hasty "Oh, indeed!" the excellent lady bundled into her carriage and
drove away, somewhat bewildered and very much disturbed.

She would have been more so if she had seen her reprehensible
brother-in-law dancing a triumphal polka down the hall with Rose in
honour of having silenced the enemy's battery for once.



Chapter 9--Phebe's Secret

"Why do you keep smiling to yourself, Phebe?" asked Rose, as they were
working together one morning, for Dr. Alec considered house-work the
best sort of gymnastics for girls; so Rose took lessons of Phebe in
sweeping, dusting and bed-making.

"I was thinking about a nice little secret I know, and couldn't help
smiling."

"Shall I know it, sometime?"

"Guess you will."

"Shall I like it?"

"Oh, won't you, though!"

"Will it happen soon?"

"Sometime this week."

"I know what it is! The boys are going to have fireworks on the fourth,
and have got some surprise for me. Haven't they?"

"That's telling."

"Well, I can wait; only tell me one thing is uncle in it?"

"Of course he is; there's never any fun without him."

"Then it's all right, and sure to be nice."

Rose went out on the balcony to shake the rugs, and, having given them
a vigorous beating, hung them on the balustrade to air, while she took a
look at her plants. Several tall vases and jars stood there, and a month
of June sun and rain had worked wonders with the seeds and slips she had
planted. Morning-glories and nasturtiums ran all over the bars, making
haste to bloom. Scarlet beans and honeysuckles were climbing up from
below to meet their pretty neighbours, and the woodbine was hanging its
green festoons wherever it could cling.

The waters of the bay were dancing in the sunshine, a fresh wind stirred
the chestnut-trees with a pleasant sound, and the garden below was full
of roses, butterflies and bees. A great chirping and twittering went on
among the birds, busy with their summer house-keeping, and, far away,
the white-winged gulls were dipping and diving in the sea, where ships,
like larger birds, went sailing to and fro.

"Oh, Phebe, it's such a lovely day, I do wish your fine secret was going
to happen right away! I feel just like having a good time; don't you?"
said Rose, waving her arms as if she was going to fly.

"I often feel that way, but I have to wait for my good times, and don't
stop working to wish for 'em. There, now you can finish as soon as the
dust settles; I must go do my stairs," and Phebe trudged away with the
broom, singing as she went.

Rose leaned where she was, and fell to thinking how many good times
she had had lately, for the gardening had prospered finely, and she was
learning to swim and row, and there were drives and walks, and quiet
hours of reading and talk with Uncle Alec, and, best of all, the old
pain and ennui seldom troubled her now. She could work and play all
day, sleep sweetly all night, and enjoy life with the zest of a healthy,
happy child. She was far from being as strong and hearty as Phebe, but
she was getting on; the once pale cheeks had colour in them now, the
hands were growing plump and brown, and the belt was not much too loose.
No one talked to her about her health, and she forgot that she had "no
constitution." She took no medicine but Dr. Alec's three great remedies,
and they seemed to suit her excellently. Aunt Plenty said it was the
pills; but, as no second batch had ever followed the first, I think the
old lady was mistaken.

Rose looked worthy of her name as she stood smiling to herself over
a happier secret than any Phebe had a secret which she did not know
herself till she found out, some years later, the magic of good health.

    "'Look only,' said the brownie,
     'At the pretty gown of blue,
     At the kerchief pinned about her head,
     And at her little shoe,"'

said a voice from below, as a great cabbage-rose came flying against her
cheek.

"What is the princess dreaming about up there in her hanging-garden?"
added Dr. Alec as she flung back a morning-glory.

"I was wishing I could do something pleasant this fine day; something
very new and interesting, for the wind makes me feel frisky and gay."

"Suppose we take a pull over to the Island? I intended to go this
afternoon; but if you feel more like it now, we can be off at once."

"I do! I do! I'll come in fifteen minutes, uncle. I must just scrabble
my room to rights, for Phebe has got a great deal to do."

Rose caught up the rugs and vanished as she spoke, while Dr. Alec went
in, saying to himself, with an indulgent smile,

"It may upset things a trifle, but half a child's pleasure consists in
having their fun when they want it."

Never did duster flap more briskly than the one Rose used that day, and
never was a room "scrabbled" to rights in such haste as hers. Tables and
chairs flew into their places as if alive; curtains shook as if a gale
was blowing; china rattled and small articles tumbled about as if a
young earthquake was playing with them. The boating suit went on in a
twinkling, and Rose was off with a hop and a skip, little dreaming how
many hours it would be before she saw her pretty room again.

Uncle Alec was putting a large basket into the boat when she arrived,
and before they were off Phebe came running down with a queer, knobby
bundle done up in a water-proof.

"We can't eat half that luncheon, and I know we shall not need so many
wraps. I wouldn't lumber the boat up so," said Rose, who still had
secret scares when on the water.

"Couldn't you make a smaller parcel, Phebe?" asked Dr. Alec, eyeing the
bundle suspiciously.

"No, sir, not in such a hurry," and Phebe laughed as she gave a
particularly large knob a good poke.

"Well, it will do for ballast. Don't forget the note to Mrs. Jessie, I
beg of you."

"No, sir. I'll send it right off," and Phebe ran up the bank as if she
had wings to her feet.

"We'll take a look at the lighthouse first, for you have not been there
yet, and it is worth seeing. By the time we have done that it will be
pretty warm, and we will have lunch under the trees on the Island."

Rose was ready for anything, and enjoyed her visit to the lighthouse on
the Point very much, especially climbing up the narrow stairs and going
inside the great lantern. They made a long stay, for Dr. Alec seemed in
no hurry to go, and kept looking through his spy-glass as if he expected
to discover something remarkable on sea or land. It was past twelve
before they reached the Island, and Rose was ready for her lunch long
before she got it.

"Now this is lovely! I do wish the boys were here. Won't it be nice to
have them with us all their vacation? Why, it begins to-day, doesn't it?
Oh, I wish I'd remembered it sooner, and perhaps they would have come
with us," she said, as they lay luxuriously eating sandwiches under the
old apple-tree.

"So we might. Next time we won't be in such a hurry. I expect the lads
will take our heads off when they find us out," answered Dr. Alec,
placidly drinking cold tea.

"Uncle, I smell a frying sort of a smell," Rose said, pausing suddenly
as she was putting away the remains of the lunch half an hour later.

"So do I; it is fish, I think."

For a moment they both sat with their noses in the air, sniffing like
hounds; then Dr. Alec sprang up, saying with great decision,

"Now, this won't do! No one is permitted on this island without asking
leave. I must see who dares to fry fish on my private property."

Taking the basket on one arm and the bundle on the other, he strode away
towards the traitorous smell, looking as fierce as a lion, while Rose
marched behind under her umbrella.

"We are Robinson Crusoe and his man Friday going to see if the savages
have come," she said presently, for her fancy was full of the dear old
stories that all children love so well.

"And there they are! Two tents and two boats, as I live! These rascals
mean to enjoy themselves, that's evident."

"There ought to be more boats and no tents. I wonder where the prisoners
are?"

"There are traces of them," and Dr. Alec pointed to the heads and tails
of fishes strewn on the grass.

"And there are more," said Rose, laughing, as she pointed to a scarlet
heap of what looked like lobsters.

"The savages are probably eating their victims now; don't you hear the
knives rattle in that tent?"

"We ought to creep up and peep; Crusoe was cautious, you know, and
Friday scared out of his wits," added Rose, still keeping up the joke.

"But this Crusoe is going to pounce upon them, regardless of
consequences. If I am killed and eaten, you seize the basket and run for
the boat; there are provisions enough for your voyage home."

With that Uncle Alec slipped round to the front of the tent and, casting
in the big bundle like a bomb-shell, roared out, in a voice of thunder,

"Pirates, surrender!"

A crash, a shout, a laugh, and out came the savages, brandishing knives
and forks, chicken bones, and tin mugs, and all fell upon the intruder,
pommelling him unmercifully as they cried,

"You came too soon! We are not half ready! You've spoilt it all! Where
is Rose?"

"Here I am," answered a half-stifled voice, and Rose was discovered
sitting on the pile of red flannel bathing clothes, which she had
mistaken for lobsters, and where she had fallen in a fit of merriment
when she discovered that the cannibals were her merry cousins.

"You good-for-nothing boys! You are always bursting out upon me in some
ridiculous way, and I always get taken in because I'm not used to such
pranks. Uncle is as bad as the rest, and it's great fun," she said,
as the lads came round her, half scolding, half welcoming, and wholly
enjoying the double surprise.

"You were not to come till afternoon, and mamma was to be here to
receive you. Everything is in a mess now, except your tent; we got that
in order the first thing, and you can sit there and see us work," said
Archie, doing the honours as usual.

"Rose felt it in her bones, as Dolly says, that something was in the
wind, and wanted to be off at once. So I let her come, and should
have kept her away an hour longer if your fish had not betrayed you,"
explained Uncle Alec, subsiding from a ferocious Crusoe into his
good-natured self again.

"As this seat is rather damp, I think I'll rise," said Rose, as the
excitement lessened a little.

Several fishy hands helped her up, and Charlie said, as he scattered the
scarlet garments over the grass with an oar,

"We had a jolly good swim before dinner, and I told the Brats to spread
these to dry. Hope you brought your things, Rose, for you belong to the
Lobsters, you know, and we can have no end of fun teaching you to dive
and float and tread water."

"I didn't bring anything--" began Rose, but was interrupted by the Brats
(otherwise Will and Geordie), who appeared bearing the big bundle, so
much demoralised by its fall that a red flannel tunic trailed out at one
end and a little blue dressing-gown at the other, while the knobs proved
to be a toilet-case, rubbers, and a silver mug.

"Oh, that sly Phebe! This was the secret, and she bundled up those
things after I went down to the boat," cried Rose, with sparkling eyes.

"Guess something is smashed inside, for a bit of glass fell out,"
observed Will, as they deposited the bundle at her feet.

"Catch a girl going anywhere without a looking-glass. We haven't got one
among the whole lot of us," added Mac, with masculine scorn.

"Dandy has; I caught him touching up his wig behind the trees after our
swim," cut in Geordie, wagging a derisive finger at Steve, who promptly
silenced him by a smart rap on the head with the drum-stick he had just
polished off.

"Come, come, you lazy lubbers, fall to work, or we shall not be ready
for mamma. Take Rose's things to her tent, and tell her all about it,
Prince. Mac and Steve, you cut away and bring up the rest of the straw;
and you small chaps, clear off the table, if you have stuffed all you
can. Please, uncle, I'd like your advice about the boundary lines and
the best place for the kitchen."

Everyone obeyed the chief, and Rose was escorted to her tent by Charlie,
who devoted himself to her service. She was charmed with her quarters,
and still more so with the programme which he unfolded before her as
they worked.

"We always camp out somewhere in vacation, and this year we thought we'd
try the Island. It is handy, and our fireworks will show off well from
here."

"Shall we stay over the Fourth? Three whole days! Oh, me! what a frolic
it will be!"

"Bless your heart, we often camp for a week, we big fellows; but this
year the small chaps wanted to come, so we let them. We have great
larks, as you'll see; for we have a cave and play Captain Kidd, and have
shipwrecks, and races, and all sorts of games. Arch and I are rather
past that kind of thing now, but we do it to please the children," added
Charlie, with a sudden recollection of his sixteen years.

"I had no idea boys had such good times. Their plays never seemed a bit
interesting before. But I suppose that was because I never knew any boys
very well, or perhaps you are unusually nice ones," observed Rose, with
an artless air of appreciation that was very flattering.

"We are a pretty clever set, I fancy; but we have a good many
advantages, you see. There are a tribe of us, to begin with; then our
family has been here for ages, and we have plenty of 'spondulics,' so
we can rather lord it over the other fellows, and do as we like. There,
ma'am, you can hang your smashed glass on that nail and do up your back
hair as fine as you please. You can have a blue blanket or a red one,
and a straw pillow or an air cushion for your head, whichever you like.
You can trim up to any extent, and be as free and easy as squaws in a
wigwam, for this corner is set apart for you ladies and we never cross
the line uncle is drawing until we ask leave. Anything more I can do for
you, cousin?"

"No, thank you. I think I'll leave the rest till auntie comes, and go
and help you somewhere else, if I may."

"Yes, indeed, come on and see to the kitchen. Can you cook?" asked
Charlie, as he led the way to the rocky nook where Archie was putting up
a sail-cloth awning.

"I can make tea and toast bread."

"Well, we'll shew you how to fry fish, and make chowder. Now you just
set these pots and pans round tastefully, and sort of tidy up a bit,
for Aunt Jessie insists on doing some of the work, and I want it to be
decent here."

By four o'clock the camp was in order, and the weary workers settled
down on Lookout Rock to watch for Mrs. Jessie and Jamie, who was never
far from mamma's apron string. They looked like a flock of blue-birds,
all being in sailor rig, with blue ribbon enough flying from the seven
hats to have set up a milliner. Very tuneful blue-birds they were, too,
for all the lads sang, and the echo of their happy voices reached Mrs.
Jessie long before she saw them.

The moment the boat hove in sight up went the Island flag, and the
blue-jackets cheered lustily, as they did on every possible occasion,
like true young Americans. This welcome was answered by the flapping of
a handkerchief and the shrill "Rah! Rah! Rah!" of the one small tar
who stood in the stern waving his hat manfully, while a maternal hand
clutched him firmly in the rear.

Cleopatra landing from her golden galley never received a heartier
greeting than "Little Mum" as she was borne to her tent by the young
folk, for love of whom she smilingly resigned herself to three days of
discomfort; while Jamie immediately attached himself to Rose, assuring
her of his protection from the manifold perils which might assail them.

Taught by long experience that boys are always hungry, Aunt Jessie soon
proposed supper, and proceeded to get it, enveloped in an immense apron,
with an old hat of Archie's stuck atop of her cap. Rose helped, and
tried to be as handy as Phebe, though the peculiar style of table she
had to set made it no easy task. It was accomplished at last, and a
very happy party lay about under the trees, eating and drinking out of
anyone's plate and cup, and quite untroubled by the frequent appearance
of ants and spiders in places which these interesting insects are not
expected to adorn.

"I never thought I should like to wash dishes, but I do," said Rose,
as she sat in a boat after supper lazily rinsing plates in the sea, and
rocking luxuriously as she wiped them.

"Mum is mighty particular; we just give 'em a scrub with sand, and dust
'em off with a bit of paper. It's much the best way, I think," replied
Geordie, who reposed in another boat alongside.

"How Phebe would like this! I wonder uncle did not have her come."

"I believe he tried to, but Dolly was as cross as two sticks, and said
she couldn't spare her. I'm sorry, for we all like the Phebe bird, and
she'd chirp like a good one out here, wouldn't she?"

"She ought to have a holiday like the rest of us. It's too bad to leave
her out."

This thought came back to Rose several times that evening, for Phebe
would have added much to the little concert they had in the moonlight,
would have enjoyed the stories told, been quick at guessing the
conundrums, and laughed with all her heart at the fun. The merry going
to bed would have been the best of all, for Rose wanted someone to
cuddle under the blue blanket with her, there to whisper and giggle and
tell secrets, as girls delight to do.

Long after the rest were asleep, Rose lay wide awake, excited by the
novelty of all about her, and a thought that had come into her mind. Far
away she heard a city clock strike twelve; a large star like a mild eye
peeped in at the opening of the tent, and the soft plash of the waves
seemed calling her to come out. Aunt Jessie lay fast asleep, with Jamie
rolled up like a kitten at her feet, and neither stirred as Rose in her
wrapper crept out to see how the world looked at midnight.

She found it very lovely, and sat down on a cracker keg to enjoy it with
a heart full of the innocent sentiment of her years. Fortunately, Dr.
Alec saw her before she had time to catch cold, for coming out to tie
back the door-flap of his tent for more air, he beheld the small
figure perched in the moonlight. Having no fear of ghosts, he quietly
approached, and, seeing that she was wide awake, said, with a hand on
her shining hair,

"What is my girl doing here?"

"Having a good time," answered Rose, not at all startled.

"I wonder what she was thinking about with such a sober look."

"The story you told of the brave sailor who gave up his place on the
raft to the woman, and the last drop of water to the poor baby. People
who make sacrifices are very much loved and admired, aren't they?" she
asked, earnestly.

"If the sacrifice is a true one. But many of the bravest never are
known, and get no praise. That does not lessen their beauty, though
perhaps it makes them harder, for we all like sympathy," and Dr. Alec
sighed a patient sort of sigh.

"I suppose you have made a great many? Would you mind telling me one of
them?" asked Rose, arrested by the sigh.

"My last was to give up smoking," was the very unromantic answer to her
pensive question.

"Why did you?"

"Bad example for the boys."

"That was very good of you, uncle! Was it hard?"

"I'm ashamed to say it was. But as a wise old fellow once said, 'It is
necessary to do right; it is not necessary to be happy.'"

Rose pondered over the saying as if it pleased her, and then said, with
a clear, bright look,

"A real sacrifice is giving up something you want or enjoy very much,
isn't it?"

"Yes."

"Doing it one's own self because one loves another person very much and
wants her to be happy?"

"Yes."

"And doing it pleasantly, and being glad about it, and not minding the
praise if it doesn't come?"

"Yes, dear, that is the true spirit of self-sacrifice; you seem to
understand it, and I dare say you will have many chances in your life to
try the real thing. I hope they won't be very hard ones."

"I think they will," began Rose, and there stopped short.

"Well, make one now, and go to sleep, or my girl will be ill to-morrow,
and then the aunts will say camping out was bad for her."

"I'll go good night!" and throwing him a kiss, the little ghost
vanished, leaving Uncle Alec to pace the shore and think about some of
the unsuspected sacrifices that had made him what he was.



Chapter 10--Rose's Sacrifice

There certainly were "larks" on Campbell's Island next day, as Charlie
had foretold, and Rose took her part in them like one intent on enjoying
every minute to the utmost. There was a merry breakfast, a successful
fishing expedition, and then the lobsters came out in full force, for
even Aunt Jessie appeared in red flannel. There was nothing Uncle Alec
could not do in the water, and the boys tried their best to equal him in
strength and skill, so there was a great diving and ducking, for every
one was bent on distinguishing himself.

Rose swam out far beyond her depth, with uncle to float her back; Aunt
Jessie splashed placidly in the shallow pools, with Jamie paddling near
by like a little whale beside its mother; while the lads careered about,
looking like a flock of distracted flamingoes, and acting like the
famous dancing party in "Alice's Adventures in Wonderland."

Nothing but chowder would have lured them from their gambols in the
briny deep; that time-honoured dish demanded the concentrated action
of several mighty minds; so the "Water Babies" came ashore and fell to
cooking.

It is unnecessary to say that, when done, it was the most remarkable
chowder ever cooked, and the quantity eaten would have amazed the
world if the secret had been divulged. After this exertion a siesta
was considered the thing, and people lay about in tents or out as they
pleased, the boys looking like warriors slumbering where they fell.

The elders had just settled to a comfortable nap when the youngsters
rose, refreshed and ready for further exploits. A hint sent them all off
to the cave, and there were discovered bows and arrows, battle clubs,
old swords, and various relics of an interesting nature. Perched upon
a commanding rock, with Jamie to "splain" things to her, Rose beheld
a series of stirring scenes enacted with great vigour and historical
accuracy by her gifted relatives.

Captain Cook was murdered by the natives of Owhyhee in the most
thrilling manner. Captain Kidd buried untold wealth in the chowder
kettle at the dead of night, and shot both the trusting villains who
shared the secret of the hiding place. Sinbad came ashore there and had
manifold adventures, and numberless wrecks bestrewed the sands.

Rose considered them by far the most exciting dramas she had ever
witnessed; and when the performance closed with a grand ballet of Feejee
Islanders, whose barbaric yells alarmed the gulls, she had no words in
which to express her gratification.

Another swim at sunset, another merry evening on the rocks watching the
lighted steamers pass seaward and the pleasure-boats come into port,
ended the second day of the camping out, and sent everyone to bed early
that they might be ready for the festivities of the morrow.

"Archie, didn't I hear uncle ask you to row home in the morning for
fresh milk and things?"

"Yes, why?"

"Please, may I go too? I have something of great importance to arrange;
you know I was carried off in a hurry," Rose said in a confidential
whisper as she was bidding her cousins good night.

"I'm willing, and I guess Charlie won't mind."

"Thank you; be sure you stand by me when I ask leave in the morning, and
don't say anything till then, except to Charlie. Promise," urged Rose,
so eagerly, that Archie struck an attitude and cried dramatically,

"By yonder moon I swear!"

"Hush! it's all right, go along"; and Rose departed as if satisfied.

"She's a queer little thing, isn't she, Prince?"

"Rather a nice little thing, I think. I'm quite fond of her."

Rose's quick ears caught both remarks, and she retired to her tent,
saying to herself with sleepy dignity,

"Little thing, indeed! Those boys talk as if I was a baby. They will
treat me with more respect after to-morrow, I guess."

Archie did stand by her in the morning, and her request was readily
granted, as the lads were coming directly back. Off they went, and Rose
waved her hand to the islanders with a somewhat pensive air, for an
heroic purpose glowed within her, and the spirit of self-sacrifice was
about to be illustrated in a new and touching manner.

While the boys got the milk Rose ran to Phebe, ordered her to leave her
dishes, to put on her hat, and take a note back to Uncle Alec, which
would explain this somewhat mysterious performance. Phebe obeyed, and
when she went to the boat Rose accompanied her, telling the boys she was
not ready to go yet, but they could, some of them, come for her when she
hung a white signal on her balcony.

"But why not come now? What are you about, miss? Uncle won't like it,"
protested Charlie, in great amazement.

"Just do as I tell you, little boy; uncle will understand and explain.
Obey, as Phebe does, and ask no questions. I can have secrets as well
as other people"; and Rose walked off with an air of lofty independence
that impressed her friends immensely.

"It's some plot between uncle and herself, so we won't meddle. All
right, Phebe? Pull away, Prince"; and off they went to be received with
much surprise by the islanders.

This was the note Phebe bore:

"Dear Uncle, I am going to take Phebe's place to-day, and let her have
all the fun she can. Please don't mind what she says, but keep her, and
tell the boys to be very good to her for my sake. Don't think it is easy
to do this; it is very hard to give up the best day of all, but I feel
so selfish to have all the pleasure and Phebe none, that I wish to make
this sacrifice. Do let me, and don't laugh at it; I truly do not wish to
be praised, and I truly want to do it. Love to all from,

"Rose."

"Bless the little dear, what a generous heart she has! Shall we go after
her, Jessie, or let her have her way?" said Dr. Alec, after the first
mingled amusement and astonishment had subsided.

"Let her alone, and don't spoil her little sacrifice. She means it, I
know, and the best way in which we can show our respect for her effort
is to give Phebe a pleasant day. I'm sure she has earned it"; and Mrs.
Jessie made a sign to the boys to suppress their disappointment and
exert themselves to please Rose's guest.

Phebe was with difficulty kept from going straight home, and declared
that she should not enjoy herself one bit without Miss Rose.

"She won't hold out all day, and we shall see her paddling back before
noon, I'll wager anything," said Charlie; and the rest so strongly
inclined to his opinion that they resigned themselves to the loss of the
little queen of the revels, sure that it would be only a temporary one.

But hour after hour passed, and no signal appeared on the balcony,
though Phebe watched it hopefully. No passing boat brought the truant
back, though more than one pair of eyes looked out for the bright hair
under the round hat; and sunset came, bringing no Rose but the lovely
colour in the western sky.

"I really did not think the child had it in her. I fancied it was a bit
of sentiment, but I see she was in earnest, and means that her sacrifice
shall be a true one. Dear little soul! I'll make it up to her a thousand
times over, and beg her pardon for thinking it might be done for
effect," Dr. Alec said remorsefully, as he strained his eyes through the
dusk, fancying he saw a small figure sitting in the garden as it had sat
on the keg the night before, laying the generous little plot that had
cost more than he could guess.

"Well, she can't help seeing the fireworks, any way, unless she is
goose enough to think she must hide in a dark closet and not look," said
Archie, who was rather disgusted at Rose's seeming ingratitude.

"She will see ours capitally, but miss the big ones on the hill, unless
papa has forgotten all about them," added Steve, cutting short the
harangue Mac had begun upon the festivals of the ancients.

"I'm sure the sight of her will be better than the finest fireworks
that ever went off," said Phebe, meditating an elopement with one of the
boats if she could get a chance.

"Let things work; if she resists a brilliant invitation we give her she
will be a heroine," added Uncle Alec, secretly hoping that she would
not.

Meanwhile Rose had spent a quiet, busy day helping Dolly, waiting on
Aunt Peace, and steadily resisting Aunt Plenty's attempts to send her
back to the happy island. It had been hard in the morning to come
in from the bright world outside, with flags flying, cannon booming,
crackers popping, and everyone making ready for a holiday, and go to
washing cups, while Dolly grumbled and the aunts lamented. It was very
hard to see the day go by, knowing how gay each hour must have been
across the water, and how a word from her would take her where she
longed to be with all her heart. But it was hardest of all when evening
came and Aunt Peace was asleep, Aunt Plenty seeing a gossip in the
parlor, Dolly established in the porch to enjoy the show, and nothing
left for the little maid to do but sit alone in her balcony and watch
the gay rockets whizz up from island, hill, and city, while bands played
and boats laden with happy people went to and fro in the fitful light.

Then it must be confessed that a tear or two dimmed the blue eyes, and
once, when a very brilliant display illuminated the island for a moment,
and she fancied she saw the tents, the curly head went down on the
railing, and a wide-awake nasturtium heard a little whisper,

"I hope someone wishes I was there!"

The tears were all gone, however, and she was watching the hill and
island answer each other with what Jamie called "whizzers, whirligigs
and busters," and smiling as she thought how hard the boys must be
working to keep up such a steady fire, when Uncle Mac came walking in
upon her, saying hurriedly,

"Come, child, put on your tippet, pelisse, or whatever you call it, and
run off with me. I came to get Phebe, but aunt says she is gone, so I
want you. I've got Fun down in the boat, and I want you to go with us
and see my fireworks. Got them up for you, and you mustn't miss them, or
I shall be disappointed."

"But, uncle," began Rose, feeling as if she ought to refuse even a
glimpse of bliss, "perhaps--"

"I know, my dear, I know; aunt told me; but no one needs you now so much
as I do, and I insist on your coming," said Uncle Mac, who seemed in a
great hurry to be off, yet was unusually kind.

So Rose went and found the little Chinaman with a funny lantern waiting
to help her in and convulse her with laughter trying to express his
emotions in pigeon English. The city clocks were striking nine as they
got out into the bay, and the island fireworks seemed to be over, for no
rocket answered the last Roman candle that shone on the Aunt-hill.

"Ours are done, I see, but they are going up all round the city, and how
pretty they are," said Rose, folding her mantle about her, and surveying
the scene with pensive interest.

"Hope my fellows have not got into trouble up there," muttered Uncle
Mac, adding with a satisfied chuckle, as a spark shone out, "No; there
it goes! Look, Rosy, and see how you like this one; it was ordered
especially in honour of your coming."

Rose looked with all her eyes, and saw the spark grow into the likeness
of a golden vase, then green leaves came out, and then a crimson flower
glowing on the darkness with a splendid lustre.

"Is it a rose, uncle?" she asked, clasping her hands with delight as she
recognised the handsome flower.

"Of course it is! Look again, and guess what those are," answered Uncle
Mac, chuckling and enjoying it all like a boy.

A wreath of what looked at first like purple brooms appeared below the
vase, but Rose guessed what they were meant for, and stood straight up,
holding by his shoulder, and crying excitedly,

"Thistles, uncle, Scotch thistles! There are seven of them one for each
boy! Oh, what a joke!" and she laughed so that she plumped into the
bottom of the boat and stayed there till the brilliant spectacle was
quite gone.

"That was rather a neat thing, I flatter myself," said Uncle Mac, in
high glee at the success of his illumination. "Now, shall I leave you
on the Island or take you home again, my good little girl?" he added,
lifting her up with such a tone of approbation in his voice that Rose
kissed him on the spot.

"Home, please uncle; and I thank you very very much for the beautiful
firework you got up for me. I'm so glad I saw it; and I know I shall
dream about it," answered Rose steadily, though a wistful glance went
toward the Island, now so near that she could smell powder and see
shadowy figures flitting about.

Home they went; and Rose fell asleep saying to herself, "It was harder
than I thought, but I'm glad I did it, and I truly don't want any reward
but Phebe's pleasure."



Chapter 11--Poor Mac

Rose's sacrifice was a failure in one respect, for, though the elders
loved her the better for it, and showed that they did, the boys were not
inspired with the sudden respect which she had hoped for. In fact, her
feelings were much hurt by overhearing Archie say that he couldn't see
any sense in it; and the Prince added another blow by pronouncing her
"the queerest chicken ever seen."

It is apt to be so, and it is hard to bear; for, though we do not want
trumpets blown, we do like to have our little virtues appreciated, and
cannot help feeling disappointed if they are not.

A time soon came, however, when Rose, quite unconsciously, won not only
the respect of her cousins, but their gratitude and affection likewise.

Soon after the Island episode, Mac had a sunstroke, and was very ill
for some time. It was so sudden that everyone was startled, and for some
days the boy's life was in danger. He pulled through, however; and then,
just as the family were rejoicing, a new trouble appeared which cast a
gloom over them all.

Poor Mac's eyes gave out; and well they might, for he had abused them,
and never being very strong, they suffered doubly now.

No one dared to tell him the dark predictions of the great oculist who
came to look at them, and the boy tried to be patient, thinking that a
few weeks of rest would repair the overwork of several years.

He was forbidden to look at a book, and as that was the one thing he
most delighted in, it was a terrible affliction to the Worm. Everyone
was very ready to read to him, and at first the lads contended for this
honour. But as week after week went by, and Mac was still condemned to
idleness and a darkened room, their zeal abated, and one after the other
fell off. It was hard for the active fellows, right in the midst of
their vacation; and nobody blamed them when they contented themselves
with brief calls, running of errands, and warm expressions of sympathy.

The elders did their best, but Uncle Mac was a busy man, Aunt Jane's
reading was of a funereal sort, impossible to listen to long, and the
other aunties were all absorbed in their own cares, though they supplied
the boy with every delicacy they could invent.

Uncle Alec was a host in himself, but he could not give all his time to
the invalid; and if it had not been for Rose, the afflicted Worm
would have fared ill. Her pleasant voice suited him, her patience was
unfailing, her time of no apparent value, and her eager good-will was
very comforting.

The womanly power of self-devotion was strong in the child, and she
remained faithfully at her post when all the rest dropped away. Hour
after hour she sat in the dusky room, with one ray of light on her book,
reading to the boy, who lay with shaded eyes silently enjoying the only
pleasure that lightened the weary days. Sometimes he was peevish and
hard to please, sometimes he growled because his reader could not manage
the dry books he wished to hear, and sometimes he was so despondent that
her heart ached to see him. Through all these trials Rose persevered,
using all her little arts to please him. When he fretted, she was
patient; when he growled, she ploughed bravely through the hard pages
not dry to her in one sense, for quiet tears dropped on them now and
then; and when Mac fell into a despairing mood, she comforted him with
every hopeful word she dared to offer.

He said little, but she knew he was grateful, for she suited him better
than anyone else. If she was late, he was impatient; when she had to go,
he seemed forlorn; and when the tired head ached worst, she could always
soothe him to sleep, crooning the old songs her father used to love.

"I don't know what I should do without that child," Aunt Jane often
said.

"She's worth all those racketing fellows put together," Mac would add,
fumbling about to discover if the little chair was ready for her coming.

That was the sort of reward Rose liked, the thanks that cheered her;
and whenever she grew very tired, one look at the green shade, the curly
head so restless on the pillow, and the poor groping hands, touched her
tender heart and put new spirit into the weary voice.

She did not know how much she was learning, both from the books she read
and the daily sacrifices she made. Stories and poetry were her delight,
but Mac did not care for them; and since his favourite Greeks and Romans
were forbidden, he satisfied himself with travels, biographies, and the
history of great inventions or discoveries. Rose despised this taste
at first, but soon got interested in Livingstone's adventures, Hobson's
stirring life in India, and the brave trials and triumphs of Watt and
Arkwright, Fulton, and "Palissy, the Potter." The true, strong books
helped the dreamy girl; her faithful service and sweet patience touched
and won the boy; and long afterward both learned to see how useful those
seemingly hard and weary hours had been to them.

One bright morning, as Rose sat down to begin a fat volume entitled
"History of the French Revolution," expecting to come to great grief
over the long names, Mac, who was lumbering about the room like a blind
bear, stopped her by asking abruptly,

"What day of the month is it?"

"The seventh of August, I believe."

"More than half my vacation gone, and I've only had a week of it! I call
that hard," and he groaned dismally.

"So it is; but there is more to come, and you may be able to enjoy
that."

"May be able! I will be able! Does that old noodle think I'm going to
stay stived up here much longer?"

"I guess he does, unless your eyes get on faster than they have yet."

"Has he said anything more lately?"

"I haven't seen him, you know. Shall I begin? this looks rather nice."

"Read away; it's all one to me." And Mac cast himself down upon the old
lounge, where his heavy head felt easiest.

Rose began with great spirit, and kept on gallantly for a couple
of chapters, getting over the unpronounceable names with unexpected
success, she thought, for her listener did not correct her once, and lay
so still she fancied he was deeply interested. All of a sudden she was
arrested in the middle of a fine paragraph by Mac, who sat bolt upright,
brought both feet down with a thump, and said, in a rough, excited tone,

"Stop! I don't hear a word, and you may as well save your breath to
answer my question."

"What is it?" asked Rose, looking uneasy, for she had something on her
mind, and feared that he suspected what it was. His next words proved
that she was right.

"Now, look here, I want to know something, and you've got to tell me."

"Please, don't--" began Rose, beseechingly.

"You must, or I'll pull off this shade and stare at the sun as hard as
ever I can stare. Come now!" and he half rose, as if ready to execute
the threat.

"I will! oh, I will tell, if I know! But don't be reckless and do
anything so crazy as that," cried Rose, in great distress.

"Very well; then listen, and don't dodge, as everyone else does. Didn't
the doctor think my eyes worse the last time he came? Mother won't say,
but you shall."

"I believe he did," faltered Rose.

"I thought so! Did he say I should be able to go to school when it
begins?"

"No, Mac," very low.

"Ah!"

That was all, but Rose saw her cousin set his lips together and take
a long breath, as if she had hit him hard. He bore the disappointment
bravely, however, and asked quite steadily in a minute,

"How soon does he think I can study again?"

It was so hard to answer that! Yet Rose knew she must, for Aunt Jane had
declared she could not do it, and Uncle Mac had begged her to break the
truth to the poor lad.

"Not for a good many months."

"How many?" he asked with a pathetic sort of gruffness.

"A year, perhaps."

"A whole year! Why, I expected to be ready for college by that time."
And, pushing up the shade, Mac stared at her with startled eyes, that
soon blinked and fell before the one ray of light.

"Plenty of time for that; you must be patient now, and get them
thoroughly well, or they will trouble you again when it will be harder
to spare them," she said, with tears in her own eyes.

"I won't do it! I will study and get through somehow. It's all humbug
about taking care so long. These doctors like to keep hold of a fellow
if they can. But I won't stand it I vow I won't!" and he banged his fist
down on the unoffending pillow as if he were pommelling the hard-hearted
doctor.

"Now, Mac, listen to me," Rose said very earnestly, though her voice
shook a little and her heart ached. "You know you have hurt your eyes
reading by fire-light and in the dusk, and sitting up late, and now
you'll have to pay for it; the doctor said so. You must be careful, and
do as he tells you, or you will be blind."

"No!"

"Yes, it is true, and he wanted us to tell you that nothing but entire
rest would cure you. I know it's dreadfully hard, but we'll all help
you; I'll read all day long, and lead you, and wait upon you, and try to
make it easier."

She stopped there, for it was evident that he did not hear a sound; the
word "blind" seemed to have knocked him down, for he had buried his
face in the pillow, and lay so still that Rose was frightened. She sat
motionless for many minutes, longing to comfort him, but not knowing
how, and wishing Uncle Alec would come, for he had promised to tell Mac.

Presently, a sort of choking sound came out of the pillow, and went
straight to her heart the most pathetic sob she ever heard, for, though
it was the most natural means of relief, the poor fellow must not
indulge in it because of the afflicted eyes. The "French Revolution"
tumbled out of her lap, and, running to the sofa, she knelt down by
it, saying, with the motherly sort of tenderness girls feel for any
sorrowing creature,

"Oh, my dear, you mustn't cry! It is so bad for your poor eyes. Take
your head out of that hot pillow, and let me cool it. I don't wonder you
feel so, but please don't cry. I'll cry for you; it won't hurt me."

As she spoke she pulled away the cushion with gentle force, and saw the
green shade all crushed and stained with the few hot tears that told how
bitter the disappointment had been. Mac felt her sympathy, but, being
a boy, did not thank her for it; only sat up with a jerk, saying, as
he tried to rub away the tell-tale drops with the sleeve of his jacket,
"Don't bother; weak eyes always water. I'm all right."

But Rose cried out, and caught his arm, "Don't touch them with that
rough woollen stuff! Lie down and let me bathe them, there's a dear boy;
then there will be no harm done."

"They do smart confoundedly. I say, don't you tell the other fellows
that I made a baby of myself, will you?" he added, yielding with a sigh
to the orders of his nurse, who had flown for the eye-wash and linen
cambric handkerchief.

"Of course I won't; but anyone would be upset at the idea of being well
troubled in this way. I'm sure you bear it splendidly, and you know it
isn't half so bad when you get used to it. Besides, it is only for a
time, and you can do lots of pleasant things if you can't study. You'll
have to wear blue goggles, perhaps; won't that be funny?"

And while she was pouring out all the comfortable words she could think
of, Rose was softly bathing the eyes and dabbing the hot forehead with
lavender-water, as her patient lay quiet with a look on his face that
grieved her sadly.

"Homer was blind, and so was Milton, and they did something to be
remembered by, in spite of it," he said, as if to himself, in a solemn
tone, for even the blue goggles did not bring a smile.

"Papa had a picture of Milton and his daughters writing for him. It
was a very sweet picture, I thought," observed Rose in a serious voice,
trying to meet the sufferer on his own ground.

"Perhaps I could study if someone read and did the eye part. Do you
suppose I could, by and by?" he asked, with a sudden ray of hope.

"I dare say, if your head is strong enough. This sunstroke, you know, is
what upset you, and your brain needs rest, the doctor says."

"I'll have a talk with the old fellow next time he comes, and find out
just what I may do; then I shall know where I am. What a fool I was that
day to be stewing my brains and letting the sun glare on my book till
the letters danced before me! I see 'em now when I shut my eyes; black
balls bobbing round, and stars and all sorts of queer things. Wonder if
all blind people do?"

"Don't think about them; I'll go on reading, shall I? We shall come
to the exciting part soon, and then you'll forget all this," suggested
Rose.

"No, I never shall forget. Hang the old 'Revolution'! I don't want to
hear another word of it. My head aches, and I'm hot. Oh, wouldn't I like
to go for a pull in the 'Stormy Petrel!"' and poor Mac tossed about as
if he did not know what to do with himself.

"Let me sing, and perhaps you'll drop off; then the day will seem
shorter," said Rose, taking up a fan and sitting down beside him.

"Perhaps I shall; I didn't sleep much last night, and when I did I
dreamed like fun. See here, you tell the people that I know, and it's
all right, and I don't want them to talk about it or howl over me.
That's all; now drone away, and I'll try to sleep. Wish I could for a
year, and wake up cured."

"Oh, I wish, I wish you could!"

Rose said it so fervently that Mac was moved to grope for her apron and
hold on to a corner of it, as if it was comfortable to feel her near
him. But all he said was,

"You are a good little soul, Rosy. Give us 'The Birks'; that is a drowsy
one that always sends me off."

Quite contented with this small return for all her sympathy, Rose waved
her fan and sang, in a dreamy tone, the pretty Scotch air, the burden of
which is,

    "Bonny lassie, will ye gang, will ye gang
     To the Birks of Aberfeldie?"

Whether the lassie went or not I cannot say, but the laddie was off to
the land of Nod, in about ten minutes, quite worn out with hearing the
bad tidings and the effort to bear them manfully.



Chapter 12--"The Other Fellows"

Rose did tell "the people" what had passed, and no one "howled" over
Mac, or said a word to trouble him. He had his talk with the doctor, and
got very little comfort out of it, for he found that "just what he might
do" was nothing at all; though the prospect of some study by and by, if
all went well, gave him courage to bear the woes of the present.
Having made up his mind to this, he behaved so well that everyone was
astonished, never having suspected so much manliness in the quiet Worm.

The boys were much impressed, both by the greatness of the affliction
which hung over him and by his way of bearing it. They were very good
to him, but not always particularly wise in their attempts to cheer
and amuse; and Rose often found him much downcast after a visit of
condolence from the Clan. She still kept her place as head-nurse and
chief-reader, though the boys did their best in an irregular sort of
way. They were rather taken aback sometimes at finding Rose's services
preferred to their's, and privately confided to one another that "Old
Mac was getting fond of being molly-coddled." But they could not help
seeing how useful she was, and owning that she alone had remained
faithful a fact which caused some of them much secret compunction now
and then.

Rose felt that she ruled in that room, if nowhere else, for Aunt Jane
left a great deal to her, finding that her experience with her invalid
father fitted her for a nurse, and in a case like this, her youth was
an advantage rather than a drawback. Mac soon came to think that no one
could take care of him so well as Rose, and Rose soon grew fond of
her patient, though at first she had considered this cousin the least
attractive of the seven. He was not polite and sensible like Archie, nor
gay and handsome like Prince Charlie, nor neat and obliging like Steve,
nor amusing like the "Brats," nor confiding and affectionate like
little Jamie. He was rough, absent-minded, careless, and awkward, rather
priggish, and not at all agreeable to a dainty, beauty-loving girl like
Rose.

But when his trouble came upon him, she discovered many good things in
this cousin of hers, and learned not only to pity but to respect and
love the poor Worm, who tried to be patient, brave, and cheerful, and
found it a harder task than anyone guessed, except the little nurse, who
saw him in his gloomiest moods. She soon came to think that his friends
did not appreciate him, and upon one occasion was moved to free her mind
in a way that made a deep impression on the boys.

Vacation was almost over, and the time drawing near when Mac would be
left outside the happy school-world which he so much enjoyed. This made
him rather low in his mind, and his cousins exerted themselves to cheer
him up, especially one afternoon when a spasm of devotion seemed
to seize them all. Jamie trudged down the hill with a basket of
blackberries which he had "picked all his ownself," as his scratched
fingers and stained lips plainly testified. Will and Geordie brought
their puppies to beguile the weary hours, and the three elder lads
called to discuss baseball, cricket, and kindred subjects, eminently
fitted to remind the invalid of his privations.

Rose had gone to drive with Uncle Alec, who declared she was getting as
pale as a potato sprout, living so much in a dark room. But her thoughts
were with her boy all the while, and she ran up to him the moment she
returned, to find things in a fine state of confusion.

With the best intentions in life, the lads had done more harm than
good, and the spectacle that met Nurse Rose's eye was a trying one.
The puppies were yelping, the small boys romping, and the big boys all
talking at once; the curtains were up, the room close, berries scattered
freely about, Mac's shade half off, his cheeks flushed, his temper
ruffled, and his voice loudest of all as he disputed hotly with Steve
about lending certain treasured books which he could no longer use.

Now Rose considered this her special kingdom, and came down upon the
invaders with an energy which amazed them and quelled the riot at once.
They had never seen her roused before, and the effect was tremendous;
also comical, for she drove the whole flock of boys out of the room like
an indignant little hen defending her brood. They all went as meekly as
sheep; the small lads fled from the house precipitately, but the three
elder ones only retired to the next room, and remained there hoping for
a chance to explain and apologise, and so appease the irate young lady,
who had suddenly turned the tables and clattered them about their ears.

As they waited, they observed her proceedings through the half-open
door, and commented upon them briefly but expressively, feeling quite
bowed down with remorse at the harm they had innocently done.

"She's put the room to rights in a jiffey. What jacks we were to let
those dogs in and kick up such a row," observed Steve, after a prolonged
peep.

"The poor old Worm turns as if she was treading on him instead of
cuddling him like a pussy cat. Isn't he cross, though?" added Charlie,
as Mac was heard growling about his "confounded head."

"She will manage him; but it's mean in us to rumple him up and then
leave her to smooth him down. I'd go and help, but I don't know how,"
said Archie, looking much depressed, for he was a conscientious fellow,
and blamed himself for his want of thought.

"No, more do I. Odd, isn't it, what a knack women have for taking care
of sick folks?" and Charlie fell a-musing over this undeniable fact.

"She has been ever so good to Mac," began Steve, in a self-reproachful
tone.

"Better than his own brother, hey?" cut in Archie, finding relief for
his own regret in the delinquencies of another.

"Well, you needn't preach; you didn't any of you do any more, and you
might have, for Mac likes you better than he does me. I always fret him,
he says, and it isn't my fault if I am a quiddle," protested Steve, in
