unfairly, giving a larger share of it to the evidence which seems
favorable to the desired conclusion, a smaller to that which seems
unfavorable. It operates, too, by making him look out eagerly for reasons,
or apparent reasons, to support opinions which are conformable, or resist
those which are repugnant, to his interests or feelings; and when the
interests or feelings are common to great numbers of persons, reasons are
accepted and pass current, which would not for a moment be listened to in
that character if the conclusion had nothing more powerful than its
reasons to speak in its behalf. The natural or acquired partialities of
mankind are continually throwing up philosophical theories, the sole
recommendation of which consists in the premises they afford for proving
cherished doctrines, or justifying favorite feelings; and when any one of
these theories has been so thoroughly discredited as no longer to serve
the purpose, another is always ready to take its place. This propensity,
when exercised in favor of any widely-spread persuasion or sentiment, is
often decorated with complimentary epithets; and the contrary habit of
keeping the judgment in complete subordination to evidence, is stigmatized
by various hard names, as skepticism, immorality, coldness,
hard-heartedness, and similar expressions according to the nature of the
case. But though the opinions of the generality of mankind, when not
dependent on mere habit and inculcation, have their root much more in the
inclinations than in the intellect, it is a necessary condition to the
triumph of the moral bias that it should first pervert the understanding.
Every erroneous inference, though originating in moral causes, involves
the intellectual operation of admitting insufficient evidence as
sufficient; and whoever was on his guard against all kinds of inconclusive
evidence which can be mistaken for conclusive, would be in no danger of
being led into error even by the strongest bias. There are minds so
strongly fortified on the intellectual side, that they could not blind
themselves to the light of truth, however really desirous of doing so;
they could not, with all the inclination in the world, pass off upon
themselves bad arguments for good ones. If the sophistry of the intellect
could be rendered impossible, that of the feelings, having no instrument
to work with, would be powerless. A comprehensive classification of all
those things which, not being evidence, are liable to appear such to the
understanding, will, therefore, of itself include all errors of judgment
arising from moral causes, to the exclusion only of errors of practice
committed against better knowledge.

To examine, then, the various kinds of apparent evidence which are not
evidence at all, and of apparently conclusive evidence which do not really
amount to conclusiveness, is the object of that part of our inquiry into
which we are about to enter.

The subject is not beyond the compass of classification and comprehensive
survey. The things, indeed, which are not evidence of any given
conclusion, are manifestly endless, and this negative property, having no
dependence on any positive ones, can not be made the groundwork of a real
classification. But the things which, not being evidence, are susceptible
of being mistaken for it, are capable of a classification having reference
to the positive property which they possess of appearing to be evidence.
We may arrange them, at our choice, on either of two principles; according
to the cause which makes them appear to be evidence, not being so; or
according to the particular kind of evidence which they simulate. The
Classification of Fallacies which will be attempted in the ensuing
chapter, is founded on these considerations jointly.




                               Chapter II.


Classification Of Fallacies.


§ 1. In attempting to establish certain general distinctions which shall
mark out from one another the various kinds of Fallacious Evidence, we
propose to ourselves an altogether different aim from that of several
eminent thinkers, who have given, under the name of Political or other
Fallacies, a mere enumeration of a certain number of erroneous opinions;
false general propositions which happen to be often met with; _loci
communes_ of bad arguments on some particular subject. Logic is not
concerned with the false opinions which people happen to entertain, but
with the manner in which they come to entertain them. The question is not,
what facts have at any time been erroneously supposed to be proof of
certain other facts, but what property in the facts it was which led any
one to this mistaken supposition.

When a fact is supposed, though incorrectly, to be evidentiary of, or a
mark of, some other fact, there must be a cause of the error; the supposed
evidentiary fact must be connected in some particular manner with the fact
of which it is deemed evidentiary—must stand in some particular relation
to it, without which relation it would not be regarded in that light. The
relation may either be one resulting from the simple contemplation of the
two facts side by side with one another, or it may depend on some process
of mind, by which a previous association has been established between
them. Some peculiarity of relation, however, there must be; the fact which
can, even by the wildest aberration, be supposed to prove another fact,
must stand in some special position with regard to it; and if we could
ascertain and define that special position, we should perceive the origin
of the error.

We can not regard one fact as evidentiary of another, unless we believe
that the two are always, or in the majority of cases, conjoined. If we
believe A to be evidentiary of B, if when we see A we are inclined to
infer B from it, the reason is because we believe that wherever A is, B
also either always or for the most part exists, either as an antecedent, a
consequent, or a concomitant. If when we see A we are inclined not to
expect B—if we believe A to be evidentiary of the absence of B—it is
because we believe that where A is, B either is never, or at least seldom,
found. Erroneous conclusions, in short, no less than correct conclusions,
have an invariable relation to a general formula, either expressed or
tacitly implied. When we infer some fact from some other fact which does
not really prove it, we either have admitted, or, if we maintained
consistency, ought to admit, some groundless general proposition
respecting the conjunction of the two phenomena.

For every property, therefore, in facts, or in our mode of considering
facts, which leads us to believe that they are habitually conjoined when
they are not, or that they are not when in reality they are, there is a
corresponding kind of Fallacy; and an enumeration of fallacies would
consist in a specification of those properties in facts, and those
peculiarities in our mode of considering them, which give rise to this
erroneous opinion.

§ 2. To begin, then; the supposed connection, or repugnance, between the
two facts, may either be a conclusion from evidence (that is, from some
other proposition or propositions), or may be admitted without any such
ground; admitted, as the phrase is, on its own evidence; embraced as
self-evident, as an axiomatic truth. This gives rise to the first great
distinction, that between Fallacies of Inference and Fallacies of Simple
Inspection. In the latter division must be included not only all cases in
which a proposition is believed and held for true, literally without any
extrinsic evidence, either of specific experience or general reasoning;
but those more frequent cases in which simple inspection creates a
_presumption_ in favor of a proposition; not sufficient for belief, but
sufficient to cause the strict principles of a regular induction to be
dispensed with, and creating a predisposition to believe it on evidence
which would be seen to be insufficient if no such presumption existed.
This class, comprehending the whole of what may be termed Natural
Prejudices, and which I shall call indiscriminately Fallacies of Simple
Inspection or Fallacies _a priori_, shall be placed at the head of our
list.

Fallacies of Inference, or erroneous conclusions from supposed evidence,
must be subdivided according to the nature of the apparent evidence from
which the conclusions are drawn; or (what is the same thing) according to
the particular kind of sound argument which the fallacy in question
simulates. But there is a distinction to be first drawn, which does not
answer to any of the divisions of sound arguments, but arises out of the
nature of bad ones. We may know exactly what our evidence is, and yet draw
a false conclusion from it; we may conceive precisely what our premises
are, what alleged matters of fact, or general principles, are the
foundation of our inference; and yet, because the premises are false, or
because we have inferred from them what they will not support, our
conclusion may be erroneous. But a case, perhaps even more frequent, is
that in which the error arises from not conceiving our premises with due
clearness, that is (as shown in the preceding Book(229)), with due fixity:
forming one conception of our evidence when we collect or receive it, and
another when we make use of it; or unadvisedly, and in general
unconsciously, substituting, as we proceed, different premises in the
place of those with which we set out, or a different conclusion for that
which we undertook to prove. This gives existence to a class of fallacies
which may be justly termed (in a phrase borrowed from Bentham) Fallacies
of Confusion; comprehending, among others, all those which have their
source in language, whether arising from the vagueness or ambiguity of our
terms, or from casual associations with them.

When the fallacy is not one of Confusion, that is, when the proposition
believed, and the evidence on which it is believed, are steadily
apprehended and unambiguously expressed, there remain to be made two cross
divisions. The Apparent Evidence may be either particular facts, or
foregone generalizations; that is, the process may simulate either simple
Induction or Deduction; and again, the evidence, whether consisting of
supposed facts or of general propositions, may be false in itself, or,
being true, may fail to bear out the conclusion attempted to be founded on
it. This gives us first, Fallacies of Induction and Fallacies of
Deduction, and then a subdivision of each of these, according as the
supposed evidence is false, or true but inconclusive.

Fallacies of Induction, where the facts on which the induction proceeds
are erroneous, may be termed Fallacies of Observation. The term is not
strictly accurate, or, rather, not accurately co-extensive with the class
of fallacies which I propose to designate by it. Induction is not always
grounded on facts immediately observed, but sometimes on facts inferred;
and when these last are erroneous, the error may not be, in the literal
sense of the term, an instance of bad observation, but of bad inference.
It will be convenient, however, to make only one class of all the
inductions of which the error lies in not sufficiently ascertaining the
facts on which the theory is grounded; whether the cause of failure be
malobservation, or simple non-observation, and whether the malobservation
be direct, or by means of intermediate marks which do not prove what they
are supposed to prove. And in the absence of any comprehensive term to
denote the ascertainment, by whatever means, of the facts on which an
induction is grounded, I will venture to retain for this class of
fallacies, under the explanation now given, the title of Fallacies of
Observation.

The other class of inductive fallacies, in which the facts are correct,
but the conclusion not warranted by them, are properly denominated
Fallacies of Generalization; and these, again, fall into various
subordinate classes or natural groups, some of which will be enumerated in
their proper place.

When we now turn to Fallacies of Deduction, namely those modes of
incorrect argumentation in which the premises, or some of them, are
general propositions, and the argument a ratiocination; we may of course
subdivide these also into two species similar to the two preceding,
namely, those which proceed on false premises, and those of which the
premises, though true, do not support the conclusion. But of these
species, the first must necessarily fall under some one of the heads
already enumerated. For the error must be either in those premises which
are general propositions, or in those which assert individual facts. In
the former case it is an Inductive Fallacy, of one or the other class; in
the latter it is a Fallacy of Observation; unless, in either case, the
erroneous premise has been assumed on simple inspection, in which case the
fallacy is _a priori_. Or, finally, the premises, of whichever kind they
are, may never have been conceived in so distinct a manner as to produce
any clear consciousness by what means they were arrived at; as in the case
of what is called reasoning in a circle; and then the fallacy is one of
Confusion.

There remain, therefore, as the only class of fallacies having properly
their seat in deduction, those in which the premises of the ratiocination
do not bear out its conclusion; the various cases, in short, of vicious
argumentation, provided against by the rules of the syllogism. We shall
call these, Fallacies of Ratiocination.

§ 3. We must not, however, expect to find that men’s actual errors always,
or even commonly, fall so unmistakably under some one of these classes, as
to be incapable of being referred to any other. Erroneous arguments do not
admit of such a sharply cut division as valid arguments do. An argument
fully stated, with all its steps distinctly set out, in language not
susceptible of misunderstanding, must, if it be erroneous, be so in some
one of these five modes unequivocally; or indeed of the first four, since
the fifth, on such a supposition, would vanish. But it is not in the
nature of bad reasoning to express itself thus unambiguously. When a
sophist, whether he is imposing on himself or attempting to impose on
others, can be constrained to throw his sophistry into so distinct a form,
it needs, in a large proportion of cases, no further exposure.

In all arguments, everywhere but in the schools, some of the links are
suppressed; _a fortiori_ when the arguer either intends to deceive, or is
a lame and inexpert thinker, little accustomed to bring his reasoning
processes to any test; and it is in those steps of the reasoning which are
made in this tacit and half-conscious, or even wholly unconscious manner,
that the error oftenest lurks. In order to detect the fallacy, the
proposition thus silently assumed must be supplied; but the reasoner, most
likely, has never really asked himself what he was assuming; his confuter,
unless permitted to extort it from him by the Socratic mode of
interrogation, must himself judge what the suppressed premise ought to be
in order to support the conclusion. And hence, in the words of Archbishop
Whately, “it must be often a matter of doubt, or, rather, of arbitrary
choice, not only to which genus each _kind_ of fallacy should be referred,
but even to which kind to refer any one _individual_ fallacy; for since,
in any course of argument, _one_ premise is usually suppressed, it
frequently happens in the case of a fallacy, that the hearers are left to
the alternative of supplying _either_ a premise which is _not true_, or
_else_, one which _does not prove_ the conclusion; _e.g._, if a man
expatiates on the distress of the country, and thence argues that the
government is tyrannical, we must suppose him to assume _either_ that
‘every distressed country is under a tyranny,’ which is a manifest
falsehood, _or_ merely that ‘every country under a tyranny is distressed,’
which, however true, proves nothing, the middle term being undistributed.”
The former would be ranked, in our distribution, among fallacies of
generalization, the latter among those of ratiocination. “Which are we to
suppose the speaker meant us to understand? Surely” (if he understood
himself) “just whichever each of his hearers might happen to prefer: some
might assent to the false premise; others allow the unsound syllogism.”

Almost all fallacies, therefore, might in strictness be brought under our
fifth class, Fallacies of Confusion. A fallacy can seldom be absolutely
referred to any of the other classes; we can only say, that if all the
links were filled up which should be capable of being supplied in a valid
argument, it would either stand thus (forming a fallacy of one class), or
thus (a fallacy of another); or at furthest we may say, that the
conclusion is most _likely_ to have originated in a fallacy of such and
such a class. Thus, in the illustration just quoted, the error committed
may be traced with most probability to a fallacy of generalization; that
of mistaking an uncertain mark, or piece of evidence, for a certain one;
concluding from an effect to some one of its possible causes, when there
are others which would have been equally capable of producing it.

Yet, though the five classes run into each other, and a particular error
often seems to be arbitrarily assigned to one of them rather than to any
of the rest, there is considerable use in so distinguishing them. We shall
find it convenient to set apart, as Fallacies of Confusion, those of which
confusion is the most obvious characteristic; in which no other cause can
be assigned for the mistake committed, than neglect or inability to state
the question properly, and to apprehend the evidence with definiteness and
precision. In the remaining four classes I shall place not only the cases
in which the evidence is clearly seen to be what it is, and yet a wrong
conclusion drawn from it, but also those in which, although there be
confusion, the confusion is not the sole cause of the error, but there is
some shadow of a ground for it in the nature of the evidence itself. And
in distributing these cases of partial confusion among the four classes, I
shall, when there can be any hesitation as to the precise seat of the
fallacy, suppose it to be in that part of the process in which, from the
nature of the case, and the tendencies of the human mind, an error would
in the particular circumstances be the most probable.

After these observations we shall proceed, without further preamble, to
consider the five classes in their order.




                               Chapter III.


Fallacies Of Simple Inspection; Or _A Priori_ Fallacies.


§ 1. The tribe of errors of which we are to treat in the first instance,
are those in which no actual inference takes place at all; the proposition
(it can not in such cases be called a conclusion) being embraced, not as
proved, but as requiring no proof; as a self-evident truth; or else as
having such intrinsic verisimilitude, that external evidence not in itself
amounting to proof, is sufficient in aid of the antecedent presumption.

An attempt to treat this subject comprehensively would be a transgression
of the bounds prescribed to this work, since it would necessitate the
inquiry which, more than any other, is the grand question of what is
called metaphysics, viz., What are the propositions which may reasonably
be received without proof? That there must be some such propositions all
are agreed, since there can not be an infinite series of proof, a chain
suspended from nothing. But to determine what these propositions are, is
the _opus magnum_ of the more recondite mental philosophy. Two principal
divisions of opinion on the subject have divided the schools of philosophy
from its first dawn. The one recognizes no ultimate premises but the facts
of our subjective consciousness; our sensations, emotions, intellectual
states of mind, and volitions. These, and whatever by strict rules of
induction can be derived from these, it is possible, according to this
theory, for us to know; of all else we must remain in ignorance. The
opposite school hold that there are other existences, suggested indeed to
our minds by these subjective phenomena, but not inferable from them, by
any process either of deduction or of induction; which, however, we must,
by the constitution of our mental nature, recognize as realities; and
realities, too, of a higher order than the phenomena of our consciousness,
being the efficient causes and necessary substrata of all Phenomena. Among
these entities they reckon Substances, whether matter or spirit; from the
dust under our feet to the soul, and from that to Deity. All these,
according to them, are preternatural or supernatural beings, having no
likeness in experience, though experience is entirely a manifestation of
their agency. Their existence, together with more or less of the laws to
which they conform in their operations, are, on this theory, apprehended
and recognized as real by the mind itself intuitively; experience (whether
in the form of sensation or of mental feeling) having no other part in the
matter than as affording facts which are consistent with these necessary
postulates of reason, and which are explained and accounted for by them.

As it is foreign to the purpose of the present treatise to decide between
these conflicting theories, we are precluded from inquiring into the
existence, or defining the extent and limits, of knowledge _a priori_, and
from characterizing the kind of correct assumption which the fallacy of
incorrect assumption, now under consideration, simulates. Yet since it is
allowed on both sides that such assumptions are often made improperly, we
may find it practicable, without entering into the ultimate metaphysical
grounds of the discussion, to state some speculative propositions, and
suggest some practical cautions, respecting the forms in which such
unwarranted assumptions are most likely to be made.

§ 2. In the cases in which, according to the thinkers of the ontological
school, the mind apprehends, by intuition, things, and the laws of things,
not cognizable by our sensitive faculty; those intuitive, or supposed
intuitive, perceptions are undistinguishable from what the opposite school
are accustomed to call ideas of the mind. When they themselves say that
they perceive the things by an immediate act of a faculty given for that
purpose by their Creator, it would be said of them by their opponents that
they find an idea or conception in their own minds, and from the idea or
conception, infer the existence of a corresponding objective reality. Nor
would this be an unfair statement, but a mere version into other words of
the account given by many of themselves; and one to which the more
clear-sighted of them might, and generally do, without hesitation,
subscribe. Since, therefore, in the cases which lay the strongest claims
to be examples of knowledge _a priori_, the mind proceeds from the idea of
a thing to the reality of the thing itself, we can not be surprised by
finding that illicit assumptions _a priori_ consist in doing the same
thing erroneously; in mistaking subjective facts for objective, laws of
the percipient mind for laws of the perceived object, properties of the
ideas or conceptions for properties of the things conceived.

Accordingly, a large proportion of the erroneous thinking which exists in
the world proceeds on a tacit assumption, that the same order must obtain
among the objects in nature which obtains among our ideas of them. That if
we always think of two things together, the two things must always exist
together. That if one thing makes us think of another as preceding or
following it, that other must precede it or follow it in actual fact. And
conversely, that when we can not conceive two things together they can not
exist together, and that their combination may, without further evidence,
be rejected from the list of possible occurrences.

Few persons, I am inclined to think, have reflected on the great extent to
which this fallacy has prevailed, and prevails, in the actual beliefs and
actions of mankind. For a first illustration of it we may refer to a large
class of popular superstitions. If any one will examine in what
circumstances most of those things agree, which in different ages and by
different portions of the human race have been considered as omens or
prognostics of some interesting event, whether calamitous or fortunate;
they will be found very generally characterized by this peculiarity, that
they cause the mind to _think_ of that, of which they are therefore
supposed to forbode the actual occurrence. “Talk of the devil and he will
appear,” has passed into a proverb. Talk of the devil, that is, raise the
idea, and the reality will follow. In times when the appearance of that
personage in a visible form was thought to be no unfrequent occurrence, it
has doubtless often happened to persons of vivid imagination and
susceptible nerves, that talking of the devil has caused them to fancy
they saw him; as even in our more incredulous days, listening to ghost
stories predisposes us to see ghosts; and thus, as a prop to the _a
priori_ fallacy, there might come to be added an auxiliary fallacy of
malobservation, with one of false generalization grounded on it. Fallacies
of different orders often herd or cluster together in this fashion, one
smoothing the way for another. But the origin of the superstition is
evidently that which we have assigned. In like manner, it has been
universally considered unlucky to speak of misfortune.

The day on which any calamity happened has been considered an unfortunate
day, and there has been a feeling everywhere, and in some nations a
religious obligation, against transacting any important business on that
day. For on such a day our thoughts are likely to be of misfortune. For a
similar reason, any untoward occurrence in commencing an undertaking has
been considered ominous of failure; and often, doubtless, has really
contributed to it by putting the persons engaged in the enterprise more or
less out of spirits; but the belief has equally prevailed where the
disagreeable circumstance was, independently of superstition, too
insignificant to depress the spirits by any influence of its own. All know
the story of Cæsar’s accidentally stumbling in the act of landing on the
African coast; and the presence of mind with which he converted the
direful presage into a favorable one by exclaiming, “Africa, I embrace
thee.” Such omens, it is true, were often conceived as warnings of the
future, given by a friendly or a hostile deity; but this very superstition
grew out of a pre-existing tendency; the god was supposed to send, as an
indication of what was to come, something which people were already
disposed to consider in that light. So in the case of lucky or unlucky
names. Herodotus tells us how the Greeks, on the way to Mycale, were
encouraged in their enterprise by the arrival of a deputation from Samos,
one of the members of which was named Hegesistratus, the leader of armies.

Cases may be pointed out in which something which could have no real
effect but to make persons _think_ of misfortune, was regarded not merely
as a prognostic, but as something approaching to an actual cause of it.
The εὐφήμει of the Greeks, and _favete linguis_, or _bona verba quæso_, of
the Romans, evince the care with which they endeavored to repress the
utterance of any word expressive or suggestive of ill fortune; not from
notions of delicate politeness, to which their general mode of conduct and
feeling had very little reference, but from _bona fide_ alarm lest the
event so suggested to the imagination should in fact occur. Some vestige
of a similar superstition has been known to exist among uneducated persons
even in our own day: it is thought an unchristian thing to talk of, or
suppose, the death of any person while he is alive. It is known how
careful the Romans were to avoid, by an indirect mode of speech, the
utterance of any word directly expressive of death or other calamity; how
instead of _mortuus est_ they said _vixit_; and “be the event fortunate or
_otherwise_” instead of _adverse_. The name Maleventum, of which Salmasius
so sagaciously detected the Thessalian origin (Μαλόεις, Μαλοέντος), they
changed into the highly propitious denomination, Beneventum; Egesta into
Segesta; and Epidamnus, a name so interesting in its associations to the
reader of Thucydides, they exchanged for Dyrrhachium, to escape the perils
of a word suggestive of _damnum_ or detriment.

“If a hare cross the highway,” says Sir Thomas Browne,(230) “there are few
above threescore that are not perplexed thereat; which notwithstanding is
but an augurial terror, according to that received expression,
_Inauspicatum dat iter oblatus lepus_. And the ground of the conceit was
probably no greater than this, that a fearful animal passing by us
portended unto us something to be feared; as upon the like consideration
the meeting of a fox presaged some future imposture.” Such superstitions
as these last must be the result of study; they are too recondite for
natural or spontaneous growth. But when the attempt was once made to
construct a science of predictions, any association, though ever so faint
or remote, by which an object could be connected in however far-fetched a
manner with ideas either of prosperity or of danger and misfortune, was
enough to determine its being classed among good or evil omens.

An example of rather a different kind from any of these, but falling under
the same principle, is the famous attempt on which so much labor and
ingenuity were expended by the alchemists, to make gold potable. The
motive to this was a conceit that potable gold could be no other than the
universal medicine; and why gold? Because it was so precious. It must have
all marvelous properties as a physical substance, because the mind was
already accustomed to marvel at it.

From a similar feeling, “every substance,” says Dr. Paris,(231) “whose
origin is involved in mystery, has at different times been eagerly applied
to the purposes of medicine. Not long since, one of those showers which
are now known to consist of the excrements of insects, fell in the north
of Italy; the inhabitants regarded it as manna, or some supernatural
panacea, and they swallowed it with such avidity, that it was only by
extreme address that a small quantity was obtained for a chemical
examination.” The superstition, in this instance, though doubtless partly
of a religious character, probably in part also arose from the prejudice
that a wonderful thing must of course have wonderful properties.

§ 3. The instances of _a priori_ fallacy which we have hitherto cited
belong to the class of vulgar errors, and do not now, nor in any but a
rude age ever could, impose upon minds of any considerable attainments.
But those to which we are about to proceed, have been, and still are, all
but universally prevalent among thinkers. The same disposition to give
objectivity to a law of the mind—to suppose that what is true of our ideas
of things must be true of the things themselves—exhibits itself in many of
the most accredited modes of philosophical investigation, both on physical
and on metaphysical subjects. In one of its most undisguised
manifestations, it embodies itself in two maxims, which lay claim to
axiomatic truth: Things which we can not think of together, can not
co-exist; and Things which we can not help thinking of together, must
co-exist. I am not sure that the maxims were ever expressed in these
precise words, but the history both of philosophy and of popular opinions
abounds with exemplifications of both forms of the doctrine.

To begin with the latter of them: Things which we can not think of except
together, must exist together. This is assumed in the generally received
and accredited mode of reasoning which concludes that A must accompany B
in point of fact, because “it is involved in the idea.” Such thinkers do
not reflect that the idea, being a result of abstraction, ought to conform
to the facts, and can not make the facts conform to it. The argument is at
most admissible as an appeal to authority; a surmise, that what is now
part of the idea, must, before it became so, have been found by previous
inquirers in the facts. Nevertheless, the philosopher who more than all
others made professions of rejecting authority, Descartes, constructed his
system on this very basis. His favorite device for arriving at truth, even
in regard to outward things, was by looking into his own mind for it.
“Credidi me,” says his celebrated maxim, “pro regulâ generali sumere
posse, omne id quod valdè dilucidè et distinctè concipiebam, verum esse;”
whatever can be very clearly conceived must certainly exist; that is, as
he afterward explains it, if the idea includes existence. And on this
ground he infers that geometrical figures really exist, because they can
be distinctly conceived. Whenever existence is “involved in an idea,” a
thing conformable to the idea must really exist; which is as much as to
say, whatever the idea contains must have its equivalent in the thing; and
what we are not able to leave out of the idea can not be absent from the
reality.(232) This assumption pervades the philosophy not only of
Descartes, but of all the thinkers who received their impulse mainly from
him, in particular the two most remarkable among them, Spinoza and
Leibnitz, from whom the modern German metaphysical philosophy is
essentially an emanation. I am indeed disposed to think that the fallacy
now under consideration has been the cause of two-thirds of the bad
philosophy, and especially of the bad metaphysics, which the human mind
has never ceased to produce. Our general ideas contain nothing but what
has been put into them, either by our passive experience, or by our active
habits of thought; and the metaphysicians in all ages, who have attempted
to construct the laws of the universe by reasoning from our supposed
necessities of thought, have always proceeded, and only could proceed, by
laboriously finding in their own minds what they themselves had formerly
put there, and evolving from their ideas of things what they had first
involved in those ideas. In this way all deeply-rooted opinions and
feelings are enabled to create apparent demonstrations of their truth and
reasonableness, as it were, out of their own substance.

The other form of the fallacy: Things which we can not think of together
can not exist together—including as one of its branches, that what we can
not think of as existing can not exist at all—may thus be briefly
expressed: Whatever is inconceivable must be false.

Against this prevalent doctrine I have sufficiently argued in a former
Book,(233) and nothing is required in this place but examples. It was long
held that Antipodes were impossible because of the difficulty which was
found in conceiving persons with their heads in the same direction as our
feet. And it was one of the received arguments against the Copernican
system, that we can not conceive so great a void space as that system
supposes to exist in the celestial regions. When men’s imaginations had
always been used to conceive the stars as firmly set in solid spheres,
they naturally found much difficulty in imagining them in so different,
and, as it doubtless appeared to them, so precarious a situation. But they
had no right to mistake the limitation (whether natural, or, as it in fact
proved, only artificial) of their own faculties, for an inherent
limitation of the possible modes of existence in the universe.

It may be said in objection, that the error in these cases was in the
minor premise, not the major; an error of fact, not of principle; that it
did not consist in supposing that what is inconceivable can not be true,
but in supposing antipodes to be inconceivable, when present experience
proves that they can be conceived. Even if this objection were allowed,
and the proposition that what is inconceivable can not be true were
suffered to remain unquestioned as a speculative truth, it would be a
truth on which no practical consequence could ever be founded, since, on
this showing, it is impossible to affirm of any proposition, not being a
contradiction in terms, that it is inconceivable. Antipodes were really,
not fictitiously, inconceivable to our ancestors: they are indeed
conceivable to us; and as the limits of our power of conception have been
so largely extended, by the extension of our experience and the more
varied exercise of our imagination, so may posterity find many
combinations perfectly conceivable to them which are inconceivable to us.
But, as beings of limited experience, we must always and necessarily have
limited conceptive powers; while it does not by any means follow that the
same limitation obtains in the possibilities of Nature, nor even in her
actual manifestations.

Rather more than a century and a half ago it was a scientific maxim,
disputed by no one, and which no one deemed to require any proof, that “a
thing can not act where it is not.”(234) With this weapon the Cartesians
waged a formidable war against the theory of gravitation, which, according
to them, involving so obvious an absurdity, must be rejected _in limine_:
the sun could not possibly act upon the earth, not being there. It was not
surprising that the adherents of the old systems of astronomy should urge
this objection against the new; but the false assumption imposed equally
on Newton himself, who, in order to turn the edge of the objection,
imagined a subtle ether which filled up the space between the sun and the
earth, and by its intermediate agency was the proximate cause of the
phenomena of gravitation. “It is inconceivable,” said Newton, in one of
his letters to Dr. Bentley,(235) “that inanimate brute matter should,
without the mediation of something else, which is not material, operate
upon and affect other matter _without mutual contact_.... That gravity
should be innate, inherent, and essential to matter, so that one body may
act on another, at a distance, through a vacuum, without the mediation of
any thing else, by and through which their action and force may be
conveyed from one to another, is to me so great an absurdity, that I
believe no man, who in philosophical matters has a competent faculty of
thinking, can ever fall into it.” This passage should be hung up in the
cabinet of every cultivator of science who is ever tempted to pronounce a
fact impossible because it appears to him inconceivable. In our own day
one would be more tempted, though with equal injustice, to reverse the
concluding observation, and consider the seeing any absurdity at all in a
thing so simple and natural, to be what really marks the absence of “a
competent faculty of thinking.” No one now feels any difficulty in
conceiving gravity to be, as much as any other property is, “inherent and
essential to matter,” nor finds the comprehension of it facilitated in the
smallest degree by the supposition of an ether (though some recent
inquirers do give this as an explanation of it); nor thinks it at all
incredible that the celestial bodies can and do act where they, in actual
bodily presence, are not. To us it is not more wonderful that bodies
should act upon one another “without mutual contact,” than that they
should do so when in contact; we are familiar with both these facts, and
we find them equally inexplicable, but equally easy to believe. To Newton,
the one, because his imagination was familiar with it, appeared natural
and a matter of course, while the other, for the contrary reason, seemed
too absurd to be credited.

It is strange that any one, after such a warning, should rely implicitly
on the evidence _a priori_ of such propositions as these, that matter can
not think; that space, or extension, is infinite; that nothing can be made
out of nothing (_ex nihilo nihil fit_). Whether these propositions are
true or not this is not the place to determine, nor even whether the
questions are soluble by the human faculties. But such doctrines are no
more self-evident truths, than the ancient maxim that a thing can not act
where it is not, which probably is not now believed by any educated person
in Europe.(236) Matter can not think; why? because we _can not conceive_
thought to be annexed to any arrangement of material particles. Space is
infinite, because having never known any part of it which had not other
parts beyond it, we _can not conceive_ an absolute termination. _Ex nihilo
nihil fit_, because having never known any physical product without a
pre-existing physical material, we _can not_, or think we can not,
_imagine_ a creation out of nothing. But these things may in themselves be
as conceivable as gravitation without an intervening medium, which Newton
thought too great an absurdity for any person of a competent faculty of
philosophical thinking to admit: and even supposing them not conceivable,
this, for aught we know, may be merely one of the limitations of our very
limited minds, and not in nature at all.

No writer has more directly identified himself with the fallacy now under
consideration, or has embodied it in more distinct terms, than Leibnitz.
In his view, unless a thing was not merely conceivable, but even
explainable, it could not exist in nature. All _natural_ phenomena,
according to him, must be susceptible of being accounted for _a priori_.
The only facts of which no explanation could be given but the will of God,
were miracles properly so called. “Je reconnais,” says he,(237) “qu’il
n’est pas permis de nier ce qu’on n’entend pas; mais j’ajoute qu’on a
droit de nier (au moins dans l’ordre naturel) ce que absolument n’est
point intelligible ni explicable. Je soutiens aussi ... qu’enfin la
conception des créatures n’est pas la mesure du pouvoir de Dieu, mais que
leur conceptivité, ou force de concevoir, est la mesure du pouvoir de la
nature, tout ce qui est conforme à l’ordre naturel pouvant être conçu ou
entendu par quelque créature.”

Not content with assuming that nothing can be true which we are unable to
conceive, scientific inquirers have frequently given a still further
extension to the doctrine, and held that, even of things not altogether
inconceivable, that which we can conceive with the greatest ease is
likeliest to be true. It was long an admitted axiom, and is not yet
entirely discredited, that “nature always acts by the simplest means,”
_i.e._, by those which are most easily conceivable.(238) A large
proportion of all the errors ever committed in the investigation of the
laws of nature, have arisen from the assumption that the most familiar
explanation or hypothesis must be the truest.

One of the most instructive facts in scientific history is the pertinacity
with which the human mind clung to the belief that the heavenly bodies
must move in circles, or be carried round by the revolution of spheres;
merely because those were in themselves the simplest suppositions: though,
to make them accord with the facts which were ever contradicting them more
and more, it became necessary to add sphere to sphere and circle to
circle, until the original simplicity was converted into almost
inextricable complication.

§ 4. We pass to another _a priori_ fallacy or natural prejudice, allied to
the former, and originating, as that does, in the tendency to presume an
exact correspondence between the laws of the mind and those of things
external to it. The fallacy may be enunciated in this general
form—Whatever can be thought of apart exists apart: and its most
remarkable manifestation consists in the personification of abstractions.
Mankind in all ages have had a strong propensity to conclude that wherever
there is a name, there must be a distinguishable separate entity
corresponding to the name; and every complex idea which the mind has
formed for itself by operating upon its conceptions of individual things,
was considered to have an outward objective reality answering to it. Fate,
Chance, Nature, Time, Space, were real beings, nay, even gods. If the
analysis of qualities in the earlier part of this work be correct, names
of qualities and names of substances stand for the very same sets of facts
or phenomena; _whiteness_ and _a white thing_ are only different phrases,
required by convenience for speaking of the same external fact under
different relations. Not such, however, was the notion which this verbal
distinction suggested of old, either to the vulgar or to the scientific.
Whiteness was an entity, inhering or sticking in the white substance: and
so of all other qualities. So far was this carried, that even concrete
general terms were supposed to be, not names of indefinite numbers of
individual substances, but names of a peculiar kind of entities termed
Universal Substances. Because we can think and speak of man in general,
that is, of all persons in so far as possessing the common attributes of
the species, without fastening our thoughts permanently on some one
individual person; therefore man in general was supposed to be, not an
aggregate of individual persons, but an abstract or universal man,
distinct from these.

It may be imagined what havoc metaphysicians trained in these habits made
with philosophy, when they came to the largest generalizations of all.
_Substantiæ Secundæ_ of any kind were bad enough, but such Substantiæ
Secundæ as τὸ ὄν, for example, and τὸ ἔν, standing for peculiar entities
supposed to be inherent in all things which _exist_, or in all which are
said to be _one_, were enough to put an end to all intelligible
discussion; especially since, with a just perception that the truths which
philosophy pursues are _general_ truths, it was soon laid down that these
general substances were the only subjects of science, being immutable,
while individual substances cognizable by the senses, being in a perpetual
flux, could not be the subject of real knowledge. This misapprehension of
the import of general language constitutes Mysticism, a word so much
oftener written and spoken than understood. Whether in the Vedas, in the
Platonists, or in the Hegelians, mysticism is neither more nor less than
ascribing objective existence to the subjective creations of our own
faculties, to ideas or feelings of the mind; and believing that by
watching and contemplating these ideas of its own making, it can read in
them what takes place in the world without.

§ 5. Proceeding with the enumeration of _a priori_ fallacies, and
endeavoring to arrange them with as much reference as possible to their
natural affinities, we come to another, which is also nearly allied to the
fallacy preceding the last, standing in the same relation to one variety
of it as the fallacy last mentioned does to the other. This, too,
represents nature as under incapacities corresponding to those of our
intellect; but instead of only asserting that nature can not do a thing
because we can not conceive it done, goes the still greater length of
averring that nature does a particular thing, on the sole ground that we
can see no reason why she should not. Absurd as this seems when so plainly
stated, it is a received principle among scientific authorities for
demonstrating _a priori_ the laws of physical phenomena. A phenomenon must
follow a certain law, because we see no reason why it should deviate from
that law in one way rather than in another. This is called the Principle
of the Sufficient Reason;(239) and by means of it philosophers often
flatter themselves that they are able to establish, without any appeal to
experience, the most general truths of experimental physics.

Take, for example, two of the most elementary of all laws, the law of
inertia and the first law of motion. A body at rest can not, it is
affirmed, begin to move unless acted upon by some external force; because,
if it did, it must either move up or down, forward or backward, and so
forth; but if no outward force acts upon it, there can be _no reason_ for
its moving up rather than down, or down rather than up, etc., _ergo_, it
will not move at all.

This reasoning I conceive to be entirely fallacious, as indeed Dr. Brown,
in his treatise on Cause and Effect, has shown with great acuteness and
justness of thought. We have before remarked, that almost every fallacy
may be referred to different genera by different modes of filling up the
suppressed steps; and this particular one may, at our option, be brought
under _petitio principii_. It supposes that nothing can be a “sufficient
reason” for a body’s moving in one particular direction, except some
external force. But this is the very thing to be proved. Why not some
_internal_ force? Why not the law of the thing’s own nature? Since these
philosophers think it necessary to prove the law of inertia, they of
course do not suppose _it_ to be self-evident; they must, therefore, be of
opinion that previously to all proof, the supposition of a body’s moving
by internal impulse is an admissible hypothesis; but if so, why is not the
hypothesis also admissible, that the internal impulse acts naturally in
some one particular direction, not in another? If spontaneous motion might
have been the law of matter, why not spontaneous motion toward the sun,
toward the earth, or toward the zenith? Why not, as the ancients supposed,
toward a particular place in the universe, appropriated to each particular
kind of substance? Surely it is not allowable to say that spontaneity of
motion is credible in itself, but not credible if supposed to take place
in any determinate direction.

Indeed, if any one chose to assert that all bodies when uncontrolled set
out in a direct line toward the North Pole, he might equally prove his
point by the principle of the Sufficient Reason. By what right is it
assumed that a state of rest is the particular state which can not be
deviated from without special cause? Why not a state of motion, and of
some particular sort of motion? Why may we not say that the natural state
of a horse left to himself is to amble, because otherwise he must either
trot, gallop, or stand still, and because we know no reason why he should
do one of these rather than another? If this is to be called an unfair use
of the “sufficient reason,” and the other a fair one, there must be a
tacit assumption that a state of rest is more natural to a horse than a
state of ambling. If this means that it is the state which the animal will
assume when left to himself, that is the very point to be proved; and if
it does not mean this, it can only mean that a state of rest is the
simplest state, and therefore the most likely to prevail in nature, which
is one of the fallacies or natural prejudices we have already examined.

So again of the First Law of Motion; that a body once moving will, if left
to itself, continue to move uniformly in a straight line. An attempt is
made to prove this law by saying, that if not, the body must deviate
either to the right or to the left, and that there is no reason why it
should do one more than the other. But who could know, antecedently to
experience, whether there was a reason or not? Might it not be the nature
of bodies, or of some particular bodies, to deviate toward the right? or
if the supposition is preferred, toward the east, or south? It was long
thought that bodies, terrestrial ones at least, had a natural tendency to
deflect downward; and there is no shadow of any thing objectionable in the
supposition, except that it is not true. The pretended proof of the law of
motion is even more manifestly untenable than that of the law of inertia,
for it is flagrantly inconsistent; it assumes that the continuance of
motion in the direction first taken is more natural than deviation either
to the right or to the left, but denies that one of these can possibly be
more natural than the other. All these fancies of the possibility of
knowing what is natural or not natural by any other means than experience,
are, in truth, entirely futile. The real and only proof of the laws of
motion, or of any other law of the universe, is experience; it is simply
that no other suppositions explain or are consistent with the facts of
universal nature.

Geometers have, in all ages, been open to the imputation of endeavoring to
prove the most general facts of the outward world by sophistical
reasoning, in order to avoid appeals to the senses. Archimedes, says
Professor Playfair,(240) established some of the elementary propositions
of statics by a process in which he “borrows no principle from experiment,
but establishes his conclusion entirely by reasoning _a priori_. He
assumes, indeed, that equal bodies, at the ends of the equal arms of a
lever, will balance one another; and also that a cylinder or
parallelopiped of homogeneous matter, will be balanced about its centre of
magnitude. These, however, are not inferences from experience; they are,
properly speaking, conclusions deduced from the principle of the
Sufficient Reason.” And to this day there are few geometers who would not
think it far more scientific to establish these or any other premises in
this way, than to rest their evidence on that familiar experience which in
the case in question might have been so safely appealed to.

§ 6. Another natural prejudice, of most extensive prevalence, and which
had a great share in producing the errors fallen into by the ancients in
their physical inquiries, was this: That the differences in nature must
correspond to our received distinctions: that effects which we are
accustomed, in popular language, to call by different names, and arrange
in different classes, must be of different natures, and have different
causes. This prejudice, so evidently of the same origin with those already
treated of, marks more especially the earliest stage of science, when it
has not yet broken loose from the trammels of every-day phraseology. The
extraordinary prevalence of the fallacy among the Greek philosophers may
be accounted for by their generally knowing no other language than their
own; from which it was a consequence that their ideas followed the
accidental or arbitrary combinations of that language, more completely
than can happen among the moderns to any but illiterate persons. They had
great difficulty in distinguishing between things which their language
confounded, or in putting mentally together things which it distinguished;
and could hardly combine the objects in nature, into any classes but those
which were made for them by the popular phrases of their own country; or
at least could not help fancying those classes to be natural and all
others arbitrary and artificial. Accordingly, scientific investigation
among the Greek schools of speculation and their followers in the Middle
Ages, was little more than a mere sifting and analyzing of the notions
attached to common language. They thought that by determining the meaning
of words, they could become acquainted with facts. “They took for
granted,” says Dr. Whewell,(241) “that philosophy must result from the
relations of those notions which are involved in the common use of
language, and they proceeded to seek it by studying such notions.” In his
next chapter, Dr. Whewell has so well illustrated and exemplified this
error, that I shall take the liberty of quoting him at some length.

“The propensity to seek for principles in the common usages of language
may be discerned at a very early period. Thus we have an example of it in
a saying which is reported of Thales, the founder of Greek philosophy.
When he was asked, ‘What is the _greatest_ thing?’ he replied ‘_Place_;
for all other things are _in_ the world, but the world is _in_ it.’ In
Aristotle we have the consummation of this mode of speculation. The usual
point from which he starts in his inquiries is, that _we say_ thus or thus
in common language. Thus, when he has to discuss the question whether
there be, in any part of the universe, a void, or space in which there is
nothing, he inquires first in how many senses we say that one thing is
_in_ another. He enumerates many of these; we say the part is in the
whole, as the finger is _in_ the hand; again we say, the species is in the
genus, as man is included _in_ animal; again, the government of Greece is
_in_ the king; and various other senses are described and exemplified, but
of all these _the most proper_ is when we say a thing is _in_ a vessel,
and generally _in place_. He next examines what _place_ is, and comes to
this conclusion, that ‘if about a body there be another body including it,
it is in place, and if not, not.’ A body moves when it changes its place;
but he adds, that if water be in a vessel, the vessel being at rest, the
parts of the water may still move, for they are included by each other; so
that while the whole does not change its place, the parts may change their
place in a circular order. Proceeding then to the question of a _void_, he
as usual examines the different senses in which the term is used, and
adopts as the most proper, _place without matter_, with no useful result.

“Again, in a question concerning mechanical action, he says, ‘When a man
moves a stone by pushing it with a stick, _we_ say both that the man moves
the stone, and that the stick moves the stone, but the latter _more
properly_.’

“Again, we find the Greek philosophers applying themselves to extract
their dogmas from the most general and abstract notions which they could
detect; for example, from the conception of the Universe as One or as Many
things. They tried to determine how far we may, or must, combine with
these conceptions that of a whole, of parts, of number, of limits, of
place, of beginning or end, of full or void, of rest or motion, of cause
and effect, and the like. The analysis of such conceptions with such a
view, occupies, for instance, almost the whole of Aristotle’s Treatise on
the Heavens.”

The following paragraph merits particular attention: “Another mode of
reasoning, very widely applied in these attempts, was the _doctrine of
contrarieties_, in which it was assumed that adjectives or substances
which are in common language, or in some abstract mode of conception,
opposed to each other, must point at some fundamental antithesis in
nature, which it is important to study. Thus Aristotle says that the
Pythagoreans, from the contrasts which number suggests, collected ten
principles—Limited and Unlimited, Odd and Even, One and Many, Right and
Left, Male and Female, Rest and Motion, Straight and Curved, Light and
Darkness, Good and Evil, Square and Oblong.... Aristotle himself deduced
the doctrine of four elements and other dogmas by oppositions of the same
kind.”

Of the manner in which, from premises obtained in this way, the ancients
attempted to deduce laws of nature, an example is given in the same work a
few pages further on. “Aristotle decides that there is no void on such
arguments as this. In a void there could be no difference of up and down;
for as in nothing there are no differences, so there are none in a
privation or negation; but a void is merely a privation or negation of
matter; therefore, in a void, bodies could not move up and down, which it
is in their nature to do. It is easily seen” (Dr. Whewell very justly
adds) “that such a mode of reasoning elevates the familiar forms of
language, and the intellectual connections of terms, to a supremacy over
facts; making truth depend upon whether terms are or are not privative,
and whether we say that bodies fall _naturally_.”

The propensity to assume that the same relations obtain between objects
themselves, which obtain between our ideas of them, is here seen in the
extreme stage of its development. For the mode of philosophizing,
exemplified in the foregoing instances, assumes no less than that the
proper way of arriving at knowledge of nature, is to study nature itself
subjectively; to apply our observation and analysis not to the facts, but
to the common notions entertained of the facts.

Many other equally striking examples may be given of the tendency to
assume that things which for the convenience of common life are placed in
different classes, must differ in every respect. Of this nature was the
universal and deeply-rooted prejudice of antiquity and the Middle Ages,
that celestial and terrestrial phenomena must be essentially different,
and could in no manner or degree depend on the same laws. Of the same
kind, also, was the prejudice against which Bacon contended, that nothing
produced by nature could be successfully imitated by man: “Calorem solis
et ignis toto genere differre; ne scilicet homines putent se per opera
ignis, aliquid simile iis quæ in Natura fiunt, educere et formare posse;”
and again, “Compositionem tantum opus Hominis, Mistionem vero opus solius
Naturæ esse: ne scilicet homines sperent aliquam ex arte Corporum
naturalium generationem aut transformationem.”(242) The grand distinction
in the ancient scientific speculations, between natural and violent
motions, though not without a plausible foundation in the appearances
themselves, was doubtless greatly recommended to adoption by its
conformity to this prejudice.

§ 7. From the fundamental error of the scientific inquirers of antiquity,
we pass, by a natural association, to a scarcely less fundamental one of
their great rival and successor, Bacon. It has excited the surprise of
philosophers that the detailed system of inductive logic, which this
extraordinary man labored to construct, has been turned to so little
direct use by subsequent inquirers, having neither continued, except in a
few of its generalities, to be recognized as a theory, nor having
conducted in practice to any great scientific results. But this, though
not unfrequently remarked, has scarcely received any plausible
explanation; and some, indeed, have preferred to assert that all rules of
induction are useless, rather than suppose that Bacon’s rules are grounded
on an insufficient analysis of the inductive process. Such, however, will
be seen to be the fact, as soon as it is considered, that Bacon entirely
overlooked Plurality of Causes. All his rules tacitly imply the
assumption, so contrary to all we now know of nature, that a phenomenon
can not have more than one cause.

When he is inquiring into what he terms the forma _calidi aut frigidi,
gravis aut levis, sicci aut humidi_, and the like, he never for an instant
doubts that there is some one thing, some invariable condition or set of
conditions, which is present in all cases of heat, or cold, or whatever
other phenomenon he is considering; the only difficulty being to find what
it is; which accordingly he tries to do by a process of elimination,
rejecting or excluding, by negative instances, whatever is not the _forma_
or cause, in order to arrive at what is. But, that this _forma_ or cause
is _one_ thing, and that it is the same in all hot objects, he has no more
doubt of, than another person has that there is always some cause _or
other_. In the present state of knowledge it could not be necessary, even
if we had not already treated so fully of the question, to point out how
widely this supposition is at variance with the truth. It is particularly
unfortunate for Bacon that, falling into this error, he should have fixed
almost exclusively upon a class of inquiries in which it was especially
fatal; namely, inquiries into the causes of the sensible qualities of
objects. For his assumption, groundless in every case, is false in a
peculiar degree with respect to those sensible qualities. In regard to
scarcely any of them has it been found possible to trace any unity of
cause, any set of conditions invariably accompanying the quality. The
conjunctions of such qualities with one another constitute the variety of
Kinds, in which, as already remarked, it has not been found possible to
trace any law. Bacon was seeking for what did not exist. The phenomenon of
which he sought for the one cause has oftenest no cause at all, and when
it has, depends (as far as hitherto ascertained) on an unassignable
variety of distinct causes.

And on this rock every one must split, who represents to himself as the
first and fundamental problem of science to ascertain what is the cause of
a given effect, rather than what are the effects of a given cause. It was
shown, in an early stage of our inquiry into the nature of Induction,(243)
how much more ample are the resources which science commands for the
latter than for the former inquiry, since it is upon the latter only that
we can throw any direct light by means of experiment; the power of
artificially producing an effect, implying a previous knowledge of at
least one of its causes. If we discover the causes of effects, it is
generally by having previously discovered the effects of causes; the
greatest skill in devising crucial instances for the former purpose may
only end, as Bacon’s physical inquiries did, in no result at all. Was it
that his eagerness to acquire the power of producing for man’s benefit
effects of practical importance to human life, rendering him impatient of
pursuing that end by a circuitous route, made even him, the champion of
experiment, prefer the direct mode, though one of mere observation, to the
indirect, in which alone experiment was possible? Or had even Bacon not
entirely cleared his mind from the notion of the ancients, that “rerum
cognoscere _causas_” was the sole object of philosophy, and that to
inquire into the _effects_ of things belonged to servile and mechanical
arts?

It is worth remarking that, while the only efficient mode of cultivating
speculative science was missed from an undue contempt of manual
operations, the false speculative views thus engendered gave in their turn
a false direction to such practical and mechanical aims as were suffered
to exist. The assumption universal among the ancients and in the Middle
Ages, that there were _principles_ of heat and cold, dryness and moisture,
etc., led directly to a belief in alchemy; in a transmutation of
substances, a change from one Kind into another. Why should it not be
possible to make gold? Each of the characteristic properties of gold has
its _forma_, its essence, its set of conditions, which if we could
discover, and learn how to realize, we could superinduce that particular
property upon any other substance, upon wood, or iron, or lime, or clay.
If, then, we could effect this with respect to every one of the essential
properties of the precious metal, we should have converted the other
substance into gold. Nor did this, if once the premises were granted,
appear to transcend the real powers of mankind. For daily experience
showed that almost every one of the distinctive sensible properties of any
object, its consistence, its color, its taste, its smell, its shape,
admitted of being totally changed by fire, or water, or some other
chemical agent. The _formæ_ of all those qualities seeming, therefore, to
be within human power either to produce or to annihilate, not only did the
transmutation of substances appear abstractedly possible, but the
employment of the power, at our choice, for practical ends, seemed by no
means hopeless.(244)

A prejudice, universal in the ancient world, and from which Bacon was so
far from being free, that it pervaded and vitiated the whole practical
part of his system of logic, may with good reason be ranked high in the
order of Fallacies of which we are now treating.

§ 8. There remains one _a priori_ fallacy or natural prejudice, the most
deeply-rooted, perhaps, of all which we have enumerated; one which not
only reigned supreme in the ancient world, but still possesses almost
undisputed dominion over many of the most cultivated minds; and some of
the most remarkable of the numerous instances by which I shall think it
necessary to exemplify it, will be taken from recent thinkers. This is,
that the conditions of a phenomenon must, or at least probably will,
resemble the phenomenon itself.

Conformably to what we have before remarked to be of frequent occurrence,
this fallacy might without much impropriety have been placed in a
different class, among Fallacies of Generalization; for experience does
afford a certain degree of countenance to the assumption. The cause does,
in very many cases, resemble its effect; like produces like. Many
phenomena have a direct tendency to perpetuate their own existence, or to
give rise to other phenomena similar to themselves. Not to mention forms
actually moulded on one another, as impressions on wax and the like, in
which the closest resemblance between the effect and its cause is the very
law of the phenomenon; all motion tends to continue itself, with its own
velocity, and in its own original direction; and the motion of one body
tends to set others in motion, which is indeed the most common of the
modes in which the motions of bodies originate. We need scarcely refer to
contagion, fermentation, and the like; or to the production of effects by
the growth or expansion of a germ or rudiment resembling on a smaller
scale the completed phenomenon, as in the growth of a plant or animal from
an embryo, that embryo itself deriving its origin from another plant or
animal of the same kind. Again, the thoughts or reminiscences, which are
effects of our past sensations, resemble those sensations; feelings
produce similar feelings by way of sympathy; acts produce similar acts by
involuntary or voluntary imitation. With so many appearances in its favor,
no wonder if a presumption naturally grew up, that causes must
_necessarily_ resemble their effects, and that like could _only_ be
produced by like.

This principle of fallacy has usually presided over the fantastical
attempts to influence the course of nature by conjectural means, the
choice of which was not directed by previous observation and experiment.
The guess almost always fixed upon some means which possessed features of
real or apparent resemblance to the end in view. If a charm was wanted, as
by Ovid’s Medea, to prolong life, all long-lived animals, or what were
esteemed such, were collected and brewed into a broth:


           nec defuit illic
    Squamea Cinyphii tenuis membrana chelydri
    Vivacisque jecur cervi: quibus insuper addit
    Ora caputque novem cornicis sæcula passæ.


A similar notion was embodied in the celebrated medical theory called the
“Doctrine of Signatures,” “which is no less,” says Dr. Paris,(245) “than a
belief that every natural substance which possesses any medicinal virtue
indicates by an obvious and well-marked external character the disease for
which it is a remedy, or the object for which it should be employed.” This
outward character was generally some feature of resemblance, real or
fantastical, either to the effect it was supposed to produce, or to the
phenomenon over which its power was thought to be exercised. “Thus the
lungs of a fox must be a specific for asthma, because that animal is
remarkable for its strong powers of respiration. Turmeric has a brilliant
yellow color, which indicates that it has the power of curing the
jaundice; for the same reason, poppies must relieve diseases of the head;
Agaricus those of the bladder; _Cassia fistula_ the affections of the
intestines, and Aristolochia the disorders of the uterus: the polished
surface and stony hardness which so eminently characterize the seeds of
the Lithospermum officinale (common gromwell) were deemed a certain
indication of their efficacy in calculous and gravelly disorders; for a
similar reason, the roots of the Saxifraga granulata (white saxifrage)
gained reputation in the cure of the same disease; and the Euphrasia
(eye-bright) acquired fame, as an application in complaints of the eye,
because it exhibits a black spot in its corolla resembling the pupil. The
blood-stone, the Heliotropium of the ancients, from the occasional small
specks or points of a blood-red color exhibited on its green surface, is
even at this very day employed in many parts of England and Scotland to
stop a bleeding from the nose; and nettle tea continues a popular remedy
for the cure of _Urticaria_. It is also asserted that some substances bear
the _signatures_ of the humors, as the petals of the red rose that of the
blood, and the roots of rhubarb and the flowers of saffron that of the
bile.”

The early speculations respecting the chemical composition of bodies were
rendered abortive by no circumstance more than by their invariably taking
for granted that the properties of the elements must resemble those of the
compounds which were formed from them.

To descend to more modern instances; it was long thought, and was stoutly
maintained by the Cartesians and even by Leibnitz against the Newtonian
system (nor did Newton himself, as we have seen, contest the assumption,
but eluded it by an arbitrary hypothesis), that nothing (of a physical
nature at least) could account for motion, except previous motion; the
impulse or impact of some other body. It was very long before the
scientific world could prevail upon itself to admit attraction and
repulsion (_i.e._, spontaneous tendencies of particles to approach or
recede from one another) as ultimate laws, no more requiring to be
accounted for than impulse itself, if indeed the latter were not, in
truth, resolvable into the former. From the same source arose the
innumerable hypotheses devised to explain those classes of motion which
appeared more mysterious than others because there was no obvious mode of
attributing them to impulse, as for example the voluntary motions of the
human body. Such were the interminable systems of vibrations propagated
along the nerves, or animal spirits rushing up and down between the
muscles and the brain; which, if the facts could have been proved, would
have been an important addition to our knowledge of physiological laws;
but the mere invention, or arbitrary supposition of them, could not unless
by the strongest delusion be supposed to render the phenomena of animal
life more comprehensible, or less mysterious. Nothing, however, seemed
satisfactory, but to make out that motion was caused by motion; by
something like itself. If it was not one kind of motion, it must be
another. In like manner it was supposed that the physical qualities of
objects must arise from some similar quality, or perhaps only some quality
bearing the same name, in the particles or atoms of which the objects were
composed; that a sharp taste, for example, must arise from sharp
particles. And reversing the inference, the effects produced by a
phenomenon must, it was supposed, resemble in their physical attributes
the phenomenon itself. The influences of the planets were supposed to be
analogous to their visible peculiarities: Mars, being of a red color,
portended fire and slaughter; and the like.

Passing from physics to metaphysics, we may notice among the most
remarkable fruits of this _a priori_ fallacy two closely analogous
theories, employed in ancient and modern times to bridge over the chasm
between the world of mind and that of matter; the _species sensibiles_ of
the Epicureans, and the modern doctrine of perception by means of ideas.
These theories are indeed, probably, indebted for their existence not
solely to the fallacy in question, but to that fallacy combined with
another natural prejudice already adverted to, that a thing can not act
where it is not. In both doctrines it is assumed that the phenomenon which
takes place _in us_ when we see or touch an object, and which we regard as
an effect of that object, or rather of its presence to our organs, must of
necessity resemble very closely the outward object itself. To fulfill this
condition, the Epicureans supposed that objects were constantly projecting
in all directions impalpable images of themselves, which entered at the
eyes and penetrated to the mind; while modern metaphysicians, though they
rejected this hypothesis, agreed in deeming it necessary to suppose that
not the thing itself, but a mental image or representation of it, was the
direct object of perception. Dr. Reid had to employ a world of argument
and illustration to familiarize people with the truth, that the sensations
or impressions on our minds need not necessarily be copies of, or bear any
resemblance to, the causes which produce them; in opposition to the
natural prejudice which led people to assimilate the action of bodies upon
our senses, and through them upon our minds, to the transfer of a given
form from one object to another by actual moulding. The works of Dr. Reid
are even now the most effectual course of study for detaching the mind
from the prejudice of which this was an example. And the value of the
service which he thus rendered to popular philosophy is not much
diminished, although we may hold, with Brown, that he went too far in
imputing the “ideal theory” as an actual tenet, to the generality of the
philosophers who preceded him, and especially to Locke and Hume; for if
they did not themselves consciously fall into the error, unquestionably
they often led their readers into it.

The prejudice, that the conditions of a phenomenon must resemble the
phenomenon, is occasionally exaggerated, at least verbally, into a still
more palpable absurdity; the conditions of the thing are spoken of as if
they _were_ the very thing itself. In Bacon’s model inquiry, which
occupies so great a space in the _Novum Organum_, the _inquisitio in
formam calidi_, the conclusion which he favors is that heat is a kind of
motion; meaning of course not the feeling of heat, but the conditions of
the feeling; meaning, therefore, only that wherever there is heat, there
must first be a particular kind of motion; but he makes no distinction in
his language between these two ideas, expressing himself as if heat, and
the conditions of heat, were one and the same thing. So the elder Darwin,
in the beginning of his _Zoonomia_, says, “The word _idea_ has various
meanings in the writers of metaphysics; it is here used simply for those
notions of external things which our organs of sense bring us acquainted
with originally” (thus far the proposition, though vague, is
unexceptionable in meaning), “and is defined a contraction, a motion, or
configuration, of the fibres which constitute the immediate organ of
sense.” Our _notions_, a configuration of the fibres! What kind of
logician must he be who thinks that a phenomenon is _defined_ to _be_ the
condition on which he supposes it to depend? Accordingly he says soon
after, not that our ideas are caused by, or consequent on, certain organic
phenomena, but “our ideas _are_ animal motions of the organs of sense.”
And this confusion runs through the four volumes of the _Zoonomia_; the
reader never knows whether the writer is speaking of the effect, or of its
supposed cause; of the idea, a state of mental consciousness, or of the
state of the nerves and brain which he considers it to presuppose.

I have given a variety of instances in which the natural prejudice, that
causes and their effects must resemble one another, has operated in
practice so as to give rise to serious errors. I shall now go further, and
produce from writings even of the present or very recent times, instances
in which this prejudice is laid down as an established principle. M.
Victor Cousin, in the last of his celebrated lectures on Locke, enunciates
the maxim in the following unqualified terms: “Tout ce qui est vrai de
l’effet, est vrai de la cause.” A doctrine to which, unless in some
peculiar and technical meaning of the words cause and effect, it is not to
be imagined that any person would literally adhere; but he who could so
write must be far enough from seeing that the very reverse might be the
effect; that there is nothing impossible in the supposition that no one
property which is true of the effect might be true of the cause. Without
going quite so far in point of expression, Coleridge, in his _Biographia
Literaria_,(246) affirms as an “evident truth,” that “the law of causality
holds only between homogeneous things, _i.e._, things having some common
property,” and therefore “can not extend from one world into another, its
opposite;” hence, as mind and matter have no common property, mind can not
act upon matter, nor matter upon mind. What is this but the _a priori_
fallacy of which we are speaking? The doctrine, like many others of
Coleridge, is taken from Spinoza, in the first book of whose _Ethica_ (_De
Deo_) it stands as the Third Proposition, “Quæ res nihil commune inter se
habent, earum una alterius causa esse non potest,” and is there proved
from two so-called axioms, equally gratuitous with itself; but Spinoza
ever systematically consistent, pursued the doctrine to its inevitable
consequence, the materiality of God.

The same conception of impossibility led the ingenious and subtle mind of
Leibnitz to his celebrated doctrine of a pre-established harmony. He, too,
thought that mind could not act upon matter, nor matter upon mind, and
that the two, therefore, must have been arranged by their Maker like two
clocks, which, though unconnected with one another, strike simultaneously,
and always point to the same hour. Malebranche’s equally famous theory of
Occasional Causes was another form of the same conception; instead of
supposing the clocks originally arranged to strike together, he held that
when the one strikes, God interposes, and makes the other strike in
correspondence with it.

Descartes, in like manner, whose works are a rich mine of almost every
description of _a priori_ fallacy, says that the Efficient Cause must at
least have all the perfections of the effect, and for this singular
reason: “Si enim ponamus aliquid in ideâ reperiri quod non fuerit in ejus
causâ, hoc igitur habet a nihilo;” of which it is scarcely a parody to
say, that if there be pepper in the soup there must be pepper in the cook
who made it, since otherwise the pepper would be without a cause. A
similar fallacy is committed by Cicero, in his second book _De Finibus_,
where, speaking in his own person against the Epicureans, he charges them
with inconsistency in saying that the pleasures of the mind had their
origin from those of the body, and yet that the former were more valuable,
as if the effect could surpass the cause. “Animi voluptas oritur propter
voluptatem corporis, et major est animi voluptas quam corporis? ita fit ut
gratulator, lætior sit quam is cui gratulatur.” Even that, surely, is not
an impossibility; a person’s good fortune has often given more pleasure to
others than it gave to the person himself.

Descartes, with no less readiness, applies the same principle the converse
way, and infers the nature of the effects from the assumption that they
must, in this or that property or in all their properties, resemble their
cause. To this class belong his speculations, and those of so many others
after him, tending to infer the order of the universe, not from
observation, but by _a priori_ reasoning from supposed qualities of the
Godhead. This sort of inference was probably never carried to a greater
length than it was in one particular instance by Descartes, when, as a
proof of one of his physical principles, that the quantity of motion in
the universe is invariable, he had recourse to the immutability of the
Divine Nature. Reasoning of a very similar character is, however, nearly
as common now as it was in his time, and does duty largely as a means of
fencing off disagreeable conclusions. Writers have not yet ceased to
oppose the theory of divine benevolence to the evidence of physical facts,
to the principle of population for example. And people seem in general to
think that they have used a very powerful argument, when they have said,
that to suppose some proposition true, would be a reflection on the
goodness or wisdom of the Deity. Put into the simplest possible terms,
their argument is, “If it had depended on me, I would not have made the
proposition true, therefore it is not true.” Put into other words, it
stands thus: “God is perfect, therefore (what I think) perfection must
obtain in nature.” But since in reality every one feels that nature is
very far from perfect, the doctrine is never applied consistently. It
furnishes an argument which (like many others of a similar character)
people like to appeal to when it makes for their own side. Nobody is
convinced by it, but each appears to think that it puts religion on his
side of the question, and that it is a useful weapon of offense for
wounding an adversary.

Although several other varieties of _a priori_ fallacy might probably be
added to those here specified, these are all against which it seems
necessary to give any special caution. Our object is to open, without
attempting or affecting to exhaust, the subject. Having illustrated,
therefore, this first class of Fallacies at sufficient length, I shall
proceed to the second.




                               Chapter IV.


Fallacies Of Observation.


§ 1. From the Fallacies which are properly Prejudices, or presumptions
antecedent to, and superseding, proof, we pass to those which lie in the
incorrect performance of the proving process. And as Proof, in its widest
extent, embraces one or more, or all, of three processes, Observation,
Generalization, and Deduction, we shall consider in their order the errors
capable of being committed in these three operations. And first, of the
first mentioned.

A fallacy of misobservation may be either negative or positive; either
Non-observation or Mal-observation. It is non-observation, when all the
error consists in overlooking, or neglecting, facts or particulars which
ought to have been observed. It is mal-observation, when something is not
simply unseen, but seen wrong; when the fact or phenomenon, instead of
being recognized for what it is in reality, is mistaken for something
else.

§ 2. Non-observation may either take place by overlooking instances, or by
overlooking some of the circumstances of a given instance. If we were to
conclude that a fortune-teller was a true prophet, from not adverting to
the cases in which his predictions had been falsified by the event, this
would be non-observation of instances; but if we overlooked or remained
ignorant of the fact that in cases where the predictions had been
fulfilled, he had been in collusion with some one who had given him the
information on which they were grounded, this would be non-observation of
circumstances.

The former case, in so far as the act of induction from insufficient
evidence is concerned, does not fall under this second class of Fallacies,
but under the third, Fallacies of Generalization. In every such case,
however, there are two defects or errors instead of one; there is the
error of treating the insufficient evidence as if it were sufficient,
which is a Fallacy of the third class; and there is the insufficiency
itself; the not having better evidence; which, when such evidence, or, in
other words, when other instances, were to be had, is Non-observation; and
the erroneous inference, so far as it is to be attributed to this cause,
is a Fallacy of the second class.

It belongs not to our purpose to treat of non-observation as arising from
casual inattention, from general slovenliness of mental habits, want of
due practice in the use of the observing faculties, or insufficient
interest in the subject. The question pertinent to logic is—Granting the
want of complete competency in the observer, on what point is that
insufficiency on his part likely to lead him wrong? or rather, what sorts
of instances, or of circumstances in any given instance, are most likely
to escape the notice of observers generally; of mankind at large.

§ 3. First, then, it is evident that when the instances on one side of a
question are more likely to be remembered and recorded than those on the
other; especially if there be any strong motive to preserve the memory of
the first, but not of the latter; these last are likely to be overlooked,
and escape the observation of the mass of mankind. This is the recognized
explanation of the credit given, in spite of reason and evidence, to many
classes of impostors; to quack-doctors, and fortune-tellers in all ages;
to the “cunning man” of modern times, and the oracles of old. Few have
considered the extent to which this fallacy operates in practice, even in
the teeth of the most palpable negative evidence. A striking example of it
is the faith which the uneducated portion of the agricultural classes, in
this and other countries, continue to repose in the prophecies as to
weather supplied by almanac-makers; though every season affords to them
numerous cases of completely erroneous prediction; but as every season
also furnishes some cases in which the prediction is fulfilled, this is
enough to keep up the credit of the prophet, with people who do not
reflect on the number of instances requisite for what we have called, in
our inductive terminology, the Elimination of Chance; since a certain
number of casual coincidences not only may but will happen, between any
two unconnected events.

Coleridge, in one of the essays in the _Friend_, has illustrated the
matter we are now considering, in discussing the origin of a proverb,
“which, differently worded, is to be found in all the languages of
Europe,” viz., “Fortune favors fools.” He ascribes it partly to the
“tendency to exaggerate all effects that seem disproportionate to their
visible cause, and all circumstances that are in any way strongly
contrasted with our notions of the persons under them.” Omitting some
explanations which would refer the error to mal-observation, or to the
other species of non-observation (that of circumstances), I take up the
quotation further on. “Unforeseen coincidences may have greatly helped a
man, yet if they have done for him only what possibly from his own
abilities he might have effected for himself, his good luck will excite
less attention, and the instances be less remembered. That clever men
should attain their objects seems natural, and we neglect the
circumstances that perhaps produced that success of themselves without the
intervention of skill or foresight; but we dwell on the fact and remember
it, as something strange, when the same happens to a weak or ignorant man.
So too, though the latter should fail in his undertakings from
concurrences that might have happened to the wisest man, yet his failure
being no more than might have been expected and accounted for from his
folly, it lays no hold on our attention, but fleets away among the other
undistinguished waves in which the stream of ordinary life murmurs by us,
and is forgotten. Had it been as true as it was notoriously false, that
those all-embracing discoveries, which have shed a dawn of _science_ on
the _art_ of chemistry, and give no obscure promise of some one great
constitutive law, in the light of which dwell dominion and the power of
prophecy; if these discoveries, instead of having been, as they really
were, preconcerted by meditation, and evolved out of his own intellect,
had occurred by a set of lucky _accidents_ to the illustrious father and
founder of philosophic alchemy; if they had presented themselves to
Professor Davy exclusively in consequence of his _luck_ in possessing a
particular galvanic battery; if this battery, as far as Davy was
concerned, had itself been an _accident_, and not (as in point of fact it
was) desired and obtained by him for the purpose of insuring the testimony
of experience to his principles, and in order to bind down material nature
under the inquisition of reason, and force from her, as by torture,
unequivocal answers to _prepared_ and _preconceived_ questions—yet still
they would not have been talked of or described as instances of _luck_,
but as the natural results of his admitted genius and known skill. But
should an accident have disclosed similar discoveries to a mechanic at
Birmingham or Sheffield, and if the man should grow rich in consequence,
and partly by the envy of his neighbors and partly with good reason, be
considered by them as a man _below par_ in the general powers of his
understanding; then, ‘Oh, what a lucky fellow! Well, Fortune _does_ favor
fools—that’s for certain! It is always so!’ And forthwith the exclaimer
relates half a dozen similar instances. Thus accumulating the one sort of
facts and never collecting the other, we do, as poets in their diction,
and quacks of all denominations do in their reasoning, put a part for the
whole.”

This passage very happily sets forth the manner in which, under the loose
mode of induction which proceeds _per enumerationem simplicem_, not
seeking for instances of such a kind as to be decisive of the question,
but generalizing from any which occur, or rather which are remembered,
opinions grow up with the apparent sanction of experience, which have no
foundation in the laws of nature at all. “Itaque recte respondit ille” (we
may say with Bacon(247)), “qui cum suspensa tabula in templo ei
monstraretur eorum, qui vota solverant, quod naufragii periculo elapsi
sint, atque interrogando premeretur, anne tum quidem Deorum numen
agnosceret, quæsivit denuo, _At ubi sunt illi depicti qui post vota
nuncupata perierunt_? Eadem ratio est fere omnis superstitionis, ut in
Astrologicis, in Somniis, Ominibus, Nemesibus, et hujusmodi; in quibus,
homines delectati hujusmodi vanitatibus, advertunt eventus, ubi implentur;
ast ubi fallunt, licet multo frequentius, tamen negligunt, et prætereunt.”
And he proceeds to say that, independently of the love of the marvelous,
or any other bias in the inclinations, there is a natural tendency in the
intellect itself to this kind of fallacy; since the mind is more moved by
affirmative instances, though negative ones are of most use in philosophy:
“Is tamen humano intellectui error est proprius et perpetuus, ut magis
moveatur et excitetur Affirmativis quam Negativis; cum rite et ordine
æquum se utrique præbere debeat; quin contra, in omni Axiomate vero
constituendo, major vis est instantiæ negativæ.”

But the greatest of all causes of non-observation is a preconceived
opinion. This it is which, in all ages, has made the whole race of
mankind, and every separate section of it, for the most part unobservant
of all facts, however abundant, even when passing under their own eyes,
which are contradictory to any first appearance, or any received tenet. It
is worth while to recall occasionally to the oblivious memory of mankind
some of the striking instances in which opinions that the simplest
experiment would have shown to be erroneous, continued to be entertained
because nobody ever thought of trying that experiment. One of the most
remarkable of these was exhibited in the Copernican controversy. The
opponents of Copernicus argued that the earth did not move, because if it
did, a stone let fall from the top of a high tower would not reach the
ground at the foot of the tower, but at a little distance from it, in a
contrary direction to the earth’s course; in the same manner (said they)
as, if a ball is let drop from the mast-head while the ship is in full
sail, it does not fall exactly at the foot of the mast, but nearer to the
stern of the vessel. The Copernicans would have silenced these objectors
at once if they had _tried_ dropping a ball from the mast-head, since they
would have found that it does fall exactly at the foot, as the theory
requires; but no; they admitted the spurious fact, and struggled vainly to
make out a difference between the two cases. “The ball was no _part_ of
the ship—and the motion forward was not _natural_, either to the ship or
to the ball. The stone, on the other hand, let fall from the top of the
tower, was a _part_ of the earth; and therefore, the diurnal and annular
revolutions which were _natural_ to the earth, were also _natural_ to the
stone; the stone would, therefore, retain the same motion with the tower,
and strike the ground precisely at the bottom of it.”(248)

Other examples, scarcely less striking, are recorded by Dr. Whewell,(249)
where imaginary laws of nature have continued to be received as real,
merely because no person had steadily looked at facts which almost every
one had the opportunity of observing. “A vague and loose mode of looking
at facts very easily observable, left men for a long time under the belief
that a body ten times as heavy as another falls ten times as fast; that
objects immersed in water are always magnified, without regard to the form
of the surface; that the magnet exerts an irresistible force; that crystal
is always found associated with ice; and the like. These and many others
are examples how blind and careless man can be even in observation of the
plainest and commonest appearances; and they show us that the mere
faculties of perception, although constantly exercised upon innumerable
objects, may long fail in leading to any exact knowledge.”

If even on physical facts, and these of the most obvious character, the
observing faculties of mankind can be to this degree the passive slaves of
their preconceived impressions, we need not be surprised that this should
be so lamentably true as all experience attests it to be, on things more
nearly connected with their stronger feelings—on moral, social, and
religious subjects. The information which an ordinary traveler brings back
from a foreign country, as the result of the evidence of his senses, is
almost always such as exactly confirms the opinions with which he set out.
He has had eyes and ears for such things only as he expected to see. Men
read the sacred books of their religion, and pass unobserved therein
multitudes of things utterly irreconcilable with even their own notions of
moral excellence. With the same authorities before them, different
historians, alike innocent of intentional misrepresentation, see only what
is favorable to Protestants or Catholics, royalists or republicans,
Charles I. or Cromwell; while others, having set out with the
preconception that extremes must be in the wrong, are incapable of seeing
truth and justice when these are wholly on one side.

The influence of a preconceived theory is well exemplified in the
superstitions of barbarians respecting the virtues of medicaments and
charms. The negroes, among whom coral, as of old among ourselves, is worn
as an amulet, affirm, according to Dr. Paris,(250) that its color “is
always affected by the state of health of the wearer, it becoming paler in
disease.” On a matter open to universal observation, a general proposition
which has not the smallest vestige of truth is received as a result of
experience; the preconceived opinion preventing, it would seem, any
observation whatever on the subject.

§ 4. For illustration of the first species of non-observation, that of
Instances, what has now been stated may suffice. But there may also be
non-observation of some material circumstances, in instances which have
not been altogether overlooked—nay, which may be the very instances on
which the whole superstructure of a theory has been founded. As, in the
cases hitherto examined, a general proposition was too rashly adopted, on
the evidence of particulars, true indeed, but insufficient to support it;
so in the cases to which we now turn, the particulars themselves have been
imperfectly observed, and the singular propositions on which the
generalization is grounded, or some at least of those singular
propositions, are false.

Such, for instance, was one of the mistakes committed in the celebrated
phlogistic theory; a doctrine which accounted for combustion by the
extrication of a substance called phlogiston, supposed to be contained in
all combustible matter. The hypothesis accorded tolerably well with
superficial appearances; the ascent of flame naturally suggests the escape
of a substance; and the visible residuum of ashes, in bulk and weight,
generally falls extremely short of the combustible material. The error
was, non-observation of an important portion of the actual residue,
namely, the gaseous products of combustion. When these were at last
noticed and brought into account, it appeared to be a universal law, that
all substances gain instead of losing weight by undergoing combustion; and
after the usual attempt to accommodate the old theory to the new fact by
means of an arbitrary hypothesis (that phlogiston had the quality of
positive levity instead of gravity), chemists were conducted to the true
explanation, namely, that instead of a substance separated, there was, on
the contrary, a substance absorbed.

Many of the absurd practices which have been deemed to possess medicinal
efficacy, have been indebted for their reputation to non-observance of
some accompanying circumstance which was the real agent in the cures
ascribed to them. Thus, of the sympathetic powder of Sir Kenelm Digby:
“Whenever any wound had been inflicted, this powder was applied to the
weapon that had inflicted it, which was, moreover, covered with ointment,
and dressed two or three times a day. The wound itself, in the mean time,
was directed to be brought together, and carefully bound up with clean
linen rags, but, _above all, to be let alone_ for seven days, at the end
of which period the bandages were removed, when the wound was generally
found perfectly united. The triumph of the cure was decreed to the
mysterious agency of the sympathetic powder which had been so assiduously
applied to the weapon, whereas it is hardly necessary to observe that the
promptness of the cure depended on the total exclusion of air from the
wound, and upon the sanative operations of nature not having received any
disturbance from the officious interference of art. The result, beyond all
doubt, furnished the first hint which led surgeons to the improved
practice of healing wounds by what is technically called the _first
intention_.”(251) “In all records,” adds Dr. Paris, of “extraordinary
cures performed by mysterious agents, there is a great desire to conceal
the remedies and other curative means which were simultaneously
administered with them; thus Oribasius commends in high terms a necklace
of Pæony root for the cure of epilepsy; but we learn that he always took
care to accompany its use with copious evacuations, although he assigns to
them no share of credit in the cure. In later times we have a good
specimen of this species of deception, presented to us in a work on
scrofula by Mr. Morley, written, as we are informed, for the sole purpose
of restoring the much-injured character and use of the Vervain; in which
the author directs the root of this plant to be tied with a yard of white
satin ribbon around the neck, where it is to remain until the patient is
cured; but mark—during this interval he calls to his aid the most active
medicines in the materia medica.”(252)

In other cases, the cures really produced by rest, regimen, and amusement
have been ascribed to the medicinal, or occasionally to the supernatural,
means which were put in requisition. “The celebrated John Wesley, while he
commemorates the triumph of sulphur and supplication over his bodily
infirmity, forgets to appreciate the resuscitating influence of four
months’ repose from his apostolic labors; and such is the disposition of
the human mind to place confidence in the operation of mysterious agents,
that we find him more disposed to attribute his cure to a brown paper
plaster of egg and brimstone, than to Dr. Fothergill’s salutary
prescription of country air, rest, asses’ milk, and horse exercise.”(253)

In the following example, the circumstance overlooked was of a somewhat
different character. “When the yellow fever raged in America, the
practitioners trusted exclusively to the copious use of mercury; at first
this plan was deemed so universally efficacious, that, in the enthusiasm
of the moment, it was triumphantly proclaimed that death never took place
after the mercury had evinced its effect upon the system: all this was
very true, but it furnished no proof of the efficacy of that metal, since
the disease in its aggravated form was so rapid in its career, that it
swept away its victims long before the system could be brought under
mercurial influence, while in its milder shape it passed off equally well
without any assistance from art.”(254)

In these examples the circumstance overlooked was cognizable by the
senses. In other cases, it is one the knowledge of which could only be
arrived at by reasoning; but the fallacy may still be classed under the
head to which, for want of a more appropriate name, we have given the
appellation Fallacies of Non-observation. It is not the nature of the
faculties which ought to have been employed, but the non-employment of
them, which constitutes this Natural Order of Fallacies. Wherever the
error is negative, not positive; wherever it consists especially in
_overlooking_, in being ignorant or unmindful of some fact which, if known
and attended to, would have made a difference in the conclusion arrived
at; the error is properly placed in the Class which we are considering. In
this Class, there is not, as in all other fallacies there is, a positive
misestimate of evidence actually had. The conclusion would be just, if the
portion which is seen of the case were the whole of it; but there is
another portion overlooked, which vitiates the result.

For instance, there is a remarkable doctrine which has occasionally found
a vent in the public speeches of unwise legislators, but which only in one
instance that I am aware of has received the sanction of a philosophical
writer, namely, M. Cousin, who in his preface to the _Gorgias_ of Plato,
contending that punishment must have some other and higher justification
than the prevention of crime, makes use of this argument—that if
punishment were only for the sake of example, it would be indifferent
whether we punished the innocent or the guilty, since the punishment,
considered as an example, is equally efficacious in either case. Now we
must, in order to go along with this reasoning, suppose, that the person
who feels himself under temptation, observing somebody punished, concludes
himself to be in danger of being punished likewise, and is terrified
accordingly. But it is forgotten that if the person punished is supposed
to be innocent, or even if there be any doubt of his guilt, the spectator
will reflect that his own danger, whatever it may be, is not contingent on
his guiltiness, but threatens him equally if he remains innocent, and how,
therefore, is he deterred from guilt by the apprehension of such
punishment? M. Cousin supposes that people will be dissuaded from guilt by
whatever renders the condition of the guilty more perilous, forgetting
that the condition of the innocent (also one of the elements in the
calculation) is, in the case supposed, made perilous in precisely an equal
degree. This is a fallacy of overlooking; or of non-observation, within
the intent of our classification.

Fallacies of this description are the great stumbling-block to correct
thinking in political economy. The economical workings of society afford
numerous cases in which the effects of a cause consist of two sets of
phenomena: the one immediate, concentrated, obvious to all eyes, and
passing, in common apprehension, for the whole effect; the other widely
diffused, or lying deeper under the surface, and which is exactly contrary
to the former. Take, for instance, the common notion so plausible at the
first glance, of the encouragement given to industry by lavish
expenditure. A, who spends his whole income, and even his capital, in
expensive living, is supposed to give great employment to labor. B, who
lives on a small portion, and invests the remainder in the funds, is
thought to give little or no employment. For every body sees the gains
which are made by A’s tradesmen, servants, and others, while his money is
spending. B’s savings, on the contrary, pass into the hands of the person
whose stock he purchased, who with it pays a debt he owed to some banker,
who lends it again to some merchant or manufacturer; and the capital being
laid out in hiring spinners and weavers, or carriers and the crews of
merchant vessels, not only gives immediate employment to at least as much
industry as A employs during the whole of his career, but coming back with
increase by the sale of the goods which have been manufactured or
imported, forms a fund for the employment of the same and perhaps a
greater quantity of labor in perpetuity. But the observer does not see,
and therefore does not consider, what becomes of B’s money; he does see
what is done with A’s; he observes the amount of industry which A’s
profusion feeds; he observes not the far greater quantity which it
prevents from being fed; and thence the prejudice, universal to the time
of Adam Smith, that prodigality encourages industry, and parsimony is a
discouragement to it.

The common argument against free trade was a fallacy of the same nature.
The purchaser of British silk encourages British industry; the purchaser
of Lyons silk encourages only French; the former conduct is patriotic, the
latter ought to be prevented by law. The circumstance is overlooked, that
the purchaser of any foreign commodity necessarily causes, directly or
indirectly, the export of an equivalent value of some article of home
production (beyond what would otherwise be exported), either to the same
foreign country or to some other; which fact, though from the complication
of the circumstances it can not always be verified by specific
observation, no observation can possibly be brought to contradict, while
the evidence of reasoning on which it rests is irrefragable. The fallacy
is, therefore, the same as in the preceding case, that of seeing a part
only of the phenomena, and imagining that part to be the whole; and may be
ranked among Fallacies of Non-observation.

§ 5. To complete the examination of the second of our five classes, we
have now to speak of Mal-observation; in which the error does not lie in
the fact that something is unseen, but that something seen is seen wrong.

Perception being infallible evidence of whatever is really perceived, the
error now under consideration can be committed no otherwise than by
mistaking for conception what is, in fact, inference. We have formerly
shown how intimately the two are blended in almost every thing which is
called observation, and still more in every Description.(255) What is
actually on any occasion perceived by our senses being so minute in
amount, and generally so unimportant a portion of the state of facts which
we wish to ascertain or to communicate; it would be absurd to say that
either in our observations, or in conveying their result to others, we
ought not to mingle inference with fact; all that can be said is, that
when we do so we ought to be aware of what we are doing, and to know what
part of the assertion rests on consciousness, and is therefore
indisputable, what part on inference, and is therefore questionable.

One of the most celebrated examples of a universal error produced by
mistaking an inference for the direct evidence of the senses, was the
resistance made, on the ground of common sense, to the Copernican system.
People fancied they _saw_ the sun rise and set, the stars revolve in
circles round the pole. We now know that they saw no such thing; what they
really saw was a set of appearances, equally reconcilable with the theory
they held and with a totally different one. It seems strange that such an
instance as this of the testimony of the senses pleaded with the most
entire conviction in favor of something which was a mere inference of the
judgment, and, as it turned out, a false inference, should not have opened
the eyes of the bigots of common sense, and inspired them with a more
modest distrust of the competency of mere ignorance to judge the
conclusions of cultivated thought.

In proportion to any person’s deficiency of knowledge and mental
cultivation is, generally, his inability to discriminate between his
inferences and the perceptions on which they were grounded. Many a
marvelous tale, many a scandalous anecdote, owes its origin to this
incapacity. The narrator relates, not what he saw or heard, but the
impression which he derived from what he saw or heard, and of which
perhaps the greater part consisted of inference, though the whole is
related, not as inference but as matter of fact. The difficulty of
inducing witnesses to restrain within any moderate limits the intermixture
of their inferences with the narrative of their perceptions, is well known
to experienced cross-examiners; and still more is this the case when
ignorant persons attempt to describe any natural phenomenon. “The simplest
narrative,” says Dugald Stewart,(256) “of the most illiterate observer
involves more or less of hypothesis; nay, in general, it will be found
that, in proportion to his ignorance, the greater is the number of
conjectural principles involved in his statements. A village apothecary
(and, if possible, in a still greater degree, an experienced nurse) is
seldom able to describe the plainest case, without employing a phraseology
of which every word is a theory: whereas a simple and genuine
specification of the phenomena which mark a particular disease; a
specification unsophisticated by fancy, or by preconceived opinions, may
be regarded as unequivocal evidence of a mind trained by long and
successful study to the most difficult of all arts, that of the faithful
_interpretation_ of nature.”

The universality of the confusion between perceptions and the inferences
drawn from them, and the rarity of the power to discriminate the one from
the other, ceases to surprise us when we consider that in the far greater
number of instances the actual perceptions of our senses are of no
importance or interest to us except as marks from which we infer something
beyond them. It is not the color and superficial extension perceived by
the eye that are important to us, but the object, of which those visible
appearances testify the presence; and where the sensation itself is
indifferent, as it generally is, we have no motive to attend particularly
to it, but acquire a habit of passing it over without distinct
consciousness, and going on at once to the inference. So that to know what
the sensation actually was, is a study in itself, to which painters, for
example, have to train themselves by special and long-continued discipline
and application. In things farther removed from the dominion of the
outward senses, no one who has not great experience in psychological
analysis is competent to break this intense association; and when such
analytic habits do not exist in the requisite degree, it is hardly
possible to mention any of the habitual judgments of mankind on subjects
of a high degree of abstraction, from the being of a God and the
immortality of the soul down to the multiplication table, which are not,
or have not been, considered as matter of direct intuition. So strong is
the tendency to ascribe an intuitive character to judgments which are mere
inferences, and often false ones. No one can doubt that many a deluded
visionary has actually believed that he was directly inspired from Heaven,
and that the Almighty had conversed with him face to face; which yet was
only, on his part, a conclusion drawn from appearances to his senses, or
feelings in his internal consciousness, which afforded no warrant for any
such belief. A caution, therefore, against this class of errors, is not
only needful but indispensable; though to determine whether, on any of the
great questions of metaphysics, such errors are actually committed,
belongs not to this place, but, as I have so often said, to a different
science.




                                Chapter V.


Fallacies Of Generalization.


§ 1. The class of Fallacies of which we are now to speak, is the most
extensive of all; embracing a greater number and variety of unfounded
inferences than any of the other classes, and which it is even more
difficult to reduce to sub-classes or species. If the attempt made in the
preceding books to define the principles of well-grounded generalization
has been successful, all generalizations not conformable to those
principles might, in a certain sense, be brought under the present class;
when, however, the rules are known and kept in view, but a casual lapse
committed in the application of them, this is a blunder, not a fallacy. To
entitle an error of generalization to the latter epithet, it must be
committed on principle; there must lie in it some erroneous general
conception of the inductive process; the legitimate mode of drawing
conclusions from observation and experiment must be fundamentally
misconceived.

Without attempting any thing so chimerical as an exhaustive classification
of all the misconceptions which can exist on the subject, let us content
ourselves with noting, among the cautions which might be suggested, a few
of the most useful and needful.

§ 2. In the first place, there are certain kinds of generalization which,
if the principles already laid down be correct, _must_ be groundless;
experience can not afford the necessary conditions for establishing them
by a correct induction. Such, for instance, are all inferences from the
order of nature existing on the earth, or in the solar system, to that
which may exist in remote parts of the universe; where the phenomena, for
aught we know, may be entirely different, or may succeed one another
according to different laws, or even according to no fixed law at all.
Such, again, in matters dependent on causation, are all universal
negatives, all propositions that assert impossibility. The non-existence
of any given phenomenon, however uniformly experience may as yet have
testified to the fact, proves at most that no cause, adequate to its
production, has yet manifested itself; but that no such causes exist in
nature can only be inferred if we are so foolish as to suppose that we
know all the forces in nature. The supposition would at least be premature
while our acquaintance with some even of those which we do know is so
extremely recent. And however much our knowledge of nature may hereafter
be extended, it is not easy to see how that knowledge could ever be
complete, or how, if it were, we could ever be assured of its being so.

The only laws of nature which afford sufficient warrant for attributing
impossibility (even with reference to the existing order of nature, and to
our own region of the universe) are, first, those of number and extension,
which are paramount to the laws of the succession of phenomena, and not
exposed to the agency of counteracting causes; and, secondly, the
universal law of causality itself. That no valuation in any effect or
consequent will take place while the whole of the antecedents remain the
same, may be affirmed with full assurance. But, that the addition of some
new antecedent might not entirely alter and subvert the accustomed
consequent, or that antecedents competent to do this do not exist in
nature, we are in no case empowered positively to conclude.

§ 3. It is next to be remarked that all generalizations which profess,
like the theories of Thales, Democritus, and others of the early Greek
speculators, to resolve all things into some one element, or like many
modern theories, to resolve phenomena radically different into the same,
are necessarily false. By radically different phenomena I mean impressions
on our senses which differ in quality, and not merely in degree. On this
subject what appeared necessary was said in the chapter on the Limits to
the Explanation of Laws of Nature; but as the fallacy is even in our own
times a common one, I shall touch on it somewhat further in this place.

When we say that the force which retains the planets in their orbits is
resolved into gravity, or that the force which makes substances combine
chemically is resolved into electricity, we assert in the one case what
is, and in the other case what might, and probably will ultimately, be a
legitimate result of induction. In both these cases motion is resolved
into motion. The assertion is, that a case of motion, which was supposed
to be special, and to follow a distinct law of its own, conforms to and is
included in the general law which regulates another class of motions. But,
from these and similar generalizations, countenance and currency have been
given to attempts to resolve, not motion into motion, but heat into
motion, light into motion, sensation itself into motion; states of
consciousness into states of the nervous system, as in the ruder forms of
the materialist philosophy; vital phenomena into mechanical or chemical
processes, as in some schools of physiology.

Now I am far from pretending that it may not be capable of proof, or that
it is not an important addition to our knowledge if proved, that certain
motions in the particles of bodies are the _conditions_ of the production
of heat or light; that certain assignable physical modifications of the
nerves may be the conditions not only of our sensations or emotions, but
even of our thoughts; that certain mechanical and chemical conditions may,
in the order of nature, be sufficient to determine to action the
physiological laws of life. All I insist upon, in common with every
thinker who entertains any clear idea of the logic of science, is, that it
shall not be supposed that by proving these things one step would be made
toward a real explanation of heat, light, or sensation; or that the
generic peculiarity of those phenomena can be in the least degree evaded
by any such discoveries, however well established. Let it be shown, for
instance, that the most complex series of physical causes and effects
succeed one another in the eye and in the brain to produce a sensation of
color; rays falling on the eye, refracted, converging, crossing one
another, making an inverted image on the retina, and after this a
motion—let it be a vibration, or a rush of nervous fluid, or whatever else
you are pleased to suppose, along the optic nerve—a propagation of this
motion to the brain itself, and as many more different motions as you
choose; still, at the end of these motions, there is something which is
not motion, there is a feeling or sensation of color. Whatever number of
motions we may be able to interpolate, and whether they be real or
imaginary, we shall still find, at the end of the series, a motion
antecedent and a color consequent. The mode in which any one of the
motions produces the next, may possibly be susceptible of explanation by
some general law of motion: but the mode in which the last motion produces
the sensation of color, can not be explained by any law of motion; it is
the law of color: which is, and must always remain, a peculiar thing.
Where our consciousness recognizes between two phenomena an inherent
distinction; where we are sensible of a difference which is not merely of
degree, and feel that no adding one of the phenomena to itself would
produce the other; any theory which attempts to bring either under the
laws of the other must be false; though a theory which merely treats the
one as a cause or condition of the other, may possibly be true.

§ 4. Among the remaining forms of erroneous generalization, several of
those most worthy of and most requiring notice have fallen under our
examination in former places, where, in investigating the rules of correct
induction, we have had occasion to advert to the distinction between it
and some common mode of the incorrect. In this number is what I have
formerly called the natural Induction of uninquiring minds, the induction
of the ancients, which proceeds _per enumerationem simplicem_: “This,
that, and the other A are B, I can not think of any A which is not B,
therefore every A is B.” As a final condemnation of this rude and slovenly
mode of generalization, I will quote Bacon’s emphatic denunciation of it;
the most important part, as I have more than once ventured to assert, of
the permanent service rendered by him to philosophy. “Inductio quæ
procedit per enumerationem simplicem, res puerilis est, et precario
concludit” (concludes only _by your leave_, or provisionally), “et
periculo exponitur ab instantiâ contradictoriâ, et plerumque secundum
pauciora quam par est, et _ex his tantummodo quæ præsto sunt pronunciat_.
At Inductio quæ ad inventionem et demonstrationem Scientiarum et Artium
erit utilis, Naturam separare debet, per rejectiones et exclusiones
debitas; ac deinde post negativas tot quot sufficiunt, super affirmativas
concludere.”

I have already said that the mode of Simple Enumeration is still the
common and received method of Induction in whatever relates to man and
society. Of this a very few instances, more by way of memento than of
instruction, may suffice. What, for example, is to be thought of all the
“common-sense” maxims for which the following may serve as the universal
formula, “Whatsoever has never been, will never be.” As for example:
negroes have never been as civilized as whites sometimes are, therefore it
is impossible they should be so. Women, as a class, are supposed not to
have hitherto been equal in intellect to men, therefore they are
necessarily inferior. Society can not prosper without this or the other
institution; _e.g._, in Aristotle’s time, without slavery; in later times,
without an established priesthood, without artificial distinctions of
rank, etc. One poor person in a thousand, educated, while the nine hundred
and ninety-nine remain uneducated, has usually aimed at raising himself
out of his class, therefore education makes people dissatisfied with the
condition of a laborer. Bookish men, taken from speculative pursuits and
set to work on something they know nothing about, have generally been
found or thought to do it ill; therefore philosophers are unfit for
business, etc., etc. All these are inductions by simple enumeration.
Reasons having some reference to the canons of scientific investigation
have been attempted to be given, however unsuccessfully, for some of these
propositions; but to the multitude of those who parrot them, the
_enumeratio simplex, ex __ his tantummodo quæ præsto sunt pronuncians_, is
the sole evidence. Their fallacy consists in this, that they are
inductions without elimination: there has been no real comparison of
instances, nor even ascertainment of the material facts in any given
instance. There is also the further error, of forgetting that such
generalizations, even if well established, could not be ultimate truths,
but must be results of laws much more elementary; and therefore, until
deduced from such, could at most be admitted as empirical laws, holding
good within the limits of space and time by which the particular
observations that suggested the generalization were bounded.

This error, of placing mere empirical laws, and laws in which there is no
direct evidence of causation, on the same footing of certainty as laws of
cause and effect, an error which is at the root of perhaps the greater
number of bad inductions, is exemplified only in its grossest form in the
kind of generalizations to which we have now referred. These, indeed, do
not possess even the degree of evidence which pertains to a
well-ascertained empirical law; but admit of refutation on the empirical
ground itself, without ascending to casual laws. A little reflection,
indeed, will show that mere negations can only form the ground of the
lowest and least valuable kind of empirical law. A phenomenon has never
been noticed; this only proves that the conditions of that phenomenon have
not yet occurred in experience, but does not prove that they may not occur
hereafter. There is a better kind of empirical law than this, namely, when
a phenomenon which is observed presents within the limits of observation a
series of gradations, in which a regularity, or something like a
mathematical law, is perceptible; from which, therefore, something may be
rationally presumed as to those terms of the series which are beyond the
limits of observation. But in negation there are no gradations, and no
series; the generalizations, therefore, which deny the possibility of any
given condition of man and society merely because it has never yet been
witnessed, can not possess this higher degree of validity even as
empirical laws. What is more, the minuter examination which that higher
order of empirical laws presupposes, being applied to the subject-matter
of these, not only does not confirm but actually refutes them. For in
reality the past history of Man and Society, instead of exhibiting them as
immovable, unchangeable, incapable of ever presenting new phenomena, shows
them, on the contrary, to be, in many most important particulars, not only
changeable, but actually undergoing a progressive change. The empirical
law, therefore, best expressive, in most cases, of the genuine result of
observation, would be, not that such and such a phenomenon will continue
unchanged, but that it will continue to change in some particular manner.

Accordingly, while almost all generalizations relating to Man and Society,
antecedent to the last fifty or sixty years, have erred in the gross way
which we have attempted to characterize, namely, by implicitly assuming
that nature and society will forever revolve in the same orbit, and
exhibit essentially the same phenomena; which is also the vulgar error of
the ostentatiously practical, the votaries of so-called common sense, in
our day, especially in Great Britain; the more thinking minds of the
present age, having applied a more minute analysis to the past records of
our race, have for the most part adopted a contrary opinion, that the
human species is in a state of necessary progression, and that from the
terms of the series which are past we may infer positively those which are
yet to come. Of this doctrine, considered as a philosophical tenet, we
shall have occasion to speak more fully in the concluding Book. If not, in
all its forms, free from error, it is at least free from the gross and
error which we previously exemplified. But, in all except the most
eminently philosophical minds, it is infected with precisely the same
_kind_ of fallacy as that is. For we must remember that even this other
and better generalization, the progressive change in the condition of the
human species, is, after all, but an empirical law; to which, too, it is
not difficult to point out exceedingly large exceptions; and even if these
could be got rid of, either by disputing the facts or by explaining and
limiting the theory, the general objection remains valid against the
supposed law, as applicable to any other than what, in our third book,
were termed Adjacent Cases. For not only is it no ultimate, but not even a
causal law. Changes do indeed take place in human affairs, but every one
of those changes depends on determinate causes; the “progressiveness of
the species” is not a cause, but a summary expression for the general
result of all the causes. So soon as, by a quite different sort of
induction, it shall be ascertained what causes have produced these
successive changes, from the beginning of history, in so far as they have
really taken place, and by what causes of a contrary tendency they have
been occasionally checked or entirely counteracted, we may then be
prepared to predict the future with reasonable foresight; we may be in
possession of the real _law_ of the future; and may be able to declare on
what circumstances the continuance of the same onward movement will
eventually depend. But this it is the error of many of the more advanced
thinkers, in the present age, to overlook; and to imagine that the
empirical law collected from a mere comparison of the condition of our
species at different past times, is a real law, is _the_ law of its
changes, not only past but also to come. The truth is, that the causes on
which the phenomena of the moral world depend, are in every age, and
almost in every country, combined in some different proportion; so that it
is scarcely to be expected that the general result of them all should
conform very closely, in its details at least, to any uniformly
progressive series. And all generalizations which affirm that mankind have
a tendency to grow better or worse, richer or poorer, more cultivated or
more barbarous, that population increases faster than subsistence, or
subsistence than population, that inequality of fortune has a tendency to
increase or to break down, and the like, propositions of considerable
value as empirical laws within certain (but generally rather narrow)
limits, are in reality true or false according to times and circumstances.

What we have said of empirical generalizations from times past to times
still to come, holds equally true of similar generalizations from present
times to times past; when persons whose acquaintance with moral and social
facts is confined to their own age, take the men and the things of that
age for the type of men and things in general, and apply without scruple
to the interpretation of the events of history, the empirical laws which
represent sufficiently for daily guidance the common phenomena of human
nature at that time and in that particular state of society. If examples
are wanted, almost every historical work, until a very recent period,
abounded in them. The same may be said of those who generalize empirically
from the people of their own country to the people of other countries, as
if human beings felt, judged, and acted everywhere in the same manner.

§ 5. In the foregoing instances, the distinction is confounded between
empirical laws, which express merely the customary order of the succession
of effects, and the laws of causation on which the effects depend. There
may, however, be incorrect generalization when this mistake is not
committed; when the investigation takes its proper direction, that of
causes, and the result erroneously obtained purports to be a really causal
law.

The most vulgar form of this fallacy is that which is commonly called
_post hoc, ergo propter hoc_, or, _cum hoc, ergo propter hoc_. As when it
was inferred that England owed her industrial pre-eminence to her
restrictions on commerce; as when the old school of financiers, and some
speculative writers, maintained that the national debt was one of the
causes of national prosperity; as when the excellence of the Church, of
the Houses of Lords and Commons, of the procedure of the law courts, etc.,
were inferred from the mere fact that the country had prospered under
them. In such cases as these, if it can be rendered probable by other
evidence that the supposed causes have some tendency to produce the effect
ascribed to them, the fact of its having been produced, though only in one
instance, is of some value as a verification by specific experience; but
in itself it goes scarcely any way at all toward establishing such a
tendency, since, admitting the effect, a hundred other antecedents could
show an equally strong title of _that_ kind to be considered as the cause.

In these examples we see bad generalization _a posteriori_, or empiricism
properly so called; causation inferred from casual conjunction, without
either due elimination, or any presumption arising from known properties
of the supposed agent. But bad generalization _a priori_ is fully as
common; which is properly called false theory; conclusions drawn, by way
of deduction, from properties of some one agent which is known or supposed
to be present, all other co-existing agents being overlooked. As the
former is the error of sheer ignorance, so the latter is especially that
of semi-instructed minds; and is mainly committed in attempting to explain
complicated phenomena by a simpler theory than their nature admits of. As
when one school of physicians sought for the universal principle of all
disease in “lentor and morbid viscidity of the blood,” and imputing most
bodily derangements to mechanical obstructions, thought to cure them by
mechanical remedies;(257) while another, the chemical school,
“acknowledged no source of disease but the presence of some hostile acid
or alkali, or some deranged condition in the chemical composition of the
fluid or solid parts,” and conceived, therefore, that “all remedies must
act by producing chemical changes in the body.” We find Tournefort busily
engaged in testing every vegetable juice, in order to discover in it some
traces of an acid or alkaline ingredient, which might confer upon it
medicinal activity. The fatal errors into which such an hypothesis was
liable to betray the practitioner, received an awful illustration in the
history of the memorable fever that raged at Leyden in the year 1699, and
which consigned two-thirds of the population of that city to an untimely
grave; an event which in a great measure depended upon the Professor
Sylvius de la Boe, who having just embraced the chemical doctrines of Van
Helmont, assigned the origin of the distemper to a prevailing acid, and
declared that its cure could alone [only] be effected by the copious
administration of absorbent and testaceous medicines.(258)

These aberrations in medical theory have their exact parallels in
politics. All the doctrines which ascribe absolute goodness to particular
forms of government, particular social arrangements, and even to
particular modes of education, without reference to the state of
civilization and the various distinguishing characters of the society for
which they are intended, are open to the same objection—that of assuming
one class of influencing circumstances to be the paramount rulers of
phenomena which depend in an equal or greater degree on many others. But
on these considerations it is the less necessary that we should now dwell,
as they will occupy our attention more largely in the concluding Book.

§ 6. The last of the modes of erroneous generalization to which I shall
advert, is that to which we may give the name of False Analogies. This
Fallacy stands distinguished from those already treated of by the
peculiarity that it does not even simulate a complete and conclusive
induction, but consists in the misapplication of an argument which is at
best only admissible as an inconclusive presumption, where real proof is
unattainable.

An argument from analogy, is an inference that what is true in a certain
case is true in a case known to be somewhat similar, but not known to be
exactly parallel, that is, to be similar in all the material
circumstances. An object has the property B: another object is not known
to have that property, but resembles the first in a property A, not known
to be connected with B; and the conclusion to which the analogy points, is
that this object has the property B also. As, for example, that the
planets are inhabited, because the earth is so. The planets resemble the
earth in describing elliptical orbits round the sun, in being attracted by
it and by one another, in being nearly spherical, revolving on their axes,
etc.; and, as we have now reason to believe from the revelations of the
spectroscope, are composed, in great part at least, of similar materials;
but it is not known that any of these properties, or all of them together,
are the conditions on which the possession of inhabitants is dependent, or
are marks of those conditions. Nevertheless, so long as we do not know
what the conditions are, they _may_ be connected by some law of nature
with those common properties; and to the extent of that possibility the
planets are more likely to be inhabited than if they did not resemble the
earth at all. This non-assignable and generally small increase of
probability, beyond what would otherwise exist, is all the evidence which
a conclusion can derive from analogy. For if we have the slightest reason
to suppose any real connection between the two properties A and B, the
argument is no longer one of analogy. If it had been ascertained (I
purposely put an absurd supposition) that there was a connection by
causation between the fact of revolving on an axis and the existence of
animated beings, or if there were any reasonable ground for even
suspecting such a connection, a probability would arise of the existence
of inhabitants in the planets, which might be of any degree of strength,
up to a complete induction; but we should then infer the fact from the
ascertained or presumed law of causation, and not from the analogy of the
earth.

The name analogy, however, is sometimes employed by extension to denote
those arguments of an inductive character but not amounting to a real
induction, which are employed to strengthen the argument drawn from a
simple resemblance. Though A, the property common to the two cases, can
not be shown to be the cause or effect of B, the analogical reasoner will
endeavor to show that there is some less close degree of connection
between them; that A is one of a set of conditions from which, when all
united, B would result; or is an occasional effect of some cause which has
been known also to produce B; and the like. Any of which things, if shown,
would render the existence of B by so much more probable, than if there
had not been even that amount of known connection between B and A.

Now an error or fallacy of analogy may occur in two ways. Sometimes it
consists in employing an argument of either of the above kinds with
correctness indeed, but overrating its probative force. This very common
aberration is sometimes supposed to be particularly incident to persons
distinguished for their imagination; but in reality it is the
characteristic intellectual vice of those whose imaginations are barren,
either from want of exercise, natural defect, or the narrowness of their
range of ideas. To such minds objects present themselves clothed in but
few properties; and as, therefore, few analogies between one object and
another occur to them, they almost invariably overrate the degree of
importance of those few: while one whose fancy takes a wider range,
perceives and remembers so many analogies tending to conflicting
conclusions, that he is much less likely to lay undue stress on any of
them. We always find that those are the greatest slaves to metaphorical
language who have but one set of metaphors.

But this is only one of the modes of error in the employment of arguments
of analogy. There is another, more properly deserving the name of fallacy;
namely, when resemblance in one point is inferred from resemblance in
another point, though there is not only no evidence to connect the two
circumstances by way of causation, but the evidence tends positively to
disconnect them. This is properly the Fallacy of False Analogies.

As a first instance, we may cite that favorite argument in defense of
absolute power, drawn from the analogy of paternal government in a family,
which government, however much in need of control, is not and can not be
controlled by the children themselves, while they remain children.
Paternal government, says the argument, works well; therefore, despotic
government in a state will work well. I waive, as not pertinent in this
place, all that could be said in qualification of the alleged excellence
of paternal government. However this might be, the argument from the
family to the state would not the less proceed on a false analogy;
implying that the beneficial working of parental government depends, in
the family, on the only point which it has in common with political
despotism, namely, irresponsibility. Whereas it depends, when real, not on
that but on two other circumstances of the case, the affection of the
parent for the children, and the superiority of the parent in wisdom and
experience; neither of which properties can be reckoned on, or are at all
likely to exist, between a political despot and his subjects; and when
either of these circumstances fails even in the family, and the influence
of the irresponsibility is allowed to work uncorrected, the result is any
thing but good government. This, therefore, is a false analogy.

Another example is the not uncommon _dictum_ that bodies politic have
youth, maturity, old age, and death, like bodies natural; that after a
certain duration of prosperity, they tend spontaneously to decay. This
also is a false analogy, because the decay of the vital powers in an
animated body can be distinctly traced to the natural progress of those
very changes of structure which, in their earlier stages, constitutes its
growth to maturity; while in the body politic the progress of those
changes can not, generally speaking, have any effect but the still further
continuance of growth: it is the stoppage of that progress, and the
commencement of retrogression, that alone would constitute decay. Bodies
politic die, but it is of disease, or violent death; they have no old age.

The following sentence from Hooker’s _Ecclesiastical Polity_ is an
instance of a false analogy from physical bodies to what are called bodies
politic. “As there could be in natural bodies no motion of any thing
unless there were some which moveth all things, and continueth immovable;
even so in politic societies there must be some unpunishable, or else no
man shall suffer punishment.” There is a double fallacy here, for not only
the analogy, but the premise from which it is drawn, is untenable. The
notion that there must be something immovable which moves all other
things, is the old scholastic error of a _primum mobile_.

The following instance I quote from Archbishop Whately’s _Rhetoric_: “It
would be admitted that a great and permanent diminution in the quantity of
some useful commodity, such as corn, or coal, or iron, throughout the
world, would be a serious and lasting loss; and again, that if the fields
and coal-mines yielded regularly double quantities, with the same labor,
we should be so much the richer; hence it might be inferred, that if the
quantity of gold and silver in the world were diminished one-half, or were
doubled, like results would follow; the utility of these metals, for the
purposes of coin, being very great. Now there are many points of
resemblance and many of difference, between the precious metals on the one
hand, and corn, coal, etc., on the other; but the important circumstance
to the supposed argument is, that the _utility_ of gold and silver (as
coin, which is far the chief) _depends on their value_, which is regulated
by their scarcity; or rather, to speak strictly, by the difficulty of
obtaining them; whereas, if corn and coal were ten times as abundant
(_i.e._, more easily obtained), a bushel of either would still be as
useful as now. But if it were twice as easy to procure gold as it is, a
sovereign would be twice as large; if only half as easy, it would be of
the size of a half-sovereign, and this (besides the trifling circumstance
of the cheapness or dearness of gold ornaments) would be all the
difference. The analogy, therefore, fails in the point essential to the
argument.”

The same author notices, after Bishop Copleston, the case of False Analogy
which consists in inferring from the similarity in many respects between
the metropolis of a country and the heart of the animal body, that the
increased size of the metropolis is a disease.

Some of the false analogies on which systems of physics were confidently
grounded in the time of the Greek philosophers, are such as we now call
fanciful, not that the resemblances are not often real, but that it is
long since any one has been inclined to draw from them the inferences
which were then drawn. Such, for instance, are the curious speculations of
the Pythagoreans on the subject of numbers. Finding that the distances of
the planets bore, or seemed to bear, to one another a proportion not
varying much from that of the divisions of the monochord, they inferred
from it the existence of an inaudible music, that of the spheres; as if
the music of a harp had depended solely on the numerical proportions, and
not on the material, nor even on the existence of any material, any
strings at all. It has been similarly imagined that certain combinations
of numbers, which were found to prevail in some natural phenomena, must
run through the whole of nature: as that there must be four elements,
because there are four possible combinations of hot and cold, wet and dry;
that there must be seven planets, because there were seven metals, and
even because there were seven days of the week. Kepler himself thought
that there could be only six planets, because there were only five regular
solids. With these we may class the reasonings, so common in the
speculations of the ancients, founded on a supposed _perfection_ in
nature; meaning by nature the customary order of events as they take place
of themselves without human interference. This also is a rude guess at an
analogy supposed to pervade all phenomena, however dissimilar. Since what
was thought to be perfection appeared to obtain in some phenomena, it was
inferred (in opposition to the plainest evidence) to obtain in all. “We
always suppose that which is better to take place in nature, if it be
possible,” says Aristotle; and the vaguest and most heterogeneous
qualities being confounded together under the notion of being _better_,
there was no limit to the wildness of the inferences. Thus, because the
heavenly bodies were “perfect,” they must move in circles and uniformly.
For “they” (the Pythagoreans) “would not allow,” says Geminus,(259) “of
any such disorder among divine and eternal things, as that they should
sometimes move quicker and sometimes slower, and sometimes stand still;
for no one would tolerate such anomaly in the movements even of a man, who
was decent and orderly. The occasions of life, however, are often reasons
for men going quicker or slower; but in the incorruptible nature of the
stars, it is not possible that any cause can be alleged of quickness or
slowness.” It is seeking an argument of analogy very far, to suppose that
the stars must observe the rules of decorum in gait and carriage
prescribed for themselves by the long-bearded philosophers satirized by
Lucian.

As late as the Copernican controversy it was urged as an argument in favor
of the true theory of the solar system, that it placed the fire, the
noblest element, in the centre of the universe. This was a remnant of the
notion that the order of nature must be perfect, and that perfection
consisted in conformity to rules of precedency in dignity, either real or
conventional. Again, reverting to numbers: certain numbers were _perfect_,
therefore those numbers must obtain in the great phenomena of nature. Six
was a perfect number, that is, equal to the sum of all its factors; an
additional reason why there must be exactly six planets. The Pythagoreans,
on the other hand, attributed perfection to the number ten; but agreed in
thinking that the perfect number must be somehow realized in the heavens;
and knowing only of nine heavenly bodies, to make up the enumeration, they
asserted “that there was an _antichthon_, or counter-earth, on the other
side of the sun, invisible to us.”(260) Even Huygens was persuaded that
when the number of the heavenly bodies had reached twelve, it could not
admit of any further increase. Creative power could not go beyond that
sacred number.

Some curious instances of false analogy are to be found in the arguments
of the Stoics to prove the equality of all crimes, and the equal
wretchedness of all who had not realized their idea of perfect virtue.
Cicero, toward the end of his Fourth Book, _De Finibus_, states some of
these as follows: “Ut, inquit, in fidibus plurimis, si nulla earum ita
contenta numeris sit, ut concentum servare possit, omnes æque incontentæ
sunt; sic peccata, quia discrepant, æque discrepant; paria sunt igitur.”
To which Cicero himself aptly answers, “æque contingit omnibus fidibus, ut
incontentæ sint; illud non continuo, ut æque incontentæ.” The Stoic
resumes: “Ut enim, inquit, gubernator æque peccat, si palearum navem
evertit, et si auri; item æque peccat qui parentem, et qui servum, injuriâ
verberat;” assuming, that because the magnitude of the interest at stake
makes no difference in the mere defect of skill, it can make none in the
moral defect: a false analogy. Again, “Quis ignorat, si plures ex alto
emergere velint, propius fore eos quidem ad respirandum, qui ad summam jam
aquam appropinquant, sed nihilo magis respirare posse, quam eos, qui sunt
in profundo? Nihil ergo adjuvat procedere, et progredi in virtute,
quominus miserrimus sit, antequam ad eam pervenerit, quoniam in aquâ nihil
adjuvat: et quoniam catuli, qui jam despecturi sunt, cæci æque, et ii qui
modo nati; Platonem quoque necesse est, quoniam nondum videbat sapientiam,
æque cæcum animo, ac Phalarim fuisse.” Cicero, in his own person, combats
these false analogies by other analogies tending to an opposite
conclusion. “Ista similia non sunt, Cato.... Illa sunt similia; hebes
acies est cuipiam oculorum: corpore alius languescit: hi curatione
adhibitâ levantur in dies: alter valet plus quotidie: alter videt. Hi
similes sunt omnibus, qui virtuti student; levantur vitiis, levantur
erroribus.”

§ 7. In these and all other arguments drawn from remote analogies, and
from metaphors, which are cases of analogy, it is apparent (especially
when we consider the extreme facility of raising up contrary analogies and
conflicting metaphors) that, so far from the metaphor or analogy proving
any thing, the applicability of the metaphor is the very thing to be made
out. It has to be shown that in the two cases asserted to be analogous,
the same law is really operating; that between the known resemblance and
the inferred one there is some connection by means of causation. Cicero
and Cato might have bandied opposite analogies forever; it rested with
each of them to prove by just induction, or at least to render probable,
that the case resembled the one set of analogous cases and not the other,
in the circumstances on which the disputed question really hinged.
Metaphors, for the most part, therefore, assume the proposition which they
are brought to prove: their use is, to aid the apprehension of it; to make
clearly and vividly comprehended what it is that the person who employs
the metaphor is proposing to make out; and sometimes also, by what media
he proposes to do so. For an apt metaphor, though it can not prove, often
suggests the proof.

For instance, when D’Alembert (I believe) remarked that in certain
governments only two creatures find their way to the highest places, the
eagle and the serpent, the metaphor not only conveys with great vividness
the assertion intended, but contributes toward substantiating it, by
suggesting, in a lively manner, the means by which the two opposite
characters thus typified effect their rise. When it is said that a certain
person misunderstands another because the lesser of two objects can not
comprehend the greater, the application of what is true in the literal
sense of the word _comprehend_, to its metaphorical sense, points to the
fact which is the ground and justification of the assertion, viz., that
one mind can not thoroughly understand another unless it can contain it in
itself, that is, unless it possesses all that is contained in the other.
When it is urged as an argument for education, that if the soil is left
uncultivated, weeds will spring up, the metaphor, though no proof, but a
statement of the thing to be proved, states it in terms which, by
suggesting a parallel case, put the mind upon the track of the real proof.
For, the reason why weeds grow in an uncultivated soil, is that the seeds
of worthless products exist everywhere, and can germinate and grow in
almost all circumstances, while the reverse is the case with those which
are valuable; and this being equally true of mental products, this mode of
conveying an argument, independently of its rhetorical advantages, has a
logical value; since it not only suggests the grounds of the conclusion,
but points to another case in which those grounds have been found, or at
least deemed to be, sufficient.

On the other hand, when Bacon, who is equally conspicuous in the use and
abuse of figurative illustration, says that the stream of time has brought
down to us only the least valuable part of the writings of the ancients,
as a river carries froth and straws floating on its surface, while more
weighty objects sink to the bottom; this, even if the assertion
illustrated by it were true, would be no good illustration, there being no
parity of cause. The levity by which substances float on a stream, and the
levity which is synonymous with worthlessness, have nothing in common
except the name; and (to show how little value there is in the metaphor)
we need only change the word into _buoyancy_, to turn the semblance of
argument involved in Bacon’s illustration against himself.

A metaphor, then, is not to be considered as an argument, but as an
assertion that an argument exists; that a parity subsists between the case
from which the metaphor is drawn and that to which it is applied. This
parity may exist though the two cases be apparently very remote from one
another; the only resemblance existing between them may be a resemblance
of relations, an analogy in Ferguson’s and Archbishop Whately’s sense: as
in the preceding instance, in which an illustration from agriculture was
applied to mental cultivation.

§ 8. To terminate the subject of Fallacies of Generalization, it remains
to be said, that the most fertile source of them is bad classification:
bringing together in one group, and under one name, things which have no
common properties, or none but such as are too unimportant to allow
general propositions of any considerable value to be made respecting the
class. The misleading effect is greatest, when a word which in common use
expresses some definite fact, is extended by slight links of connection to
cases in which that fact does not exist, but some other or others, only
slightly resembling it. Thus Bacon,(261) in speaking of the _Idola_ or
Fallacies arising from notions _temere et inæqualiter à rebus abstractæ_,
exemplifies them by the notion of Humidum or Wet, so familiar in the
physics of antiquity and of the Middle Ages. “Invenietur verbum istud,
Humidum, nihil aliud quam nota confusa diversarum actionum, quæ nullam
constantiam aut reductionem patiuntur. Significat enim, et quod circa
aliud corpus facile se circumfundit; et quod in se est indeterminabile,
nec consistere potest; et quod facile cedit undique; et quod facile se
dividit et dispergit; et quod facile se unit et colligit; et quod facile
fluit, et in motu ponitur; et quod alteri corpori facile adhæret, idque
madefacit; et quod facile reducitur in liquidum, sive colliquatur, cum
antea consisteret. Itaque quum ad hujus nominis prædicationem et
impositionem ventum sit; si alia accipias, flamma humida est; si alia
accipias, aer humidus non est; si alia, pulvis minutus humidus est; si
alia, vitrum humidum est: ut facile appareat, istam notionem ex aquâ
tantum, et communibus et vulgaribus liquoribus, absque ullâ debitâ
verificatione, temere abstractam esse.”

Bacon himself is not exempt from a similar accusation when inquiring into
the nature of heat: where he occasionally proceeds like one who, seeking
for the cause of hardness, after examining that quality in iron, flint,
and diamond, should expect to find that it is something which can be
traced also in hard water, a hard knot, and a hard heart.

The word κίνησις in the Greek philosophy, and the words Generation and
Corruption, both then and long afterward, denoted such a multitude of
heterogeneous phenomena, that any attempt at philosophizing in which those
words were used was almost as necessarily abortive as if the word _hard_
had been taken to denote a class including all the things mentioned above.
Κίνησις, for instance, which properly signified motion, was taken to
denote not only all motion but even all change: ἀλλοίωσις being recognized
as one of the modes of κίνησις. The effect was, to connect with every form
of ἀλλοίωσις or change, ideas drawn from motion in the proper and literal
sense, and which had no real connection with any other kind of κίνησις
than that. Aristotle and Plato labored under a continual embarrassment
from this misuse of terms. But if we proceed further in this direction we
shall encroach upon the Fallacy of Ambiguity, which belongs to a different
class, the last in order of our classification, Fallacies of Confusion.




                               Chapter VI.


Fallacies Of Ratiocination.


§ 1. We have now, in our progress through the classes of Fallacies,
arrived at those to which, in the common books of logic, the appellation
is in general exclusively appropriated; those which have their seat in the
ratiocinative or deductive part of the investigation of truth. Of these
fallacies it is the less necessary for us to insist at any length, as they
have been most satisfactorily treated in a work familiar to almost all, in
this country at least, who feel any interest in these speculations,
Archbishop Whately’s _Logic_. Against the more obvious forms of this class
of fallacies, the rules of the syllogism are a complete protection. Not
(as we have so often said) that ratiocination can not be good unless it be
in the form of a syllogism; but that, by showing it in that form, we are
sure to discover if it be bad, or at least if it contain any fallacy of
this class.

§ 2. Among Fallacies of Ratiocination, we ought perhaps to include the
errors committed in processes which have the appearance only, not the
reality, of an inference from premises; the fallacies connected with the
conversion and æquipollency of propositions. I believe errors of this
description to be far more frequently committed than is generally
supposed, or than their extreme obviousness might seem to admit of. For
example, the simple conversion of a universal affirmative proposition, All
A are B, therefore all B are A, I take to be a very common form of error:
though committed, like many other fallacies, oftener in the silence of
thought than in express words, for it can scarcely be clearly enunciated
without being detected. And so with another form of fallacy, not
substantially different from the preceding: the erroneous conversion of an
hypothetical proposition. The proper converse of an hypothetical
proposition is this: If the consequent be false, the antecedent is false;
but this, If the consequent be true, the antecedent is true, by no means
holds good, but is an error corresponding to the simple conversion of a
universal affirmative. Yet hardly any thing is more common than for
people, in their private thoughts, to draw this inference. As when the
conclusion is accepted, which it so often is, for proof of the premises.
That the premises can not be true if the conclusion is false, is the
unexceptionable foundation of the legitimate mode of reasoning called
_reductio ad absurdum_. But people continually think and express
themselves, as if they also believed that the premises can not be false if
the conclusion is true. The truth, or supposed truth, of the inferences
which follow from a doctrine, often enables it to find acceptance in spite
of gross absurdities in it. How many philosophical systems which had
scarcely any intrinsic recommendation, have been received by thoughtful
men because they were supposed to lend additional support to religion,
morality, some favorite view of politics, or some other cherished
persuasion: not merely because their wishes were thereby enlisted on its
side, but because its leading to what they deemed sound conclusions
appeared to them a strong presumption in favor of its truth: though the
presumption, when viewed in its true light, amounted only to the absence
of that particular evidence of falsehood, which would have resulted from
its leading by correct inference to something already known to be false.

Again, the very frequent error in conduct, of mistaking reverse of wrong
for right, is the practical form of a logical error with respect to the
Opposition of Propositions. It is committed for want of the habit of
distinguishing the _contrary_ of a proposition from the _contradictory_ of
it, and of attending to the logical canon, that contrary propositions,
though they can not both be true, may both be false. If the error were to
express itself in words, it would run distinctly counter to this canon. It
generally, however, does not so express itself, and to compel it to do so
is the most effectual method of detecting and exposing it.

§ 3. Among Fallacies of Ratiocination are to be ranked, in the first
place, all the cases of vicious syllogism laid down in the books. These
generally resolve themselves into having more than three terms to the
syllogism, either avowedly, or in the covert mode of an undistributed
middle term, or an _illicit process_ of one of the two extremes. It is
not, indeed, very easy fully to convict an argument of falling under any
one of these vicious cases in particular; for the reason already more than
once referred to, that the premises are seldom formally set out: if they
were, the fallacy would impose upon nobody; and while they are not, it is
almost always to a certain degree optional in what manner the suppressed
link shall be filled up. The rules of the syllogism are rules for
compelling a person to be aware of the whole of what he must undertake to
defend if he persists in maintaining his conclusion. He has it almost
always in his power to make his syllogism good by introducing a false
premise; and hence it is scarcely ever possible decidedly to affirm that
any argument involves a bad syllogism: but this detracts nothing from the
value of the syllogistic rules, since it is by them that a reasoner is
compelled distinctly to make his election what premises he is prepared to
maintain. The election made, there is generally so little difficulty in
seeing whether the conclusion follows from the premises set out, that we
might without much logical impropriety have merged this fourth class of
fallacies in the fifth, or Fallacies of Confusion.

§ 4. Perhaps, however, the commonest, and certainly the most dangerous
fallacies of this class, are those which do not lie in a single syllogism,
but slip in between one syllogism and another in a chain of argument, and
are committed by _changing the premises_. A proposition is proved, or an
acknowledged truth laid down, in the first part of an argumentation, and
in the second a further argument is founded not on the same proposition,
but on some other, resembling it sufficiently to be mistaken for it.
Instances of this fallacy will be found in almost all the argumentative
discourses of unprecise thinkers; and we need only here advert to one of
the obscurer forms of it, recognized by the school-men as the fallacy _à
dicto secundum quid ad dictum simpliciter_. This is committed when, in the
premises, a proposition is asserted with a qualification, and the
qualification lost sight of in the conclusion; or oftener, when a
limitation or condition, though not asserted, is necessary to the truth of
the proposition, but is forgotten when that proposition comes to be
employed as a premise. Many of the bad arguments in vogue belong to this
class of error. The premise is some admitted truth, some common maxim, the
reasons or evidence for which have been forgotten, or are not thought of
at the time, but if they had been thought of would have shown the
necessity of so limiting the premise that it would no longer have
supported the conclusion drawn from it.

Of this nature is the fallacy in what is called, by Adam Smith and others,
the Mercantile Theory in Political Economy. That theory sets out from the
common maxim, that whatever brings in money enriches; or that every one is
rich in proportion to the quantity of money he obtains. From this it is
concluded that the value of any branch of trade, or of the trade of the
country altogether, consists in the balance of money it brings in; that
any trade which carries more money out of the country than it draws into
it is a losing trade; that therefore money should be attracted into the
country and kept there, by prohibitions and bounties; and a train of
similar corollaries. All for want of reflecting that if the riches of an
individual are in proportion to the quantity of money he can command, it
is because that is the measure of his power of purchasing money’s worth;
and is therefore subject to the proviso that he is not debarred from
employing his money in such purchases. The premise, therefore, is only
true _secundum quid_; but the theory assumes it to be true absolutely, and
infers that increase of money is increase of riches, even when produced by
means subversive of the condition under which alone money can be riches.

A second instance is, the argument by which it used to be contended,
before the commutation of tithe, that tithes fell on the landlord, and
were a deduction from rent; because the rent of tithe-free land was always
higher than that of land of the same quality, and the same advantages of
situation, subject to tithe. Whether it be true or not that a tithe falls
on rent, a treatise on Logic is not the place to examine; but it is
certain that this is no proof of it. Whether the proposition be true or
false, tithe-free land must, by the necessity of the case, pay a higher
rent. For if tithes do not fall on rent, it must be because they fall on
the consumer; because they raise the price of agricultural produce. But if
the produce be raised in price, the farmer of tithe-free as well as the
farmer of tithed land gets the benefit. To the latter the rise is but a
compensation for the tithe he pays; to the first, who pays none, it is
clear gain, and therefore enables him, and if there be freedom of
competition, forces him, to pay so much more rent to his landlord. The
question remains, to what class of fallacies this belongs. The premise is,
that the owner of tithed land receives less rent than the owner of
tithe-free land; the conclusion is, that therefore he receives less than
he himself would receive if tithe were abolished. But the premise is only
true conditionally; the owner of tithed land receives less than what the
owner of tithe-free land is enabled to receive _when other lands are
tithed_; while the conclusion is applied to a state of circumstances in
which that condition fails, and in which, by consequence, the premise will
not be true. The fallacy, therefore, is _à dicto secundum quid ad dictum
simpliciter_.

A third example is the opposition sometimes made to legitimate
interferences of government in the economical affairs of society, grounded
on a misapplication of the maxim, that an individual is a better judge
than the government of what is for his own pecuniary interest. This
objection was urged to Mr. Wakefield’s principle of colonization; the
concentration of the settlers, by fixing such a price on unoccupied land
as may preserve the most desirable proportion between the quantity of land
in culture and the laboring population. Against this it was argued, that
if individuals found it for their advantage to occupy extensive tracts of
land, they, being better judges of their own interest than the legislature
(which can only proceed on general rules), ought not to be restrained from
doing so. But in this argument it was forgotten that the fact of a
person’s taking a large tract of land is evidence only that it is his
interest to take as much as other people, but not that it might not be for
his interest to content himself with less, if he could be assured that
other people would do so too; an assurance which nothing but a government
regulation can give. If all other people took much, and he only a little,
he would reap none of the advantages derived from the concentration of the
population and the consequent possibility of procuring labor for hire, but
would have placed himself, without equivalent, in a situation of voluntary
inferiority. The proposition, therefore, that the quantity of land which
people will take when left to themselves is that which is most for their
interest to take, is true only _secundum quid_: it is only their interest
while they have no guarantee for the conduct of one another. But the
arrangement disregards the limitation, and takes the proposition for true
_simpliciter_.

One of the conditions oftenest dropped, when what would otherwise be a
true proposition is employed as a premise for proving others, is the
condition of _time_. It is a principle of political economy that prices,
profits, wages, etc., “always find their level;” but this is often
interpreted as if it meant that they are always, or generally, _at_ their
level, while the truth is, as Coleridge epigrammatically expresses it,
that they are always _finding_ their level, “which might be taken as a
paraphrase or ironical definition of a storm.”

Under the same head of fallacy (_à dicto secundum quid ad dictum
simpliciter_) might be placed all the errors which are vulgarly called
misapplications of abstract truths; that is, where a principle, true (as
the common expression is) _in the abstract_, that is, all modifying causes
being supposed absent, is reasoned on as if it were true absolutely, and
no modifying circumstance could ever by possibility exist. This very
common form of error it is not requisite that we should exemplify here, as
it will be particularly treated of hereafter in its application to the
subjects on which it is most frequent and most fatal, those of politics
and society.(262)




                               Chapter VII.


Fallacies Of Confusion.


§ 1. Under this fifth and last class it is convenient to arrange all those
fallacies in which the source of error is not so much a false estimate of
the probative force of known evidence, as an indistinct, indefinite, and
fluctuating conception of what the evidence is.

At the head of these stands that multitudinous body of fallacious
reasonings in which the source of error is the ambiguity of terms: when
something which is true if a word be used in a particular sense, is
reasoned on as if it were true in another sense. In such a case there is
not a mal-estimation of evidence, because there is not properly any
evidence to the point at all; there is evidence, but to a different point,
which from a confused apprehension of the meaning of the terms used, is
supposed to be the same. This error will naturally be oftener committed in
our ratiocinations than in our direct inductions, because in the former we
are deciphering our own or other people’s notes, while in the latter we
have the things themselves present, either to the senses or to the memory.
Except, indeed, when the induction is not from individual cases to a
generality, but from generalities to a still higher generalization; in
that case the fallacy of ambiguity may affect the inductive process as
well as the ratiocinative. It occurs in ratiocination in two ways: when
the middle term is ambiguous, or when one of the terms of the syllogism is
taken in one sense in the premises, and in another sense in the
conclusion.

Some good exemplifications of this fallacy are given by Archbishop
Whately. “One case,” says he, “which may be regarded as coming under the
head of Ambiguous Middle, is (what I believe logical writers mean by
‘_Fallacia Figuræ Dictionis_’) the fallacy built on the grammatical
structure of language, from men’s usually taking for granted that
_paronymous_ (or _conjugate_) words, _i.e._, those belonging to each
other, as the substantive, adjective, verb, etc., of the same root, have a
precisely corresponding meaning; which is by no means universally the
case. Such a fallacy could not indeed be even exhibited in strict logical
form, which would preclude even the attempt at it, since it has two middle
terms in sound as well as sense. But nothing is more common in practice
than to vary continually the terms employed, with a view to grammatical
convenience; nor is there any thing unfair in such a practice, as long as
the _meaning_ is preserved unaltered; _e.g._, ‘murder should be punished
with death; this man is a murderer, therefore he deserves to die,’ etc.
Here we proceed on the assumption (in this case just) that to commit
murder, and to be a murderer—to deserve death, and to be one who ought to
die, are, respectively, equivalent expressions; and it would frequently
prove a heavy inconvenience to be debarred this kind of liberty; but the
abuse of it gives rise to the Fallacy in question; _e.g._, _projectors_
are unfit to be trusted; this man has formed a _project_, therefore he is
unfit to be trusted: here the sophist proceeds on the hypothesis that he
who forms a _project_ must be a _projector_: whereas the bad sense that
commonly attaches to the latter word, is not at all implied in the former.
This fallacy may often be considered as lying not in the Middle, but in
one of the terms of the Conclusion; so that the conclusion drawn shall not
be, in reality, at all warranted by the premises, though it will appear to
be so, by means of the grammatical affinity of the words; _e.g._, to be
acquainted with the guilty is a _presumption_ of guilt; this man is so
acquainted, therefore we may _presume_ that he is guilty: this argument
proceeds on the supposition of an exact correspondence between _presume_
and _presumption_, which, however, does not really exist; for
‘presumption’ is commonly used to express a kind of _slight suspicion_;
whereas, ‘to presume’ amounts to actual belief. There are innumerable
instances of a non-correspondence in paronymous words, similar to that
above instanced; as between _art_ and _artful_, _design_ and _designing_,
_faith_ and _faithful_, etc.; and the more slight the variation of the
meaning, the more likely is the fallacy to be successful; for when the
words have become so widely removed in sense as ‘pity’ and ‘pitiful,’
every one would perceive such a fallacy, nor would it be employed but in
jest.(263)

“The present Fallacy is nearly allied to, or rather, perhaps, may be
regarded as a branch of, that founded on _etymology_—viz., when a term is
used, at one time in its customary, and at another in its etymological
sense. Perhaps no example of this can be found that is more extensively
and mischievously employed than in the case of the word _representative_:
assuming that its right meaning must correspond exactly with the strict
and original sense of the verb ‘represent,’ the sophist persuades the
multitude that a member of the House of Commons is bound to be guided in
all points by the opinion of his constituents; and, in short, to be merely
their _spokesman_; whereas law and custom, which in this case may be
considered as fixing the meaning of the term, require no such thing, but
enjoin the representative to act according to the best of his _own_
judgment, and on his own responsibility.”

The following are instances of great practical importance, in which
arguments are habitually founded on a verbal ambiguity.

The mercantile public are frequently led into this fallacy by the phrase
“scarcity of money.” In the language of commerce, “money” has two
meanings: _currency_, or the circulating medium; and _capital seeking
investment_, especially investment on loan. In this last sense the word is
used when the “money market” is spoken of, and when the “value of money”
is said to be high or low, the rate of interest being meant. The
consequence of this ambiguity is, that as soon as scarcity of money in the
latter of these senses begins to be felt—as soon as there is difficulty of
obtaining loans, and the rate of interest is high—it is concluded that
this must arise from causes acting upon the quantity of money in the other
and more popular sense; that the circulating medium must have diminished
in quantity, or ought to be increased. I am aware that, independently of
the double meaning of the term, there are in the facts themselves some
peculiarities, giving an apparent support to this error; but the ambiguity
of the language stands on the very threshold of the subject, and
intercepts all attempts to throw light upon it.

Another ambiguous expression which continually meets us in the political
controversies of the present time, especially in those which relate to
organic changes, is the phrase “influence of property”—which is sometimes
used for the influence of respect for superior intelligence or gratitude
for the kind offices which persons of large property have it so much in
their power to bestow; at other times for the influence of fear; fear of
the worst sort of power, which large property also gives to its possessor,
the power of doing mischief to dependents. To confound these two, is the
standing fallacy of ambiguity brought against those who seek to purify the
electoral system from corruption and intimidation. Persuasive influence,
acting through the conscience of the voter, and carrying his heart and
mind with it, is beneficial—therefore (it is pretended) coercive
influence, which compels him to forget that he is a moral agent, or to act
in opposition to his moral convictions, ought not to be placed under
restraint.

Another word which is often turned into an instrument of the fallacy of
ambiguity, is Theory. In its most proper acceptation, theory means the
completed result of philosophical induction from experience. In that
sense, there are erroneous as well as true theories, for induction may be
incorrectly performed, but theory of some sort is the necessary result of
knowing any thing of a subject, and having put one’s knowledge into the
form of general propositions for the guidance of practice. In this, the
proper sense of the word, Theory is the explanation of practice. In
another and a more vulgar sense, theory means any mere fiction of the
imagination, endeavoring to conceive how a thing may possibly have been
produced, instead of examining how it was produced. In this sense only are
theory and theorists unsafe guides; but because of this, ridicule or
discredit is attempted to be attached to theory in its proper sense, that
is, to legitimate generalization, the end and aim of all philosophy; and a
conclusion is represented as worthless, just because that has been done
which, if done correctly, constitutes the highest worth that a principle
for the guidance of practice can possess, namely, to comprehend in a few
words the real law on which a phenomenon depends, or some property or
relation which is universally true of it.

“The Church” is sometimes understood to mean the clergy alone, sometimes
the whole body of believers, or at least of communicants. The declamations
respecting the inviolability of church property are indebted for the
greater part of their apparent force to this ambiguity. The clergy, being
called the church, are supposed to be the real owners of what is called
church property; whereas they are in truth only the managing members of a
much larger body of proprietors, and enjoy on their own part a mere
usufruct, not extending beyond a life interest.

The following is a Stoical argument taken from Cicero, _De Finibus_, book
the third: “Quod est bonum, omne laudabile est. Quod autem laudabile est,
omne honestum est. Bonum igitur quod est, honestum est.” Here the
ambiguous word is _laudabile_, which in the minor premise means any thing
which mankind are accustomed, on good grounds, to admire or value; as
beauty, for instance, or good fortune: but in the major, it denotes
exclusively moral qualities. In much the same manner the Stoics endeavored
logically to justify as philosophical truths, their figurative and
rhetorical expressions of ethical sentiment: as that the virtuous man is
alone free, alone beautiful, alone a king, etc. Whoever has virtue has
Good (because it has been previously determined not to call any thing else
good); but, again, Good necessarily includes freedom, beauty, and even
kingship, all these being good things; therefore whoever has virtue has
all these.

The following is an argument of Descartes to prove, in his _a priori_
manner, the being of a God. The conception, says he, of an infinite Being
proves the real existence of such a being. For if there is not really any
such being, _I_ must have made the conception; but if I could make it, I
can also unmake it; which evidently is not true; therefore there must be,
externally to myself, an archetype, from which the conception was derived.
In this argument (which, it may be observed, would equally prove the real
existence of ghosts and of witches) the ambiguity is in the pronoun _I_,
by which, in one place, is to be understood my _will_, in another the
_laws of my nature_. If the conception, existing as it does in my mind,
had no original without, the conclusion would unquestionably follow that
_I_ made it; that is, the laws of my nature must have somehow evolved it:
but that my _will_ made it, would not follow. Now when Descartes afterward
adds that I can not unmake the conception, he means that I can not get rid
of it by an act of my will: which is true, but is not the proposition
required. I can as much unmake this conception as I can any other: no
conception which I have once had, can I ever dismiss by mere volition; but
what some of the laws of my nature have produced, other laws, or those
same laws in other circumstances, may, and often do, subsequently efface.

Analogous to this are some of the ambiguities in the free-will
controversy; which, as they will come under special consideration in the
concluding Book, I only mention _memoriæ causâ_. In that discussion, too,
the word _I_ is often shifted from one meaning to another, at one time
standing for my volitions, at another time for the actions which are the
consequences of them, or the mental dispositions from which they proceed.
The latter ambiguity is exemplified in an argument of Coleridge (in his
_Aids to Reflection_), in support of the freedom of the will. It is not
true, he says, that a man is governed by motives; “the man makes the
motive, not the motive the man;” the proof being that “what is a strong
motive to one man is no motive at all to another.” The premise is true,
but only amounts to this, that different persons have different degrees of
susceptibility to the same motive; as they have also to the same
intoxicating liquid, which, however, does not prove that they are free to
be drunk or not drunk, whatever quantity of the fluid they may drink. What
is proved is, that certain mental conditions in the person himself must
co-operate, in the production of the act, with the external inducement;
but those mental conditions also are the effect of causes; and there is
nothing in the argument to prove that they can arise without a cause—that
a spontaneous determination of the will, without any cause at all, ever
takes place, as the free-will doctrine supposes.

The double use, in the free-will controversy, of the word Necessity, which
sometimes stands only for Certainty, at other times for Compulsion;
sometimes for what _can not_ be prevented, at other times only for what we
have reason to be assured _will_ not; we shall have occasion hereafter to
pursue to some of its ulterior consequences.

A most important ambiguity, both in common and in metaphysical language,
is thus pointed out by Archbishop Whately in the Appendix to his Logic:
“_Same_ (as well as _One_, _Identical_, and other words derived from them)
is used frequently in a sense very different from its primary one, as
applicable to a _single_ object; being employed to denote great
_similarity_. When several objects are undistinguishably alike, _one
single description_ will apply equally to any of them; and thence they are
said to be all of _one and the same_ nature, appearance, etc. As, _e.g._,
when we say ‘this house is built of the _same_ stone with such another,’
we only mean that the stones are undistinguishable in their qualities; not
that the one building was pulled down, and the other constructed with the
materials. Whereas _sameness_, in the primary sense, does not even
necessarily imply similarity; for if we say of any man that he is greatly
altered since such a time, we understand, and indeed imply by the very
expression, that he is _one person_, though different in several
qualities. It is worth observing also, that Same, in the secondary sense,
admits, according to popular usage, of degrees: we speak of two things
being _nearly_ the same, but not entirely: personal identity does not
admit of degrees. Nothing, perhaps, has contributed more to the error of
Realism than inattention to this ambiguity. When several persons are said
to have _one and the same_ opinion, thought, or idea, many men,
overlooking the true simple statement of the case, which is, that they are
_all thinking alike_, look for something more abstruse and mystical, and
imagine there must be some _One Thing_, in the primary sense, though not
an individual which is present at once in the mind of each of these
persons; and thence readily sprung Plato’s theory of Ideas, each of which
was, according to him, one real, eternal object, existing entire and
complete in each of the individual objects that are known by one name.”

It is, indeed, not a matter of inference, but of authentic history, that
Plato’s doctrine of Ideas, and the Aristotelian doctrine (in this respect
similar to the Platonic) of substantial forms and second substances, grew
up in the precise way here pointed out; from the supposed necessity of
finding, in things which were said to have the _same_ nature, or the
_same_ qualities, something which was the _same_ in the very sense in
which a man is the same as himself. All the idle speculations respecting
τὸ ὄν, τὸ ἕν, τὸ ὅμοιον, and similar abstractions, so common in the
ancient and in some modern schools of thought, sprang from the same
source. The Aristotelian logicians saw, however, one case of the
ambiguity, and provided against it with their peculiar felicity in the
invention of technical language, when they distinguished things which
differed both _specie_ and _numero_, from those which differed _numero
tantum_, that is, which were exactly alike (in some particular respect at
least) but were distinct individuals. An extension of this distinction to
the two meanings of the word Same, namely, things which are the same
_specie tantum_, and a thing which is the same _numero_ as well as
_specie_, would have prevented the confusion which has been a source of so
much darkness and such an abundance of positive error in metaphysical
philosophy.

One of the most singular examples of the length to which a thinker of
eminence may be led away by an ambiguity of language, is afforded by this
very case. I refer to the famous argument by which Bishop Berkeley
flattered himself that he had forever put an end to “skepticism, atheism,
and irreligion.” It is briefly as follows: I thought of a thing yesterday;
I ceased to think of it; I think of it again to-day. I had, therefore, in
my mind yesterday an _idea_ of the object; I have also an idea of it
to-day; this idea is evidently not another, but the very same idea. Yet an
intervening time elapsed in which I had it not. Where was the idea during
this interval? It must have been somewhere; it did not cease to exist;
otherwise the idea I had yesterday could not be the _same_ idea; no more
than the man I see alive to-day can be the same whom I saw yesterday if
the man has died in the mean while. Now an idea can not be conceived to
exist anywhere except in a mind; and hence there must exist a Universal
Mind, in which all ideas have their permanent residence during the
intervals of their conscious presence in our own minds.

It is evident that Berkeley here confounded sameness _numero_ with
sameness _specie_, that is, with exact resemblance, and assumed the former
where there was only the latter; not perceiving that when we say we have
the same thought to-day which we had yesterday, we do not mean the same
individual thought, but a thought exactly similar: as we say that we have
the same illness which we had last year, meaning only the same sort of
illness.

In one remarkable instance the scientific world was divided into two
furiously hostile parties by an ambiguity of language affecting a branch
of science which, more completely than most others, enjoys the advantage
of a precise and well-defined terminology. I refer to the famous dispute
respecting the vis viva, the history of which is given at large in
Professor Playfair’s Dissertation. The question was, whether the _force_
of a moving body was proportional (its mass being given) to its velocity
simply, or to the square of its velocity: and the ambiguity was in the
word Force. “One of the effects,” says Playfair, “produced by a moving
body is proportional to the square of the velocity, while another is
proportional to the velocity simply:” from whence clearer thinkers were
subsequently led to establish a double measure of the efficiency of a
moving power, one being called _vis viva_, and the other _momentum_. About
the facts, both parties were from the first agreed: the only question was,
with which of the two effects the term _force_ should be, or could most
conveniently be, associated. But the disputants were by no means aware
that this was all; they thought that force was one thing, the production
of effects another; and the question, by which set of effects the force
which produced both the one and the other should be measured, was supposed
to be a question not of terminology, but of fact.

The ambiguity of the word Infinite is the real fallacy in the amusing
logical puzzle of Achilles and the Tortoise, a puzzle which has been too
hard for the ingenuity or patience of many philosophers, and which no less
a thinker than Sir William Hamilton considered as insoluble; as a sound
argument, though leading to a palpable falsehood. The fallacy, as Hobbes
hinted, lies in the tacit assumption that whatever is infinitely divisible
is infinite; but the following solution (to the invention of which I have
no claim) is more precise and satisfactory.

The argument is, let Achilles run ten times as fast as the tortoise, yet
if the tortoise has the start, Achilles will never overtake him. For
suppose them to be at first separated by an interval of a thousand feet:
when Achilles has run these thousand feet, the tortoise will have got on a
hundred; when Achilles has run those hundred, the tortoise will have run
ten, and so on forever: therefore Achilles may run forever without
overtaking the tortoise.

Now the “forever,” in the conclusion, means, for any length of time that
can be supposed; but in the premises, “ever” does not mean any _length_ of
time; it means any _number of subdivisions_ of time. It means that we may
divide a thousand feet by ten, and that quotient again by ten, and so on
as often as we please; that there never needs be an end to the
subdivisions of the distance, nor consequently to those of the time in
which it is performed. But an unlimited number of subdivisions may be made
of that which is itself limited. The argument proves no other infinity of
duration than may be embraced within five minutes. As long as the five
minutes are not expired, what remains of them may be divided by ten, and
again by ten, as often as we like, which is perfectly compatible with
their being only five minutes altogether. It proves, in short, that to
pass through this finite space requires a time which is infinitely
divisible, but not an infinite time; the confounding of which distinction
Hobbes had already seen to be the gist of the fallacy.

The following ambiguities of the word _right_ (in addition to the obvious
and familiar one of _a_ right and the _adjective_ right) are extracted
from a forgotten paper of my own, in a periodical:

“Speaking morally, you are said to have a right to do a thing, if all
persons are morally bound not to hinder you from doing it. But, in another
sense, to have a right to do a thing is the opposite of having _no_ right
to do it, _i.e._, of being under a moral obligation to forbear doing it.
In this sense, to say that you have a right to do a thing, means that you
may do it without any breach of duty on your part; that other persons not
only ought not to hinder you, but have no cause to think worse of you for
doing it. This is a perfectly distinct proposition from the preceding. The
right which you have by virtue of a duty incumbent upon other persons, is
obviously quite a different thing from a right consisting in the absence
of any duty incumbent upon yourself. Yet the two things are perpetually
confounded. Thus, a man will say he has a right to publish his opinions;
which may be true in this sense, that it would be a breach of duty in any
other person to interfere and prevent the publication: but he assumes
thereupon that, in publishing his opinions, he himself violates no duty;
which may either be true or false, depending, as it does, on his having
taken due pains to satisfy himself, first, that the opinions are true, and
next, that their publication in this manner, and at this particular
juncture, will probably be beneficial to the interests of truth on the
whole.

“The second ambiguity is that of confounding a right of any kind, with a
right to enforce that right by resisting or punishing a violation of it.
People will say, for example, that they have a right to good government,
which is undeniably true, it being the moral duty of their governors to
govern them well. But in granting this, you are supposed to have admitted
their right or liberty to turn out their governors, and perhaps to punish
them, for having failed in the performance of this duty; which, far from
being the same thing, is by no means universally true, but depends on an
immense number of varying circumstances,” requiring to be conscientiously
weighed before adopting or acting on such a resolution. This last example
is (like others which have been cited) a case of fallacy within fallacy;
it involves not only the second of the two ambiguities pointed out, but
the first likewise.

One not unusual form of the Fallacy of Ambiguous Terms is known
technically as the Fallacy of Composition and Division; when the same term
is collective in the premises, distributive in the conclusion, or _vicè __
versa_; or when the middle term is collective in one premise, distributive
in the other. As if one were to say (I quote from Archbishop Whately),
“All the angles of a triangle are equal to two right angles: A B C is an
angle of a triangle; therefore A B C is equal to two right angles....
There is no fallacy more common, or more likely to deceive, than the one
now before us. The form in which it is most usually employed is to
establish some truth, separately, concerning _each single_ member of a
certain class, and thence to infer the same of the _whole collectively_.”
As in the argument one sometimes hears, to prove that the world could do
without great men. If Columbus (it is said) had never lived, America would
still have been discovered, at most only a few years later; if Newton had
never lived, some other person would have discovered the law of
gravitation; and so forth. Most true: these things would have been done,
but in all probability not till some one had again been found with the
qualities of Columbus or Newton. Because any one great man might have had
his place supplied by other great men, the argument concludes that all
great men could have been dispensed with. The term “great men” is
distributive in the premises and collective in the conclusion.

“Such also is the fallacy which probably operates on most adventurers in
lotteries; _e.g._, ‘the gaining of a high prize is no uncommon occurrence;
and what is no uncommon occurrence may reasonably be expected; therefore
the gaining of a high prize may reasonably be expected;’ the conclusion,
when applied to the individual (as in practice it is), must be understood
in the sense of ‘reasonably expected _by a certain individual_;’ therefore
for the major premise to be true, the middle term must be understood to
mean, ‘no uncommon occurrence to some one _particular_ person;’ whereas
for the minor (which has been placed first) to be true, you must
understand it of ‘no uncommon occurrence to _some one or other_;’ and thus
you will have the Fallacy of Composition.

“This is a Fallacy with which men are extremely apt to deceive
_themselves_; for when a multitude of particulars are presented to the
mind, many are too weak or too indolent to take a comprehensive view of
them, but confine their attention to each single point, by turns; and then
decide, infer, and act accordingly; _e.g._, the imprudent spendthrift,
finding that he is able to afford this, _or_ that, _or_ the other expense,
forgets that _all of them together_ will ruin him.” The debauchee destroys
his health by successive acts of intemperance, because no _one_ of those
acts would be of itself sufficient to do him any serious harm. A sick
person reasons with himself, “one, and another, and another, of my
symptoms do not prove that I have a fatal disease;” and practically
concludes that all taken together do not prove it.

§ 2. We have now sufficiently exemplified one of the principal Genera in
this Order of Fallacies; where, the source of error being the ambiguity of
terms, the premises are verbally what is required to support the
conclusion, but not really so. In the second great Fallacy of Confusion
they are neither verbally nor really sufficient, though, from their
multiplicity and confused arrangement, and still oftener from defect of
memory, they are not seen to be what they are. The fallacy I mean is that
of Petitio Principii, or begging the question; including the more complex
and not uncommon variety of it, which is termed Reasoning in a Circle.

Petitio Principii, as defined by Archbishop Whately, is the fallacy “in
which the premise either appears manifestly to be the same as the
conclusion, or is actually proved from the conclusion, or is such as would
naturally and properly so be proved.” By the last clause I presume is
meant, that it is not susceptible of any other proof; for otherwise, there
would be no fallacy. To deduce from a proposition propositions from which
it would itself more naturally be deduced, is often an allowable deviation
from the usual didactic order; or at most, what, by an adaptation of a
phrase familiar to mathematicians, may be called a logical
_inelegance_.(264)

The employment of a proposition to prove that on which it is itself
dependent for proof, by no means implies the degree of mental imbecility
which might at first be supposed. The difficulty of comprehending how this
fallacy could possibly be committed, disappears when we reflect that all
persons, even the instructed, hold a great number of opinions without
exactly recollecting how they came by them. Believing that they have at
some former time verified them by sufficient evidence, but having
forgotten what the evidence was, they may easily be betrayed into deducing
from them the very propositions which are alone capable of serving as
premises for their establishment. “As if,” says Archbishop Whately, “one
should attempt to prove the being of a God from the authority of Holy
Writ;” which might easily happen to one with whom both doctrines, as
fundamental tenets of his religious creed, stand on the same ground of
familiar and traditional belief.

Arguing in a circle, however, is a stronger case of the fallacy, and
implies more than the mere passive reception of a premise by one who does
not remember how it is to be proved. It implies an actual attempt to prove
two propositions reciprocally from one another; and is seldom resorted to,
at least in express terms, by any person in his own speculations, but is
committed by those who, being hard pressed by an adversary, are forced
into giving reasons for an opinion of which, when they began to argue,
they had not sufficiently considered the grounds. As in the following
example from Archbishop Whately: “Some mechanicians attempt to prove (what
they ought to lay down as a probable but doubtful hypothesis)(265) that
every particle of matter gravitates equally: ‘why?’ ‘because those bodies
which contain more particles ever gravitate more strongly, _i.e._, are
heavier:’ ‘but (it may be urged) those which are heaviest are not always
more bulky;’ ‘no, but they contain more particles, though more closely
condensed:’ ‘how do you know that?’ ‘because they are heavier:’ ‘how does
that prove it?’ ‘because all particles of matter gravitating equally, that
mass which is specifically the heavier must needs have the more of them in
the same space.’ ” It appears to me that the fallacious reasoner, in his
private thoughts, would not be likely to proceed beyond the first step. He
would acquiesce in the sufficiency of the reason first given, “bodies
which contain more particles are heavier.” It is when he finds this
questioned, and is called upon to prove it, without knowing how, that he
tries to establish his premise by supposing proved what he is attempting
to prove by it. The most effectual way, in fact, of exposing a petitio
principii, when circumstances allow of it, is by challenging the reasoner
to prove his premises; which if he attempts to do, he is necessarily
driven into arguing in a circle.

It is not uncommon, however, for thinkers, and those not of the lowest
description, to be led even in their own thoughts, not indeed into
formally proving each of two propositions from the other, but into
admitting propositions which can only be so proved. In the preceding
example the two together form a complete and consistent, though
hypothetical, explanation of the facts concerned. And the tendency to
mistake mutual coherency for truth—to trust one’s safety to a strong chain
though it has no point of support—is at the bottom of much which, when
reduced to the strict forms of argumentation, can exhibit itself no
otherwise than as reasoning in a circle. All experience bears testimony to
the enthralling effect of neat concatenation in a system of doctrines, and
the difficulty with which people admit the persuasion that any thing which
holds so well together can possibly fall.

Since every case where a conclusion which can only be proved from certain
premises is used for the proof of those premises, is a case of _petitio
principii_, that fallacy includes a very great proportion of all incorrect
reasoning. It is necessary, for completing our view of the fallacy, to
exemplify some of the disguises under which it is accustomed to mask
itself, and to escape exposure.

A proposition would not be admitted by any person in his senses as a
corollary from itself, unless it were expressed in language which made it
seem different. One of the commonest modes of so expressing it, is to
present the proposition itself in abstract terms, as a proof of the same
proposition expressed in concrete language. This is a very frequent mode,
not only of pretended proof, but of pretended explanation; and is parodied
when Molière (_Le Malade Imaginaire_) makes one of his absurd physicians
say,


      Mihi a docto doctore,
      Demandatur causam et rationem quare
    Opium facit dormire.
      A quoi respondeo,
      Quia est in eo
      Virtus dormitiva,
    Cujus est natura
      Sensus assoupire.


The words Nature and Essence are grand instruments of this mode of begging
the question, as in the well-known argument of the scholastic theologians,
that the mind thinks always, because the _essence_ of the mind is to
think. Locke had to point out, that if by essence is here meant some
property which must manifest itself by actual exercise at all times, the
premise is a direct assumption of the conclusion; while if it only means
that to think is the distinctive property of a mind, there is no
connection between the premise and the conclusion, since it is not
necessary that a distinctive property should be perpetually in action.

The following is one of the modes in which these abstract terms, Nature
and Essence, are used as instruments of this fallacy. Some particular
properties of a thing are selected, more or less arbitrarily, to be termed
its nature or essence; and when this has been done, these properties are
supposed to be invested with a kind of indefeasibleness; to have become
paramount to all the other properties of the thing, and incapable of being
prevailed over or counteracted by them. As when Aristotle, in a passage
already cited, “decides that there is no void on such arguments as this:
in a void there could be no difference of up and down; for as in nothing
there are no differences, so there are none in a privation or negation;
but a void is merely a privation or negation of matter; therefore, in a
void, bodies could not move up and down, which it is in their _nature_ to
do.”(266) In other words, it is in the _nature_ of bodies to move up and
down, _ergo_ any physical fact which supposes them not so to move, can not
be authentic. This mode of reasoning, by which a bad generalization is
made to overrule all facts which contradict it, is Petitio Principii in
one of its most palpable forms.

None of the modes of assuming what should be proved are in more frequent
use than what are termed by Bentham “question-begging appellatives;” names
which beg the question under the disguise of stating it. The most potent
of these are such as have a laudatory or vituperative character. For
instance, in politics, the word Innovation. The dictionary meaning of this
term being merely “a change to something new,” it is difficult for the
defenders even of the most salutary improvement to deny that it is an
innovation; yet the word having acquired in common usage a vituperative
connotation in addition to its dictionary meaning, the admission is always
construed as a large concession to the disadvantage of the thing proposed.

The following passage from the argument in refutation of the Epicureans,
in the second book of Cicero, “De Finibus,” affords a fine example of this
sort of fallacy: “Et quidem illud ipsum non nimium probo (et tantum
patior) philosophum loqui de cupiditatibus finiendis. An potest cupiditas
finiri? tollenda est, atque extrahenda radicitus. Quis est enim, in quo
sit cupiditas, quin recte cupidus dici possit? Ergo et avarus erit, sed
finite: adulter, verum habebit modum: et luxuriosus eodem modo. Qualis
ista philosophia est, quæ non interitum afferat pravitatis, sed sit
contenta mediocritate vitiorum?” The question was, whether certain
desires, when kept within bounds, are vices or not; and the argument
decides the point by applying to them a word (_cupiditas_) which _implies_
vice. It is shown, however, in the remarks which follow, that Cicero did
not intend this as a serious argument, but as a criticism on what he
deemed an inappropriate expression. “Rem ipsam prorsus probo: elegantiam
desidero. Appellet hæc _desideria naturæ_; cupiditatis nomen servet alio,”
etc. But many persons, both ancient and modern, have employed this, or
something equivalent to it, as a real and conclusive argument. We may
remark that the passage respecting _cupiditas_ and _cupidus_ is also an
example of another fallacy already noticed, that of Paronymous Terms.

Many more of the arguments of the ancient moralists, and especially of the
Stoics, fall within the definition of Petitio Principii. In the “De
Finibus,” for example, which I continue to quote as being probably the
best extant exemplification at once of the doctrines and the methods of
the schools of philosophy existing at that time; of what value as
arguments are such pleas as those of Cato in the third book: That if
virtue were not happiness, it could not be a thing to _boast_ of: That if
death or pain were evils, it would be impossible not to fear them, and it
could not, therefore, be laudable to despise them, etc. In one way of
viewing these arguments, they may be regarded as appeals to the authority
of the general sentiment of mankind which had stamped its approval upon
certain actions and characters by the phrases referred to; but that such
could have been the meaning intended is very unlikely, considering the
contempt of the ancient philosophers for vulgar opinion. In any other
sense they are clear cases of Petitio Principii, since the word laudable,
and the idea of boasting, imply principles of conduct; and practical
maxims can only be proved from speculative truths, namely, from the
properties of the subject-matter, and can not, therefore, be employed to
prove those properties. As well might it be argued that a government is
good because we ought to support it, or that there is a God because it is
our duty to pray to him.

It is assumed by all the disputants in the “De Finibus” as the foundation
of the inquiry into the _summum bonum_, that “sapiens semper beatus est.”
Not simply that wisdom gives the best chance of happiness, or that wisdom
consists in knowing what happiness is, and by what things it is promoted;
these propositions would not have been enough for them; but that the sage
always is, and must of necessity be, happy. The idea that wisdom could be
consistent with unhappiness, was always rejected as inadmissible: the
reason assigned by one of the interlocutors, near the beginning of the
third book, being, that if the wise could be unhappy, there was little use
in pursuing wisdom. But by unhappiness they did not mean pain or
suffering; to that it was granted that the wisest person was liable in
common with others: he was happy, because in possessing wisdom he had the
most valuable of all possessions, the most to be sought and prized of all
things, and to possess the most valuable thing was to be the most happy.
By laying it down, therefore, at the commencement of the inquiry, that the
sage must be happy, the disputed question respecting the _summum bonum_
was in fact begged; with the further assumption, that pain and suffering,
so far as they can co-exist with wisdom, are not unhappiness, and are no
evil.

The following are additional instances of Petitio Principii, under more or
less of disguise.

Plato, in the _Sophistes_, attempts to prove that things may exist which
are incorporeal, by the argument that justice and wisdom are incorporeal,
and justice and wisdom must be something. Here, if by _something_ be
meant, as Plato did in fact mean, a thing capable of existing in and by
itself, and not as a quality of some other thing, he begs the question in
asserting that justice and wisdom must be something; if he means any thing
else, his conclusion is not proved. This fallacy might also be classed
under ambiguous middleterm; _something_, in the one premise, meaning some
substance, in the other merely some object of thought, whether substance
or attribute.

It was formerly an argument employed in proof of what is now no longer a
popular doctrine, the infinite divisibility of matter, that every portion
of matter however small, must at least have an upper and an under surface.
Those who used this argument did not see that it assumed the very point in
dispute, the impossibility of arriving at a minimum of thickness; for if
there be a minimum, its upper and under surface will of course be one; it
will be itself a surface, and no more. The argument owes its very
considerable plausibility to this, that the premise does actually seem
more obvious than the conclusion, though really identical with it. As
expressed in the premise, the proposition appeals directly and in concrete
language to the incapacity of the human imagination for conceiving a
minimum. Viewed in this light, it becomes a case of the _a priori_ fallacy
or natural prejudice, that whatever can not be conceived can not exist.
Every fallacy of Confusion (it is almost unnecessary to repeat) will, if
cleared up, become a fallacy of some other sort; and it will be found of
deductive or ratiocinative fallacies generally, that when they mislead,
there is mostly, as in this case, a fallacy of some other description
lurking under them, by virtue of which chiefly it is that the verbal
juggle, which is the outside or body of this kind of fallacy, passes
undetected.

Euler’s Algebra, a book otherwise of great merit, but full, to
overflowing, of logical errors in respect to the foundation of the
science, contains the following argument to prove that _minus_ multiplied
by _minus_ gives _plus_, a doctrine the opprobrium of all mere
mathematicians, and which Euler had not a glimpse of the true method of
proving. He says _minus_ multiplied by _minus_ can not give _minus_; for
_minus_ multiplied by _plus_ gives _minus_, and _minus_ multiplied by
_minus_ can not give the same product as _minus_ multiplied by _plus_. Now
one is obliged to ask, why minus multiplied by minus must give any product
at all? and if it does, why its product can not be the same as that of
minus multiplied by plus? for this would seem, at the first glance, not
more absurd than that minus by minus should give the same as plus by plus,
the proposition which Euler prefers to it. The premise requires proof, as
much as the conclusion; nor can it be proved, except by that more
comprehensive view of the nature of multiplication, and of algebraic
processes in general, which would also supply a far better proof of the
mysterious doctrine which Euler is here endeavoring to demonstrate.

A striking instance of reasoning in a circle is that of some ethical
writers, who first take for their standard of moral truth what, being the
general, they deem to be the natural or instinctive sentiments and
perceptions of mankind, and then explain away the numerous instances of
divergence from their assumed standard, by representing them as cases in
which the perceptions are unhealthy. Some particular mode of conduct or
feeling is affirmed to be _unnatural_; why? because it is abhorrent to the
universal and natural sentiments of mankind. Finding no such sentiment in
yourself, you question the fact; and the answer is (if your antagonist is
polite), that you are an exception, a peculiar case. But neither (say you)
do I find in the people of some other country, or of some former age, any
such feeling of abhorrence; “ay, but their feelings were sophisticated and
unhealthy.”

One of the most notable specimens of reasoning in a circle is the doctrine
of Hobbes, Rousseau, and others, which rests the obligations by which
human beings are bound as members of society, on a supposed social
compact. I waive the consideration of the fictitious nature of the compact
itself; but when Hobbes, through the whole Leviathan, elaborately deduces
the obligation of obeying the sovereign, not from the necessity or utility
of doing so, but from a promise supposed to have been made by our
ancestors, on renouncing savage life and agreeing to establish political
society, it is impossible not to retort by the question, Why are we bound
to keep a promise made for us by others? or why bound to keep a promise at
all? No satisfactory ground can be assigned for the obligation, except the
mischievous consequences of the absence of faith and mutual confidence
among mankind. We are, therefore, brought round to the interests of
society, as the ultimate ground of the obligation of a promise; and yet
those interests are not admitted to be a sufficient justification for the
existence of government and law. Without a promise it is thought that we
should not be bound to that which is implied in all modes of living in
society, namely, to yield a general obedience to the laws therein
established; and so necessary is the promise deemed, that if none has
actually been made, some additional safety is supposed to be given to the
foundations of society by feigning one.

§ 3. Two principal subdivisions of the class of Fallacies of Confusion
having been disposed of; there remains a third, in which the confusion is
not, as in the Fallacy of Ambiguity, in misconceiving the import of the
premises, nor, as in Petitio Principii, in forgetting what the premises
are, but in mistaking the conclusion which is to be proved. This is the
fallacy of Ignoratio Elenchi, in the widest sense of the phrase; also
called by Archbishop Whately the Fallacy of Irrelevant Conclusion. His
examples and remarks are highly worthy of citation.

“Various kinds of propositions are, according to the occasion, substituted
for the one of which proof is required; sometimes the particular for the
universal; sometimes a proposition with different terms; and various are
the contrivances employed to effect and to conceal this substitution, and
to make the conclusion which the sophist has drawn, answer practically the
same purpose as the one he ought to have established. We say, ‘practically
the same purpose,’ because it will very often happen that some _emotion_
will be excited, some sentiment impressed on the mind (by a dexterous
employment of this fallacy), such as shall bring men into the
_disposition_ requisite for your purpose; though they may not have
assented to, or even stated distinctly in their own minds, the
_proposition_ which it was your business to establish. Thus if a sophist
has to defend one who has been guilty of some _serious_ offense, which he
wishes to extenuate, though he is unable distinctly to prove that it is
not such, yet if he can succeed in _making the audience laugh_ at some
casual matter, he has gained practically the same point. So also if any
one has pointed out the extenuating circumstances in some particular case
of offense, so as to show that it differs widely from the generality of
the same class, the sophist, if he finds himself unable to disprove these
circumstances, may do away the force of them, by simply _referring the
action to that very class_, which no one can deny that it belongs to, and
the very name of which will excite a feeling of disgust sufficient to
counteract the extenuation; _e.g._, let it be a case of peculation, and
that many _mitigating_ circumstances have been brought forward which can
not be denied; the sophistical opponent will reply, ‘Well, but after all,
the man is a _rogue_, and there is an end of it;’ now in reality this was
(by hypothesis) never the question; and the mere assertion of what was
never denied _ought_ not, in fairness, to be regarded as decisive; but,
practically, the odiousness of the word, arising in great measure from the
association of those very circumstances which belong to most of the class,
but which we have supposed to be _absent_ in _this particular_ instance,
excites precisely that feeling of disgust which, in effect, destroys the
force of the defense. In like manner we may refer to this head all cases
of improper appeal to the passions, and every thing else which is
mentioned by Aristotle as extraneous to the matter in hand (ἔξω τοῦ
πράγματος).”

Again, “instead of proving that ‘this prisoner has committed an atrocious
fraud,’ you prove that the fraud he is accused of is atrocious; instead of
proving (as in the well-known tale of Cyrus and the two coats) that the
taller boy had a right to force the other boy to exchange coats with him,
you prove that the exchange would have been advantageous to both; instead
of proving that the poor ought to be relieved in this way rather than in
that, you prove that the poor ought to be relieved; instead of proving
that the irrational agent—whether a brute or a madman—can never be
deterred from any act by apprehension of punishment (as, for instance, a
dog from sheep-biting, by fear of being beaten), you prove that the
beating of one dog does not operate as an _example_ to _other_ dogs, etc.

“It is evident that Ignoratio Elenchi may be employed as well for the
apparent refutation of your opponent’s proposition, as for the apparent
establishment of your own; for it is substantially the same thing, to
prove what was not denied or to disprove what was not asserted. The latter
practice is not less common, and it is more offensive, because it
frequently amounts to a personal affront, in attributing to a person
opinions, etc., which he perhaps holds in abhorrence. Thus, when in a
discussion one party vindicates, on the ground of general expediency, a
particular instance of resistance to government in a case of intolerable
oppression, the opponent may gravely maintain, ‘that we ought not to do
evil that good may come;’ a proposition which of course had never been
denied, the point in dispute being, ‘whether resistance in this particular
case _were_ doing evil or not.’ Or again, by way of disproving the
assertion of the right of private judgment in religion, one may hear a
grave argument to prove that ‘it is impossible every one can be _right in
his judgment_.’ ”

The works of controversial writers are seldom free from this fallacy. The
attempts, for instance, to disprove the population doctrines of Malthus,
have been mostly cases of _ignoratio elenchi_. Malthus has been supposed
to be refuted if it could be shown that in some countries or ages
population has been nearly stationary; as if he had asserted that
population always increases in a given ratio, or had not expressly
declared that it increases only in so far as it is not restrained by
prudence, or kept down by poverty and disease. Or, perhaps, a collection
of facts is produced to prove that in some one country the people are
better off with a dense population than they are in another country with a
thin one; or that the people have become more numerous and better off at
the same time. As if the assertion were that a dense population could not
possibly be well off; as if it were not part of the very doctrine, and
essential to it, that where there is a more abundant production there may
be a greater population without any increase of poverty, or even with a
diminution of it.

The favorite argument against Berkeley’s theory of the non-existence of
matter, and the most popularly effective, next to a “grin”(267)—an
argument, moreover, which is not confined to “coxcombs,” nor to men like
Samuel Johnson, whose greatly overrated ability certainly did not lie in
the direction of metaphysical speculation, but is the stock argument of
the Scotch school of metaphysicians—is a palpable Ignoratio Elenchi. The
argument is perhaps as frequently expressed by gesture as by words, and
one of its commonest forms consists in knocking a stick against the
ground. This short and easy confutation overlooks the fact, that in
denying matter, Berkeley did not deny any thing to which our senses bear
witness, and therefore can not be answered by any appeal to them. His
skepticism related to the supposed substratum, or hidden cause of the
appearances perceived by our senses; the evidence of which, whatever may
be thought of its conclusiveness, is certainly not the evidence of sense.
And it will always remain a signal proof of the want of metaphysical
profundity of Reid, Stewart, and, I am sorry to add, of Brown, that they
should have persisted in asserting that Berkeley, if he believed his own
doctrine, was bound to walk into the kennel, or run his head against a
post. As if persons who do not recognize an occult cause of their
sensations could not possibly believe that a fixed order subsists among
the sensations themselves. Such a want of comprehension of the distinction
between a thing and its sensible manifestation, or, in metaphysical
language, between the noumenon and the phenomenon, would be impossible to
even the dullest disciple of Kant or Coleridge.

It would be easy to add a greater number of examples of this fallacy, as
well as of the others which I have attempted to characterize. But a more
copious exemplification does not seem to be necessary; and the intelligent
reader will have little difficulty in adding to the catalogue from his own
reading and experience. We shall, therefore, here close our exposition of
the general principles of logic, and proceed to the supplementary inquiry
which is necessary to complete our design.





                                 Book VI.


ON THE LOGIC OF THE MORAL SCIENCES.


    “Si l’homme peut prédire, avec une assurance presque entière, les
    phénomènes dont il connaît les lois; si lors même qu’elles lui
    sont inconnues, il peut, d’après l’expérience, prévoir avec une
    grande probabilité les événements de l’avenir; pourquoi
    regarderait-on comme une entreprise chimérique, celle de tracer
    avec quelque vraisemblance le tableau des destinées futures de
    l’espèce humaine, d’après les résultats de son histoire? Le seul
    fondement de croyance dans les sciences naturelles, est cette
    idée, que les lois générales, connues ou ignorées, qui règlent les
    phénomènes de l’univers, sont nécessaires et constantes; et par
    quelle raison ce principe serait-il moins vrai pour le
    développement des facultés intellectuelles et morales de l’homme,
    que pour les autres opérations de la nature? Enfin, puisque des
    opinions formées d’après l’expérience ... sont la seule règle de
    la conduite des hommes les plus sages, pourquoi interdirait-on au
    philosophe d’appuyer ses conjectures sur cette même base, pourvu
    qu’il ne leur attribue pas une certitude supérieure à celle qui
    peut naître du nombre, de la constance, de l’exactitude des
    observations?”—CONDORCET, _Esquisse d’un Tableau Historique des
    Progrès de l’Esprit Humain_.




                                Chapter I.


Introductory Remarks.


§ 1. Principles of Evidence and Theories of Method are not to be
constructed _a priori_. The laws of our rational faculty, like those of
every other natural agency, are only learned by seeing the agent at work.
The earlier achievements of science were made without the conscious
observance of any Scientific Method; and we should never have known by
what process truth is to be ascertained, if we had not previously
ascertained many truths. But it was only the easier problems which could
be thus resolved: natural sagacity, when it tried its strength against the
more difficult ones, either failed altogether, or, if it succeeded here
and there in obtaining a solution, had no sure means of convincing others
that its solution was correct. In scientific investigation, as in all
other works of human skill, the way of obtaining the end is seen as it
were instinctively by superior minds in some comparatively simple case,
and is then, by judicious generalization, adapted to the variety of
complex cases. We learn to do a thing in difficult circumstances, by
attending to the manner in which we have spontaneously done the same thing
in easier ones.

This truth is exemplified by the history of the various branches of
knowledge which have successively, in the ascending order of their
complication, assumed the character of sciences; and will doubtless
receive fresh confirmation from those of which the final scientific
constitution is yet to come, and which are still abandoned to the
uncertainties of vague and popular discussion. Although several other
sciences have emerged from this state at a comparatively recent date, none
now remain in it except those which relate to man himself, the most
complex and most difficult subject of study on which the human mind can be
engaged.

Concerning the physical nature of man, as an organized being—though there
is still much uncertainty and much controversy, which can only be
terminated by the general acknowledgment and employment of stricter rules
of induction than are commonly recognized—there is, however, a
considerable body of truths which all who have attended to the subject
consider to be fully established; nor is there now any radical
imperfection in the method observed in the department of science by its
most distinguished modern teachers. But the laws of Mind, and, in even a
greater degree, those of Society, are so far from having attained a
similar state of even partial recognition, that it is still a controversy
whether they are capable of becoming subjects of science in the strict
sense of the term: and among those who are agreed on this point, there
reigns the most irreconcilable diversity on almost every other. Here,
therefore, if anywhere, the principles laid down in the preceding Books
may be expected to be useful.

If on matters so much the most important with which human intellect can
occupy itself a more general agreement is ever to exist among thinkers; if
what has been pronounced “the proper study of mankind” is not destined to
remain the only subject which Philosophy can not succeed in rescuing from
Empiricism; the same process through which the laws of many simpler
phenomena have by general acknowledgment been placed beyond dispute, must
be consciously and deliberately applied to those more difficult inquiries.
If there are some subjects on which the results obtained have finally
received the unanimous assent of all who have attended to the proof, and
others on which mankind have not yet been equally successful; on which the
most sagacious minds have occupied themselves from the earliest date, and
have never succeeded in establishing any considerable body of truths, so
as to be beyond denial or doubt; it is by generalizing the methods
successfully followed in the former inquiries, and adapting them to the
latter, that we may hope to remove this blot on the face of science. The
remaining chapters are an endeavor to facilitate this most desirable
object.

§ 2. In attempting this, I am not unmindful how little can be done toward
it in a mere treatise on Logic, or how vague and unsatisfactory all
precepts of Method must necessarily appear when not practically
exemplified in the establishment of a body of doctrine. Doubtless, the
most effectual mode of showing how the sciences of Ethics and Politics may
be constructed would be to construct them: a task which, it needs scarcely
be said, I am not about to undertake. But even if there were no other
examples, the memorable one of Bacon would be sufficient to demonstrate,
that it is sometimes both possible and useful to point out the way, though
without being one’s self prepared to adventure far into it. And if more
were to be attempted, this at least is not a proper place for the attempt.

In substance, whatever can be done in a work like this for the Logic of
the Moral Sciences, has been or ought to have been accomplished in the
five preceding Books; to which the present can be only a kind of
supplement or appendix, since the methods of investigation applicable to
moral and social science must have been already described, if I have
succeeded in enumerating and characterizing those of science in general.
It remains, however, to examine which of those methods are more especially
suited to the various branches of moral inquiry; under what peculiar
facilities or difficulties they are there employed; how far the
unsatisfactory state of those inquiries is owing to a wrong choice of
methods, how far to want of skill in the application of right ones; and
what degree of ultimate success may be attained or hoped for by a better
choice or more careful employment of logical processes appropriate to the
case. In other words, whether moral sciences exist, or can exist; to what
degree of perfection they are susceptible of being carried; and by what
selection or adaptation of the methods brought to view in the previous
part of this work that degree of perfection is attainable.

At the threshold of this inquiry we are met by an objection, which, if not
removed, would be fatal to the attempt to treat human conduct as a subject
of science. Are the actions of human beings, like all other natural
events, subject to invariable laws? Does that constancy of causation,
which is the foundation of every scientific theory of successive
phenomena, really obtain among them? This is often denied; and for the
sake of systematic completeness, if not from any very urgent practical
necessity, the question should receive a deliberate answer in this place.
We shall devote to the subject a chapter apart.




                               Chapter II.


Of Liberty And Necessity.


§ 1. The question, whether the law of causality applies in the same strict
sense to human actions as to other phenomena, is the celebrated
controversy concerning the freedom of the will; which, from at least as
far back as the time of Pelagius, has divided both the philosophical and
the religious world. The affirmative opinion is commonly called the
doctrine of Necessity, as asserting human volitions and actions to be
necessary and inevitable. The negative maintains that the will is not
determined, like other phenomena, by antecedents, but determines itself;
that our volitions are not, properly speaking, the effects of causes, or
at least have no causes which they uniformly and implicitly obey.

I have already made it sufficiently apparent that the former of these
opinions is that which I consider the true one; but the misleading terms
in which it is often expressed, and the indistinct manner in which it is
usually apprehended, have both obstructed its reception, and perverted its
influence when received. The metaphysical theory of free-will, as held by
philosophers (for the practical feeling of it, common in a greater or less
degree to all mankind, is in no way inconsistent with the contrary
theory), was invented because the supposed alternative of admitting human
actions to be _necessary_ was deemed inconsistent with every one’s
instinctive consciousness, as well as humiliating to the pride and even
degrading to the moral nature of man. Nor do I deny that the doctrine, as
sometimes held, is open to these imputations; for the misapprehension in
which I shall be able to show that they originate, unfortunately is not
confined to the opponents of the doctrine, but is participated in by many,
perhaps we might say by most, of its supporters.

§ 2. Correctly conceived, the doctrine called Philosophical Necessity is
simply this: that, given the motives which are present to an individual’s
mind, and given likewise the character and disposition of the individual,
the manner in which he will act might be unerringly inferred; that if we
knew the person thoroughly, and knew all the inducements which are acting
upon him, we could foretell his conduct with as much certainty as we can
predict any physical event. This proposition I take to be a mere
interpretation of universal experience, a statement in words of what every
one is internally convinced of. No one who believed that he knew
thoroughly the circumstances of any case, and the characters of the
different persons concerned, would hesitate to foretell how all of them
would act. Whatever degree of doubt he may in fact feel, arises from the
uncertainty whether he really knows the circumstances, or the character of
some one or other of the persons, with the degree of accuracy required;
but by no means from thinking that if he did know these things, there
could be any uncertainty what the conduct would be. Nor does this full
assurance conflict in the smallest degree with what is called our feeling
of freedom. We do not feel ourselves the less free, because those to whom
we are intimately known are well assured how we shall will to act in a
particular case. We often, on the contrary, regard the doubt what our
conduct will be, as a mark of ignorance of our character, and sometimes
even resent it as an imputation. The religious metaphysicians who have
asserted the freedom of the will, have always maintained it to be
consistent with divine foreknowledge of our actions: and if with divine,
then with any other foreknowledge. We may be free, and yet another may
have reason to be perfectly certain what use we shall make of our freedom.
It is not, therefore, the doctrine that our volitions and actions are
invariable consequents of our antecedent states of mind, that is either
contradicted by our consciousness, or felt to be degrading.

But the doctrine of causation, when considered as obtaining between our
volitions and their antecedents, is almost universally conceived as
involving more than this. Many do not believe, and very few practically
feel, that there is nothing in causation but invariable, certain, and
unconditional sequence. There are few to whom mere constancy of succession
appears a sufficiently stringent bond of union for so peculiar a relation
as that of cause and effect. Even if the reason repudiates, the
imagination retains, the feeling of some more intimate connection, of some
peculiar tie, or mysterious constraint exercised by the antecedent over
the consequent. Now this it is which, considered as applying to the human
will, conflicts with our consciousness, and revolts our feelings. We are
certain that, in the case of our volitions, there is not this mysterious
constraint. We know that we are not compelled, as by a magical spell, to
obey any particular motive. We feel, that if we wished to prove that we
have the power of resisting the motive, we could do so (that wish being,
it needs scarcely be observed, a _new antecedent_); and it would be
humiliating to our pride, and (what is of more importance) paralyzing to
our desire of excellence, if we thought otherwise. But neither is any such
mysterious compulsion now supposed, by the best philosophical authorities,
to be exercised by any other cause over its effect. Those who think that
causes draw their effects after them by a mystical tie, are right in
believing that the relation between volitions and their antecedents is of
another nature. But they should go farther, and admit that this is also
true of all other effects and their antecedents. If such a tie is
considered to be involved in the word Necessity, the doctrine is not true
of human actions; but neither is it then true of inanimate objects. It
would be more correct to say that matter is not bound by necessity, than
that mind is so.

That the free-will metaphysicians, being mostly of the school which
rejects Hume’s and Brown’s analysis of Cause and Effect, should miss their
way for want of the light which that analysis affords, can not surprise
us. The wonder is, that the necessitarians, who usually admit that
philosophical theory, should in practice equally lose sight of it. The
very same misconception of the doctrine called Philosophical Necessity,
which prevents the opposite party from recognizing its truth, I believe to
exist more or less obscurely in the minds of most necessitarians, however
they may in words disavow it. I am much mistaken if they habitually feel
that the necessity which they recognize in actions is but uniformity of
order, and capability of being predicted. They have a feeling as if there
were at bottom a stronger tie between the volitions and their causes; as
if, when they asserted that the will is governed by the balance of
motives, they meant something more cogent than if they had only said, that
whoever knew the motives, and our habitual susceptibilities to them, could
predict how we should will to act. They commit, in opposition to their own
scientific system, the very same mistake which their adversaries commit in
obedience to theirs; and in consequence do really in some instances suffer
those depressing consequences which their opponents erroneously impute to
the doctrine itself.

§ 3. I am inclined to think that this error is almost wholly an effect of
the associations with a word, and that it would be prevented, by
forbearing to employ, for the expression of the simple fact of causation,
so extremely inappropriate a term as Necessity. That word, in its other
acceptations, involves much more than mere uniformity of sequence: it
implies irresistibleness. Applied to the will, it only means that, the
given cause will be followed by the effect, subject to all possibilities
of counteraction by other causes; but in common use it stands for the
operation of those causes exclusively which are supposed too powerful to
be counteracted at all. When we say that all human actions take place of
necessity, we only mean that they will certainly happen if nothing
prevents; when we say that dying of want, to those who can not get food,
is a necessity, we mean that it will certainly happen whatever may be done
to prevent it. The application of the same term to the agencies on which
human actions depend, as is used to express those agencies of nature which
are really uncontrollable, can not fail, when habitual, to create a
feeling of uncontrollableness in the former also. This, however, is a mere
illusion. There are physical sequences which we call necessary, as death
for want of food or air; there are others which, though as much cases of
causation as the former, are not said to be necessary, as death from
poison, which an antidote, or the use of the stomach-pump, will sometimes
avert. It is apt to be forgotten by people’s feelings, even if remembered
by their understandings, that human actions are in this last predicament:
they are never (except in some cases of mania) ruled by any one motive
with such absolute sway that there is no room for the influence of any
other. The causes, therefore, on which action depends, are never
uncontrollable; and any given effect is only necessary provided that the
causes tending to produce it are not controlled. That whatever happens,
could not have happened otherwise, unless something had taken place which
was capable of preventing it, no one surely needs hesitate to admit. But
to call this by the name Necessity is to use the term in a sense so
different from its primitive and familiar meaning, from that which it
bears in the common occasions of life, as to amount almost to a play upon
words. The associations derived from the ordinary sense of the term will
adhere to it in spite of all we can do; and though the doctrine of
Necessity, as stated by most who hold it, is very remote from fatalism, it
is probable that most necessitarians are fatalists, more or less, in their
feelings.

A fatalist believes, or half believes (for nobody is a consistent
fatalist), not only that whatever is about to happen will be the
infallible result of the causes which produce it (which is the true
necessitarian doctrine), but moreover that there is no use in struggling
against it; that it will happen, however we may strive to prevent it. Now,
a necessitarian, believing that our actions follow from our characters,
and that our characters follow from our organization, our education, and
our circumstances, is apt to be, with more or less of consciousness on his
part, a fatalist as to his own actions, and to believe that his nature is
such, or that his education and circumstances have so moulded his
character, that nothing can now prevent him from feeling and acting in a
particular way, or at least that no effort of his own can hinder it. In
the words of the sect which in our own day has most perseveringly
inculcated and most perversely misunderstood this great doctrine, his
character is formed _for_ him, and not _by_ him; therefore his wishing
that it had been formed differently is of no use; he has no power to alter
it. But this is a grand error. He has, to a certain extent, a power to
alter his character. Its being, in the ultimate resort, formed for him, is
not inconsistent with its being, in part, formed _by_ him as one of the
intermediate agents. His character is formed by his circumstances
(including among these his particular organization); but his own desire to
mould it in a particular way, is one of those circumstances, and by no
means one of the least influential. We can not, indeed, directly will to
be different from what we are. But neither did those who are supposed to
have formed our characters directly will that we should be what we are.
Their will had no direct power except over their own actions. They made us
what they did make us, by willing, not the end, but the requisite means;
and we, when our habits are not too inveterate, can, by similarly willing
the requisite means, make ourselves different. If they could place us
under the influence of certain circumstances, we, in like manner, can
place ourselves under the influence of other circumstances. We are exactly
as capable of making our own character, _if we will_, as others are of
making it for us.

Yes (answers the Owenite), but these words, “if we will,” surrender the
whole point: since the will to alter our own character is given us, not by
any efforts of ours, but by circumstances which we can not help, it comes
to us either from external causes, or not at all. Most true: if the
Owenite stops here, he is in a position from which nothing can expel him.
Our character is formed by us as well as for us; but the wish which
induces us to attempt to form it is formed for us; and how? Not, in
general, by our organization, nor wholly by our education, but by our
experience; experience of the painful consequences of the character we
previously had; or by some strong feeling of admiration or aspiration,
accidentally aroused. But to think that we have no power of altering our
character, and to think that we shall not use our power unless we desire
to use it, are very different things, and have a very different effect on
the mind. A person who does not wish to alter his character, can not be
the person who is supposed to feel discouraged or paralyzed by thinking
himself unable to do it. The depressing effect of the fatalist doctrine
can only be felt where there _is_ a wish to do what that doctrine
represents as impossible. It is of no consequence what we think forms our
character, when we have no desire of our own about forming it; but it is
of great consequence that we should not be prevented from forming such a
desire by thinking the attainment impracticable, and that if we have the
desire, we should know that the work is not so irrevocably done as to be
incapable of being altered.

And indeed, if we examine closely, we shall find that this feeling, of our
being able to modify our own character _if we wish_, is itself the feeling
of moral freedom which we are conscious of. A person feels morally free
who feels that his habits or his temptations are not his masters, but he
theirs; who, even in yielding to them, knows that he could resist; that
were he desirous of altogether throwing them off, there would not be
required for that purpose a stronger desire than he knows himself to be
capable of feeling. It is of course necessary, to render our consciousness
of freedom complete, that we should have succeeded in making our character
all we have hitherto attempted to make it; for if we have wished and not
attained, we have, to that extent, not power over our own character; we
are not free. Or at least, we must feel that our wish, if not strong
enough to alter our character, is strong enough to conquer our character
when the two are brought into conflict in any particular case of conduct.
And hence it is said with truth, that none but a person of confirmed
virtue is completely free.

The application of so improper a term as Necessity to the doctrine of
cause and effect in the matter of human character, seems to me one of the
most signal instances in philosophy of the abuse of terms, and its
practical consequences one of the most striking examples of the power of
language over our associations. The subject will never be generally
understood until that objectionable term is dropped. The free-will
doctrine, by keeping in view precisely that portion of the truth which the
word Necessity puts out of sight, namely the power of the mind to
co-operate in the formation of its own character, has given to its
adherents a practical feeling much nearer to the truth than has generally
(I believe) existed in the minds of necessitarians. The latter may have
had a stronger sense of the importance of what human beings can do to
shape the characters of one another; but the free-will doctrine has, I
believe, fostered in its supporters a much stronger spirit of
self-culture.

§ 4. There is still one fact which requires to be noticed (in addition to
the existence of a power of self-formation) before the doctrine of the
causation of human actions can be freed from the confusion and
misapprehensions which surround it in many minds. When the will is said to
be determined by motives, a motive does not mean always, or solely, the
anticipation of a pleasure or of a pain. I shall not here inquire whether
it be true that, in the commencement, all our voluntary actions are mere
means consciously employed to obtain some pleasure or avoid some pain. It
is at least certain that we gradually, through the influence of
association, come to desire the means without thinking of the end; the
action itself becomes an object of desire, and is performed without
reference to any motive beyond itself. Thus far, it may still be objected
that, the action having through association become pleasurable, we are, as
much as before, moved to act by the anticipation of a pleasure, namely,
the pleasure of the action itself. But granting this, the matter does not
end here. As we proceed in the formation of habits, and become accustomed
to will a particular act or a particular course of conduct because it is
pleasurable, we at last continue to will it without any reference to its
being pleasurable. Although, from some change in us or in our
circumstances, we have ceased to find any pleasure in the action, or
perhaps to anticipate any pleasure as the consequence of it, we still
continue to desire the action, and consequently to do it. In this manner
it is that habits of hurtful excess continue to be practiced although they
have ceased to be pleasurable; and in this manner also it is that the
habit of willing to persevere in the course which he has chosen, does not
desert the moral hero, even when the reward, however real, which he
doubtless receives from the consciousness of well-doing, is any thing but
an equivalent for the sufferings he undergoes, or the wishes which he may
have to renounce.

A habit of willing is commonly called a purpose; and among the causes of
our volitions, and of the actions which flow from them, must be reckoned
not only likings and aversions, but also purposes. It is only when our
purposes have become independent of the feelings of pain or pleasure from
which they originally took their rise, that we are said to have a
confirmed character. “A character,” says Novalis, “is a completely
fashioned will:” and the will, once so fashioned, may be steady and
constant, when the passive susceptibilities of pleasure and pain are
greatly weakened or materially changed.

With the corrections and explanations now given, the doctrine of the
causation of our volitions by motives, and of motives by the desirable
objects offered to us, combined with our particular susceptibilities of
desire, may be considered, I hope, as sufficiently established for the
purposes of this treatise.(268)




                               Chapter III.


That There Is, Or May Be, A Science Of Human Nature.


§ 1. It is a common notion, or at least it is implied in many common modes
of speech, that the thoughts, feelings, and actions of sentient beings are
not a subject of science, in the same strict sense in which this is true
of the objects of outward nature. This notion seems to involve some
confusion of ideas, which it is necessary to begin by clearing up.

Any facts are fitted, in themselves, to be a subject of science which
follow one another according to constant laws, although those laws may not
have been discovered, nor even be discoverable by our existing resources.
Take, for instance, the most familiar class of meteorological phenomena,
those of rain and sunshine. Scientific inquiry has not yet succeeded in
ascertaining the order of antecedence and consequence among these
phenomena, so as to be able, at least in our regions of the earth, to
predict them with certainty, or even with any high degree of probability.
Yet no one doubts that the phenomena depend on laws, and that these must
be derivative laws resulting from known ultimate laws, those of heat,
electricity, vaporization, and elastic fluids. Nor can it be doubted that
if we were acquainted with all the antecedent circumstances, we could,
even from those more general laws, predict (saving difficulties of
calculation) the state of the weather at any future time. Meteorology,
therefore, not only has in itself every natural requisite for being, but
actually is, a science; though, from the difficulty of observing the facts
on which the phenomena depend (a difficulty inherent in the peculiar
nature of those phenomena), the science is extremely imperfect; and were
it perfect, might probably be of little avail in practice, since the data
requisite for applying its principles to particular instances would rarely
be procurable.

A case may be conceived, of an intermediate character, between the
perfection of science and this its extreme imperfection. It may happen
that the greater causes, those on which the principal part of the
phenomena depends, are within the reach of observation and measurement; so
that if no other causes intervened, a complete explanation could be given
not only of the phenomena in general, but of all the variations and
modifications which it admits of. But inasmuch as other, perhaps many
other causes, separately insignificant in their effects, co-operate or
conflict in many or in all cases with those greater causes, the effect,
accordingly, presents more or less of aberration from what would be
produced by the greater causes alone. Now if these minor causes are not so
constantly accessible, or not accessible at all, to accurate observation,
the principal mass of the effect may still, as before, be accounted for,
and even predicted; but there will be variations and modifications which
we shall not be competent to explain thoroughly, and our predictions will
not be fulfilled accurately, but only approximately.

It is thus, for example, with the theory of the tides. No one doubts that
Tidology (as Dr. Whewell proposes to call it) is really a science. As much
of the phenomena as depends on the attraction of the sun and moon is
completely understood, and may, in any, even unknown, part of the earth’s
surface, be foretold with certainty; and the far greater part of the
phenomena depends on those causes. But circumstances of a local or casual
nature, such as the configuration of the bottom of the ocean, the degree
of confinement from shores, the direction of the wind, etc., influence, in
many or in all places, the height and time of the tide; and a portion of
these circumstances being either not accurately knowable, not precisely
measurable, or not capable of being certainly foreseen, the tide in known
places commonly varies from the calculated result of general principles by
some difference that we can not explain, and in unknown ones may vary from
it by a difference that we are not able to foresee or conjecture.
Nevertheless, not only is it certain that these variations depend on
causes, and follow their causes by laws of unerring uniformity; not only,
therefore, is tidology a science, like meteorology, but it is, what
hitherto at least meteorology is not, a science largely available in
practice. General laws may be laid down respecting the tides, predictions
may be founded on those laws, and the result will in the main, though
often not with complete accuracy, correspond to the predictions.

And this is what is or ought to be meant by those who speak of sciences
which are not _exact_ sciences. Astronomy was once a science, without
being an exact science. It could not become exact until not only the
general course of the planetary motions, but the perturbations also, were
accounted for, and referred to their causes. It has become an exact
science, because its phenomena have been brought under laws comprehending
the whole of the causes by which the phenomena are influenced, whether in
a great or only in a trifling degree, whether in all or only in some
cases, and assigning to each of those causes the share of effect which
really belongs to it. But in the theory of the tides the only laws as yet
accurately ascertained are those of the causes which affect the phenomenon
in all cases, and in a considerable degree; while others which affect it
in some cases only, or, if in all, only in a slight degree, have not been
sufficiently ascertained and studied to enable us to lay down their laws;
still less to deduce the completed law of the phenomenon, by compounding
the effects of the greater with those of the minor causes. Tidology,
therefore, is not yet an exact science; not from any inherent incapacity
of being so, but from the difficulty of ascertaining with complete
precision the real derivative uniformities. By combining, however, the
exact laws of the greater causes, and of such of the minor ones as are
sufficiently known, with such empirical laws or such approximate
generalizations respecting the miscellaneous variations as can be obtained
by specific observation, we can lay down general propositions which will
be true in the main, and on which, with allowance for the degree of their
probable inaccuracy, we may safely ground our expectations and our
conduct.

§ 2. The science of human nature is of this description. It falls far
short of the standard of exactness now realized in Astronomy; but there is
no reason that it should not be as much a science as Tidology is, or as
Astronomy was when its calculations had only mastered the main phenomena,
but not the perturbations.

The phenomena with which this science is conversant being the thoughts,
feelings, and actions of human beings, it would have attained the ideal
perfection of a science if it enabled us to foretell how an individual
would think, feel, or act throughout life, with the same certainty with
which astronomy enables us to predict the places and the occultations of
the heavenly bodies. It needs scarcely be stated that nothing approaching
to this can be done. The actions of individuals could not be predicted
with scientific accuracy, were it only because we can not foresee the
whole of the circumstances in which those individuals will be placed. But
further, even in any given combination of (present) circumstances, no
assertion, which is both precise and universally true, can be made
respecting the manner in which human beings will think, feel, or act. This
is not, however, because every person’s modes of thinking, feeling, and
acting do not depend on causes; nor can we doubt that if, in the case of
any individual, our data could be complete, we even now know enough of the
ultimate laws by which mental phenomena are determined, to enable us in
many cases to predict, with tolerable certainty, what, in the greater
number of supposable combinations of circumstances, his conduct or
sentiments would be. But the impressions and actions of human beings are
not solely the result of their present circumstances, but the joint result
of those circumstances and of the characters of the individuals; and the
agencies which determine human character are so numerous and diversified
(nothing which has happened to the person throughout life being without
its portion of influence), that in the aggregate they are never in any two
cases exactly similar. Hence, even if our science of human nature were
theoretically perfect, that is, if we could calculate any character as we
can calculate the orbit of any planet, _from given data_; still, as the
data are never all given, nor ever precisely alike in different cases, we
could neither make positive predictions, nor lay down universal
propositions.

Inasmuch, however, as many of those effects which it is of most importance
to render amenable to human foresight and control are determined, like the
tides, in an incomparably greater degree by general causes, than by all
partial causes taken together; depending in the main on those
circumstances and qualities which are common to all mankind, or at least
to large bodies of them, and only in a small degree on the idiosyncrasies
of organization or the peculiar history of individuals; it is evidently
possible with regard to all such effects, to make predictions which will
_almost_ always be verified, and general propositions which are almost
always true. And whenever it is sufficient to know how the great majority
of the human race, or of some nation or class of persons, will think,
feel, and act, these propositions are equivalent to universal ones. For
the purposes of political and social science this _is_ sufficient. As we
formerly remarked,(269) an approximate generalization is, in social
inquiries, for most practical purposes equivalent to an exact one; that
which is only probable when asserted of individual human beings
indiscriminately selected, being certain when affirmed of the character
and collective conduct of masses.

It is no disparagement, therefore, to the science of Human Nature, that
those of its general propositions which descend sufficiently into detail
to serve as a foundation for predicting phenomena in the concrete, are for
the most part only approximately true. But in order to give a genuinely
scientific character to the study, it is indispensable that these
approximate generalizations, which in themselves would amount only to the
lowest kind of empirical laws, should be connected deductively with the
laws of nature from which they result; should be resolved into the
properties of the causes on which the phenomena depend. In other words,
the science of Human Nature may be said to exist in proportion as the
approximate truths, which compose a practical knowledge of mankind, can be
exhibited as corollaries from the universal laws of human nature on which
they rest; whereby the proper limits of those approximate truths would be
shown, and we should be enabled to deduce others for any new state of
circumstances, in anticipation of specific experience.

The proposition now stated is the text on which the two succeeding
chapters will furnish the comment.




                               Chapter IV.


Of The Laws Of Mind.


§ 1. What the Mind is, as well as what Matter is, or any other question
respecting Things in themselves, as distinguished from their sensible
manifestations, it would be foreign to the purposes of this treatise to
consider. Here, as throughout our inquiry, we shall keep clear of all
speculations respecting the mind’s own nature, and shall understand by the
laws of mind those of mental Phenomena; of the various feelings or states
of consciousness of sentient beings. These, according to the
classification we have uniformly followed, consist of Thoughts, Emotions,
Volitions, and Sensations; the last being as truly states of Mind as the
three former. It is usual, indeed, to speak of sensations as states of
body, not of mind. But this is the common confusion, of giving one and the
same name to a phenomenon and to the approximate cause or conditions of
the phenomenon. The immediate antecedent of a sensation is a state of
body, but the sensation itself is a state of mind. If the word Mind means
any thing, it means that which feels. Whatever opinion we hold respecting
the fundamental identity or diversity of matter and mind, in any case the
distinction between mental and physical facts, between the internal and
the external world, will always remain, as a matter of classification; and
in that classification, sensations, like all other feelings, must be
ranked as mental phenomena. The mechanism of their production, both in the
body itself and in what is called outward nature, is all that can with any
propriety be classed as physical.

The phenomena of mind, then, are the various feelings of our nature, both
those improperly called physical and those peculiarly designated as
mental; and by the laws of mind, I mean the laws according to which those
feelings generate one another.

§ 2. All states of mind are immediately caused either by other states of
mind, or by states of body. When a state of mind is produced by a state of
mind, I call the law concerned in the case a law of Mind. When a state of
mind is produced directly by a state of body, the law is a law of Body,
and belongs to physical science.

With regard to those states of mind which are called sensations, all are
agreed that these have for their immediate antecedents, states of body.
Every sensation has for its proximate cause some affection of the portion
of our frame called the nervous system, whether this affection originates
in the action of some external object, or in some pathological condition
of the nervous organization itself. The laws of this portion of our
nature—the varieties of our sensations, and the physical conditions on
which they proximately depend—manifestly belong to the province of
Physiology.

Whether the remainder of our mental states are similarly dependent on
physical conditions, is one of the _vexatæ questiones_ in the science of
human nature. It is still disputed whether our thoughts, emotions, and
volitions are generated through the intervention of material mechanism;
whether we have organs of thought and of emotion, in the same sense in
which we have organs of sensation. Many eminent physiologists hold the
affirmative. These contend that a thought (for example) is as much the
result of nervous agency, as a sensation; that some particular state of
our nervous system, in particular of that central portion of it called the
brain, invariably precedes, and is presupposed by, every state of our
consciousness. According to this theory, one state of mind is never really
produced by another: all are produced by states of body. When one thought
seems to call up another by association, it is not really a thought which
recalls a thought; the association did not exist between the two thoughts,
but between the two states of the brain or nerves which preceded the
thoughts: one of those states recalls the other, each being attended in
its passage by the particular state of consciousness which is consequent
on it. On this theory the uniformities of succession among states of mind
would be mere derivative uniformities, resulting from the laws of
succession of the bodily states which cause them. There would be no
original mental laws, no Laws of Mind in the sense in which I use the
term, at all; and mental science would be a mere branch, though the
highest and most recondite branch, of the science of physiology. M. Comte,
accordingly, claims the scientific cognizance of moral and intellectual
phenomena exclusively for physiologists; and not only denies to
Psychology, or Mental Philosophy properly so called, the character of a
science, but places it, in the chimerical nature of its objects and
pretensions, almost on a par with astrology.

But, after all has been said which can be said, it remains incontestable
that there exist uniformities of succession among states of mind, and that
these can be ascertained by observation and experiment. Further, that
every mental state has a nervous state for its immediate antecedent and
proximate cause, though extremely probable, can not hitherto be said to be
proved, in the conclusive manner in which this can be proved of
sensations; and even were it certain, yet every one must admit that we are
wholly ignorant of the characteristics of these nervous states; we know
not, and at present have no means of knowing, in what respect one of them
differs from another; and our only mode of studying their successions or
co-existences must be by observing the successions and co-existences of
the mental states, of which they are supposed to be the generators or
causes. The successions, therefore, which obtain among mental phenomena,
do not admit of being deduced from the physiological laws of our nervous
organization; and all real knowledge of them must continue, for a long
time at least, if not always, to be sought in the direct study, by
observation and experiment, of the mental successions themselves. Since,
therefore, the order of our mental phenomena must be studied in those
phenomena, and not inferred from the laws of any phenomena more general,
there is a distinct and separate Science of Mind.

The relations, indeed, of that science to the science of physiology must
never be overlooked or undervalued. It must by no means be forgotten that
the laws of mind may be derivative laws resulting from laws of animal
life, and that their truth, therefore, may ultimately depend on physical
conditions; and the influence of physiological states or physiological
changes in altering or counteracting the mental successions, is one of the
most important departments of psychological study. But, on the other hand,
to reject the resource of psychological analysis, and construct the theory
of the mind solely on such data as physiology at present affords, seems to
me as great an error in principle, and an even more serious one in
practice. Imperfect as is the science of mind, I do not scruple to affirm
that it is in a considerably more advanced state than the portion of
physiology which corresponds to it; and to discard the former for the
latter appears, to me an infringement of the true canons of inductive
philosophy, which must produce, and which does produce, erroneous
conclusions in some very important departments of the science of human
nature.

§ 3. The subject, then, of Psychology is the uniformities of succession,
the laws, whether ultimate or derivative, according to which one mental
state succeeds another; is caused by, or at least, is caused to follow,
another. Of these laws some are general, others more special. The
following are examples of the most general laws:

First. Whenever any state of consciousness has once been excited in us, no
matter by what cause, an inferior degree of the same state of
consciousness, a state of consciousness resembling the former, but
inferior in intensity, is capable of being reproduced in us, without the
presence of any such cause as excited it at first. Thus, if we have once
seen or touched an object, we can afterward think of the object though it
be absent from our sight or from our touch. If we have been joyful or
grieved at some event, we can think of or remember our past joy or grief,
though no new event of a happy or painful nature has taken place. When a
poet has put together a mental picture of an imaginary object, a Castle of
Indolence, a Una, or a Hamlet, he can afterward think of the ideal object
he has created, without any fresh act of intellectual combination. This
law is expressed by saying, in the language of Hume, that every mental
_impression_ has its _idea_.

Secondly. These ideas, or secondary mental states, are excited by our
impressions, or by other ideas, according to certain laws which are called
Laws of Association. Of these laws the first is, that similar ideas tend
to excite one another. The second is, that when two impressions have been
frequently experienced (or even thought of) either simultaneously or in
immediate succession, then whenever one of these impressions, or the idea
of it, recurs, it tends to excite the idea of the other. The third law is,
that greater intensity in either or both of the impressions is equivalent,
in rendering them excitable by one another, to a greater frequency of
conjunction. These are the laws of ideas, on which I shall not enlarge in
this place, but refer the reader to works professedly psychological, in
particular to Mr. James Mill’s _Analysis of the Phenomena of the Human
Mind_, where the principal laws of association, along with many of their
applications, are copiously exemplified, and with a masterly hand.(270)

These simple or elementary Laws of Mind have been ascertained by the
ordinary methods of experimental inquiry; nor could they have been
ascertained in any other manner. But a certain number of elementary laws
having thus been obtained, it is a fair subject of scientific inquiry how
far those laws can be made to go in explaining the actual phenomena. It is
obvious that complex laws of thought and feeling not only may, but must,
be generated from these simple laws. And it is to be remarked, that the
case is not always one of Composition of Causes: the effect of concurring
causes is not always precisely the sum of the effects of those causes when
separate, nor even always an effect of the same kind with them. Reverting
to the distinction which occupies so prominent a place in the theory of
induction, the laws of the phenomena of mind are sometimes analogous to
mechanical, but sometimes also to chemical laws. When many impressions or
ideas are operating in the mind together, there sometimes takes place a
process of a similar kind to chemical combination. When impressions have
been so often experienced in conjunction, that each of them calls up
readily and instantaneously the ideas of the whole group, those ideas
sometimes melt and coalesce into one another, and appear not several
ideas, but one; in the same manner as, when the seven prismatic colors are
presented to the eye in rapid succession, the sensation produced is that
of white. But as in this last case it is correct to say that the seven
colors when they rapidly follow one another _generate_ white, but not that
they actually _are_ white; so it appears to me that the Complex Idea,
formed by the blending together of several simpler ones, should, when it
really appears simple (that is, when the separate elements are not
consciously distinguishable in it), be said to _result from_, or _be
generated by_, the simple ideas, not to _consist_ of them. Our idea of an
orange really _consists_ of the simple ideas of a certain color, a certain
form, a certain taste and smell, etc., because we can, by interrogating
our consciousness, perceive all these elements in the idea. But we can not
perceive, in so apparently simple a feeling as our perception of the shape
of an object by the eye, all that multitude of ideas derived from other
senses, without which it is well ascertained that no such visual
perception would ever have had existence; nor, in our idea of Extension,
can we discover those elementary ideas of resistance, derived from our
muscular frame, in which it has been conclusively shown that the idea
originates. These, therefore, are cases of mental chemistry; in which it
is proper to say that the simple ideas generate, rather than that they
compose, the complex ones.

With respect to all the other constituents of the mind, its beliefs, its
abstruser conceptions, its sentiments, emotions, and volitions, there are
some (among whom are Hartley and the author of the _Analysis_) who think
that the whole of these are generated from simple ideas of sensation, by a
chemistry similar to that which we have just exemplified. These
philosophers have made out a great part of their case, but I am not
satisfied that they have established the whole of it. They have shown that
there is such a thing as mental chemistry; that the heterogeneous nature
of a feeling A, considered in relation to B and C, is no conclusive
argument against its being generated from B and C. Having proved this,
they proceed to show, that where A is found, B and C were, or may have
been present, and why, therefore, they ask, should not A have been
generated from B and C? But even if this evidence were carried to the
highest degree of completeness which it admits of; if it were shown (which
hitherto it has not, in all cases, been) that certain groups of associated
ideas not only might have been, but actually were, present whenever the
more recondite mental feeling was experienced; this would amount only to
the Method of Agreement, and could not prove causation until confirmed by
the more conclusive evidence of the Method of Difference. If the question
be whether Belief is a mere case of close association of ideas, it would
be necessary to examine experimentally if it be true that any ideas
whatever, provided they are associated with the required degree of
closeness, give rise to belief. If the inquiry be into the origin of moral
feelings, the feeling for example of moral reprobation, it is necessary to
compare all the varieties of actions or states of mind which are ever
morally disapproved, and see whether in all these cases it can be shown,
or reasonably surmised, that the action or state of mind had become
connected by association, in the disapproving mind, with some particular
class of hateful or disgusting ideas; and the method employed is, thus
far, that of Agreement. But this is not enough. Supposing this proved, we
must try further by the Method of Difference, whether this particular kind
of hateful or disgusting ideas, when it becomes associated with an action
previously indifferent, will render that action a subject of moral
disapproval. If this question can be answered in the affirmative, it is
shown to be a law of the human mind, that an association of that
particular description is the generating cause of moral reprobation. That
all this is the case has been rendered extremely probable, but the
experiments have not been tried with the degree of precision necessary for
a complete and absolutely conclusive induction.(271)

It is further to be remembered, that even if all which this theory of
mental phenomena contends for could be proved, we should not be the more
enabled to resolve the laws of the more complex feelings into those of the
simpler ones. The generation of one class of mental phenomena from
another, whenever it can be made out, is a highly interesting fact in
psychological chemistry; but it no more supersedes the necessity of an
experimental study of the generated phenomenon, than a knowledge of the
properties of oxygen and sulphur enables us to deduce those of sulphuric
acid without specific observation and experiment. Whatever, therefore, may
be the final issue of the attempt to account for the origin of our
judgments, our desires, or our volitions, from simpler mental phenomena,
it is not the less imperative to ascertain the sequences of the complex
phenomena themselves, by special study in conformity to the canons of
Induction. Thus, in respect to Belief, psychologists will always have to
inquire what beliefs we have by direct consciousness, and according to
what laws one belief produces another; what are the laws in virtue of
which one thing is recognized by the mind, either rightly or erroneously,
as evidence of another thing. In regard to Desire, they will have to
examine what objects we desire naturally, and by what causes we are made
to desire things originally indifferent, or even disagreeable to us; and
so forth. It may be remarked that the general laws of association prevail
among these more intricate states of mind, in the same manner as among the
simpler ones. A desire, an emotion, an idea of the higher order of
abstraction, even our judgments and volitions, when they have become
habitual, are called up by association, according to precisely the same
laws as our simple ideas.

§ 4. In the course of these inquiries, it will be natural and necessary to
examine how far the production of one state of mind by another is
influenced by any assignable state of body. The commonest observation
shows that different minds are susceptible in very different degrees to
the action of the same psychological causes. The idea, for example, of a
given desirable object will excite in different minds very different
degrees of intensity of desire. The same subject of meditation, presented
to different minds, will excite in them very unequal degrees of
intellectual action. These differences of mental susceptibility in
different individuals may be, first, original and ultimate facts; or,
secondly, they may be consequences of the previous mental history of those
individuals; or, thirdly and lastly, they may depend on varieties of
physical organization. That the previous mental history of the individuals
must have some share in producing or in modifying the whole of their
mental character, is an inevitable consequence of the laws of mind; but
that differences of bodily structure also co-operate, is the opinion of
all physiologists, confirmed by common experience. It is to be regretted
that hitherto this experience, being accepted in the gross, without due
analysis, has been made the groundwork of empirical generalizations most
detrimental to the progress of real knowledge.

It is certain that the natural differences which really exist in the
mental predispositions or susceptibilities of different persons are often
not unconnected with diversities in their organic constitution. But it
does not therefore follow that these organic differences must in all cases
influence the mental phenomena directly and immediately. They often affect
them through the medium of their psychological causes. For example, the
idea of some particular pleasure may excite in different persons, even
independently of habit or education, very different strengths of desire,
and this may be the effect of their different degrees or kinds of nervous
susceptibility; but these organic differences, we must remember, will
render the pleasurable sensation itself more intense in one of these
persons than in the other; so that the idea of the pleasure will also be
an intenser feeling, and will, by the operation of mere mental laws,
excite an intenser desire, without its being necessary to suppose that the
desire itself is directly influenced by the physical peculiarity. As in
this, so in many cases, such differences in the kind or in the intensity
of the physical sensations as must necessarily result from differences of
bodily organization, will of themselves account for many differences not
only in the degree, but even in the kind, of the other mental phenomena.
So true is this, that even different _qualities_ of mind, different types
of mental character, will naturally be produced by mere differences of
intensity in the sensations generally; as is well pointed out in the able
essay on Dr. Priestley, by Mr. Martineau, mentioned in a former chapter:

“The sensations which form the elements of all knowledge are received
either simultaneously or successively: when several are received
simultaneously, as the smell, the taste, the color, the form, etc., of a
fruit, their association together constitutes our idea of an _object_;
when received successively, their association makes up the idea of an
_event_. Any thing, then, which favors the associations of synchronous
ideas will tend to produce a knowledge of objects, a perception of
qualities; while any thing which favors association in the successive
order, will tend to produce a knowledge of events, of the order of
occurrences, and of the connection of cause and effect: in other words, in
the one case a perceptive mind, with a discriminate feeling of the
pleasurable and painful properties of things, a sense of the grand and the
beautiful will be the result: in the other, a mind attentive to the
movements and phenomena, a ratiocinative and philosophic intellect. Now it
is an acknowledged principle, that all sensations experienced during the
presence of any vivid impression become strongly associated with it, and
with each other; and does it not follow that the synchronous feelings of a
sensitive constitution (_i.e._, the one which has vivid impressions) will
be more intimately blended than in a differently formed mind? If this
suggestion has any foundation in truth, it leads to an inference not
unimportant; that where nature has endowed an individual with great
original susceptibility, he will probably be distinguished by fondness for
natural history, a relish for the beautiful and great, and moral
enthusiasm; where there is but a mediocrity of sensibility, a love of
science, of abstract truth, with a deficiency of taste and of fervor, is
likely to be the result.”

We see from this example, that when the general laws of mind are more
accurately known, and, above all, more skillfully applied to the detailed
explanation of mental peculiarities, they will account for many more of
those peculiarities than is ordinarily supposed. Unfortunately the
reaction of the last and present generation against the philosophy of the
eighteenth century has produced a very general neglect of this great
department of analytical inquiry; of which, consequently, the recent
progress has been by no means proportional to its early promise. The
majority of those who speculate on human nature prefer dogmatically to
assume that the mental differences which they perceive, or think they
perceive, among human beings, are ultimate facts, incapable of being
either explained or altered, rather than take the trouble of fitting
themselves, by the requisite processes of thought, for referring those
mental differences to the outward causes by which they are for the most
part produced, and on the removal of which they would cease to exist. The
German school of metaphysical speculation, which has not yet lost its
temporary predominance in European thought, has had this among many other
injurious influences; and at the opposite extreme of the psychological
scale, no writer, either of early or of recent date, is chargeable in a
higher degree with this aberration from the true scientific spirit, than
M. Comte.

It is certain that, in human beings at least, differences in education and
in outward circumstances are capable of affording an adequate explanation
of by far the greatest portion of character; and that the remainder may be
in great part accounted for by physical differences in the sensations
produced in different individuals by the same external or internal cause.
There are, however, some mental facts which do not seem to admit of these
modes of explanation. Such, to take the strongest case, are the various
instincts of animals, and the portion of human nature which corresponds to
those instincts. No mode has been suggested, even by way of hypothesis, in
which these can receive any satisfactory, or even plausible, explanation
from psychological causes alone; and there is great reason to think that
they have as positive, and even as direct and immediate, a connection with
physical conditions of the brain and nerves as any of our mere sensations
have. A supposition which (it is perhaps not superfluous to add) in no way
conflicts with the indisputable fact that these instincts may be modified
to any extent, or entirely conquered, in human beings, and to no
inconsiderable extent even in some of the domesticated animals, by other
mental influences, and by education.

Whether organic causes exercise a direct influence over any other classes
of mental phenomena, is hitherto as far from being ascertained as is the
precise nature of the organic conditions even in the case of instincts.
The physiology, however, of the brain and nervous system is in a state of
such rapid advance, and is continually bringing forth such new and
interesting results, that if there be really a connection between mental
peculiarities and any varieties cognizable by our senses in the structure
of the cerebral and nervous apparatus, the nature of that connection is
now in a fair way of being found out. The latest discoveries in cerebral
physiology appear to have proved that any such connection which may exist
is of a radically different character from that contended for by Gall and
his followers, and that, whatever may hereafter be found to be the true
theory of the subject, phrenology at least is untenable.




                                Chapter V.


Of Ethology, Or The Science Of The Formation Of Character.


§ 1. The laws of mind as characterized in the preceding chapter, compose
the universal or abstract portion of the philosophy of human nature; and
all the truths of common experience, constituting a practical knowledge of
mankind, must, to the extent to which they are truths, be results or
consequences of these. Such familiar maxims, when collected _a posteriori_
from observation of life, occupy among the truths of the science the place
of what, in our analysis of Induction, have so often been spoken of under
the title of Empirical Laws.

An Empirical Law (it will be remembered) is a uniformity, whether of
succession or of co-existence, which holds true in all instances within
our limits of observation, but is not of a nature to afford any assurance
that it would hold beyond those limits; either because the consequent is
not really the effect of the antecedent, but forms part along with it of a
chain of effects flowing from prior causes not yet ascertained, or because
there is ground to believe that the sequence (though a case of causation)
is resolvable into simpler sequences, and, depending therefore on a
concurrence of several natural agencies, is exposed to an unknown
multitude of possibilities of counteraction. In other words, an empirical
law is a generalization, of which, not content with finding it true, we
are obliged to ask, why is it true? knowing that its truth is not
absolute, but dependent on some more general conditions, and that it can
only be relied on in so far as there is ground of assurance that those
conditions are realized.

Now, the observations concerning human affairs collected from common
experience are precisely of this nature. Even if they were universally and
exactly true within the bounds of experience, which they never are, still
they are not the ultimate laws of human action; they are not the
principles of human nature, but results of those principles under the
circumstances in which mankind have happened to be placed. When the
Psalmist “said in his haste that all men are liars,” he enunciated what in
some ages and countries is borne out by ample experience; but it is not a
law of man’s nature to lie; though it is one of the consequences of the
laws of human nature, that lying is nearly universal when certain external
circumstances exist universally, especially circumstances productive of
habitual distrust and fear. When the character of the old is asserted to
be cautious, and of the young impetuous, this, again, is but an empirical
law; for it is not because of their youth that the young are impetuous,
nor because of their age that the old are cautious. It is chiefly, if not
wholly, because the old, during their many years of life, have generally
had much experience of its various evils, and having suffered or seen
others suffer much from incautious exposure to them, have acquired
associations favorable to circumspection; while the young, as well from
the absence of similar experience as from the greater strength of the
inclinations which urge them to enterprise, engage themselves in it more
readily. Here, then, is the _explanation_ of the empirical law; here are
the conditions which ultimately determine whether the law holds good or
not. If an old man has not been oftener than most young men in contact
with danger and difficulty, he will be equally incautious; if a youth has
not stronger inclinations than an old man, he probably will be as little
enterprising. The empirical law derives whatever truth it has from the
causal laws of which it is a consequence. If we know those laws, we know
what are the limits to the derivative law; while, if we have not yet
accounted for the empirical law—if it rests only on observation—there is
no safety in applying it far beyond the limits of time, place, and
circumstance in which the observations were made.

The really scientific truths, then, are not these empirical laws, but the
causal laws which explain them. The empirical laws of those phenomena
which depend on known causes, and of which a general theory can therefore
be constructed, have, whatever may be their value in practice, no other
function in science than that of verifying the conclusions of theory.
Still more must this be the case when most of the empirical laws amount,
even within the limits of observation, only to approximate
generalizations.

§ 2. This, however, is not, so much as is sometimes supposed, a
peculiarity of the sciences called moral. It is only in the simplest
branches of science that empirical laws are ever exactly true; and not
always in those. Astronomy, for example, is the simplest of all the
sciences which explain, in the concrete, the actual course of natural
events. The causes or forces on which astronomical phenomena depend, are
fewer in number than those which determine any other of the great
phenomena of nature. Accordingly, as each effect results from the conflict
of but few causes, a great degree of regularity and uniformity might be
expected to exist among the effects; and such is really the case: they
have a fixed order, and return in cycles. But propositions which should
express, with absolute correctness, all the successive positions of a
planet until the cycle is completed, would be of almost unmanageable
complexity, and could be obtained from theory alone. The generalizations
which can be collected on the subject from direct observation, even such
as Kepler’s law, are mere approximations; the planets, owing to their
perturbations by one another, do not move in exact ellipses. Thus even in
astronomy, perfect exactness in the mere empirical laws is not to be
looked for; much less, then, in more complex subjects of inquiry.

The same example shows how little can be inferred against the universality
or even the simplicity of the ultimate laws, from the impossibility of
establishing any but approximate empirical laws of the effects. The laws
of causation according to which a class of phenomena are produced may be
very few and simple, and yet the effects themselves may be so various and
complicated that it shall be impossible to trace any regularity whatever
completely through them. For the phenomena in question may be of an
eminently modifiable character; insomuch that innumerable circumstances
are capable of influencing the effect, although they may all do it
according to a very small number of laws. Suppose that all which passes in
the mind of man is determined by a few simple laws; still, if those laws
be such that there is not one of the facts surrounding a human being, or
of the events which happen to him, that does not influence in some mode or
degree his subsequent mental history, and if the circumstances of
different human beings are extremely different, it will be no wonder if
very few propositions can be made respecting the details of their conduct
or feelings, which will be true of all mankind.

Now, without deciding whether the ultimate laws of our mental nature are
few or many, it is at least certain that they are of the above
description. It is certain that our mental states, and our mental
capacities and susceptibilities, are modified, either for a time or
permanently, by every thing which happens to us in life. Considering,
therefore, how much these modifying causes differ in the case of any two
individuals, it would be unreasonable to expect that the empirical laws of
the human mind, the generalizations which can be made respecting the
feelings or actions of mankind without reference to the causes that
determine them, should be any thing but approximate generalizations. They
are the common wisdom of common life, and as such are invaluable;
especially as they are mostly to be applied to cases not very dissimilar
to those from which they were collected. But when maxims of this sort,
collected from Englishmen, come to be applied to Frenchmen, or when those
collected from the present day are applied to past or future generations,
they are apt to be very much at fault. Unless we have resolved the
empirical law into the laws of the causes on which it depends, and
ascertained that those causes extend to the case which we have in view,
there can be no reliance placed in our inferences. For every individual is
surrounded by circumstances different from those of every other
individual; every nation or generation of mankind from every other nation
or generation: and none of these differences are without their influence
in forming a different type of character. There is, indeed, also a certain
general resemblance; but peculiarities of circumstances are continually
constituting exceptions even to the propositions which are true in the
great majority of cases.

Although, however, there is scarcely any mode of feeling or conduct which
is, in the absolute sense, common to all mankind; and though the
generalizations which assert that any given variety of conduct or feeling
will be found universally (however nearly they may approximate to truth
within given limits of observation), will be considered as scientific
propositions by no one who is at all familiar with scientific
investigation; yet all modes of feeling and conduct met with among mankind
have causes which produce them; and in the propositions which assign those
causes will be found the explanation of the empirical laws, and the
limiting principle of our reliance on them. Human beings do not all feel
and act alike in the same circumstances; but it is possible to determine
what makes one person, in a given position, feel or act in one way,
another in another; how any given mode of feeling and conduct, compatible
with the general laws (physical and mental) of human nature, has been, or
may be, formed. In other words, mankind have not one universal character,
but there exist universal laws of the Formation of Character. And since it
is by these laws, combined with the facts of each particular case, that
the whole of the phenomena of human action and feeling are produced, it is
on these that every rational attempt to construct the science of human
nature in the concrete, and for practical purposes, must proceed.

§ 3. The laws, then, of the formation of character being the principal
object of scientific inquiry into human nature, it remains to determine
the method of investigation best fitted for ascertaining them. And the
logical principles according to which this question is to be decided, must
be those which preside over every other attempt to investigate the laws of
very complex phenomena. For it is evident that both the character of any
human being, and the aggregate of the circumstances by which that
character has been formed, are facts of a high order of complexity. Now to
such cases we have seen that the Deductive Method, setting out from
general laws, and verifying their consequences by specific experience, is
alone applicable. The grounds of this great logical doctrine have formerly
been stated; and its truth will derive additional support from a brief
examination of the specialties of the present case.

There are only two modes in which laws of nature can be
ascertained—deductively and experimentally; including under the
denomination of experimental inquiry, observation as well as artificial
experiment. Are the laws of the formation of character susceptible of a
satisfactory investigation by the method of experimentation? Evidently
not; because, even if we suppose unlimited power of varying the experiment
(which is abstractedly possible, though no one but an Oriental despot has
that power, or, if he had, would probably be disposed to exercise it), a
still more essential condition is wanting—the power of performing any of
the experiments with scientific accuracy.

The instances requisite for the prosecution of a directly experimental
inquiry into the formation of character, would be a number of human beings
to bring up and educate, from infancy to mature age. And to perform any
one of these experiments with scientific propriety, it would be necessary
to know and record every sensation or impression received by the young
pupil from a period long before it could speak; including its own notions
respecting the sources of all those sensations and impressions. It is not
only impossible to do this completely, but even to do so much of it as
should constitute a tolerable approximation. One apparently trivial
circumstance which eluded our vigilance might let in a train of
impressions and associations sufficient to vitiate the experiment as an
authentic exhibition of the effects flowing from given causes. No one who
has sufficiently reflected on education is ignorant of this truth; and
whoever has not, will find it most instructively illustrated in the
writings of Rousseau and Helvetius on that great subject.

Under this impossibility of studying the laws of the formation of
character by experiments purposely contrived to elucidate them, there
remains the resource of simple observation. But if it be impossible to
ascertain the influencing circumstances with any approach to completeness
even when we have the shaping of them ourselves, much more impossible is
it when the cases are further removed from our observation, and altogether
out of our control. Consider the difficulty of the very first step—of
ascertaining what actually is the character of the individual, in each
particular case that we examine. There is hardly any person living
concerning some essential part of whose character there are not
differences of opinion even among his intimate acquaintances; and a single
action, or conduct continued only for a short time, goes a very little way
toward ascertaining it. We can only make our observations in a rough way
and _en masse_; not attempting to ascertain completely in any given
instance, what character has been formed, and still less by what causes;
but only observing in what state of previous circumstances it is found
that certain marked mental qualities or deficiencies _oftenest_ exist.
These conclusions, besides that they are mere approximate generalizations,
deserve no reliance, even as such, unless the instances are sufficiently
numerous to eliminate not only chance, but every assignable circumstance
in which a number of the cases examined may happen to have resembled one
another. So numerous and various, too, are the circumstances which form
individual character, that the consequence of any particular combination
is hardly ever some definite and strongly marked character, always found
where that combination exists, and not otherwise. What is obtained, even
after the most extensive and accurate observation, is merely a comparative
result; as, for example, that in a given number of Frenchmen, taken
indiscriminately, there will be found more persons of a particular mental
tendency, and fewer of the contrary tendency, than among an equal number
of Italians or English, similarly taken; or thus: of a hundred Frenchmen
and an equal number of Englishmen, fairly selected, and arranged according
to the degree in which they possess a particular mental characteristic,
each number, 1, 2, 3, etc., of the one series, will be found to possess
more of that characteristic than the corresponding number of the other.
Since, therefore, the comparison is not one of kinds, but of ratios and
degrees; and since, in proportion as the differences are slight, it
requires a greater number of instances to eliminate chance, it can not
often happen to any one to know a sufficient number of cases with the
accuracy requisite for making the sort of comparison last mentioned; less
than which, however, would not constitute a real induction. Accordingly,
there is hardly one current opinion respecting the characters of nations,
classes, or descriptions of persons, which is universally acknowledged as
indisputable.(272)

And finally, if we could even obtain by way of experiment a much more
satisfactory assurance of these generalizations than is really possible,
they would still be only empirical laws. They would show, indeed, that
there was some connection between the type of character formed and the
circumstances existing in the case; but not what the precise connection
was, nor to which of the peculiarities of those circumstances the effect
was really owing. They could only, therefore, be received as results of
causation, requiring to be resolved into the general laws of the causes:
until the determination of which, we could not judge within what limits
the derivative laws might serve as presumptions in cases yet unknown, or
even be depended on as permanent in the very cases from which they were
collected. The French people had, or were supposed to have, a certain
national character; but they drive out their royal family and aristocracy,
alter their institutions, pass through a series of extraordinary events
for the greater part of a century, and at the end of that time their
character is found to have undergone important changes. A long list of
mental and moral differences are observed, or supposed to exist between
men and women; but at some future and, it may be hoped, not distant
period, equal freedom and an equally independent social position come to
be possessed by both, and their differences of character are either
removed or totally altered.

But if the differences which we think we observe between French and
English, or between men and women, can be connected with more general
laws; if they be such as might be expected to be produced by the
differences of government, former customs, and physical peculiarities in
the two nations, and by the diversities of education, occupations,
personal independence, and social privileges, and whatever original
differences there may be in bodily strength and nervous sensibility
between the two sexes; then, indeed, the coincidence of the two kinds of
evidence justifies us in believing that we have both reasoned rightly and
observed rightly. Our observation, though not sufficient as proof, is
ample as verification. And having ascertained not only the empirical laws,
but the causes, of the peculiarities, we need be under no difficulty in
judging how far they may be expected to be permanent, or by what
circumstances they would be modified or destroyed.

§ 4. Since then it is impossible to obtain really accurate propositions
respecting the formation of character from observation and experiment
alone, we are driven perforce to that which, even if it had not been the
indispensable, would have been the most perfect, mode of investigation,
and which it is one of the principal aims of philosophy to extend; namely,
that which tries its experiments not on the complex facts, but on the
simple ones of which they are compounded; and after ascertaining the laws
of the causes, the composition of which gives rise to the complex
phenomena, then considers whether these will not explain and account for
the approximate generalizations which have been framed empirically
respecting the sequences of those complex phenomena. The laws of the
formation of character are, in short, derivative laws, resulting from the
general laws of mind, and are to be obtained by deducing them from those
general laws by supposing any given set of circumstances, and then
considering what, according to the laws of mind, will be the influence of
those circumstances on the formation of character.

A science is thus formed, to which I would propose to give the name of
Ethology, or the Science of Character, from ἦθος, a word more nearly
corresponding to the term “character” as I here use it, than any other
word in the same language. The name is perhaps etymologically applicable
to the entire science of our mental and moral nature; but if, as is usual
and convenient, we employ the name Psychology for the science of the
elementary laws of mind, Ethology will serve for the ulterior science
which determines the kind of character produced in conformity to those
general laws by any set of circumstances, physical and moral. According to
this definition, Ethology is the science which corresponds to the art of
education in the widest sense of the term, including the formation of
national or collective character as well as individual. It would indeed be
vain to expect (however completely the laws of the formation of character
might be ascertained) that we could know so accurately the circumstances
of any given case as to be able positively to predict the character that
would be produced in that case. But we must remember that a degree of
knowledge far short of the power of actual prediction is often of much
practical value. There may be great power of influencing phenomena, with a
very imperfect knowledge of the causes by which they are in any given
instance determined. It is enough that we know that certain means have a
_tendency_ to produce a given effect, and that others have a tendency to
frustrate it. When the circumstances of an individual or of a nation are
in any considerable degree under our control, we may, by our knowledge of
tendencies, be enabled to shape those circumstances in a manner much more
favorable to the ends we desire, than the shape which they would of
themselves assume. This is the limit of our power; but within this limit
the power is a most important one.

This science of Ethology may be called the Exact Science of Human Nature;
for its truths are not, like the empirical laws which depend on them,
approximate generalizations, but real laws. It is, however (as in all
cases of complex phenomena), necessary to the exactness of the
propositions, that they should be hypothetical only, and affirm
tendencies, not facts. They must not assert that something will always, or
certainly, happen; but only that such and such will be the effect of a
given cause, so far as it operates uncounteracted. It is a scientific
proposition, that bodily strength tends to make men courageous; not that
it always makes them so: that an interest on one side of a question tends
to bias the judgment; not that it invariably does so: that experience
tends to give wisdom; not that such is always its effect. These
propositions, being assertive only of tendencies, are not the less
universally true because the tendencies may be frustrated.

§ 5. While, on the one hand, Psychology is altogether, or principally, a
science of observation and experiment, Ethology, as I have conceived it,
is, as I have already remarked, altogether deductive. The one ascertains
the simple laws of Mind in general, the other traces their operation in
complex combinations of circumstances. Ethology stands to Psychology in a
relation very similar to that in which the various branches of natural
philosophy stand to mechanics. The principles of Ethology are properly the
middle principles, the _axiomata media_ (as Bacon would have said) of the
science of mind: as distinguished, on the one hand, from the empirical
laws resulting from simple observation, and, on the other, from the
highest generalizations.

And this seems a suitable place for a logical remark, which, though of
general application, is of peculiar importance in reference to the present
subject. Bacon has judiciously observed that the _axiomata media_ of every
science principally constitute its value. The lowest generalizations,
until explained by and resolved into the middle principles of which they
are the consequences, have only the imperfect accuracy of empirical laws;
while the most general laws are _too_ general, and include too few
circumstances, to give sufficient indication of what happens in individual
cases, where the circumstances are almost always immensely numerous. In
the importance, therefore, which Bacon assigns, in every science, to the
middle principles, it is impossible not to agree with him. But I conceive
him to have been radically wrong in his doctrine respecting the mode in
which these _axiomata media_ should be arrived at; though there is no one
proposition laid down in his works for which he has been more
extravagantly eulogized. He enunciates as a universal rule that induction
should proceed from the lowest to the middle principles, and from those to
the highest, never reversing that order, and, consequently, leaving no
room for the discovery of new principles by way of deduction at all. It is
not to be conceived that a man of his sagacity could have fallen into this
mistake if there had existed in his time, among the sciences which treat
of successive phenomena, one single instance of a deductive science, such
as mechanics, astronomy, optics, acoustics, etc., now are. In those
sciences it is evident that the higher and middle principles are by no
means derived from the lowest, but the reverse. In some of them the very
highest generalizations were those earliest ascertained with any
scientific exactness; as, for example (in mechanics), the laws of motion.
Those general laws had not, indeed, at first the acknowledged universality
which they acquired after having been successfully employed to explain
many classes of phenomena to which they were not originally seen to be
applicable; as when the laws of motion were employed, in conjunction with
other laws, to explain deductively the celestial phenomena. Still, the
fact remains, that the propositions which were afterward recognized as the
most general truths of the science were, of all its accurate
generalizations, those earliest arrived at. Bacon’s greatest merit can not
therefore consist, as we are so often told that it did, in exploding the
vicious method pursued by the ancients of flying to the highest
generalizations first, and deducing the middle principles from them; since
this is neither a vicious nor an exploded, but the universally accredited
method of modern science, and that to which it owes its greatest triumphs.
The error of ancient speculation did not consist in making the largest
generalizations first, but in making them without the aid or warrant of
rigorous inductive methods, and applying them deductively without the
needful use of that important part of the Deductive Method termed
Verification.

The order in which truths of the various degrees of generality should be
ascertained can not, I apprehend, be prescribed by any unbending rule. I
know of no maxim which can be laid down on the subject, but to obtain
those first in respect to which the conditions of a real induction can be
first and most completely realized. Now, wherever our means of
investigation can reach causes, without stopping at the empirical laws of
the effects, the simplest cases, being those in which fewest causes are
simultaneously concerned, will be most amenable to the inductive process;
and these are the cases which elicit laws of the greatest
comprehensiveness. In every science, therefore, which has reached the
stage at which it becomes a science of causes, it will be usual as well as
desirable first to obtain the highest generalizations, and then deduce the
more special ones from them. Nor can I discover any foundation for the
Baconian maxim, so much extolled by subsequent writers, except this: That
before we attempt to explain deductively from more general laws any new
class of phenomena, it is desirable to have gone as far as is practicable
in ascertaining the empirical laws of those phenomena; so as to compare
the results of deduction, not with one individual instance after another,
but with general propositions expressive of the points of agreement which
have been found among many instances. For if Newton had been obliged to
verify the theory of gravitation, not by deducing from it Kepler’s laws,
but by deducing all the observed planetary positions which had served
Kepler to establish those laws, the Newtonian theory would probably never
have emerged from the state of an hypothesis.(273)

The applicability of these remarks to the special case under consideration
can not admit of question. The science of the formation of character is a
science of causes. The subject is one to which those among the canons of
induction, by which laws of causation are ascertained, can be rigorously
applied. It is, therefore, both natural and advisable to ascertain the
simplest, which are necessarily the most general, laws of causation first,
and to deduce the middle principles from them. In other words, Ethology,
the deductive science, is a system of corollaries from Psychology, the
experimental science.

§ 6. Of these, the earlier alone has been, as yet, really conceived or
studied as a science; the other, Ethology, is still to be created. But its
creation has at length become practicable. The empirical laws, destined to
verify its deductions, have been formed in abundance by every successive
age of humanity; and the premises for the deductions are now sufficiently
complete. Excepting the degree of uncertainty which still exists as to the
extent of the natural differences of individual minds, and the physical
circumstances on which these may be dependent (considerations which are of
secondary importance when we are considering mankind in the average, or
_en masse_), I believe most competent judges will agree that the general
laws of the different constituent elements of human nature are even now
sufficiently understood to render it possible for a competent thinker to
deduce from those laws, with a considerable approach to certainty, the
particular type of character which would be formed in mankind generally by
any assumed set of circumstances. A science of Ethology, founded on the
laws of Psychology, is therefore possible; though little has yet been
done, and that little not at all systematically, toward forming it. The
progress of this important but most imperfect science will depend on a
double process: first, that of deducing theoretically the ethological
consequences of particular circumstances of position, and comparing them
with the recognized results of common experience; and, secondly, the
reverse operation; increased study of the various types of human nature
that are to be found in the world; conducted by persons not only capable
of analyzing and recording the circumstances in which these types
severally prevail, but also sufficiently acquainted with psychological
laws to be able to explain and account for the characteristics of the
type, by the peculiarities of the circumstances: the residuum alone, when
there proves to be any, being set down to the account of congenital
predispositions.

For the experimental or _a posteriori_ part of this process, the materials
are continually accumulating by the observation of mankind. So far as
thought is concerned, the great problem of Ethology is to deduce the
requisite middle principles from the general laws of Psychology. The
subject to be studied is, the origin and sources of all those qualities in
human beings which are interesting to us, either as facts to be produced,
to be avoided, or merely to be understood; and the object is, to
determine, from the general laws of mind, combined with the general
position of our species in the universe, what actual or possible
combinations of circumstances are capable of promoting or of preventing
the production of those qualities. A science which possesses middle
principles of this kind, arranged in the order, not of causes, but of the
effects which it is desirable to produce or to prevent, is duly prepared
to be the foundation of the corresponding Art. And when Ethology shall be
thus prepared, practical education will be the mere transformation of
those principles into a parallel system of precepts, and the adaptation of
these to the sum total of the individual circumstances which exist in each
particular case.

It is hardly necessary again to repeat that, as in every other deductive
science, verification _a posteriori_ must proceed _pari passu_ with
deduction _a priori_. The inference given by theory as to the type of
character which would be formed by any given circumstances must be tested
by specific experience of those circumstances whenever obtainable; and the
conclusions of the science as a whole must undergo a perpetual
verification and correction from the general remarks afforded by common
experience respecting human nature in our own age, and by history
respecting times gone by. The conclusions of theory can not be trusted,
unless confirmed by observation; nor those of observation, unless they can
be affiliated to theory, by deducing them from the laws of human nature,
and from a close analysis of the circumstances of the particular
situation. It is the accordance of these two kinds of evidence separately
taken—the consilience of _a priori_ reasoning and specific
experience—which forms the only sufficient ground for the principles of
any science so “immersed in matter,” dealing with such complex and
concrete phenomena, as Ethology.




                               Chapter VI.


General Considerations On The Social Science.


§ 1. Next after the science of individual man comes the science of man in
society—of the actions of collective masses of mankind, and the various
phenomena which constitute social life.

If the formation of individual character is already a complex subject of
study, this subject must be, in appearance at least, still more complex;
because the number of concurrent causes, all exercising more or less
influence on the total effect, is greater, in the proportion in which a
nation, or the species at large, exposes a larger surface to the operation
of agents, psychological and physical, than any single individual. If it
was necessary to prove, in opposition to an existing prejudice, that the
simpler of the two is capable of being a subject of science, the prejudice
is likely to be yet stronger against the possibility of giving a
scientific character to the study of Politics, and of the phenomena of
Society. It is, accordingly, but of yesterday that the conception of a
political or social science has existed anywhere but in the mind of here
and there an insulated thinker, generally very ill prepared for its
realization: though the subject itself has of all others engaged the most
general attention, and been a theme of interested and earnest discussions,
almost from the beginning of recorded time.

The condition, indeed, of politics as a branch of knowledge was, until
very lately, and has scarcely even yet ceased to be, that which Bacon
animadverted on, as the natural state of the sciences while their
cultivation is abandoned to practitioners; not being carried on as a
branch of speculative inquiry, but only with a view to the exigencies of
daily practice, and the _fructifera experimenta_, therefore, being aimed
at, almost to the exclusion of the _lucifera_. Such was medical
investigation, before physiology and natural history began to be
cultivated as branches of general knowledge. The only questions examined
were, what diet is wholesome, or what medicine will cure some given
disease; without any previous systematic inquiry into the laws of
nutrition, and of the healthy and morbid action of the different organs,
on which laws the effect of any diet or medicine must evidently depend.
And in politics the questions which engaged general attention were
similar: Is such an enactment, or such a form of government, beneficial or
the reverse—either universally, or to some particular community? without
any previous inquiry into the general conditions by which the operation of
legislative measures, or the effects produced by forms of government, are
determined. Students in politics thus attempted to study the pathology and
therapeutics of the social body, before they had laid the necessary
foundation in its physiology; to cure disease without understanding the
laws of health. And the result was such as it must always be when persons,
even of ability, attempt to deal with the complex questions of a science
before its simpler and more elementary truths have been established.

No wonder that, when the phenomena of society have so rarely been
contemplated in the point of view characteristic of science, the
philosophy of society should have made little progress; should contain few
general propositions sufficiently precise and certain for common inquirers
to recognize in them a scientific character. The vulgar notion accordingly
is, that all pretension to lay down general truths on politics and society
is quackery; that no universality and no certainty are attainable in such
matters. What partly excuses this common notion is, that it is really not
without foundation in one particular sense. A large proportion of those
who have laid claim to the character of philosophic politicians have
attempted not to ascertain universal sequences, but to frame universal
precepts. They have imagined some one form of government, or system of
laws, to fit all cases—a pretension well meriting the ridicule with which
it is treated by practitioners, and wholly unsupported by the analogy of
the art to which, from the nature of its subject, that of politics must be
the most nearly allied. No one now supposes it possible that one remedy
can cure all diseases, or even the same disease in all constitutions and
habits of body.

It is not necessary even to the perfection of a science, that the
corresponding art should possess universal, or even general, rules. The
phenomena of society might not only be completely dependent on known
causes, but the mode of action of all those causes might be reducible to
laws of considerable simplicity, and yet no two cases might admit of being
treated in precisely the same manner. So great might be the variety of
circumstances on which the results in different cases depend, that the art
might not have a single general precept to give, except that of watching
the circumstances of the particular case, and adapting our measures to the
effects which, according to the principles of the science, result from
those circumstances. But although, in so complicated a class of subjects,
it is impossible to lay down practical maxims of universal application, it
does not follow that the phenomena do not conform to universal laws.

§ 2. All phenomena of society are phenomena of human nature, generated by
the action of outward circumstances upon masses of human beings; and if,
therefore, the phenomena of human thought, feeling, and action are subject
to fixed laws, the phenomena of society can not but conform to fixed laws,
the consequence of the preceding. There is, indeed, no hope that these
laws, though our knowledge of them were as certain and as complete as it
is in astronomy, would enable us to predict the history of society, like
that of the celestial appearances, for thousands of years to come. But the
difference of certainty is not in the laws themselves, it is in the data
to which these laws are to be applied. In astronomy the causes influencing
the result are few, and change little, and that little according to known
laws; we can ascertain what they are now, and thence determine what they
will be at any epoch of a distant future. The data, therefore, in
astronomy are as certain as the laws themselves. The circumstances, on the
contrary, which influence the condition and progress of society are
innumerable, and perpetually changing; and though they all change in
obedience to causes, and therefore to laws, the multitude of the causes is
so great as to defy our limited powers of calculation. Not to say that the
impossibility of applying precise numbers to facts of such a description
would set an impassable limit to the possibility of calculating them
beforehand, even if the powers of the human intellect were otherwise
adequate to the task.

But, as before remarked, an amount of knowledge quite insufficient for
prediction, may be most valuable for guidance. The science of society
would have attained a very high point of perfection if it enabled us, in
any given condition of social affairs, in the condition, for instance, of
Europe or any European country at the present time, to understand by what
causes it had, in any and every particular, been made what it was; whether
it was tending to any, and to what, changes; what effects each feature of
its existing state was likely to produce in the future; and by what means
any of those effects might be prevented, modified, or accelerated, or a
different class of effects superinduced. There is nothing chimerical in
the hope that general laws, sufficient to enable us to answer these
various questions for any country or time with the individual
circumstances of which we are well acquainted, do really admit of being
ascertained; and that the other branches of human knowledge, which this
undertaking presupposes, are so far advanced that the time is ripe for its
commencement. Such is the object of the Social Science.

That the nature of what I consider the true method of the science may be
made more palpable, by first showing what that method is not, it will be
expedient to characterize briefly two radical misconceptions of the proper
mode of philosophizing on society and government, one or other of which
is, either explicitly or more often unconsciously, entertained by almost
all who have meditated or argued respecting the logic of politics, since
the notion of treating it by strict rules, and on Baconian principles, has
been current among the more advanced thinkers. These erroneous methods, if
the word method can be applied to erroneous tendencies arising from the
absence of any sufficiently distinct conception of method, may be termed
the Experimental, or Chemical, mode of investigation, and the Abstract, or
Geometrical, mode. We shall begin with the former.




                               Chapter VII.


Of The Chemical, Or Experimental, Method In The Social Science.


§ 1. The laws of the phenomena of society are, and can be, nothing but the
laws of the actions and passions of human beings united together in the
social state. Men, however, in a state of society are still men; their
actions and passions are obedient to the laws of individual human nature.
Men are not, when brought together, converted into another kind of
substance, with different properties; as hydrogen and oxygen are different
from water, or as hydrogen, oxygen, carbon, and azote, are different from
nerves, muscles, and tendons. Human beings in society have no properties
but those which are derived from, and may be resolved into, the laws of
the nature of individual man. In social phenomena the Composition of
Causes is the universal law.

Now, the method of philosophizing which may be termed chemical overlooks
this fact, and proceeds as if the nature of man as an individual were not
concerned at all, or were concerned in a very inferior degree, in the
operations of human beings in society. All reasoning in political or
social affairs, grounded on principles of human nature, is objected to by
reasoners of this sort, under such names as “abstract theory.” For the
direction of their opinions and conduct, they profess to demand, in all
cases without exception, specific experience.

This mode of thinking is not only general with practitioners in politics,
and with that very numerous class who (on a subject which no one, however
ignorant, thinks himself incompetent to discuss) profess to guide
themselves by common sense rather than by science; but is often
countenanced by persons with greater pretensions to instruction—persons
who, having sufficient acquaintance with books and with the current ideas
to have heard that Bacon taught mankind to follow experience, and to
ground their conclusions on facts instead of metaphysical dogmas, think
that, by treating political facts in as directly experimental a method as
chemical facts, they are showing themselves true Baconians, and proving
their adversaries to be mere syllogizers and school-men. As, however, the
notion of the applicability of experimental methods to political
philosophy can not co-exist with any just conception of these methods
themselves, the kind of arguments from experience which the chemical
theory brings forth as its fruits (and which form the staple, in this
country especially, of parliamentary and hustings oratory), are such as,
at no time since Bacon, would have been admitted to be valid in chemistry
itself, or in any other branch of experimental science. They are such as
these: that the prohibition of foreign commodities must conduce to
national wealth, because England has flourished under it, or because
countries in general which have adopted it have flourished; that our laws,
or our internal administration, or our constitution, are excellent for a
similar reason; and the eternal arguments from historical examples, from
Athens or Rome, from the fires in Smithfield or the French Revolution.

I will not waste time in contending against modes of argumentation which
no person with the smallest practice in estimating evidence could possibly
be betrayed into; which draw conclusions of general application from a
single unanalyzed instance, or arbitrarily refer an effect to some one
among its antecedents, without any process of elimination or comparison of
instances. It is a rule both of justice and of good sense to grapple not
with the absurdest, but with the most reasonable form of a wrong opinion.
We shall suppose our inquirer acquainted with the true conditions of
experimental investigation, and competent in point of acquirements for
realizing them, so far as they can be realized. He shall know as much of
the facts of history as mere erudition can teach—as much as can be proved
by testimony, without the assistance of any theory; and if those mere
facts, properly collated, can fulfill the conditions of a real induction,
he shall be qualified for the task.

But that no such attempt can have the smallest chance of success, has been
abundantly shown in the tenth chapter of the Third Book.(274) We there
examined whether effects which depend on a complication of causes can be
made the subject of a true induction by observation and experiment; and
concluded, on the most convincing grounds, that they can not. Since, of
all effects, none depend on so great a complication of causes as social
phenomena, we might leave our case to rest in safety on that previous
showing. But a logical principle as yet so little familiar to the ordinary
run of thinkers, requires to be insisted on more than once, in order to
make the due impression; and the present being the case which of all
others exemplifies it the most strongly, there will be advantage in
re-stating the grounds of the general maxim, as applied to the specialties
of the class of inquiries now under consideration.

§ 2. The first difficulty which meets us in the attempt to apply
experimental methods for ascertaining the laws of social phenomena, is
that we are without the means of making artificial experiments. Even if we
could contrive experiments at leisure, and try them without limit, we
should do so under immense disadvantage; both from the impossibility of
ascertaining and taking note of all the facts of each case, and because
(those facts being in a perpetual state of change), before sufficient time
had elapsed to ascertain the result of the experiment, some material
circumstances would always have ceased to be the same. But it is
unnecessary to consider the logical objections which would exist to the
conclusiveness of our experiments, since we palpably never have the power
of trying any. We can only watch those which nature produces, or which are
produced for other reasons. We can not adapt our logical means to our
wants, by varying the circumstances as the exigencies of elimination may
require. If the spontaneous instances, formed by contemporary events and
by the successions of phenomena recorded in history, afford a sufficient
variation of circumstances, an induction from specific experience is
attainable; otherwise not. The question to be resolved is, therefore,
whether the requisites for induction respecting the causes of political
effects or the properties of political agents, are to be met with in
history? including under the term, contemporary history. And in order to
give fixity to our conceptions, it will be advisable to suppose this
question asked in reference to some special subject of political inquiry
or controversy; such as that frequent topic of debate in the present
century, the operation of restrictive and prohibitory commercial
legislation upon national wealth. Let this, then, be the scientific
question to be investigated by specific experience.

§ 3. In order to apply to the case the most perfect of the methods of
experimental inquiry, the Method of Difference, we require to find two
instances which tally in every particular except the one which is the
subject of inquiry. If two nations can be found which are alike in all
natural advantages and disadvantages; whose people resemble each other in
every quality, physical and moral, spontaneous and acquired; whose habits,
usages, opinions, laws, and institutions are the same in all respects,
except that one of them has a more protective tariff, or in other respects
interferes more with the freedom of industry; if one of these nations is
found to be rich and the other poor, or one richer than the other, this
will be an _experimentum crucis_: a real proof by experience, which of the
two systems is most favorable to national riches. But the supposition that
two such instances can be met with is manifestly absurd. Nor is such a
concurrence even abstractedly possible. Two nations which agreed in every
thing except their commercial policy would agree also in that. Differences
of legislation are not inherent and ultimate diversities; are not
properties of Kinds. They are effects of pre-existing causes. If the two
nations differ in this portion of their institutions, it is from some
difference in their position, and thence in their apparent interests, or
in some portion or other of their opinions, habits, and tendencies; which
opens a view of further differences without any assignable limit, capable
of operating on their industrial prosperity, as well as on every other
feature of their condition, in more ways than can be enumerated or
imagined. There is thus a demonstrated impossibility of obtaining, in the
investigations of the social science, the conditions required for the most
conclusive form of inquiry by specific experience.

In the absence of the direct, we may next try, as in other cases, the
supplementary resource, called in a former place the Indirect Method of
Difference; which, instead of two instances differing in nothing but the
presence or absence of a given circumstance, compares two _classes_ of
instances respectively agreeing in nothing but the presence of a
circumstance on the one side and its absence on the other. To choose the
most advantageous case conceivable (a case far too advantageous to be ever
obtained), suppose that we compare one nation which has a restrictive
policy with two or more nations agreeing in nothing but in permitting free
trade. We need not now suppose that either of these nations agrees with
the first in all its circumstances; one may agree with it in some of its
circumstances, and another in the remainder. And it may be argued, that if
these nations remain poorer than the restrictive nation, it can not be for
want either of the first or of the second set of circumstances, but it
must be for want of the protective system. If (we might say) the
restrictive nation had prospered from the one set of causes, the first of
the free-trade nations would have prospered equally; if by reason of the
other, the second would; but neither has; therefore the prosperity was
owing to the restrictions. This will be allowed to be a very favorable
specimen of an argument from specific experience in politics, and if this
be inconclusive, it would not be easy to find another preferable to it.

Yet, that it is inconclusive, scarcely requires to be pointed out. Why
must the prosperous nation have prospered from one cause exclusively?
National prosperity is always the collective result of a multitude of
favorable circumstances; and of these, the restrictive nation may unite a
greater number than either of the others, though it may have all of those
circumstances in common with either one or the other of them. Its
prosperity may be partly owing to circumstances common to it with one of
those nations, and partly with the other, while they, having each of them
only half the number of favorable circumstances, have remained inferior.
So that the closest imitation which can be made, in the social science, of
a legitimate induction from direct experience, gives but a specious
semblance of conclusiveness, without any real value.

§ 4. The Method of Difference in either of its forms being thus completely
out of the question, there remains the Method of Agreement. But we are
already aware of how little value this method is, in cases admitting
Plurality of Causes; and social phenomena are those in which the plurality
prevails in the utmost possible extent.

Suppose that the observer makes the luckiest hit which could be given by
any conceivable combination of chances; that he finds two nations which
agree in no circumstance whatever, except in having a restrictive system,
and in being prosperous; or a number of nations, all prosperous, which
have no antecedent circumstances common to them all but that of having a
restrictive policy. It is unnecessary to go into the consideration of the
impossibility of ascertaining from history, or even from contemporary
observation, that such is really the fact; that the nations agree in no
other circumstance capable of influencing the case. Let us suppose this
impossibility vanquished, and the fact ascertained that they agree only in
a restrictive system as an antecedent, and industrial prosperity as a
consequent. What degree of presumption does this raise that the
restrictive system caused the prosperity? One so trifling as to be
equivalent to none at all. That some one antecedent is the cause of a
given effect, because all other antecedents have been found capable of
being eliminated, is a just inference, only if the effect can have but one
cause. If it admits of several, nothing is more natural than that each of
these should separately admit of being eliminated. Now, in the case of
political phenomena, the supposition of unity of cause is not only wide of
the truth, but at an immeasurable distance from it. The causes of every
social phenomenon which we are particularly interested about, security,
wealth, freedom, good government, public virtue, general intelligence, or
their opposites, are infinitely numerous, especially the external or
remote causes, which alone are, for the most part, accessible to direct
observation. No one cause suffices of itself to produce any of these
phenomena; while there are countless causes which have some influence over
them, and may co-operate either in their production or in their
prevention. From the mere fact, therefore, of our having been able to
eliminate some circumstance, we can by no means infer that this
circumstance was not instrumental to the effect in some of the very
instances from which we have eliminated it. We can conclude that the
effect is sometimes produced without it; but not that, when present, it
does not contribute its share.

Similar objections will be found to apply to the Method of Concomitant
Variations. If the causes which act upon the state of any society produced
effects differing from one another in kind; if wealth depended on one
cause, peace on another, a third made people virtuous, a fourth
intelligent; we might, though unable to sever the causes from one another,
refer to each of them that property of the effect which waxed as it waxed,
and which waned as it waned. But every attribute of the social body is
influenced by innumerable causes; and such is the mutual action of the
co-existing elements of society, that whatever affects any one of the more
important of them, will by that alone, if it does not affect the others
directly, affect them indirectly. The effects, therefore, of different
agents not being different in quality, while the quantity of each is the
mixed result of all the agents, the variations of the aggregate can not
bear a uniform proportion to those of any one of its component parts.

§ 5. There remains the Method of Residues; which appears, on the first
view, less foreign to this kind of inquiry than the three other methods,
because it only requires that we should accurately note the circumstances
of some one country, or state of society. Making allowance, thereupon, for
the effect of all causes whose tendencies are known, the residue which
those causes are inadequate to explain may plausibly be imputed to the
remainder of the circumstances which are known to have existed in the
case. Something similar to this is the method which Coleridge(275)
describes himself as having followed in his political essays in the
_Morning Post_. “On every great occurrence I endeavored to discover in
past history the event that most nearly resembled it. I procured, whenever
it was possible, the contemporary historians, memorialists, and
pamphleteers. Then fairly subtracting the points of difference from those
of likeness, as the balance favored the former or the latter, I
conjectured that the result would be the same or different. As, for
instance, in the series of essays entitled ‘A Comparison of France under
Napoleon with Rome under the first Cæsars,’ and in those which followed,
‘on the probable final restoration of the Bourbons.’ The same plan I
pursued at the commencement of the Spanish Revolution, and with the same
success, taking the war of the United Provinces with Philip II. as the
groundwork of the comparison.” In this inquiry he no doubt employed the
Method of Residues; for, in “subtracting the points of difference from
those of likeness,” he doubtless weighed, and did not content himself with
numbering, them: he doubtless took those points of agreement only which he
presumed from their own nature to be capable of influencing the effect,
and, allowing for that influence, concluded that the remainder of the
result would be referable to the points of difference.

Whatever may be the efficacy of this method, it is, as we long ago
remarked, not a method of pure observation and experiment; it concludes,
not from a comparison of instances, but from the comparison of an instance
with the result of a previous deduction. Applied to social phenomena, it
presupposes that the causes from which part of the effect proceeded are
already known; and as we have shown that these can not have been known by
specific experience, they must have been learned by deduction from
principles of human nature; experience being called in only as a
supplementary resource, to determine the causes which produced an
unexplained residue. But if the principles of human nature may be had
recourse to for the establishment of some political truths, they may for
all. If it be admissible to say, England must have prospered by reason of
the prohibitory system, because after allowing for all the other
tendencies which have been operating, there is a portion of prosperity
still to be accounted for; it must be admissible to go to the same source
for the effect of the prohibitory system, and examine what account the
laws of human motives and actions will enable us to give of _its_
tendencies. Nor, in fact, will the experimental argument amount to any
thing, except in verification of a conclusion drawn from those general
laws. For we may subtract the effect of one, two, three, or four causes,
but we shall never succeed in subtracting the effect of all causes except
one; while it would be a curious instance of the dangers of too much
caution if, to avoid depending on _a priori_ reasoning concerning the
effect of a single cause, we should oblige ourselves to depend on as many
separate _a priori_ reasonings as there are causes operating concurrently
with that particular cause in some given instance.

We have now sufficiently characterized the gross misconception of the mode
of investigation proper to political phenomena, which I have termed the
Chemical Method. So lengthened a discussion would not have been necessary,
if the claim to decide authoritatively on political doctrines were
confined to persons who had competently studied any one of the higher
departments of physical science. But since the generality of those who
reason on political subjects, satisfactorily to themselves and to a more
or less numerous body of admirers, know nothing whatever of the methods of
physical investigation beyond a few precepts which they continue to parrot
after Bacon, being entirely unaware that Bacon’s conception of scientific
inquiry has done its work, and that science has now advanced into a higher
stage, there are probably many to whom such remarks as the foregoing may
still be useful. In an age in which chemistry itself, when attempting to
deal with the more complex chemical sequences—those of the animal or even
the vegetable organism—has found it necessary to become, and has succeeded
in becoming, a Deductive Science, it is not to be apprehended that any
person of scientific habits, who has kept pace with the general progress
of the knowledge of nature, can be in danger of applying the methods of
elementary chemistry to explore the sequences of the most complex order of
phenomena in existence.




                              Chapter VIII.


Of The Geometrical, Or Abstract, Method.


§ 1. The misconception discussed in the preceding chapter is, as we said,
chiefly committed by persons not much accustomed to scientific
investigation: practitioners in politics, who rather employ the
commonplaces of philosophy to justify their practice than seek to guide
their practice by philosophic principles; or imperfectly educated persons,
who, in ignorance of the careful selection and elaborate comparison of
instances required for the formation of a sound theory, attempt to found
one upon a few coincidences which they have casually noticed.

The erroneous method of which we are now to treat is, on the contrary,
peculiar to thinking and studious minds. It never could have suggested
itself but to persons of some familiarity with the nature of scientific
research; who, being aware of the impossibility of establishing, by casual
observation or direct experimentation, a true theory of sequences so
complex as are those of the social phenomena, have recourse to the simpler
laws which are immediately operative in those phenomena, and which are no
other than the laws of the nature of the human beings therein concerned,
These thinkers perceive (what the partisans of the chemical or
experimental theory do not) that the science of society must necessarily
be deductive. But, from an insufficient consideration of the specific
nature of the subject-matter—and often because (their own scientific
education having stopped short in too early a stage) geometry stands in
their minds as the type of all deductive science—it is to geometry, rather
than to astronomy and natural philosophy, that they unconsciously
assimilate the deductive science of society.

Among the differences between geometry (a science of co-existent facts,
altogether independent of the laws of the succession of phenomena), and
those physical Sciences of Causation which have been rendered deductive,
the following is one of the most conspicuous: That geometry affords no
room for what so constantly occurs in mechanics and its applications, the
case of conflicting forces; of causes which counteract or modify one
another. In mechanics we continually find two or more moving forces
producing, not motion, but rest; or motion in a different direction from
that which would have been produced by either of the generating forces. It
is true that the effect of the joint forces is the same when they act
simultaneously, as if they had acted one after another, or by turns; and
it is in this that the difference between mechanical and chemical laws
consists. But still the effects, whether produced by successive or by
simultaneous action, do, wholly or in part, cancel one another: what the
one force does, the other, partly, or altogether undoes. There is no
similar state of things in geometry. The result which follows from one
geometrical principle has nothing that conflicts with the result which
follows from another. What is proved true from one geometrical theorem,
what would be true if no other geometrical principles existed, can not be
altered and made no longer true by reason of some other geometrical
principle. What is once proved true is true in all cases, whatever
supposition may be made in regard to any other matter.

Now a conception similar to this last would appear to have been formed of
the social science, in the minds of the earlier of those who have
attempted to cultivate it by a deductive method. Mechanics would be a
science very similar to geometry, if every motion resulted from one force
alone, and not from a conflict of forces. In the geometrical theory of
society, it seems to be supposed that this is really the case with the
social phenomena; that each of them results always from only one force,
one single property of human nature.

At the point which we have now reached, it can not be necessary to say any
thing either in proof or in illustration of the assertion that such is not
the true character of the social phenomena. There is not, among these most
complex and (for that reason) most modifiable of all phenomena, any one
over which innumerable forces do not exercise influence; which does not
depend on a conjunction of very many causes. We have not, therefore, to
prove the notion in question to be an error, but to prove that the error
has been committed; that so mistaken a conception of the mode in which the
phenomena of society are produced has actually been ascertained.

§ 2. One numerous division of the reasoners who have treated social facts
according to geometrical methods, not admitting any modification of one
law by another, must for the present be left out of consideration, because
in them this error is complicated with, and is the effect of, another
fundamental misconception, of which we have already taken some notice, and
which will be further treated of before we conclude. I speak of those who
deduce political conclusions not from laws of nature, not from sequences
of phenomena, real or imaginary, but from unbending practical maxims.
Such, for example, are all who found their theory of politics on what is
called abstract right, that is to say, on universal precepts; a pretension
of which we have already noticed the chimerical nature. Such, in like
manner, are those who make the assumption of a social contract, or any
other kind of original obligation, and apply it to particular cases by
mere interpretation. But in this the fundamental error is the attempt to
treat an art like a science, and to have a deductive art; the
irrationality of which will be shown in a future chapter. It will be
proper to take our exemplification of the geometrical theory from those
thinkers who have avoided this additional error, and who entertain, so
far, a juster idea of the nature of political inquiry.

We may cite, in the first instance, those who assume as the principle of
their political philosophy that government is founded on fear; that the
dread of each other is the one motive by which human beings were
originally brought into a state of society, and are still held in it. Some
of the earlier scientific inquirers into politics, in particular Hobbes,
assumed this proposition, not by implication, but avowedly, as the
foundation of their doctrine, and attempted to build a complete philosophy
of politics thereupon. It is true that Hobbes did not find this one maxim
sufficient to carry him through the whole of his subject, but was obliged
to eke it out by the double sophism of an original contract. I call this a
double sophism; first, as passing off a fiction for a fact, and, secondly,
assuming a practical principle, or precept, as the basis of a theory;
which is a _petitio principii_, since (as we noticed in treating of that
Fallacy) every rule of conduct, even though it be so binding a one as the
observance of a promise, must rest its own foundations on the theory of
the subject; and the theory, therefore, can not rest upon it.

§ 3. Passing over less important instances, I shall come at once to the
most remarkable example afforded by our own times of the geometrical
method in politics; emanating from persons who are well aware of the
distinction between science and art; who knew that rules of conduct must
follow, not precede, the ascertainment of laws of nature, and that the
latter, not the former, is the legitimate field for the application of the
deductive method. I allude to the interest-philosophy of the Bentham
school.

The profound and original thinkers who are commonly known under this
description, founded their general theory of government on one
comprehensive premise, namely, that men’s actions are always determined by
their interests. There is an ambiguity in this last expression; for, as
the same philosophers, especially Bentham, gave the name of an interest to
any thing which a person likes, the proposition may be understood to mean
only this, that men’s actions are always determined by their wishes. In
this sense, however, it would not bear out any of the consequences which
these writers drew from it; and the word, therefore, in their political
reasonings, must be understood to mean (which is also the explanation they
themselves, on such occasions gave of it) what is commonly termed private,
or worldly, interest.

Taking the doctrine, then, in this sense, an objection presents itself _in
limine_ which might be deemed a fatal one, namely, that so sweeping a
proposition is far from being universally true. Human beings are not
governed in all their actions by their worldly interests. This, however,
is by no means so conclusive an objection as it at first appears; because
in politics we are for the most part concerned with the conduct, not of
individual persons, but either of a series of persons (as a succession of
kings), or a body or mass of persons, as a nation, an aristocracy, or a
representative assembly. And whatever is true of a large majority of
mankind, may without much error be taken for true of any succession of
persons, considered as a whole, or of any collection of persons in which
the act of the majority becomes the act of the whole body. Although,
therefore, the maxim is sometimes expressed in a manner unnecessarily
paradoxical, the consequences drawn from it will hold equally good if the
assertion be limited as follows: Any succession of persons, or the
majority of any body of persons, will be governed in the bulk of their
conduct by their personal interests. We are bound to allow to this school
of thinkers the benefit of this more rational statement of their
fundamental maxim, which is also in strict conformity to the explanations
which, when considered to be called for, have been given by themselves.

The theory goes on to infer, quite correctly, that if the actions of
mankind are determined in the main by their selfish interests, the only
rulers who will govern according to the interest of the governed, are
those whose selfish interests are in accordance with it. And to this is
added a third proposition, namely, that no rulers have their selfish
interest identical with that of the governed, unless it be rendered so by
accountability, that is, by dependence on the will of the governed. In
other words (and as the result of the whole), that the desire of retaining
or the fear of losing their power, and whatever is thereon consequent, is
the sole motive which can be relied on for producing on the part of rulers
a course of conduct in accordance with the general interest.

We have thus a fundamental theorem of political science, consisting of
three syllogisms, and depending chiefly on two general premises, in each
of which a certain effect is considered as determined only by one cause,
not by a concurrence of causes. In the one, it is assumed that the actions
of average rulers are determined solely by self-interest; in the other,
that the sense of identity of interest with the governed, is produced and
producible by no other cause than responsibility.

Neither of these propositions is by any means true; the last is extremely
wide of the truth.

It is not true that the actions even of average rulers are wholly, or any
thing approaching to wholly, determined by their personal interest, or
even by their own opinion of their personal interest. I do not speak of
the influence of a sense of duty, or feelings of philanthropy, motives
never to be mainly relied on, though (except in countries or during
periods of great moral debasement) they influence almost all rulers in
some degree, and some rulers in a very great degree. But I insist only on
what is true of all rulers, viz., that the character and course of their
actions is largely influenced (independently of personal calculation) by
the habitual sentiments and feelings, the general modes of thinking and
acting, which prevail throughout the community of which they are members;
as well as by the feelings, habits, and modes of thought which
characterize the particular class in that community to which they
themselves belong. And no one will understand or be able to decipher their
system of conduct, who does not take all these things into account. They
are also much influenced by the maxims and traditions which have descended
to them from other rulers, their predecessors; which maxims and traditions
have been known to retain an ascendancy during long periods, even in
opposition to the private interests of the rulers for the time being. I
put aside the influence of other less general causes. Although, therefore,
the private interest of the rulers or of the ruling class is a very
powerful force, constantly in action, and exercising the most important
influence upon their conduct, there is also, in what they do, a large
portion which that private interest by no means affords a sufficient
explanation of; and even the particulars which constitute the goodness or
badness of their government, are in some, and no small degree, influenced
by those among the circumstances acting upon them, which can not, with any
propriety, be included in the term self-interest.

Turning now to the other proposition, that responsibility to the governed
is the only cause capable of producing in the rulers a sense of identity
of interest with the community, this is still less admissible as a
universal truth, than even the former. I am not speaking of perfect
identity of interest, which is an impracticable chimera; which, most
assuredly, responsibility to the people does not give. I speak of identity
in essentials; and the essentials are different at different places and
times. There are a large number of cases in which those things which it is
most for the general interest that the rulers should do, are also those
which they are prompted to do by their strongest personal interest, the
consolidation of their power. The suppression, for instance, of anarchy
and resistance to law—the complete establishment of the authority of the
central government, in a state of society like that of Europe in the
Middle Ages—is one of the strongest interests of the people, and also of
the rulers simply because they are the rulers; and responsibility on their
part could not strengthen, though in many conceivable ways it might
weaken, the motives prompting them to pursue this object. During the
greater part, of the reign of Queen Elizabeth, and of many other monarchs
who might be named, the sense of identity of interest between the
sovereign and the majority of the people was probably stronger than it
usually is in responsible governments; every thing that the people had
most at heart, the monarch had at heart too. Had Peter the Great, or the
rugged savages whom he began to civilize, the truest inclination toward
the things which were for the real interest of those savages?

I am not here attempting to establish a theory of government, and am not
called upon to determine the proportional weight which ought to be given
to the circumstances which this school of geometrical politicians left out
of their system, and those which they took into it. I am only concerned to
show that their method was unscientific; not to measure the amount of
error which may have affected their practical conclusions.

It is but justice to them, however, to remark, that their mistake was not
so much one of substance as of form, and consisted in presenting in a
systematic shape, and as the scientific treatment of a great philosophical
question, what should have passed for that which it really was, the mere
polemics of the day. Although the actions of rulers are by no means wholly
determined by their selfish interests, it is chiefly as a security against
those selfish interests that constitutional checks are required; and for
that purpose such checks, in England, and the other nations of modern
Europe, can in no manner be dispensed with. It is likewise true, that in
these same nations, and in the present age, responsibility to the governed
is the only means practically available to create a feeling of identity of
interest, in the cases, and on the points, where that feeling does not
sufficiently exist. To all this, and to the arguments which may be founded
on it in favor of measures for the correction of our representative
system, I have nothing to object; but I confess my regret, that the small
though highly important portion of the philosophy of government, which was
wanted for the immediate purpose of serving the cause of parliamentary
reform, should have been held forth by thinkers of such eminence as a
complete theory.

It is not to be imagined possible, nor is it true in point of fact, that
these philosophers regarded the few premises of their theory as including
all that is required for explaining social phenomena, or for determining
the choice of forms of government and measures of legislation and
administration. They were too highly instructed, of too comprehensive
intellect, and some of them of too sober and practical a character, for
such an error. They would have applied, and did apply, their principles
with innumerable allowances. But it is not allowances that are wanted.
There is little chance of making due amends in the superstructure of a
theory for the want of sufficient breadth in its foundations. It is
unphilosophical to construct a science out of a few of the agencies by
which the phenomena are determined, and leave the rest to the routine of
practice or the sagacity of conjecture. We either ought not to pretend to
scientific forms, or we ought to study all the determining agencies
equally, and endeavor, so far as it can be done, to include all of them
within the pale of the science; else we shall infallibly bestow a
disproportionate attention upon those which our theory takes into account,
while we misestimate the rest, and probably underrate their importance.
That the deductions should be from the whole and not from a part only of
the laws of nature that are concerned, would be desirable even if those
omitted were so insignificant in comparison with the others, that they
might, for most purposes and on most occasions, be left out of the
account. But this is far indeed from being true in the social science. The
phenomena of society do not depend, in essentials, on some one agency or
law of human nature, with only inconsiderable modifications from others.
The whole of the qualities of human nature influence those phenomena, and
there is not one which influences them in a small degree. There is not
one, the removal or any great alteration of which would not materially
affect the whole aspect of society, and change more or less the sequences
of social phenomena generally.

The theory which has been the subject of these remarks is, in this country
at least, the principal contemporary example of what I have styled the
geometrical method of philosophizing in the social science; and our
examination of it has, for this reason, been more detailed than would
otherwise have been suitable to a work like the present. Having now
sufficiently illustrated the two erroneous methods, we shall pass without
further preliminary to the true method; that which proceeds (conformably
to the practice of the more complex physical sciences) deductively indeed,
but by deduction from many, not from one or a very few, original premises;
considering each effect as (what it really is) an aggregate result of many
causes, operating sometimes through the same, sometimes through different
mental agencies, or laws of human nature.




                               Chapter IX.


Of The Physical, Or Concrete Deductive, Method.


§ 1. After what has been said to illustrate the nature of the inquiry into
social phenomena, the general character of the method proper to that
inquiry is sufficiently evident, and needs only to be recapitulated, not
proved. However complex the phenomena, all their sequences and
co-existences result from the laws of the separate elements. The effect
produced, in social phenomena, by any complex set of circumstances,
amounts precisely to the sum of the effects of the circumstances taken
singly; and the complexity does not arise from the number of the laws
themselves, which is not remarkably great, but from the extraordinary
number and variety of the data or elements—of the agents which, in
obedience to that small number of laws, co-operate toward the effect. The
Social Science, therefore (which, by a convenient barbarism, has been
termed Sociology), is a deductive science; not, indeed, after the model of
geometry, but after that of the more complex physical sciences. It infers
the law of each effect from the laws of causation on which that effect
depends; not, however, from the law merely of one cause, as in the
geometrical method, but by considering all the causes which conjunctly
influence the effect, and compounding their laws with one another. Its
method, in short, is the Concrete Deductive Method: that of which
astronomy furnishes the most perfect, natural philosophy a somewhat less
perfect, example, and the employment of which, with the adaptations and
precautions required by the subject, is beginning to regenerate
physiology.

Nor does it admit of doubt, that similar adaptations and precautions are
indispensable in sociology. In applying to that most complex of all
studies what is demonstrably the sole method capable of throwing the light
of science even upon phenomena of a far inferior degree of complication,
we ought to be aware that the same superior complexity which renders the
instrument of Deduction more necessary, renders it also more precarious;
and we must be prepared to meet, by appropriate contrivances, this
increase of difficulty.

The actions and feelings of human beings in the social state, are, no
doubt, entirely governed by psychological and ethological laws: whatever
influence any cause exercises upon the social phenomena, it exercises
through those laws. Supposing therefore the laws of human actions and
feelings to be sufficiently known, there is no extraordinary difficulty in
determining from those laws, the nature of the social effects which any
given cause tends to produce. But when the question is that of compounding
several tendencies together, and computing the aggregate result of many
co-existent causes; and especially when, by attempting to predict what
will actually occur in a given case, we incur the obligation of estimating
and compounding the influences of all the causes which happen to exist in
that case, we attempt a task to proceed far in which, surpasses the
compass of the human faculties.

If all the resources of science are not sufficient to enable us to
calculate, _a priori_, with complete precision, the mutual action of three
bodies gravitating toward one another, it may be judged with what prospect
of success we should endeavor to calculate the result of the conflicting
tendencies which are acting in a thousand different directions and
promoting a thousand different changes at a given instant in a given
society; although we might and ought to be able, from the laws of human
nature, to distinguish correctly enough the tendencies themselves, so far
as they depend on causes accessible to our observation; and to determine
the direction which each of them, if acting alone, would impress upon
society, as well as, in a general way at least, to pronounce that some of
these tendencies are more powerful than others.

But, without dissembling the necessary imperfections of the _a priori_
method when applied to such a subject, neither ought we, on the other
hand; to exaggerate them. The same objections which apply to the Method of
Deduction in this its most difficult employment, apply to it, as we
formerly showed,(276) in its easiest; and would even there have been
insuperable, if there had not existed, as was then fully explained, an
appropriate remedy. This remedy consists in the process which, under the
name of Verification, we have characterized as the third essential
constituent part of the Deductive Method; that of collating the
conclusions of the ratiocination either with the concrete phenomena
themselves, or, when such are obtainable, with their empirical laws. The
ground of confidence in any concrete deductive science is not the _a
priori_ reasoning itself, but the accordance between its results and those
of observation _a posteriori_. Either of these processes, apart from the
other, diminishes in value as the subject increases in complication, and
this is in so rapid a ratio as soon to become entirely worthless; but the
reliance to be placed in the concurrence of the two sorts of evidence, not
only does not diminish in any thing like the same proportion, but is not
necessarily much diminished at all. Nothing more results than a
disturbance in the order of precedency of the two processes, sometimes
amounting to its actual inversion: insomuch that instead of deducing our
conclusions by reasoning, and verifying them by observation, we in some
cases begin by obtaining them provisionally from specific experience, and
afterward connect them with the principles of human nature by _a priori_
reasonings, which reasonings are thus a real Verification.

The only thinker who, with a competent knowledge of scientific methods in
general, has attempted to characterize the Method of Sociology, M. Comte,
considers this inverse order as inseparably inherent in the nature of
sociological speculation. He looks upon the social science as essentially
consisting of generalizations from history, verified, not originally
suggested, by deduction from the laws of human nature. Though there is a
truth contained in this opinion, of which I shall presently endeavor to
show the importance, I can not but think that this truth is enunciated in
too unlimited a manner, and that there is considerable scope in
sociological inquiry for the direct, as well as for the inverse, Deductive
Method.

It will, in fact, be shown in the next chapter, that there is a kind of
sociological inquiries to which, from their prodigious complication, the
method of direct deduction is altogether inapplicable, while by a happy
compensation it is precisely in these cases that we are able to obtain the
best empirical laws: to these inquiries, therefore, the Inverse Method is
exclusively adapted. But there are also, as will presently appear, other
cases in which it is impossible to obtain from direct observation any
thing worthy the name of an empirical law; and it fortunately happens that
these are the very cases in which the Direct Method is least affected by
the objection which undoubtedly must always affect it in a certain degree.

We shall begin, then, by looking at the Social Science as a science of
direct Deduction, and considering what can be accomplished in it, and
under what limitations, by that mode of investigation. We shall, then, in
a separate chapter, examine and endeavor to characterize the inverse
process.

§ 2. It is evident, in the first place, that Sociology, considered as a
system of deductions _a priori_, can not be a science of positive
predictions, but only of tendencies. We may be able to conclude, from the
laws of human nature applied to the circumstances of a given state of
society, that a particular cause will operate in a certain manner unless
counteracted; but we can never be assured to what extent or amount it will
so operate, or affirm with certainty that it will not be counteracted;
because we can seldom know, even approximately, all the agencies which may
co-exist with it, and still less calculate the “collective result” of so
many combined elements. The remark, however, must here be once more
repeated, that knowledge insufficient for prediction may be most valuable
for guidance. It is not necessary for the wise conduct of the affairs of
society, no more than of any one’s private concerns, that we should be
able to foresee infallibly the results of what we do. We must seek our
objects by means which may perhaps be defeated, and take precautions
against dangers which possibly may never be realized. The aim of practical
politics is to surround any given society with the greatest possible
number of circumstances of which the tendencies are beneficial, and to
remove or counteract, as far as practicable, those of which the tendencies
are injurious. A knowledge of the tendencies only, though without the
power of accurately predicting their conjunct result, gives us to a
considerable extent this power.

It would, however, be an error to suppose that even with respect to
tendencies we could arrive in this manner at any great number of
propositions which will be true in all societies without exception. Such a
supposition would be inconsistent with the eminently modifiable nature of
the social phenomena, and the multitude and variety of the circumstances
by which they are modified—circumstances never the same, or even nearly
the same, in two different societies, or in two different periods of the
same society. This would not be so serious an obstacle if, though the
causes acting upon society in general are numerous, those which influence
any one feature of society were limited in number; for we might then
insulate any particular social phenomenon, and investigate its laws
without disturbance from the rest. But the truth is the very opposite of
this. Whatever affects, in an appreciable degree, any one element of the
social state, affects through it all the other elements. The mode of
production of all social phenomena is one great case of Intermixture of
Laws. We can never either understand in theory or command in practice the
condition of a society in any one respect, without taking into
consideration its condition in all other respects. There is no social
phenomenon which is not more or less influenced by every other part of the
condition of the same society, and therefore by every cause which is
influencing any other of the contemporaneous social phenomena. There is,
in short, what physiologists term a _consensus_, similar to that existing
among the various organs and functions of the physical frame of man and
the more perfect animals; and constituting one of the many analogies which
have rendered universal such expressions as the “body politic” and “body
natural.” It follows from this _consensus_, that unless two societies
could be alike in all the circumstances which surround and influence them
(which would imply their being alike in their previous history), no
portion whatever of the phenomena will, unless by accident, precisely
correspond; no one cause will produce exactly the same effects in both.
Every cause, as its effect spreads through society, comes somewhere in
contact with different sets of agencies, and thus has its effects on some
of the social phenomena differently modified; and these differences, by
their reaction, produce a difference even in those of the effects which
would otherwise have been the same. We can never, therefore, affirm with
certainty that a cause which has a particular tendency in one people or in
one age will have exactly the same tendency in another, without referring
back to our premises, and performing over again for the second age or
nation, that analysis of the whole of its influencing circumstances which
we had already performed for the first. The deductive science of society
will not lay down a theorem, asserting in a universal manner the effect of
any cause; but will rather teach us how to frame the proper theorem for
the circumstances of any given case. It will not give the laws of society
in general, but the means of determining the phenomena of any given
society from the particular elements or data of that society.

All the general propositions which can be framed by the deductive science,
are therefore, in the strictest sense of the word, hypothetical. They are
grounded on some suppositious set of circumstances, and declare how some
given cause would operate in those circumstances, supposing that no others
were combined with them. If the set of circumstances supposed have been
copied from those of any existing society, the conclusions will be true of
that society, provided, and in as far as, the effect of those
circumstances shall not be modified by others which have not been taken
into the account. If we desire a nearer approach to concrete truth, we can
only aim at it by taking, or endeavoring to take, a greater number of
individualizing circumstances into the computation.

Considering, however, in how accelerating a ratio the uncertainty of our
conclusions increases as we attempt to take the effect of a greater number
of concurrent causes into our calculations, the hypothetical combinations
of circumstances on which we construct the general theorems of the
science, can not be made very complex, without so rapidly accumulating a
liability to error as must soon deprive our conclusions of all value. This
mode of inquiry, considered as a means of obtaining general propositions,
must, therefore, on pain of frivolity, be limited to those classes of
social facts which, though influenced like the rest by all sociological
agents, are under the _immediate_ influence, principally at least, of a
few only.

§ 3. Notwithstanding the universal _consensus_ of the social phenomena,
whereby nothing which takes place in any part of the operations of society
is without its share of influence on every other part; and notwithstanding
the paramount ascendancy which the general state of civilization and
social progress in any given society must hence exercise over all the
partial and subordinate phenomena; it is not the less true that different
species of social facts are in the main dependent, immediately and in the
first resort, on different kinds of causes; and therefore not only may
with advantage, but must, be studied apart: just as in the natural body we
study separately the physiology and pathology of each of the principal
organs and tissues, though every one is acted upon by the state of all the
others; and though the peculiar constitution and general state of health
of the organism co-operates with, and often preponderates over, the local
causes, in determining the state of any particular organ.

On these considerations is grounded the existence of distinct and
separate, though not independent, branches or departments of sociological
speculation.

There is, for example, one large class of social phenomena in which the
immediately determining causes are principally those which act through the
desire of wealth, and in which the psychological law mainly concerned is
the familiar one, that a greater gain is preferred to a smaller. I mean,
of course, that portion of the phenomena of society which emanate from the
industrial, or productive, operations of mankind; and from those of their
acts through which the distribution of the products of those industrial
operations takes place, in so far as not effected by force, or modified by
voluntary gift. By reasoning from that one law of human nature, and from
the principal outward circumstances (whether universal or confined to
particular states of society) which operate upon the human mind through
that law, we may be enabled to explain and predict this portion of the
phenomena of society, so far as they depend on that class of circumstances
only; overlooking the influence of any other of the circumstances of
society; and therefore neither tracing back the circumstances which we do
take into account, to their possible origin in some other facts in the
social state, nor making allowance for the manner in which any of those
other circumstances may interfere with, and counteract or modify, the
effect of the former. A department of science may thus be constructed,
which has received the name of Political Economy.

The motive which suggests the separation of this portion of the social
phenomena from the rest, and the creation of a distinct branch of science
relating to them is—that they do _mainly_ depend, at least in the first
resort, on one class of circumstances only; and that even when other
circumstances interfere, the ascertainment of the effect due to the one
class of circumstances alone, is a sufficiently intricate and difficult
business to make it expedient to perform it once for all, and then allow
for the effect of the modifying circumstances; especially as certain fixed
combinations of the former are apt to recur often, in conjunction with
ever-varying circumstances of the latter class.

Political Economy, as I have said on another occasion, concerns itself
only with “such of the phenomena of the social state as take place in
consequence of the pursuit of wealth. It makes entire abstraction of every
other human passion or motive; except those which may be regarded as
perpetually antagonizing principles to the desire of wealth, namely,
aversion to labor, and desire of the present enjoyment of costly
indulgences. These it takes, to a certain extent, into its calculations,
because these do not merely, like our other desires, occasionally conflict
with the pursuit of wealth, but accompany it always as a drag or
impediment, and are therefore inseparably mixed up in the consideration of
it. Political Economy considers mankind as occupied solely in acquiring
and consuming wealth; and aims at showing what is the course of action
into which mankind, living in a state of society, would be impelled, if
that motive, except in the degree in which it is checked by the two
perpetual counter-motives above adverted to, were absolute ruler of all
their actions. Under the influence of this desire, it shows mankind
accumulating wealth, and employing that wealth in the production of other
wealth; sanctioning by mutual agreement the institution of property;
establishing laws to prevent individuals from encroaching upon the
property of others by force or fraud; adopting various contrivances for
increasing the productiveness of their labor; settling the division of the
produce by agreement, under the influence of competition (competition
itself being governed by certain laws, which laws are therefore the
ultimate regulators of the division of the produce); and employing certain
expedients (as money, credit, etc.) to facilitate the distribution. All
these operations, though many of them are really the result of a plurality
of motives, are considered by political economy as flowing solely from the
desire of wealth. The science then proceeds to investigate the laws which
govern these several operations, under the supposition that man is a being
who is determined, by the necessity of his nature, to prefer a greater
portion of wealth to a smaller, in all cases, without any other exception
than that constituted by the two counter-motives already specified. Not
that any political economist was ever so absurd as to suppose that mankind
are really thus constituted, but because this is the mode in which science
must necessarily proceed. When an effect depends on a concurrence of
causes, these causes must be studied one at a time, and their laws
separately investigated, if we wish, through the causes, to obtain the
power of either predicting or controlling the effect; since the law of the
effect is compounded of the laws of all the causes which determine it. The
law of the centripetal and that of the projectile force must have been
known, before the motions of the earth and planets could be explained, or
many of them predicted. The same is the case with the conduct of man in
society. In order to judge how he will act under the variety of desires
and aversions which are concurrently operating upon him, we must know how
he would act under the exclusive influence of each one in particular.
There is, perhaps, no action of a man’s life in which he is neither under
the immediate nor under the remote influence of any impulse but the mere
desire of wealth. With respect to those parts of human conduct of which
wealth is not even the principal object, to these political economy does
not pretend that its conclusions are applicable. But there are also
certain departments of human affairs, in which the acquisition of wealth
is the main and acknowledged end. It is only of these that political
economy takes notice. The manner in which it necessarily proceeds is that
of treating the main and acknowledged end as if it were the sole end;
which, of all hypotheses equally simple, is the nearest to the truth. The
political economist inquires, what are the actions which would be produced
by this desire, if within the departments in question it were unimpeded by
any other. In this way a nearer approximation is obtained than would
otherwise be practicable to the real order of human affairs in those
departments. This approximation has then to be corrected by making proper
allowance for the effects of any impulses of a different description,
which can be shown to interfere with the result in any particular case.
Only in a few of the most striking cases (such as the important one of the
principle of population) are these corrections interpolated into the
expositions of political economy itself; the strictness of purely
scientific arrangement being thereby somewhat departed from, for the sake
of practical utility. So far as it is known, or may be presumed, that the
conduct of mankind in the pursuit of wealth is under the collateral
influence of any other of the properties of our nature than the desire of
obtaining the greatest quantity of wealth with the least labor and
self-denial, the conclusions of political economy will so far fail of
being applicable to the explanation or prediction of real events, until
they are modified by a correct allowance for the degree of influence
exercised by the other cause.”(277)

Extensive and important practical guidance may be derived, in any given
state of society, from general propositions such as those above indicated;
even though the modifying influence of the miscellaneous causes which the
theory does not take into account, as well as the effect of the general
social changes in progress, be provisionally overlooked. And though it has
been a very common error of political economists to draw conclusions from
the elements of one state of society, and apply them to other states in
which many of the elements are not the same, it is even then not
difficult, by tracing back the demonstrations, and introducing the new
premises in their proper places, to make the same general course of
argument which served for the one case, serve for the others too.

For example, it has been greatly the custom of English political
economists to discuss the laws of the distribution of the produce of
industry, on a supposition which is scarcely realized anywhere out of
England and Scotland, namely, that the produce is “shared among three
classes, altogether distinct from one another, laborers, capitalists, and
landlords; and that all these are free agents, permitted in law and in
fact to set upon their labor, their capital, and their land, whatever
price they are able to get for it. The conclusions of the science, being
all adapted to a society thus constituted, require to be revised whenever
they are applied to any other. They are inapplicable where the only
capitalists are the landlords, and the laborers are their property, as in
slave countries. They are inapplicable where the almost universal landlord
is the state, as in India. They are inapplicable where the agricultural
laborer is generally the owner both of the land itself and of the capital,
as frequently in France, or of the capital only, as in Ireland.” But
though it may often be very justly objected to the existing race of
political economists “that they attempt to construct a permanent fabric
out of transitory materials; that they take for granted the immutability
of arrangements of society, many of which are in their nature fluctuating
or progressive, and enunciate with as little qualification as if they were
universal and absolute truths, propositions which are perhaps applicable
to no state of society except the particular one in which the writer
happened to live;” this does not take away the value of the propositions,
considered with reference to the state of society from which they were
drawn. And even as applicable to other states of society, “it must not be
supposed that the science is so incomplete and unsatisfactory as this
might seem to prove. Though many of its conclusions are only locally true,
its method of investigation is applicable universally; and as whoever has
solved a certain number of algebraic equations, can without difficulty
solve all others of the same kind, so whoever knows the political economy
of England, or even of Yorkshire, knows that of all nations, actual or
possible, provided he have good sense enough not to expect the same
conclusion to issue from varying premises.” Whoever has mastered with the
degree of precision which is attainable the laws which, under free
competition, determine the rent, profits, and wages, received by
landlords, capitalists, and laborers, in a state of society in which the
three classes are completely separate, will have no difficulty in
determining the very different laws which regulate the distribution of the
produce among the classes interested in it in any of the states of
cultivation and landed property set forth in the foregoing extract.(278)

§ 4. I would not here undertake to decide what other hypothetical or
abstract sciences similar to Political Economy, may admit of being carved
out of the general body of the social science; what other portions of the
social phenomena are in a sufficiently close and complete dependence, in
the first resort, on a peculiar class of causes, to make it convenient to
create a preliminary science of those causes; postponing the consideration
of the causes which act through them, or in concurrence with them, to a
later period of the inquiry. There is, however, among these separate
departments one which can not be passed over in silence, being of a more
comprehensive and commanding character than any of the other branches into
which the social science may admit of being divided. Like them, it is
directly conversant with the causes of only one class of social facts, but
a class which exercises, immediately or remotely, a paramount influence
over the test. I allude to what may be termed Political Ethology, or the
theory of the causes which determine the type of character belonging to a
people or to an age. Of all the subordinate branches of the social
science, this is the most completely in its infancy. The causes of
national character are scarcely at all understood, and the effect of
institutions or social arrangements upon the character of the people is
generally that portion of their effects which is least attended to, and
least comprehended. Nor is this wonderful, when we consider the infant
state of the science of Ethology itself, from whence the laws must be
drawn, of which the truths of political ethology can be but results and
exemplifications.

Yet, to whoever well considers the matter, it must appear that the laws of
national (or collective) character are by far the most important class of
sociological laws. In the first place, the character which is formed by
any state of social circumstances is in itself the most interesting
phenomenon which that state of society can possibly present. Secondly, it
is also a fact which enters largely into the production of all the other
phenomena. And above all, the character, that is, the opinions, feelings,
and habits, of the people, though greatly the results of the state of
society which precedes them, are also greatly the causes of the state of
society which follows them; and are the power by which all those of the
circumstances of society which are artificial, laws and customs for
instance, are altogether moulded: customs evidently, laws no less really,
either by the direct influence of public sentiment upon the ruling powers,
or by the effect which the state of national opinion and feeling has in
determining the form of government and shaping the character of the
governors.

As might be expected, the most imperfect part of those branches of social
inquiry which have been cultivated as separate sciences, is the theory of
the manner in which their conclusions are affected by ethological
considerations. The omission is no defect in them as abstract or
hypothetical sciences, but it vitiates them in their practical application
as branches of a comprehensive social science. In political economy, for
instance, empirical laws of human nature are tacitly assumed by English
thinkers, which are calculated only for Great Britain and the United
States. Among other things, an intensity of competition is constantly
supposed, which, as a general mercantile fact, exists in no country in the
world except those two. An English political economist, like his
countrymen in general, has seldom learned that it is possible that men, in
conducting the business of selling their goods over a counter, should care
more about their ease or their vanity than about their pecuniary gain. Yet
those who know the habits of the continent of Europe are aware how
apparently small a motive often outweighs the desire of money getting,
even in the operations which have money getting for their direct object.
The more highly the science of ethology is cultivated, and the better the
diversities of individual and national character are understood, the
smaller, probably, will the number of propositions become, which it will
be considered safe to build on as universal principles of human nature.

These considerations show that the process of dividing off the social
science into compartments, in order that each may be studied separately,
and its conclusions afterward corrected for practice by the modifications
supplied by the others, must be subject to at least one important
limitation. Those portions alone of the social phenomena can with
advantage be made the subjects, even provisionally, of distinct branches
of science, into which the diversities of character between different
nations or different times enter as influencing causes only in a secondary
degree. Those phenomena, on the contrary, with which the influences of the
ethological state of the people are mixed up at every step (so that the
connection of effects and causes can not be even rudely marked out without
taking those influences into consideration) could not with any advantage,
nor without great disadvantage, be treated independently of political
ethology, nor, therefore, of all the circumstances by which the qualities
of a people are influenced. For this reason (as well as for others which
will hereafter appear) there can be no separate Science of Government;
that being the fact which, of all others, is most mixed up, both as cause
and effect, with the qualities of the particular people or of the
particular age. All questions respecting the tendencies of forms of
government must stand part of the general science of society, not of any
separate branch of it.

This general Science of Society, as distinguished from the separate
departments of the science (each of which asserts its conclusions only
conditionally, subject to the paramount control of the laws of the general
science) now remains to be characterized. And as will be shown presently,
nothing of a really scientific character is here possible, except by the
inverse deductive method. But before we quit the subject of those
sociological speculations which proceed by way of direct deduction, we
must examine in what relation they stand to that indispensable element in
all deductive sciences, Verification by Specific Experience—comparison
between the conclusions of reasoning and the results of observation.

§ 5. We have seen that, in most deductive sciences, and among the rest in
Ethology itself, which is the immediate foundation of the Social Science,
a preliminary work of preparation is performed on the observed facts, to
fit them for being rapidly and accurately collated (sometimes even for
being collated at all) with the conclusions of theory. This preparatory
treatment consists in finding general propositions which express concisely
what is common to large classes of observed facts; and these are called
the empirical laws of the phenomena. We have, therefore, to inquire,
whether any similar preparatory process can be performed on the facts of
the social science; whether there are any empirical laws in history or
statistics.

In statistics, it is evident that empirical laws may sometimes be traced;
and the tracing them forms an important part of that system of indirect
observation on which we must often rely for the data of the Deductive
Science. The process of the science consists in inferring effects from
their causes; but we have often no means of observing the causes, except
through the medium of their effects. In such cases the deductive science
is unable to predict the effects, for want of the necessary data; it can
determine what causes are capable of producing any given effect, but not
with what frequency and in what quantities those causes exist. An instance
in point is afforded by a newspaper now lying before me. A statement was
furnished by one of the official assignees in bankruptcy showing among the
various bankruptcies which it had been his duty to investigate, in how
many cases the losses had been caused by misconduct of different kinds,
and in how many by unavoidable misfortunes. The result was, that the
number of failures caused by misconduct greatly preponderated over those
arising from all other causes whatever. Nothing but specific experience
could have given sufficient ground for a conclusion to this purport. To
collect, therefore, such empirical laws (which are never more than
approximate generalizations) from direct observation, is an important part
of the process of sociological inquiry.

The experimental process is not here to be regarded as a distinct road to
the truth, but as a means (happening accidentally to be the only, or the
best, available) for obtaining the necessary data for the deductive
science. When the immediate causes of social facts are not open to direct
observation, the empirical law of the effects gives us the empirical law
(which in that case is all that we can obtain) of the causes likewise. But
those immediate causes depend on remote causes; and the empirical law,
obtained by this indirect mode of observation, can only be relied on as
applicable to unobserved cases, so long as there is reason to think that
no change has taken place in any of the remote causes on which the
immediate causes depend. In making use, therefore, of even the best
statistical generalizations for the purpose of inferring (though it be
only conjecturally) that the same empirical laws will hold in any new
case, it is necessary that we be well acquainted with the remoter causes,
in order that we may avoid applying the empirical law to cases which
differ in any of the circumstances on which the truth of the law
ultimately depends. And thus, even where conclusions derived from specific
observation are available for practical inferences in new cases, it is
necessary that the deductive science should stand sentinel over the whole
process; that it should be constantly referred to, and its sanction
obtained to every inference.

The same thing holds true of all generalizations which can be grounded on
history. Not only there are such generalizations, but it will presently be
shown that the general science of society, which inquires into the laws of
succession and co-existence of the great facts constituting the state of
society and civilization at any time, can proceed in no other manner than
by making such generalizations—afterward to be confirmed by connecting
them with the psychological and ethological laws on which they must really
depend.

§ 6. But (reserving this question for its proper place) in those more
special inquiries which form the subject of the separate branches of the
social science, this twofold logical process and reciprocal verification
is not possible; specific experience affords nothing amounting to
empirical laws. This is particularly the case where the object is to
determine the effect of any one social cause among a great number acting
simultaneously; the effect, for example, of corn laws, or of a prohibitive
commercial system generally. Though it may be perfectly certain, from
theory, what _kind_ of effects corn laws must produce, and in what general
direction their influence must tell upon industrial prosperity, their
effect is yet of necessity so much disguised by the similar or contrary
effects of other influencing agents, that specific experience can at most
only show that on the average of some great number of instances, the cases
where there were corn laws exhibited the effect in a greater degree than
those where there were not. Now the number of instances necessary to
exhaust the whole round of combinations of the various influential
circumstances, and thus afford a fair average, never can be obtained. Not
only we can never learn with sufficient authenticity the facts of so many
instances, but the world itself does not afford them in sufficient
numbers, within the limits of the given state of society and civilization
which such inquiries always presuppose. Having thus no previous empirical
generalizations with which to collate the conclusions of theory, the only
mode of direct verification which remains is to compare those conclusions
with the result of an individual experiment or instance. But here the
difficulty is equally great. For in order to verify a theory by an
experiment, the circumstances of the experiment must be exactly the same
with those contemplated in the theory. But in social phenomena the
circumstances of no two cases are exactly alike. A trial of corn laws in
another country, or in a former generation, would go a very little way
toward verifying a conclusion drawn respecting their effect in this
generation and in this country. It thus happens, in most cases, that the
only individual instance really fitted to verify the predictions of theory
is the very instance for which the predictions were made; and the
verification comes too late to be of any avail for practical guidance.

Although, however, direct verification is impossible, there is an indirect
verification, which is scarcely of less value, and which is always
practicable. The conclusion drawn as to the individual case can only be
directly verified in that case; but it is verified indirectly, by the
verification of other conclusions, drawn in other individual cases from
the same laws. The experience which comes too late to verify the
particular proposition to which it refers, is not too late to help toward
verifying the general sufficiency of the theory. The test of the degree in
which the science affords safe ground for predicting (and consequently for
practically dealing with) what has not yet happened, is the degree in
which it would have enabled us to predict what has actually occurred.
Before our theory of the influence of a particular cause, in a given state
of circumstances, can be entirely trusted, we must be able to explain and
account for the existing state of all that portion of the social phenomena
which that cause has a tendency to influence. If, for instance, we would
apply our speculations in political economy to the prediction or guidance
of the phenomena of any country, we must be able to explain all the
mercantile or industrial facts of a general character, appertaining to the
present state of that country; to point out causes sufficient to account
for all of them, and prove, or show good ground for supposing, that these
causes have really existed. If we can not do this, it is a proof either
that the facts which ought to be taken into account are not yet completely
known to us, or that although we know the facts, we are not masters of a
sufficiently perfect theory to enable us to assign their consequences. In
either case we are not, in the present state of our knowledge, fully
competent to draw conclusions, speculative or practical, for that country.
In like manner, if we would attempt to judge of the effect which any
political institution would have, supposing that it could be introduced
into any given country, we must be able to show that the existing state of
the practical government of that country, and of whatever else depends
thereon, together with the particular character and tendencies of the
people, and their state in respect to the various elements of social
well-being, are such as the institutions they have lived under, in
conjunction with the other circumstances of their nature or of their
position, were calculated to produce.

To prove, in short, that our science, and our knowledge of the particular
case, render us competent to predict the future, we must show that they
would have enabled us to predict the present and the past. If there be any
thing which we could not have predicted, this constitutes a residual
phenomenon, requiring further study for the purpose of explanation; and we
must either search among the circumstances of the particular case until we
find one which, on the principles of our existing theory, accounts for the
unexplained phenomenon, or we must turn back, and seek the explanation by
an extension and improvement of the theory itself.




                                Chapter X.


Of The Inverse Deductive, Or Historical, Method.


§ 1. There are two kinds of sociological inquiry. In the first kind, the
question proposed is, what effect will follow from a given cause, a
certain general condition of social circumstances being presupposed. As,
for example, what would be the effect of imposing or of repealing corn
laws, of abolishing monarchy or introducing universal suffrage, in the
present condition of society and civilization in any European country, or
under any other given supposition with regard to the circumstances of
society in general, without reference to the changes which might take
place, or which may already be in progress, in those circumstances. But
there is also a second inquiry, namely, what are the laws which determine
those general circumstances themselves. In this last the question is, not
what will be the effect of a given cause in a certain state of society,
but what are the causes which produce, and the phenomena which
characterize, states of society generally. In the solution of this
question consists the general Science of Society; by which the conclusions
of the other and more special kind of inquiry must be limited and
controlled.

§ 2. In order to conceive correctly the scope of this general science, and
distinguish it from the subordinate departments of sociological
speculation, it is necessary to fix the ideas attached to the phrase, “A
State of Society.” What is called a state of society, is the simultaneous
state of all the greater social facts or phenomena. Such are: the degree
of knowledge, and of intellectual and moral culture, existing in the
community, and in every class of it; the state of industry, of wealth and
its distribution; the habitual occupations of the community; their
division into classes, and the relations of those classes to one another;
the common beliefs which they entertain on all the subjects most important
to mankind, and the degree of assurance with which those beliefs are held;
their tastes, and the character and degree of their æsthetic development;
their form of government, and the more important of their laws and
customs. The condition of all these things, and of many more which will
readily suggest themselves, constitute the state of society, or the state
of civilization, at any given time.

When states of society, and the causes which produce them, are spoken of
as a subject of science, it is implied that there exists a natural
correlation among these different elements; that not every variety of
combination of these general social facts is possible, but only certain
combinations; that, in short, there exist Uniformities of Co-existence
between the states of the various social phenomena. And such is the truth;
as is indeed a necessary consequence of the influence exercised by every
one of those phenomena over every other. It is a fact implied in the
_consensus_ of the various parts of the social body.

States of society are like different constitutions or different ages in
the physical frame; they are conditions not of one or a few organs or
functions, but of the whole organism. Accordingly, the information which
we possess respecting past ages, and respecting the various states of
society now existing in different regions of the earth, does, when duly
analyzed, exhibit uniformities. It is found that when one of the features
of society is in a particular state, a state of many other features, more
or less precisely determinate, always or usually co-exists with it.

But the uniformities of co-existence obtaining among phenomena which are
effects of causes, must (as we have so often observed) be corollaries from
the laws of causation by which these phenomena are really determined. The
mutual correlation between the different elements of each state of
society, is, therefore, a derivative law, resulting from the laws which
regulate the succession between one state of society and another; for the
proximate cause of every state of society is the state of society
immediately preceding it. The fundamental problem, therefore, of the
social science, is to find the laws according to which any state of
society produces the state which succeeds it and takes its place. This
opens the great and vexed question of the progressiveness of man and
society; an idea involved in every just conception of social phenomena as
the subject of a science.

§ 3. It is one of the characters, not absolutely peculiar to the sciences
of human nature and society, but belonging to them in a peculiar degree,
to be conversant with a subject-matter whose properties are changeable. I
do not mean changeable from day to day, but from age to age; so that not
only the qualities of individuals vary, but those of the majority are not
the same in one age as in another.

The principal cause of this peculiarity is the extensive and constant
reaction of the effects upon their causes. The circumstances in which
mankind are placed, operating according to their own laws and to the laws
of human nature, form the characters of the human beings; but the human
beings, in their turn, mould and shape the circumstances for themselves
and for those who come after them. From this reciprocal action there must
necessarily result either a cycle or a progress. In astronomy also, every
fact is at once effect and cause; the successive positions of the various
heavenly bodies produce changes both in the direction and in the intensity
of the forces by which those positions are determined. But in the case of
the solar system, these mutual actions bring around again, after a certain
number of changes, the former state of circumstances; which, of course,
leads to the perpetual recurrence of the same series in an unvarying
order. Those bodies, in short, revolve in orbits: but there are (or,
conformably to the laws of astronomy, there might be) others which,
instead of an orbit, describe a trajectory—a course not returning into
itself. One or other of these must be the type to which human affairs must
conform.

One of the thinkers who earliest conceived the succession of historical
events as subject to fixed laws, and endeavored to discover these laws by
an analytical survey of history, Vico, the celebrated author of the
_Scienza Nuova_, adopted the former of these opinions. He conceived the
phenomena of human society as revolving in an orbit; as going through
periodically the same series of changes. Though there were not wanting
circumstances tending to give some plausibility to this view, it would not
bear a close scrutiny: and those who have succeeded Vico in this kind of
speculations have universally adopted the idea of a trajectory or
progress, in lieu of an orbit or cycle.

The words Progress and Progressiveness are not here to be understood as
synonymous with improvement and tendency to improvement. It is conceivable
that the laws of human nature might determine, and even necessitate, a
certain series of changes in man and society, which might not in every
case, or which might not on the whole, be improvements. It is my belief,
indeed, that the general tendency is, and will continue to be, saving
occasional and temporary exceptions, one of improvement; a tendency toward
a better and happier state. This, however, is not a question of the method
of the social science, but a theorem of the science itself. For our
purpose it is sufficient that there is a progressive change both in the
character of the human race and in their outward circumstances, so far as
moulded by themselves; that in each successive age the principal phenomena
of society are different from what they were in the age preceding, and
still more different from any previous age: the periods which most
distinctly mark these successive changes being intervals of one
generation, during which a new set of human beings have been educated,
have grown up from childhood, and taken possession of society.

The progressiveness of the human race is the foundation on which a method
of philosophizing in the social science has been of late years erected,
far superior to either of the two modes which had previously been
prevalent, the chemical or experimental, and the geometrical modes. This
method, which is now generally adopted by the most advanced thinkers on
the Continent, consists in attempting, by a study and analysis of the
general facts of history, to discover (what these philosophers term) the
law of progress: which law, once ascertained, must according to them
enable us to predict future events, just as after a few terms of an
infinite series in algebra we are able to detect the principle, of
regularity in their formation, and to predict the rest of the series to
any number of terms we please. The principal aim of historical speculation
in France, of late years, has been to ascertain this law. But while I
gladly acknowledge the great services which have been rendered to
historical knowledge by this school, I can not but deem them to be mostly
chargeable with a fundamental misconception of the true method of social
philosophy. The misconception consists in supposing that the order of
succession which we may be able to trace among the different states of
society and civilization which history presents to us, even if that order
were more rigidly uniform than it has yet been proved to be, could ever
amount to a law of nature. It can only be an empirical law. The succession
of states of the human mind and of human society can not have an
independent law of its own; it must depend on the psychological and
ethological laws which govern the action of circumstances on men and of
men on circumstances. It is conceivable that those laws might be such, and
the general circumstances of the human race such, as to determine the
successive transformations of man and society to one given and unvarying
order. But even if the case were so, it can not be the ultimate aim of
science to discover an empirical law. Until that law could be connected
with the psychological and ethological laws on which it must depend, and,
by the consilience of deduction _a priori_ with historical evidence, could
be converted from an empirical law into a scientific one, it could not be
relied on for the prediction of future events, beyond, at most, strictly
adjacent cases. M. Comte alone, among the new historical school, has seen
the necessity of thus connecting all our generalizations from history with
the laws of human nature.

§ 4. But, while it is an imperative rule never to introduce any
generalization from history into the social science unless sufficient
grounds can be pointed out for it in human nature, I do not think any one
will contend that it would have been possible, setting out from the
principles of human nature and from the general circumstances of the
position of our species, to determine _a priori_ the order in which human
development must take place, and to predict, consequently, the general
facts of history up to the present time. After the first few terms of the
series, the influence exercised, over each generation by the generations
which preceded it, becomes, (as is well observed by the writer last
referred to) more and more preponderant over all other influences; until
at length what we now are and do, is in a very small degree the result of
the universal circumstances of the human race, or even of our own
circumstances acting through the original qualities of our species, but
mainly of the qualities produced in us by the whole previous history of
humanity. So long a series of actions and reactions between Circumstances
and Man, each successive term being composed of an ever greater number and
variety of parts, could not possibly be computed by human faculties from
the elementary laws which produce it. The mere length of the series would
be a sufficient obstacle, since a slight error in any one of the terms
would augment in rapid progression at every subsequent step.

If, therefore, the series of the effects themselves did not, when examined
as a whole, manifest any regularity, we should in vain attempt to
construct a general science of society. We must in that case have
contented ourselves with that subordinate order of sociological
speculation formerly noticed, namely, with endeavoring to ascertain what
would be the effect of the introduction of any new cause, in a state of
society supposed to be fixed—a knowledge sufficient for the more common
exigencies of daily political practice, but liable to fail in all cases in
which the progressive movement of society is one of the influencing
elements; and therefore more precarious in proportion as the case is more
important. But since both the natural varieties of mankind, and the
original diversities of local circumstances, are much less considerable
than the points of agreement, there will naturally be a certain degree of
uniformity in the progressive development of the species and of its works.
And this uniformity tends to become greater, not less, as society
advances; since the evolution of each people, which is at first determined
exclusively by the nature and circumstances of that people, is gradually
brought under the influence (which becomes stronger as civilization
advances) of the other nations of the earth, and of the circumstances by
which they have been influenced. History accordingly does, when
judiciously examined, afford Empirical Laws of Society. And the problem of
general sociology is to ascertain these, and connect them with the laws of
human nature, by deductions showing that such were the derivative laws
naturally to be expected as the consequences of those ultimate ones.

It is, indeed, hardly ever possible, even after history has suggested the
derivative law, to demonstrate _a priori_ that such was the only order of
succession or of co-existence in which the effects could, consistently
with the laws of human nature, have been produced. We can at most make out
that there were strong _a priori_ reasons for expecting it, and that no
other order of succession or co-existence would have been so likely to
result from the nature of man and the general circumstances of his
position. Often we can not do even this; we can not even show that what
did take place was probable _a priori_, but only that it was possible.
This, however—which, in the Inverse Deductive Method that we are now
characterizing, is a real process of verification—is as indispensable, as
verification by specific experience has been shown to be, where the
conclusion is originally obtained by the direct way of deduction. The
empirical laws must be the result of but a few instances, since few
nations have ever attained at all, and still fewer by their own
independent development, a high stage of social progress. If, therefore,
even one or two of these few instances be insufficiently known, or
imperfectly analyzed into their elements, and therefore not adequately
compared with other instances, nothing is more probable than that a wrong
empirical law will emerge instead of the right one. Accordingly, the most
erroneous generalizations are continually made from the course of history;
not only in this country, where history can not yet be said to be at all
cultivated as a science, but in other countries where it is so cultivated,
and by persons well versed in it. The only check or corrective is,
constant verification by psychological and ethological laws. We may add to
this, that no one but a person competently skilled in those laws is
capable of preparing the materials for historical generalization, by
analyzing the facts of history, or even by observing the social phenomena
of his own time. No other will be aware of the comparative importance of
different facts, nor consequently know what facts to look for, or to
observe; still less will he be capable of estimating the evidence of facts
which, as is the case with most, can not be ascertained by direct
observation or learned from testimony, but must be inferred from marks.

§ 5. The Empirical Laws of Society are of two kinds; some are uniformities
of co-existence, some of succession. According as the science is occupied
in ascertaining and verifying the former sort of uniformities or the
latter, M. Comte gives it the title of Social Statics, or of Social
Dynamics; conformably to the distinction in mechanics between the
conditions of equilibrium and those of movement; or in biology, between
the laws of organization and those of life. The first branch of the
science ascertains the conditions of stability in the social union; the
second, the laws of progress. Social Dynamics is the theory of Society
considered in a state of progressive movement; while Social Statics is the
theory of the _consensus_ already spoken of as existing among the
different parts of the social organism; in other words, the theory of the
mutual actions and reactions of contemporaneous social phenomena;
making(279) provisionally, as far as possible, abstraction, for scientific
purposes, of the fundamental movement which is at all times gradually
modifying the whole of them.

“In this first point of view, the provisions of sociology will enable us
to infer one from another (subject to ulterior verification by direct
observation) the various characteristic marks of each distinct mode of
social existence, in a manner essentially analogous to what is now
habitually practiced in the anatomy of the physical body. This preliminary
aspect, therefore, of political science, of necessity supposes that
(contrary to the existing habits of philosophers) each of the numerous
elements of the social state, ceasing to be looked at independently and
absolutely, shall be always and exclusively considered relatively to all
the other elements, with the whole of which it is united by mutual
interdependence. It would be superfluous to insist here upon the great and
constant utility of this branch of sociological speculation. It is, in the
first place, the indispensable basis of the theory of social progress. It
may, moreover, be employed, immediately, and of itself, to supply the
place, provisionally at least, of direct observation, which in many cases
is not always practicable for some of the elements of society, the real
condition of which may, however, be sufficiently judged of by means of the
relations which connect them with others previously known. The history of
the sciences may give us some notion of the habitual importance of this
auxiliary resource, by reminding us, for example, how the vulgar errors of
mere erudition concerning the pretended acquirements of the ancient
Egyptians in the higher astronomy were irrevocably dissipated (even before
sentence had been passed on them by a sounder erudition) from the single
consideration of the inevitable connection between the general state of
astronomy and that of abstract geometry, then evidently in its infancy. It
would be easy to cite a multitude of analogous cases, the character of
which could admit of no dispute. In order to avoid exaggeration, however,
it should be remarked, that these necessary relations among the different
aspects of society can not, from their very nature, be so simple and
precise that the results observed could only have arisen from some one
mode of mutual co-ordination. Such a notion, already too narrow in the
science of life, would be completely at variance with the still more
complex nature of sociological speculations. But the exact estimation of
these limits of variation, both in the healthy and in the morbid state,
constitutes, at least as much as in the anatomy of the natural body, an
indispensable complement to every theory of Sociological Statics; without
which the indirect exploration above spoken of would often lead into
error.

“This is not the place for methodically demonstrating the existence of a
necessary relation among all the possible aspects of the same social
organism; a point on which, in principle at least, there is now little
difference of opinion among sound thinkers. From whichever of the social
elements we choose to set out, we may easily recognize that it has always
a connection, more or less immediate, with all the other elements, even
with those which at first sight appear the most independent of it. The
dynamical consideration of the progressive development of civilized
humanity, affords, no doubt, a still more efficacious means of effecting
this interesting verification of the _consensus_ of the social phenomena,
by displaying the manner in which every change in any one part, operates
immediately, or very speedily, upon all the rest. But this indication may
be preceded, or at all events followed, by a confirmation of a purely
statical kind; for, in politics as in mechanics, the communication of
motion from one object to another proves a connection between them.
Without descending to the minute interdependence of the different branches
of any one science or art, is it not evident that among the different
sciences, as well as among most of the arts, there exists such a
connection, that if the state of any one well-marked division of them is
sufficiently known to us, we can with real scientific assurance infer,
from their necessary correlation, the contemporaneous state of every one
of the others? By a further extension of this consideration, we may
conceive the necessary relation which exists between the condition of the
sciences in general and that of the arts in general, except that the
mutual dependence is less intense in proportion as it is more indirect.
The same is the case, when, instead of considering the aggregate of the
social phenomena in some one people, we examine it simultaneously in
different contemporaneous nations; between which the perpetual reciprocity
of influence, especially in modern times, can not be contested, though the
_consensus_ must in this case be ordinarily of a less decided character,
and must decrease gradually with the affinity of the cases and the
multiplicity of the points of contact, so as at last, in some cases, to
disappear almost entirely; as for, example, between Western Europe and
Eastern Asia, of which the various general states of society appear to
have been hitherto almost independent of one another.

These remarks are followed by illustrations of one of the most important,
and until lately, most neglected, of the general principles which, in this
division of the social science, may be considered as established; namely,
the necessary correlation between the form of government existing in any
society and the contemporaneous state of civilization: a natural law which
stamps the endless discussions and innumerable theories respecting forms
of government in the abstract, as fruitless and worthless, for any other
purpose than as a preparatory treatment of materials to be afterward used
for the construction of a better philosophy.

As already remarked, one of the main results of the science of social
statics would be to ascertain the requisites of stable political union.
There are some circumstances which, being found in all societies without
exception, and in the greatest degree where the social union is most
complete, may be considered (when psychological and ethological laws
confirm the indication) as conditions of the existence of the complex
phenomena called a State. For example, no numerous society has ever been
held together without laws, or usages equivalent to them; without
tribunals, and an organized force of some sort to execute their decisions.
There have always been public authorities whom, with more or less
strictness and in cases more or less accurately defined, the rest of the
community obeyed, or according to general opinion were bound to obey. By
following out this course of inquiry we shall find a number of requisites,
which have been present in every society that has maintained a collective
existence, and on the cessation of which it has either merged in some
other society, or reconstructed itself on some new basis, in which the
conditions were conformed to. Although these results, obtained by
comparing different forms and states of society, amount in themselves only
to empirical laws; some of them, when once suggested, are found to follow
with so much probability from general laws of human nature, that the
consilience of the two processes raises the evidence to proof, and the
generalizations to the rank of scientific truths.

This seems to be affirmable (for instance) of the conclusions arrived at
in the following passage, extracted, with some alterations, from a
criticism on the negative philosophy of the eighteenth century,(280) and
which I quote, though (as in some former instances) from myself, because I
have no better way of illustrating the conception I have formed of the
kind of theorems of which sociological statics would consist.

“The very first element of the social union, obedience to a government of
some sort, has not been found so easy a thing to establish in the world.
Among a timid and spiritless race like the inhabitants of the vast plains
of tropical countries, passive obedience may be of natural growth; though
even there we doubt whether it has ever been found among any people with
whom fatalism, or in other words, submission to the pressure of
circumstances as a divine decree, did not prevail as a religious doctrine.
But the difficulty of inducing a brave and warlike race to submit their
individual _arbitrium_ to any common umpire, has always been felt to be so
great, that nothing short of supernatural power has been deemed adequate
to overcome it; and such tribes have always assigned to the first
institution of civil society a divine origin. So differently did those
judge who knew savage men by actual experience, from those who had no
acquaintance with them except in the civilized state. In modern Europe
itself, after the fall of the Roman empire, to subdue the feudal anarchy
and bring the whole people of any European nation into subjection to
government (though Christianity in the most concentrated form of its
influence was co-operating in the work) required thrice as many centuries
as have elapsed since that time.

“Now if these philosophers had known human nature under any other type
than that of their own age, and of the particular classes of society among
whom they lived, it would have occurred to them, that wherever this
habitual submission to law and government has been firmly and durably
established, and yet the vigor and manliness of character which resisted
its establishment have been in any degree preserved, certain requisites
have existed, certain conditions have been fulfilled, of which the
following may be regarded as the principal.

“First: there has existed, for all who were accounted citizens—for all who
were not slaves, kept down by brute force—a system of _education_,
beginning with infancy and continued through life, of which whatever else
it might include, one main and incessant ingredient was _restraining
discipline_. To train the human being in the habit, and thence the power,
of subordinating his personal impulses and aims to what were considered
the ends of society; of adhering, against all temptation, to the course of
conduct which those ends prescribed; of controlling in himself all
feelings which were liable to militate against those ends, and encouraging
all such as tended toward them; this was the purpose, to which every
outward motive that the authority directing the system could command, and
every inward power or principle which its knowledge of human nature
enabled it to evoke, were endeavored to be rendered instrumental. The
entire civil and military policy of the ancient commonwealths was such a
system of training; in modern nations its place has been attempted to be
supplied, principally, by religious teaching. And whenever and in
proportion as the strictness of the restraining discipline was relaxed,
the natural tendency of mankind to anarchy re-asserted itself; the state
became disorganized from within; mutual conflict for selfish ends,
neutralized the energies which were required to keep up the contest
against natural causes of evil; and the nation, after a longer or briefer
interval of progressive decline, became either the slave of a despotism,
or the prey of a foreign invader.

“The second condition of permanent political society has been found to be,
the existence, in some form or other, of the feeling of allegiance or
loyalty. This feeling may vary in its objects, and is not confined to any
particular form of government; but whether in a democracy or in a
monarchy, its essence is always the same; viz., that there be in the
constitution of the state _something_ which is settled, something
permanent, and not to be called in question; something which, by general
agreement, has a right to be where it is, and to be secure against
disturbance, whatever else may change. This feeling may attach itself, as
among the Jews (and in most of the commonwealths of antiquity), to a
common God or gods, the protectors and guardians of their state. Or it may
attach itself to certain persons, who are deemed to be, whether by divine
appointment, by long prescription, or by the general recognition of their
superior capacity and worthiness, the rightful guides and guardians of the
rest. Or it may connect itself with laws; with ancient liberties or
ordinances. Or, finally, (and this is the only shape in which the feeling
is likely to exist hereafter), it may attach itself to the principles of
individual freedom and political and social equality, as realized in
institutions which as yet exist nowhere, or exist only in a rudimentary
state. But in all political societies which have had a durable existence,
there has been some fixed point: something which people agreed in holding
sacred; which, wherever freedom of discussion was a recognized principle,
it was of course lawful to contest in theory, but which no one could
either fear or hope to see shaken in practice; which, in short (except
perhaps during some temporary crisis), was in the common estimation placed
beyond discussion. And the necessity of this may easily be made evident. A
state never is, nor until mankind are vastly improved, can hope to be, for
any long time exempt from internal dissension; for there neither is nor
has ever been any state of society in which collisions did not occur
between the immediate interests and passions of powerful sections of the
people. What, then, enables nations to weather these storms, and pass
through turbulent times without any permanent weakening of the securities
for peaceable existence? Precisely this—that however important the
interests about which men fell out, the conflict did not affect the
fundamental principle of the system of social union which happened to
exist; nor threaten large portions of the community with the subversion of
that on which they had built their calculations, and with which their
hopes and aims had become identified. But when the questioning of these
fundamental principles is (not the occasional disease, or salutary
medicine, but) the habitual condition of the body politic, and when all
the violent animosities are called forth, which spring naturally from such
a situation, the state is virtually in a position of civil war; and can
never long remain free from it in act and fact.

“The third essential condition of stability in political society, is a
strong and active principle of cohesion among the members of the same
community or state. We need scarcely say that we do not mean nationality,
in the vulgar sense of the term; a senseless antipathy to foreigners;
indifference to the general welfare of the human race, or an unjust
preference of the supposed interests of our own country; a cherishing of
bad peculiarities because they are national, or a refusal to adopt what
has been found good by other countries. We mean a principle of sympathy,
not of hostility; of union, not of separation. We mean a feeling of common
interest among those who live under the same government, and are contained
within the same natural or historical boundaries. We mean, that one part
of the community do not consider themselves as foreigners with regard to
another part; that they set a value on their connection—feel that they are
one people, that their lot is cast together, that evil to any of their
fellow-countrymen is evil to themselves, and do not desire selfishly to
free themselves from their share of any common inconvenience by severing
the connection. How strong this feeling was in those ancient commonwealths
which attained any durable greatness, every one knows. How happily Rome,
in spite of all her tyranny, succeeded in establishing the feeling of a
common country among the provinces of her vast and divided empire, will
appear when any one who has given due attention to the subject shall take
the trouble to point it out. In modern times the countries which have had
that feeling in the strongest degree have been the most powerful
countries: England, France, and, in proportion to their territory and
resources, Holland and Switzerland; while England in her connection with
Ireland is one of the most signal examples of the consequences of its
absence. Every Italian knows why Italy is under a foreign yoke; every
German knows what maintains despotism in the Austrian empire;(281) the
evils of Spain flow as much from the absence of nationality among the
Spaniards themselves, as from the presence of it in their relations with
foreigners: while the completest illustration of all is afforded by the
republics of South America, where the parts of one and the same state
adhere so slightly together, that no sooner does any province think itself
aggrieved by the general government than it proclaims itself a separate
nation.”

§ 6. While the derivative laws of social statics are ascertained by
analyzing different states of society, and comparing them with one
another, without regard to the order of their succession, the
consideration of the successive order is, on the contrary, predominant in
the study of social dynamics, of which the aim is to observe and explain
the sequences of social conditions. This branch of the social science
would be as complete as it can be made, if every one of the leading
general circumstances of each generation were traced to its causes in the
generation immediately preceding. But the _consensus_ is so complete
(especially in modern history), that in the filiation of one generation
and another, it is the whole which produces the whole, rather than any
part a part. Little progress, therefore, can be made in establishing the
filiation, directly from laws of human nature, without having first
ascertained the immediate or derivative laws according to which social
states generate one another as society advances; the _axiomata media_ of
General Sociology.

The empirical laws which are most readily obtained by generalization from
history do not amount to this. They are not the "middle principles"
themselves, but only evidence toward the establishment of such principles.
They consist of certain general tendencies which may be perceived in
society; a progressive increase of some social elements, and diminution of
others, or a gradual change in the general character of certain elements.
It is easily seen, for instance, that as society advances, mental tend
more and more to prevail over bodily qualities, and masses over
individuals; that the occupation of all that portion of mankind who are
not under external restraint is at first chiefly military, but society
becomes progressively more and more engrossed with productive pursuits,
and the military spirit gradually gives way to the industrial; to which
many similar truths might be added. And with generalizations of this
description, ordinary inquirers, even of the historical school now
predominant on the Continent, are satisfied. But these and all such
results are still at too great a distance from the elementary laws of
human nature on which they depend—too many links intervene, and the
concurrence of causes at each link is far too complicated—to enable these
propositions to be presented as direct corollaries from those elementary
principles. They have, therefore, in the minds of most inquirers, remained
in the state of empirical laws, applicable only within the bounds of
actual observation; without any means of determining their real limits,
and of judging whether the changes which have hitherto been in progress
are destined to continue indefinitely, or to terminate, or even to be
reversed.

§ 7. In order to obtain better empirical laws, we must not rest satisfied
with noting the progressive changes which manifest themselves in the
separate elements of society, and in which nothing is indicated but the
relation of fragments of the effect to corresponding fragments of the
cause. It is necessary to combine the statical view of social phenomena
with the dynamical, considering not only the progressive changes of the
different elements, but the contemporaneous condition of each; and thus
obtain empirically the law of correspondence not only between the
simultaneous states, but between the simultaneous changes, of those
elements. This law of correspondence it is, which, duly verified _a
priori_, would become the real scientific derivative law of the
development of humanity and human affairs.

In the difficult process of observation and comparison which is here
required, it would evidently be a great assistance if it should happen to
be the fact, that some one element in the complex existence of social man
is pre-eminent over all others as the prime agent of the social movement.
For we could then take the progress of that one element as the central
chain, to each successive link of which, the corresponding links of all
the other progressions being appended, the succession of the facts would
by this alone be presented in a kind of spontaneous order, far more nearly
approaching to the real order of their filiation than could be obtained by
any other merely empirical process.

Now, the evidence of history and that of human nature combine, by a
striking instance of consilience, to show that there really is one social
element which is thus predominant, and almost paramount, among the agents
of the social progression. This is, the state of the speculative faculties
of mankind; including the nature of the beliefs which by any means they
have arrived at, concerning themselves and the world by which they are
surrounded.

It would be a great error, and one very little likely to be committed, to
assert that speculation, intellectual activity, the pursuit of truth, is
among the more powerful propensities of human nature, or holds a
predominating place in the lives of any, save decidedly exceptional,
individuals. But, notwithstanding the relative weakness of this principle
among other sociological agents, its influence is the main determining
cause of the social progress; all the other dispositions of our nature
which contribute to that progress being dependent on it for the means of
accomplishing their share of the work. Thus (to take the most obvious case
first), the impelling force to most of the improvements effected in the
arts of life, is the desire of increased material comfort; but as we can
only act upon external objects in proportion to our knowledge of them, the
state of knowledge at any time is the limit of the industrial improvements
possible at that time; and the progress of industry must follow, and
depend on, the progress of knowledge. The same thing may be shown to be
true, though it is not quite so obvious, of the progress of the fine arts.
Further, as the strongest propensities of uncultivated or half-cultivated
human nature (being the purely selfish ones, and those of a sympathetic
character which partake most of the nature of selfishness) evidently tend
in themselves to disunite mankind, not to unite them—to make them rivals,
not confederates, social existence is only possible by a disciplining of
those more powerful propensities, which consists in subordinating them to
a common system of opinions. The degree of this subordination is the
measure of the completeness of the social union, and the nature of the
common opinions determines its kind. But in order that mankind should
conform their actions to any set of opinions, these opinions must exist,
must be believed by them. And thus, the state of the speculative
faculties, the character of the propositions assented to by the intellect,
essentially determines the moral and political state of the community, as
we have already seen that it determines the physical.

These conclusions, deduced from the laws of human nature, are in entire
accordance with the general facts of history. Every considerable change
historically known to us in the condition of any portion of mankind, when
not brought about by external force, has been preceded by a change, of
proportional extent, in the state of their knowledge, or in their
prevalent beliefs. As between any given state of speculation, and the
correlative state of every thing else, it was almost always the former
which first showed itself; though the effects, no doubt, reacted potently
upon the cause. Every considerable advance in material civilization has
been preceded by an advance in knowledge: and when any great social change
has come to pass, either in the way of gradual development or of sudden
conflict, it has had for its precursor a great change in the opinions and
modes of thinking of society. Polytheism, Judaism, Christianity,
Protestantism, the critical philosophy of modern Europe, and its positive
science—each of these has been a primary agent in making society what it
was at each successive period, while society was but secondarily
instrumental in making _them_, each of them (so far as causes can be
assigned for its existence) being mainly an emanation not from the
practical life of the period, but from the previous state of belief and
thought. The weakness of the speculative propensity in mankind generally
has not, therefore, prevented the progress of speculation from governing
that of society at large; it has only, and too often, prevented progress
altogether, where the intellectual progression has come to an early stand
for want of sufficiently favorable circumstances.

From this accumulated evidence, we are justified in concluding, that the
order of human progression in all respects will mainly depend on the order
of progression in the intellectual convictions of mankind, that is, on the
law of the successive transformations of human opinions. The question
remains, whether this law can be determined; at first from history as an
empirical law, then converted into a scientific theorem by deducing it _a
priori_ from the principles of human nature. As the progress of knowledge
and the changes in the opinions of mankind are very slow, and manifest
themselves in a well-defined manner only at long intervals, it can not be
expected that the general order of sequence should be discoverable from
the examination of less than a very considerable part of the duration of
the social progress. It is necessary to take into consideration the whole
of past time, from the first recorded condition of the human race, to the
memorable phenomena of the last and present generations.

§ 8. The investigation which I have thus endeavored to characterize, has
been systematically attempted, up to the present time, by M. Comte alone.
His work is hitherto the only known example of the study of social
phenomena according to this conception of the Historical Method. Without
discussing here the worth of his conclusions, and especially of his
predictions and recommendations with respect to the Future of society,
which appear to me greatly inferior in value to his appreciation of the
Past, I shall confine myself to mentioning one important generalization,
which M. Comte regards as the fundamental law of the progress of human
knowledge. Speculation he conceives to have, on every subject of human
inquiry, three successive stages; in the first of which it tends to
explain the phenomena by supernatural agencies, in the second by
metaphysical abstractions, and in the third or final state confines itself
to ascertaining their laws of succession and similitude. This
generalization appears to me to have that high degree of scientific
evidence which is derived from the concurrence of the indications of
history with the probabilities derived from the constitution of the human
mind. Nor could it be easily conceived, from the mere enunciation of such
a proposition, what a flood of light it lets in upon the whole course of
history, when its consequences are traced, by connecting with each of the
three states of human intellect which it distinguishes, and with each
successive modification of those three states, the correlative condition
of other social phenomena.(282)

But whatever decision competent judges may pronounce on the results
arrived at by any individual inquirer, the method now characterized is
that by which the derivative laws of social order and of social progress
must be sought. By its aid we may hereafter succeed not only in looking
far forward into the future history of the human race, but in determining
what artificial means may be used, and to what extent, to accelerate the
natural progress in so far as it is beneficial; to compensate for whatever
may be its inherent inconveniences or disadvantages; and to guard against
the dangers or accidents to which our species is exposed from the
necessary incidents of its progression. Such practical instructions,
founded on the highest branch of speculative sociology, will form the
noblest and most beneficial portion of the Political Art.

That of this science and art even the foundations are but beginning to be
laid, is sufficiently evident. But the superior minds are fairly turning
themselves toward that object. It has become the aim of really scientific
thinkers to connect by theories the facts of universal history: it is
acknowledged to be one of the requisites of a general system of social
doctrine, that it should explain, so far as the data exist, the main facts
of history; and a Philosophy of History is generally admitted to be at
once the verification, and the initial form, of the Philosophy of the
Progress of Society.

If the endeavors now making in all the more cultivated nations, and
beginning to be made even in England (usually the last to enter into the
general movement of the European mind) for the construction of a
Philosophy of History, shall be directed and controlled by those views of
the nature of sociological evidence which I have (very briefly and
imperfectly) attempted to characterize; they can not fail to give birth to
a sociological system widely removed from the vague and conjectural
character of all former attempts, and worthy to take its place, at last,
among the sciences. When this time shall come, no important branch of
human affairs will be any longer abandoned to empiricism and unscientific
surmise: the circle of human knowledge will be complete, and it can only
thereafter receive further enlargement by perpetual expansion from within.




                               Chapter XI.


Additional Elucidations Of The Science Of History.


§ 1. The doctrine which the preceding chapters were intended to enforce
and elucidate—that the collective series of social phenomena, in other
words the course of history, is subject to general laws, which philosophy
may possibly detect—has been familiar for generations to the scientific
thinkers of the Continent, and has for the last quarter of a century
passed out of their peculiar domain, into that of newspapers and ordinary
political discussion. In our own country, however, at the time of the
first publication of this Treatise, it was almost a novelty, and the
prevailing habits of thought on historical subjects were the very reverse
of a preparation for it. Since then a great change has taken place, and
has been eminently promoted by the important work of Mr. Buckle; who, with
characteristic energy, flung down this great principle, together with many
striking exemplifications of it, into the arena of popular discussion, to
be fought over by a sort of combatants, in the presence of a sort of
spectators, who would never even have been aware that there existed such a
principle if they had been left to learn its existence from the
speculations of pure science. And hence has arisen a considerable amount
of controversy, tending not only to make the principle rapidly familiar to
the majority of cultivated minds, but also to clear it from the confusions
and misunderstandings by which it was but natural that it should for a
time be clouded, and which impair the worth of the doctrine to those who
accept it, and are the stumbling-block of many who do not.

Among the impediments to the general acknowledgment, by thoughtful minds,
of the subjection of historical facts to scientific laws, the most
fundamental continues to be that which is grounded on the doctrine of Free
Will, or, in other words, on the denial that the law of invariable
Causation holds true of human volitions; for if it does not, the course of
history, being the result of human volitions, can not be a subject of
scientific laws, since the volitions on which it depends can neither be
foreseen, nor reduced to any canon of regularity even after they have
occurred. I have discussed this question, as far as seemed suitable to the
occasion, in a former chapter; and I only think it necessary to repeat,
that the doctrine of the Causation of human actions, improperly called the
doctrine of Necessity, affirms no mysterious _nexus_, or overruling
fatality: it asserts only that men’s actions are the joint result of the
general laws and circumstances of human nature, and of their own
particular characters; those characters again being the consequence of the
natural and artificial circumstances that constituted their education,
among which circumstances must be reckoned their own conscious efforts.
Any one who is willing to take (if the expression may be permitted) the
trouble of thinking himself into the doctrine as thus stated, will find
it, I believe, not only a faithful interpretation of the universal
experience of human conduct, but a correct representation of the mode in
which he himself, in every particular case, spontaneously interprets his
own experience of that conduct.

But if this principle is true of individual man, it must be true of
collective man. If it is the law of human life, the law must be realized
in history. The experience of human affairs when looked at _en masse_,
must be in accordance with it if true, or repugnant to it if false. The
support which this _a posteriori_ verification affords to the law, is the
part of the case which has been most clearly and triumphantly brought out
by Mr. Buckle.

The facts of statistics, since they have been made a subject of careful
recordation and study, have yielded conclusions, some of which have been
very startling to persons not accustomed to regard moral actions as
subject to uniform laws. The very events which in their own nature appear
most capricious and uncertain, and which in any individual case no
attainable degree of knowledge would enable us to foresee, occur, when
considerable numbers are taken into the account, with a degree of
regularity approaching to mathematical. What act is there which all would
consider as more completely dependent on individual character, and on the
exercise of individual free will, than that of slaying a fellow-creature?
Yet in any large country, the number of murders, in proportion to the
population, varies (it has been found) very little from one year to
another, and in its variations never deviates widely from a certain
average. What is still more remarkable, there is a similar approach to
constancy in the proportion of these murders annually committed with every
particular kind of instrument. There is a like approximation to identity,
as between one year and another, in the comparative number of legitimate
and of illegitimate births. The same thing is found true of suicides,
accidents, and all other social phenomena of which the registration is
sufficiently perfect; one of the most curiously illustrative examples
being the fact, ascertained by the registers of the London and Paris
post-offices, that the number of letters posted which the writers have
forgotten to direct, is nearly the same, in proportion to the whole number
of letters posted, in one year as in another. “Year after year,” says Mr.
Buckle, “the same proportion of letter-writers forget this simple act; so
that for each successive period we can actually foretell the number of
persons whose memory will fail them in regard to this trifling, and as it
might appear, accidental occurrence.”(283)

This singular degree of regularity _en masse_, combined with the extreme
of irregularity in the cases composing the mass, is a felicitous
verification _a posteriori_ of the law of causation in its application to
human conduct. Assuming the truth of that law, every human action, every
murder, for instance, is the concurrent result of two sets of causes. On
the one part, the general circumstances of the country and its
inhabitants; the moral, educational, economical, and other influences
operating on the whole people, and constituting what we term the state of
civilization. On the other part, the great variety of influences special
to the individual: his temperament, and other peculiarities of
organization, his parentage, habitual associates, temptations, and so
forth. If we now take the whole of the instances which occur within a
sufficiently large field to exhaust all the combinations of these special
influences, or, in other words, to eliminate chance; and if all these
instances have occurred within such narrow limits of time, that no
material change can have taken place in the general influences
constituting the state of civilization of the country; we may be certain,
that if human actions are governed by invariable laws, the aggregate
result will be something like a constant quantity. The number of murders
committed within that space and time, being the effect partly of general
causes which have not varied, and partly of partial causes the whole round
of whose variations has been included, will be, practically speaking,
invariable.

Literally and mathematically invariable it is not, and could not be
expected to be: because the period of a year is too short to include _all_
the possible combinations of partial causes, while it is, at the same
time, sufficiently long to make it probable that in some years at least,
of every series, there will have been introduced new influences of a more
or less general character; such as a more vigorous or a more relaxed
police; some temporary excitement from political or religious causes; or
some incident generally notorious, of a nature to act morbidly on the
imagination. That in spite of these unavoidable imperfections in the data,
there should be so very trifling a margin of variation in the annual
results, is a brilliant continuation of the general theory.

§ 2. The same considerations which thus strikingly corroborate the
evidence of the doctrine, that historical facts are the invariable effects
of causes, tend equally to clear that doctrine from various
misapprehensions, the existence of which has been put in evidence by the
recent discussions. Some persons, for instance, seemingly imagine the
doctrine to imply, not merely that the total number of murders committed
in a given space and time is entirely the effect of the general
circumstances of society, but that every particular murder is so too—that
the individual murderer is, so to speak, a mere instrument in the hands of
general causes that he himself has no option, or, if he has, and chose to
exercise it, some one else would be necessitated to take his place; that
if any one of the actual murderers had abstained from the crime, some
person who would otherwise have remained innocent, would have committed an
extra murder to make up the average. Such a corollary would certainly
convict any theory which necessarily led to it of absurdity. It is
obvious, however, that each particular murder depends, not on the general
state of society only, but on that combined with causes special to the
case, which are generally much more powerful; and if these special causes,
which have greater influence than the general ones in causing every
particular murder, have no influence on the number of murders in a given
period, it is because the field of observation is so extensive as to
include all possible combinations of the special causes—all varieties of
individual character and individual temptation compatible with the general
state of society. The collective experiment, as it may be termed, exactly
separates the effect of the general from that of the special causes, and
shows the net result of the former; but it declares nothing at all
respecting the amount of influence of the special causes, be it greater or
smaller, since the scale of the experiment extends to the number of cases
within which the effects of the special causes balance one another, and
disappear in that of the general causes.

I will not pretend that all the defenders of the theory have always kept
their language free from this same confusion, and have shown no tendency
to exalt the influence of general causes at the expense of special. I am
of opinion, on the contrary, that they have done so in a very great
degree, and by so doing have encumbered their theory with difficulties,
and laid it open to objections, which do not necessarily affect it. Some,
for example (among whom is Mr. Buckle himself), have inferred, or allowed
it to be supposed that they inferred, from the regularity in the
recurrence of events which depend on moral qualities, that the moral
qualities of mankind are little capable of being improved, or are of
little importance in the general progress of society, compared with
intellectual or economic causes. But to draw this inference is to forget
that the statistical tables, from which the invariable averages are
deduced, were compiled from facts occurring within narrow geographical
limits and in a small number of successive years; that is, from a field
the whole of which was under the operation of the same general causes, and
during too short a time to allow of much change therein. All moral causes
but those common to the country generally, have been eliminated by the
great number of instances taken; and those which are common to the whole
country have not varied considerably, in the short space of time comprised
in the observations. If we admit the supposition that they have varied; if
we compare one age with another, or one country with another, or even one
part of a country with another, differing in position and character as to
the moral elements, the crimes committed within a year give no longer the
same, but a widely different numerical aggregate. And this can not but be
the case: for, inasmuch as every single crime committed by an individual
mainly depends on his moral qualities, the crimes committed by the entire
population of the country must depend in an equal degree on their
collective moral qualities. To render this element inoperative upon the
large scale, it would be necessary to suppose that the general moral
average of mankind does not vary from country to country or from age to
age; which is not true, and, even if it were true, could not possibly be
proved by any existing statistics. I do not on this account the less agree
in the opinion of Mr. Buckle, that the intellectual element in mankind,
including in that expression the nature of their beliefs, the amount of
their knowledge, and the development of their intelligence, is the
predominant circumstance in determining their progress. But I am of this
opinion, not because I regard their moral or economical condition either
as less powerful or less variable agencies, but because these are in a
great degree the consequences of the intellectual condition, and are, in
all cases, limited by it; as was observed in the preceding chapter. The
intellectual changes are the most conspicuous agents in history, not from
their superior force, considered in themselves, but because practically
they work with the united power belonging to all three.(284)

§ 3. There is another distinction often neglected in the discussion of
this subject, which it is extremely important to observe. The theory of
the subjection of social progress to invariable laws, is often held in
conjunction with the doctrine, that social progress can not be materially
influenced by the exertions of individual persons, or by the acts of
governments. But though these opinions are often held by the same persons,
they are two very different opinions, and the confusion between them is
the eternally recurring error of confounding Causation with Fatalism.
Because whatever happens will be the effect of causes, human volitions
among the rest, it does not follow that volitions, even those of peculiar
individuals, are not of great efficacy as causes. If any one in a storm at
sea, because about the same number of persons in every year perish by
shipwreck, should conclude that it was useless for him to attempt to save
his own life, we should call him a Fatalist; and should remind him that
the efforts of shipwrecked persons to save their lives are so far from
being immaterial, that the average amount of those efforts is one of the
causes on which the ascertained annual number of deaths by shipwreck
depend. However universal the laws of social development may be, they can
not be more universal or more rigorous than those of the physical agencies
of nature; yet human will can convert these into instruments of its
designs, and the extent to which it does so makes the chief difference
between savages and the most highly civilized people. Human and social
facts, from their more complicated nature, are not less, but more,
modifiable than mechanical and chemical facts; human agency, therefore,
has still greater power over them. And accordingly, those who maintain
that the evolution of society depends exclusively, or almost exclusively,
on general causes, always include among these the collective knowledge and
intellectual development of the race. But if of the race, why not also of
some powerful monarch or thinker, or of the ruling portion of some
political society, acting through its government? Though the varieties of
character among ordinary individuals neutralize one another on any large
scale, exceptional individuals in important positions do not in any given
age neutralize one another; there was not another Themistocles, or Luther,
or Julius Cæsar, of equal powers and contrary dispositions, who exactly
balanced the given Themistocles, Luther, and Cæsar, and prevented them
from having any permanent effect. Moreover, for aught that appears, the
volitions of exceptional persons, or the opinions and purposes of the
individuals who at some particular time compose a government, may be
indispensable links in the chain of causation by which even the general
causes produce their effects; and I believe this to be the only tenable
form of the theory.

Lord Macaulay, in a celebrated passage of one of his early essays (let me
add that it was one which he did not himself choose to reprint), gives
expression to the doctrine of the absolute inoperativeness of great men,
more unqualified, I should think, than has been given to it by any writer
of equal abilities. He compares them to persons who merely stand on a
loftier height, and thence receive the sun’s rays a little earlier, than
the rest of the human race. “The sun illuminates the hills while it is
still below the horizon, and truth is discovered by the highest minds a
little before it becomes manifest to the multitude. This is the extent of
their superiority. They are the first to catch and reflect a light which,
without their assistance, must in a short time be visible to those who lie
far beneath them.”(285) If this metaphor is to be carried out, it follows
that if there had been no Newton, the world would not only have had the
Newtonian system, but would have had it equally soon; as the sun would
have risen just as early to spectators in the plain if there had been no
mountain at hand to catch still earlier rays. And so it would be, if
truths, like the sun, rose by their own proper motion, without human
effort; but not otherwise. I believe that if Newton had not lived, the
world must have waited for the Newtonian philosophy until there had been
another Newton, or his equivalent. No ordinary man, and no succession of
ordinary men, could have achieved it. I will not go the length of saying
that what Newton did in a single life, might not have been done in
successive steps by some of those who followed him, each singly inferior
to him in genius. But even the least of those steps required a man of
great intellectual superiority. Eminent men do not merely see the coming
light from the hill-top, they mount on the hill-top and evoke it; and if
no one had ever ascended thither, the light, in many cases, might never
have risen upon the plain at all. Philosophy and religion are abundantly
amenable to general causes; yet few will doubt that, had there been no
Socrates, no Plato, and no Aristotle, there would have been no philosophy
for the next two thousand years, nor in all probability then; and that if
there had been no Christ, and no St. Paul, there would have been no
Christianity.

The point in which, above all, the influence of remarkable individuals is
decisive, is in determining the celerity of the movement. In most states
of society it is the existence of great men which decides even whether
there shall be any progress. It is conceivable that Greece, or that
Christian Europe, might have been progressive in certain periods of their
history through general causes only: but if there had been no Mohammed,
would Arabia have produced Avicenna or Averroes, or Caliphs of Bagdad or
of Cordova? In determining, however, in what manner and order the progress
of mankind shall take place if it take place at all, much less depends on
the character of individuals. There is a sort of necessity established in
this respect by the general laws of human nature—by the constitution of
the human mind. Certain truths can not be discovered, nor inventions made,
unless certain others have been made first; certain social improvements,
from the nature of the case, can only follow, and not precede, others. The
order of human progress, therefore, may to a certain extent have definite
laws assigned to it: while as to its celerity, or even as to its taking
place at all, no generalization, extending to the human species generally,
can possibly be made; but only some very precarious approximate
generalizations, confined to the small portion of mankind in whom there
has been any thing like consecutive progress within the historical period,
and deduced from their special position, or collected from their
particular history. Even looking to the _manner_ of progress, the order of
succession of social states, there is need of great flexibility in our
generalizations. The limits of variation in the possible development of
social, as of animal life, are a subject of which little is yet
understood, and are one of the great problems in social science. It is, at
all events, a fact, that different portions of mankind, under the
influence of different circumstances, have developed themselves in a more
or less different manner and into different forms; and among these
determining circumstances, the individual character of their great
speculative thinkers or practical organizers may well have been one. Who
can tell how profoundly the whole subsequent history of China may have
been influenced by the individuality of Confucius? and of Sparta (and
hence of Greece and the world) by that of Lycurgus?

Concerning the nature and extent of what a great man under favorable
circumstances can do for mankind, as well as of what a government can do
for a nation, many different opinions are possible; and every shade of
opinion on these points is consistent with the fullest recognition that
there are invariable laws of historical phenomena. Of course the degree of
influence which has to be assigned to these more special agencies, makes a
great difference in the precision which can be given to the general laws,
and in the confidence with which predictions can be grounded on them.
Whatever depends on the peculiarities of individuals, combined with the
accident of the positions they hold, is necessarily incapable of being
foreseen. Undoubtedly these casual combinations might be eliminated like
any others, by taking a sufficiently large cycle: the peculiarities of a
great historical character make their influence felt in history sometimes
for several thousand years, but it is highly probable that they will make
no difference at all at the end of fifty millions. Since, however, we can
not obtain an average of the vast length of time necessary to exhaust all
the possible combinations of great men and circumstances, as much of the
law of evolution of human affairs as depends upon this average, is and
remains inaccessible to us; and within the next thousand years, which are
of considerably more importance to us than the whole remainder of the
fifty millions, the favorable and unfavorable combinations which will
occur will be to us purely accidental. We can not foresee the advent of
great men. Those who introduce new speculative thoughts or great practical
conceptions into the world, can not have their epoch fixed beforehand.
What science can do, is this. It can trace through past history the
general causes which had brought mankind into that preliminary state
which, when the right sort of great man appeared, rendered them accessible
to his influence. If this state continues, experience renders it tolerably
certain that in a longer or shorter period the great man will be produced;
provided that the general circumstances of the country and people are
(which very often they are not) compatible with his existence; of which
point also, science can in some measure judge. It is in this manner that
the results of progress, except as to the celerity of their production,
can be, to a certain extent, reduced to regularity and law. And the belief
that they can be so, is equally consistent with assigning very great, or
very little efficacy, to the influence of exceptional men, or of the acts
of governments. And the same may be said of all other accidents and
disturbing causes.

§ 4. It would nevertheless be a great error to assign only a trifling
importance to the agency of eminent individuals, or of governments. It
must not be concluded that the influence of either is small, because they
can not bestow what the general circumstances of society, and the course
of its previous history, have not prepared it to receive. Neither thinkers
nor governments effect all that they intend, but in compensation they
often produce important results which they did not in the least foresee.
Great men, and great actions, are seldom wasted; they send forth a
thousand unseen influences, more effective than those which are seen; and
though nine out of every ten things done, with a good purpose, by those
who are in advance of their age, produce no material effect, the tenth
thing produces effects twenty times as great as any one would have dreamed
of predicting from it. Even the men who for want of sufficiently favorable
circumstances left no impress at all upon their own age, have often been
of the greatest value to posterity. Who could appear to have lived more
entirely in vain than some of the early heretics? They were burned or
massacred, their writings extirpated, their memory anathematized, and
their very names and existence left for seven or eight centuries in the
obscurity of musty manuscripts—their history to be gathered, perhaps, only
from the sentences by which they were condemned. Yet the memory of these
men—men who resisted certain pretensions or certain dogmas of the Church
in the very age in which the unanimous assent of Christendom was afterward
claimed as having been given to them, and asserted as the ground of their
authority—broke the chain of tradition, established a series of precedents
for resistance, inspired later Reformers with the courage, and armed them
with the weapons, which they needed when mankind were better prepared to
follow their impulse. To this example from men, let us add another from
governments. The comparatively enlightened rule of which Spain had the
benefit during a considerable part of the eighteenth century, did not
correct the fundamental defects of the Spanish people; and in consequence,
though it did great temporary good, so much of that good perished with it,
that it may plausibly be affirmed to have had no permanent effect. The
case has been cited as a proof how little governments can do in opposition
to the causes which have determined the general character of the nation.
It does show how much there is which they can not do; but not that they
can do nothing. Compare what Spain was at the beginning of that
half-century of liberal government, with what she had become at its close.
That period fairly let in the light of European thought upon the more
educated classes; and it never afterward ceased to go on spreading.
Previous to that time the change was in an inverse direction; culture,
light, intellectual and even material activity, were becoming
extinguished. Was it nothing to arrest this downward and convert it into
an upward course? How much that Charles the Third and Aranda could not do,
has been the ultimate consequence of what they did! To that half-century
Spain owes that she has got rid of the Inquisition, that she has got rid
of the monks, that she now has parliaments and (save in exceptional
intervals) a free press, and the feelings of freedom and citizenship, and
is acquiring railroads and all the other constituents of material and
economical progress. In the Spain which preceded that era, there was not a
single element at work which could have led to these results in any length
of time, if the country had continued to be governed as it was by the last
princes of the Austrian dynasty, or if the Bourbon rulers had been from
the first what, both in Spain and in Naples, they afterward became.

And if a government can do much, even when it seems to have done little,
in causing positive improvement, still greater are the issues dependent on
it in the way of warding off evils, both internal and external, which else
would stop improvement altogether. A good or a bad counselor, in a single
city at a particular crisis, has affected the whole subsequent fate of the
world. It is as certain as any contingent judgment respecting historical
events can be, that if there had been no Themistocles there would have
been no victory of Salamis; and had there not, where would have been all
our civilization? How different, again, would have been the issue if
Epaminondas, or Timoleon, or even Iphicrates, instead of Chares and
Lysicles, had commanded at Chæroneia. As is well said in the second of two
Essays on the Study of History,(286) in my judgment the soundest and most
philosophical productions which the recent controversies on this subject
have called forth, historical science authorizes not absolute, but only
conditional predictions. General causes count for much, but individuals
also “produce great changes in history, and color its whole complexion
long after their death.... No one can doubt that the Roman republic would
have subsided into a military despotism if Julius Cæsar had never lived”
(thus much was rendered practically certain by general causes); “but is it
at all clear that in that case Gaul would ever have formed a province of
the empire? Might not Varus have lost his three legions on the banks of
the Rhone? and might not that river have become the frontier instead of
the Rhine? This might well have happened if Cæsar and Crassus had changed
provinces; and it is surely impossible to say that in such an event the
venue (as lawyers say) of European civilization might not have been
changed. The Norman Conquest in the same way was as much the act of a
single man, as the writing of a newspaper article; and knowing as we do
the history of that man and his family, we can retrospectively predict
with all but infallible certainty, that no other person” (no other in that
age, I presume, is meant) “could have accomplished the enterprise. If it
had not been accomplished, is there any ground to suppose that either our
history or our national character would have been what they are?”

As is most truly remarked by the same writer, the whole stream of Grecian
history, as cleared up by Mr. Grote, is one series of examples how often
events on which the whole destiny of subsequent civilization turned, were
dependent on the personal character for good or evil of some one
individual. It must be said, however, that Greece furnishes the most
extreme example of this nature to be found in history, and is a very
exaggerated specimen of the general tendency. It has happened only that
once, and will probably never happen again, that the fortunes of mankind
depended upon keeping a certain order of things in existence in a single
town, or a country scarcely larger than Yorkshire; capable of being ruined
or saved by a hundred causes, of very slight magnitude in comparison with
the general tendencies of human affairs. Neither ordinary accidents, nor
the characters of individuals, can ever again be so vitally important as
they then were. The longer our species lasts, and the more civilized it
becomes, the more, as Comte remarks, does the influence of past
generations over the present, and of mankind _en masse_ over every
individual in it, predominate over other forces; and though the course of
affairs never ceases to be susceptible of alteration both by accidents and
by personal qualities, the increasing preponderance of the collective
agency of the species over all minor causes, is constantly bringing the
general evolution of the race into something which deviates less from a
certain and preappointed track. Historical science, therefore, is always
becoming more possible; not solely because it is better studied, but
because, in every generation, it becomes better adapted for study.




                               Chapter XII.


Of The Logic Of Practice, Or Art; Including Morality And Policy.


§ 1. In the preceding chapters we have endeavored to characterize the
present state of those among the branches of knowledge called Moral, which
are sciences in the only proper sense of the term, that is, inquiries into
the course of nature. It is customary, however, to include under the term
moral knowledge, and even (though improperly) under that of moral science,
an inquiry the results of which do not express themselves in the
indicative, but in the imperative mood, or in periphrases equivalent to
it; what is called the knowledge of duties; practical ethics, or morality.

Now, the imperative mood is the characteristic of art, as distinguished
from science. Whatever speaks in rules, or precepts, not in assertions
respecting matters of fact, is art; and ethics, or morality, is properly a
portion of the art corresponding to the sciences of human nature and
society.(287)

The Method, therefore, of Ethics, can be no other than that of Art, or
Practice, in general; and the portion yet uncompleted of the task which we
proposed to ourselves in the concluding Book, is to characterize the
general Method of Art, as distinguished from Science.

§ 2. In all branches of practical business there are cases in which
individuals are bound to conform their practice to a pre-established rule,
while there are others in which it is part of their task to find or
construct the rule by which they are to govern their conduct. The first,
for example, is the case of a judge, under a definite written code. The
judge is not called upon to determine what course would be intrinsically
the most advisable in the particular case in hand, but only within what
rule of law it falls; what the legislature has ordained to be done in the
kind of case, and must therefore be presumed to have intended in the
individual case. The method must here be wholly and exclusively one of
ratiocination, or syllogism; and the process is obviously, what in our
analysis of the syllogism we showed that all ratiocination is, namely the
interpretation of a formula.

In order that our illustration of the opposite case may be taken from the
same class of subjects as the former, we will suppose, in contrast with
the situation of the judge, the position of the legislator. As the judge
has laws for his guidance, so the legislator has rules, and maxims of
policy; but it would be a manifest error to suppose that the legislator is
bound by these maxims in the same manner as the judge is bound by the
laws, and that all he has to do is to argue down from them to the
particular case, as the judge does from the laws. The legislator is bound
to take into consideration the reasons or grounds of the maxim; the judge
has nothing to do with those of the law, except so far as a consideration
of them may throw light upon the intention of the law-maker, where his
words have left it doubtful. To the judge, the rule, once positively
ascertained, is final; but the legislator, or other practitioner, who goes
by rules rather than by their reasons, like the old-fashioned German
tacticians who were vanquished by Napoleon, or the physician who preferred
that his patients should die by rule rather than recover contrary to it,
is rightly judged to be a mere pedant, and the slave of his formulas.

Now, the reasons of a maxim of policy, or of any other rule of art, can be
no other than the theorems of the corresponding science.

The relation in which rules of art stand to doctrines of science may be
thus characterized. The art proposes to itself an end to be attained,
defines the end, and hands it over to the science. The science receives
it, considers it as a phenomenon or effect to be studied, and having
investigated its causes and conditions, sends it back to art with a
theorem of the combination of circumstances by which it could be produced.
Art then examines these combinations of circumstances, and according as
any of them are or are not in human power, pronounces the end attainable
or not. The only one of the premises, therefore, which Art supplies, is
the original major premise, which asserts that the attainment of the given
end is desirable. Science then lends to Art the proposition (obtained by a
series of inductions or of deductions) that the performance of certain
actions will attain the end. From these premises Art concludes that the
performance of these actions is desirable, and finding it also
practicable, converts the theorem into a rule or precept.

§ 3. It deserves particular notice, that the theorem or speculative truth
is not ripe for being turned into a precept, until the whole, and not a
part merely, of the operation which belongs to science, has been
performed. Suppose that we have completed the scientific process only up
to a certain point; have discovered that a particular cause will produce
the desired effect, but have not ascertained all the negative conditions
which are necessary, that is, all the circumstances which, if present,
would prevent its production. If, in this imperfect state of the
scientific theory, we attempt to frame a rule of art, we perform that
operation prematurely. Whenever any counteracting cause, overlooked by the
theorem, takes place, the rule will be at fault; we shall employ the means
and the end will not follow. No arguing from or about the rule itself will
then help us through the difficulty; there is nothing for it but to turn
back and finish the scientific process which should have preceded the
formation of the rule. We must re-open the investigation to inquire into
the remainder of the conditions on which the effect depends; and only
after we have ascertained the whole of these are we prepared to transform
the completed law of the effect into a precept, in which those
circumstances or combinations of circumstances which the science exhibits
as conditions are prescribed as means.

It is true that, for the sake of convenience, rules must be formed from
something less than this ideally perfect theory: in the first place,
because the theory can seldom be made ideally perfect; and next, because,
if all the counteracting contingencies, whether of frequent or of rare
occurrence, were included, the rules would be too cumbrous to be
apprehended and remembered by ordinary capacities, on the common occasions
of life. The rules of art do not attempt to comprise more conditions than
require to be attended to in ordinary cases; and are therefore always
imperfect. In the manual arts, where the requisite conditions are not
numerous, and where those which the rules do not specify are generally
either plain to common observation or speedily learned from practice,
rules may often be safely acted on by persons who know nothing more than
the rule. But in the complicated affairs of life, and still more in those
of states and societies, rules can not be relied on, without constantly
referring back to the scientific laws on which they are founded. To know
what are the practical contingencies which require a modification of the
rule, or which are altogether exceptions to it, is to know what
combinations of circumstances would interfere with, or entirely
counteract, the consequences of those laws; and this can only be learned
by a reference to the theoretic grounds of the rule.

By a wise practitioner, therefore, rules of conduct will only be
considered as provisional. Being made for the most numerous cases, or for
those of most ordinary occurrence, they point out the manner in which it
will be least perilous to act, where time or means do not exist for
analyzing the actual circumstances of the case, or where we can not trust
our judgment in estimating them. But they do not at all supersede the
propriety of going through, when circumstances permit, the scientific
process requisite for framing a rule from the data of the particular case
before us. At the same time, the common rule may very properly serve as an
admonition that a certain mode of action has been found by ourselves and
others to be well adapted to the cases of most common occurrence; so that
if it be unsuitable to the case in hand, the reason of its being so will
be likely to arise from some unusual circumstance.

§ 4. The error is therefore apparent of those who would deduce the line of
conduct proper to particular cases from supposed universal practical
maxims, overlooking the necessity of constantly referring back to the
principles of the speculative science, in order to be sure of attaining
even the specific end which the rules have in view. How much greater
still, then, must the error be, of setting up such unbending principles,
not merely as universal rules for attaining a given end, but as rules of
conduct generally, without regard to the possibility, not only that some
modifying cause may prevent the attainment of the given end by the means
which the rule prescribes, but that success itself may conflict with some
other end, which may possibly chance to be more desirable.

This is the habitual error of many of the political speculators whom I
have characterized as the geometrical school; especially in France, where
ratiocination from rules of practice forms the staple commodity of
journalism and political oratory—a misapprehension of the functions of
Deduction which has brought much discredit, in the estimation of other
countries, upon the spirit of generalization so honorably characteristic
of the French mind. The commonplaces of politics in France are large and
sweeping practical maxims, from which, as ultimate premises, men reason
downward to particular applications; and this they call being logical and
consistent. For instance, they are perpetually arguing that such and such
a measure ought to be adopted, because it is a consequence of the
principle on which the form of government is founded; of the principle of
legitimacy, or the principle of the sovereignty of the people. To which it
may be answered, that if these be really practical principles, they must
rest on speculative grounds; the sovereignty of the people, for example,
must be a right foundation for government, because a government thus
constituted tends to produce certain beneficial effects. Inasmuch,
however, as no government produces all possible beneficial effects, but
all are attended with more or fewer inconveniences, and since these can
not usually be combated by means drawn from the very causes which produce
them, it would be often a much stronger recommendation of some practical
arrangement, that it does not follow from what is called the general
principle of the government, than that it does. Under a government of
legitimacy, the presumption is far rather in favor of institutions of
popular origin; and in a democracy, in favor of arrangements tending to
check the impetus of popular will. The line of augmentation so commonly
mistaken in France for political philosophy, tends to the practical
conclusion that we should exert our utmost efforts to aggravate, instead
of alleviating, whatever are the characteristic imperfections of the
system of institutions which we prefer, or under which we happen to live.

§ 5. The grounds, then, of every rule of art, are to be found in the
theorems of science. An art, or a body of art, consists of the rules,
together with as much of the speculative propositions as comprises the
justification of those rules. The complete art of any matter includes a
selection of such a portion from the science as is necessary to show on
what conditions the effects, which the art aims at producing, depend. And
Art in general, consists of the truths of Science, arranged in the most
convenient order for practice, instead of the order which is the most
convenient for thought. Science groups and arranges its truths, so as to
enable us to take in at one view as much as possible of the general order
of the universe. Art, though it must assume the same general laws, follows
them only into such of their detailed consequences as have led to the
formation of rules of conduct; and brings together from parts of the field
of science most remote from one another, the truths relating to the
production of the different and heterogeneous conditions necessary to each
effect which the exigencies of practical life require to be produced.(288)

Science, therefore, following one cause to its various effects, while art
traces one effect to its multiplied and diversified causes and conditions,
there is need of a set of intermediate scientific truths, derived from the
higher generalities of science, and destined to serve as the generalia or
first principles of the various arts. The scientific operation of framing
these intermediate principles, M. Comte characterizes as one of those
results of philosophy which are reserved for futurity. The only complete
example which he points out as actually realized, and which can be held up
as a type to be imitated in more important matters, is the general theory
of the art of Descriptive Geometry, as conceived by M. Monge. It is not,
however, difficult to understand what the nature of these intermediate
principles must generally be. After framing the most comprehensive
possible conception of the end to be aimed at, that is, of the effect to
be produced, and determining in the same comprehensive manner the set of
conditions on which that effect depends, there remains to be taken, a
general survey of the resources which can be commanded for realizing this
set of conditions; and when the result of this survey has been embodied in
the fewest and most extensive propositions possible, those propositions
will express the general relation between the available means and the end,
and will constitute the general scientific theory of the art, from which
its practical methods will follow as corollaries.

§ 6. But though the reasonings which connect the end or purpose of every
art with its means belong to the domain of Science, the definition of the
end itself belongs exclusively to Art, and forms its peculiar province.
Every art has one first principle, or general major premise, not borrowed
from science; that which enunciates the object aimed at, and affirms it to
be a desirable object. The builder’s art assumes that it is desirable to
have buildings; architecture, as one of the fine arts, that it is
desirable to have them beautiful or imposing. The hygienic and medical
arts assume, the one that the preservation of health, the other that the
cure of disease, are fitting and desirable ends. These are not
propositions of science. Propositions of science assert a matter of fact:
an existence, a co-existence, a succession, or a resemblance. The
propositions now spoken of do not assert that any thing is, but enjoin or
recommend that something should be. They are a class by themselves. A
proposition of which the predicate is expressed by the words _ought_ or
_should be_, is generically different from one which is expressed by _is_,
or _will be_. It is true, that in the largest sense of the words, even
these propositions assert something as a matter of fact. The fact affirmed
in them is, that the conduct recommended excites in the speaker’s mind the
feeling of approbation. This, however, does not go to the bottom of the
matter; for the speaker’s approbation is no sufficient reason why other
people should approve; nor ought it to be a conclusive reason even with
himself. For the purposes of practice, every one must be required to
justify his approbation; and for this there is need of general premises,
determining what are the proper objects of approbation, and what the
proper order of precedence among those objects.

These general premises, together with the principal conclusions which may
be deduced from them, form (or rather might form) a body of doctrine,
which is properly the Art of Life, in its three departments, Morality,
Prudence or Policy, and Æsthetics; the Right, the Expedient, and the
Beautiful or Noble, in human conduct and works. To this art (which, in the
main, is unfortunately still to be created), all other arts are
subordinate; since its principles are those which must determine whether
the special aim of any particular art is worthy and desirable, and what is
its place in the scale of desirable things. Every art is thus a joint
result of laws of nature disclosed by science, and of the general
principles of what has been called Teleology, or the Doctrine of
Ends;(289) which, borrowing the language of the German metaphysicians, may
also be termed, not improperly, the principles of Practical Reason.

A scientific observer or reasoner, merely as such, is not an adviser for
practice. His part is only to show that certain consequences follow from
certain causes, and that to obtain certain ends, certain means are the
most effectual. Whether the ends themselves are such as ought to be
pursued, and if so, in what cases and to how great a length, it is no part
of his business as a cultivator of science to decide, and science alone
will never qualify him for the decision. In purely physical science, there
is not much temptation to assume this ulterior office; but those who treat
of human nature and society invariably claim it: they always undertake to
say, not merely what is, but what ought to be. To entitle them to do this,
a complete doctrine of Teleology is indispensable. A scientific theory,
however perfect, of the subject-matter, considered merely as part of the
order of nature, can in no degree serve as a substitute. In this respect
the various subordinate arts afford a misleading analogy. In them there is
seldom any visible necessity for justifying the end, since in general its
desirableness is denied by nobody, and it is only when the question of
precedence is to be decided between that end and some other, that the
general principles of Teleology have to be called in; but a writer on
Morals and Politics requires those principles at every step. The most
elaborate and well-digested exposition of the laws of succession and
co-existence among mental or social phenomena, and of their relation to
one another as causes and effects, will be of no avail toward the art of
Life or of Society, if the ends to be aimed at by that art are left to the
vague suggestions of the _intellectus sibi permissus_, or are taken for
granted without analysis or questioning.

§ 7. There is, then, a _philosophia prima_ peculiar to Art, as there is
one which belongs to Science. There are not only first principles of
Knowledge, but first principles of Conduct. There must be some standard by
which to determine the goodness or badness, absolute and comparative, of
ends, or objects of desire. And whatever that standard is, there can be
but one; for if there were several ultimate principles of conduct, the
same conduct might be approved by one of those principles and condemned by
another; and there would be needed some more general principle, as umpire
between them.

Accordingly, writers on Moral Philosophy have mostly felt the necessity
not only of referring all rules of conduct, and all judgments of praise
and blame, to principles, but of referring them to some one principle;
some rule, or standard, with which all other rules of conduct were
required to be consistent, and from which by ultimate consequence they
could all be deduced. Those who have dispensed with the assumption of such
a universal standard, have only been enabled to do so by supposing that a
moral sense, or instinct, inherent in our constitution, informs us, both
what principles of conduct we are bound to observe, and also in what order
these should be subordinated to one another.

The theory of the foundations of morality is a subject which it would be
out of place, in a work like this, to discuss at large, and which could
not to any useful purpose be treated incidentally. I shall content myself,
therefore, with saying, that the doctrine of intuitive moral principles,
even if true, would provide only for that portion of the field of conduct
which is properly called moral. For the remainder of the practice of life
some general principle, or standard, must still be sought; and if that
principle be rightly chosen, it will be found, I apprehend, to serve quite
as well for the ultimate principle of Morality, as for that of Prudence,
Policy, or Taste.

Without attempting in this place to justify my opinion, or even to define
the kind of justification which it admits of, I merely declare my
conviction, that the general principle to which all rules of practice
ought to conform, and the test by which they should be tried, is that of
conduciveness to the happiness of mankind, or rather, of all sentient
beings; in other words, that the promotion of happiness is the ultimate
principle of Teleology.(290)

I do not mean to assert that the promotion of happiness should be itself
the end of all actions, or even of all rules of action. It is the
justification, and ought to be the controller, of all ends, but it is not
itself the sole end. There are many virtuous actions, and even virtuous
modes of action (though the cases are, I think, less frequent than is
often supposed), by which happiness in the particular instance is
sacrificed, more pain being produced than pleasure. But conduct of which
this can be truly asserted, admits of justification only because it can be
shown that, on the whole, more happiness will exist in the world, if
feelings are cultivated which will make people, in certain cases,
regardless of happiness. I fully admit that this is true; that the
cultivation of an ideal nobleness of will and conduct should be to
individual human beings an end, to which the specific pursuit either of
their own happiness or of that of others (except so far as included in
that idea) should, in any case of conflict, give way. But I hold that the
very question, what constitutes this elevation of character, is itself to
be decided by a reference to happiness as the standard. The character
itself should be, to the individual, a paramount end, simply because the
existence of this ideal nobleness of character, or of a near approach to
it, in any abundance, would go farther than all things else toward making
human life happy, both in the comparatively humble sense of pleasure and
freedom from pain, and in the higher meaning, of rendering life, not what
it now is almost universally, puerile and insignificant, but such as human
beings with highly developed faculties can care to have.

§ 8. With these remarks we must close this summary view of the application
of the general logic of scientific inquiry to the moral and social
departments of science. Notwithstanding the extreme generality of the
principles of method which I have laid down (a generality which, I trust,
is not, in this instance, synonymous with vagueness), I have indulged the
hope that to some of those on whom the task will devolve of bringing those
most important of all sciences into a more satisfactory state, these
observations may be useful, both in removing erroneous, and in clearing up
the true, conceptions of the means by which, on subjects of so high a
degree of complication, truth can be attained. Should this hope be
realized, what is probably destined to be the great intellectual
achievement of the next two or three generations of European thinkers will
have been in some degree forwarded.

THE END.






FOOTNOTES


    1 In the later editions of Archbishop Whately’s “Logic,” he states his
      meaning to be, not that “rules” for the ascertainment of truths by
      inductive investigation can not be laid down, or that they may not
      be “of eminent service,” but that they “must always be comparatively
      vague and general, and incapable of being built up into a regular
      demonstrative theory like that of the Syllogism.” (Book iv., ch.
      iv., § 3.) And he observes, that to devise a system for this
      purpose, capable of being “brought into a scientific form,” would be
      an achievement which “he must be more sanguine than scientific who
      expects.” (Book iv., ch. ii., § 4.) To effect this, however, being
      the express object of the portion of the present work which treats
      of Induction, the words in the text are no overstatement of the
      difference of opinion between Archbishop Whately and me on the
      subject.

    2 Now forming a chapter in his volume on “The Philosophy of
      Discovery.”

    3 Archbishop Whately.

    4 I use these terms indiscriminately, because, for the purpose in
      view, there is no need for making any distinction between them. But
      metaphysicians usually restrict the name Intuition to the direct
      knowledge we are supposed to have of things external to our minds,
      and Consciousness to our knowledge of our own mental phenomena.

    5 This important theory has of late been called in question by a
      writer of deserved reputation, Mr. Samuel Bailey; but I do not
      conceive that the grounds on which it has been admitted as an
      established doctrine for a century past, have been at all shaken by
      that gentleman’s objections. I have elsewhere said what appeared to
      me necessary in reply to his arguments. (_Westminster Review_ for
      October, 1842; reprinted in “Dissertations and Discussions,” vol.
      ii.)

    6 The view taken in the text, of the definition and purpose of Logic,
      stands in marked opposition to that of the school of philosophy
      which, in this country, is represented by the writings of Sir
      William Hamilton and of his numerous pupils. Logic, as this school
      conceives it, is “the Science of the Formal Laws of Thought;” a
      definition framed for the express purpose of excluding, as
      irrelevant to Logic, whatever relates to Belief and Disbelief, or to
      the pursuit of truth as such, and restricting the science to that
      very limited portion of its total province, which has reference to
      the conditions, not of Truth, but of Consistency. What I have
      thought it useful to say in opposition to this limitation of the
      field of Logic, has been said at some length in a separate work,
      first published in 1865, and entitled “An Examination of Sir William
      Hamilton’s Philosophy, and of the Principal Philosophical Questions
      discussed in his Writings.” For the purposes of the present
      Treatise, I am content that the justification of the larger
      extension which I give to the domain of the science, should rest on
      the sequel of the Treatise itself. Some remarks on the relation
      which the Logic of Consistency bears to the Logic of Truth, and on
      the place which that particular part occupies in the whole to which
      it belongs, will be found in the present volume (Book II., chap.
      iii., § 9).

_    7 Computation or Logic_, chap. ii.

    8 In the original “had, _or had not_.” These last words, as involving
      a subtlety foreign to our present purpose, I have forborne to quote.

    9 Vide infra, note at the end of § 3, book ii., chap. ii.

_   10 Notare_, to mark; _con_notare, to mark _along with_; to mark one
      thing _with_ or _in addition to_ another.

   11 Archbishop Whately, who, in the later editions of his _Elements of
      Logic_, aided in reviving the important distinction treated of in
      the text, proposes the term “Attributive” as a substitute for
      “Connotative” (p. 22, 9th edit.). The expression is, in itself,
      appropriate; but as it has not the advantage of being connected with
      any verb, of so markedly distinctive a character as “to connote,” it
      is not, I think, fitted to supply the place of the word Connotative
      in scientific use.

   12 A writer who entitles his book _Philosophy; or, the Science of
      Truth_, charges me in his very first page (referring at the foot of
      it to this passage) with asserting that _general_ names have
      properly no signification. And he repeats this statement many times
      in the course of his volume, with comments, not at all flattering,
      thereon. It is well to be now and then reminded to how great a
      length perverse misquotation (for, strange as it appears, I do not
      believe that the writer is dishonest) can sometimes go. It is a
      warning to readers when they see an author accused, with volume and
      page referred to, and the apparent guarantee of inverted commas, of
      maintaining something more than commonly absurd, not to give
      implicit credence to the assertion without verifying the reference.

   13 “Take the familiar term Stone. It is applied to mineral and rocky
      materials, to the kernels of fruit, to the accumulations in the
      gall-bladder and in the kidney; while it is refused to polished
      minerals (called gems), to rocks that have the cleavage suited for
      roofing (slates), and to baked clay (bricks). It occurs in the
      designation of the magnetic oxide of iron (loadstone), and not in
      speaking of other metallic ores. Such a term is wholly unfit for
      accurate reasoning, unless hedged round on every occasion by other
      phrases; as building stone, precious stone, gall-stone, etc.
      Moreover, the methods of definition are baffled for want of
      sufficient community to ground upon. There is no quality uniformly
      present in the cases where it is applied, and uniformly absent where
      it is not applied; hence the definer would have to employ largely
      the license of striking off existing applications, and taking in new
      ones.”—BAIN, _Logic_, ii., 172.

   14 Before quitting the subject of connotative names, it is proper to
      observe, that the first writer who, in our times, has adopted from
      the schoolmen the word _to connote_, Mr. James Mill, in his
      _Analysis of the Phenomena of the Human Mind_, employs it in a
      signification different from that in which it is here used. He uses
      the word in a sense co-extensive with its etymology, applying it to
      every case in which a name, while pointing directly to one thing
      (which is consequently termed its signification), includes also a
      tacit reference to some other thing. In the case considered in the
      text, that of concrete general names, his language and mine are the
      converse of one another. Considering (very justly) the signification
      of the name to lie in the attribute, he speaks of the word as
      _noting_ the attribute, and _connoting_ the things possessing the
      attribute. And he describes abstract names as being properly
      concrete names with their connotation dropped; whereas, in my view,
      it is the _de_notation which would be said to be dropped, what was
      previously connoted becoming the whole signification.

      In adopting a phraseology at variance with that which so high an
      authority, and one which I am less likely than any other person to
      undervalue, has deliberately sanctioned, I have been influenced by
      the urgent necessity for a term exclusively appropriated to express
      the manner in which a concrete general name serves to mark the
      attributes which are involved in its signification. This necessity
      can scarcely be felt in its full force by any one who has not found
      by experience how vain is the attempt to communicate clear ideas on
      the philosophy of language without such a word. It is hardly an
      exaggeration to say, that some of the most prevalent of the errors
      with which logic has been infected, and a large part of the
      cloudiness and confusion of ideas which have enveloped it, would, in
      all probability, have been avoided, if a term had been in common use
      to express exactly what I have signified by the term to connote. And
      the schoolmen, to whom we are indebted for the greater part of our
      logical language, gave us this also, and in this very sense. For
      though some of their general expressions countenance the use of the
      word in the more extensive and vague acceptation in which it is
      taken by Mr. Mill, yet when they had to define it specifically as a
      technical term, and to fix its meaning as such, with that admirable
      precision which always characterizes their definitions, they clearly
      explained that nothing was said to be connoted except _forms_, which
      word may generally, in their writings, be understood as synonymous
      with _attributes_.

      Now, if the word _to connote_, so well suited to the purpose to
      which they applied it, be diverted from that purpose by being taken
      to fulfill another, for which it does not seem to me to be at all
      required; I am unable to find any expression to replace it, but such
      as are commonly employed in a sense so much more general, that it
      would be useless attempting to associate them peculiarly with this
      precise idea. Such are the words, to involve, to imply, etc. By
      employing these, I should fail of attaining the object for which
      alone the name is needed, namely, to distinguish this particular
      kind of involving and implying from all other kinds, and to assure
      to it the degree of habitual attention which its importance demands.

   15 Professor Bain (_Logic_, i., 56) thinks that negative names are not
      names of all things whatever except those denoted by the correlative
      positive name, but only for all things of some particular class:
      _not-white_, for instance, he deems not to be a name for every thing
      in nature except white things, but only for every _colored_ thing
      other than white. In this case, however, as in all others, the test
      of what a name denotes is what it can be predicated of: and we can
      certainly predicate of a sound, or a smell, that it is not white.
      The affirmation and the negation of the same attribute can not but
      divide the whole field of predication between them.

   16 Or rather, all objects except itself and the percipient mind; for,
      as we shall see hereafter, to ascribe any attribute to an object,
      necessarily implies a mind to perceive it.

      The simple and clear explanation given in the text, of relation and
      relative names, a subject so long the opprobrium of metaphysics, was
      given (as far as I know) for the first time, by Mr. James Mill, in
      his Analysis of the Phenomena of the Human Mind.

   17 On the preceding passage Professor Bain remarks (Logic, i., 265):
      “The Categories do not seem to have been intended as a
      classification of Namable Things, in the sense of ‘an enumeration of
      all kinds of Things which are capable of being made predicates, or
      of having any thing predicated of them.’ They seem to have been
      rather intended as a generalization of predicates; an analysis of
      the final import of predication. Viewed in this light, they are not
      open to the objections offered by Mr. Mill. The proper question to
      ask is not—In what Category are we to place sensations or other
      feelings or states of mind? but, Under what Categories can we
      predicate regarding states of mind? Take, for example, Hope. When we
      say that it is a state of mind, we predicate Substance: we may also
      describe how great it is (Quantity), what is the quality of it,
      pleasurable or painful (Quality), what it has reference to
      (Relation). Aristotle seems to have framed the Categories on the
      plan—Here is an individual; what is the final analysis of all that
      we can predicate about him?”

      This is doubtless a true statement of the leading idea in the
      classification. The Category Οὐσία was certainly understood by
      Aristotle to be a general name for all possible answers to the
      question Quid sit? when asked respecting a concrete individual; as
      the other Categories are names comprehending all possible answers to
      the questions Quantum sit? Quale sit? etc. In Aristotle’s
      conception, therefore, the Categories may not have been a
      classification of Things; but they were soon converted into one by
      his Scholastic followers, who certainly regarded and treated them as
      a classification of Things, and carried them out as such, dividing
      down the Category Substance as a naturalist might do, into the
      different classes of physical or metaphysical objects as
      distinguished from attributes, and the other Categories into the
      principal varieties of quantity, quality, relation, etc. It is,
      therefore, a just subject of complaint against them, that they had
      no Category of Feeling. Feeling is assuredly predicable as a summum
      genus, of every particular kind of feeling, for instance, as in Mr.
      Bain’s example, of Hope: but it can not be brought within any of the
      Categories as interpreted either by Aristotle or by his followers.

_   18 Philosophy of the Inductive Sciences_, vol. i., p. 40.

_   19 Discussions on Philosophy_, etc. Appendix I., pp. 643, 644.

   20 It is to be regretted that Sir William Hamilton, though he often
      strenuously insists on this doctrine, and though, in the passage
      quoted, he states it with a comprehensiveness and force which leave
      nothing to be desired, did not consistently adhere to his own
      doctrine, but maintained along with it opinions with which it is
      utterly irreconcilable. See the third and other chapters of _An
      Examination of Sir William Hamilton’s Philosophy_.

   21 “Nous savons qu’il existe quelque chose hors de nous, parceque nous
      ne pouvons expliquer nos perceptions sans les rattacher à des causes
      distinctes de nous mêmes; nous savons de plus que ces causes, dont
      nous ne connaissons pas d’ailleurs l’essence, produisent les effets
      les plus variables, les plus divers, et même les plus contraires,
      selon qu’elles rencontrent telle nature ou telle disposition du
      sujet. Mais savons-nous quelque chose de plus? et même, vu le
      caractère indéterminé des causes que nous concevons dans les corps,
      y a-t-il quelque chose de plus à savoir? Y a-t-il lieu de nous
      enquérir si nous percevons les choses telles qu’elles sont? Non
      évidemment.... Je ne dis pas que le problème est insoluble, _je dis
      qu’il est absurde et enferme une contradiction_. Nous _ne savons pas
      ce que ces causes sont en elles-mêmes_, et la raison nous défend de
      chercher à le connaître: mais il est bien évident _à priori_,
      qu’_elles ne sont pas en elles-mêmes ce qu’elles sont par rapport à
      nous_, puisque la présence du sujet modifie nécessairement leur
      action. Supprimez tout sujet sentant, il est certain que ces causes
      agiraient encore puisqu’elles continueraient d’exister; mais elles
      agiraient autrement; elles seraient encore des qualités et des
      propriétés, mais qui ne ressembleraient à rien de ce que nous
      connaissons. Le feu ne manifesterait plus aucune des propriétés que
      nous lui connaissons: que serait-il? C’est ce que nous ne saurons
      jamais. _C’est d’ailleurs peut-être un problème qui ne répugne pas
      seulement à la nature de notre esprit, mais à l’essence même des
      choses._ Quand même en effet on supprimerait par le pensée tous les
      sujets sentants, il faudrait encore admettre que nul corps ne
      manifesterait ses propriétés autrement qu’en relation avec un sujet
      quelconque, et dans ce cas _ses propriétés ne seraient encore que
      relatives_: en sorte qu’il me paraît fort raisonnable d’admettre que
      les propriétés déterminées des corps n’existent pas indépendamment
      d’un sujet quelconque, et que quand on demande si les propriétés de
      la matiere sont telles que nous les percevons, il faudrait voir
      auparavant si elles sont en tant que déterminées, et dans quel sens
      il est vrai de dire qu’elles sont.”—_Cours d’Histoire de la
      Philosophie Morale au 18me siècle_, 8me leçon.

   22 An attempt, indeed, has been made by Reid and others, to establish
      that although some of the properties we ascribe to objects exist
      only in our sensations, others exist in the things themselves, being
      such as can not possibly be copies of any impression upon the
      senses; and they ask, from what sensations our notions of extension
      and figure have been derived? The gauntlet thrown down by Reid was
      taken up by Brown, who, applying greater powers of analysis than had
      previously been applied to the notions of extension and figure,
      pointed out that the sensations from which those notions are
      derived, are sensations of touch, combined with sensations of a
      class previously too little adverted to by metaphysicians, those
      which have their seat in our muscular frame. His analysis, which was
      adopted and followed up by James Mill, has been further and greatly
      improved upon in Professor Bain’s profound work, _The Senses and the
      Intellect_, and in the chapters on “Perception” of a work of eminent
      analytic power, Mr. Herbert Spencer’s _Principles of Psychology_.

      On this point M. Cousin may again be cited in favor of the better
      doctrine. M. Cousin recognizes, in opposition to Reid, the essential
      subjectivity of our conceptions of what are called the primary
      qualities of matter, as extension, solidity, etc., equally with
      those of color, heat, and the remainder of the so-called secondary
      qualities.—_Cours_, ut supra, 9me leçon.

   23 This doctrine, which is the most complete form of the philosophical
      theory known as the Relativity of Human Knowledge, has, since the
      recent revival in this country of an active interest in metaphysical
      speculation, been the subject of a greatly increased amount of
      discussion and controversy; and dissentients have manifested
      themselves in considerably greater number than I had any knowledge
      of when the passage in the text was written. The doctrine has been
      attacked from two sides. Some thinkers, among whom are the late
      Professor Ferrier, in his _Institutes of Metaphysic_, and Professor
      John Grote, in his _Exploratio Philosophica_, appear to deny
      altogether the reality of Noumena, or Things in themselves—of an
      unknowable substratum or support for the sensations which we
      experience, and which, according to the theory, constitute all our
      knowledge of an external world. It seems to me, however, that in
      Professor Grote’s case at least, the denial of Noumena is only
      apparent, and that he does not essentially differ from the other
      class of objectors, including Mr. Bailey in his valuable _Letters on
      the Philosophy of the Human Mind_, and (in spite of the striking
      passage quoted in the text) also Sir William Hamilton, who contend
      for a direct knowledge by the human mind of more than the
      sensations—of certain attributes or properties as they exist not in
      us, but in the Things themselves.

      With the first of these opinions, that which denies Noumena, I have,
      as a metaphysician, no quarrel; but, whether it be true or false, it
      is irrelevant to Logic. And since all the forms of language are in
      contradiction to it, nothing but confusion could result from its
      unnecessary introduction into a treatise, every essential doctrine
      of which could stand equally well with the opposite and accredited
      opinion. The other and rival doctrine, that of a direct perception
      or intuitive knowledge of the outward object as it is in itself,
      considered as distinct from the sensations we receive from it, is of
      far greater practical moment. But even this question, depending on
      the nature and laws of Intuitive Knowledge, is not within the
      province of Logic. For the grounds of my own opinion concerning it,
      I must content myself with referring to a work already mentioned—_An
      Examination of Sir William Hamilton’s Philosophy_; several chapters
      of which are devoted to a full discussion of the questions and
      theories relating to the supposed direct perception of external
      objects.

   24 Professor Bain (_Logic_, i., 49) defines attributes as “points of
      community among classes.” This definition expresses well one point
      of view, but is liable to the objection that it applies only to the
      attributes of classes; though an object, unique in its kind, may be
      said to have attributes. Moreover, the definition is not ultimate,
      since the points of community themselves admit of, and require,
      further analysis; and Mr. Bain does analyze them into resemblances
      in the sensations, or other states of consciousness excited by the
      object.

_   25 Analysis of the Human Mind_, i., 126 et seq.

_   26 Logic_, i., 85.

   27 Instead of Universal and Particular as applied to propositions,
      Professor Bain proposes (_Logic_, i., 81) the terms Total and
      Partial; reserving the former pair of terms for their inductive
      meaning, “the contrast between a general proposition and the
      particulars or individuals that we derive it from.” This change in
      nomenclature would be attended with the further advantage, that
      Singular propositions, which in the Syllogism follow the same rules
      as Universal, would be included along with them in the same class,
      that of Total predications. It is not the Subject’s denoting many
      things or only one, that is of importance in reasoning, it is that
      the assertion is made of the whole or a part only of what the
      Subject denotes. The words Universal and Particular, however, are so
      familiar and so well understood in both the senses mentioned by Mr.
      Bain, that the double meaning does not produce any material
      inconvenience.

   28 It may, however, be considered as equivalent to a universal
      proposition with a different predicate, viz.: “All wine is good
      _quâ_ wine,” or “is good in respect of the qualities which
      constitute it wine.”

_   29 Logic_, i., 82.

   30 Dr. Whewell (_Philosophy of Discovery_, p. 242) questions this
      statement, and asks, “Are we to say that a mole can not dig the
      ground, except he has an idea of the ground, and of the snout and
      paws with which he digs it?” I do not know what passes in a mole’s
      mind, nor what amount of mental apprehension may or may not
      accompany his instinctive actions. But a human being does not use a
      spade by instinct; and he certainly could not use it unless he had
      knowledge of a spade, and of the earth which he uses it upon.

   31 Professor Bain remarks, in qualification of the statement in the
      text (_Logic_, i., 50), that the word Class has two meanings; “the
      class definite, and the class indefinite. The class definite is an
      enumeration of actual individuals, as the Peers of the Realm, the
      oceans of the globe, the known planets.... The class indefinite is
      unenumerated. Such classes are stars, planets, gold-bearing rocks,
      men, poets, virtuous.... In this last acceptation of the word, class
      name and general name are identical. The class name denotes an
      indefinite number of individuals, and connotes the points of
      community or likeness.”

      The theory controverted in the text, tacitly supposes all classes to
      be _definite_. I have assumed them to be indefinite; because, for
      the purposes of Logic, definite classes, as such, are almost
      useless; though often serviceable as means of abridged expression.
      (Vide infra, book iii., chap. ii.)

   32 “From hence also this may be deduced, that the first truths were
      arbitrarily made by those that first of all imposed names upon
      things, or received them from the imposition of others. For it is
      true (for example) that _man is a living creature_, but it is for
      this reason, that it pleased men to impose both these names on the
      same thing.”—_Computation or Logic_, chap. iii., sect. 8.

   33 “Men are subject to err not only in affirming and denying, but also
      in perception, and in silent cogitation.... Tacit errors, or the
      errors of sense and cogitation, are made by passing from one
      imagination to the imagination of another different thing; or by
      feigning that to be past, or future, which never was, nor ever shall
      be; as when by seeing the image of the sun in water, we imagine the
      sun itself to be there; or by seeing swords, that there has been, or
      shall be, fighting, because it used to be so for the most part; or
      when from promises we feign the mind of the promiser to be such and
      such; or, lastly, when from any sign we vainly imagine something to
      be signified which is not. And errors of this sort are common to all
      things that have sense.”—_Computation or Logic_, chap. v., sect. 1.

   34 Chap. iii., sect 3.

   35 To the preceding statement it has been objected, that “we naturally
      construe the subject of a proposition in its extension, and the
      predicate (which therefore may be an adjective) in its intension
      (connotation): and that consequently co-existence of attributes does
      not, any more than the opposite theory of equation of groups,
      correspond with the living processes of thought and language.” I
      acknowledge the distinction here drawn, which, indeed, I had myself
      laid down and exemplified a few pages back (p. 77). But though it is
      true that we naturally “construe the subject of a proposition in its
      extension,” this extension, or in other words, the extent of the
      class denoted by the name, is not apprehended or indicated directly.
      It is both apprehended and indicated solely through the attributes.
      In the “living processes of thought and language” the extension,
      though in this case really thought of (which in the case of the
      predicate it is not), is thought of only through the medium of what
      my acute and courteous critic terms the “intension.”

      For further illustrations of this subject, see _Examination of Sir
      William Hamilton’s Philosophy_, chap. xxii.

   36 Professor Bain, in his _Logic_ (i., 256), excludes Existence from
      the list, considering it as a mere name. All propositions, he says,
      which predicate mere existence “are more or less abbreviated, or
      elliptical: when fully expressed they fall under either co-existence
      or succession. When we say there _exists_ a conspiracy for a
      particular purpose, we mean that at the present time a body of men
      have formed themselves into a society for a particular object; which
      is a complex affirmation, resolvable into propositions of
      co-existence and succession (as causation). The assertion that the
      dodo does not exist, points to the fact that this animal, once known
      in a certain place, has disappeared or become extinct; is no longer
      associated with the locality: all which may be better stated without
      the use of the verb ‘exist.’ There is a debated question—Does an
      ether exist? but the concrete form would be this—‘Are heat and light
      and other radiant influences propagated by an ethereal medium
      diffused in space;’ which is a proposition of causation. In like
      manner the question of the Existence of a Deity can not be discussed
      in that form. It is properly a question as to the First _Cause_ of
      the Universe, and as to the continued exertion of that Cause in
      providential superintendence.” (i., 407.)

      Mr. Bain thinks it “fictitious and unmeaning language” to carry up
      the classification of Nature to one _summum genus_, Being, or that
      which Exists; since nothing can be perceived or apprehended but by
      way of contrast with something else (of which important truth, under
      the name of Law of Relativity, he has been in our time the principal
      expounder and champion), and we have no other class to oppose to
      Being, or fact to contrast with Existence.

      I accept fully Mr. Bain’s Law of Relativity, but I do not understand
      by it that to enable us to apprehend or be conscious of any fact, it
      is necessary that we should contrast it with some other positive
      fact. The antithesis necessary to consciousness need not, I
      conceive, be an antithesis between two positives; it may be between
      one positive and its negative. Hobbes was undoubtedly right when he
      said that a single sensation indefinitely prolonged would cease to
      be felt at all; but simple intermission, without other change, would
      restore it to consciousness. In order to be conscious of heat, it is
      not necessary that we should pass to it from cold; it suffices that
      we should pass to it from a state of no sensation, or from a
      sensation of some other kind. The relative opposite of Being,
      considered as a summum genus, is Nonentity, or Nothing; and we have,
      now and then, occasion to consider and discuss things merely in
      contrast with Nonentity.

      I grant that the _decision_ of questions of Existence usually if not
      always depends on a previous question of either Causation or
      Co-existence. But Existence is nevertheless a different thing from
      Causation or Co-existence, and can be predicated apart from them.
      The meaning of the abstract name Existence, and the connotation of
      the concrete name Being, consist, like the meaning of all other
      names, in sensations or states of consciousness: their peculiarity
      is that to exist, is to excite, or be capable of exciting, _any_
      sensations or states of consciousness: no matter what, but it is
      indispensable that there should be some. It was from overlooking
      this that Hegel, finding that Being is an abstraction reached by
      thinking away all particular attributes, arrived at the
      self-contradictory proposition on which he founded all his
      philosophy, that Being is the same as Nothing. It is really the name
      of Something, taken in the most comprehensive sense of the word.

   37 Book iv., chap. vii.

_   38 Logic_, i., 103-105.

   39 The doctrines which prevented the real meaning of Essences from
      being understood, had not assumed so settled a shape in the time of
      Aristotle and his immediate followers, as was afterward given to
      them by the Realists of the Middle Ages. Aristotle himself (in his
      Treatise on the Categories) expressly denies that the δεύτεραι
      οὔσιαι, or Substantiæ Secundæ, inhere in a subject. They are only,
      he says, predicated of it.

   40 The always acute and often profound author of _An Outline of
      Sematology_ (Mr. B. H. Smart) justly says, “Locke will be much more
      intelligible, if, in the majority of places, we substitute ‘the
      knowledge of’ for what he calls ‘the Idea of’ ” (p. 10). Among the
      many criticisms on Locke’s use of the word Idea, this is the one
      which, as it appears to me, most nearly hits the mark; and I quote
      it for the additional reason that it precisely expresses the point
      of difference respecting the import of Propositions, between my view
      and what I have spoken of as the Conceptualist view of them. Where a
      Conceptualist says that a name or a proposition expresses our Idea
      of a thing, I should generally say (instead of our Idea) our
      Knowledge, or Belief, concerning the thing itself.

   41 This distinction corresponds to that which is drawn by Kant and
      other metaphysicians between what they term _analytic_ and
      _synthetic_, judgments; the former being those which can be evolved
      from the meaning of the terms used.

   42 If we allow a differentia to what is not really a species. For the
      distinction of Kinds, in the sense explained by us, not being in any
      way applicable to attributes, it of course follows that although
      attributes may be put into classes, those classes can be admitted to
      be genera or species only by courtesy.

   43 Professor Bain, in his Logic, takes a peculiar view of Definition.
      He holds (i., 71) with the present work, that “the definition in its
      full import, is the sum of all the properties connoted by the name;
      it exhausts the meaning of a word.” But he regards the meaning of a
      general name as including, not indeed all the common properties of
      the class named, but all of them that are ultimate properties, not
      resolvable into one another. “The enumeration of the attributes of
      oxygen, of gold, of man, should be an enumeration of the final (so
      far as can be made out), the underivable, powers or functions of
      each,” and nothing less than this is a complete Definition (i., 75).
      An independent property, not derivable from other properties, even
      if previously unknown, yet as soon as discovered becomes, according
      to him, part of the meaning of the term, and should be included in
      the definition. “When we are told that diamond, which we know to be
      a transparent, glittering, hard, and high-priced substance, is
      composed of carbon, and is combustible, we must put these additional
      properties on the same level as the rest; to us they are henceforth
      connoted by the name” (i., 73). Consequently the propositions that
      diamond is composed of carbon, and that it is combustible, are
      regarded by Mr. Bain as merely verbal propositions. He carries this
      doctrine so far as to say that unless mortality can be shown to be a
      consequence of the ultimate laws of animal organization, mortality
      is connoted by man, and “Man is Mortal” is a merely verbal
      proposition. And one of the peculiarities (I think a disadvantageous
      peculiarity) of his able and valuable treatise, is the large number
      of propositions requiring proof, and learned by experience, which,
      in conformity with this doctrine, he considers as not real, but
      verbal, propositions.

      The objection I have to this language is that it confounds, or at
      least confuses, a much more important distinction than that which it
      draws. The only reason for dividing Propositions into real and
      verbal, is in order to discriminate propositions which convey
      information about facts, from those which do not. A proposition
      which affirms that an object has a given attribute, while
      designating the object by a name which already signifies the
      attribute, adds no information to that which was already possessed
      by all who understood the name. But when this is said, it is implied
      that, by the signification of a name, is meant the signification
      attached to it in the common usage of life. I can not think we ought
      to say that the meaning of a word includes matters of fact which are
      unknown to every person who uses the word unless he has learned them
      by special study of a particular department of Nature; or that
      because a few persons are aware of these matters of fact, the
      affirmation of them is a proposition conveying no information. I
      hold that (special scientific connotation apart) a name means, or
      connotes, only the properties which it is a mark of in the general
      mind; and that in the case of any additional properties, however
      uniformly found to accompany these, it remains possible that a thing
      which did not possess the properties might still be thought entitled
      to the name. Ruminant, according to Mr. Bain’s use of language,
      connotes cloven-hoofed, since the two properties are always found
      together, and no connection has ever been discovered between them:
      but ruminant does not mean cloven-hoofed; and were an animal to be
      discovered which chews the cud, but has its feet undivided, I
      venture to say that it would still be called ruminant.

   44 In the fuller discussion which Archbishop Whately has given to this
      subject in his later editions, he almost ceases to regard the
      definitions of names and those of things as, in any important sense,
      distinct. He seems (9th ed., p. 145) to limit the notion of a Real
      Definition to one which “explains any thing _more_ of the nature of
      the thing than is implied in the name;” (including under the word
      “implied,” not only what the name connotes, but every thing which
      can be deduced by reasoning from the attributes connoted). Even
      this, as he adds, is usually called not a Definition, but a
      Description; and (as it seems to me) rightly so called. A
      Description, I conceive, can only be ranked among Definitions, when
      taken (as in the case of the zoological definition of man) to
      fulfill the true office of a Definition, by declaring the
      connotation given to a word in some special use, as a term of
      science or art: which special connotation of course would not be
      expressed by the proper definition of the word in its ordinary
      employment.

      Mr. De Morgan, exactly reversing the doctrine of Archbishop Whately,
      understands by a Real Definition one which contains _less_ than the
      Nominal Definition, provided only that what it contains is
      sufficient for distinction. “By _real_ definition I mean such an
      explanation of the word, be it the whole of the meaning or only
      part, as will be sufficient to separate the things contained under
      that word from all others. Thus the following, I believe, is a
      complete definition of an elephant: An animal which naturally drinks
      by drawing the water into its nose, and then spurting it into its
      mouth.”—_Formal Logic_, p. 36. Mr. De Morgan’s general proposition
      and his example are at variance; for the peculiar mode of drinking
      of the elephant certainly forms no part of the meaning of the word
      elephant. It could not be said, because a person happened to be
      ignorant of this property, that he did not know what an elephant
      means.

   45 In the only attempt which, so far as I know, has been made to refute
      the preceding argumentation, it is maintained that in the first form
      of the syllogism,

      A dragon is a thing which breathes flame,
      A dragon is a serpent,
      Therefore some serpent or serpents breathe flame,

      “there is just as much truth in the conclusion as there is in the
      premises, or rather, no more in the latter than in the former. If
      the general name serpent includes both real and imaginary serpents,
      there is no falsity in the conclusion; if not, there is falsity in
      the minor premise.”

      Let us, then, try to set out the syllogism on the hypothesis that
      the name serpent includes imaginary serpents. We shall find that it
      is now necessary to alter the predicates; for it can not be asserted
      that an imaginary creature breathes flame; in predicating of it such
      a fact, we assert by the most positive implication that it is real,
      and not imaginary. The conclusion must run thus, “Some serpent or
      serpents either do or are _imagined_ to breathe flame.” And to prove
      this conclusion by the instance of dragons, the premises must be, A
      dragon is _imagined_ as breathing flame. A dragon is a (real or
      imaginary) serpent: from which it undoubtedly follows, that there
      are serpents which are imagined to breathe flame; but the major
      premise is not a definition, nor part of a definition; which is all
      that I am concerned to prove.

      Let us now examine the other assertion—that if the word serpent
      stands for none but real serpents, the minor premise (a dragon is a
      serpent) is false. This is exactly what I have myself said of the
      premise, considered as a statement of fact: but it is not false as
      part of the definition of a dragon; and since the premises, or one
      of them, must be false (the conclusion being so), the real premise
      can not be the definition, which is true, but the statement of fact,
      which is false.

   46 “Few people” (I have said in another place) “have reflected how
      great a knowledge of Things is required to enable a man to affirm
      that any given argument turns wholly upon words. There is, perhaps,
      not one of the leading terms of philosophy which is not used in
      almost innumerable shades of meaning, to express ideas more or less
      widely different from one another. Between two of these ideas a
      sagacious and penetrating mind will discern, as it were intuitively,
      an unobvious link of connection, upon which, though perhaps unable
      to give a logical account of it, he will found a perfectly valid
      argument, which his critic, not having so keen an insight into the
      Things, will mistake for a fallacy turning on the double meaning of
      a term. And the greater the genius of him who thus safely leaps over
      the chasm, the greater will probably be the crowing and vainglory of
      the mere logician, who, hobbling after him, evinces his own superior
      wisdom by pausing on its brink, and giving up as desperate his
      proper business of bridging it over.”

   47 The different cases of Equipollency, or “Equivalent Propositional
      Forms,” are set forth with some fullness in Professor Bain’s
      _Logic_. One of the commonest of these changes of expression, that
      from affirming a proposition to denying its negative, or _vicè
      versa_, Mr. Bain designates, very happily, by the name Obversion.

   48 As Sir William Hamilton has pointed out, “Some A is not B” may also
      be converted in the following form: “No B is _some_ A.” Some men are
      not negroes; therefore, No negroes are _some_ men (_e.g._,
      Europeans).

   49 Contraries:
      All  A is B
      No   A is B

      Subtraries:
      Some A is B
      Some A is not B

      Contradictories:
      All  A is B
      Some A is not B

      Also contradictories:
      No A is B
      Some A is B

      Respectively subalternate:
      All  A is B and No A is B
      Some A is B and Some A is not B

   50 Professor Bain denies the claim of Singular Propositions to be
      classed, for the purposes of ratiocination, with Universal; though
      they come within the designation which he himself proposes as an
      equivalent for Universal, that of Total. He would even, to use his
      own expression, banish them entirely from the syllogism. He takes as
      an example,

      Socrates is wise,
      Socrates is poor, therefore
      Some poor men are wise,

      or more properly (as he observes) “one poor man is wise.” “Now, if
      wise, poor, and a man, are attributes belonging to the meaning of
      the word Socrates, there is then no march of reasoning at all. We
      have given in Socrates, _inter alia_, the facts wise, poor, and a
      man, and we merely repeat the concurrence which is selected from the
      whole aggregate of properties making up the whole, Socrates. The
      case is one under the head ‘Greater and Less Connotation’ in
      Equivalent Propositional Forms, or Immediate Inference.

      “But the example in this form does not do justice to the syllogism
      of singulars. We must suppose both propositions to be real, the
      predicates being in no way involved in the subject. Thus

      Socrates was the master of Plato,
      Socrates fought at Delium,
      The master of Plato fought at Delium.

      “It may fairly be doubted whether the transitions, in this instance,
      are any thing more than equivalent forms. For the proposition
      ‘Socrates was the master of Plato and fought at Delium,’ compounded
      out of the two premises, is obviously nothing more than a
      grammatical abbreviation. No one can say that there is here any
      change of meaning, or any thing beyond a verbal modification of the
      original form. The next step is, ‘The master of Plato fought at
      Delium,’ which is the previous statement cut down by the omission of
      Socrates. It contents itself with reproducing a part of the meaning,
      or saying less than had been previously said. The full equivalent of
      the affirmation is, ‘The master of Plato fought at Delium, and the
      master of Plato was Socrates:’ the new form omits the last piece of
      information, and gives only the first. Now, we never consider that
      we have made a real inference, a step in advance, when we repeat
      _less_ than we are entitled to say, or drop from a complex statement
      some portion not desired at the moment. Such an operation keeps
      strictly within the domain of equivalence, or Immediate Inference.
      In no way, therefore, can a syllogism with two singular premises be
      viewed as a genuine syllogistic or deductive inference.” (_Logic_,
      i., 159.)

      The first argument, as will have been seen, rests upon the
      supposition that the name Socrates has a meaning; that man, wise,
      and poor, are parts of this meaning; and that by predicating them of
      Socrates we convey no information; a view of the signification of
      names which, for reasons already given (Note to § 4 of the chapter
      on Definition, _supra_, pp. 110, 111.), I can not admit, and which,
      as applied to the class of names which Socrates belongs to, is at
      war with Mr. Bain’s own definition of a Proper Name (i., 148), “a
      single _meaningless_ mark or designation appropriated to the thing.”
      Such names, Mr. Bain proceeded to say, do not necessarily indicate
      even human beings: much less then does the name Socrates include the
      meaning of wise or poor. Otherwise it would follow that if Socrates
      had grown rich, or had lost his mental faculties by illness, he
      would no longer have been called Socrates.

      The second part of Mr. Bain’s argument, in which he contends that
      even when the premises convey real information, the conclusion is
      merely the premises with a part left out, is applicable, if at all,
      as much to universal propositions as to singular. In every syllogism
      the conclusion contains less than is asserted in the two premises
      taken together. Suppose the syllogism to be

      All bees are intelligent,
      All bees are insects, therefore
      Some insects are intelligent:

      one might use the same liberty taken by Mr. Bain, of joining
      together the two premises as if they were one—“All bees are insects
      and intelligent”—and might say that in omitting the middle term
      _bees_ we make no real inference, but merely reproduce part of what
      had been previously said. Mr. Bain’s is really an objection to the
      syllogism itself, or at all events to the third figure: it has no
      special applicability to singular propositions.

   51 His conclusions are, “The first figure is suited to the discovery or
      proof of the properties of a thing; the second to the discovery or
      proof of the distinctions between things; the third to the discovery
      or proof of instances and exceptions; the fourth to the discovery,
      or exclusion, of the different species of a genus.” The reference of
      syllogisms in the last three figures to the _dictum de omni et
      nullo_ is, in Lambert’s opinion, strained and unnatural: to each of
      the three belongs, according to him, a separate axiom, co-ordinate
      and of equal authority with that _dictum_, and to which he gives the
      names of _dictum de diverso_ for the second figure, _dictum de
      exemplo_ for the third, and _dictum de reciproco_ for the fourth.
      See part i., or _Dianoiologie_, chap, iv., § 229 _et seqq._ Mr.
      Bailey (_Theory of Reasoning_, 2d ed., pp. 70-74) takes a similar
      view of the subject.

   52 Since this chapter was written, two treatises have appeared (or
      rather a treatise and a fragment of a treatise), which aim at a
      further improvement in the theory of the forms of ratiocination: Mr.
      De Morgan’s “Formal Logic; or, the Calculus of Inference, Necessary
      and Probable;” and the “New Analytic of Logical Forms,” attached as
      an Appendix to Sir William Hamilton’s _Discussions on Philosophy_,
      and at greater length, to his posthumous _Lectures on Logic_.

      In Mr. De Morgan’s volume—abounding, in its more popular parts, with
      valuable observations felicitously expressed—the principal feature
      of originality is an attempt to bring within strict technical rules
      the cases in which a conclusion can be drawn from premises of a form
      usually classed as particular. Mr. De Morgan observes, very justly,
      that from the premises most Bs are Cs, most Bs are As, it may be
      concluded with certainty that some As are Cs, since two portions of
      the class B, each of them comprising more than half, must
      necessarily in part consist of the same individuals. Following out
      this line of thought, it is equally evident that if we knew exactly
      what proportion the “most” in each of the premises bear to the
      entire class B, we could increase in a corresponding degree the
      definiteness of the conclusion. Thus if 60 per cent. of B are
      included in C, and 70 per cent. in A, 30 per cent. at least must be
      common to both; in other words, the number of As which are Cs, and
      of Cs which are As, must be at least equal to 30 per cent. of the
      class B. Proceeding on this conception of “numerically definite
      propositions,” and extending it to such forms as these:—“45 Xs (or
      more) are each of them one of 70 Ys,” or “45 Xs (or more) are no one
      of them to be found among 70 Ys,” and examining what inferences
      admit of being drawn from the various combinations which may be made
      of premises of this description, Mr. De Morgan establishes universal
      formulæ for such inferences; creating for that purpose not only a
      new technical language, but a formidable array of symbols analogous
      to those of algebra.

      Since it is undeniable that inferences, in the cases examined by Mr.
      De Morgan, can legitimately be drawn, and that the ordinary theory
      takes no account of them, I will not say that it was not worth while
      to show in detail how these also could be reduced to formulæ as
      rigorous as those of Aristotle. What Mr. De Morgan has done was
      worth doing once (perhaps more than once, as a school exercise); but
      I question if its results are worth studying and mastering for any
      practical purpose. The practical use of technical forms of reasoning
      is to bar out fallacies: but the fallacies which require to be
      guarded against in ratiocination properly so called, arise from the
      incautious use of the common forms of language; and the logician
      must track the fallacy into that territory, instead of waiting for
      it on a territory of his own. While he remains among propositions
      which have acquired the numerical precision of the Calculus of
      Probabilities, the enemy is left in possession of the only ground on
      which he can be formidable. And since the propositions (short of
      universal) on which a thinker has to depend, either for purposes of
      speculation or of practice, do not, except in a few peculiar cases,
      admit of any numerical precision; common reasoning can not be
      translated into Mr. De Morgan’s forms, which therefore can not serve
      any purpose as a test of it.

      Sir William Hamilton’s theory of the “quantification of the
      predicate” may be described as follows:

      “Logically” (I quote his words) “we ought to take into account the
      quantity, always understood in thought, but usually, for manifest
      reasons, elided in its expression, not only of the subject, but also
      of the predicate of a judgment.” All A is B, is equivalent to all A
      is _some_ B. No A is B, to No A is _any_ B. Some A is B, is
      tantamount to some A is _some_ B. Some A is not B, to Some A is _not
      any_ B. As in these forms of assertion the predicate is exactly
      co-extensive with the subject, they all admit of simple conversion;
      and by this we obtain two additional forms—Some B is _all_ A, and No
      B is _some_ A. We may also make the assertion All A is all B, which
      will be true if the classes A and B are exactly co-extensive. The
      last three forms, though conveying real assertions, have no place in
      the ordinary classification of Propositions. All propositions, then,
      being supposed to be translated into this language, and written each
      in that one of the preceding forms which answers to its
      signification, there emerges a new set of syllogistic rules,
      materially different from the common ones. A general view of the
      points of difference may be given in the words of Sir W. Hamilton
      (_Discussions_, 2d ed., p. 651):

      “The revocation of the two terms of a Proposition to their true
      relation; a proposition being always an _equation_ of its subject
      and its predicate.

      “The consequent reduction of the Conversion of Propositions from
      three species to one—that of Simple Conversion.

      “The reduction of all the _General Laws_ of Categorical Syllogisms
      to a single Canon.

      “The evolution from that one canon of all the Species and varieties
      of Syllogisms.

      “The abrogation of all the _Special Laws_ of Syllogism.

      “A demonstration of the exclusive possibility of Three Syllogistic
      Figures; and (on new grounds) the scientific and final abolition of
      the Fourth.

      “A manifestation that Figure is an unessential variation in
      syllogistic form; and the consequent absurdity of Reducing the
      syllogisms of the other figures to the first.

      “An enouncement of _one Organic Principle_ for each Figure.

      “A determination of the true number of the Legitimate Moods; with

      “Their amplification in number (thirty-six);

      “Their numerical equality under all the figures; and

      “Their relative equivalence, or virtual identity, throughout every
      schematic difference.

      “That, in the second and third figures, the extremes holding both
      the same relation to the middle term, there is not, as in the first,
      an opposition and subordination between a term major and a term
      minor, mutually containing and contained, in the counter wholes of
      Extension and Comprehension.

      “Consequently, in the second and third figures, there is no
      determinate major and minor premises, and there are two indifferent
      conclusions: whereas in the first the premises are determinate, and
      there is a single proximate conclusion.”

      This doctrine, like that of Mr. De Morgan previously noticed, is a
      real addition to the syllogistic theory; and has moreover this
      advantage over Mr. De Morgan’s “numerically definite Syllogism,”
      that the forms it supplies are really available as a test of the
      correctness of ratiocination; since propositions in the common form
      may always have their predicates quantified, and so be made amenable
      to Sir W. Hamilton’s rules. Considered, however, as a contribution
      to the _Science_ of Logic, that is, to the analysis of the mental
      processes concerned in reasoning, the new doctrine appears to me, I
      confess, not merely superfluous, but erroneous; since the form in
      which it clothes propositions does not, like the ordinary form,
      express what is in the mind of the speaker when he enunciates the
      proposition. I can not think Sir William Hamilton right in
      maintaining that the quantity of the predicate is “always understood
      in thought.” It is implied, but is not present to the mind of the
      person who asserts the proposition. The quantification of the
      predicate, instead of being a means of bringing out more clearly the
      meaning of the proposition, actually leads the mind out of the
      proposition, into another order of ideas. For when we say, All men
      are mortal, we simply mean to affirm the attribute mortality of all
      men; without thinking at all of the _class_ mortal in the concrete,
      or troubling ourselves about whether it contains any other beings or
      not. It is only for some artificial purpose that we ever look at the
      proposition in the aspect in which the predicate also is thought of
      as a class-name, either including the subject only, or the subject
      and something more. (See above, p. 77, 78.)

      For a fuller discussion of this subject, see the twenty-second
      chapter of a work already referred to, “An Examination of Sir
      William Hamilton’s Philosophy.”

   53 Mr. Herbert Spencer (_Principles of Psychology_, pp. 125-7), though
      his theory of the syllogism coincides with all that is essential of
      mine, thinks it a logical fallacy to present the two axioms in the
      text, as the regulating principles of syllogism. He charges me with
      falling into the error pointed out by Archbishop Whately and myself,
      of confounding exact likeness with literal identity; and maintains,
      that we ought not to say that Socrates possesses _the same_
      attributes which are connoted by the word Man, but only that he
      possesses attributes _exactly like_ them: according to which
      phraseology, Socrates, and the attribute mortality, are not two
      things co-existing with the same thing, as the axiom asserts, but
      two things coexisting with two different things.

      The question between Mr. Spencer and me is merely one of language;
      for neither of us (if I understand Mr. Spencer’s opinions rightly)
      believes an attribute to be a real thing, possessed of objective
      existence; we believe it to be a particular mode of naming our
      sensations, or our expectations of sensation, when looked at in
      their relation to an external object which excites them. The
      question raised by Mr. Spencer does not, therefore, concern the
      properties of any really existing thing, but the comparative
      appropriateness, for philosophical purposes, of two different modes
      of using a name. Considered in this point of view, the phraseology I
      have employed, which is that commonly used by philosophers, seems to
      me to be the best. Mr. Spencer is of opinion that because Socrates
      and Alcibiades are not the same man, the attribute which constitutes
      them men should not be called the same attribute; that because the
      humanity of one man and that of another express themselves to our
      senses not by the same individual sensations but by sensations
      exactly alike, humanity ought to be regarded as a different
      attribute in every different man. But on this showing, the humanity
      even of any one man should be considered as different attributes now
      and half an hour hence; for the sensations by which it will then
      manifest itself to my organs will not be a continuation of my
      present sensations, but a repetition of them; fresh sensations, not
      identical with, but only exactly like the present. If every general
      conception, instead of being “the One in the Many,” were considered
      to be as many different conceptions as there are things to which it
      is applicable, there would be no such thing as general language. A
      name would have no general meaning if _man_ connoted one thing when
      predicated of John, and another, though closely resembling, thing
      when predicated of William. Accordingly a recent pamphlet asserts
      the impossibility of general knowledge on this precise ground.

      The meaning of any general name is some outward or inward
      phenomenon, consisting, in the last resort, of feelings; and these
      feelings, if their continuity is for an instant broken, are no
      longer the same feelings, in the sense of individual identity. What,
      then, is the common something which gives a meaning to the general
      name? Mr. Spencer can only say, it is the similarity of the
      feelings; and I rejoin, the attribute is precisely that similarity.
      The names of attributes are in their ultimate analysis names for the
      resemblances of our sensations (or other feelings). Every general
      name, whether abstract or concrete, denotes or connotes one or more
      of those resemblances. It will not, probably, be denied, that if a
      hundred sensations are undistinguishably alike, their resemblance
      ought to be spoken of as one resemblance, and not a hundred
      resemblances which merely _resemble_ one another. The things
      compared are many, but the something common to all of them must be
      conceived as one, just as the name is conceived as one, though
      corresponding to numerically different sensations of sound each time
      it is pronounced. The general term _man_ does not connote the
      sensations derived once from one man, which, once gone, can no more
      occur again than the same flash of lightning. It connotes the
      general type of the sensations derived always from all men, and the
      power (always thought of as one) of producing sensations of that
      type. And the axiom might be thus worded: Two _types of sensation_
      each of which co-exists with a third type, co-exist with another; or
      Two _powers_ each of which co-exists with a third power co-exist
      with one another.

      Mr. Spencer has misunderstood me in another particular. He supposes
      that the co-existence spoken of in the axiom, of two things with the
      same third thing, means simultaneousness in time. The co-existence
      meant is that of being jointly attributes of the same subject. The
      attribute of being born without teeth, and the attribute of having
      thirty-two teeth in mature age, are in this sense co-existent, both
      being attributes of man, though _ex vi termini_ never of the same
      man at the same time.

   54 Supra, p. 93.

   55 Professor Bain (_Logic_, i., 157) considers the axiom (or rather
      axioms) here proposed as a substitute for the _dictum de omni_, to
      possess certain advantages, but to be “unworkable as a basis of the
      syllogism. The fatal defect consists in this, that it is ill-adapted
      to bring out the difference between total and partial coincidence of
      terms, the observation of which is the essential precaution in
      syllogizing correctly. If all the terms were co-extensive, the axiom
      would flow on admirably; A carries B, all B and none but B; B
      carries C in the same manner; at once A carries C, without
      limitation or reserve. But in point of fact, we know that while A
      carries B, other things carry B also; whence a process of limitation
      is required, in transferring A to C through B. A (in common with
      other things) carries B; B (in common with other things) carries C;
      whence A (in common with other things) carries C. The axiom provides
      no means of making this limitation; if we were to follow A
      literally, we should be led to suppose A and C co-extensive: for
      such is the only obvious meaning of ‘the attribute A coincides with
      the attribute C.’ ”

      It is certainly possible that a careless learner here and there may
      suppose that if A carries B, it follows that B carries A. But if any
      one is so incautious as to commit this mistake, the very earliest
      lesson in the logic of inference, the Conversion of propositions,
      will correct it. The first of the two forms in which I have stated
      the axiom, is in some degree open to Mr. Bain’s criticism: when B is
      said to co-exist with A (it must be by a _lapsus calami_ that Mr.
      Bain uses the word _coincide_), it is possible, in the absence of
      warning, to suppose the meaning to be that the two things are only
      found together. But this misinterpretation is excluded by the other,
      or practical, form of the maxim; _Nota notœ est nota rei ipsius._ No
      one would be in any danger of inferring that because _a_ is a mark
      of _b, b_ can never exist without _a_; that because being in a
      confirmed consumption is a mark of being about to die, no one dies
      who is not in a consumption; that because being coal is a mark of
      having come out of the earth, nothing can come out of the earth
      except coal. Ordinary knowledge of English seems a sufficient
      protection against these mistakes, since in speaking of a mark of
      any thing we are never understood as implying reciprocity.

      A more fundamental objection is stated by Mr. Bain in a subsequent
      passage (p. 158). “The axiom does not accommodate itself to the type
      of Deductive Reasoning as contrasted with Induction—the application
      of a general principle to a special case. Any thing that fails to
      make prominent this circumstance is not adapted as a foundation for
      the syllogism.” But though it may be proper to limit the term
      Deduction to the application of a general principle to a special
      case, it has never been held that Ratiocination or Syllogism is
      subject to the same limitation; and the adoption of it would exclude
      a great amount of valid and conclusive syllogistic reasoning.
      Moreover, if the _dictum de omni_ makes prominent the fact of the
      application of a general principle to a particular case, the axiom I
      propose makes prominent the condition which alone makes that
      application a real inference.

      I conclude, therefore, that both forms have their value, and their
      place in Logic. The _dictum de omni_ should be retained as the
      fundamental axiom of the logic of mere consistency, often called
      Formal Logic; nor have I ever quarreled with the use of it in that
      character, nor proposed to banish it from treatises on Formal Logic.
      But the other is the proper axiom for the logic of the pursuit of
      truth by way of Deduction; and the recognition of it can alone show
      how it is possible that deductive reasoning can be a road to truth.

_   56 Logic_, p. 239 (9th ed.).

   57 It is hardly necessary to say, that I am not contending for any such
      absurdity as that we _actually_ “ought to have known” and considered
      the case of every individual man, past, present, and future, before
      affirming that all men are mortal: although this interpretation has
      been, strangely enough, put upon the preceding observations. There
      is no difference between me and Archbishop Whately, or any other
      defender of the syllogism, on the practical part of the matter; I am
      only pointing out an inconsistency in the logical theory of it, as
      conceived by almost all writers. I do not say that a person who
      affirmed, before the Duke of Wellington was born, that all men are
      mortal, _knew_ that the Duke of Wellington was mortal; but I do say
      that he _asserted_ it; and I ask for an explanation of the apparent
      logical fallacy, of adducing in proof of the Duke of Wellington’s
      mortality, a general statement which presupposes it. Finding no
      sufficient resolution of this difficulty in any of the writers on
      Logic, I have attempted to supply one.

   58 The language of ratiocination would, I think, be brought into closer
      agreement with the real nature of the process, if the general
      propositions employed in reasoning, instead of being in the form All
      men are mortal, or Every man is mortal, were expressed in the form
      Any man is mortal. This mode of expression, exhibiting as the type
      of all reasoning from experience “The men A, B, C, etc., are so and
      so, therefore _any_ man is so and so,” would much better manifest
      the true idea—that inductive reasoning is always, at bottom,
      inference from particulars to particulars, and that the whole
      function of general propositions in reasoning, is to vouch for the
      legitimacy of such inferences.

   59 Review of Quetelet on Probabilities, _Essays_, p. 367.

_   60 Philosophy of Discovery_, p. 289.

_   61 Theory of Reasoning_, chap. iv., to which I may refer for an able
      statement and enforcement of the grounds of the doctrine.

   62 On a recent careful reperusal of Berkeley’s whole works, I have been
      unable to find this doctrine in them. Sir John Herschel probably
      meant that it is implied in Berkeley’s argument against abstract
      ideas. But I can not find that Berkeley saw the implication, or had
      ever asked himself what bearing his argument had on the theory of
      the syllogism. Still less can I admit that the doctrine is (as has
      been affirmed by one of my ablest and most candid critics) “among
      the standing marks of what is called the empirical philosophy.”

_   63 Logic_, book iv., chap. i., sect. 1.

   64 See the important chapter on Belief, in Professor Bain’s great
      treatise, _The Emotions and the Will_, pp. 581-4.

   65 A writer in the “British Quarterly Review” (August, 1846), in a
      review of this treatise, endeavors to show that there is no _petitio
      principii_ in the syllogism, by denying that the proposition, All
      men are mortal, asserts or assumes that Socrates is mortal. In
      support of this denial, he argues that we may, and in fact do, admit
      the general proposition that all men are mortal, without having
      particularly examined the case of Socrates, and even without knowing
      whether the individual so named is a man or something else. But this
      of course was never denied. That we can and do draw conclusions
      concerning cases specifically unknown to us, is the datum from which
      all who discuss this subject must set out. The question is, in what
      terms the evidence, or ground, on which we draw these conclusions,
      may best be designated—whether it is most correct to say, that the
      unknown case is proved by known cases, or that it is proved by a
      general proposition including both sets of cases, the unknown and
      the known? I contend for the former mode of expression. I hold it an
      abuse of language to say, that the proof that Socrates is mortal, is
      that all men are mortal. Turn it in what way we will, this seems to
      me to be asserting that a thing is the proof of itself. Whoever
      pronounces the words, All men are mortal, has affirmed that Socrates
      is mortal, though he may never have heard of Socrates; for since
      Socrates, whether known to be so or not, really is a man, he is
      included in the words, All men, and in every assertion of which they
      are the subject. If the reviewer does not see that there is a
      difficulty here, I can only advise him to reconsider the subject
      until he does: after which he will be a better judge of the success
      or failure of an attempt to remove the difficulty. That he had
      reflected very little on the point when he wrote his remarks, is
      shown by his oversight respecting the _dictum de omni et nullo_. He
      acknowledges that this maxim as commonly expressed—“Whatever is true
      of a class, is true of every thing included in the class,” is a mere
      identical proposition, since the class _is_ nothing but the things
      included in it. But he thinks this defect would be cured by wording
      the maxim thus—“Whatever is true of a class, is true of every thing
      which _can be shown_ to be a member of the class:” as if a thing
      could “be shown” to be a member of the class without being one. If a
      class means the sum of all the things included in the class, the
      things which can “be shown” to be included in it are part of the
      sum, and the _dictum_ is as much an identical proposition with
      respect to them as to the rest. One would almost imagine that, in
      the reviewer’s opinion, things are not members of a class until they
      are called up publicly to take their place in it—that so long, in
      fact, as Socrates is not known to be a man, he _is not_ a man, and
      any assertion which can be made concerning men does not at all
      regard him, nor is affected as to its truth or falsity by any thing
      in which he is concerned.

      The difference between the reviewer’s theory and mine may be thus
      stated. Both admit that when we say, All men are mortal, we make an
      assertion reaching beyond the sphere of our knowledge of individual
      cases; and that when a new individual, Socrates, is brought within
      the field of our knowledge by means of the minor premise, we learn
      that we have already made an assertion respecting Socrates without
      knowing it: our own general formula being, to that extent, for the
      first time _interpreted_ to us. But according to the reviewer’s
      theory, the smaller assertion is proved by the larger: while I
      contend, that both assertions are proved together, by the same
      evidence, namely, the grounds of experience on which the general
      assertion was made, and by which it must be justified.

      The reviewer says, that if the major premise included the
      conclusion, “we should be able to affirm the conclusion without the
      intervention of the minor premise; but every one sees that that is
      impossible.” A similar argument is urged by Mr. De Morgan (_Formal
      Logic_, p. 259): “The whole objection tacitly assumes the
      superfluity of the minor; that is, tacitly assumes we know Socrates
      (Mr. De Morgan says ‘Plato,’ but to prevent confusion I have kept to
      my own _exemplum_.) to be a man as soon as we know him to be
      Socrates.” The objection would be well grounded if the assertion
      that the major premise includes the conclusion, meant that it
      individually specifies all it includes. As, however, the only
      indication it gives is a description by marks, we have still to
      compare any new individual with the marks; and to show that this
      comparison has been made, is the office of the minor. But since, by
      supposition, the new individual has the marks, whether we have
      ascertained him to have them or not; if we have affirmed the major
      premise, we have asserted him to be mortal. Now my position is that
      this assertion can not be a necessary part of the argument. It can
      not be a necessary condition of reasoning that we should begin by
      making an assertion, which is afterward to be employed in proving a
      part of itself. I can conceive only one way out of this difficulty,
      viz., that what really forms the proof is _the other_ part of the
      assertion: the portion of it, the truth of which has been
      ascertained previously: and that the unproved part is bound up in
      one formula with the proved part in mere anticipation, and as a
      memorandum of the nature of the conclusions which we are prepared to
      prove.

      With respect to the minor premise in its formal shape, the minor as
      it stands in the syllogism, predicating of Socrates a definite class
      name, I readily admit that it is no more a necessary part of
      reasoning than the major. When there is a major, doing its work by
      means of a class name, minors are needed to interpret it: but
      reasoning can be carried on without either the one or the other.
      They are not the conditions of reasoning, but a precaution against
      erroneous reasoning. The only minor premise necessary to reasoning
      in the example under consideration, is, Socrates is _like_ A, B, C,
      and the other individuals who are known to have died. And this is
      the only universal type of that step in the reasoning process which
      is represented by the minor. Experience, however, of the uncertainty
      of this loose mode of inference, teaches the expediency of
      determining beforehand what _kind_ of likeness to the cases
      observed, is necessary to bring an unobserved case within the same
      predicate; and the answer to this question is the major. The minor
      then identifies the precise kind of likeness possessed by Socrates,
      as being the kind required by the formula. Thus the syllogistic
      major and the syllogistic minor start into existence together, and
      are called forth by the same exigency. When we conclude from
      personal experience without referring to any record—to any general
      theorems, either written, or traditional, or mentally registered by
      ourselves as conclusions of our own drawing—we do not use, in our
      thoughts, either a major or a minor, such as the syllogism puts into
      words. When, however, we revise this rough inference from
      particulars to particulars, and substitute a careful one, the
      revision consists in selecting two syllogistic premises. But this
      neither alters nor adds to the evidence we had before; it only puts
      us in a better position for judging whether our inference from
      particulars to particulars is well grounded.

   66 Infra, book iii., chap. ii.

   67 Infra, book iii., ch. iv., § 3, and elsewhere.

   68 It is justly remarked by Professor Bain (_Logic_, ii., 134) that the
      word Hypothesis is here used in a somewhat peculiar sense. An
      hypothesis, in science, usually means a supposition not proved to be
      true, but surmised to be so, because if true it would account for
      certain known facts; and the final result of the speculation may be
      to prove its truth. The hypotheses spoken of in the text are of a
      different character; they are known not to be literally true, while
      as much of them as is true is not hypothetical, but certain. The two
      cases, however, resemble in the circumstance that in both we reason,
      not from a truth, but from an assumption, and the truth therefore of
      the conclusions is conditional, not categorical. This suffices to
      justify, in point of logical propriety, Stewart’s use of the term.
      It is of course needful to bear in mind that the hypothetical
      element in the definitions of geometry is the assumption that what
      is very nearly true is exactly so. This unreal exactitude might be
      called a fiction, as properly as an hypothesis; but that
      appellation, still more than the other, would fail to point out the
      close relation which exists between the fictitious point or line and
      the points and lines of which we have experience.

_   69 Mechanical Euclid_, pp. 149 _et seqq._

   70 We might, it is true, insert this property into the definition of
      parallel lines, framing the definition so as to require, both that
      when produced indefinitely they shall never meet, and also that any
      straight line which intersects one of them shall, if prolonged, meet
      the other. But by doing this we by no means get rid of the
      assumption; we are still obliged to take for granted the geometrical
      truth, that all straight lines in the same plane, which have the
      former of these properties, have also the latter. For if it were
      possible that they should not, that is, if any straight lines in the
      same plane, other than those which are parallel according to the
      definition, had the property of never meeting although indefinitely
      produced, the demonstrations of the subsequent portions of the
      theory of parallels could not be maintained.

   71 Some persons find themselves prevented from believing that the
      axiom, Two straight lines can not inclose a space, could ever become
      known to us through experience, by a difficulty which may be stated
      as follows: If the straight lines spoken of are those contemplated
      in the definition—lines absolutely without breadth and absolutely
      straight—that such are incapable of inclosing a space is not proved
      by experience, for lines such as these do not present themselves in
      our experience. If, on the other hand, the lines meant are such
      straight lines as we do meet with in experience, lines straight
      enough for practical purposes, but in reality slightly zigzag, and
      with some, however trifling, breadth; as applied to these lines the
      axiom is not true, for two of them may, and sometimes do, inclose a
      small portion of space. In neither case, therefore, does experience
      prove the axiom.

      Those who employ this argument to show that geometrical axioms can
      not be proved by induction, show themselves unfamiliar with a common
      and perfectly valid mode of inductive proof; proof by approximation.
      Though experience furnishes us with no lines so unimpeachably
      straight that two of them are incapable of inclosing the smallest
      space, it presents us with gradations of lines possessing less and
      less either of breadth or of flexure, of which series the straight
      line of the definition is the ideal limit. And observation shows
      that just as much, and as nearly, as the straight lines of
      experience approximate to having no breadth or flexure, so much and
      so nearly does the space-inclosing power of any two of them approach
      to zero. The inference that if they had no breadth or flexure at
      all, they would inclose no space at all, is a correct inductive
      inference from these facts, conformable to one of the four Inductive
      Methods hereinafter characterized, the Method of Concomitant
      Variations; of which the mathematical Doctrine of Limits presents
      the extreme case.

   72 Whewell’s _History of Scientific Ideas_, i., 140.

   73 Dr. Whewell (_Philosophy of Discovery_, p. 289) thinks it
      unreasonable to contend that we know by experience, that our idea of
      a line exactly resembles a real line. “It does not appear,” he says,
      “how we can compare our ideas with the realities, since we know the
      realities only by our ideas.” We know the realities by our
      sensations. Dr. Whewell surely does not hold the “doctrine of
      perception by means of ideas,” which Reid gave himself so much
      trouble to refute. If Dr. Whewell doubts whether we compare our
      ideas with the corresponding sensations, and assume that they
      resemble, let me ask on what evidence do we judge that a portrait of
      a person not present is like the original. Surely because it is like
      our idea, or mental image of the person, and because our idea is
      like the man himself.

      Dr. Whewell also says, that it does not appear why this resemblance
      of ideas to the sensations of which they are copies, should be
      spoken of as if it were a peculiarity of one class of ideas, those
      of space. My reply is, that I do not so speak of it. The peculiarity
      I contend for is only one of degree. All our ideas of sensation of
      course resemble the corresponding sensations, but they do so with
      very different degrees of exactness and of reliability. No one, I
      presume, can recall in imagination a color or an odor with the same
      distinctness and accuracy with which almost every one can mentally
      reproduce an image of a straight line or a triangle. To the extent,
      however, of their capabilities of accuracy, our recollections of
      colors or of odors may serve as subjects of experimentation, as well
      as those of lines and spaces, and may yield conclusions which will
      be true of their external prototypes. A person in whom, either from
      natural gift or from cultivation, the impressions of color were
      peculiarly vivid and distinct, if asked which of two blue flowers
      was of the darkest tinge, though he might never have compared the
      two, or even looked at them together, might be able to give a
      confident answer on the faith of his distinct recollection of the
      colors; that is, he might examine his mental pictures, and find
      there a property of the outward objects. But in hardly any case
      except that of simple geometrical forms, could this be done by
      mankind generally, with a degree of assurance equal to that which is
      given by a contemplation of the objects themselves. Persons differ
      most widely in the precision of their recollection, even of forms:
      one person, when he has looked any one in the face for half a
      minute, can draw an accurate likeness of him from memory; another
      may have seen him every day for six months, and hardly know whether
      his nose is long or short. But every body has a perfectly distinct
      mental image of a straight line, a circle, or a rectangle. And every
      one concludes confidently from these mental images to the
      corresponding outward things. The truth is, that we may, and
      continually do, study nature in our recollections, when the objects
      themselves are absent; and in the case of geometrical forms we can
      perfectly, but in most other cases only imperfectly, trust our
      recollections.

_   74 Logic_, i., 222.

   75 Ibid., 226.

_   76 History of Scientific Ideas_, i., 65-67.

   77 Ibid., i., 60.

   78 Ibid., 58, 59.

   79 “If all mankind had spoken one language, we can not doubt that there
      would have been a powerful, perhaps a universal, school of
      philosophers, who would have believed in the inherent connection
      between names and things, who would have taken the sound _man_ to be
      the mode of agitating the air which is essentially communicative of
      the ideas of reason, cookery, bipedality, etc.”—De Morgan, _Formal
      Logic_, p. 246.

   80 It would be difficult to name a man more remarkable at once for the
      greatness and the wide range of his mental accomplishments, than
      Leibnitz. Yet this eminent man gave as a reason for rejecting
      Newton’s scheme of the solar system, that God _could not_ make a
      body revolve round a distant centre, unless either by some impelling
      mechanism, or by miracle: “Tout ce qui n’est pas explicable,” says
      he in a letter to the Abbé Conti, “par la nature des créatures, est
      miraculeux. Il ne suffit pas de dire: Dieu a fait une telle loi de
      nature; donc la chose est naturelle. Il faut que la loi soit
      exécutable par les natures des créatures. Si Dien donnait cette loi,
      par exemple, à un corps libre, de tourner à l’entour d’un certain
      centre, _il faudrait ou qu’il y joignît d’autres corps qui par leur
      impulsion l’obligeassent de rester toujours dans son orbite
      circulaire, ou qu’il mît un ange à ses trousses, ou enfin il
      faudrait qu’il y concourût extraordinairement_; car naturellement il
      s’écartera par la tangente.”—_Works of Leibnitz_, ed. Dutens, iii.,
      446.

_   81 Novum Organum Renovatum_, pp. 32, 33.

_   82 History of Scientific Ideas_, i., 264.

   83 Ibid., i., 263.

   84 Ibid., 240.

_   85 Hist. Scientific Ideas_, ii., 25, 26.

_   86 Phil. of Disc._, p. 339.

_   87 Phil. of Disc._, p. 338.

   88 Ibid., p. 463.

_   89 Phil. of Disc._, pp. 472, 473.

   90 The _Quarterly Review_ for June, 1841, contained an article of great
      ability on Dr. Whewell’s two great works (since acknowledged and
      reprinted in Sir John Herschel’s Essays) which maintains, on the
      subject of axioms, the doctrine advanced in the text, that they are
      generalizations from experience, and supports that opinion by a line
      of argument strikingly coinciding with mine. When I state that the
      whole of the present chapter (except the last four pages, added in
      the fifth edition) was written before I had seen the article (the
      greater part, indeed, before it was published), it is not my object
      to occupy the reader’s attention with a matter so unimportant as the
      degree of originality which may or may not belong to any portion of
      my own speculations, but to obtain for an opinion which is opposed
      to reigning doctrines, the recommendation derived from a striking
      concurrence of sentiment between two inquirers entirely independent
      of one another. I embrace the opportunity of citing from a writer of
      the extensive acquirements in physical and metaphysical knowledge
      and the capacity of systematic thought which the article evinces,
      passages so remarkably in unison with my own views as the following:

      “The truths of geometry are summed up and embodied in its
      definitions and axioms.... Let us turn to the axioms, and what do we
      find? A string of propositions concerning magnitude in the abstract,
      which are equally true of space, time, force, number, and every
      other magnitude susceptible of aggregation and subdivision. Such
      propositions, where they are not mere definitions, as some of them
      are, carry their inductive origin on the face of their
      enunciation.... Those which declare that two straight lines can not
      inclose a space, and that two straight lines which cut one another
      can not both be parallel to a third, are in reality the only ones
      which express characteristic properties of space, and these it will
      be worth while to consider more nearly. Now the only clear notion we
      can form of straightness is uniformity of direction, for space in
      its ultimate analysis is nothing but an assemblage of distances and
      directions. And (not to dwell on the notion of continued
      contemplation, _i.e._, mental experience, as included in the very
      idea of uniformity; nor on that of transfer of the contemplating
      being from point to point, and of experience, during such transfer,
      of the homogeneity of the interval passed over) we can not even
      propose the proposition in an intelligible form to any one whose
      experience ever since he was born has not assured him of the fact.
      The unity of direction, or that we can not march from a given point
      by more than one path direct to the same object, is matter of
      practical experience long before it can by possibility become matter
      of abstract thought. _We can not attempt mentally to exemplify the
      conditions of the assertion in an imaginary case opposed to it,
      without violating our habitual recollection of this experience, and
      defacing our mental picture of space as grounded on it._ What but
      experience, we may ask, can possibly assure us of the homogeneity of
      the parts of distance, time, force, and measurable aggregates in
      general, on which the truth of the other axioms depends? As regards
      the latter axiom, after what has been said it must be clear that the
      very same course of remarks equally applies to its case, and that
      its truth is quite as much forced on the mind as that of the former
      by daily and hourly experience, ... _including always, be it
      observed, in our notion of experience, that which is gained by
      contemplation of the inward picture which the mind forms to itself
      in any proposed case, or which it arbitrarily selects as an
      example—such picture, in virtue of the extreme simplicity of these
      primary relations, being called up by the imagination with as much
      vividness and clearness as could be done by any external impression,
      which is the only meaning we can attach to the word intuition, as
      applied to such relations_.”

      And again, of the axioms of mechanics: “As we admit no such
      propositions, other than as truths inductively collected from
      observation, even in geometry itself, it can hardly be expected
      that, in a science of obviously contingent relations, we should
      acquiesce in a contrary view. Let us take one of these axioms and
      examine its evidence: for instance, that equal forces
      perpendicularly applied at the opposite ends of equal arms of a
      straight lever will balance each other. What but experience, we may
      ask, in the first place, can possibly inform us that a force so
      applied will have any tendency to turn the lever on its centre at
      all? or that force can be so transmitted along a rigid line
      perpendicular to its direction, as to act elsewhere in space than
      along its own line of action? Surely this is so far from being
      self-evident that it has even a paradoxical appearance, which is
      only to be removed by giving our lever thickness, material
      composition, and molecular powers. Again, we conclude, that the two
      forces, being equal and applied under precisely similar
      circumstances, must, if they exert any effort at all to turn the
      lever, exert equal and opposite efforts: but what _a priori_
      reasoning can possibly assure us that they _do_ act under precisely
      similar circumstances? that points which differ in place _are_
      similarly circumstanced as regards the exertion of force? that
      universal space may not have relations to universal force—or, at all
      events, that the organization of the material universe may not be
      such as to place that portion of space occupied by it in such
      relations to the forces exerted in it, as may invalidate the
      absolute similarity of circumstances assumed? Or we may argue, what
      have we to do with the notion of angular movement in the lever at
      all? The case is one of rest, and of quiescent destruction of force
      by force. Now how is this destruction effected? Assuredly by the
      counter-pressure which supports the fulcrum. But would not this
