When the procession came opposite to Alice, they all stopped and looked
at her, and the Queen said severely 'Who is this?' She said it to the
Knave of Hearts, who only bowed and smiled in reply.

'Idiot!' said the Queen, tossing her head impatiently; and, turning to
Alice, she went on, 'What's your name, child?'

'My name is Alice, so please your Majesty,' said Alice very politely;
but she added, to herself, 'Why, they're only a pack of cards, after
all. I needn't be afraid of them!'

'And who are THESE?' said the Queen, pointing to the three gardeners who
were lying round the rosetree; for, you see, as they were lying on their
faces, and the pattern on their backs was the same as the rest of the
pack, she could not tell whether they were gardeners, or soldiers, or
courtiers, or three of her own children.

'How should I know?' said Alice, surprised at her own courage. 'It's no
business of MINE.'

The Queen turned crimson with fury, and, after glaring at her for a
moment like a wild beast, screamed 'Off with her head! Off--'

'Nonsense!' said Alice, very loudly and decidedly, and the Queen was
silent.

The King laid his hand upon her arm, and timidly said 'Consider, my
dear: she is only a child!'

The Queen turned angrily away from him, and said to the Knave 'Turn them
over!'

The Knave did so, very carefully, with one foot.

'Get up!' said the Queen, in a shrill, loud voice, and the three
gardeners instantly jumped up, and began bowing to the King, the Queen,
the royal children, and everybody else.

'Leave off that!' screamed the Queen. 'You make me giddy.' And then,
turning to the rose-tree, she went on, 'What HAVE you been doing here?'

'May it please your Majesty,' said Two, in a very humble tone, going
down on one knee as he spoke, 'we were trying--'

'I see!' said the Queen, who had meanwhile been examining the roses.
'Off with their heads!' and the procession moved on, three of the
soldiers remaining behind to execute the unfortunate gardeners, who ran
to Alice for protection.

'You shan't be beheaded!' said Alice, and she put them into a large
flower-pot that stood near. The three soldiers wandered about for a
minute or two, looking for them, and then quietly marched off after the
others.

'Are their heads off?' shouted the Queen.

'Their heads are gone, if it please your Majesty!' the soldiers shouted
in reply.

'That's right!' shouted the Queen. 'Can you play croquet?'

The soldiers were silent, and looked at Alice, as the question was
evidently meant for her.

'Yes!' shouted Alice.

'Come on, then!' roared the Queen, and Alice joined the procession,
wondering very much what would happen next.

'It's--it's a very fine day!' said a timid voice at her side. She was
walking by the White Rabbit, who was peeping anxiously into her face.

'Very,' said Alice: '--where's the Duchess?'

'Hush! Hush!' said the Rabbit in a low, hurried tone. He looked
anxiously over his shoulder as he spoke, and then raised himself upon
tiptoe, put his mouth close to her ear, and whispered 'She's under
sentence of execution.'

'What for?' said Alice.

'Did you say "What a pity!"?' the Rabbit asked.

'No, I didn't,' said Alice: 'I don't think it's at all a pity. I said
"What for?"'

'She boxed the Queen's ears--' the Rabbit began. Alice gave a little
scream of laughter. 'Oh, hush!' the Rabbit whispered in a frightened
tone. 'The Queen will hear you! You see, she came rather late, and the
Queen said--'

'Get to your places!' shouted the Queen in a voice of thunder, and
people began running about in all directions, tumbling up against each
other; however, they got settled down in a minute or two, and the game
began. Alice thought she had never seen such a curious croquet-ground in
her life; it was all ridges and furrows; the balls were live hedgehogs,
the mallets live flamingoes, and the soldiers had to double themselves
up and to stand on their hands and feet, to make the arches.

The chief difficulty Alice found at first was in managing her flamingo:
she succeeded in getting its body tucked away, comfortably enough, under
her arm, with its legs hanging down, but generally, just as she had got
its neck nicely straightened out, and was going to give the hedgehog a
blow with its head, it WOULD twist itself round and look up in her face,
with such a puzzled expression that she could not help bursting out
laughing: and when she had got its head down, and was going to begin
again, it was very provoking to find that the hedgehog had unrolled
itself, and was in the act of crawling away: besides all this, there was
generally a ridge or furrow in the way wherever she wanted to send the
hedgehog to, and, as the doubled-up soldiers were always getting up
and walking off to other parts of the ground, Alice soon came to the
conclusion that it was a very difficult game indeed.

The players all played at once without waiting for turns, quarrelling
all the while, and fighting for the hedgehogs; and in a very short
time the Queen was in a furious passion, and went stamping about, and
shouting 'Off with his head!' or 'Off with her head!' about once in a
minute.

Alice began to feel very uneasy: to be sure, she had not as yet had any
dispute with the Queen, but she knew that it might happen any minute,
'and then,' thought she, 'what would become of me? They're dreadfully
fond of beheading people here; the great wonder is, that there's any one
left alive!'

She was looking about for some way of escape, and wondering whether she
could get away without being seen, when she noticed a curious appearance
in the air: it puzzled her very much at first, but, after watching it
a minute or two, she made it out to be a grin, and she said to herself
'It's the Cheshire Cat: now I shall have somebody to talk to.'

'How are you getting on?' said the Cat, as soon as there was mouth
enough for it to speak with.

Alice waited till the eyes appeared, and then nodded. 'It's no use
speaking to it,' she thought, 'till its ears have come, or at least one
of them.' In another minute the whole head appeared, and then Alice put
down her flamingo, and began an account of the game, feeling very glad
she had someone to listen to her. The Cat seemed to think that there was
enough of it now in sight, and no more of it appeared.

'I don't think they play at all fairly,' Alice began, in rather a
complaining tone, 'and they all quarrel so dreadfully one can't hear
oneself speak--and they don't seem to have any rules in particular;
at least, if there are, nobody attends to them--and you've no idea how
confusing it is all the things being alive; for instance, there's the
arch I've got to go through next walking about at the other end of the
ground--and I should have croqueted the Queen's hedgehog just now, only
it ran away when it saw mine coming!'

'How do you like the Queen?' said the Cat in a low voice.

'Not at all,' said Alice: 'she's so extremely--' Just then she noticed
that the Queen was close behind her, listening: so she went on,
'--likely to win, that it's hardly worth while finishing the game.'

The Queen smiled and passed on.

'Who ARE you talking to?' said the King, going up to Alice, and looking
at the Cat's head with great curiosity.

'It's a friend of mine--a Cheshire Cat,' said Alice: 'allow me to
introduce it.'

'I don't like the look of it at all,' said the King: 'however, it may
kiss my hand if it likes.'

'I'd rather not,' the Cat remarked.

'Don't be impertinent,' said the King, 'and don't look at me like that!'
He got behind Alice as he spoke.

'A cat may look at a king,' said Alice. 'I've read that in some book,
but I don't remember where.'

'Well, it must be removed,' said the King very decidedly, and he called
the Queen, who was passing at the moment, 'My dear! I wish you would
have this cat removed!'

The Queen had only one way of settling all difficulties, great or small.
'Off with his head!' she said, without even looking round.

'I'll fetch the executioner myself,' said the King eagerly, and he
hurried off.

Alice thought she might as well go back, and see how the game was going
on, as she heard the Queen's voice in the distance, screaming with
passion. She had already heard her sentence three of the players to be
executed for having missed their turns, and she did not like the look
of things at all, as the game was in such confusion that she never knew
whether it was her turn or not. So she went in search of her hedgehog.

The hedgehog was engaged in a fight with another hedgehog, which seemed
to Alice an excellent opportunity for croqueting one of them with the
other: the only difficulty was, that her flamingo was gone across to the
other side of the garden, where Alice could see it trying in a helpless
sort of way to fly up into a tree.

By the time she had caught the flamingo and brought it back, the fight
was over, and both the hedgehogs were out of sight: 'but it doesn't
matter much,' thought Alice, 'as all the arches are gone from this side
of the ground.' So she tucked it away under her arm, that it might not
escape again, and went back for a little more conversation with her
friend.

When she got back to the Cheshire Cat, she was surprised to find quite a
large crowd collected round it: there was a dispute going on between
the executioner, the King, and the Queen, who were all talking at once,
while all the rest were quite silent, and looked very uncomfortable.

The moment Alice appeared, she was appealed to by all three to settle
the question, and they repeated their arguments to her, though, as they
all spoke at once, she found it very hard indeed to make out exactly
what they said.

The executioner's argument was, that you couldn't cut off a head unless
there was a body to cut it off from: that he had never had to do such a
thing before, and he wasn't going to begin at HIS time of life.

The King's argument was, that anything that had a head could be
beheaded, and that you weren't to talk nonsense.

The Queen's argument was, that if something wasn't done about it in less
than no time she'd have everybody executed, all round. (It was this last
remark that had made the whole party look so grave and anxious.)

Alice could think of nothing else to say but 'It belongs to the Duchess:
you'd better ask HER about it.'

'She's in prison,' the Queen said to the executioner: 'fetch her here.'
And the executioner went off like an arrow.

 The Cat's head began fading away the moment he was gone, and,
by the time he had come back with the Duchess, it had entirely
disappeared; so the King and the executioner ran wildly up and down
looking for it, while the rest of the party went back to the game.




CHAPTER IX. The Mock Turtle's Story

'You can't think how glad I am to see you again, you dear old thing!'
said the Duchess, as she tucked her arm affectionately into Alice's, and
they walked off together.

Alice was very glad to find her in such a pleasant temper, and thought
to herself that perhaps it was only the pepper that had made her so
savage when they met in the kitchen.

'When I'M a Duchess,' she said to herself, (not in a very hopeful tone
though), 'I won't have any pepper in my kitchen AT ALL. Soup does very
well without--Maybe it's always pepper that makes people hot-tempered,'
she went on, very much pleased at having found out a new kind of
rule, 'and vinegar that makes them sour--and camomile that makes
them bitter--and--and barley-sugar and such things that make children
sweet-tempered. I only wish people knew that: then they wouldn't be so
stingy about it, you know--'

She had quite forgotten the Duchess by this time, and was a little
startled when she heard her voice close to her ear. 'You're thinking
about something, my dear, and that makes you forget to talk. I can't
tell you just now what the moral of that is, but I shall remember it in
a bit.'

'Perhaps it hasn't one,' Alice ventured to remark.

'Tut, tut, child!' said the Duchess. 'Everything's got a moral, if only
you can find it.' And she squeezed herself up closer to Alice's side as
she spoke.

Alice did not much like keeping so close to her: first, because the
Duchess was VERY ugly; and secondly, because she was exactly the
right height to rest her chin upon Alice's shoulder, and it was an
uncomfortably sharp chin. However, she did not like to be rude, so she
bore it as well as she could.

'The game's going on rather better now,' she said, by way of keeping up
the conversation a little.

''Tis so,' said the Duchess: 'and the moral of that is--"Oh, 'tis love,
'tis love, that makes the world go round!"'

'Somebody said,' Alice whispered, 'that it's done by everybody minding
their own business!'

'Ah, well! It means much the same thing,' said the Duchess, digging her
sharp little chin into Alice's shoulder as she added, 'and the moral
of THAT is--"Take care of the sense, and the sounds will take care of
themselves."'

'How fond she is of finding morals in things!' Alice thought to herself.

'I dare say you're wondering why I don't put my arm round your waist,'
the Duchess said after a pause: 'the reason is, that I'm doubtful about
the temper of your flamingo. Shall I try the experiment?'

'HE might bite,' Alice cautiously replied, not feeling at all anxious to
have the experiment tried.

'Very true,' said the Duchess: 'flamingoes and mustard both bite. And
the moral of that is--"Birds of a feather flock together."'

'Only mustard isn't a bird,' Alice remarked.

'Right, as usual,' said the Duchess: 'what a clear way you have of
putting things!'

'It's a mineral, I THINK,' said Alice.

'Of course it is,' said the Duchess, who seemed ready to agree to
everything that Alice said; 'there's a large mustard-mine near here. And
the moral of that is--"The more there is of mine, the less there is of
yours."'

'Oh, I know!' exclaimed Alice, who had not attended to this last remark,
'it's a vegetable. It doesn't look like one, but it is.'

'I quite agree with you,' said the Duchess; 'and the moral of that
is--"Be what you would seem to be"--or if you'd like it put more
simply--"Never imagine yourself not to be otherwise than what it might
appear to others that what you were or might have been was not otherwise
than what you had been would have appeared to them to be otherwise."'

'I think I should understand that better,' Alice said very politely, 'if
I had it written down: but I can't quite follow it as you say it.'

'That's nothing to what I could say if I chose,' the Duchess replied, in
a pleased tone.

'Pray don't trouble yourself to say it any longer than that,' said
Alice.

'Oh, don't talk about trouble!' said the Duchess. 'I make you a present
of everything I've said as yet.'

'A cheap sort of present!' thought Alice. 'I'm glad they don't give
birthday presents like that!' But she did not venture to say it out
loud.

'Thinking again?' the Duchess asked, with another dig of her sharp
little chin.

'I've a right to think,' said Alice sharply, for she was beginning to
feel a little worried.

'Just about as much right,' said the Duchess, 'as pigs have to fly; and
the m--'

But here, to Alice's great surprise, the Duchess's voice died away, even
in the middle of her favourite word 'moral,' and the arm that was linked
into hers began to tremble. Alice looked up, and there stood the Queen
in front of them, with her arms folded, frowning like a thunderstorm.

'A fine day, your Majesty!' the Duchess began in a low, weak voice.

'Now, I give you fair warning,' shouted the Queen, stamping on the
ground as she spoke; 'either you or your head must be off, and that in
about half no time! Take your choice!'

The Duchess took her choice, and was gone in a moment.

'Let's go on with the game,' the Queen said to Alice; and Alice was
too much frightened to say a word, but slowly followed her back to the
croquet-ground.

The other guests had taken advantage of the Queen's absence, and were
resting in the shade: however, the moment they saw her, they hurried
back to the game, the Queen merely remarking that a moment's delay would
cost them their lives.

All the time they were playing the Queen never left off quarrelling with
the other players, and shouting 'Off with his head!' or 'Off with her
head!' Those whom she sentenced were taken into custody by the soldiers,
who of course had to leave off being arches to do this, so that by
the end of half an hour or so there were no arches left, and all the
players, except the King, the Queen, and Alice, were in custody and
under sentence of execution.

Then the Queen left off, quite out of breath, and said to Alice, 'Have
you seen the Mock Turtle yet?'

'No,' said Alice. 'I don't even know what a Mock Turtle is.'

'It's the thing Mock Turtle Soup is made from,' said the Queen.

'I never saw one, or heard of one,' said Alice.

'Come on, then,' said the Queen, 'and he shall tell you his history,'

As they walked off together, Alice heard the King say in a low voice,
to the company generally, 'You are all pardoned.' 'Come, THAT'S a good
thing!' she said to herself, for she had felt quite unhappy at the
number of executions the Queen had ordered.

They very soon came upon a Gryphon, lying fast asleep in the sun.
(IF you don't know what a Gryphon is, look at the picture.) 'Up, lazy
thing!' said the Queen, 'and take this young lady to see the Mock
Turtle, and to hear his history. I must go back and see after some
executions I have ordered'; and she walked off, leaving Alice alone with
the Gryphon. Alice did not quite like the look of the creature, but on
the whole she thought it would be quite as safe to stay with it as to go
after that savage Queen: so she waited.

The Gryphon sat up and rubbed its eyes: then it watched the Queen till
she was out of sight: then it chuckled. 'What fun!' said the Gryphon,
half to itself, half to Alice.

'What IS the fun?' said Alice.

'Why, SHE,' said the Gryphon. 'It's all her fancy, that: they never
executes nobody, you know. Come on!'

'Everybody says "come on!" here,' thought Alice, as she went slowly
after it: 'I never was so ordered about in all my life, never!'

They had not gone far before they saw the Mock Turtle in the distance,
sitting sad and lonely on a little ledge of rock, and, as they came
nearer, Alice could hear him sighing as if his heart would break. She
pitied him deeply. 'What is his sorrow?' she asked the Gryphon, and the
Gryphon answered, very nearly in the same words as before, 'It's all his
fancy, that: he hasn't got no sorrow, you know. Come on!'

So they went up to the Mock Turtle, who looked at them with large eyes
full of tears, but said nothing.

'This here young lady,' said the Gryphon, 'she wants for to know your
history, she do.'

'I'll tell it her,' said the Mock Turtle in a deep, hollow tone: 'sit
down, both of you, and don't speak a word till I've finished.'

So they sat down, and nobody spoke for some minutes. Alice thought to
herself, 'I don't see how he can EVEN finish, if he doesn't begin.' But
she waited patiently.

'Once,' said the Mock Turtle at last, with a deep sigh, 'I was a real
Turtle.'

These words were followed by a very long silence, broken only by an
occasional exclamation of 'Hjckrrh!' from the Gryphon, and the constant
heavy sobbing of the Mock Turtle. Alice was very nearly getting up and
saying, 'Thank you, sir, for your interesting story,' but she could
not help thinking there MUST be more to come, so she sat still and said
nothing.

'When we were little,' the Mock Turtle went on at last, more calmly,
though still sobbing a little now and then, 'we went to school in the
sea. The master was an old Turtle--we used to call him Tortoise--'

'Why did you call him Tortoise, if he wasn't one?' Alice asked.

'We called him Tortoise because he taught us,' said the Mock Turtle
angrily: 'really you are very dull!'

'You ought to be ashamed of yourself for asking such a simple question,'
added the Gryphon; and then they both sat silent and looked at poor
Alice, who felt ready to sink into the earth. At last the Gryphon said
to the Mock Turtle, 'Drive on, old fellow! Don't be all day about it!'
and he went on in these words:

'Yes, we went to school in the sea, though you mayn't believe it--'

'I never said I didn't!' interrupted Alice.

'You did,' said the Mock Turtle.

'Hold your tongue!' added the Gryphon, before Alice could speak again.
The Mock Turtle went on.

'We had the best of educations--in fact, we went to school every day--'

'I'VE been to a day-school, too,' said Alice; 'you needn't be so proud
as all that.'

'With extras?' asked the Mock Turtle a little anxiously.

'Yes,' said Alice, 'we learned French and music.'

'And washing?' said the Mock Turtle.

'Certainly not!' said Alice indignantly.

'Ah! then yours wasn't a really good school,' said the Mock Turtle in
a tone of great relief. 'Now at OURS they had at the end of the bill,
"French, music, AND WASHING--extra."'

'You couldn't have wanted it much,' said Alice; 'living at the bottom of
the sea.'

'I couldn't afford to learn it.' said the Mock Turtle with a sigh. 'I
only took the regular course.'

'What was that?' inquired Alice.

'Reeling and Writhing, of course, to begin with,' the Mock Turtle
replied; 'and then the different branches of Arithmetic--Ambition,
Distraction, Uglification, and Derision.'

'I never heard of "Uglification,"' Alice ventured to say. 'What is it?'

The Gryphon lifted up both its paws in surprise. 'What! Never heard of
uglifying!' it exclaimed. 'You know what to beautify is, I suppose?'

'Yes,' said Alice doubtfully: 'it means--to--make--anything--prettier.'

'Well, then,' the Gryphon went on, 'if you don't know what to uglify is,
you ARE a simpleton.'

Alice did not feel encouraged to ask any more questions about it, so she
turned to the Mock Turtle, and said 'What else had you to learn?'

'Well, there was Mystery,' the Mock Turtle replied, counting off
the subjects on his flappers, '--Mystery, ancient and modern, with
Seaography: then Drawling--the Drawling-master was an old conger-eel,
that used to come once a week: HE taught us Drawling, Stretching, and
Fainting in Coils.'

'What was THAT like?' said Alice.

'Well, I can't show it you myself,' the Mock Turtle said: 'I'm too
stiff. And the Gryphon never learnt it.'

'Hadn't time,' said the Gryphon: 'I went to the Classics master, though.
He was an old crab, HE was.'

'I never went to him,' the Mock Turtle said with a sigh: 'he taught
Laughing and Grief, they used to say.'

'So he did, so he did,' said the Gryphon, sighing in his turn; and both
creatures hid their faces in their paws.

'And how many hours a day did you do lessons?' said Alice, in a hurry to
change the subject.

'Ten hours the first day,' said the Mock Turtle: 'nine the next, and so
on.'

'What a curious plan!' exclaimed Alice.

'That's the reason they're called lessons,' the Gryphon remarked:
'because they lessen from day to day.'

This was quite a new idea to Alice, and she thought it over a little
before she made her next remark. 'Then the eleventh day must have been a
holiday?'

'Of course it was,' said the Mock Turtle.

'And how did you manage on the twelfth?' Alice went on eagerly.

'That's enough about lessons,' the Gryphon interrupted in a very decided
tone: 'tell her something about the games now.'




CHAPTER X. The Lobster Quadrille

The Mock Turtle sighed deeply, and drew the back of one flapper across
his eyes. He looked at Alice, and tried to speak, but for a minute or
two sobs choked his voice. 'Same as if he had a bone in his throat,'
said the Gryphon: and it set to work shaking him and punching him in
the back. At last the Mock Turtle recovered his voice, and, with tears
running down his cheeks, he went on again:--

'You may not have lived much under the sea--' ('I haven't,' said
Alice)--'and perhaps you were never even introduced to a lobster--'
(Alice began to say 'I once tasted--' but checked herself hastily, and
said 'No, never') '--so you can have no idea what a delightful thing a
Lobster Quadrille is!'

'No, indeed,' said Alice. 'What sort of a dance is it?'

'Why,' said the Gryphon, 'you first form into a line along the
sea-shore--'

'Two lines!' cried the Mock Turtle. 'Seals, turtles, salmon, and so on;
then, when you've cleared all the jelly-fish out of the way--'

'THAT generally takes some time,' interrupted the Gryphon.

'--you advance twice--'

'Each with a lobster as a partner!' cried the Gryphon.

'Of course,' the Mock Turtle said: 'advance twice, set to partners--'

'--change lobsters, and retire in same order,' continued the Gryphon.

'Then, you know,' the Mock Turtle went on, 'you throw the--'

'The lobsters!' shouted the Gryphon, with a bound into the air.

'--as far out to sea as you can--'

'Swim after them!' screamed the Gryphon.

'Turn a somersault in the sea!' cried the Mock Turtle, capering wildly
about.

'Change lobsters again!' yelled the Gryphon at the top of its voice.

'Back to land again, and that's all the first figure,' said the Mock
Turtle, suddenly dropping his voice; and the two creatures, who had been
jumping about like mad things all this time, sat down again very sadly
and quietly, and looked at Alice.

'It must be a very pretty dance,' said Alice timidly.

'Would you like to see a little of it?' said the Mock Turtle.

'Very much indeed,' said Alice.

'Come, let's try the first figure!' said the Mock Turtle to the Gryphon.
'We can do without lobsters, you know. Which shall sing?'

'Oh, YOU sing,' said the Gryphon. 'I've forgotten the words.'

So they began solemnly dancing round and round Alice, every now and
then treading on her toes when they passed too close, and waving their
forepaws to mark the time, while the Mock Turtle sang this, very slowly
and sadly:--

 '"Will you walk a little faster?" said a whiting to a snail.
 "There's a porpoise close behind us, and he's treading on my tail.

 See how eagerly the lobsters and the turtles all advance!
 They are waiting on the shingle--will you come and join the dance?

 Will you, won't you, will you, won't you, will you join the dance?
 Will you, won't you, will you, won't you, won't you join the dance?

 "You can really have no notion how delightful it will be
 When they take us up and throw us, with the lobsters, out to sea!"
 But the snail replied "Too far, too far!" and gave a look askance--
 Said he thanked the whiting kindly, but he would not join the dance.

 Would not, could not, would not, could not, would not join the dance.
 Would not, could not, would not, could not, could not join the dance.

 '"What matters it how far we go?" his scaly friend replied.
 "There is another shore, you know, upon the other side.
 The further off from England the nearer is to France--
 Then turn not pale, beloved snail, but come and join the dance.

 Will you, won't you, will you, won't you, will you join the dance?
 Will you, won't you, will you, won't you, won't you join the dance?"'

'Thank you, it's a very interesting dance to watch,' said Alice, feeling
very glad that it was over at last: 'and I do so like that curious song
about the whiting!'

'Oh, as to the whiting,' said the Mock Turtle, 'they--you've seen them,
of course?'

'Yes,' said Alice, 'I've often seen them at dinn--' she checked herself
hastily.

'I don't know where Dinn may be,' said the Mock Turtle, 'but if you've
seen them so often, of course you know what they're like.'

'I believe so,' Alice replied thoughtfully. 'They have their tails in
their mouths--and they're all over crumbs.'

'You're wrong about the crumbs,' said the Mock Turtle: 'crumbs would all
wash off in the sea. But they HAVE their tails in their mouths; and the
reason is--' here the Mock Turtle yawned and shut his eyes.--'Tell her
about the reason and all that,' he said to the Gryphon.

'The reason is,' said the Gryphon, 'that they WOULD go with the lobsters
to the dance. So they got thrown out to sea. So they had to fall a long
way. So they got their tails fast in their mouths. So they couldn't get
them out again. That's all.'

'Thank you,' said Alice, 'it's very interesting. I never knew so much
about a whiting before.'

'I can tell you more than that, if you like,' said the Gryphon. 'Do you
know why it's called a whiting?'

'I never thought about it,' said Alice. 'Why?'

'IT DOES THE BOOTS AND SHOES.' the Gryphon replied very solemnly.

Alice was thoroughly puzzled. 'Does the boots and shoes!' she repeated
in a wondering tone.

'Why, what are YOUR shoes done with?' said the Gryphon. 'I mean, what
makes them so shiny?'

Alice looked down at them, and considered a little before she gave her
answer. 'They're done with blacking, I believe.'

'Boots and shoes under the sea,' the Gryphon went on in a deep voice,
'are done with a whiting. Now you know.'

'And what are they made of?' Alice asked in a tone of great curiosity.

'Soles and eels, of course,' the Gryphon replied rather impatiently:
'any shrimp could have told you that.'

'If I'd been the whiting,' said Alice, whose thoughts were still running
on the song, 'I'd have said to the porpoise, "Keep back, please: we
don't want YOU with us!"'

'They were obliged to have him with them,' the Mock Turtle said: 'no
wise fish would go anywhere without a porpoise.'

'Wouldn't it really?' said Alice in a tone of great surprise.

'Of course not,' said the Mock Turtle: 'why, if a fish came to ME, and
told me he was going a journey, I should say "With what porpoise?"'

'Don't you mean "purpose"?' said Alice.

'I mean what I say,' the Mock Turtle replied in an offended tone. And
the Gryphon added 'Come, let's hear some of YOUR adventures.'

'I could tell you my adventures--beginning from this morning,' said
Alice a little timidly: 'but it's no use going back to yesterday,
because I was a different person then.'

'Explain all that,' said the Mock Turtle.

'No, no! The adventures first,' said the Gryphon in an impatient tone:
'explanations take such a dreadful time.'

So Alice began telling them her adventures from the time when she first
saw the White Rabbit. She was a little nervous about it just at first,
the two creatures got so close to her, one on each side, and opened
their eyes and mouths so VERY wide, but she gained courage as she went
on. Her listeners were perfectly quiet till she got to the part about
her repeating 'YOU ARE OLD, FATHER WILLIAM,' to the Caterpillar, and the
words all coming different, and then the Mock Turtle drew a long breath,
and said 'That's very curious.'

'It's all about as curious as it can be,' said the Gryphon.

'It all came different!' the Mock Turtle repeated thoughtfully. 'I
should like to hear her try and repeat something now. Tell her to
begin.' He looked at the Gryphon as if he thought it had some kind of
authority over Alice.

'Stand up and repeat "'TIS THE VOICE OF THE SLUGGARD,"' said the
Gryphon.

'How the creatures order one about, and make one repeat lessons!'
thought Alice; 'I might as well be at school at once.' However, she
got up, and began to repeat it, but her head was so full of the Lobster
Quadrille, that she hardly knew what she was saying, and the words came
very queer indeed:--

  ''Tis the voice of the Lobster; I heard him declare,
  "You have baked me too brown, I must sugar my hair."
  As a duck with its eyelids, so he with his nose
  Trims his belt and his buttons, and turns out his toes.'

       [later editions continued as follows
  When the sands are all dry, he is gay as a lark,
  And will talk in contemptuous tones of the Shark,
  But, when the tide rises and sharks are around,
  His voice has a timid and tremulous sound.]

'That's different from what I used to say when I was a child,' said the
Gryphon.

'Well, I never heard it before,' said the Mock Turtle; 'but it sounds
uncommon nonsense.'

Alice said nothing; she had sat down with her face in her hands,
wondering if anything would EVER happen in a natural way again.

'I should like to have it explained,' said the Mock Turtle.

'She can't explain it,' said the Gryphon hastily. 'Go on with the next
verse.'

'But about his toes?' the Mock Turtle persisted. 'How COULD he turn them
out with his nose, you know?'

'It's the first position in dancing.' Alice said; but was dreadfully
puzzled by the whole thing, and longed to change the subject.

'Go on with the next verse,' the Gryphon repeated impatiently: 'it
begins "I passed by his garden."'

Alice did not dare to disobey, though she felt sure it would all come
wrong, and she went on in a trembling voice:--

  'I passed by his garden, and marked, with one eye,
  How the Owl and the Panther were sharing a pie--'

    [later editions continued as follows
  The Panther took pie-crust, and gravy, and meat,
  While the Owl had the dish as its share of the treat.
  When the pie was all finished, the Owl, as a boon,
  Was kindly permitted to pocket the spoon:
  While the Panther received knife and fork with a growl,
  And concluded the banquet--]

'What IS the use of repeating all that stuff,' the Mock Turtle
interrupted, 'if you don't explain it as you go on? It's by far the most
confusing thing I ever heard!'

'Yes, I think you'd better leave off,' said the Gryphon: and Alice was
only too glad to do so.

'Shall we try another figure of the Lobster Quadrille?' the Gryphon went
on. 'Or would you like the Mock Turtle to sing you a song?'

'Oh, a song, please, if the Mock Turtle would be so kind,' Alice
replied, so eagerly that the Gryphon said, in a rather offended tone,
'Hm! No accounting for tastes! Sing her "Turtle Soup," will you, old
fellow?'

The Mock Turtle sighed deeply, and began, in a voice sometimes choked
with sobs, to sing this:--

   'Beautiful Soup, so rich and green,
   Waiting in a hot tureen!
   Who for such dainties would not stoop?
   Soup of the evening, beautiful Soup!
   Soup of the evening, beautiful Soup!
     Beau--ootiful Soo--oop!
     Beau--ootiful Soo--oop!
   Soo--oop of the e--e--evening,
     Beautiful, beautiful Soup!

   'Beautiful Soup! Who cares for fish,
   Game, or any other dish?
   Who would not give all else for two
   Pennyworth only of beautiful Soup?
   Pennyworth only of beautiful Soup?
     Beau--ootiful Soo--oop!
     Beau--ootiful Soo--oop!
   Soo--oop of the e--e--evening,
     Beautiful, beauti--FUL SOUP!'

'Chorus again!' cried the Gryphon, and the Mock Turtle had just begun
to repeat it, when a cry of 'The trial's beginning!' was heard in the
distance.

'Come on!' cried the Gryphon, and, taking Alice by the hand, it hurried
off, without waiting for the end of the song.

'What trial is it?' Alice panted as she ran; but the Gryphon only
answered 'Come on!' and ran the faster, while more and more faintly
came, carried on the breeze that followed them, the melancholy words:--

   'Soo--oop of the e--e--evening,
     Beautiful, beautiful Soup!'




CHAPTER XI. Who Stole the Tarts?

The King and Queen of Hearts were seated on their throne when they
arrived, with a great crowd assembled about them--all sorts of little
birds and beasts, as well as the whole pack of cards: the Knave was
standing before them, in chains, with a soldier on each side to guard
him; and near the King was the White Rabbit, with a trumpet in one hand,
and a scroll of parchment in the other. In the very middle of the court
was a table, with a large dish of tarts upon it: they looked so good,
that it made Alice quite hungry to look at them--'I wish they'd get the
trial done,' she thought, 'and hand round the refreshments!' But there
seemed to be no chance of this, so she began looking at everything about
her, to pass away the time.

Alice had never been in a court of justice before, but she had read
about them in books, and she was quite pleased to find that she knew
the name of nearly everything there. 'That's the judge,' she said to
herself, 'because of his great wig.'

The judge, by the way, was the King; and as he wore his crown over the
wig, (look at the frontispiece if you want to see how he did it,) he did
not look at all comfortable, and it was certainly not becoming.

'And that's the jury-box,' thought Alice, 'and those twelve creatures,'
(she was obliged to say 'creatures,' you see, because some of them were
animals, and some were birds,) 'I suppose they are the jurors.' She said
this last word two or three times over to herself, being rather proud of
it: for she thought, and rightly too, that very few little girls of her
age knew the meaning of it at all. However, 'jury-men' would have done
just as well.

The twelve jurors were all writing very busily on slates. 'What are they
doing?' Alice whispered to the Gryphon. 'They can't have anything to put
down yet, before the trial's begun.'

'They're putting down their names,' the Gryphon whispered in reply, 'for
fear they should forget them before the end of the trial.'

'Stupid things!' Alice began in a loud, indignant voice, but she stopped
hastily, for the White Rabbit cried out, 'Silence in the court!' and the
King put on his spectacles and looked anxiously round, to make out who
was talking.

Alice could see, as well as if she were looking over their shoulders,
that all the jurors were writing down 'stupid things!' on their slates,
and she could even make out that one of them didn't know how to spell
'stupid,' and that he had to ask his neighbour to tell him. 'A nice
muddle their slates'll be in before the trial's over!' thought Alice.

One of the jurors had a pencil that squeaked. This of course, Alice
could not stand, and she went round the court and got behind him, and
very soon found an opportunity of taking it away. She did it so quickly
that the poor little juror (it was Bill, the Lizard) could not make out
at all what had become of it; so, after hunting all about for it, he was
obliged to write with one finger for the rest of the day; and this was
of very little use, as it left no mark on the slate.

'Herald, read the accusation!' said the King.

On this the White Rabbit blew three blasts on the trumpet, and then
unrolled the parchment scroll, and read as follows:--

   'The Queen of Hearts, she made some tarts,
      All on a summer day:
    The Knave of Hearts, he stole those tarts,
      And took them quite away!'

'Consider your verdict,' the King said to the jury.

'Not yet, not yet!' the Rabbit hastily interrupted. 'There's a great
deal to come before that!'

'Call the first witness,' said the King; and the White Rabbit blew three
blasts on the trumpet, and called out, 'First witness!'

The first witness was the Hatter. He came in with a teacup in one
hand and a piece of bread-and-butter in the other. 'I beg pardon, your
Majesty,' he began, 'for bringing these in: but I hadn't quite finished
my tea when I was sent for.'

'You ought to have finished,' said the King. 'When did you begin?'

The Hatter looked at the March Hare, who had followed him into the
court, arm-in-arm with the Dormouse. 'Fourteenth of March, I think it
was,' he said.

'Fifteenth,' said the March Hare.

'Sixteenth,' added the Dormouse.

'Write that down,' the King said to the jury, and the jury eagerly
wrote down all three dates on their slates, and then added them up, and
reduced the answer to shillings and pence.

'Take off your hat,' the King said to the Hatter.

'It isn't mine,' said the Hatter.

'Stolen!' the King exclaimed, turning to the jury, who instantly made a
memorandum of the fact.

'I keep them to sell,' the Hatter added as an explanation; 'I've none of
my own. I'm a hatter.'

Here the Queen put on her spectacles, and began staring at the Hatter,
who turned pale and fidgeted.

'Give your evidence,' said the King; 'and don't be nervous, or I'll have
you executed on the spot.'

This did not seem to encourage the witness at all: he kept shifting
from one foot to the other, looking uneasily at the Queen, and in
his confusion he bit a large piece out of his teacup instead of the
bread-and-butter.

Just at this moment Alice felt a very curious sensation, which puzzled
her a good deal until she made out what it was: she was beginning to
grow larger again, and she thought at first she would get up and leave
the court; but on second thoughts she decided to remain where she was as
long as there was room for her.

'I wish you wouldn't squeeze so.' said the Dormouse, who was sitting
next to her. 'I can hardly breathe.'

'I can't help it,' said Alice very meekly: 'I'm growing.'

'You've no right to grow here,' said the Dormouse.

'Don't talk nonsense,' said Alice more boldly: 'you know you're growing
too.'

'Yes, but I grow at a reasonable pace,' said the Dormouse: 'not in that
ridiculous fashion.' And he got up very sulkily and crossed over to the
other side of the court.

All this time the Queen had never left off staring at the Hatter, and,
just as the Dormouse crossed the court, she said to one of the officers
of the court, 'Bring me the list of the singers in the last concert!' on
which the wretched Hatter trembled so, that he shook both his shoes off.

'Give your evidence,' the King repeated angrily, 'or I'll have you
executed, whether you're nervous or not.'

'I'm a poor man, your Majesty,' the Hatter began, in a trembling voice,
'--and I hadn't begun my tea--not above a week or so--and what with the
bread-and-butter getting so thin--and the twinkling of the tea--'

'The twinkling of the what?' said the King.

'It began with the tea,' the Hatter replied.

'Of course twinkling begins with a T!' said the King sharply. 'Do you
take me for a dunce? Go on!'

'I'm a poor man,' the Hatter went on, 'and most things twinkled after
that--only the March Hare said--'

'I didn't!' the March Hare interrupted in a great hurry.

'You did!' said the Hatter.

'I deny it!' said the March Hare.

'He denies it,' said the King: 'leave out that part.'

'Well, at any rate, the Dormouse said--' the Hatter went on, looking
anxiously round to see if he would deny it too: but the Dormouse denied
nothing, being fast asleep.

'After that,' continued the Hatter, 'I cut some more bread-and-butter--'

'But what did the Dormouse say?' one of the jury asked.

'That I can't remember,' said the Hatter.

'You MUST remember,' remarked the King, 'or I'll have you executed.'

The miserable Hatter dropped his teacup and bread-and-butter, and went
down on one knee. 'I'm a poor man, your Majesty,' he began.

'You're a very poor speaker,' said the King.

Here one of the guinea-pigs cheered, and was immediately suppressed by
the officers of the court. (As that is rather a hard word, I will just
explain to you how it was done. They had a large canvas bag, which tied
up at the mouth with strings: into this they slipped the guinea-pig,
head first, and then sat upon it.)

'I'm glad I've seen that done,' thought Alice. 'I've so often read
in the newspapers, at the end of trials, "There was some attempts
at applause, which was immediately suppressed by the officers of the
court," and I never understood what it meant till now.'

'If that's all you know about it, you may stand down,' continued the
King.

'I can't go no lower,' said the Hatter: 'I'm on the floor, as it is.'

'Then you may SIT down,' the King replied.

Here the other guinea-pig cheered, and was suppressed.

'Come, that finished the guinea-pigs!' thought Alice. 'Now we shall get
on better.'

'I'd rather finish my tea,' said the Hatter, with an anxious look at the
Queen, who was reading the list of singers.

'You may go,' said the King, and the Hatter hurriedly left the court,
without even waiting to put his shoes on.

'--and just take his head off outside,' the Queen added to one of the
officers: but the Hatter was out of sight before the officer could get
to the door.

'Call the next witness!' said the King.

The next witness was the Duchess's cook. She carried the pepper-box in
her hand, and Alice guessed who it was, even before she got into the
court, by the way the people near the door began sneezing all at once.

'Give your evidence,' said the King.

'Shan't,' said the cook.

The King looked anxiously at the White Rabbit, who said in a low voice,
'Your Majesty must cross-examine THIS witness.'

'Well, if I must, I must,' the King said, with a melancholy air, and,
after folding his arms and frowning at the cook till his eyes were
nearly out of sight, he said in a deep voice, 'What are tarts made of?'

'Pepper, mostly,' said the cook.

'Treacle,' said a sleepy voice behind her.

'Collar that Dormouse,' the Queen shrieked out. 'Behead that Dormouse!
Turn that Dormouse out of court! Suppress him! Pinch him! Off with his
whiskers!'

For some minutes the whole court was in confusion, getting the Dormouse
turned out, and, by the time they had settled down again, the cook had
disappeared.

'Never mind!' said the King, with an air of great relief. 'Call the next
witness.' And he added in an undertone to the Queen, 'Really, my dear,
YOU must cross-examine the next witness. It quite makes my forehead
ache!'

Alice watched the White Rabbit as he fumbled over the list, feeling very
curious to see what the next witness would be like, '--for they haven't
got much evidence YET,' she said to herself. Imagine her surprise, when
the White Rabbit read out, at the top of his shrill little voice, the
name 'Alice!'




CHAPTER XII. Alice's Evidence


'Here!' cried Alice, quite forgetting in the flurry of the moment how
large she had grown in the last few minutes, and she jumped up in such
a hurry that she tipped over the jury-box with the edge of her skirt,
upsetting all the jurymen on to the heads of the crowd below, and there
they lay sprawling about, reminding her very much of a globe of goldfish
she had accidentally upset the week before.

'Oh, I BEG your pardon!' she exclaimed in a tone of great dismay, and
began picking them up again as quickly as she could, for the accident of
the goldfish kept running in her head, and she had a vague sort of idea
that they must be collected at once and put back into the jury-box, or
they would die.

'The trial cannot proceed,' said the King in a very grave voice, 'until
all the jurymen are back in their proper places--ALL,' he repeated with
great emphasis, looking hard at Alice as he said do.

Alice looked at the jury-box, and saw that, in her haste, she had put
the Lizard in head downwards, and the poor little thing was waving its
tail about in a melancholy way, being quite unable to move. She soon got
it out again, and put it right; 'not that it signifies much,' she said
to herself; 'I should think it would be QUITE as much use in the trial
one way up as the other.'

As soon as the jury had a little recovered from the shock of being
upset, and their slates and pencils had been found and handed back to
them, they set to work very diligently to write out a history of the
accident, all except the Lizard, who seemed too much overcome to do
anything but sit with its mouth open, gazing up into the roof of the
court.

'What do you know about this business?' the King said to Alice.

'Nothing,' said Alice.

'Nothing WHATEVER?' persisted the King.

'Nothing whatever,' said Alice.

'That's very important,' the King said, turning to the jury. They were
just beginning to write this down on their slates, when the White Rabbit
interrupted: 'UNimportant, your Majesty means, of course,' he said in a
very respectful tone, but frowning and making faces at him as he spoke.

'UNimportant, of course, I meant,' the King hastily said, and went on
to himself in an undertone,

'important--unimportant--unimportant--important--' as if he were trying
which word sounded best.

Some of the jury wrote it down 'important,' and some 'unimportant.'
Alice could see this, as she was near enough to look over their slates;
'but it doesn't matter a bit,' she thought to herself.

At this moment the King, who had been for some time busily writing in
his note-book, cackled out 'Silence!' and read out from his book, 'Rule
Forty-two. ALL PERSONS MORE THAN A MILE HIGH TO LEAVE THE COURT.'

Everybody looked at Alice.

'I'M not a mile high,' said Alice.

'You are,' said the King.

'Nearly two miles high,' added the Queen.

'Well, I shan't go, at any rate,' said Alice: 'besides, that's not a
regular rule: you invented it just now.'

'It's the oldest rule in the book,' said the King.

'Then it ought to be Number One,' said Alice.

The King turned pale, and shut his note-book hastily. 'Consider your
verdict,' he said to the jury, in a low, trembling voice.

'There's more evidence to come yet, please your Majesty,' said the White
Rabbit, jumping up in a great hurry; 'this paper has just been picked
up.'

'What's in it?' said the Queen.

'I haven't opened it yet,' said the White Rabbit, 'but it seems to be a
letter, written by the prisoner to--to somebody.'

'It must have been that,' said the King, 'unless it was written to
nobody, which isn't usual, you know.'

'Who is it directed to?' said one of the jurymen.

'It isn't directed at all,' said the White Rabbit; 'in fact, there's
nothing written on the OUTSIDE.' He unfolded the paper as he spoke, and
added 'It isn't a letter, after all: it's a set of verses.'

'Are they in the prisoner's handwriting?' asked another of the jurymen.

'No, they're not,' said the White Rabbit, 'and that's the queerest thing
about it.' (The jury all looked puzzled.)

'He must have imitated somebody else's hand,' said the King. (The jury
all brightened up again.)

'Please your Majesty,' said the Knave, 'I didn't write it, and they
can't prove I did: there's no name signed at the end.'

'If you didn't sign it,' said the King, 'that only makes the matter
worse. You MUST have meant some mischief, or else you'd have signed your
name like an honest man.'

There was a general clapping of hands at this: it was the first really
clever thing the King had said that day.

'That PROVES his guilt,' said the Queen.

'It proves nothing of the sort!' said Alice. 'Why, you don't even know
what they're about!'

'Read them,' said the King.

The White Rabbit put on his spectacles. 'Where shall I begin, please
your Majesty?' he asked.

'Begin at the beginning,' the King said gravely, 'and go on till you
come to the end: then stop.'

These were the verses the White Rabbit read:--

   'They told me you had been to her,
    And mentioned me to him:
   She gave me a good character,
    But said I could not swim.

   He sent them word I had not gone
    (We know it to be true):
   If she should push the matter on,
    What would become of you?

   I gave her one, they gave him two,
    You gave us three or more;
   They all returned from him to you,
    Though they were mine before.

   If I or she should chance to be
    Involved in this affair,
   He trusts to you to set them free,
    Exactly as we were.

   My notion was that you had been
    (Before she had this fit)
   An obstacle that came between
    Him, and ourselves, and it.

   Don't let him know she liked them best,
    For this must ever be
   A secret, kept from all the rest,
    Between yourself and me.'

'That's the most important piece of evidence we've heard yet,' said the
King, rubbing his hands; 'so now let the jury--'

'If any one of them can explain it,' said Alice, (she had grown so large
in the last few minutes that she wasn't a bit afraid of interrupting
him,) 'I'll give him sixpence. _I_ don't believe there's an atom of
meaning in it.'

The jury all wrote down on their slates, 'SHE doesn't believe there's an
atom of meaning in it,' but none of them attempted to explain the paper.

'If there's no meaning in it,' said the King, 'that saves a world of
trouble, you know, as we needn't try to find any. And yet I don't know,'
he went on, spreading out the verses on his knee, and looking at them
with one eye; 'I seem to see some meaning in them, after all. "--SAID
I COULD NOT SWIM--" you can't swim, can you?' he added, turning to the
Knave.

The Knave shook his head sadly. 'Do I look like it?' he said. (Which he
certainly did NOT, being made entirely of cardboard.)

'All right, so far,' said the King, and he went on muttering over
the verses to himself: '"WE KNOW IT TO BE TRUE--" that's the jury, of
course--"I GAVE HER ONE, THEY GAVE HIM TWO--" why, that must be what he
did with the tarts, you know--'

'But, it goes on "THEY ALL RETURNED FROM HIM TO YOU,"' said Alice.

'Why, there they are!' said the King triumphantly, pointing to the tarts
on the table. 'Nothing can be clearer than THAT. Then again--"BEFORE SHE
HAD THIS FIT--" you never had fits, my dear, I think?' he said to the
Queen.

'Never!' said the Queen furiously, throwing an inkstand at the Lizard
as she spoke. (The unfortunate little Bill had left off writing on his
slate with one finger, as he found it made no mark; but he now hastily
began again, using the ink, that was trickling down his face, as long as
it lasted.)

'Then the words don't FIT you,' said the King, looking round the court
with a smile. There was a dead silence.

'It's a pun!' the King added in an offended tone, and everybody laughed,
'Let the jury consider their verdict,' the King said, for about the
twentieth time that day.

'No, no!' said the Queen. 'Sentence first--verdict afterwards.'

'Stuff and nonsense!' said Alice loudly. 'The idea of having the
sentence first!'

'Hold your tongue!' said the Queen, turning purple.

'I won't!' said Alice.

'Off with her head!' the Queen shouted at the top of her voice. Nobody
moved.

'Who cares for you?' said Alice, (she had grown to her full size by this
time.) 'You're nothing but a pack of cards!'

At this the whole pack rose up into the air, and came flying down upon
her: she gave a little scream, half of fright and half of anger, and
tried to beat them off, and found herself lying on the bank, with her
head in the lap of her sister, who was gently brushing away some dead
leaves that had fluttered down from the trees upon her face.

'Wake up, Alice dear!' said her sister; 'Why, what a long sleep you've
had!'

'Oh, I've had such a curious dream!' said Alice, and she told her
sister, as well as she could remember them, all these strange Adventures
of hers that you have just been reading about; and when she had
finished, her sister kissed her, and said, 'It WAS a curious dream,
dear, certainly: but now run in to your tea; it's getting late.' So
Alice got up and ran off, thinking while she ran, as well she might,
what a wonderful dream it had been.

But her sister sat still just as she left her, leaning her head on her
hand, watching the setting sun, and thinking of little Alice and all her
wonderful Adventures, till she too began dreaming after a fashion, and
this was her dream:--

First, she dreamed of little Alice herself, and once again the tiny
hands were clasped upon her knee, and the bright eager eyes were looking
up into hers--she could hear the very tones of her voice, and see that
queer little toss of her head to keep back the wandering hair that
WOULD always get into her eyes--and still as she listened, or seemed to
listen, the whole place around her became alive with the strange creatures
of her little sister's dream.

The long grass rustled at her feet as the White Rabbit hurried by--the
frightened Mouse splashed his way through the neighbouring pool--she
could hear the rattle of the teacups as the March Hare and his friends
shared their never-ending meal, and the shrill voice of the Queen
ordering off her unfortunate guests to execution--once more the pig-baby
was sneezing on the Duchess's knee, while plates and dishes crashed
around it--once more the shriek of the Gryphon, the squeaking of the
Lizard's slate-pencil, and the choking of the suppressed guinea-pigs,
filled the air, mixed up with the distant sobs of the miserable Mock
Turtle.

So she sat on, with closed eyes, and half believed herself in
Wonderland, though she knew she had but to open them again, and all
would change to dull reality--the grass would be only rustling in the
wind, and the pool rippling to the waving of the reeds--the rattling
teacups would change to tinkling sheep-bells, and the Queen's shrill
cries to the voice of the shepherd boy--and the sneeze of the baby, the
shriek of the Gryphon, and all the other queer noises, would change (she
knew) to the confused clamour of the busy farm-yard--while the lowing
of the cattle in the distance would take the place of the Mock Turtle's
heavy sobs.

Lastly, she pictured to herself how this same little sister of hers
would, in the after-time, be herself a grown woman; and how she would
keep, through all her riper years, the simple and loving heart of her
childhood: and how she would gather about her other little children, and
make THEIR eyes bright and eager with many a strange tale, perhaps even
with the dream of Wonderland of long ago: and how she would feel with
all their simple sorrows, and find a pleasure in all their simple joys,
remembering her own child-life, and the happy summer days.

              THE END







                        ALICE'S ADVENTURES
                           UNDER GROUND



                    _BEING A FACSIMILE OF THE_
                       _ORIGINAL MS. BOOK_
                   _AFTERWARDS DEVELOPED INTO_
               "_ALICE'S ADVENTURES IN WONDERLAND_"



                                BY

                          LEWIS CARROLL


                 _WITH THIRTY-SEVEN ILLUSTRATIONS
                          BY THE AUTHOR_


                      _PRICE FOUR SHILLINGS_


                              London

                         MACMILLAN AND CO.
                           AND NEW YORK
                               1886

       *       *       *       *       *




CONTENTS.


CHAPTER

  I. DOWN THE RABBIT-HOLE. THE POOL OF TEARS

 II. A LONG TALE. THE RABBIT SENDS IN A LITTLE BILL

III. ADVICE FROM A CATERPILLAR

 IV. THE QUEEN'S CROQUET-GROUND. THE MOCK TURTLE'S STORY. THE
LOBSTER QUADRILLE. WHO STOLE THE TARTS?

       *       *       *       *       *




Chapter 1

[Illustration]


Alice was beginning to get very tired of sitting by her sister on
the bank, and of having nothing to do: once or twice she had
peeped into the book her sister was reading, but it had no
pictures or conversations in it, and where is the use of a book,
thought Alice, without pictures or conversations? So she was
considering in her own mind, (as well as she could, for the hot
day made her feel very sleepy and stupid,) whether the pleasure
of making a daisy-chain was worth the trouble of getting up and
picking the daisies, when a white rabbit with pink eyes ran close
by her.

There was nothing very remarkable in that, nor did Alice think it
so very much out of the way to hear the rabbit say to itself
"dear, dear! I shall be too late!" (when she thought it over
afterwards, it occurred to her that she ought to have wondered at
this, but at the time it all seemed quite natural); but when the
rabbit actually took a watch out of its waistcoat-pocket, looked
at it, and then hurried on, Alice started to her feet, for it
flashed across her mind that she had never before seen a rabbit
with either a waistcoat-pocket or a watch to take out of it, and,
full of curiosity, she hurried across the field after it, and was
just in time to see it pop down a large rabbit-hole under the
hedge. In a moment down went Alice after it, never once
considering how in the world she was to get out again.

The rabbit-hole went straight on like a tunnel for some way, and
then dipped suddenly down, so suddenly, that Alice had not a
moment to think about stopping herself, before she found herself
falling down what seemed a deep well. Either the well was very
deep, or she fell very slowly, for she had plenty of time as she
went down to look about her, and to wonder what would happen
next. First, she tried to look down and make out what she was
coming to, but it was too dark to see anything: then, she looked
at the sides of the well, and noticed that they were filled with
cupboards and book-shelves: here and there were maps and pictures
hung on pegs. She took a jar down off one of the shelves as she
passed: it was labelled "Orange Marmalade," but to her great
disappointment it was empty: she did not like to drop the jar,
for fear of killing somebody underneath, so managed to put it
into one of the cupboards as she fell past it.

"Well!" thought Alice to herself, "after such a fall as this, I
shall think nothing of tumbling down stairs! How brave they'll
all think me at home! Why, I wouldn't say anything about it, even
if I fell off the top of the house!" (which was most likely
true.)

Down, down, down. Would the fall never come to an end? "I wonder
how many miles I've fallen by this time?" she said aloud, "I must
be getting somewhere near the centre of the earth. Let me see:
that would be four thousand miles down, I think--" (for you see
Alice had learnt several things of this sort in her lessons in
the schoolroom, and though this was not a very good opportunity
of showing off her knowledge, as there was no one to hear her,
still it was good practice to say it over,) "yes that's the right
distance, but then what Longitude or Latitude-line shall I be
in?" (Alice had no idea what Longitude was, or Latitude either,
but she thought they were nice grand words to say.)

Presently she began again: "I wonder if I shall fall right
through the earth! How funny it'll be to come out among the
people that walk with their heads downwards! But I shall have to
ask them what the name of the country is, you know. Please,
Ma'am, is this New Zealand or Australia?"--and she tried to
curtsey as she spoke (fancy curtseying as you're falling through
the air! do you think you could manage it?) "and what an ignorant
little girl she'll think me for asking! No, it'll never do to
ask: perhaps I shall see it written up somewhere."

Down, down, down: there was nothing else to do, so Alice soon
began talking again. "Dinah will miss me very much tonight, I
should think!" (Dinah was the cat.) "I hope they'll remember her
saucer of milk at tea-time! Oh, dear Dinah, I wish I had you
here! There are no mice in the air, I'm afraid, but you might
catch a bat, and that's very like a mouse, you know, my dear. But
do cats eat bats, I wonder?" And here Alice began to get rather
sleepy, and kept on saying to herself, in a dreamy sort of way
"do cats eat bats? do cats eat bats?" and sometimes, "do bats
eat cats?" for, as she couldn't answer either question, it didn't
much matter which way she put it. She felt that she was dozing
off, and had just begun to dream that she was walking hand in
hand with Dinah, and was saying to her very earnestly, "Now,
Dinah, my dear, tell me the truth. Did you ever eat a bat?" when
suddenly, bump! bump! down she came upon a heap of sticks and
shavings, and the fall was over.

Alice was not a bit hurt, and jumped on to her feet directly: she
looked up, but it was all dark overhead; before her was another
long passage, and the white rabbit was still in sight, hurrying
down it. There was not a moment to be lost: away went Alice like
the wind, and just heard it say, as it turned a corner, "my ears
and whiskers, how late it's getting!" She turned the corner after
it, and instantly found herself in a long, low hall, lit up by a
row of lamps which hung from the roof.

[Illustration]

There were doors all round the hall, but they were all locked,
and when Alice had been all round it, and tried them all, she
walked sadly down the middle, wondering how she was ever to get
out again: suddenly she came upon a little three-legged table,
all made of solid glass; there was nothing lying upon it, but a
tiny golden key, and Alice's first idea was that it might belong
to one of the doors of the hall, but alas! either the locks were
too large, or the key too small, but at any rate it would open
none of them. However, on the second time round, she came to a
low curtain, behind which was a door about eighteen inches high:
she tried the little key in the keyhole, and it fitted! Alice
opened the door, and looked down a small passage, not larger than
a rat-hole, into the loveliest garden you ever saw. How she
longed to get out of that dark hall, and wander about among those
beds of bright flowers and those cool fountains, but she could
not even get her head through the doorway, "and even if my head
would go through," thought poor Alice, "it would be very little
use without my shoulders. Oh, how I wish I could shut up like a
telescope! I think I could, if I only knew how to begin." For,
you see, so many out-of-the-way things had happened lately, that
Alice began to think very few things indeed were really
impossible.

There was nothing else to do, so she went back to the table, half
hoping she might find another key on it, or at any rate a book of
rules for shutting up people like telescopes: this time there was
a little bottle on it--"which certainly was not there before"
said Alice--and tied round the neck of the bottle was a paper
label with the words DRINK ME beautifully printed on it in large
letters.

It was all very well to say "drink me," "but I'll look first,"
said the wise little Alice, "and see whether the bottle's marked
"poison" or not," for Alice had read several nice little stories
about children that got burnt, and eaten up by wild beasts, and
other unpleasant things, because they would not remember the
simple rules their friends had given them, such as, that, if you
get into the fire, it will burn you, and that, if you cut your
finger very deeply with a knife, it generally bleeds, and she
had never forgotten that, if you drink a bottle marked "poison,"
it is almost certain to disagree with you, sooner or later.

However, this bottle was not marked poison, so Alice tasted it,
and finding it very nice, (it had, in fact, a sort of mixed
flavour of cherry-tart, custard, pine-apple, roast turkey, toffy,
and hot buttered toast,) she very soon finished it off.

       *       *       *       *       *

"What a curious feeling!" said Alice, "I must be shutting up like
a telescope."

It was so indeed: she was now only ten inches high, and her face
brightened up as it occurred to her that she was now the right
size for going through the little door into that lovely garden.
First, however, she waited for a few minutes to see whether she
was going to shrink any further: she felt a little nervous about
this, "for it might end, you know," said Alice to herself, "in my
going out altogether, like a candle, and what should I be like
then, I wonder?" and she tried to fancy what the flame of a
candle is like after the candle is blown out, for she could not
remember having ever seen one. However, nothing more happened so
she decided on going into the garden at once, but, alas for poor
Alice! when she got to the door, she found she had forgotten the
little golden key, and when she went back to the table for the
key, she found she could not possibly reach it: she could see it
plainly enough through the glass, and she tried her best to climb
up one of the legs of the table, but it was too slippery, and
when she had tired herself out with trying, the poor little thing
sat down and cried.

[Illustration]

"Come! there's no use in crying!" said Alice to herself rather
sharply, "I advise you to leave off this minute!" (she generally
gave herself very good advice, and sometimes scolded herself so
severely as to bring tears into her eyes, and once she remembered
boxing her own ears for having been unkind to herself in a game
of croquet she was playing with herself, for this curious child
was very fond of pretending to be two people,) "but it's no use
now," thought poor Alice, "to pretend to be two people! Why,
there's hardly enough of me left to make one respectable person!"

Soon her eyes fell on a little ebony box lying under the table:
she opened it, and found in it a very small cake, on which was
lying a card with the words EAT ME beautifully printed on it in
large letters. "I'll eat," said Alice, "and if it makes me
larger, I can reach the key, and if it makes me smaller, I can
creep under the door, so either way I'll get into the garden, and
I don't care which happens!"

She ate a little bit, and said anxiously to herself "which way?
which way?" and laid her hand on the top of her head to feel
which way it was growing, and was quite surprised to find that
she remained the same size: to be sure this is what generally
happens when one eats cake, but Alice had got into the way of
expecting nothing but out-of-the way things to happen, and it
seemed quite dull and stupid for things to go on in the common
way.

So she set to work, and very soon finished off the cake.

       *       *       *       *       *

"Curiouser and curiouser!" cried Alice, (she was so surprised
that she quite forgot how to speak good English,) "now I'm
opening out like the largest telescope that ever was! Goodbye,
feet!" (for when she looked down at her feet, they seemed almost
out of sight, they were getting so far off,) "oh, my poor little
feet, I wonder who will put on your shoes and stockings for you
now, dears? I'm sure I can't! I shall be a great deal too far off
to bother myself about you: you must manage the best way you
can--but I must be kind to them," thought Alice, "or perhaps they
won't walk the way I want to go! Let me see: I'll give them a new
pair of boots every Christmas."

[Illustration]

And she went on planning to herself how she would manage it
"they must go by the carrier," she thought, "and how funny it'll
seem, sending presents to one's own feet! And how odd the
directions will look! ALICE'S RIGHT FOOT, ESQ.
                            THE CARPET,
                              with ALICE'S LOVE

oh dear! what nonsense I am talking!"

Just at this moment, her head struck against the roof of the
hall: in fact, she was now rather more than nine feet high, and
she at once took up the little golden key, and hurried off to the
garden door.

Poor Alice! it was as much as she could do, lying down on one
side, to look through into the garden with one eye, but to get
through was more hopeless than ever: she sat down and cried
again.

"You ought to be ashamed of yourself," said Alice, "a great girl
like you," (she might well say this,) "to cry in this way! Stop
this instant, I tell you!" But she cried on all the same,
shedding gallons of tears, until there was a large pool, about
four inches deep, all round her, and reaching half way across the
hall. After a time, she heard a little pattering of feet in the
distance, and dried her eyes to see what was coming. It was the
white rabbit coming back again, splendidly dressed, with a pair
of white kid gloves in one hand, and a nosegay in the other.
Alice was ready to ask help of any one, she felt so desperate,
and as the rabbit passed her, she said, in a low, timid voice,
"If you please, Sir--" the rabbit started violently, looked up
once into the roof of the hall, from which the voice seemed to
come, and then dropped the nosegay and the white kid gloves, and
skurried away into the darkness, as hard as it could go.

[Illustration]

Alice took up the nosegay and gloves, and found the nosegay so
delicious that she kept smelling at it all the time she went on
talking to herself--"dear, dear! how queer everything is today!
and yesterday everything happened just as usual: I wonder if I
was changed in the night? Let me think: was I the same when I got
up this morning? I think I remember feeling rather different.
But if I'm not the same, who in the world am I? Ah, that's the
great puzzle!" And she began thinking over all the children she
knew of the same age as herself, to see if she could have been
changed for any of them.

"I'm sure I'm not Gertrude," she said, "for her hair goes in such
long ringlets, and mine doesn't go in ringlets at all--and I'm
sure I ca'n't be Florence, for I know all sorts of things, and
she, oh! she knows such a very little! Besides, she's she, and
I'm I, and--oh dear! how puzzling it all is! I'll try if I know
all the things I used to know. Let me see: four times five is
twelve, and four times six is thirteen, and four times seven is
fourteen--oh dear! I shall never get to twenty at this rate! But
the Multiplication Table don't signify--let's try Geography.
London is the capital of France, and Rome is the capital of
Yorkshire, and Paris--oh dear! dear! that's all wrong, I'm
certain! I must have been changed for Florence! I'll try and say
"How doth the little,"" and she crossed her hands on her lap,
and began, but her voice sounded hoarse and strange, and the
words did not sound the same as they used to do:

    "How doth the little crocodile
      Improve its shining tail,
    And pour the waters of the Nile
      On every golden scale!

    "How cheerfully it seems to grin!
      How neatly spreads its claws!
    And welcomes little fishes in
      With gently-smiling jaws!"

"I'm sure those are not the right words," said poor Alice, and
her eyes filled with tears as she thought "I must be Florence
after all, and I shall have to go and live in that poky little
house, and have next to no toys to play with, and oh! ever so
many lessons to learn! No! I've made up my mind about it: if I'm
Florence, I'll stay down here! It'll be no use their putting
their heads down and saying 'come up, dear!' I shall only look
up and say 'who am I then? answer me that first, and then, if I
like being that person, I'll come up: if not, I'll stay down here
till I'm somebody else--but, oh dear!" cried Alice with a sudden
burst of tears, "I do wish they would put their heads down! I am
so tired of being all alone here!"

As she said this, she looked down at her hands, and was surprised
to find she had put on one of the rabbit's little gloves while
she was talking. "How can I have done that?" thought she, "I must
be growing small again." She got up and went to the table to
measure herself by it, and found that, as nearly as she could
guess, she was now about two feet high, and was going on
shrinking rapidly: soon she found out that the reason of it was
the nosegay she held in her hand: she dropped it hastily, just in
time to save herself from shrinking away altogether, and found
that she was now only three inches high.

"Now for the garden!" cried Alice, as she hurried back to the
little door, but the little door was locked again, and the little
gold key was lying on the glass table as before, and "things are
worse than ever!" thought the poor little girl, "for I never was
as small as this before, never! And I declare it's too bad, it
is!"

[Illustration]

At this moment her foot slipped, and splash! she was up to her
chin in salt water. Her first idea was that she had fallen into
the sea: then she remembered that she was under ground, and she
soon made out that it was the pool of tears she had wept when she
was nine feet high. "I wish I hadn't cried so much!" said Alice,
as she swam about, trying to find her way out, "I shall be
punished for it now, I suppose, by being drowned in my own tears!
Well! that'll be a queer thing, to be sure! However, every thing
is queer today." Very soon she saw something splashing about in
the pool near her: at first she thought it must be a walrus or a
hippopotamus, but then she remembered how small she was herself,
and soon made out that it was only a mouse, that had slipped in
like herself.

"Would it be any use, now," thought Alice, "to speak to this
mouse? The rabbit is something quite out-of-the-way, no doubt,
and so have I been, ever since I came down here, but that is no
reason why the mouse should not be able to talk. I think I may as
well try."

So she began: "oh Mouse, do you know how to get out of this pool?
I am very tired of swimming about here, oh Mouse!" The mouse
looked at her rather inquisitively, and seemed to her to wink
with one of its little eyes, but it said nothing.

[Illustration]

"Perhaps it doesn't understand English," thought Alice; "I
daresay it's a French mouse, come over with William the
Conqueror!" (for, with all her knowledge of history, Alice had
no very clear notion how long ago anything had happened,) so she
began again: "o est ma chatte?" which was the first sentence out
of her French lesson-book. The mouse gave a sudden jump in the
pool, and seemed to quiver with fright: "oh, I beg your pardon!"
cried Alice hastily, afraid that she had hurt the poor animal's
feelings, "I quite forgot you didn't like cats!"

"Not like cats!" cried the mouse, in a shrill, passionate voice,
"would you like cats if you were me?"

"Well, perhaps not," said Alice in a soothing tone, "don't be
angry about it. And yet I wish I could show you our cat Dinah: I
think you'd take a fancy to cats if you could only see her. She
is such a dear quiet thing," said Alice, half to herself, as she
swam lazily about in the pool, "she sits purring so nicely by the
fire, licking her paws and washing her face: and she is such a
nice soft thing to nurse, and she's such a capital one for
catching mice--oh! I beg your pardon!" cried poor Alice again,
for this time the mouse was bristling all over, and she felt
certain that it was really offended, "have I offended you?"

"Offended indeed!" cried the mouse, who seemed to be positively
trembling with rage, "our family always hated cats! Nasty, low,
vulgar things! Don't talk to me about them any more!"

"I won't indeed!" said Alice, in a great hurry to change the
conversation, "are you--are you--fond of--dogs?" The mouse did
not answer, so Alice went on eagerly: "there is such a nice
little dog near our house I should like to show you! A little
bright-eyed terrier, you know, with oh! such long curly brown
hair! And it'll fetch things when you throw them, and it'll sit
up and beg for its dinner, and all sorts of things--I ca'n't
remember half of them--and it belongs to a farmer, and he says it
kills all the rats and--oh dear!" said Alice sadly, "I'm afraid
I've offended it again!" for the mouse was swimming away from her
as hard as it could go, and making quite a commotion in the pool
as it went.

So she called softly after it: "mouse dear! Do come back again,
and we won't talk about cats and dogs any more, if you don't like
them!" When the mouse heard this, it turned and swam slowly back
to her: its face was quite pale, (with passion, Alice thought,)
and it said in a trembling low voice "let's get to the shore, and
then I'll tell you my history, and you'll understand why it is I
hate cats and dogs."

It was high time to go, for the pool was getting quite full of
birds and animals that had fallen into it. There was a Duck and a
Dodo, a Lory and an Eaglet, and several other curious creatures.
Alice led the way, and the whole party swam to the shore.

[Illustration]




Chapter II

[Illustration]


They were indeed a curious looking party that assembled on the
bank--the birds with draggled feathers, the animals with their
fur clinging close to them--all dripping wet, cross, and
uncomfortable. The first question of course was, how to get dry:
they had a consultation about this, and Alice hardly felt at all
surprised at finding herself talking familiarly with the birds,
as if she had known them all her life. Indeed, she had quite a
long argument with the Lory, who at last turned sulky, and would
only say "I am older than you, and must know best," and this
Alice would not admit without knowing how old the Lory was, and
as the Lory positively refused to tell its age, there was nothing
more to be said.

At last the mouse, who seemed to have some authority among them,
called out "sit down, all of you, and attend to me! I'll soon
make you dry enough!" They all sat down at once, shivering, in a
large ring, Alice in the middle, with her eyes anxiously fixed on
the mouse, for she felt sure she would catch a bad cold if she
did not get dry very soon.

"Ahem!" said the mouse, with a self-important air, "are you all
ready? This is the driest thing I know. Silence all round, if you
please!

"William the Conqueror, whose cause was favoured by the pope, was
soon submitted to by the English, who wanted leaders, and had
been of late much accustomed to usurpation and conquest. Edwin
and Morcar, the earls of Mercia and Northumbria--"

"Ugh!" said the Lory with a shiver.

"I beg your pardon?" said the mouse, frowning, but very politely,
"did you speak?"

"Not I!" said the Lory hastily.

"I thought you did," said the mouse, "I proceed. Edwin and
Morcar, the earls of Mercia and Northumbria, declared for him;
and even Stigand, the patriotic archbishop of Canterbury, found
it advisable to go with Edgar Atheling to meet William and offer
him the crown. William's conduct was at first moderate--how are
you getting on now, dear?" said the mouse, turning to Alice as it
spoke.

"As wet as ever," said poor Alice, "it doesn't seem to dry me at
all."

"In that case," said the Dodo solemnly, rising to his feet, "I
move that the meeting adjourn, for the immediate adoption of more
energetic remedies--"

"Speak English!" said the Duck, "I don't know the meaning of half
those long words, and what's more, I don't believe you do
either!" And the Duck quacked a comfortable laugh to itself. Some
of the other birds tittered audibly.

"I only meant to say," said the Dodo in a rather offended tone,
"that I know of a house near here, where we could get the young
lady and the rest of the party dried, and then we could listen
comfortably to the story which I think you were good enough to
promise to tell us," bowing gravely to the mouse.

The mouse made no objection to this, and the whole party moved
along the river bank, (for the pool had by this time began to
flow out of the hall, and the edge of it was fringed with rushes
and forget-me-nots,) in a slow procession, the Dodo leading the
way. After a time the Dodo became impatient, and, leaving the
Duck to bring up the rest of the party, moved on at a quicker
pace with Alice, the Lory, and the Eaglet, and soon brought them
to a little cottage, and there they sat snugly by the fire,
wrapped up in blankets, until the rest of the party had arrived,
and they were all dry again.

Then they all sat down again in a large ring on the bank, and
begged the mouse to begin his story.

"Mine is a long and a sad tale!" said the mouse, turning to
Alice, and sighing.

"It is a long tail, certainly," said Alice, looking down with
wonder at the mouse's tail, which was coiled nearly all round the
party, "but why do you call it sad?" and she went on puzzling
about this as the mouse went on speaking, so that her idea of the
tale was something like this:

We lived beneath the mat
       Warm and snug and fat
              But one woe, & that
                       Was the cat!
                           To our joys
                            a clog, In
                           our eyes a
                       fog, On our
                  hearts a log
               Was the dog!
              When the
       cat's away,
     Then
   the mice
   will
     play,
       But, alas!
         one day, (So they say)
              Came the dog and
                        cat, Hunting
                                for a
                                  rat,
                             Crushed
                          the mice
                      all flat;
                      Each
                     one
                     as
                     he
                     sat.
                       U
                        n
                         d
                          e
                           r
                            n
                             e
                              a
                               t
                                h

                                t
                                h
                                e

                              m
                             a
                            t
                           ,
                   m r a W
            g u n s &
       t a f &
   T h i n k?
o f t h a t!

"You are not attending!" said the mouse to Alice severely, "what
are you thinking of?"

"I beg your pardon," said Alice very humbly, "you had got to the
fifth bend, I think?"

"I had not!" cried the mouse, sharply and very angrily.

"A knot!" said Alice, always ready to make herself useful, and
looking anxiously about her, "oh, do let me help to undo it!"

"I shall do nothing of the sort!" said the mouse, getting up and
walking away from the party, "you insult me by talking such
nonsense!"

"I didn't mean it!" pleaded poor Alice, "but you're so easily
offended, you know."

The mouse only growled in reply.

"Please come back and finish your story!" Alice called after it,
and the others all joined in chorus "yes, please do!" but the
mouse only shook its ears, and walked quickly away, and was soon
out of sight.

"What a pity it wouldn't stay!" sighed the Lory, and an old Crab
took the opportunity of saying to its daughter "Ah, my dear! let
this be a lesson to you never to lose your temper!" "Hold your
tongue, Ma!" said the young Crab, a little snappishly, "you're
enough to try the patience of an oyster!"

"I wish I had our Dinah here, I know I do!" said Alice aloud,
addressing no one in particular, "she'd soon fetch it back!"

"And who is Dinah, if I might venture to ask the question?" said
the Lory.

[Illustration]

Alice replied eagerly, for she was always ready to talk about her
pet, "Dinah's our cat. And she's such a capital one for catching
mice, you can't think! And oh! I wish you could see her after the
birds! Why, she'll eat a little bird as soon as look at it!"

This answer caused a remarkable sensation among the party: some
of the birds hurried off at once; one old magpie began wrapping
itself up very carefully, remarking "I really must be getting
home: the night air does not suit my throat," and a canary called
out in a trembling voice to its children "come away from her, my
dears, she's no fit company for you!" On various pretexts, they
all moved off, and Alice was soon left alone.

[Illustration]

She sat for some while sorrowful and silent, but she was not long
before she recovered her spirits, and began talking to herself
again as usual: "I do wish some of them had stayed a little
longer! and I was getting to be such friends with them--really
the Lory and I were almost like sisters! and so was that dear
little Eaglet! And then the Duck and the Dodo! How nicely the
Duck sang to us as we came along through the water: and if the
Dodo hadn't known the way to that nice little cottage, I don't
know when we should have got dry again--" and there is no knowing
how long she might have prattled on in this way, if she had not
suddenly caught the sound of pattering feet.

It was the white rabbit, trotting slowly back again, and looking
anxiously about it as it went, as if it had lost something, and she
heard it muttering to itself "the Marchioness! the Marchioness! oh
my dear paws! oh my fur and whiskers! She'll have me executed, as
sure as ferrets are ferrets! Where can I have dropped them, I
wonder?" Alice guessed in a moment that it was looking for the
nosegay and the pair of white kid gloves, and she began hunting for
them, but they were now nowhere to be seen--everything seemed to
have changed since her swim in the pool, and her walk along the
river-bank with its fringe of rushes and forget-me-nots, and the
glass table and the little door had vanished.

Soon the rabbit noticed Alice, as she stood looking curiously
about her, and at once said in a quick angry tone, "why, Mary
Ann! what are you doing out here? Go home this moment, and look
on my dressing-table for my gloves and nosegay, and fetch them
here, as quick as you can run, do you hear?" and Alice was so
much frightened that she ran off at once, without saying a word,
in the direction which the rabbit had pointed out.

She soon found herself in front of a neat little house, on the
door of which was a bright brass plate with the name W. RABBIT,
ESQ. She went in, and hurried upstairs, for fear she should meet
the real Mary Ann and be turned out of the house before she had
found the gloves: she knew that one pair had been lost in the
hall, "but of course," thought Alice, "it has plenty more of them
in its house. How queer it seems to be going messages for a
rabbit! I suppose Dinah'll be sending me messages next!" And she
began fancying the sort of things that would happen: "Miss Alice!
come here directly and get ready for your walk!" "Coming in a
minute, nurse! but I've got to watch this mousehole till Dinah
comes back, and see that the mouse doesn't get out--" "only I
don't think," Alice went on, "that they'd let Dinah stop in the
house, if it began ordering people about like that!"

[Illustration]

By this time she had found her way into a tidy little room, with a
table in the window on which was a looking-glass and, (as Alice had
hoped,) two or three pairs of tiny white kid gloves: she took up a
pair of gloves, and was just going to leave the room, when her eye
fell upon a little bottle that stood near the looking-glass: there
was no label on it this time with the words "drink me," but
nonetheless she uncorked it and put it to her lips: "I know
something interesting is sure to happen," she said to herself,
"whenever I eat or drink anything, so I'll see what this bottle
does. I do hope it'll make me grow larger, for I'm quite tired of
being such a tiny little thing!"

[Illustration]

It did so indeed, and much sooner than she expected: before she
had drunk half the bottle, she found her head pressing against
the ceiling, and she stooped to save her neck from being broken,
and hastily put down the bottle, saying to herself "that's quite
enough--I hope I sha'n't grow any more--I wish I hadn't drunk so
much!"

[Illustration]

Alas! it was too late: she went on growing and growing, and very
soon had to kneel down: in another minute there was not room even
for this, and she tried the effect of lying down, with one elbow
against the door, and the other arm curled round her head. Still
she went on growing, and as a last resource she put one arm out
of the window, and one foot up the chimney, and said to herself
"now I can do no more--what will become of me?"

Luckily for Alice, the little magic bottle had now had its full
effect, and she grew no larger; still it was very uncomfortable,
and as there seemed to be no sort of chance of ever getting out
of the room again, no wonder she felt unhappy. "It was much
pleasanter at home," thought poor Alice, "when one wasn't always
growing larger and smaller, and being ordered about by mice and
rabbits--I almost wish I hadn't gone down that rabbit-hole, and
yet, and yet--it's rather curious, you know, this sort of life. I
do wonder what can have happened to me! When I used to read
fairy-tales, I fancied that sort of thing never happened, and now
here I am in the middle of one! There out to be a book written
about me, that there ought! and when I grow up I'll write
one--but I'm grown up now" said she in a sorrowful tone, "at
least there's no room to grow up any more here."

[Illustration]

"But then," thought Alice, "shall I never get any older than I
am now? That'll be a comfort, one way--never to be an old
woman--but then--always to have lessons to learn! Oh, I shouldn't
like that!"

"Oh, you foolish Alice!" she said again, "how can you learn
lessons in here? Why, there's hardly room for you, and no room at
all for any lesson-books!"

And so she went on, taking first one side, and then the other,
and making quite a conversation of it altogether, but after a few
minutes she heard a voice outside, which made her stop to listen.

"Mary Ann! Mary Ann!" said the voice, "fetch me my gloves this
moment!" Then came a little pattering of feet on the stairs:
Alice knew it was the rabbit coming to look for her, and she
trembled till she shook the house, quite forgetting that she was
now about a thousand times as large as the rabbit, and had no
reason to be afraid of it. Presently the rabbit came to the door,
and tried to open it, but as it opened inwards, and Alice's elbow
was against it, the attempt proved a failure. Alice heard it say
to itself "then I'll go round and get in at the window."

"That you wo'n't!" thought Alice, and, after waiting till she
fancied she heard the rabbit, just under the window, she suddenly
spread out her hand, and made a snatch in the air. She did not
get hold of anything, but she heard a little shriek and a fall
and a crash of breaking glass, from which she concluded that it
was just possible it had fallen into a cucumber-frame, or
something of the sort.

[Illustration]

Next came an angry voice--the rabbit's--"Pat, Pat! where are
you?" And then a voice she had never heard before, "shure then
I'm here! digging for apples, anyway, yer honour!"

"Digging for apples indeed!" said the rabbit angrily, "here, come
and help me out of this!"--Sound of more breaking glass.

"Now, tell me, Pat, what is that coming out of the window?"

"Shure it's an arm, yer honour!" (He pronounced it "arrum".)

"An arm, you goose! Who ever saw an arm that size? Why, it fills
the whole window, don't you see?"

"Shure, it does, yer honour, but it's an arm for all that."

"Well, it's no business there: go and take it away!"

There was a long silence after this, and Alice could only hear
whispers now and then, such as "shure I don't like it, yer
honour, at all at all!" "do as I tell you, you coward!" and at
last she spread out her hand again and made another snatch in the
air. This time there were two little shrieks, and more breaking
glass--"what a number of cucumber-frames there must be!" thought
Alice, "I wonder what they'll do next! As for pulling me out of
the window, I only wish they could! I'm sure I don't want to stop
in here any longer!"

She waited for some time without hearing anything more: at last
came a rumbling of little cart-wheels, and the sound of a good
many voices all talking together: she made out the words "where's
the other ladder?--why, I hadn't to bring but one, Bill's got the
other--here, put 'em up at this corner--no, tie 'em together
first--they don't reach high enough yet--oh, they'll do well
enough, don't be particular--here, Bill! catch hold of this
rope--will the roof bear?--mind that loose slate--oh, it's coming
down! heads below!--" (a loud crash) "now, who did that?--it was
Bill, I fancy--who's to go down the chimney?--nay, I sha'n't! you
do it!--that I won't then--Bill's got to go down--here, Bill! the
master says you've to go down the chimney!"

"Oh, so Bill's got to come down the chimney, has he?" said Alice
to herself, "why, they seem to put everything upon Bill! I
wouldn't be in Bill's place for a good deal: the fireplace is a
pretty tight one, but I think I can kick a little!"

She drew her foot as far down the chimney as she could, and
waited till she heard a little animal (she couldn't guess what
sort it was) scratching and scrambling in the chimney close above
her: then, saying to herself "this is Bill," she gave one sharp
kick, and waited again to see what would happen next.

[Illustration]

The first thing was a general chorus of "there goes Bill!" then
the rabbit's voice alone "catch him, you by the hedge!" then
silence, and then another confusion of voices, "how was it, old
fellow? what happened to you? tell us all about it."

Last came a little feeble squeaking voice, ("that's Bill" thought
Alice,) which said "well, I hardly know--I'm all of a fluster
myself--something comes at me like a Jack-in-the-box, and the
next minute up I goes like a rocket!" "And so you did, old
fellow!" said the other voices.

"We must burn the house down!" said the voice of the rabbit, and
Alice called out as loud as she could "if you do, I'll set Dinah
at you!" This caused silence again, and while Alice was thinking
"but how can I get Dinah here?" she found to her great delight
that she was getting smaller: very soon she was able to get up
out of the uncomfortable position in which she had been lying,
and in two or three minutes more she was once more three inches
high.

She ran out of the house as quick as she could, and found quite a
crowd of little animals waiting outside--guinea-pigs, white mice,
squirrels, and "Bill" a little green lizard, that was being
supported in the arms of one of the guinea-pigs, while another
was giving it something out of a bottle. They all made a rush at
her the moment she appeared, but Alice ran her hardest, and soon
found herself in a thick wood.

[Illustration]




Chapter III

[Illustration]


"The first thing I've got to do," said Alice to herself, as she
wandered about in the wood, "is to grow to my right size, and the
second thing is to find my way into that lovely garden. I think
that will be the best plan."

It sounded an excellent plan, no doubt, and very neatly and
simply arranged: the only difficulty was, that she had not the
smallest idea how to set about it, and while she was peering
anxiously among the trees round her, a little sharp bark just
over her head made her look up in a great hurry.

An enormous puppy was looking down at her with large round eyes,
and feebly stretching out one paw, trying to reach her: "poor
thing!" said Alice in a coaxing tone, and she tried hard to
whistle to it, but she was terribly alarmed all the while at the
thought that it might be hungry, in which case it would probably
devour her in spite of all her coaxing. Hardly knowing what she
did, she picked up a little bit of stick, and held it out to the
puppy: whereupon the puppy jumped into the air off all its feet at
once, and with a yelp of delight rushed at the stick, and made
believe to worry it then Alice dodged behind a great thistle to
keep herself from being run over, and, the moment she appeared at
the other side, the puppy made another dart at the stick, and
tumbled head over heels in its hurry to get hold: then Alice,
thinking it was very like having a game of play with a cart-horse,
and expecting every moment to be trampled under its feet, ran round
the thistle again: then the puppy begin a series of short charges
at the stick, running a very little way forwards each time and a
long way back, and barking hoarsely all the while, till at last it
sat down a good way off, panting, with its tongue hanging out of
its mouth, and its great eyes half shut.

This seemed to Alice a good opportunity for making her escape.
She set off at once, and ran till the puppy's bark sounded quite
faint in the distance, and till she was quite tired and out of
breath.

"And yet what a dear little puppy it was!" said Alice, as she
leant against a buttercup to rest herself, and fanned herself
with her hat. "I should have liked teaching it tricks, if--if I'd
only been the right size to do it! Oh! I'd nearly forgotten that
I've got to grow up again! Let me see; how _is_ it to be managed?
I suppose I ought to eat or drink something or other, but the
great question is what?"

The great question certainly was, what? Alice looked all round
her at the flowers and the blades of grass but could not see
anything that looked like the right thing to eat under the
circumstances. There was a large mushroom near her, about the
same height as herself, and when she had looked under it, and on
both sides of it, and behind it, it occurred to her to look and
see what was on the top of it.

She stretched herself up on tiptoe, and peeped over the edge of
the mushroom, and her eyes immediately met those of a large blue
caterpillar, which was sitting with its arms folded, quietly
smoking a long hookah, and taking not the least notice of her or
of anything else.

[Illustration]

For some time they looked at each other in silence: at last the
caterpillar took the hookah out of its mouth, and languidly
addressed her.

"Who are you?" said the caterpillar.

This was not an encouraging opening for a conversation: Alice
replied rather shyly, "I--I hardly know, sir, just at present--at
least I know who I was when I got up this morning, but I think I
must have been changed several times since that."

"What do you mean by that?" said the caterpillar, "explain
yourself!"

"I ca'n't explain myself, I'm afraid, sir," said Alice, "because
I'm not myself, you see."

"I don't see," said the caterpillar.

"I'm afraid I can't put it more clearly," Alice replied very
politely, "for I ca'n't understand it myself, and really to be so
many different sizes in one day is very confusing."

"It isn't," said the caterpillar.

"Well, perhaps you haven't found it so yet," said Alice, "but
when you have to turn into a chrysalis, you know, and then after
that into a butterfly, I should think it'll feel a little queer,
don't you think so?"

"Not a bit," said the caterpillar.

"All I know is," said Alice, "it would feel queer to me."

"You!" said the caterpillar contemptuously, "who are you?"

Which brought them back again to the beginning of the
conversation: Alice felt a little irritated at the caterpillar
making such very short remarks, and she drew herself up and said
very gravely "I think you ought to tell me who you are, first."

"Why?" said the caterpillar.

Here was another puzzling question: and as Alice had no reason
ready, and the caterpillar seemed to be in a very bad temper, she
turned round and walked away.

"Come back!" the caterpillar called after her, "I've something
important to say!"

This sounded promising: Alice turned and came back again.

"Keep your temper," said the caterpillar.

"Is that all?" said Alice, swallowing down her anger as well as
she could.

"No," said the caterpillar.

Alice thought she might as well wait, as she had nothing else to
do, and perhaps after all the caterpillar might tell her
something worth hearing. For some minutes it puffed away at its
hookah without speaking, but at last it unfolded its arms, took
the hookah out of its mouth again, and said "so you think you're
changed, do you?"

"Yes, sir," said Alice, "I ca'n't remember the things I used to
know--I've tried to say "How doth the little busy bee" and it
came all different!"

"Try and repeat "You are old, father William"," said the
caterpillar.

Alice folded her hands, and began:

[Illustration]

1.

    "You are old, father William," the young man said,
        "And your hair is exceedingly white:
    And yet you incessantly stand on your head--
        Do you think, at your age, it is right?"

2.

    "In my youth," father William replied to his son,
        "I feared it might injure the brain
    But now that I'm perfectly sure I have none,
        Why, I do it again and again."

[Illustration]

3.

    "You are old," said the youth, "as I mentioned before,
        And have grown most uncommonly fat:
    Yet you turned a back-somersault in at the door--
        Pray what is the reason of that?"

4.

    "In my youth," said the sage, as he shook his gray locks,
        "I kept all my limbs very supple,
    By the use of this ointment, five shillings the box--
        Allow me to sell you a couple."

[Illustration]

5.

    "You are old," said the youth, "and your jaws are too weak
        For anything tougher than suet:
    Yet you eat all the goose, with the bones and the beak--
        Pray, how did you manage to do it?"

6.

    "In my youth," said the old man, "I took to the law,
        And argued each case with my wife,
    And the muscular strength, which it gave to my jaw,
        Has lasted the rest of my life."

[Illustration]

7.

    "You are old," said the youth; "one would hardly suppose
        That your eye was as steady as ever:
    Yet you balanced an eel on the end of your nose--
        What made you so awfully clever?"

8.

    "I have answered three questions, and that is enough,"
        Said his father, "don't give yourself airs!
    Do you think I can listen all day to such stuff?
        Be off, or I'll kick you down stairs!"

"That is not said right," said the caterpillar.

"Not quite right, I'm afraid," said Alice timidly, "some of the
words have got altered."

"It is wrong from beginning to end," said the caterpillar
decidedly, and there was silence for some minutes: the caterpillar
was the first to speak.

"What size do you want to be?" it asked.

"Oh, I'm not particular as to size," Alice hastily replied, "only
one doesn't like changing so often, you know."

"Are you content now?" said the caterpillar.

"Well, I should like to be a little larger, sir, if you wouldn't
mind," said Alice, "three inches is such a wretched height to
be."

"It is a very good height indeed!" said the caterpillar loudly
and angrily, rearing itself straight up as it spoke (it was
exactly three inches high).

"But I'm not used to it!" pleaded poor Alice in a piteous tone,
and she thought to herself "I wish the creatures wouldn't be so
easily offended!"

"You'll get used to it in time," said the caterpillar, and it put
the hookah into its mouth, and began smoking again.

This time Alice waited quietly until it chose to speak again: in
a few minutes the caterpillar took the hookah out of its mouth,
and got down off the mushroom, and crawled away into the grass,
merely remarking as it went; "the top will make you grow taller,
and the stalk will make you grow shorter."

"The top of what? the stalk of what?" thought Alice.

"Of the mushroom," said the caterpillar, just as if she had asked
it aloud, and in another moment was out of sight.

Alice remained looking thoughtfully at the mushroom for a minute,
and then picked it and carefully broke it in two, taking the
stalk in one hand, and the top in the other.

[Illustration]

"Which does the stalk do?" she said, and nibbled a little bit of
it to try; the next moment she felt a violent blow on her chin:
it had struck her foot!

She was a good deal frightened by this very sudden change, but as
she did not shrink any further, and had not dropped the top of
the mushroom, she did not give up hope yet. There was hardly room
to open her mouth, with her chin pressing against her foot, but
she did it at last, and managed to bite off a little bit of the
top of the mushroom.

       *       *       *       *       *

"Come! my head's free at last!" said Alice in a tone of delight,
which changed into alarm in another moment, when she found that
her shoulders were nowhere to be seen: she looked down upon an
immense length of neck, which seemed to rise like a stalk out of
a sea of green leaves that lay far below her.

[Illustration]

"What can all that green stuff be?" said Alice, "and where have
my shoulders got to? And oh! my poor hands! how is it I ca'n't
see you?" She was moving them about as she spoke, but no result
seemed to follow, except a little rustling among the leaves. Then
she tried to bring her head down to her hands, and was delighted
to find that her neck would bend about easily in every direction,
like a serpent. She had just succeeded in bending it down in a
beautiful zig-zag, and was going to dive in among the leaves,
which she found to be the tops of the trees of the wood she had
been wandering in, when a sharp hiss made her draw back: a large
pigeon had flown into her face, and was violently beating her
with its wings.

[Illustration]

"Serpent!" screamed the pigeon.

"I'm not a serpent!" said Alice indignantly, "let me alone!"

"I've tried every way!" the pigeon said desperately, with a kind
of sob: "nothing seems to suit 'em!"

"I haven't the least idea what you mean," said Alice.

"I've tried the roots of trees, and I've tried banks, and I've
tried hedges," the pigeon went on without attending to her, "but
them serpents! There's no pleasing 'em!"

Alice was more and more puzzled, but she thought there was no use
in saying anything till the pigeon had finished.

"As if it wasn't trouble enough hatching the eggs!" said the
pigeon, "without being on the look out for serpents, day and
night! Why, I haven't had a wink of sleep these three weeks!"

"I'm very sorry you've been annoyed," said Alice, beginning to
see its meaning.

"And just as I'd taken the highest tree in the wood," said the
pigeon raising its voice to a shriek, "and was just thinking I
was free of 'em at last, they must needs come down from the sky!
Ugh! Serpent!"

"But I'm not a serpent," said Alice, "I'm a--I'm a--"

"Well! What are you?" said the pigeon, "I see you're trying to
invent something."

"I--I'm a little girl," said Alice, rather doubtfully, as she
remembered the number of changes she had gone through.

"A likely story indeed!" said the pigeon, "I've seen a good many
of them in my time, but never one with such a neck as yours! No,
you're a serpent, I know that well enough! I suppose you'll tell
me next that you never tasted an egg!"

"I have tasted eggs, certainly," said Alice, who was a very
truthful child, "but indeed I do'n't want any of yours. I do'n't
like them raw."

"Well, be off, then!" said the pigeon, and settled down into its
nest again. Alice crouched down among the trees, as well as she
could, as her neck kept getting entangled among the branches, and
several times she had to stop and untwist it. Soon she remembered
the pieces of mushroom which she still held in her hands, and set
to work very carefully, nibbling first at one and then at the
other, and growing sometimes taller and sometimes shorter, until
she had succeeded in bringing herself down to her usual size.

It was so long since she had been of the right size that it felt
quite strange at first, but she got quite used to it in a minute
or two, and began talking to herself as usual: "well! there's
half my plan done now! How puzzling all these changes are! I'm
never sure what I'm going to be, from one minute to another!
However, I've got to my right size again: the next thing is, to
get into that beautiful garden--how is that to be done, I
wonder?"

Just as she said this, she noticed that one of the trees had a
doorway leading right into it. "That's very curious!" she
thought, "but everything's curious today: I may as well go in."
And in she went.

Once more she found herself in the long hall, and close to the
little glass table: "now, I'll manage better this time" she said
to herself, and began by taking the little golden key, and
unlocking the door that led into the garden. Then she set to work
eating the pieces of mushroom till she was about fifteen inches
high: then she walked down the little passage: and then--she
found herself at last in the beautiful garden, among the bright
flowerbeds and the cool fountains.

[Illustration]




Chapter IV

[Illustration]


A large rose tree stood near the entrance of the garden: the
roses on it were white, but there were three gardeners at it,
busily painting them red. This Alice thought a very curious
thing, and she went near to watch them, and just as she came up
she heard one of them say "look out, Five! Don't go splashing
paint over me like that!"

"I couldn't help it," said Five in a sulky tone, "Seven jogged my
elbow."

On which Seven lifted up his head and said "that's right, Five!
Always lay the blame on others!"

"You'd better not talk!" said Five, "I heard the Queen say only
yesterday she thought of having you beheaded!"

"What for?" said the one who had spoken first.

"That's not your business, Two!" said Seven.

"Yes, it is his business!" said Five, "and I'll tell him: it was
for bringing in tulip-roots to the cook instead of potatoes."

Seven flung down his brush, and had just begun "well! Of all the
unjust things--" when his eye fell upon Alice, and he stopped
suddenly; the others looked round, and all of them took off their
hats and bowed low.

"Would you tell me, please," said Alice timidly, "why you are
painting those roses?"

Five and Seven looked at Two, but said nothing: Two began, in a
low voice, "why, Miss, the fact is, this ought to have been a red
rose tree, and we put a white one in by mistake, and if the Queen
was to find it out, we should all have our heads cut off. So, you
see, we're doing our best, before she comes, to--" At this moment
Five, who had been looking anxiously across the garden called out
"the Queen! the Queen!" and the three gardeners instantly threw
themselves flat upon their faces. There was a sound of many
footsteps, and Alice looked round, eager to see the Queen.

First came ten soldiers carrying clubs; these were all shaped
like the three gardeners, flat and oblong, with their hands and
feet at the corners: next the ten courtiers; these were all
ornamented with diamonds, and walked two and two, as the soldiers
did. After these came the Royal children: there were ten of them,
and the little dears came jumping merrily along, hand in hand, in
couples: they were all ornamented with hearts. Next came the
guests, mostly kings and queens, among whom Alice recognised the
white rabbit: it was talking in a hurried nervous manner, smiling
at everything that was said, and went by without noticing her.
Then followed the Knave of Hearts, carrying the King's crown on a
cushion, and, last of all this grand procession, came THE KING
AND QUEEN OF HEARTS.

[Illustration]

When the procession came opposite to Alice, they all stopped and
looked at her, and the Queen said severely "who is this?" She
said it to the Knave of Hearts, who only bowed and smiled in
reply.

"Idiot!" said the Queen, turning up her nose, and asked Alice
"what's your name?"

"My name is Alice, so please your Majesty," said Alice boldly,
for she thought to herself "why, they're only a pack of cards! I
needn't be afraid of them!"

"Who are these?" said the Queen, pointing to the three gardeners
lying round the rose tree, for, as they were lying on their
faces, and the pattern on their backs was the same as the rest of
the pack, she could not tell whether they were gardeners, or
soldiers, or courtiers, or three of her own children.

"How should I know?" said Alice, surprised at her own courage,
"it's no business of mine."

The Queen turned crimson with fury, and, after glaring at her for
a minute, began in a voice of thunder "off with her--"

"Nonsense!" said Alice, very loudly and decidedly, and the Queen
was silent.

The King laid his hand upon her arm, and said timidly "remember,
my dear! She is only a child!"

The Queen turned angrily away from him, and said to the Knave
"turn them over!"

The Knave did so, very carefully, with one foot.

"Get up!" said the Queen, in a shrill loud voice, and the three
gardeners instantly jumped up, and began bowing to the King, the
Queen, the Royal children, and everybody else.

"Leave off that!" screamed the Queen, "you make me giddy." And
then, turning to the rose tree, she went on "what have you been
doing here?"

"May it please your Majesty," said Two very humbly, going down on
one knee as he spoke, "we were trying--"

"I see!" said the Queen, who had meantime been examining the
roses, "off with their heads!" and the procession moved on, three
of the soldiers remaining behind to execute the three unfortunate
gardeners, who ran to Alice for protection.

"You sha'n't be beheaded!" said Alice, and she put them into her
pocket: the three soldiers marched once round her, looking for
them, and then quietly marched off after the others.

"Are their heads off?" shouted the Queen.

"Their heads are gone," the soldiers shouted in reply, "if it
please your Majesty!"

"That's right!" shouted the Queen, "can you play croquet?"

The soldiers were silent, and looked at Alice, as the question
was evidently meant for her.

"Yes!" shouted Alice at the top of her voice.

"Come on then!" roared the Queen, and Alice joined the
procession, wondering very much what would happen next.

"It's--it's a very fine day!" said a timid little voice: she was
walking by the white rabbit, who was peeping anxiously into her
face.

"Very," said Alice, "where's the Marchioness?"

"Hush, hush!" said the rabbit in a low voice, "she'll hear you.
The Queen's the Marchioness: didn't you know that?"

"No, I didn't," said Alice, "what of?"

"Queen of Hearts," said the rabbit in a whisper, putting its
mouth close to her ear, "and Marchioness of Mock Turtles."

"What are they?" said Alice, but there was no time for the
answer, for they had reached the croquet-ground, and the game
began instantly.

Alice thought she had never seen such a curious croquet-ground in
all her life: it was all in ridges and furrows: the croquet-balls
were live hedgehogs, the mallets live ostriches, and the soldiers
had to double themselves up, and stand on their feet and hands,
to make the arches.

[Illustration]

[Illustration]

The chief difficulty which Alice found at first was to manage her
ostrich: she got its body tucked away, comfortably enough, under
her arm, with its legs hanging down, but generally, just as she
had got its neck straightened out nicely, and was going to give a
blow with its head, it would twist itself round, and look up into
her face, with such a puzzled expression that she could not help
bursting out laughing: and when she had got its head down, and
was going to begin again, it was very confusing to find that the
hedgehog had unrolled itself, and was in the act of crawling
away: besides all this, there was generally a ridge or a furrow
in her way, wherever she wanted to send the hedgehog to, and as
the doubled-up soldiers were always getting up and walking off to
other parts of the ground, Alice soon came to the conclusion
that it was a very difficult game indeed.

The players all played at once without waiting for turns, and
quarrelled all the while at the tops of their voices, and in a
very few minutes the Queen was in a furious passion, and went
stamping about and shouting "off with his head!" of "off with her
head!" about once in a minute. All those whom she sentenced were
taken into custody by the soldiers, who of course had to leave
off being arches to do this, so that, by the end of half an hour
or so, there were no arches left, and all the players, except the
King, the Queen, and Alice, were in custody, and under sentence
of execution.

Then the Queen left off, quite out of breath, and said to Alice
"have you seen the Mock Turtle?"

"No," said Alice, "I don't even know what a Mock Turtle is."

"Come on then," said the Queen, "and it shall tell you its
history."

As they walked off together, Alice heard the King say in a low
voice, to the company generally, "you are all pardoned."

"Come, that's a good thing!" thought Alice, who had felt quite
grieved at the number of executions which the Queen had ordered.

[Illustration]

They very soon came upon a Gryphon, which lay fast asleep in the
sun: (if you don't know what a Gryphon is, look at the picture):
"Up, lazy thing!" said the Queen, "and take this young lady to
see the Mock Turtle, and to hear its history. I must go back and
see after some executions I ordered," and she walked off, leaving
Alice with the Gryphon. Alice did not quite like the look of the
creature, but on the whole she thought it quite as safe to stay
as to go after that savage Queen: so she waited.

The Gryphon sat up and rubbed its eyes: then it watched the Queen
till she was out of sight: then it chuckled. "What fun!" said the
Gryphon, half to itself, half to Alice.

"What is the fun?" said Alice.

"Why, she," said the Gryphon; "it's all her fancy, that: they
never executes nobody, you know: come on!"

"Everybody says 'come on!' here," thought Alice as she walked
slowly after the Gryphon; "I never was ordered about so before in
all my life--never!"

They had not gone far before they saw the Mock Turtle in the
distance, sitting sad and lonely on a little ledge of rock, and,
as they came nearer, Alice could here it sighing as if its heart
would break. She pitied it deeply: "what is its sorrow?" she
asked the Gryphon, and the Gryphon answered, very nearly in the
same words as before, "it's all its fancy, that: it hasn't got no
sorrow, you know: come on!"

[Illustration]

So they went up to the Mock Turtle, who looked at them with large
eyes full of tears, but said nothing.

"This here young lady" said the Gryphon, "wants for to know your
history, she do."

"I'll tell it," said the Mock Turtle, in a deep hollow tone, "sit
down, and don't speak till I've finished."

So they sat down, and no one spoke for some minutes: Alice
thought to herself "I don't see how it can ever finish, if it
doesn't begin," but she waited patiently.

"Once," said the Mock Turtle at last, with a deep sigh, "I was a
real Turtle."

These words were followed by a very long silence, broken only by
an occasional exclamation of "hjckrrh!" from the Gryphon, and the
constant heavy sobbing of the Mock Turtle. Alice was very nearly
getting up and saying, "thank you, sir, for your interesting
story," but she could not help thinking there must be more to
come, so she sat still and said nothing.

"When we were little," the Mock Turtle went on, more calmly,
though still sobbing a little now and then, "we went to school in
the sea. The master was an old Turtle--we used to call him
Tortoise--"

"Why did you call him Tortoise, if he wasn't one?" asked Alice.

"We called him Tortoise because he taught us," said the Mock
Turtle angrily, "really you are very dull!"

"You ought to be ashamed of yourself for asking such a simple
question," added the Gryphon, and then they both sat silent and
looked at poor Alice, who felt ready to sink into the earth: at
last the Gryphon said to the Mock Turtle, "get on, old fellow!
Don't be all day!" and the Mock Turtle went on in these words:

"You may not have lived much under the sea--" ("I haven't," said
Alice,) "and perhaps you were never even introduced to a
lobster--" (Alice began to say "I once tasted--" but hastily
checked herself, and said "no, never," instead,) "so you can have
no idea what a delightful thing a Lobster Quadrille is!"

"No, indeed," said Alice, "what sort of a thing is it?"

"Why," said the Gryphon, "you form into a line along the sea
shore--"

"Two lines!" cried the Mock Turtle, "seals, turtles, salmon, and
so on--advance twice--"

"Each with a lobster as partner!" cried the Gryphon.

[Illustration]

"Of course," the Mock Turtle said, "advance twice, set to
partners--"

"Change lobsters, and retire in same order--" interrupted the
Gryphon.

"Then, you know," continued the Mock Turtle, "you throw the--"

"The lobsters!" shouted the Gryphon, with a bound into the air.

"As far out to sea as you can--"

"Swim after them!" screamed the Gryphon.

"Turn a somersault in the sea!" cried the Mock Turtle, capering
wildly about.

"Change lobsters again!" yelled the Gryphon at the top of its
voice, "and then--"

"That's all," said the Mock Turtle, suddenly dropping its voice,
and the two creatures, who had been jumping about like mad things
all this time, sat down again very sadly and quietly, and looked
at Alice.

"It must be a very pretty dance," said Alice timidly.

"Would you like to see a little of it?" said the Mock Turtle.

"Very much indeed," said Alice.

"Come, let's try the first figure!" said the Mock Turtle to the
Gryphon, "we can do it without lobsters, you know. Which shall
sing?"

"Oh! you sing!" said the Gryphon, "I've forgotten the words."

[Illustration]

So they began solemnly dancing round and round Alice, every now
and then treading on her toes when they came too close, and
waving their fore-paws to mark the time, while the Mock Turtle
sang, slowly and sadly, these words:

    "Beneath the waters of the sea
    Are lobsters thick as thick can be--
    They love to dance with you and me,
      My own, my gentle Salmon!"

The Gryphon joined in singing the chorus, which was:

    "Salmon come up! Salmon go down!
    Salmon come twist your tail around!
    Of all the fishes of the sea
      There's none so good as Salmon!"

"Thank you," said Alice, feeling very glad that the figure was
over.

"Shall we try the second figure?" said the Gryphon, "or would you
prefer a song?"

"Oh, a song, please!" Alice replied, so eagerly, that the Gryphon
said, in a rather offended tone, "hm! no accounting for tastes!
Sing her 'Mock Turtle Soup', will you, old fellow!"

The Mock Turtle sighed deeply, and began, in a voice sometimes
choked with sobs, to sing this:

    "Beautiful Soup, so rich and green,
    Waiting in a hot tureen!
    Who for such dainties would not stoop?
    Soup of the evening, beautiful Soup!
    Soup of the evening, beautiful Soup!
        Beau--ootiful Soo--oop!
        Beau--ootiful Soo--oop!
    Soo--oop of the e--e--evening,
        Beautiful beautiful Soup!

"Chorus again!" cried the Gryphon, and the Mock Turtle had just
begun to repeat it, when a cry of "the trial's beginning!" was
heard in the distance.

"Come on!" cried the Gryphon, and, taking Alice by the hand, he
hurried off, without waiting for the end of the song.

"What trial is it?" panted Alice as she ran, but the Gryphon only
answered "come on!" and ran the faster, and more and more faintly
came, borne on the breeze that followed them, the melancholy
words:

    "Soo--oop of the e--e--evening,
    Beautiful beautiful Soup!"

The King and Queen were seated on their throne when they arrived,
with a great crowd assembled around them: the Knave was in
custody: and before the King stood the white rabbit, with a
trumpet in one hand, and a scroll of parchment in the other.

"Herald! read the accusation!" said the King.

On this the white rabbit blew three blasts on the trumpet, and
then unrolled the parchment scroll, and read as follows:

[Illustration]

    "The Queen of Hearts she made some tarts
      All on a summer day:
    The Knave of Hearts he stole those tarts,
      And took them quite away!"

[Illustration]

"Now for the evidence," said the King, "and then the sentence."

"No!" said the Queen, "first the sentence, and then the
evidence!"

"Nonsense!" cried Alice, so loudly that everybody jumped, "the
idea of having the sentence first!"

"Hold your tongue!" said the Queen.

"I won't!" said Alice, "you're nothing but a pack of cards! Who
cares for you?"

At this the whole pack rose up into the air, and came flying down
upon her: she gave a little scream of fright, and tried to beat
them off, and found herself lying on the bank, with her head in
the lap of her sister, who was gently brushing away some leaves
that had fluttered down from the trees on to her face.

"Wake up! Alice dear!" said her sister, "what a nice long sleep
you've had!"

"Oh, I've had such a curious dream!" said Alice, and she told her
sister all her Adventures Under Ground, as you have read them,
and when she had finished, her sister kissed her and said "it was
a curious dream, dear, certainly! But now run in to your tea:
it's getting late."

So Alice ran off, thinking while she ran (as well she might) what
a wonderful dream it had been.

       *       *       *       *       *

But her sister sat there some while longer, watching the setting
sun, and thinking of little Alice and her Adventures, till she
too began dreaming after a fashion, and this was her dream:

She saw an ancient city, and a quiet river winding near it along
the plain, and up the stream went slowly gliding a boat with a
merry party of children on board--she could hear their voices and
laughter like music over the water--and among them was another
little Alice, who sat listening with bright eager eyes to a tale
that was being told, and she listened for the words of the tale,
and lo! it was the dream of her own little sister. So the boat
wound slowly along, beneath the bright summer-day, with its merry
crew and its music of voices and laughter, till it passed round
one of the many turnings of the stream, and she saw it no more.

Then she thought, (in a dream within the dream, as it were,) how
this same little Alice would, in the after-time, be herself a
grown woman: and how she would keep, through her riper years, the
simple and loving heart of her childhood: and how she would
gather around her other little children, and make their eyes
bright and eager with many a wonderful tale, perhaps even with
these very adventures of the little Alice of long-ago: and how
she would feel with all their simple sorrows, and find a pleasure
in all their simple joys, remembering her own child-life, and the
happy summer days.

[Illustration]

happy summer days.


THE END.

       *       *       *       *       *




_POSTSCRIPT._


_The profits, if any, of this book will be given to Children's
Hospitals and Convalescent Homes for Sick Children; and the
accounts, down to June 30 in each year, will be published in the
St. James's Gazette, on the second Tuesday of the following
December._

_P.P.S.--The thought, so prettily expressed by the little boy, is
also to be found in Longfellow's "Hiawatha," where he appeals to
those who believe_

    "_That the feeble hands and helpless,_
    _Groping blindly in the darkness_,
    _Touch_ GOD'S _right hand in that darkness_,
    _And are lifted up and strengthened_."

       *       *       *       *       *




"Who will Riddle me the How and the Why?"


_So questions one of England's sweetest singers. The "How?" has
already been told, after a fashion, in the verses prefixed to
"Alice in Wonderland"; and some other memories of that happy
summer day are set down, for those who care to see them, in this
little book--the germ that was to grow into the published volume.
But the "Why?" cannot, and need not, be put into words. Those for
whom a child's mind is a sealed book, and who see no divinity in
a child's smile, would read such words in vain: while for any one
that has ever loved one true child, no words are needed. For he
will have known the awe that falls on one in the presence of a
spirit fresh from_ GOD'S _hands, on whom no shadow of sin, and
but the outermost fringe of the shadow of sorrow, has yet fallen:
he will have felt the bitter contrast between the haunting
selfishness that spoils his best deeds and the life that is but
an overflowing love--for I think a child's_ first _attitude to
the world is a simple love for all living things: and he will
have learned that the best work a man can do is when he works for
love's sake only, with no thought of name, or gain, or earthly
reward. No deed of ours, I suppose, on this side the grave, is
really unselfish: yet if one can put forth all one's powers in a
task where nothing of reward is hoped for but a little child's
whispered thanks, and the airy touch of a little child's pure
lips, one seems to come somewhere near to this._

_There was no idea of publication in my mind when I wrote this
little book_: that _was wholly an afterthought, pressed on me by
the "perhaps too partial friends" who always have to bear the
blame when a writer rushes into print: and I can truly say that
no praise of theirs has ever given me one hundredth part of the
pleasure it has been to think of the sick children in hospitals
(where it has been a delight to me to send copies) forgetting,
for a few bright hours, their pain and weariness--perhaps
thinking lovingly of the unknown writer of the tale--perhaps even
putting up a childish prayer (and oh, how much it needs!) for one
who can but dimly hope to stand, some day, not quite out of sight
of those pure young faces, before the great white throne. "I am
very sure," writes a lady-visitor at a Home for Sick Children,
"that there will be many loving earnest prayers for you on Easter
morning from the children._"

_I would like to quote further from her letters, as embodying a
suggestion that may perhaps thus come to the notice of some one
able and willing to carry it out._

"_I want you to send me one of your Easter Greetings for a very
dear child who is dying at our Home. She is just fading away, and
'Alice' has brightened some of the weary hours in her illness,
and I know that letter would be such a delight to her--especially
if you would put 'Minnie' at the top, and she could know you had
sent it for her._ She _knows_ you, _and would so value it.... She
suffers so much that I long for what I know would so please her."
... "Thank you very much for sending me the letter, and for
writing Minnie's name.... I am quite sure that all these children
will say a loving prayer for the 'Alice-man' on Easter Day: and I
am sure the letter will help the little ones to the real Easter
joy. How I do wish that you, who have won the hearts and
confidence of so many children, would do for them what is so very
near my heart, and yet what no one will do, viz. write a book for
children about_ GOD _and themselves, which is_ not _goody, and
which begins at the right end, about religion, to make them see
what it really is. I get quite miserable very often over the
children I come across: hardly any of them have an idea of_
really _knowing that_ GOD _loves them, or of loving and confiding
in Him. They will love and trust_ me, _and be sure that I want
them to be happy, and will not let them suffer more than is
necessary: but as for going to Him in the same way, they would
never think of it. They are dreadfully afraid of Him, if they
think of Him at all, which they generally only do when they have
been naughty, and they look on all connected with Him as very
grave and dull: and, when they are full of fun and thoroughly
happy, I am sure they unconsciously hope He is not looking. I am
sure I don't wonder they think of Him in this way, for people_
never _talk of Him in connection with what makes their little
lives the brightest. If they are naughty, people put on solemn
faces, and say He is very angry or shocked, or something which
frightens them: and, for the rest, He is talked about only in a
way that makes them think of church and having to be quiet. As
for being taught that all Joy and all Gladness and Brightness is
His Joy--that He is wearying for them to be happy, and is not
hard and stern, but always doing things to make their days
brighter, and caring for them so tenderly, and wanting them to
run to Him with_ all _their little joys and sorrows, they are
not taught that. I do so long to make them trust Him as they
trust us, to feel that He will 'take their part' as they do with
us in their little woes, and to go to Him in their plays and
enjoyments and not only when they say their prayers. I was quite
grateful to one little dot, a short time ago, who said to his
mother 'when I am in bed, I put out my hand to see if I can feel_
JESUS _and my angel. I thought perhaps_ in the dark _they'd touch
me, but they never have yet.' I do so want them to_ want _to go
to Him, and to feel how, if He is there, it_ must _be happy._"

_Let me add--for I feel I have drifted into far too serious a vein
for a preface to a fairy-tale--the deliciously nave remark of a
very dear child-friend, whom I asked, after an acquaintance of two
or three days, if she had read 'Alice' and the 'Looking-Glass.' "Oh
yes," she replied readily, "I've read both of them! And I think"
(this more slowly and thoughtfully) "I think 'Through the
Looking-Glass' is_ more _stupid than 'Alice's Adventures.' Don't_
you _think so?" But this was a question I felt it would be hardly
discreet for me to enter upon._

_LEWIS CARROLL._

_Dec._ 1886.

       *       *       *       *       *




AN EASTER GREETING

TO

EVERY CHILD WHO LOVES

"Alice."


DEAR CHILD,

_Please to fancy, if you can, that you are reading a real letter,
from a real friend whom you have seen, and whose voice you can
seem to yourself to hear wishing you, as I do now with all my
heart, a happy Easter._

_Do you know that delicious dreamy feeling when one first wakes
on a summer morning, with the twitter of birds in the air, and
the fresh breeze coming in at the open window--when, lying lazily
with eyes half shut, one sees as in a dream green boughs waving,
or waters rippling in a golden light? It is a pleasure very near
to sadness, bringing tears to one's eyes like a beautiful picture
or poem. And is not that a Mother's gentle hand that undraws your
curtains, and a Mother's sweet voice that summons you to rise? To
rise and forget, in the bright sunlight, the ugly dreams that
frightened you so when all was dark--to rise and enjoy another
happy day, first kneeling to thank that unseen Friend, who sends
you the beautiful sun_?

_Are these strange words from a writer of such tales as "Alice"?
And is this a strange letter to find in a book of nonsense? It
may be so. Some perhaps may blame me for thus mixing together
things grave and gay; others may smile and think it odd that any
one should speak of solemn things at all, except in church and on
a Sunday: but I think--nay, I am sure--that some children will
read this gently and lovingly, and in the spirit in which I have
written it._

_For I do not believe God means us thus to divide life into two
halves--to wear a grave face on Sunday, and to think it
out-of-place to even so much as mention Him on a week-day. Do you
think He cares to see only kneeling figures, and to hear only
tones of prayer--and that He does not also love to see the lambs
leaping in the sunlight, and to hear the merry voices of the
children, as they roll among the hay? Surely their innocent
laughter is as sweet in His ears as the grandest anthem that ever
rolled up from the "dim religious light" of some solemn
cathedral?_

_And if I have written anything to add to those stores of
innocent and healthy amusement that are laid up in books for the
children I love so well, it is surely something I may hope to
look back upon without shame and sorrow (as how much of life must
then be recalled!) when_ my _turn comes to walk through the
valley of shadows._

_This Easter sun will rise on you, dear child, feeling your "life
in every limb," and eager to rush out into the fresh morning
air_--_and many an Easter-day will come and go, before it finds
you feeble and gray-headed, creeping wearily out to bask once
more in the sunlight--but it is good, even now, to think
sometimes of that great morning when the "Sun of Righteousness
shall arise with healing in his wings."_

_Surely your gladness need not be the less for the thought that
you will one day see a brighter dawn than this--when lovelier
sights will meet your eyes than any waving trees or rippling
waters--when angel-hands shall undraw your curtains, and sweeter
tones than ever loving Mother breathed shall wake you to a new
and glorious day--and when all the sadness, and the sin, that
darkened life on this little earth, shall be forgotten like the
dreams of a night that is past!_

_Your affectionate friend_,

_LEWIS CARROLL_.

EASTER, 1876.

       *       *       *       *       *




CHRISTMAS GREETINGS.

[FROM A FAIRY TO A CHILD.]


    Lady dear, if Fairies may
      For a moment lay aside
    Cunning tricks and elfish play,
      'Tis at happy Christmas-tide.

    We have heard the children say--
      Gentle children, whom we love--
    Long ago, on Christmas Day,
      Came a message from above.

    Still, as Christmas-tide comes round,
      They remember it again--
    Echo still the joyful sound
      "Peace on earth, good-will to men!"

    Yet the hearts must childlike be
      Where such heavenly guests abide:
    Unto children, in their glee,
      All the year is Christmas-tide!

    Thus, forgetting tricks and play
      For a moment, Lady dear,
    We would wish you, if we may,
      Merry Christmas, glad New Year!

LEWIS CARROLL.

_Christmas, 1867._

       *       *       *       *       *




WORKS BY LEWIS CARROLL.

PUBLISHED BY

MACMILLAN AND CO., LONDON.


ALICE'S ADVENTURES _IN_ WONDERLAND. With Forty-two Illustrations
by TENNIEL. (First published in 1865.) Crown 8vo, cloth, gilt
edges, price 6_s._ Seventy-eighth Thousand.

AVENTURES D'ALICE AU PAYS DES MERVEILLES. Traduit de l'Anglais
par Henri Bu. Ouvrage illustr de 42 Vignettes par JOHN TENNIEL.
(First published in 1869.) Crown 8vo, cloth, gilt edges, price
6_s._

ALICE'S ABENTEUER IM WUNDERLAND. AUS DEM ENGLISCHEN, VON ANTONIE
ZIMMERMANN. MITT 42 ILLUSTRATIONEN VON JOHN TENNIEL. (First
published in 1869.) Crown 8vo, cloth, gilt edges, price 6_s._

LE AVVENTURE D'ALICE NEL PAESE DELLE MERAVIGLIE. Tradotte dall'
Inglese da T. PIETROCLA-ROSSETTI. Con 42 Vignette di GIOVANNI
TENNIEL. (First published in 1872.) Crown 8vo, cloth, gilt edges,
price 6_s._

THROUGH THE LOOKING-GLASS AND WHAT ALICE FOUND THERE. With Fifty
Illustrations by TENNIEL. (First published in 1871.) Crown 8vo,
cloth, gilt edges, price 6_s._ Fifty sixth Thousand.

RHYME? AND REASON? With Sixty-five Illustrations by ARTHUR B.
FROST, and Nine by HENRY HOLIDAY. (This book, first published in
1883, is a reprint, with a few additions, of the comic portion of
"Phantasmagoria and other Poems," published in 1869, and of "The
Hunting of the Snark," published in 1876. Mr. Frost's pictures
are new.) Crown 8vo, cloth, coloured edges, price 6_s._ Fifth
Thousand.

       *       *       *       *       *




WORKS BY LEWIS CARROLL.

PUBLISHED BY

MACMILLAN AND CO., LONDON.


A TANGLED TALE. Reprinted from _The Monthly Packet_. With Six
Illustrations by ARTHUR B. FROST. (First published in 1885.)
Crown 8vo, cloth, gilt edges, 4_s._ 6_d._ Third Thousand.

THE GAME OF LOGIC. (With an Envelope containing a card diagram
and nine counters--four red and five grey.) Crown 8vo, cloth,
price 3_s._

N.B.--The Envelope, etc., may be had separately at 3_d._ each.

ALICE'S ADVENTURES UNDER GROUND. Being a Facsimile of the
original MS. Book, afterwards developed into "Alice's Adventures
in Wonderland." With Thirty-seven Illustrations by the Author.
Crown 8vo, cloth, gilt edges. 4_s._

THE NURSERY ALICE. A selection of twenty of the pictures in
"Alice's Adventures in Wonderland," enlarged and coloured under the
Artist's superintendence, with explanations.      [_In preparation._

       *       *       *       *       *

N.B. In selling the above-mentioned books to the Trade, Messrs.
Macmillan and Co. will abate 2_d._ in the shilling (no odd
copies), and allow 5 per cent. discount for payment within six
months, and 10 per cent. for cash. In selling them to the Public
(for cash only) they will allow 10 per cent. discount.

       *       *       *       *       *

MR. LEWIS CARROLL, having been requested to allow "AN EASTER
GREETING" (a leaflet, addressed to children, first published in
1876, and frequently given with his books) to be sold separately,
has arranged with Messrs. Harrison, of 59, Pall Mall, who will
supply a single copy for 1_d._, or 12 for 9_d._, or 100 for 5_s._

       *       *       *       *       *







A TANGLED TALE

[Decoration]

[Illustration: "AT A PACE OF SIX MILES IN THE HOUR."

_Frontispiece._]




   A TANGLED TALE

   BY

   LEWIS CARROLL

   _WITH SIX ILLUSTRATIONS_

   BY

   ARTHUR B. FROST

   Hoc meum tale quale est accipe.

   _SECOND THOUSAND._

   London
   MACMILLAN AND CO.
   1885

   [_All Rights Reserved_]




   RICHARD CLAY & SONS,
   BREAD STREET HILL, LONDON, E.C.

   _And Bungay, Suffolk_.




To My Pupil.


   Beloved pupil! Tamed by thee,
     Addish-, Subtrac-, Multiplica-tion,
   Division, Fractions, Rule of Three,
     Attest thy deft manipulation!

   Then onward! Let the voice of Fame
     From Age to Age repeat thy story,
   Till thou hast won thyself a name
     Exceeding even Euclid's glory!




PREFACE.


This Tale originally appeared as a serial in _The Monthly Packet_,
beginning in April, 1880. The writer's intention was to embody in each
Knot (like the medicine so dexterously, but ineffectually, concealed in
the jam of our early childhood) one or more mathematical questions--in
Arithmetic, Algebra, or Geometry, as the case might be--for the
amusement, and possible edification, of the fair readers of that
Magazine.

                                                           L. C.

   _October, 1885._




CONTENTS.


   KNOT                                  PAGE

      I. EXCELSIOR                          1

     II. ELIGIBLE APARTMENTS                4

    III. MAD MATHESIS                      13

     IV. THE DEAD RECKONING                19

      V. OUGHTS AND CROSSES                27

     VI. HER RADIANCY                      34

    VII. PETTY CASH                        43

   VIII. DE OMNIBUS REBUS                  52

     IX. A SERPENT WITH CORNERS            58

      X. CHELSEA BUNS                      66

   ANSWERS TO KNOT    I.                   77

      "        "     II.                   84

      "        "    III.                   90

      "        "     IV.                   96

      "        "      V.                  102

      "        "     VI.                  106

      "        "    VII.                  112

      "        "   VIII.                  132

      "        "     IX.                  135

      "        "      X.                  142




A TANGLED TALE.




KNOT I.

EXCELSIOR.


"Goblin, lead them up and down."


The ruddy glow of sunset was already fading into the sombre shadows of
night, when two travellers might have been observed swiftly--at a pace
of six miles in the hour--descending the rugged side of a mountain; the
younger bounding from crag to crag with the agility of a fawn, while his
companion, whose aged limbs seemed ill at ease in the heavy chain armour
habitually worn by tourists in that district, toiled on painfully at his
side.

As is always the case under such circumstances, the younger knight was
the first to break the silence.

"A goodly pace, I trow!" he exclaimed. "We sped not thus in the ascent!"

"Goodly, indeed!" the other echoed with a groan. "We clomb it but at
three miles in the hour."

"And on the dead level our pace is----?" the younger suggested; for he
was weak in statistics, and left all such details to his aged companion.

"Four miles in the hour," the other wearily replied. "Not an ounce
more," he added, with that love of metaphor so common in old age, "and
not a farthing less!"

"'Twas three hours past high noon when we left our hostelry," the young
man said, musingly. "We shall scarce be back by supper-time. Perchance
mine host will roundly deny us all food!"

"He will chide our tardy return," was the grave reply, "and such a
rebuke will be meet."

"A brave conceit!" cried the other, with a merry laugh. "And should we
bid him bring us yet another course, I trow his answer will be tart!"

"We shall but get our deserts," sighed the elder knight, who had never
seen a joke in his life, and was somewhat displeased at his companion's
untimely levity. "'Twill be nine of the clock," he added in an
undertone, "by the time we regain our hostelry. Full many a mile shall
we have plodded this day!"

"How many? How many?" cried the eager youth, ever athirst for knowledge.

The old man was silent.

"Tell me," he answered, after a moment's thought, "what time it was when
we stood together on yonder peak. Not exact to the minute!" he added
hastily, reading a protest in the young man's face. "An' thy guess be
within one poor half-hour of the mark, 'tis all I ask of thy mother's
son! Then will I tell thee, true to the last inch, how far we shall have
trudged betwixt three and nine of the clock."

A groan was the young man's only reply; while his convulsed features and
the deep wrinkles that chased each other across his manly brow, revealed
the abyss of arithmetical agony into which one chance question had
plunged him.




KNOT II.

ELIGIBLE APARTMENTS.

   "Straight down the crooked lane,
   And all round the square."


"Let's ask Balbus about it," said Hugh.

"All right," said Lambert.

"_He_ can guess it," said Hugh.

"Rather," said Lambert.

No more words were needed: the two brothers understood each other
perfectly.

[Illustration: "BALBUS WAS ASSISTING HIS MOTHER-IN-LAW TO CONVINCE THE
DRAGON."]

Balbus was waiting for them at the hotel: the journey down had tired
him, he said: so his two pupils had been the round of the place, in
search of lodgings, without the old tutor who had been their inseparable
companion from their childhood. They had named him after the hero of
their Latin exercise-book, which overflowed with anecdotes of that
versatile genius--anecdotes whose vagueness in detail was more than
compensated by their sensational brilliance. "Balbus has overcome all
his enemies" had been marked by their tutor, in the margin of the book,
"Successful Bravery." In this way he had tried to extract a moral from
every anecdote about Balbus--sometimes one of warning, as in "Balbus had
borrowed a healthy dragon," against which he had written "Rashness in
Speculation"--sometimes of encouragement, as in the words "Influence of
Sympathy in United Action," which stood opposite to the anecdote "Balbus
was assisting his mother-in-law to convince the dragon"--and sometimes
it dwindled down to a single word, such as "Prudence," which was all he
could extract from the touching record that "Balbus, having scorched the
tail of the dragon, went away." His pupils liked the short morals best,
as it left them more room for marginal illustrations, and in this
instance they required all the space they could get to exhibit the
rapidity of the hero's departure.

Their report of the state of things was discouraging. That most
fashionable of watering-places, Little Mendip, was "chockfull" (as the
boys expressed it) from end to end. But in one Square they had seen no
less than four cards, in different houses, all announcing in flaming
capitals "ELIGIBLE APARTMENTS." "So there's plenty of choice, after all,
you see," said spokesman Hugh in conclusion.

"That doesn't follow from the data," said Balbus, as he rose from the
easy chair, where he had been dozing over _The Little Mendip Gazette_.
"They may be all single rooms. However, we may as well see them. I shall
be glad to stretch my legs a bit."

An unprejudiced bystander might have objected that the operation was
needless, and that this long, lank creature would have been all the
better with even shorter legs: but no such thought occurred to his
loving pupils. One on each side, they did their best to keep up with his
gigantic strides, while Hugh repeated the sentence in their father's
letter, just received from abroad, over which he and Lambert had been
puzzling. "He says a friend of his, the Governor of----_what_ was that
name again, Lambert?" ("Kgovjni," said Lambert.) "Well, yes. The
Governor of----what-you-may-call-it----wants to give a _very_ small
dinner-party, and he means to ask his father's brother-in-law, his
brother's father-in-law, his father-in-law's brother, and his
brother-in-law's father: and we're to guess how many guests there will
be."

There was an anxious pause. "_How_ large did he say the pudding was to
be?" Balbus said at last. "Take its cubical contents, divide by the
cubical contents of what each man can eat, and the quotient----"

"He didn't say anything about pudding," said Hugh, "--and here's the
Square," as they turned a corner and came into sight of the "eligible
apartments."

"It _is_ a Square!" was Balbus' first cry of delight, as he gazed around
him. "Beautiful! Beau-ti-ful! Equilateral! _And_ rectangular!"

The boys looked round with less enthusiasm. "Number nine is the first
with a card," said prosaic Lambert; but Balbus would not so soon awake
from his dream of beauty.

"See, boys!" he cried. "Twenty doors on a side! What symmetry! Each side
divided into twenty-one equal parts! It's delicious!"

"Shall I knock, or ring?" said Hugh, looking in some perplexity at a
square brass plate which bore the simple inscription "RING ALSO."

"Both," said Balbus. "That's an Ellipsis, my boy. Did you never see an
Ellipsis before?"

"I couldn't hardly read it," said Hugh, evasively. "It's no good having
an Ellipsis, if they don't keep it clean."

"Which there is _one_ room, gentlemen," said the smiling landlady. "And
a sweet room too! As snug a little back-room----"

"We will see it," said Balbus gloomily, as they followed her in. "I knew
how it would be! One room in each house! No view, I suppose?"

"Which indeed there _is_, gentlemen!" the landlady indignantly
protested, as she drew up the blind, and indicated the back garden.

"Cabbages, I perceive," said Balbus. "Well, they're green, at any rate."

"Which the greens at the shops," their hostess explained, "are by no
means dependable upon. Here you has them on the premises, _and_ of the
best."

"Does the window open?" was always Balbus' first question in testing a
lodging: and "Does the chimney smoke?" his second. Satisfied on all
points, he secured the refusal of the room, and they moved on to Number
Twenty-five.

This landlady was grave and stern. "I've nobbut one room left," she
told them: "and it gives on the back-gyardin."

"But there are cabbages?" Balbus suggested.

The landlady visibly relented. "There is, sir," she said: "and good
ones, though I say it as shouldn't. We can't rely on the shops for
greens. So we grows them ourselves."

"A singular advantage," said Balbus: and, after the usual questions,
they went on to Fifty-two.

"And I'd gladly accommodate you all, if I could," was the greeting that
met them. "We are but mortal," ("Irrelevant!" muttered Balbus) "and I've
let all my rooms but one."

"Which one is a back-room, I perceive," said Balbus: "and looking out
on--on cabbages, I presume?"

"Yes, indeed, sir!" said their hostess. "Whatever _other_ folks may do,
_we_ grows our own. For the shops----"

"An excellent arrangement!" Balbus interrupted. "Then one can really
depend on their being good. Does the window open?"

The usual questions were answered satisfactorily: but this time Hugh
added one of his own invention--"Does the cat scratch?"

The landlady looked round suspiciously, as if to make sure the cat was
not listening, "I will not deceive you, gentlemen," she said. "It _do_
scratch, but not without you pulls its whiskers! It'll never do it," she
repeated slowly, with a visible effort to recall the exact words of some
written agreement between herself and the cat, "without you pulls its
whiskers!"

"Much may be excused in a cat so treated," said Balbus, as they left the
house and crossed to Number Seventy-three, leaving the landlady
curtseying on the doorstep, and still murmuring to herself her parting
words, as if they were a form of blessing, "---- not without you pulls
its whiskers!"

At Number Seventy-three they found only a small shy girl to show the
house, who said "yes'm" in answer to all questions.

"The usual room," said Balbus, as they marched in: "the usual
back-garden, the usual cabbages. I suppose you can't get them good at
the shops?"

"Yes'm," said the girl.

"Well, you may tell your mistress we will take the room, and that her
plan of growing her own cabbages is simply _admirable_!"

"Yes'm," said the girl, as she showed them out.

"One day-room and three bed-rooms," said Balbus, as they returned to the
hotel. "We will take as our day-room the one that gives us the least
walking to do to get to it."

"Must we walk from door to door, and count the steps?" said Lambert.

"No, no! Figure it out, my boys, figure it out!" Balbus gaily exclaimed,
as he put pens, ink, and paper before his hapless pupils, and left the
room.

"I say! It'll be a job!" said Hugh.

"Rather!" said Lambert.




KNOT III.

MAD MATHESIS.

   "I waited for the train."


"Well, they call me so because I _am_ a little mad, I suppose," she
said, good-humouredly, in answer to Clara's cautiously-worded question
as to how she came by so strange a nick-name. "You see, I never do what
sane people are expected to do now-a-days. I never wear long trains,
(talking of trains, that's the Charing Cross Metropolitan Station--I've
something to tell you about _that_), and I never play lawn-tennis. I
can't cook an omelette. I can't even set a broken limb! _There's_ an
ignoramus for you!"

Clara was her niece, and full twenty years her junior; in fact, she was
still attending a High School--an institution of which Mad Mathesis
spoke with undisguised aversion. "Let a woman be meek and lowly!" she
would say. "None of your High Schools for me!" But it was vacation-time
just now, and Clara was her guest, and Mad Mathesis was showing her the
sights of that Eighth Wonder of the world--London.

"The Charing Cross Metropolitan Station!" she resumed, waving her hand
towards the entrance as if she were introducing her niece to a friend.
"The Bayswater and Birmingham Extension is just completed, and the
trains now run round and round continuously--skirting the border of
Wales, just touching at York, and so round by the east coast back to
London. The way the trains run is _most_ peculiar. The westerly ones go
round in two hours; the easterly ones take three; but they always manage
to start two trains from here, opposite ways, punctually every
quarter-of-an-hour."

"They part to meet again," said Clara, her eyes filling with tears at
the romantic thought.

"No need to cry about it!" her aunt grimly remarked. "They don't meet on
the same line of rails, you know. Talking of meeting, an idea strikes
me!" she added, changing the subject with her usual abruptness. "Let's
go opposite ways round, and see which can meet most trains. No need for
a chaperon--ladies' saloon, you know. You shall go whichever way you
like, and we'll have a bet about it!"

"I never make bets," Clara said very gravely. "Our excellent preceptress
has often warned us----"

"You'd be none the worse if you did!" Mad Mathesis interrupted. "In
fact, you'd be the better, I'm certain!"

"Neither does our excellent preceptress approve of puns," said Clara.
"But we'll have a match, if you like. Let me choose my train," she added
after a brief mental calculation, "and I'll engage to meet exactly half
as many again as you do."

"Not if you count fair," Mad Mathesis bluntly interrupted. "Remember, we
only count the trains we meet _on the way_. You mustn't count the one
that starts as you start, nor the one that arrives as you arrive."

"That will only make the difference of _one_ train," said Clara, as they
turned and entered the station. "But I never travelled alone before.
There'll be no one to help me to alight. However, I don't mind. Let's
have a match."

A ragged little boy overheard her remark, and came running after her.
"Buy a box of cigar-lights, Miss!" he pleaded, pulling her shawl to
attract her attention. Clara stopped to explain.

"I never smoke cigars," she said in a meekly apologetic tone. "Our
excellent preceptress----," but Mad Mathesis impatiently hurried her on,
and the little boy was left gazing after her with round eyes of
amazement.

The two ladies bought their tickets and moved slowly down the central
platform, Mad Mathesis prattling on as usual--Clara silent, anxiously
reconsidering the calculation on which she rested her hopes of winning
the match.

"Mind where you go, dear!" cried her aunt, checking her just in time.
"One step more, and you'd have been in that pail of cold water!"

"I know, I know," Clara said, dreamily. "The pale, the cold, and the
moony----"

"Take your places on the spring-boards!" shouted a porter.

"What are _they_ for!" Clara asked in a terrified whisper.

"Merely to help us into the trains." The elder lady spoke with the
nonchalance of one quite used to the process. "Very few people can get
into a carriage without help in less than three seconds, and the trains
only stop for one second." At this moment the whistle was heard, and two
trains rushed into the station. A moment's pause, and they were gone
again; but in that brief interval several hundred passengers had been
shot into them, each flying straight to his place with the accuracy of a
Minie bullet--while an equal number were showered out upon the
side-platforms.

Three hours had passed away, and the two friends met again on the
Charing Cross platform, and eagerly compared notes. Then Clara turned
away with a sigh. To young impulsive hearts, like hers, disappointment
is always a bitter pill. Mad Mathesis followed her, full of kindly
sympathy.

"Try again, my love!" she said, cheerily. "Let us vary the experiment.
We will start as we did before, but not to begin counting till our
trains meet. When we see each other, we will say 'One!' and so count on
till we come here again."

Clara brightened up. "I shall win _that_," she exclaimed eagerly, "if I
may choose my train!"

Another shriek of engine whistles, another upheaving of spring-boards,
another living avalanche plunging into two trains as they flashed by:
and the travellers were off again.

Each gazed eagerly from her carriage window, holding up her handkerchief
as a signal to her friend. A rush and a roar. Two trains shot past each
other in a tunnel, and two travellers leaned back in their corners with
a sigh--or rather with _two_ sighs--of relief. "One!" Clara murmured to
herself. "Won! It's a word of good omen. _This_ time, at any rate, the
victory will be mine!"

But _was_ it?




KNOT IV.

THE DEAD RECKONING.

   "I did dream of money-bags to-night."


Noonday on the open sea within a few degrees of the Equator is apt to be
oppressively warm; and our two travellers were now airily clad in suits
of dazzling white linen, having laid aside the chain-armour which they
had found not only endurable in the cold mountain air they had lately
been breathing, but a necessary precaution against the daggers of the
banditti who infested the heights. Their holiday-trip was over, and they
were now on their way home, in the monthly packet which plied between
the two great ports of the island they had been exploring.

Along with their armour, the tourists had laid aside the antiquated
speech it had pleased them to affect while in knightly disguise, and
had returned to the ordinary style of two country gentlemen of the
Twentieth Century.

Stretched on a pile of cushions, under the shade of a huge umbrella,
they were lazily watching some native fishermen, who had come on board
at the last landing-place, each carrying over his shoulder a small but
heavy sack. A large weighing-machine, that had been used for cargo at
the last port, stood on the deck; and round this the fishermen had
gathered, and, with much unintelligible jabber, seemed to be weighing
their sacks.

"More like sparrows in a tree than human talk, isn't it?" the elder
tourist remarked to his son, who smiled feebly, but would not exert
himself so far as to speak. The old man tried another listener.

"What have they got in those sacks, Captain?" he inquired, as that great
being passed them in his never ending parade to and fro on the deck.

The Captain paused in his march, and towered over the travellers--tall,
grave, and serenely self-satisfied.

"Fishermen," he explained, "are often passengers in My ship. These five
are from Mhruxi--the place we last touched at--and that's the way they
carry their money. The money of this island is heavy, gentlemen, but it
costs little, as you may guess. We buy it from them by weight--about
five shillings a pound. I fancy a ten pound-note would buy all those
sacks."

By this time the old man had closed his eyes--in order, no doubt, to
concentrate his thoughts on these interesting facts; but the Captain
failed to realise his motive, and with a grunt resumed his monotonous
march.

Meanwhile the fishermen were getting so noisy over the weighing-machine
that one of the sailors took the precaution of carrying off all the
weights, leaving them to amuse themselves with such substitutes in the
form of winch-handles, belaying-pins, &c., as they could find. This
brought their excitement to a speedy end: they carefully hid their sacks
in the folds of the jib that lay on the deck near the tourists, and
strolled away.

When next the Captain's heavy footfall passed, the younger man roused
himself to speak.

"_What_ did you call the place those fellows came from, Captain?" he
asked.

"Mhruxi, sir."

"And the one we are bound for?"

The Captain took a long breath, plunged into the word, and came out of
it nobly. "They call it Kgovjni, sir."

"K--I give it up!" the young man faintly said.

He stretched out his hand for a glass of iced water which the
compassionate steward had brought him a minute ago, and had set down,
unluckily, just outside the shadow of the umbrella. It was scalding hot,
and he decided not to drink it. The effort of making this resolution,
coming close on the fatiguing conversation he had just gone through, was
too much for him: he sank back among the cushions in silence.

His father courteously tried to make amends for his _nonchalance_.

"Whereabouts are we now, Captain?" said he, "Have you any idea?"

The Captain cast a pitying look on the ignorant landsman. "I could tell
you _that_, sir," he said, in a tone of lofty condescension, "to an
inch!"

"You don't say so!" the old man remarked, in a tone of languid surprise.

"And mean so," persisted the Captain. "Why, what do you suppose would
become of My ship, if I were to lose My Longitude and My Latitude?
Could _you_ make anything of My Dead Reckoning?"

"Nobody could, I'm sure!" the other heartily rejoined.

But he had overdone it.

"It's _perfectly_ intelligible," the Captain said, in an offended tone,
"to any one that understands such things." With these words he moved
away, and began giving orders to the men, who were preparing to hoist
the jib.

Our tourists watched the operation with such interest that neither of
them remembered the five money-bags, which in another moment, as the
wind filled out the jib, were whirled overboard and fell heavily into
the sea.

But the poor fishermen had not so easily forgotten their property. In a
moment they had rushed to the spot, and stood uttering cries of fury,
and pointing, now to the sea, and now to the sailors who had caused the
disaster.

The old man explained it to the Captain.

"Let us make it up among us," he added in conclusion. "Ten pounds will
do it, I think you said?"

[Illustration]

But the Captain put aside the suggestion with a wave of the hand.

"No, sir!" he said, in his grandest manner. "You will excuse Me, I am
sure; but these are My passengers. The accident has happened on board My
ship, and under My orders. It is for Me to make compensation." He
turned to the angry fishermen. "Come here, my men!" he said, in the
Mhruxian dialect. "Tell me the weight of each sack. I saw you weighing
them just now."

Then ensued a perfect Babel of noise, as the five natives explained, all
screaming together, how the sailors had carried off the weights, and
they had done what they could with whatever came handy.

Two iron belaying-pins, three blocks, six holystones, four
winch-handles, and a large hammer, were now carefully weighed, the
Captain superintending and noting the results. But the matter did not
seem to be settled, even then: an angry discussion followed, in which
the sailors and the five natives all joined: and at last the Captain
approached our tourists with a disconcerted look, which he tried to
conceal under a laugh.

"It's an absurd difficulty," he said. "Perhaps one of you gentlemen can
suggest something. It seems they weighed the sacks two at a time!"

"If they didn't have five separate weighings, of course you can't value
them separately," the youth hastily decided.

"Let's hear all about it," was the old man's more cautious remark.

"They _did_ have five separate weighings," the Captain said, "but--Well,
it beats _me_ entirely!" he added, in a sudden burst of candour. "Here's
the result. First and second sack weighed twelve pounds; second and
third, thirteen and a half; third and fourth, eleven and a half; fourth
and fifth, eight: and then they say they had only the large hammer left,
and it took _three_ sacks to weigh it down--that's the first, third and
fifth--and _they_ weighed sixteen pounds. There, gentlemen! Did you ever
hear anything like _that_?"

The old man muttered under his breath "If only my sister were here!" and
looked helplessly at his son. His son looked at the five natives. The
five natives looked at the Captain. The Captain looked at nobody: his
eyes were cast down, and he seemed to be saying softly to himself
"Contemplate one another, gentlemen, if such be your good pleasure. _I_
contemplate _Myself_!"




KNOT V.

OUGHTS AND CROSSES.

   "Look here, upon this picture, and on this."


"And what made you choose the first train, Goosey?" said Mad Mathesis,
as they got into the cab. "Couldn't you count better than _that_?"

"I took an extreme case," was the tearful reply. "Our excellent
preceptress always says 'When in doubt, my dears, take an extreme case.'
And I _was_ in doubt."

"Does it always succeed?" her aunt enquired.

Clara sighed. "Not _always_," she reluctantly admitted. "And I can't
make out why. One day she was telling the little girls--they make such a
noise at tea, you know--'The more noise you make, the less jam you will
have, and _vice vers_.' And I thought they wouldn't know what '_vice
vers_' meant: so I explained it to them. I said 'If you make an
infinite noise, you'll get no jam: and if you make no noise, you'll get
an infinite lot of jam.' But our excellent preceptress said that wasn't
a good instance. _Why_ wasn't it?" she added plaintively.

Her aunt evaded the question. "One sees certain objections to it," she
said. "But how did you work it with the Metropolitan trains? None of
them go infinitely fast, I believe."

"I called them hares and tortoises," Clara said--a little timidly, for
she dreaded being laughed at. "And I thought there couldn't be so many
hares as tortoises on the Line: so I took an extreme case--one hare and
an infinite number of tortoises."

"An extreme case, indeed," her aunt remarked with admirable gravity:
"and a most dangerous state of things!"

"And I thought, if I went with a tortoise, there would be only _one_
hare to meet: but if I went with the hare--you know there were _crowds_
of tortoises!"

"It wasn't a bad idea," said the elder lady, as they left the cab, at
the entrance of Burlington House. "You shall have another chance to-day.
We'll have a match in marking pictures."

Clara brightened up. "I should like to try again, very much," she said.
"I'll take more care this time. How are we to play?"

To this question Mad Mathesis made no reply: she was busy drawing lines
down the margins of the catalogue. "See," she said after a minute, "I've
drawn three columns against the names of the pictures in the long room,
and I want you to fill them with oughts and crosses--crosses for good
marks and oughts for bad. The first column is for choice of subject, the
second for arrangement, the third for colouring. And these are the
conditions of the match. You must give three crosses to two or three
pictures. You must give two crosses to four or five----"

"Do you mean _only_ two crosses?" said Clara. "Or may I count the
three-cross pictures among the two-cross pictures?"

"Of course you may," said her aunt. "Any one, that has _three_ eyes, may
be said to have _two_ eyes, I suppose?"

Clara followed her aunt's dreamy gaze across the crowded gallery,
half-dreading to find that there was a three-eyed person in sight.

"And you must give one cross to nine or ten."

"And which wins the match?" Clara asked, as she carefully entered these
conditions on a blank leaf in her catalogue.

"Whichever marks fewest pictures."

"But suppose we marked the same number?"

"Then whichever uses most marks."

Clara considered. "I don't think it's much of a match," she said. "I
shall mark nine pictures, and give three crosses to three of them, two
crosses to two more, and one cross each to all the rest."

"Will you, indeed?" said her aunt. "Wait till you've heard all the
conditions, my impetuous child. You must give three oughts to one or two
pictures, two oughts to three or four, and one ought to eight or nine. I
don't want you to be _too_ hard on the R.A.'s."

Clara quite gasped as she wrote down all these fresh conditions. "It's a
great deal worse than Circulating Decimals!" she said. "But I'm
determined to win, all the same!"

Her aunt smiled grimly. "We can begin _here_," she said, as they paused
before a gigantic picture, which the catalogue informed them was the
"Portrait of Lieutenant Brown, mounted on his favorite elephant."

"He looks awfully conceited!" said Clara. "I don't think he was the
elephant's favorite Lieutenant. What a hideous picture it is! And it
takes up room enough for twenty!"

"Mind what you say, my dear!" her aunt interposed. "It's by an R.A.!"

But Clara was quite reckless. "I don't care who it's by!" she cried.
"And I shall give it three bad marks!"

Aunt and niece soon drifted away from each other in the crowd, and for
the next half-hour Clara was hard at work, putting in marks and rubbing
them out again, and hunting up and down for suitable pictures. This she
found the hardest part of all. "I _can't_ find the one I want!" she
exclaimed at last, almost crying with vexation.

"What is it you want to find, my dear?" The voice was strange to Clara,
but so sweet and gentle that she felt attracted to the owner of it, even
before she had seen her; and when she turned, and met the smiling looks
of two little old ladies, whose round dimpled faces, exactly alike,
seemed never to have known a care, it was as much as she could do--as
she confessed to Aunt Mattie afterwards--to keep herself from hugging
them both.

"I was looking for a picture," she said, "that has a good subject--and
that's well arranged--but badly coloured."

The little old ladies glanced at each other in some alarm. "Calm
yourself, my dear," said the one who had spoken first, "and try to
remember which it was. What _was_ the subject?"

"Was it an elephant, for instance?" the other sister suggested. They
were still in sight of Lieutenant Brown.

"I don't know, indeed!" Clara impetuously replied. "You know it doesn't
matter a bit what the subject _is_, so long as it's a good one!"

Once more the sisters exchanged looks of alarm, and one of them
whispered something to the other, of which Clara caught only the one
word "mad."

"They mean Aunt Mattie, of course," she said to herself--fancying, in
her innocence, that London was like her native town, where everybody
knew everybody else. "If you mean my aunt," she added aloud, "she's
_there_--just three pictures beyond Lieutenant Brown."

"Ah, well! Then you'd better go to her, my dear!" her new friend said,
soothingly. "_She'll_ find you the picture you want. Good-bye, dear!"

"Good-bye, dear!" echoed the other sister, "Mind you don't lose sight of
your aunt!" And the pair trotted off into another room, leaving Clara
rather perplexed at their manner.

"They're real darlings!" she soliloquised. "I wonder why they pity me
so!" And she wandered on, murmuring to herself "It must have two good
marks, and----"




KNOT VI.

HER RADIANCY.

   "One piecee thing that my have got,
     Maskee[A] that thing my no can do.
   You talkee you no sabey what?
               Bamboo."


They landed, and were at once conducted to the Palace. About half way
they were met by the Governor, who welcomed them in English--a great
relief to our travellers, whose guide could speak nothing but Kgovjnian.

"I don't half like the way they grin at us as we go by!" the old man
whispered to his son. "And why do they say 'Bamboo!' so often?"

"It alludes to a local custom," replied the Governor, who had overheard
the question. "Such persons as happen in any way to displease Her
Radiancy are usually beaten with rods."

[Illustration: "WHY DO THEY SAY 'BAMBOO!' SO OFTEN?"]

The old man shuddered. "A most objectional local custom!" he remarked
with strong emphasis. "I wish we had never landed! Did you notice that
black fellow, Norman, opening his great mouth at us? I verily believe he
would like to eat us!"

Norman appealed to the Governor, who was walking at his other side. "Do
they often eat distinguished strangers here?" he said, in as indifferent
a tone as he could assume.

"Not often--not ever!" was the welcome reply. "They are not good for it.
Pigs we eat, for they are fat. This old man is thin."

"And thankful to be so!" muttered the elder traveller. "Beaten we shall
be without a doubt. It's a comfort to know it won't be Beaten without
the B! My dear boy, just look at the peacocks!"

They were now walking between two unbroken lines of those gorgeous
birds, each held in check, by means of a golden collar and chain, by a
black slave, who stood well behind, so as not to interrupt the view of
the glittering tail, with its network of rustling feathers and its
hundred eyes.

The Governor smiled proudly. "In your honour," he said, "Her Radiancy
has ordered up ten thousand additional peacocks. She will, no doubt,
decorate you, before you go, with the usual Star and Feathers."

"It'll be Star without the S!" faltered one of his hearers.

"Come, come! Don't lose heart!" said the other. "All this is full of
charm for me."

"You are young, Norman," sighed his father; "young and light-hearted.
For me, it is Charm without the C."

"The old one is sad," the Governor remarked with some anxiety. "He has,
without doubt, effected some fearful crime?"

"But I haven't!" the poor old gentleman hastily exclaimed. "Tell him I
haven't, Norman!"

"He has not, as yet," Norman gently explained. And the Governor
repeated, in a satisfied tone, "Not as yet."

"Yours is a wondrous country!" the Governor resumed, after a pause. "Now
here is a letter from a friend of mine, a merchant, in London. He and
his brother went there a year ago, with a thousand pounds apiece; and on
New-Year's-day they had sixty thousand pounds between them!"

"How did they do it?" Norman eagerly exclaimed. Even the elder traveller
looked excited.

The Governor handed him the open letter. "Anybody can do it, when once
they know how," so ran this oracular document. "We borrowed nought: we
stole nought. We began the year with only a thousand pounds apiece: and
last New-Year's-day we had sixty thousand pounds between us--sixty
thousand golden sovereigns!"

Norman looked grave and thoughtful as he handed back the letter. His
father hazarded one guess. "Was it by gambling?"

"A Kgovjnian never gambles," said the Governor gravely, as he ushered
them through the palace gates. They followed him in silence down a long
passage, and soon found themselves in a lofty hall, lined entirely with
peacocks' feathers. In the centre was a pile of crimson cushions, which
almost concealed the figure of Her Radiancy--a plump little damsel, in a
robe of green satin dotted with silver stars, whose pale round face lit
up for a moment with a half-smile as the travellers bowed before her,
and then relapsed into the exact expression of a wax doll, while she
languidly murmured a word or two in the Kgovjnian dialect.

The Governor interpreted. "Her Radiancy welcomes you. She notes the
Impenetrable Placidity of the old one, and the Imperceptible Acuteness
of the youth."

Here the little potentate clapped her hands, and a troop of slaves
instantly appeared, carrying trays of coffee and sweetmeats, which they
offered to the guests, who had, at a signal from the Governor, seated
themselves on the carpet.

"Sugar-plums!" muttered the old man. "One might as well be at a
confectioner's! Ask for a penny bun, Norman!"

"Not so loud!" his son whispered. "Say something complimentary!" For the
Governor was evidently expecting a speech.

"We thank Her Exalted Potency," the old man timidly began. "We bask in
the light of her smile, which----"

"The words of old men are weak!" the Governor interrupted angrily. "Let
the youth speak!"

"Tell her," cried Norman, in a wild burst of eloquence, "that, like two
grasshoppers in a volcano, we are shrivelled up in the presence of Her
Spangled Vehemence!"

"It is well," said the Governor, and translated this into Kgovjnian. "I
am now to tell you," he proceeded, "what Her Radiancy requires of you
before you go. The yearly competition for the post of Imperial
Scarf-maker is just ended; you are the judges. You will take account of
the rate of work, the lightness of the scarves, and their warmth.
Usually the competitors differ in one point only. Thus, last year, Fifi
and Gogo made the same number of scarves in the trial-week, and they
were equally light; but Fifi's were twice as warm as Gogo's and she was
pronounced twice as good. But this year, woe is me, who can judge it?
Three competitors are here, and they differ in all points! While you
settle their claims, you shall be lodged, Her Radiancy bids me say, free
of expense--in the best dungeon, and abundantly fed on the best bread
and water."

The old man groaned. "All is lost!" he wildly exclaimed. But Norman
heeded him not: he had taken out his note-book, and was calmly jotting
down the particulars.

"Three they be," the Governor proceeded, "Lolo, Mimi, and Zuzu. Lolo
makes 5 scarves while Mimi makes 2; but Zuzu makes 4 while Lolo makes 3!
Again, so fairylike is Zuzu's handiwork, 5 of her scarves weigh no more
than one of Lolo's; yet Mimi's is lighter still--5 of hers will but
balance 3 of Zuzu's! And for warmth one of Mimi's is equal to 4 of
Zuzu's; yet one of Lolo's is as warm as 3 of Mimi's!"

Here the little lady once more clapped her hands.

"It is our signal of dismissal!" the Governor hastily said. "Pay Her
Radiancy your farewell compliments--and walk out backwards."

The walking part was all the elder tourist could manage. Norman simply
said "Tell Her Radiancy we are transfixed by the spectacle of Her Serene
Brilliance, and bid an agonized farewell to her Condensed Milkiness!"

"Her Radiancy is pleased," the Governor reported, after duly translating
this. "She casts on you a glance from Her Imperial Eyes, and is
confident that you will catch it!"

"That I warrant we shall!" the elder traveller moaned to himself
distractedly.

Once more they bowed low, and then followed the Governor down a winding
staircase to the Imperial Dungeon, which they found to be lined with
coloured marble, lighted from the roof, and splendidly though not
luxuriously furnished with a bench of polished malachite. "I trust you
will not delay the calculation," the Governor said, ushering them in
with much ceremony. "I have known great inconvenience--great and serious
inconvenience--result to those unhappy ones who have delayed to execute
the commands of Her Radiancy! And on this occasion she is resolute: she
says the thing must and shall be done: and she has ordered up ten
thousand additional bamboos!" With these words he left them, and they
heard him lock and bar the door on the outside.

"I told you how it would end!" moaned the elder traveller, wringing his
hands, and quite forgetting in his anguish that he had himself proposed
the expedition, and had never predicted anything of the sort. "Oh that
we were well out of this miserable business!"

"Courage!" cried the younger cheerily. "_Hc olim meminisse juvabit!_
The end of all this will be glory!"

"Glory without the L!" was all the poor old man could say, as he rocked
himself to and fro on the malachite bench. "Glory without the L!"

FOOTNOTE:

[Footnote A: "_Maskee_," in Pigeon-English, means "_without_."]




KNOT VII.

PETTY CASH.

   "Base is the slave that pays."


"Aunt Mattie!"

"My child?"

"_Would_ you mind writing it down at once? I shall be quite _certain_ to
forget it if you don't!"

"My dear, we really must wait till the cab stops. How can I possibly
write anything in the midst of all this jolting?"

"But _really_ I shall be forgetting it!"

Clara's voice took the plaintive tone that her aunt never knew how to
resist, and with a sigh the old lady drew forth her ivory tablets and
prepared to record the amount that Clara had just spent at the
confectioner's shop. Her expenditure was always made out of her aunt's
purse, but the poor girl knew, by bitter experience, that sooner or
later "Mad Mathesis" would expect an exact account of every penny that
had gone, and she waited, with ill-concealed impatience, while the old
lady turned the tablets over and over, till she had found the one headed
"PETTY CASH."

"Here's the place," she said at last, "and here we have yesterday's
luncheon duly entered. _One glass lemonade_ (Why can't you drink water,
like me?) _three sandwiches_ (They never put in half mustard enough. I
told the young woman so, to her face; and she tossed her head--like her
impudence!) _and seven biscuits_. _Total one-and-two-pence._ Well, now
for to-day's?"

"One glass of lemonade----" Clara was beginning to say, when suddenly
the cab drew up, and a courteous railway-porter was handing out the
bewildered girl before she had had time to finish her sentence.

Her aunt pocketed the tablets instantly. "Business first," she said:
"petty cash--which is a form of pleasure, whatever _you_ may
think--afterwards." And she proceeded to pay the driver, and to give
voluminous orders about the luggage, quite deaf to the entreaties of her
unhappy niece that she would enter the rest of the luncheon account.

"My dear, you really must cultivate a more capacious mind!" was all the
consolation she vouchsafed to the poor girl. "Are not the tablets of
your memory wide enough to contain the record of one single luncheon?"

"Not wide enough! Not half wide enough!" was the passionate reply.

The words came in aptly enough, but the voice was not that of Clara, and
both ladies turned in some surprise to see who it was that had so
suddenly struck into their conversation. A fat little old lady was
standing at the door of a cab, helping the driver to extricate what
seemed an exact duplicate of herself: it would have been no easy task to
decide which was the fatter, or which looked the more good-humoured of
the two sisters.

"I tell you the cab-door isn't half wide enough!" she repeated, as her
sister finally emerged, somewhat after the fashion of a pellet from a
pop-gun, and she turned to appeal to Clara. "Is it, dear?" she said,
trying hard to bring a frown into a face that dimpled all over with
smiles.

"Some folks is too wide for 'em," growled the cab-driver.

[Illustration: "I TELL YOU THE CAB-DOOR ISN'T HALF WIDE ENOUGH!"]

"Don't provoke me, man!" cried the little old lady, in what she meant
for a tempest of fury. "Say another word and I'll put you into the
County Court, and sue you for a _Habeas Corpus_!" The cabman touched his
hat, and marched off, grinning.

"Nothing like a little Law to cow the ruffians, my dear!" she remarked
confidentially to Clara. "You saw how he quailed when I mentioned the
_Habeas Corpus_? Not that I've any idea what it means, but it sounds
very grand, doesn't it?"

"It's very provoking," Clara replied, a little vaguely.

"Very!" the little old lady eagerly repeated. "And we're very much
provoked indeed. Aren't we, sister?"

"I never was so provoked in all my life!" the fatter sister assented,
radiantly.

By this time Clara had recognised her picture-gallery acquaintances,
and, drawing her aunt aside, she hastily whispered her reminiscences. "I
met them first in the Royal Academy--and they were very kind to me--and
they were lunching at the next table to us, just now, you know--and they
tried to help me to find the picture I wanted--and I'm sure they're dear
old things!"

"Friends of yours, are they?" said Mad Mathesis. "Well, I like their
looks. You can be civil to them, while I get the tickets. But do try and
arrange your ideas a little more chronologically!"

And so it came to pass that the four ladies found themselves seated side
by side on the same bench waiting for the train, and chatting as if they
had known one another for years.

"Now this I call quite a remarkable coincidence!" exclaimed the smaller
and more talkative of the two sisters--the one whose legal knowledge had
annihilated the cab-driver. "Not only that we should be waiting for the
same train, and at the same station--_that_ would be curious enough--but
actually on the same day, and the same hour of the day! That's what
strikes _me_ so forcibly!" She glanced at the fatter and more silent
sister, whose chief function in life seemed to be to support the family
opinion, and who meekly responded--

"And me too, sister!"

"Those are not _independent_ coincidences----" Mad Mathesis was just
beginning, when Clara ventured to interpose.

"There's no jolting here," she pleaded meekly. "_Would_ you mind writing
it down now?"

Out came the ivory tablets once more. "What was it, then?" said her
aunt.

"One glass of lemonade, one sandwich, one biscuit--Oh dear me!" cried
poor Clara, the historical tone suddenly changing to a wail of agony.

"Toothache?" said her aunt calmly, as she wrote down the items. The two
sisters instantly opened their reticules and produced two different
remedies for neuralgia, each marked "unequalled."

"It isn't that!" said poor Clara. "Thank you very much. It's only that I
_can't_ remember how much I paid!"

"Well, try and make it out, then," said her aunt. "You've got
yesterday's luncheon to help you, you know. And here's the luncheon we
had the day before--the first day we went to that shop--_one
glass lemonade_, _four sandwiches_, _ten biscuits_. _Total,
one-and-fivepence._" She handed the tablets to Clara, who gazed at them
with eyes so dim with tears that she did not at first notice that she
was holding them upside down.

The two sisters had been listening to all this with the deepest
interest, and at this juncture the smaller one softly laid her hand on
Clara's arm.

"Do you know, my dear," she said coaxingly, "my sister and I are in the
very same predicament! Quite identically the very same predicament!
Aren't we, sister?"

"Quite identically and absolutely the very----" began the fatter sister,
but she was constructing her sentence on too large a scale, and the
little one would not wait for her to finish it.

"Yes, my dear," she resumed; "we were lunching at the very same shop as
you were--and we had two glasses of lemonade and three sandwiches and
five biscuits--and neither of us has the least idea what we paid. Have
we, sister?"

"Quite identically and absolutely----" murmured the other, who evidently
considered that she was now a whole sentence in arrears, and that she
ought to discharge one obligation before contracting any fresh
liabilities; but the little lady broke in again, and she retired from
the conversation a bankrupt.

"_Would_ you make it out for us, my dear?" pleaded the little old lady.

"You can do Arithmetic, I trust?" her aunt said, a little anxiously, as
Clara turned from one tablet to another, vainly trying to collect her
thoughts. Her mind was a blank, and all human expression was rapidly
fading out of her face.

A gloomy silence ensued.




KNOT VIII.

DE OMNIBUS REBUS.

   "This little pig went to market:
   This little pig staid at home."


"By Her Radiancy's express command," said the Governor, as he conducted
the travellers, for the last time, from the Imperial presence, "I shall
now have the ecstasy of escorting you as far as the outer gate of the
Military Quarter, where the agony of parting--if indeed Nature can
survive the shock--must be endured! From that gate grurmstipths start
every quarter of an hour, both ways----"

"Would you mind repeating that word?" said Norman. "Grurm----?"

"Grurmstipths," the Governor repeated. "You call them omnibuses in
England. They run both ways, and you can travel by one of them all the
way down to the harbour."

The old man breathed a sigh of relief; four hours of courtly ceremony
had wearied him, and he had been in constant terror lest something
should call into use the ten thousand additional bamboos.

In another minute they were crossing a large quadrangle, paved with
marble, and tastefully decorated with a pigsty in each corner. Soldiers,
carrying pigs, were marching in all directions: and in the middle stood
a gigantic officer giving orders in a voice of thunder, which made
itself heard above all the uproar of the pigs.

"It is the Commander-in-Chief!" the Governor hurriedly whispered to his
companions, who at once followed his example in prostrating themselves
before the great man. The Commander gravely bowed in return. He was
covered with gold lace from head to foot: his face wore an expression of
deep misery: and he had a little black pig under each arm. Still the
gallant fellow did his best, in the midst of the orders he was every
moment issuing to his men, to bid a courteous farewell to the departing
guests.

"Farewell, oh old one--carry these three to the South corner--and
farewell to thee, thou young one--put this fat one on the top of the
others in the Western sty--may your shadows never be less--woe is me, it
is wrongly done! Empty out all the sties, and begin again!" And the
soldier leant upon his sword, and wiped away a tear.

"He is in distress," the Governor explained as they left the court. "Her
Radiancy has commanded him to place twenty-four pigs in those four
sties, so that, as she goes round the court, she may always find the
number in each sty nearer to ten than the number in the last."

"Does she call ten nearer to ten than nine is?" said Norman.

"Surely," said the Governor. "Her Radiancy would admit that ten is
nearer to ten than nine is--and also nearer than eleven is."

"Then I think it can be done," said Norman.

The Governor shook his head. "The Commander has been transferring them
in vain for four months," he said. "What hope remains? And Her Radiancy
has ordered up ten thousand additional----"

"The pigs don't seem to enjoy being transferred," the old man hastily
interrupted. He did not like the subject of bamboos.

"They are only _provisionally_ transferred, you know," said the
Governor. "In most cases they are immediately carried back again: so
they need not mind it. And all is done with the greatest care, under the
personal superintendence of the Commander-in-Chief."

"Of course she would only go _once_ round?" said Norman.

"Alas, no!" sighed their conductor. "Round and round. Round and round.
These are Her Radiancy's own words. But oh, agony! Here is the outer
gate, and we must part!" He sobbed as he shook hands with them, and the
next moment was briskly walking away.

"He _might_ have waited to see us off!" said the old man, piteously.

"And he needn't have begun whistling the very _moment_ he left us!" said
the young one, severely. "But look sharp--here are two what's-his-names
in the act of starting!"

Unluckily, the sea-bound omnibus was full. "Never mind!" said Norman,
cheerily. "We'll walk on till the next one overtakes us."

They trudged on in silence, both thinking over the military problem,
till they met an omnibus coming from the sea. The elder traveller took
out his watch. "Just twelve minutes and a half since we started," he
remarked in an absent manner. Suddenly the vacant face brightened; the
old man had an idea. "My boy!" he shouted, bringing his hand down upon
Norman's shoulder so suddenly as for a moment to transfer his centre of
gravity beyond the base of support.

Thus taken off his guard, the young man wildly staggered forwards, and
seemed about to plunge into space: but in another moment he had
gracefully recovered himself. "Problem in Precession and Nutation," he
remarked--in tones where filial respect only just managed to conceal a
shade of annoyance. "What is it?" he hastily added, fearing his father
might have been taken ill. "Will you have some brandy?"

"When will the next omnibus overtake us? When? When?" the old man cried,
growing more excited every moment.

Norman looked gloomy. "Give me time," he said. "I must think it over."
And once more the travellers passed on in silence--a silence only broken
by the distant squeals of the unfortunate little pigs, who were still
being provisionally transferred from sty to sty, under the personal
superintendence of the Commander-in-Chief.




KNOT IX.

A SERPENT WITH CORNERS.

   "Water, water, every where,
   Nor any drop to drink."


"It'll just take one more pebble."

"What ever _are_ you doing with those buckets?"

The speakers were Hugh and Lambert. Place, the beach of Little Mendip.
Time, 1.30, P.M. Hugh was floating a bucket in another a size larger,
and trying how many pebbles it would carry without sinking. Lambert was
lying on his back, doing nothing.

For the next minute or two Hugh was silent, evidently deep in thought.
Suddenly he started. "I say, look here, Lambert!" he cried.

"If it's alive, and slimy, and with legs, I don't care to," said
Lambert.

"Didn't Balbus say this morning that, if a body is immersed in liquid,
it displaces as much liquid as is equal to its own bulk?" said Hugh.

"He said things of that sort," Lambert vaguely replied.

"Well, just look here a minute. Here's the little bucket almost quite
immersed: so the water displaced ought to be just about the same bulk.
And now just look at it!" He took out the little bucket as he spoke, and
handed the big one to Lambert. "Why, there's hardly a teacupful! Do you
mean to say _that_ water is the same bulk as the little bucket?"

"Course it is," said Lambert.

"Well, look here again!" cried Hugh, triumphantly, as he poured the
water from the big bucket into the little one. "Why, it doesn't half
fill it!"

"That's _its_ business," said Lambert. "If Balbus says it's the same
bulk, why, it _is_ the same bulk, you know."

"Well, I don't believe it," said Hugh.

"You needn't," said Lambert. "Besides, it's dinner-time. Come along."

They found Balbus waiting dinner for them, and to him Hugh at once
propounded his difficulty.

"Let's get you helped first," said Balbus, briskly cutting away at the
joint. "You know the old proverb 'Mutton first, mechanics afterwards'?"

The boys did _not_ know the proverb, but they accepted it in perfect
good faith, as they did every piece of information, however startling,
that came from so infallible an authority as their tutor. They ate on
steadily in silence, and, when dinner was over, Hugh set out the usual
array of pens, ink, and paper, while Balbus repeated to them the problem
he had prepared for their afternoon's task.

"A friend of mine has a flower-garden--a very pretty one, though no
great size--"

"How big is it?" said Hugh.

"That's what _you_ have to find out!" Balbus gaily replied. "All _I_
tell you is that it is oblong in shape--just half a yard longer than its
width--and that a gravel-walk, one yard wide, begins at one corner and
runs all round it."

"Joining into itself?" said Hugh.

"_Not_ joining into itself, young man. Just before doing _that_, it
turns a corner, and runs round the garden again, alongside of the first
portion, and then inside that again, winding in and in, and each lap
touching the last one, till it has used up the whole of the area."

"Like a serpent with corners?" said Lambert.

"Exactly so. And if you walk the whole length of it, to the last inch,
keeping in the centre of the path, it's exactly two miles and half a
furlong. Now, while you find out the length and breadth of the garden,
I'll see if I can think out that sea-water puzzle."

"You said it was a flower-garden?" Hugh inquired, as Balbus was leaving
the room.

"I did," said Balbus.

"Where do the flowers grow?" said Hugh. But Balbus thought it best not
to hear the question. He left the boys to their problem, and, in the
silence of his own room, set himself to unravel Hugh's mechanical
paradox.

"To fix our thoughts," he murmured to himself, as, with hands
deep-buried in his pockets, he paced up and down the room, "we will take
a cylindrical glass jar, with a scale of inches marked up the side, and
fill it with water up to the 10-inch mark: and we will assume that every
inch depth of jar contains a pint of water. We will now take a solid
cylinder, such that every inch of it is equal in bulk to _half_ a pint
of water, and plunge 4 inches of it into the water, so that the end of
the cylinder comes down to the 6-inch mark. Well, that displaces 2
pints of water. What becomes of them? Why, if there were no more
cylinder, they would lie comfortably on the top, and fill the jar up to
the 12-inch mark. But unfortunately there _is_ more cylinder, occupying
half the space between the 10-inch and the 12-inch marks, so that only
_one_ pint of water can be accommodated there. What becomes of the other
pint? Why, if there were no more cylinder, it would lie on the top, and
fill the jar up to the 13-inch mark. But unfortunately----Shade of
Newton!" he exclaimed, in sudden accents of terror. "When _does_ the
water stop rising?"

A bright idea struck him. "I'll write a little essay on it," he said.

       *       *       *       *       *

_Balbus's Essay._

"When a solid is immersed in a liquid, it is well known that it
displaces a portion of the liquid equal to itself in bulk, and that the
level of the liquid rises just so much as it would rise if a quantity of
liquid had been added to it, equal in bulk to the solid. Lardner says,
precisely the same process occurs when a solid is _partially_ immersed:
the quantity of liquid displaced, in this case, equalling the portion of
the solid which is immersed, and the rise of the level being in
proportion.

"Suppose a solid held above the surface of a liquid and partially
immersed: a portion of the liquid is displaced, and the level of the
liquid rises. But, by this rise of level, a little bit more of the solid
is of course immersed, and so there is a new displacement of a second
portion of the liquid, and a consequent rise of level. Again, this
second rise of level causes a yet further immersion, and by consequence
another displacement of liquid and another rise. It is self-evident that
this process must continue till the entire solid is immersed, and that
the liquid will then begin to immerse whatever holds the solid, which,
being connected with it, must for the time be considered a part of it.
If you hold a stick, six feet long, with its end in a tumbler of water,
and wait long enough, you must eventually be immersed. The question as
to the source from which the water is supplied--which belongs to a high
branch of mathematics, and is therefore beyond our present scope--does
not apply to the sea. Let us therefore take the familiar instance of a
man standing at the edge of the sea, at ebb-tide, with a solid in his
hand, which he partially immerses: he remains steadfast and unmoved, and
we all know that he must be drowned. The multitudes who daily perish in
this manner to attest a philosophical truth, and whose bodies the
unreasoning wave casts sullenly upon our thankless shores, have a truer
claim to be called the martyrs of science than a Galileo or a Kepler. To
use Kossuth's eloquent phrase, they are the unnamed demigods of the
nineteenth century."[B]

       *       *       *       *       *

"There's a fallacy _somewhere_," he murmured drowsily, as he stretched
his long legs upon the sofa. "I must think it over again." He closed his
eyes, in order to concentrate his attention more perfectly, and for the
next hour or so his slow and regular breathing bore witness to the
careful deliberation with which he was investigating this new and
perplexing view of the subject.

[Illustration: "HE REMAINS STEADFAST AND UNMOVED."]

FOOTNOTE:

[Footnote B: _Note by the writer._--For the above Essay I am indebted to
a dear friend, now deceased.]




KNOT X.

CHELSEA BUNS.

   "Yea, buns, and buns, and buns!"

                          OLD SONG.


"How very, very sad!" exclaimed Clara; and the eyes of the gentle girl
filled with tears as she spoke.

"Sad--but very curious when you come to look at it arithmetically," was
her aunt's less romantic reply. "Some of them have lost an arm in their
country's service, some a leg, some an ear, some an eye----"

"And some, perhaps, _all_!" Clara murmured dreamily, as they passed the
long rows of weather-beaten heroes basking in the sun. "Did you notice
that very old one, with a red face, who was drawing a map in the dust
with his wooden leg, and all the others watching? I _think_ it was a
plan of a battle----"

"The battle of Trafalgar, no doubt," her aunt interrupted, briskly.

"Hardly that, I think," Clara ventured to say. "You see, in that case,
he couldn't well be alive----"

"Couldn't well be alive!" the old lady contemptuously repeated. "He's as
lively as you and me put together! Why, if drawing a map in the
dust--with one's wooden leg--doesn't prove one to be alive, perhaps
you'll kindly mention what _does_ prove it!"

Clara did not see her way out of it. Logic had never been her _forte_.

"To return to the arithmetic," Mad Mathesis resumed--the eccentric old
lady never let slip an opportunity of driving her niece into a
calculation--"what percentage do you suppose must have lost all four--a
leg, an arm, an eye, and an ear?"

"How _can_ I tell?" gasped the terrified girl. She knew well what was
coming.

"You can't, of course, without _data_," her aunt replied: "but I'm just
going to give you----"

"Give her a Chelsea bun, Miss! That's what most young ladies likes
best!" The voice was rich and musical, and the speaker dexterously
whipped back the snowy cloth that covered his basket, and disclosed a
tempting array of the familiar square buns, joined together in rows,
richly egged and browned, and glistening in the sun.

"No, sir! I shall give her nothing so indigestible! Be off!" The old
lady waved her parasol threateningly: but nothing seemed to disturb the
good-humour of the jolly old man, who marched on, chanting his melodious
refrain:--

[Music: Chel-sea buns! Chel-sea buns hot! Chel-sea buns!

Pi-ping hot! Chel-sea buns hot! Chel-sea buns!]

"Far too indigestible, my love!" said the old lady. "Percentages will
agree with you ever so much better!"

Clara sighed, and there was a hungry look in her eyes as she watched the
basket lessening in the distance: but she meekly listened to the
relentless old lady, who at once proceeded to count off the _data_ on
her fingers.

"Say that 70 per cent. have lost an eye--75 per cent. an ear--80 per
cent. an arm--85 per cent. a leg--that'll do it beautifully. Now, my
dear, what percentage, _at least_, must have lost all four?"

No more conversation occurred--unless a smothered exclamation of "Piping
hot!" which escaped from Clara's lips as the basket vanished round a
corner could be counted as such--until they reached the old Chelsea
mansion, where Clara's father was then staying, with his three sons and
their old tutor.

Balbus, Lambert, and Hugh had entered the house only a few minutes
before them. They had been out walking, and Hugh had been propounding a
difficulty which had reduced Lambert to the depths of gloom, and had
even puzzled Balbus.

"It changes from Wednesday to Thursday at midnight, doesn't it?" Hugh
had begun.

"Sometimes," said Balbus, cautiously.

"Always," said Lambert, decisively.

"_Sometimes_," Balbus gently insisted. "Six midnights out of seven, it
changes to some other name."

"I meant, of course," Hugh corrected himself, "when it _does_ change
from Wednesday to Thursday, it does it at midnight--and _only_ at
midnight."

"Surely," said Balbus. Lambert was silent.

"Well, now, suppose it's midnight here in Chelsea. Then it's Wednesday
_west_ of Chelsea (say in Ireland or America) where midnight hasn't
arrived yet: and it's Thursday _east_ of Chelsea (say in Germany or
Russia) where midnight has just passed by?"

"Surely," Balbus said again. Even Lambert nodded this time.

"But it isn't midnight, anywhere else; so it can't be changing from one
day to another anywhere else. And yet, if Ireland and America and so on
call it Wednesday, and Germany and Russia and so on call it Thursday,
there _must_ be some place--not Chelsea--that has different days on the
two sides of it. And the worst of it is, the people _there_ get their
days in the wrong order: they've got Wednesday _east_ of them, and
Thursday _west_--just as if their day had changed from Thursday to
Wednesday!"

"I've heard that puzzle before!" cried Lambert. "And I'll tell you the
explanation. When a ship goes round the world from east to west, we
know that it loses a day in its reckoning: so that when it gets home,
and calls its day Wednesday, it finds people here calling it Thursday,
because we've had one more midnight than the ship has had. And when you
go the other way round you gain a day."

"I know all that," said Hugh, in reply to this not very lucid
explanation: "but it doesn't help me, because the ship hasn't proper
days. One way round, you get more than twenty-four hours to the day, and
the other way you get less: so of course the names get wrong: but people
that live on in one place always get twenty-four hours to the day."

"I suppose there _is_ such a place," Balbus said, meditatively, "though
I never heard of it. And the people must find it very queer, as Hugh
says, to have the old day _east_ of them, and the new one _west_:
because, when midnight comes round to them, with the new day in front of
it and the old one behind it, one doesn't see exactly what happens. I
must think it over."

So they had entered the house in the state I have described--Balbus
puzzled, and Lambert buried in gloomy thought.

"Yes, m'm, Master _is_ at home, m'm," said the stately old butler.
(N.B.--It is only a butler of experience who can manage a series of
three M's together, without any interjacent vowels.) "And the _ole_
party is a-waiting for you in the libery."

"I don't like his calling your father an _old_ party," Mad Mathesis
whispered to her niece, as they crossed the hall. And Clara had only
just time to whisper in reply "he meant the _whole_ party," before they
were ushered into the library, and the sight of the five solemn faces
there assembled chilled her into silence.

Her father sat at the head of the table, and mutely signed to the ladies
to take the two vacant chairs, one on each side of him. His three sons
and Balbus completed the party. Writing materials had been arranged
round the table, after the fashion of a ghostly banquet: the butler had
evidently bestowed much thought on the grim device. Sheets of quarto
paper, each flanked by a pen on one side and a pencil on the other,
represented the plates--penwipers did duty for rolls of bread--while
ink-bottles stood in the places usually occupied by wine-glasses. The
_pice de resistance_ was a large green baize bag, which gave forth, as
the old man restlessly lifted it from side to side, a charming jingle,
as of innumerable golden guineas.

"Sister, daughter, sons--and Balbus--," the old man began, so nervously,
that Balbus put in a gentle "Hear, hear!" while Hugh drummed on the
table with his fists. This disconcerted the unpractised orator.
"Sister--" he began again, then paused a moment, moved the bag to the
other side, and went on with a rush, "I mean--this being--a critical
occasion--more or less--being the year when one of my sons comes of
age--" he paused again in some confusion, having evidently got into the
middle of his speech sooner than he intended: but it was too late to go
back. "Hear, hear!" cried Balbus. "Quite so," said the old gentleman,
recovering his self-possession a little: "when first I began this annual
custom--my friend Balbus will correct me if I am wrong--" (Hugh
whispered "with a strap!" but nobody heard him except Lambert, who only
frowned and shook his head at him) "--this annual custom of giving each
of my sons as many guineas as would represent his age--it was a critical
time--so Balbus informed me--as the ages of two of you were together
equal to that of the third--so on that occasion I made a speech----" He
paused so long that Balbus thought it well to come to the rescue with
the words "It was a most----" but the old man checked him with a warning
look: "yes, made a speech," he repeated. "A few years after that, Balbus
pointed out--I say pointed out--" ("Hear, hear"! cried Balbus. "Quite
so," said the grateful old man.) "--that it was _another_ critical
occasion. The ages of two of you were together _double_ that of the
third. So I made another speech--another speech. And now again it's a
critical occasion--so Balbus says--and I am making----" (Here Mad
Mathesis pointedly referred to her watch) "all the haste I can!" the old
man cried, with wonderful presence of mind. "Indeed, sister, I'm coming
to the point now! The number of years that have passed since that first
occasion is just two-thirds of the number of guineas I then gave you.
Now, my boys, calculate your ages from the _data_, and you shall have
the money!"

"But we _know_ our ages!" cried Hugh.

"Silence, sir!" thundered the old man, rising to his full height (he was
exactly five-foot five) in his indignation. "I say you must use the
_data_ only! You mustn't even assume _which_ it is that comes of age!"
He clutched the bag as he spoke, and with tottering steps (it was about
as much as he could do to carry it) he left the room.

"And _you_ shall have a similar _cadeau_," the old lady whispered to her
niece, "when you've calculated that percentage!" And she followed her
brother.

Nothing could exceed the solemnity with which the old couple had risen
from the table, and yet was it--was it a _grin_ with which the father
turned away from his unhappy sons? Could it be--could it be a _wink_
with which the aunt abandoned her despairing niece? And were those--were
those sounds of suppressed _chuckling_ which floated into the room, just
before Balbus (who had followed them out) closed the door? Surely not:
and yet the butler told the cook--but no, that was merely idle gossip,
and I will not repeat it.

The shades of evening granted their unuttered petition, and "closed not
o'er" them (for the butler brought in the lamp): the same obliging
shades left them a "lonely bark" (the wail of a dog, in the back-yard,
baying the moon) for "awhile": but neither "morn, alas," (nor any other
epoch) seemed likely to "restore" them--to that peace of mind which had
once been theirs ere ever these problems had swooped upon them, and
crushed them with a load of unfathomable mystery!

"It's hardly fair," muttered Hugh, "to give us such a jumble as this to
work out!"

"Fair?" Clara echoed, bitterly. "Well!"

And to all my readers I can but repeat the last words of gentle Clara--

   FARE-WELL!




APPENDIX.

     "A knot!" said Alice. "Oh, do let me help to undo it!"


ANSWERS TO KNOT I.

_Problem._--"Two travellers spend from 3 o'clock till 9 in walking along
a level road, up a hill, and home again: their pace on the level being 4
miles an hour, up hill 3, and down hill 6. Find distance walked: also
(within half an hour) time of reaching top of hill."

_Answer._--"24 miles: half-past 6."

       *       *       *       *       *

_Solution._--A level mile takes 1/4 of an hour, up hill 1/3, down hill
1/6. Hence to go and return over the same mile, whether on the level or
on the hill-side, takes 1/2 an hour. Hence in 6 hours they went 12 miles
out and 12 back. If the 12 miles out had been nearly all level, they
would have taken a little over 3 hours; if nearly all up hill, a little
under 4. Hence 3-1/2 hours must be within 1/2 an hour of the time taken
in reaching the peak; thus, as they started at 3, they got there within
1/2 an hour of 1/2 past 6.

       *       *       *       *       *

Twenty-seven answers have come in. Of these, 9 are right, 16 partially
right, and 2 wrong. The 16 give the _distance_ correctly, but they have
failed to grasp the fact that the top of the hill might have been
reached at _any_ moment between 6 o'clock and 7.

The two wrong answers are from GERTY VERNON and A NIHILIST. The former
makes the distance "23 miles," while her revolutionary companion puts it
at "27." GERTY VERNON says "they had to go 4 miles along the plain, and
got to the foot of the hill at 4 o'clock." They _might_ have done so, I
grant; but you have no ground for saying they _did_ so. "It was 7-1/2
miles to the top of the hill, and they reached that at 1/4 before 7
o'clock." Here you go wrong in your arithmetic, and I must, however
reluctantly, bid you farewell. 7-1/2 miles, at 3 miles an hour, would
_not_ require 2-3/4 hours. A NIHILIST says "Let _x_ denote the whole
number of miles; _y_ the number of hours to hill-top; [** therefore] 3_y_ =
number of miles to hill-top, and _x_-3_y_ = number of miles on the other
side." You bewilder me. The other side of _what_? "Of the hill," you
say. But then, how did they get home again? However, to accommodate your
views we will build a new hostelry at the foot of the hill on the
opposite side, and also assume (what I grant you is _possible_, though
it is not _necessarily_ true) that there was no level road at all. Even
then you go wrong.

You say

   "_y_ = 6 - (_x_ - 3_y_)/6, ..... (i);

   _x_/4-1/2 = 6              ..... (ii)."

I grant you (i), but I deny (ii): it rests on the assumption that to go
_part_ of the time at 3 miles an hour, and the rest at 6 miles an hour,
comes to the same result as going the _whole_ time at 4-1/2 miles an
hour. But this would only be true if the "_part_" were an exact _half_,
i.e., if they went up hill for 3 hours, and down hill for the other 3:
which they certainly did _not_ do.

The sixteen, who are partially right, are AGNES BAILEY, F. K., FIFEE, G.
E. B., H. P., KIT, M. E. T., MYSIE, A MOTHER'S SON, NAIRAM, A
REDRUTHIAN, A SOCIALIST, SPEAR MAIDEN, T. B. C, VIS INERTI, and YAK. Of
these, F. K., FIFEE, T. B. C, and VIS INERTI do not attempt the second
part at all. F. K. and H. P. give no working. The rest make particular
assumptions, such as that there was no level road--that there were 6
miles of level road--and so on, all leading to _particular_ times being
fixed for reaching the hill-top. The most curious assumption is that of
AGNES BAILEY, who says "Let _x_ = number of hours occupied in ascent;
then _x_/2 = hours occupied in descent; and 4_x_/3 = hours occupied on
the level." I suppose you were thinking of the relative _rates_, up
hill and on the level; which we might express by saying that, if they
went x miles up hill in a certain time, they would go 4_x_/3 miles on
the level _in the same time_. You have, in fact, assumed that they took
_the same time_ on the level that they took in ascending the hill. FIFEE
assumes that, when the aged knight said they had gone "four miles in the
hour" on the level, he meant that four miles was the _distance_ gone,
not merely the rate. This would have been--if FIFEE will excuse the
slang expression--a "sell," ill-suited to the dignity of the hero.

And now "descend, ye classic Nine!" who have solved the whole problem,
and let me sing your praises. Your names are BLITHE, E. W., L. B., A
MARLBOROUGH BOY, O. V. L., PUTNEY WALKER, ROSE, SEA BREEZE, SIMPLE
SUSAN, and MONEY SPINNER. (These last two I count as one, as they send a
joint answer.) ROSE and SIMPLE SUSAN and CO. do not actually state that
the hill-top was reached some time between 6 and 7, but, as they have
clearly grasped the fact that a mile, ascended and descended, took the
same time as two level miles, I mark them as "right." A MARLBOROUGH BOY
and PUTNEY WALKER deserve honourable mention for their algebraical
solutions being the only two who have perceived that the question leads
to _an indeterminate equation_. E. W. brings a charge of untruthfulness
against the aged knight--a serious charge, for he was the very pink of
chivalry! She says "According to the data given, the time at the summit
affords no clue to the total distance. It does not enable us to state
precisely to an inch how much level and how much hill there was on the
road." "Fair damsel," the aged knight replies, "--if, as I surmise, thy
initials denote Early Womanhood--bethink thee that the word 'enable' is
thine, not mine. I did but ask the time of reaching the hill-top as my
_condition_ for further parley. If _now_ thou wilt not grant that I am a
truth-loving man, then will I affirm that those same initials denote
Envenomed Wickedness!"


CLASS LIST.

I.

   A MARLBOROUGH BOY.
   PUTNEY WALKER.

II.

   BLITHE.
   E. W.
   L. B.
   O. V. L.
   ROSE.
   SEA BREEZE.
   {SIMPLE SUSAN.
   {MONEY-SPINNER.

BLITHE has made so ingenious an addition to the problem, and SIMPLE
SUSAN and CO. have solved it in such tuneful verse, that I record both
their answers in full. I have altered a word or two in BLITHE'S--which I
trust she will excuse; it did not seem quite clear as it stood.

       *       *       *       *       *

"Yet stay," said the youth, as a gleam of inspiration lighted up the
relaxing muscles of his quiescent features. "Stay. Methinks it matters
little _when_ we reached that summit, the crown of our toil. For in the
space of time wherein we clambered up one mile and bounded down the same
on our return, we could have trudged the _twain_ on the level. We have
plodded, then, four-and-twenty miles in these six mortal hours; for
never a moment did we stop for catching of fleeting breath or for gazing
on the scene around!"

"Very good," said the old man. "Twelve miles out and twelve miles in.
And we reached the top some time between six and seven of the clock. Now
mark me! For every five minutes that had fled since six of the clock
when we stood on yonder peak, so many miles had we toiled upwards on the
dreary mountainside!"

The youth moaned and rushed into the hostel.

   BLITHE.

   The elder and the younger knight,
     They sallied forth at three;
   How far they went on level ground
     It matters not to me;
   What time they reached the foot of hill,
     When they began to mount,
   Are problems which I hold to be
     Of very small account.

   The moment that each waved his hat
     Upon the topmost peak--
   To trivial query such as this
     No answer will I seek.
   Yet can I tell the distance well
     They must have travelled o'er:
   On hill and plain, 'twixt three and nine,
     The miles were twenty-four.

   Four miles an hour their steady pace
     Along the level track,
   Three when they climbed--but six when they
     Came swiftly striding back
   Adown the hill; and little skill
     It needs, methinks, to show,
   Up hill and down together told,
     Four miles an hour they go.

   For whether long or short the time
     Upon the hill they spent,
   Two thirds were passed in going up,
     One third in the descent.
   Two thirds at three, one third at six,
     If rightly reckoned o'er,
   Will make one whole at four--the tale
     Is tangled now no more.

                                SIMPLE SUSAN.
                                MONEY SPINNER.


ANSWERS TO KNOT II.

 1. THE DINNER PARTY.

_Problem._--"The Governor of Kgovjni wants to give a very small dinner
party, and invites his father's brother-in-law, his brother's
father-in-law, his father-in-law's brother, and his brother-in-law's
father. Find the number of guests."

_Answer._--"One."

       *       *       *       *       *

In this genealogy, males are denoted by capitals, and females by small
letters.

The Governor is E and his guest is C.

            A = a
              |
       +------+-+----+
       |        |    |
   b = B    D = d    C = c
     |        |        |
     |   +---++--+   +-+-+
     |   |   |   |   |   |
     e = E   |   g = G   |
             F ========= f

Ten answers have been received. Of these, one is wrong, GALANTHUS
NIVALIS MAJOR, who insists on inviting _two_ guests, one being the
Governor's _wife's brother's father_. If she had taken his _sister's
husband's father_ instead, she would have found it possible to reduce
the guests to _one_.

Of the nine who send right answers, SEA-BREEZE is the very faintest
breath that ever bore the name! She simply states that the Governor's
uncle might fulfill all the conditions "by intermarriages"! "Wind of the
western sea," you have had a very narrow escape! Be thankful to appear
in the Class-list at all! BOG-OAK and BRADSHAW OF THE FUTURE use
genealogies which require 16 people instead of 14, by inviting the
Governor's _father's sister's husband_ instead of his _father's wife's
brother_. I cannot think this so good a solution as one that requires
only 14. CAIUS and VALENTINE deserve special mention as the only two who
have supplied genealogies.


CLASS LIST.

I.

   BEE.
   CAIUS.
   M. M.
   MATTHEW MATTICKS.
   OLD CAT.
   VALENTINE.

II.

   BOG-OAK.
   BRADSHAW OF THE FUTURE.

III.

   SEA-BREEZE.


 2. THE LODGINGS.

_Problem._--"A Square has 20 doors on each side, which contains 21 equal
parts. They are numbered all round, beginning at one corner. From which
of the four, Nos. 9, 25, 52, 73, is the sum of the distances, to the
other three, least?"

_Answer._--"From No. 9."

       *       *       *       *       *

[Illustration]

Let A be No. 9, B No. 25, C No. 52, and D No. 73.

   Then AB = [** sqrt](12^{2} + 5^{2}) = [** sqrt]169 = 13;
   AC = 21;
   AD = [** sqrt](9^{2} + 8^{2}) = [** sqrt]145 = 12 +
   (N.B. _i.e._ "between 12 and 13.")
   BC = [** sqrt](16^{2} + 12^{2}) = [** sqrt]400 = 20;
   BD = [** sqrt](3^{2} + 21^{2}) = [** sqrt]450 = 21+;
   CD = [** sqrt](9^{2} + 13^{2}) = [** sqrt]250 = 15+;


Hence sum of distances from A is between 46 and 47; from B, between 54
and 55; from C, between 56 and 57; from D, between 48 and 51. (Why not
"between 48 and 49"? Make this out for yourselves.) Hence the sum is
least for A.

       *       *       *       *       *

Twenty-five solutions have been received. Of these, 15 must be marked
"0," 5 are partly right, and 5 right. Of the 15, I may dismiss
ALPHABETICAL PHANTOM, BOG-OAK, DINAH MITE, FIFEE, GALANTHUS NIVALIS
MAJOR (I fear the cold spring has blighted our SNOWDROP), GUY, H.M.S.
PINAFORE, JANET, and VALENTINE with the simple remark that they insist
on the unfortunate lodgers _keeping to the pavement_. (I used the words
"crossed to Number Seventy-three" for the special purpose of showing
that _short cuts_ were possible.) SEA-BREEZE does the same, and adds
that "the result would be the same" even if they crossed the Square, but
gives no proof of this. M. M. draws a diagram, and says that No. 9 is
the house, "as the diagram shows." I cannot see _how_ it does so. OLD
CAT assumes that the house _must_ be No. 9 or No. 73. She does not
explain how she estimates the distances. Bee's Arithmetic is faulty: she
makes [** sqrt]169 + [** sqrt]442 + [** sqrt]130 = 741. (I suppose you
mean [** sqrt]741, which would be a little nearer the truth. But roots
cannot be added in this manner. Do you think [** sqrt]9 + [** sqrt]16 is
25, or even [** sqrt]25?) But AYR'S state is more perilous still: she
draws illogical conclusions with a frightful calmness. After pointing
out (rightly) that AC is less than BD she says, "therefore the nearest
house to the other three must be A or C." And again, after pointing out
(rightly) that B and D are both within the half-square containing A,
she says "therefore" AB + AD must be less than BC + CD. (There is no
logical force in either "therefore." For the first, try Nos. 1, 21, 60,
70: this will make your premiss true, and your conclusion false.
Similarly, for the second, try Nos. 1, 30, 51, 71.)

Of the five partly-right solutions, RAGS AND TATTERS and MAD HATTER (who
send one answer between them) make No. 25 6 units from the corner
instead of 5. CHEAM, E. R. D. L., and MEGGY POTTS leave openings at the
corners of the Square, which are not in the _data_: moreover CHEAM gives
values for the distances without any hint that they are only
_approximations_. CROPHI AND MOPHI make the bold and unfounded
assumption that there were really 21 houses on each side, instead of 20
as stated by Balbus. "We may assume," they add, "that the doors of Nos.
21, 42, 63, 84, are invisible from the centre of the Square"! What is
there, I wonder, that CROPHI AND MOPHI would _not_ assume?

Of the five who are wholly right, I think BRADSHAW OF THE FUTURE, CAIUS,
CLIFTON C., and MARTREB deserve special praise for their full
_analytical_ solutions. MATTHEW MATTICKS picks out No. 9, and proves it
to be the right house in two ways, very neatly and ingeniously, but
_why_ he picks it out does not appear. It is an excellent _synthetical_
proof, but lacks the analysis which the other four supply.


CLASS LIST.

I.

   BRADSHAW OF THE FUTURE
   CAIUS.
   CLIFTON C.
   MARTREB.

II.

MATTHEW MATTICKS.

III.

   CHEAM.
   CROPHI AND MOPHI.
   E. R. D. L.
   MEGGY POTTS.
   {RAGS AND TATTERS.
   {MAD HATTER.


A remonstrance has reached me from SCRUTATOR on the subject of KNOT I.,
which he declares was "no problem at all." "Two questions," he says,
"are put. To solve one there is no data: the other answers itself." As
to the first point, SCRUTATOR is mistaken; there _are_ (not "is") data
sufficient to answer the question. As to the other, it is interesting to
know that the question "answers itself," and I am sure it does the
question great credit: still I fear I cannot enter it on the list of
winners, as this competition is only open to human beings.


ANSWERS TO KNOT III.

_Problem._--(1) "Two travellers, starting at the same time, went
opposite ways round a circular railway. Trains start each way every 15
minutes, the easterly ones going round in 3 hours, the westerly in 2.
How many trains did each meet on the way, not counting trains met at the
terminus itself?" (2) "They went round, as before, each traveller
counting as 'one' the train containing the other traveller. How many did
each meet?"

_Answers._--(1) 19. (2) The easterly traveller met 12; the other 8.

       *       *       *       *       *

The trains one way took 180 minutes, the other way 120. Let us take the
L. C. M., 360, and divide the railway into 360 units. Then one set of
trains went at the rate of 2 units a minute and at intervals of 30
units; the other at the rate of 3 units a minute and at intervals of 45
units. An easterly train starting has 45 units between it and the first
train it will meet: it does 2-5ths of this while the other does 3-5ths,
and thus meets it at the end of 18 units, and so all the way round. A
westerly train starting has 30 units between it and the first train it
will meet: it does 3-5ths of this while the other does 2-5ths, and thus
meets it at the end of 18 units, and so all the way round. Hence if the
railway be divided, by 19 posts, into 20 parts, each containing 18
units, trains meet at every post, and, in (1), each traveller passes 19
posts in going round, and so meets 19 trains. But, in (2), the easterly
traveller only begins to count after traversing 2-5ths of the journey,
_i.e._, on reaching the 8th post, and so counts 12 posts: similarly the
other counts 8. They meet at the end of 2-5ths of 3 hours, or 3-5ths of
2 hours, _i.e._, 72 minutes.

       *       *       *       *       *

Forty-five answers have been received. Of these 12 are beyond the reach
of discussion, as they give no working. I can but enumerate their names.
ARDMORE, E. A., F. A. D., L. D., MATTHEW MATTICKS, M. E. T., POO-POO,
and THE RED QUEEN are all wrong. BETA and ROWENA have got (1) right and
(2) wrong. CHEEKY BOB and NAIRAM give the right answers, but it may
perhaps make the one less cheeky, and induce the other to take a less
inverted view of things, to be informed that, if this had been a
competition for a prize, they would have got no marks. [N.B.--I have
not ventured to put E. A.'s name in full, as she only gave it
provisionally, in case her answer should prove right.]

Of the 33 answers for which the working is given, 10 are wrong; 11
half-wrong and half-right; 3 right, except that they cherish the
delusion that it was _Clara_ who travelled in the easterly train--a
point which the data do not enable us to settle; and 9 wholly right.

The 10 wrong answers are from BO-PEEP, FINANCIER, I. W. T., KATE B., M.
A. H., Q. Y. Z., SEA-GULL, THISTLEDOWN, TOM-QUAD, and an unsigned one.
BO-PEEP rightly says that the easterly traveller met all trains which
started during the 3 hours of her trip, as well as all which started
during the previous 2 hours, _i.e._, all which started at the
commencements of 20 periods of 15 minutes each; and she is right in
striking out the one she met at the moment of starting; but wrong in
striking out the _last_ train, for she did not meet this at the
terminus, but 15 minutes before she got there. She makes the same
mistake in (2). FINANCIER thinks that any train, met for the second
time, is not to be counted. I. W. T. finds, by a process which is not
stated, that the travellers met at the end of 71 minutes and 26-1/2
seconds. KATE B. thinks the trains which are met on starting and on
arriving are _never_ to be counted, even when met elsewhere. Q. Y. Z.
tries a rather complex algebraical solution, and succeeds in finding the
time of meeting correctly: all else is wrong. SEA-GULL seems to think
that, in (1), the easterly train _stood still_ for 3 hours; and says
that, in (2), the travellers met at the end of 71 minutes 40 seconds.
THISTLEDOWN nobly confesses to having tried no calculation, but merely
having drawn a picture of the railway and counted the trains; in (1),
she counts wrong; in (2) she makes them meet in 75 minutes. TOM-QUAD
omits (1): in (2) he makes Clara count the train she met on her arrival.
The unsigned one is also unintelligible; it states that the travellers
go "1-24th more than the total distance to be traversed"! The "Clara"
theory, already referred to, is adopted by 5 of these, viz., BO-PEEP,
FINANCIER, KATE B., TOM-QUAD, and the nameless writer.

The 11 half-right answers are from BOG-OAK, BRIDGET, CASTOR, CHESHIRE
CAT, G. E. B., GUY, MARY, M. A. H., OLD MAID, R. W., and VENDREDI. All
these adopt the "Clara" theory. CASTOR omits (1). VENDREDI gets (1)
right, but in (2) makes the same mistake as BO-PEEP. I notice in your
solution a marvellous proportion-sum:--"300 miles: 2 hours :: one mile:
24 seconds." May I venture to advise your acquiring, as soon as
possible, an utter disbelief in the possibility of a ratio existing
between _miles_ and _hours_? Do not be disheartened by your two friends'
sarcastic remarks on your "roundabout ways." Their short method, of
adding 12 and 8, has the slight disadvantage of bringing the answer
wrong: even a "roundabout" method is better than _that_! M. A. H., in
(2), makes the travellers count "one" _after_ they met, not _when_ they
met. CHESHIRE CAT and OLD MAID get "20" as answer for (1), by forgetting
to strike out the train met on arrival. The others all get "18" in
various ways. BOG-OAK, GUY, and R. W. divide the trains which the
westerly traveller has to meet into 2 sets, viz., those already on the
line, which they (rightly) make "11," and those which started during her
2 hours' journey (exclusive of train met on arrival), which they
(wrongly) make "7"; and they make a similar mistake with the easterly
train. BRIDGET (rightly) says that the westerly traveller met a train
every 6 minutes for 2 hours, but (wrongly) makes the number "20"; it
should be "21." G. E. B. adopts BO-PEEP'S method, but (wrongly) strikes
out (for the easterly traveller) the train which started at the
_commencement_ of the previous 2 hours. MARY thinks a train, met on
arrival, must not be counted, even when met on a _previous_ occasion.

The 3, who are wholly right but for the unfortunate "Clara" theory, are
F. LEE, G. S. C., and X. A. B.

And now "descend, ye classic Ten!" who have solved the whole problem.
Your names are AIX-LES-BAINS, ALGERNON BRAY (thanks for a friendly
remark, which comes with a heart-warmth that not even the Atlantic could
chill), ARVON, BRADSHAW OF THE FUTURE, FIFEE, H. L. R., J. L. O., OMEGA,
S. S. G., and WAITING FOR THE TRAIN. Several of these have put Clara,
provisionally, into the easterly train: but they seem to have understood
that the data do not decide that point.


CLASS LIST.

I.

   AIX-LES-BAINS.
   ALGERNON BRAY.
   BRADSHAW OF THE FUTURE.
   FIFEE.
   H. L. R.
   OMEGA.
   S. S. G.
   WAITING FOR THE TRAIN.

II.

   ARVON.
   J. L. O.

III.

   F. LEE.
   G. S. C.
   X. A. B.


ANSWERS TO KNOT IV.

_Problem._--"There are 5 sacks, of which Nos. 1, 2, weigh 12 lbs.; Nos.
2, 3, 13-1/2 lbs.; Nos. 3, 4, 11-1/2 lbs.; Nos. 4, 5, 8 lbs.; Nos. 1, 3,
5, 16 lbs. Required the weight of each sack."

_Answer._--"5-1/2, 6-1/2, 7, 4-1/2, 3-1/2."

       *       *       *       *       *

The sum of all the weighings, 61 lbs., includes sack No. 3 _thrice_ and
each other _twice_. Deducting twice the sum of the 1st and 4th
weighings, we get 21 lbs. for _thrice_ No. 3, _i.e._, 7 lbs. for No. 3.
Hence, the 2nd and 3rd weighings give 6-1/2 lbs., 4-1/2 lbs. for Nos. 2,
4; and hence again, the 1st and 4th weighings give 5-1/2 lbs., 3-1/2
lbs., for Nos. 1, 5.

       *       *       *       *       *

Ninety-seven answers have been received. Of these, 15 are beyond the
reach of discussion, as they give no working. I can but enumerate their
names, and I take this opportunity of saying that this is the last time
I shall put on record the names of competitors who give no sort of clue
to the process by which their answers were obtained. In guessing a
conundrum, or in catching a flea, we do not expect the breathless victor
to give us afterwards, in cold blood, a history of the mental or
muscular efforts by which he achieved success; but a mathematical
calculation is another thing. The names of this "mute inglorious" band
are COMMON SENSE, D. E. R., DOUGLAS, E. L., ELLEN, I. M. T., J. M. C.,
JOSEPH, KNOT I, LUCY, MEEK, M. F. C., PYRAMUS, SHAH, VERITAS.

Of the eighty-two answers with which the working, or some approach to
it, is supplied, one is wrong: seventeen have given solutions which are
(from one cause or another) practically valueless: the remaining
sixty-four I shall try to arrange in a Class-list, according to the
varying degrees of shortness and neatness to which they seem to have
attained.

The solitary wrong answer is from NELL. To be thus "alone in the crowd"
is a distinction--a painful one, no doubt, but still a distinction. I am
sorry for you, my dear young lady, and I seem to hear your tearful
exclamation, when you read these lines, "Ah! This is the knell of all my
hopes!" Why, oh why, did you assume that the 4th and 5th bags weighed 4
lbs. each? And why did you not test your answers? However, please try
again: and please don't change your _nom-de-plume_: let us have NELL in
the First Class next time!

The seventeen whose solutions are practically valueless are ARDMORE, A
READY RECKONER, ARTHUR, BOG-LARK, BOG-OAK, BRIDGET, FIRST ATTEMPT, J. L.
C., M. E. T., ROSE, ROWENA, SEA-BREEZE, SYLVIA, THISTLEDOWN,
THREE-FIFTHS ASLEEP, VENDREDI, and WINIFRED. BOG-LARK tries it by a sort
of "rule of false," assuming experimentally that Nos. 1, 2, weigh 6 lbs.
each, and having thus produced 17-1/2, instead of 16, as the weight of
1, 3, and 5, she removes "the superfluous pound and a half," but does
not explain how she knows from which to take it. THREE-FIFTHS ASLEEP
says that (when in that peculiar state) "it seemed perfectly clear" to
her that, "3 out of the 5 sacks being weighed twice over, 3/5 of 45 =
27, must be the total weight of the 5 sacks." As to which I can only
say, with the Captain, "it beats me entirely!" WINIFRED, on the plea
that "one must have a starting-point," assumes (what I fear is a mere
guess) that No. 1 weighed 5-1/2 lbs. The rest all do it, wholly or
partly, by guess-work.

The problem is of course (as any Algebraist sees at once) a case of
"simultaneous simple equations." It is, however, easily soluble by
Arithmetic only; and, when this is the case, I hold that it is bad
workmanship to use the more complex method. I have not, this time, given
more credit to arithmetical solutions; but in future problems I shall
(other things being equal) give the highest marks to those who use the
simplest machinery. I have put into Class I. those whose answers seemed
specially short and neat, and into Class III. those that seemed
specially long or clumsy. Of this last set, A. C. M., FURZE-BUSH, JAMES,
PARTRIDGE, R. W., and WAITING FOR THE TRAIN, have sent long wandering
solutions, the substitutions having no definite method, but seeming to
have been made to see what would come of it. CHILPOME and DUBLIN BOY
omit some of the working. ARVON MARLBOROUGH BOY only finds the weight of
_one_ sack.


CLASS LIST

I.

   B. E. D.
   C. H.
   CONSTANCE JOHNSON.
   GREYSTEAD.
   GUY.
   HOOPOE.
   J. F. A.
   M. A. H.
   NUMBER FIVE.
   PEDRO.
   R. E. X.
   SEVEN OLD MEN.
   VIS INERTI.
   WILLY B.
   YAHOO.

II.

   AMERICAN SUBSCRIBER.
   AN APPRECIATIVE SCHOOLMA'AM.
   AYR.
   BRADSHAW OF THE FUTURE.
   CHEAM.
   C. M. G.
   DINAH MITE.
   DUCKWING.
   E. C. M.
   E. N. Lowry.
   ERA.
   EUROCLYDON.
   F. H. W.
   FIFEE.
   G. E. B.
   HARLEQUIN.
   HAWTHORN.
   HOUGH GREEN.
   J. A. B.
   JACK TAR.
   J. B. B.
   KGOVJNI.
   LAND LUBBER.
   L. D.
   MAGPIE.
   MARY.
   MHRUXI.
   MINNIE.
   MONEY-SPINNER.
   NAIRAM.
   OLD CAT.
   POLICHINELLE.
   SIMPLE SUSAN.
   S. S. G.
   THISBE.
   VERENA.
   WAMBA.
   WOLFE.
   WYKEHAMICUS.
   Y. M. A. H.

III.

   A. C. M.
   ARVON MARLBOROUGH BOY.
   CHILPOME.
   DUBLIN BOY.
   FURZE-BUSH.
   JAMES.
   PARTRIDGE.
   R. W.
   WAITING FOR THE TRAIN.


ANSWERS TO KNOT V.

_Problem._--To mark pictures, giving 3 x's to 2 or 3, 2 to 4 or 5, and 1
to 9 or 10; also giving 3 o's to 1 or 2, 2 to 3 or 4 and 1 to 8 or 9; so
as to mark the smallest possible number of pictures, and to give them
the largest possible number of marks.

_Answer._--10 pictures; 29 marks; arranged thus:--

   x  x  x  x  x  x  x  x  x  o
   x  x  x  x  x     o  o  o  o
   x  x  o  o  o  o  o  o  o  o

_Solution._--By giving all the x's possible, putting into brackets the
optional ones, we get 10 pictures marked thus:--

   x  x  x  x  x  x  x  x  x (x)
   x  x  x  x (x)
   x  x (x)

By then assigning o's in the same way, beginning at the other end, we
get 9 pictures marked thus:--

                        (o) o
                  (o) o  o  o
   (o) o  o  o  o  o  o  o  o

All we have now to do is to run these two wedges as close together as
they will go, so as to get the minimum number of pictures----erasing
optional marks where by so doing we can run them closer, but otherwise
letting them stand. There are 10 necessary marks in the 1st row, and in
the 3rd; but only 7 in the 2nd. Hence we erase all optional marks in the
1st and 3rd rows, but let them stand in the 2nd.

       *       *       *       *       *

Twenty-two answers have been received. Of these 11 give no working; so,
in accordance with what I announced in my last review of answers, I
leave them unnamed, merely mentioning that 5 are right and 6 wrong.

Of the eleven answers with which some working is supplied, 3 are wrong.
C. H. begins with the rash assertion that under the given conditions
"the sum is impossible. For," he or she adds (these initialed
correspondents are dismally vague beings to deal with: perhaps "it"
would be a better pronoun), "10 is the least possible number of
pictures" (granted): "therefore we must either give 2 x's to 6, or 2 o's
to 5." Why "must," oh alphabetical phantom? It is nowhere ordained that
every picture "must" have 3 marks! FIFEE sends a folio page of solution,
which deserved a better fate: she offers 3 answers, in each of which 10
pictures are marked, with 30 marks; in one she gives 2 x's to 6
pictures; in another to 7; in the 3rd she gives 2 o's to 5; thus in
every case ignoring the conditions. (I pause to remark that the
condition "2 x's to 4 or 5 pictures" can only mean "_either_ to 4 _or
else_ to 5": if, as one competitor holds, it might mean _any_ number not
less than 4, the words "_or_ 5" would be superfluous.) I. E. A. (I am
happy to say that none of these bloodless phantoms appear this time in
the class-list. Is it IDEA with the "D" left out?) gives 2 x's to 6
pictures. She then takes me to task for using the word "ought" instead
of "nought." No doubt, to one who thus rebels against the rules laid
down for her guidance, the word must be distasteful. But does not I. E.
A. remember the parallel case of "adder"? That creature was originally
"a nadder": then the two words took to bandying the poor "n" backwards
and forwards like a shuttlecock, the final state of the game being "an
adder." May not "a nought" have similarly become "an ought"? Anyhow,
"oughts and crosses" is a very old game. I don't think I ever heard it
called "noughts and crosses."

In the following Class-list, I hope the solitary occupant of III. will
sheathe her claws when she hears how narrow an escape she has had of not
being named at all. Her account of the process by which she got the
answer is so meagre that, like the nursery tale of "Jack-a-Minory" (I
trust I. E. A. will be merciful to the spelling), it is scarcely to be
distinguished from "zero."


CLASS LIST.

I.

   GUY.
   OLD CAT.
   SEA-BREEZE.

II.

   AYR.
   BRADSHAW OF THE FUTURE.
   F. LEE.
   H. VERNON.

III.

CAT.


ANSWERS TO KNOT VI.

_Problem 1._--_A_ and _B_ began the year with only 1,000_l._ a-piece.
They borrowed nought; they stole nought. On the next New-Year's Day they
had 60,000_l._ between them. How did they do it?

_Solution._--They went that day to the Bank of England. _A_ stood in
front of it, while _B_ went round and stood behind it.

       *       *       *       *       *

Two answers have been received, both worthy of much honour. ADDLEPATE
makes them borrow "0" and steal "0," and uses both cyphers by putting
them at the right-hand end of the 1,000_l._, thus producing 100,000_l._,
which is well over the mark. But (or to express it in Latin) AT SPES
INFRACTA has solved it even more ingeniously: with the first cypher she
turns the "1" of the 1,000_l._ into a "9," and adds the result to the
original sum, thus getting 10,000_l._: and in this, by means of the
other "0," she turns the "1" into a "6," thus hitting the exact
60,000_l._


CLASS LIST

I.

AT SPES INFRACTA.

II.

ADDLEPATE.

       *       *       *       *       *

_Problem 2._--_L_ makes 5 scarves, while _M_ makes 2: _Z_ makes 4 while
_L_ makes 3. Five scarves of _Z_'s weigh one of _L_'s; 5 of _M_'s weigh
3 of _Z_'s. One of _M_'s is as warm as 4 of _Z_'s: and one of _L_'s as
warm as 3 of _M_'s. Which is best, giving equal weight in the result to
rapidity of work, lightness, and warmth?

_Answer._--The order is _M_, _L_, _Z_.

       *       *       *       *       *

_Solution._--As to rapidity (other things being constant) _L_'s merit is
to _M_'s in the ratio of 5 to 2: _Z_'s to _L_'s in the ratio of 4 to 3.
In order to get one set of 3 numbers fulfilling these conditions, it is
perhaps simplest to take the one that occurs _twice_ as unity, and
reduce the others to fractions: this gives, for _L_, _M_, and _Z_, the
marks 1, 2/5, 4/3. In estimating for _lightness_, we observe that the
greater the weight, the less the merit, so that _Z_'s merit is to _L_'s
as 5 to 1. Thus the marks for _lightness_ are 1/5, 5/3, 1. And
similarly, the marks for warmth are 3, 1, 1/4. To get the total result,
we must _multiply_ _L_'s 3 marks together, and do the same for _M_ and
for _Z_. The final numbers are 1  1/5  3, 2/5  5/3  1, 4/3  1 
1/4; _i.e._ 3/5, 2/3, 1/3; _i.e._ multiplying throughout by 15 (which
will not alter the proportion), 9, 10, 5; showing the order of merit to
be _M_, _L_, _Z_.

       *       *       *       *       *

Twenty-nine answers have been received, of which five are right, and
twenty-four wrong. These hapless ones have all (with three exceptions)
fallen into the error of _adding_ the proportional numbers together, for
each candidate, instead of _multiplying_. _Why_ the latter is right,
rather than the former, is fully proved in text-books, so I will not
occupy space by stating it here: but it can be _illustrated_ very easily
by the case of length, breadth, and depth. Suppose _A_ and _B_ are rival
diggers of rectangular tanks: the amount of work done is evidently
measured by the number of _cubical feet_ dug out. Let _A_ dig a tank 10
feet long, 10 wide, 2 deep: let _B_ dig one 6 feet long, 5 wide, 10
deep. The cubical contents are 200, 300; _i.e._ _B_ is best digger in
the ratio of 3 to 2. Now try marking for length, width, and depth,
separately; giving a maximum mark of 10 to the best in each contest, and
then _adding_ the results!

Of the twenty-four malefactors, one gives no working, and so has no real
claim to be named; but I break the rule for once, in deference to its
success in Problem 1: he, she, or it, is ADDLEPATE. The other
twenty-three may be divided into five groups.

First and worst are, I take it, those who put the rightful winner
_last_; arranging them as "Lolo, Zuzu, Mimi." The names of these
desperate wrong-doers are AYR, BRADSHAW OF THE FUTURE, FURZE-BUSH and
POLLUX (who send a joint answer), GREYSTEAD, GUY, OLD HEN, and SIMPLE
SUSAN. The latter was _once_ best of all; the Old Hen has taken
advantage of her simplicity, and beguiled her with the chaff which was
the bane of her own chickenhood.

Secondly, I point the finger of scorn at those who have put the worst
candidate at the top; arranging them as "Zuzu, Mimi, Lolo." They are
GRAECIA, M. M., OLD CAT, and R. E. X. "'Tis Greece, but----."

The third set have avoided both these enormities, and have even
succeeded in putting the worst last, their answer being "Lolo, Mimi,
Zuzu." Their names are AYR (who also appears among the "quite too too"),
CLIFTON C., F. B., FIFEE, GRIG, JANET, and MRS. SAIREY GAMP. F. B. has
not fallen into the common error; she _multiplies_ together the
proportionate numbers she gets, but in getting them she goes wrong, by
reckoning warmth as a _de_-merit. Possibly she is "Freshly Burnt," or
comes "From Bombay." JANET and MRS. SAIREY GAMP have also avoided this
error: the method they have adopted is shrouded in mystery--I scarcely
feel competent to criticize it. MRS. GAMP says "if Zuzu makes 4 while
Lolo makes 3, Zuzu makes 6 while Lolo makes 5 (bad reasoning), while
Mimi makes 2." From this she concludes "therefore Zuzu excels in speed
by 1" (_i.e._ when compared with Lolo; but what about Mimi?). She then
compares the 3 kinds of excellence, measured on this mystic scale. JANET
takes the statement, that "Lolo makes 5 while Mimi makes 2," to prove
that "Lolo makes 3 while Mimi makes 1 and Zuzu 4" (worse reasoning than
MRS. GAMP'S), and thence concludes that "Zuzu excels in speed by 1/8"!
JANET should have been ADELINE, "mystery of mysteries!"

The fourth set actually put Mimi at the top, arranging them as "Mimi,
Zuzu, Lolo." They are MARQUIS AND CO., MARTREB, S. B. B. (first initial
scarcely legible: _may_ be meant for "J"), and STANZA.

The fifth set consist of AN ANCIENT FISH and CAMEL. These ill-assorted
comrades, by dint of foot and fin, have scrambled into the right answer,
but, as their method is wrong, of course it counts for nothing. Also AN
ANCIENT FISH has very ancient and fishlike ideas as to _how_ numbers
represent merit: she says "Lolo gains 2-1/2 on Mimi." Two and a half
_what_? Fish, fish, art thou in thy duty?

Of the five winners I put BALBUS and THE ELDER TRAVELLER slightly below
the other three--BALBUS for defective reasoning, the other for scanty
working. BALBUS gives two reasons for saying that _addition_ of marks is
_not_ the right method, and then adds "it follows that the decision must
be made by _multiplying_ the marks together." This is hardly more
logical than to say "This is not Spring: _therefore_ it must be Autumn."


CLASS LIST.

I.

   DINAH MITE.
   E. B. D. L.
   JORAM.

II.

   BALBUS.
   THE ELDER TRAVELLER.

       *       *       *       *       *

With regard to Knot V., I beg to express to VIS INERTI and to any
others who, like her, understood the condition to be that _every_ marked
picture must have _three_ marks, my sincere regret that the unfortunate
phrase "_fill_ the columns with oughts and crosses" should have caused
them to waste so much time and trouble. I can only repeat that a
_literal_ interpretation of "fill" would seem to _me_ to require that
_every_ picture in the gallery should be marked. VIS INERTI would have
been in the First Class if she had sent in the solution she now offers.


ANSWERS TO KNOT VII.

_Problem._--Given that one glass of lemonade, 3 sandwiches, and 7
biscuits, cost 1_s._ 2_d._; and that one glass of lemonade, 4
sandwiches, and 10 biscuits, cost 1_s._ 5_d._: find the cost of (1) a
glass of lemonade, a sandwich, and a biscuit; and (2) 2 glasses of
lemonade, 3 sandwiches, and 5 biscuits.

_Answer._--(1) 8_d._; (2) 1_s._ 7_d._

_Solution._--This is best treated algebraically. Let _x_ = the cost (in
pence) of a glass of lemonade, _y_ of a sandwich, and _z_ of a biscuit.
Then we have _x_ + 3_y_ + 7_z_ = 14, and _x_ + 4_y_ + 10_z_ = 17. And we
require the values of _x_ + _y_ + _z_, and of 2_x_ + 3_y_ + 5_z_. Now,
from _two_ equations only, we cannot find, _separately_, the values of
_three_ unknowns: certain _combinations_ of them may, however, be found.
Also we know that we can, by the help of the given equations, eliminate
2 of the 3 unknowns from the quantity whose value is required, which
will then contain one only. If, then, the required value is
ascertainable at all, it can only be by the 3rd unknown vanishing of
itself: otherwise the problem is impossible.

Let us then eliminate lemonade and sandwiches, and reduce everything to
biscuits--a state of things even more depressing than "if all the world
were apple-pie"--by subtracting the 1st equation from the 2nd, which
eliminates lemonade, and gives _y_ + 3_z_ = 3, or _y_ = 3-3_z_; and then
substituting this value of _y_ in the 1st, which gives _x_-2_z_ = 5,
_i.e._ _x_ = 5 + 2_z_. Now if we substitute these values of _x_, _y_, in
the quantities whose values are required, the first becomes (5 + 2_z_) +
(3-3_z_) + _z_, _i.e._ 8: and the second becomes 2(5 + 2_z_) + 3(3-3_z_)
+ 5_z_, _i.e._ 19. Hence the answers are (1) 8_d._, (2) 1_s._ 7_d._

       *       *       *       *       *

The above is a _universal_ method: that is, it is absolutely certain
either to produce the answer, or to prove that no answer is possible.
The question may also be solved by combining the quantities whose values
are given, so as to form those whose values are required. This is merely
a matter of ingenuity and good luck: and as it _may_ fail, even when the
thing is possible, and is of no use in proving it _im_possible, I cannot
rank this method as equal in value with the other. Even when it
succeeds, it may prove a very tedious process. Suppose the 26
competitors, who have sent in what I may call _accidental_ solutions,
had had a question to deal with where every number contained 8 or 10
digits! I suspect it would have been a case of "silvered is the raven
hair" (see "Patience") before any solution would have been hit on by
the most ingenious of them.

Forty-five answers have come in, of which 44 give, I am happy to say,
some sort of _working_, and therefore deserve to be mentioned by name,
and to have their virtues, or vices as the case may be, discussed.
Thirteen have made assumptions to which they have no right, and so
cannot figure in the Class-list, even though, in 10 of the 13 cases, the
answer is right. Of the remaining 28, no less than 26 have sent in
_accidental_ solutions, and therefore fall short of the highest honours.

I will now discuss individual cases, taking the worst first, as my
custom is.

FROGGY gives no working--at least this is all he gives: after stating
the given equations, he says "therefore the difference, 1 sandwich + 3
biscuits, = 3_d._": then follow the amounts of the unknown bills, with
no further hint as to how he got them. FROGGY has had a _very_ narrow
escape of not being named at all!

Of those who are wrong, VIS INERTI has sent in a piece of incorrect
working. Peruse the horrid details, and shudder! She takes _x_ (call it
"_y_") as the cost of a sandwich, and concludes (rightly enough) that a
biscuit will cost (3-_y_)/3. She then subtracts the second equation from
the first, and deduces 3_y_ + 7  (3-_y_)/3-4_y_ + 10  (3-_y_)/3 = 3.
By making two mistakes in this line, she brings out _y_ = 3/2. Try it
again, oh VIS INERTI! Away with INERTI: infuse a little more VIS: and
you will bring out the correct (though uninteresting) result, 0 = 0!
This will show you that it is hopeless to try to coax any one of these 3
unknowns to reveal its _separate_ value. The other competitor, who is
wrong throughout, is either J. M. C. or T. M. C.: but, whether he be a
Juvenile Mis-Calculator or a True Mathematician Confused, he makes the
answers 7_d._ and 1_s._ 5_d._ He assumes, with Too Much Confidence, that
biscuits were 1/2_d._ each, and that Clara paid for 8, though she only
ate 7!

We will now consider the 13 whose working is wrong, though the answer is
right: and, not to measure their demerits too exactly, I will take them
in alphabetical order. ANITA finds (rightly) that "1 sandwich and 3
biscuits cost 3_d._," and proceeds "therefore 1 sandwich = 1-1/2_d._, 3
biscuits = 1-1/2_d._, 1 lemonade = 6_d._" DINAH MITE begins like ANITA:
and thence proves (rightly) that a biscuit costs less than a 1_d._:
whence she concludes (wrongly) that it _must_ cost 1/2_d._ F. C. W. is
so beautifully resigned to the certainty of a verdict of "guilty," that
I have hardly the heart to utter the word, without adding a "recommended
to mercy owing to extenuating circumstances." But really, you know,
where _are_ the extenuating circumstances? She begins by assuming that
lemonade is 4_d._ a glass, and sandwiches 3_d._ each, (making with the 2
given equations, _four_ conditions to be fulfilled by _three_ miserable
unknowns!). And, having (naturally) developed this into a contradiction,
she then tries 5_d._ and 2_d._ with a similar result. (N.B. _This_
process might have been carried on through the whole of the Tertiary
Period, without gratifying one single Megatherium.) She then, by a
"happy thought," tries half-penny biscuits, and so obtains a consistent
result. This may be a good solution, viewing the problem as a conundrum:
but it is _not_ scientific. JANET identifies sandwiches with biscuits!
"One sandwich + 3 biscuits" she makes equal to "4." Four _what_? MAYFAIR
makes the astounding assertion that the equation, _s_ + 3_b_ = 3, "is
evidently only satisfied by _s_ = 3/2, _b_ = 1/2"! OLD CAT believes that
the assumption that a sandwich costs 1-1/2_d._ is "the only way to avoid
unmanageable fractions." But _why_ avoid them? Is there not a certain
glow of triumph in taming such a fraction? "Ladies and gentlemen, the
fraction now before you is one that for years defied all efforts of a
refining nature: it was, in a word, hopelessly vulgar. Treating it as a
circulating decimal (the treadmill of fractions) only made matters
worse. As a last resource, I reduced it to its lowest terms, and
extracted its square root!" Joking apart, let me thank OLD CAT for some
very kind words of sympathy, in reference to a correspondent (whose name
I am happy to say I have now forgotten) who had found fault with me as a
discourteous critic. O. V. L. is beyond my comprehension. He takes the
given equations as (1) and (2): thence, by the process [(2)-(1)] deduces
(rightly) equation (3) viz. _s_ + 3_b_ = 3: and thence again, by the
process [x3] (a hopeless mystery), deduces 3_s_ + 4_b_ = 4. I have
nothing to say about it: I give it up. SEA-BREEZE says "it is immaterial
to the answer" (why?) "in what proportion 3_d._ is divided between the
sandwich and the 3 biscuits": so she assumes _s_ = l-1/2_d._, _b_ =
1/2_d._ STANZA is one of a very irregular metre. At first she (like
JANET) identifies sandwiches with biscuits. She then tries two
assumptions (_s_ = 1, _b_ = 2/3, and _s_ = 1/2 _b_ = 5/6), and
(naturally) ends in contradictions. Then she returns to the first
assumption, and finds the 3 unknowns separately: _quod est absurdum_.
STILETTO identifies sandwiches and biscuits, as "articles." Is the word
ever used by confectioners? I fancied "What is the next article, Ma'am?"
was limited to linendrapers. TWO SISTERS first assume that biscuits are
4 a penny, and then that they are 2 a penny, adding that "the answer
will of course be the same in both cases." It is a dreamy remark,
making one feel something like Macbeth grasping at the spectral dagger.
"Is this a statement that I see before me?" If you were to say "we both
walked the same way this morning," and _I_ were to say "_one_ of you
walked the same way, but the other didn't," which of the three would be
the most hopelessly confused? TURTLE PYATE (what _is_ a Turtle Pyate,
please?) and OLD CROW, who send a joint answer, and Y. Y., adopt the
same method. Y. Y. gets the equation _s_ + 3_b_ = 3: and then says "this
sum must be apportioned in one of the three following ways." It _may_
be, I grant you: but Y. Y. do you say "must"? I fear it is _possible_
for Y. Y. to be _two_ Y's. The other two conspirators are less positive:
they say it "can" be so divided: but they add "either of the three
prices being right"! This is bad grammar and bad arithmetic at once, oh
mysterious birds!

Of those who win honours, THE SHETLAND SNARK must have the 3rd class all
to himself. He has only answered half the question, viz. the amount of
Clara's luncheon: the two little old ladies he pitilessly leaves in the
midst of their "difficulty." I beg to assure him (with thanks for his
friendly remarks) that entrance-fees and subscriptions are things
unknown in that most economical of clubs, "The Knot-Untiers."

The authors of the 26 "accidental" solutions differ only in the number
of steps they have taken between the _data_ and the answers. In order
to do them full justice I have arranged the 2nd class in sections,
according to the number of steps. The two Kings are fearfully
deliberate! I suppose walking quick, or taking short cuts, is
inconsistent with kingly dignity: but really, in reading THESEUS'
solution, one almost fancied he was "marking time," and making no
advance at all! The other King will, I hope, pardon me for having
altered "Coal" into "Cole." King Coilus, or Coil, seems to have reigned
soon after Arthur's time. Henry of Huntingdon identifies him with the
King Col who first built walls round Colchester, which was named after
him. In the Chronicle of Robert of Gloucester we read:--

   "Aftur Kyng Aruirag, of wam we habbeth y told,
   Marius ys sone was kyng, quoynte mon & bold.
   And ys sone was aftur hym, _Coil_ was ys name,
   Bothe it were quoynte men, & of noble fame."

BALBUS lays it down as a general principle that "in order to ascertain
the cost of any one luncheon, it must come to the same amount upon two
different assumptions." (_Query._ Should not "it" be "we"? Otherwise the
_luncheon_ is represented as wishing to ascertain its own cost!) He then
makes two assumptions--one, that sandwiches cost nothing; the other,
that biscuits cost nothing, (either arrangement would lead to the shop
being inconveniently crowded!)--and brings out the unknown luncheons as
8_d._ and 19_d._, on each assumption. He then concludes that this
agreement of results "shows that the answers are correct." Now I propose
to disprove his general law by simply giving _one_ instance of its
failing. One instance is quite enough. In logical language, in order to
disprove a "universal affirmative," it is enough to prove its
contradictory, which is a "particular negative." (I must pause for a
digression on Logic, and especially on Ladies' Logic. The universal
affirmative "everybody says he's a duck" is crushed instantly by proving
the particular negative "Peter says he's a goose," which is equivalent
to "Peter does _not_ say he's a duck." And the universal negative
"nobody calls on her" is well met by the particular affirmative "_I_
called yesterday." In short, either of two contradictories disproves the
other: and the moral is that, since a particular proposition is much
more easily proved than a universal one, it is the wisest course, in
arguing with a Lady, to limit one's _own_ assertions to "particulars,"
and leave _her_ to prove the "universal" contradictory, if she can. You
will thus generally secure a _logical_ victory: a _practical_ victory is
not to be hoped for, since she can always fall back upon the crushing
remark "_that_ has nothing to do with it!"--a move for which Man has not
yet discovered any satisfactory answer. Now let us return to BALBUS.)
Here is my "particular negative," on which to test his rule. Suppose the
two recorded luncheons to have been "2 buns, one queen-cake, 2
sausage-rolls, and a bottle of Zodone: total, one-and-ninepence," and
"one bun, 2 queen-cakes, a sausage-roll, and a bottle of Zodone: total,
one-and-fourpence." And suppose Clara's unknown luncheon to have been "3
buns, one queen-cake, one sausage-roll, and 2 bottles of Zodone:" while
the two little sisters had been indulging in "8 buns, 4 queen-cakes, 2
sausage-rolls, and 6 bottles of Zodone." (Poor souls, how thirsty they
must have been!) If BALBUS will kindly try this by his principle of "two
assumptions," first assuming that a bun is 1_d._ and a queen-cake 2_d._,
and then that a bun is 3_d._ and a queen-cake 3_d._, he will bring out
the other two luncheons, on each assumption, as "one-and-nine-pence" and
"four-and-ten-pence" respectively, which harmony of results, he will
say, "shows that the answers are correct." And yet, as a matter of fact,
the buns were 2_d._ each, the queen-cakes 3_d._, the sausage-rolls
6_d._, and the Zodone 2_d._ a bottle: so that Clara's third luncheon
had cost one-and-sevenpence, and her thirsty friends had spent
four-and-fourpence!

Another remark of BALBUS I will quote and discuss: for I think that it
also may yield a moral for some of my readers. He says "it is the same
thing in substance whether in solving this problem we use words and call
it Arithmetic, or use letters and signs and call it Algebra." Now this
does not appear to me a correct description of the two methods: the
Arithmetical method is that of "synthesis" only; it goes from one known
fact to another, till it reaches its goal: whereas the Algebraical
method is that of "analysis": it begins with the goal, symbolically
represented, and so goes backwards, dragging its veiled victim with it,
till it has reached the full daylight of known facts, in which it can
tear off the veil and say "I know you!"

Take an illustration. Your house has been broken into and robbed, and
you appeal to the policeman who was on duty that night. "Well, Mum, I
did see a chap getting out over your garden-wall: but I was a good bit
off, so I didn't chase him, like. I just cut down the short way to the
Chequers, and who should I meet but Bill Sykes, coming full split round
the corner. So I just ups and says 'My lad, you're wanted.' That's all I
says. And he says 'I'll go along quiet, Bobby,' he says, 'without the
darbies,' he says." There's your _Arithmetical_ policeman. Now try the
other method. "I seed somebody a running, but he was well gone or ever
_I_ got nigh the place. So I just took a look round in the garden. And I
noticed the foot-marks, where the chap had come right across your
flower-beds. They was good big foot-marks sure-ly. And I noticed as the
left foot went down at the heel, ever so much deeper than the other. And
I says to myself 'The chap's been a big hulking chap: and he goes lame
on his left foot.' And I rubs my hand on the wall where he got over, and
there was soot on it, and no mistake. So I says to myself 'Now where can
I light on a big man, in the chimbley-sweep line, what's lame of one
foot?' And I flashes up permiscuous: and I says 'It's Bill Sykes!' says
I." There is your _Algebraical_ policeman--a higher intellectual type,
to my thinking, than the other.

LITTLE JACK'S solution calls for a word of praise, as he has written out
what really is an algebraical proof _in words_, without representing any
of his facts as equations. If it is all his own, he will make a good
algebraist in the time to come. I beg to thank SIMPLE SUSAN for some
kind words of sympathy, to the same effect as those received from OLD
CAT.

HECLA and MARTREB are the only two who have used a method _certain_
either to produce the answer, or else to prove it impossible: so they
must share between them the highest honours.


CLASS LIST.

I.

   HECLA.
   MARTREB.

II.

 1 (2 _steps_).

   ADELAIDE.
   CLIFTON C....
   E. K. C.
   GUY.
   L'INCONNU.
   LITTLE JACK.
   NIL DESPERANDUM.
   SIMPLE SUSAN.
   YELLOW-HAMMER.
   WOOLLY ONE.

 2 (3 _steps_).

   A. A.
   A CHRISTMAS CAROL.
   AFTERNOON TEA.
   AN APPRECIATIVE SCHOOLMA'AM.
   BABY.
   BALBUS.
   BOG-OAK.
   THE RED QUEEN.
   WALL-FLOWER.

 3 (4 _steps_).

   HAWTHORN.
   JORAM.
   S. S. G.

 4 (5 _steps_).

   A STEPNEY COACH.

 5 (6 _steps_).

   BAY LAUREL.
   BRADSHAW OF THE FUTURE.

 6 (9 _steps_).

   OLD KING COLE.

 7 (14 _steps_).

   THESEUS.


ANSWERS TO CORRESPONDENTS.

I have received several letters on the subjects of Knots II. and VI.,
which lead me to think some further explanation desirable.

In Knot II., I had intended the numbering of the houses to begin at one
corner of the Square, and this was assumed by most, if not all, of the
competitors. TROJANUS however says "assuming, in default of any
information, that the street enters the square in the middle of each
side, it may be supposed that the numbering begins at a street." But
surely the other is the more natural assumption?

In Knot VI., the first Problem was of course a mere _jeu de mots_, whose
presence I thought excusable in a series of Problems whose aim is to
entertain rather than to instruct: but it has not escaped the
contemptuous criticisms of two of my correspondents, who seem to think
that Apollo is in duty bound to keep his bow always on the stretch.
Neither of them has guessed it: and this is true human nature. Only the
other day--the 31st of September, to be quite exact--I met my old friend
Brown, and gave him a riddle I had just heard. With one great effort of
his colossal mind, Brown guessed it. "Right!" said I. "Ah," said he,
"it's very neat--very neat. And it isn't an answer that would occur to
everybody. Very neat indeed." A few yards further on, I fell in with
Smith and to him I propounded the same riddle. He frowned over it for a
minute, and then gave it up. Meekly I faltered out the answer. "A poor
thing, sir!" Smith growled, as he turned away. "A very poor thing! I
wonder you care to repeat such rubbish!" Yet Smith's mind is, if
possible, even more colossal than Brown's.

The second Problem of Knot VI. is an example in ordinary Double Rule of
Three, whose essential feature is that the result depends on the
variation of several elements, which are so related to it that, if all
but one be constant, it varies as that one: hence, if none be constant,
it varies as their product. Thus, for example, the cubical contents of a
rectangular tank vary as its length, if breadth and depth be constant,
and so on; hence, if none be constant, it varies as the product of the
length, breadth, and depth.

When the result is not thus connected with the varying elements, the
Problem ceases to be Double Rule of Three and often becomes one of great
complexity.

To illustrate this, let us take two candidates for a prize, _A_ and _B_,
who are to compete in French, German, and Italian:

(_a_) Let it be laid down that the result is to depend on their
_relative_ knowledge of each subject, so that, whether their marks, for
French, be "1, 2" or "100, 200," the result will be the same: and let it
also be laid down that, if they get equal marks on 2 papers, the final
marks are to have the same ratio as those of the 3rd paper. This is a
case of ordinary Double Rule of Three. We multiply _A_'s 3 marks
together, and do the same for _B_. Note that, if _A_ gets a single "0,"
his final mark is "0," even if he gets full marks for 2 papers while _B_
gets only one mark for each paper. This of course would be very unfair
on _A_, though a correct solution under the given conditions.

(_b_) The result is to depend, as before, on _relative_ knowledge; but
French is to have twice as much weight as German or Italian. This is an
unusual form of question. I should be inclined to say "the resulting
ratio is to be nearer to the French ratio than if we multiplied as in
(_a_), and so much nearer that it would be necessary to use the other
multipliers _twice_ to produce the same result as in (_a_):" _e.g._ if
the French Ratio were 9/10, and the others 4/9, 1/9 so that the ultimate
ratio, by method (_a_), would be 2/45, I should multiply instead by 2/3,
1/3, giving the result, 1/3 which is nearer to 9/10 than if he had used
method (_a_).

(_c_) The result is to depend on _actual_ amount of knowledge of the 3
subjects collectively. Here we have to ask two questions. (1) What is
to be the "unit" (_i.e._ "standard to measure by") in each subject? (2)
Are these units to be of equal, or unequal value? The usual "unit" is
the knowledge shown by answering the whole paper correctly; calling this
"100," all lower amounts are represented by numbers between "0" and
"100." Then, if these units are to be of equal value, we simply add
_A_'s 3 marks together, and do the same for _B_.

(_d_) The conditions are the same as (_c_), but French is to have double
weight. Here we simply double the French marks, and add as before.

(_e_) French is to have such weight, that, if other marks be equal, the
ultimate ratio is to be that of the French paper, so that a "0" in this
would swamp the candidate: but the other two subjects are only to affect
the result collectively, by the amount of knowledge shown, the two being
reckoned of equal value. Here I should add _A_'s German and Italian
marks together, and multiply by his French mark.

But I need not go on: the problem may evidently be set with many varying
conditions, each requiring its own method of solution. The Problem in
Knot VI. was meant to belong to variety (_a_), and to make this clear, I
inserted the following passage:

"Usually the competitors differ in one point only. Thus, last year, Fifi
and Gogo made the same number of scarves in the trial week, and they
were equally light; but Fifi's were twice as warm as Gogo's, and she was
pronounced twice as good."

What I have said will suffice, I hope, as an answer to BALBUS, who holds
that (_a_) and (_c_) are the only possible varieties of the problem, and
that to say "We cannot use addition, therefore we must be intended to
use multiplication," is "no more illogical than, from knowledge that one
was not born in the night, to infer that he was born in the daytime";
and also to FIFEE, who says "I think a little more consideration will
show you that our 'error of _adding_ the proportional numbers together
for each candidate instead of _multiplying_' is no error at all." Why,
even if addition _had_ been the right method to use, not one of the
writers (I speak from memory) showed any consciousness of the necessity
of fixing a "unit" for each subject. "No error at all!" They were
positively steeped in error!

One correspondent (I do not name him, as the communication is not quite
friendly in tone) writes thus:--"I wish to add, very respectfully, that
I think it would be in better taste if you were to abstain from the very
trenchant expressions which you are accustomed to indulge in when
criticising the answer. That such a tone must not be" ("be not"?)
"agreeable to the persons concerned who have made mistakes may possibly
have no great weight with you, but I hope you will feel that it would be
as well not to employ it, _unless you are quite certain of being correct
yourself_." The only instances the writer gives of the "trenchant
expressions" are "hapless" and "malefactors." I beg to assure him (and
any others who may need the assurance: I trust there are none) that all
such words have been used in jest, and with no idea that they could
possibly annoy any one, and that I sincerely regret any annoyance I may
have thus inadvertently given. May I hope that in future they will
recognise the distinction between severe language used in sober earnest,
and the "words of unmeant bitterness," which Coleridge has alluded to in
that lovely passage beginning "A little child, a limber elf"? If the
writer will refer to that passage, or to the preface to "Fire, Famine,
and Slaughter," he will find the distinction, for which I plead, far
better drawn out than I could hope to do in any words of mine.

The writer's insinuation that I care not how much annoyance I give to my
readers I think it best to pass over in silence; but to his concluding
remark I must entirely demur. I hold that to use language likely to
annoy any of my correspondents would not be in the least justified by
the plea that I was "quite certain of being correct." I trust that the
knot-untiers and I are not on such terms as those!

I beg to thank _G. B._ for the offer of a puzzle--which, however, is too
like the old one "Make four 9's into 100."


ANSWERS TO KNOT VIII.

 1. THE PIGS.

_Problem._--Place twenty-four pigs in four sties so that, as you go
round and round, you may always find the number in each sty nearer to
ten than the number in the last.

_Answer._--Place 8 pigs in the first sty, 10 in the second, nothing in
the third, and 6 in the fourth: 10 is nearer ten than 8; nothing is
nearer ten than 10; 6 is nearer ten than nothing; and 8 is nearer ten
than 6.

       *       *       *       *       *

This problem is noticed by only two correspondents. BALBUS says "it
certainly cannot be solved mathematically, nor do I see how to solve it
by any verbal quibble." NOLENS VOLENS makes Her Radiancy change the
direction of going round; and even then is obliged to add "the pigs must
be carried in front of her"!

 2. THE GRURMSTIPTHS.

_Problem._--Omnibuses start from a certain point, both ways, every 15
minutes. A traveller, starting on foot along with one of them, meets
one in 12-1/2 minutes: when will he be overtaken by one?

_Answer._--In 6-1/4 minutes.

       *       *       *       *       *

_Solution._--Let "_a_" be the distance an omnibus goes in 15 minutes,
and "_x_" the distance from the starting-point to where the traveller is
overtaken. Since the omnibus met is due at the starting-point in 2-1/2
minutes, it goes in that time as far as the traveller walks in 12-1/2;
_i.e._ it goes 5 times as fast. Now the overtaking omnibus is "_a_"
behind the traveller when he starts, and therefore goes "_a_ + _x_"
while he goes "_x_." Hence _a_ + _x_ = 5_x_; _i.e._ 4_x_ = _a_, and _x_
= _a_/4. This distance would be traversed by an omnibus in 15/4 minutes,
and therefore by the traveller in 5  15/4. Hence he is overtaken in
18-3/4 minutes after starting, _i.e._ in 6-1/4 minutes after meeting the
omnibus.

       *       *       *       *       *

Four answers have been received, of which two are wrong. DINAH MITE
rightly states that the overtaking omnibus reached the point where they
met the other omnibus 5 minutes after they left, but wrongly concludes
that, going 5 times as fast, it would overtake them in another minute.
The travellers are 5-minutes-walk ahead of the omnibus, and must walk
1-4th of this distance farther before the omnibus overtakes them, which
will be 1-5th of the distance traversed by the omnibus in the same time:
this will require 1-1/4 minutes more. NOLENS VOLENS tries it by a
process like "Achilles and the Tortoise." He rightly states that, when
the overtaking omnibus leaves the gate, the travellers are 1-5th of
"_a_" ahead, and that it will take the omnibus 3 minutes to traverse
this distance; "during which time" the travellers, he tells us, go
1-15th of "_a_" (this should be 1-25th). The travellers being now 1-15th
of "_a_" ahead, he concludes that the work remaining to be done is for
the travellers to go 1-60th of "_a_," while the omnibus goes l-12th. The
_principle_ is correct, and might have been applied earlier.


CLASS LIST.

I.

   BALBUS.
   DELTA.


ANSWERS TO KNOT IX.


 1. THE BUCKETS.

_Problem._--Lardner states that a solid, immersed in a fluid, displaces
an amount equal to itself in bulk. How can this be true of a small
bucket floating in a larger one?

_Solution._--Lardner means, by "displaces," "occupies a space which
might be filled with water without any change in the surroundings." If
the portion of the floating bucket, which is above the water, could be
annihilated, and the rest of it transformed into water, the surrounding
water would not change its position: which agrees with Lardner's
statement.

       *       *       *       *       *

Five answers have been received, none of which explains the difficulty
arising from the well-known fact that a floating body is the same weight
as the displaced fluid. HECLA says that "only that portion of the
smaller bucket which descends below the original level of the water can
be properly said to be immersed, and only an equal bulk of water is
displaced." Hence, according to HECLA, a solid, whose weight was equal
to that of an equal bulk of water, would not float till the whole of it
was below "the original level" of the water: but, as a matter of fact,
it would float as soon as it was all under water. MAGPIE says the
fallacy is "the assumption that one body can displace another from a
place where it isn't," and that Lardner's assertion is incorrect, except
when the containing vessel "was originally full to the brim." But the
question of floating depends on the present state of things, not on past
history. OLD KING COLE takes the same view as HECLA. TYMPANUM and VINDEX
assume that "displaced" means "raised above its original level," and
merely explain how it comes to pass that the water, so raised, is less
in bulk than the immersed portion of bucket, and thus land
themselves--or rather set themselves floating--in the same boat as
HECLA.

I regret that there is no Class-list to publish for this Problem.

       *       *       *       *       *


 2. BALBUS' ESSAY.

_Problem._--Balbus states that if a certain solid be immersed in a
certain vessel of water, the water will rise through a series of
distances, two inches, one inch, half an inch, &c., which series has no
end. He concludes that the water will rise without limit. Is this true?

_Solution._--No. This series can never reach 4 inches, since, however
many terms we take, we are always short of 4 inches by an amount equal
to the last term taken.

       *       *       *       *       *

Three answers have been received--but only two seem to me worthy of
honours.

TYMPANUM says that the statement about the stick "is merely a blind, to
which the old answer may well be applied, _solvitur ambulando_, or
rather _mergendo_." I trust TYMPANUM will not test this in his own
person, by taking the place of the man in Balbus' Essay! He would
infallibly be drowned.

OLD KING COLE rightly points out that the series, 2, 1, &c., is a
decreasing Geometrical Progression: while VINDEX rightly identifies the
fallacy as that of "Achilles and the Tortoise."


CLASS LIST.

I.

   OLD KING COLE.
   VINDEX.

       *       *       *       *       *


 3. THE GARDEN.

_Problem._--An oblong garden, half a yard longer than wide, consists
entirely of a gravel-walk, spirally arranged, a yard wide and 3,630
yards long. Find the dimensions of the garden.

_Answer._--60, 60-1/2.

_Solution._--The number of yards and fractions of a yard traversed in
walking along a straight piece of walk, is evidently the same as the
number of square-yards and fractions of a square-yard, contained in that
piece of walk: and the distance, traversed in passing through a
square-yard at a corner, is evidently a yard. Hence the area of the
garden is 3,630 square-yards: _i.e._, if _x_ be the width, _x_ (_x_ +
1/2) = 3,630. Solving this Quadratic, we find _x_ = 60. Hence the
dimensions are 60, 60-1/2.

       *       *       *       *       *

Twelve answers have been received--seven right and five wrong.

C. G. L., NABOB, OLD CROW, and TYMPANUM assume that the number of yards
in the length of the path is equal to the number of square-yards in the
garden. This is true, but should have been proved. But each is guilty of
darker deeds. C. G. L.'s "working" consists of dividing 3,630 by 60.
Whence came this divisor, oh Segiel? Divination? Or was it a dream? I
fear this solution is worth nothing. OLD CROW'S is shorter, and so (if
possible) worth rather less. He says the answer "is at once seen to be
60  60-1/2"! NABOB'S calculation is short, but "as rich as a Nabob" in
error. He says that the square root of 3,630, multiplied by 2, equals
the length plus the breadth. That is 60.25  2 = 120-1/2. His first
assertion is only true of a _square_ garden. His second is irrelevant,
since 60.25 is _not_ the square-root of 3,630! Nay, Bob, this will _not_
do! TYMPANUM says that, by extracting the square-root of 3,630, we get
60 yards with a remainder of 30/60, or half-a-yard, which we add so as
to make the oblong 60  60-1/2. This is very terrible: but worse remains
behind. TYMPANUM proceeds thus:--"But why should there be the half-yard
at all? Because without it there would be no space at all for flowers.
By means of it, we find reserved in the very centre a small plot of
ground, two yards long by half-a-yard wide, the only space not occupied
by walk." But Balbus expressly said that the walk "used up the whole of
the area." Oh, TYMPANUM! My tympa is exhausted: my brain is num! I can
say no more.

HECLA indulges, again and again, in that most fatal of all habits in
computation--the making _two_ mistakes which cancel each other. She
takes _x_ as the width of the garden, in yards, and _x_ + 1/2 as its
length, and makes her first "coil" the sum of _x_-1/2, _x_-1/2, _x_-1,
_x_-1, _i.e._ 4_x_-3: but the fourth term should be _x_-1-1/2, so that
her first coil is 1/2 a yard too long. Her second coil is the sum of
_x_-2-1/2, _x_-2-1/2, _x_-3, _x_-3: here the first term should be _x_-2
and the last _x_-3-1/2: these two mistakes cancel, and this coil is
therefore right. And the same thing is true of every other coil but the
last, which needs an extra half-yard to reach the _end_ of the path: and
this exactly balances the mistake in the first coil. Thus the sum total
of the coils comes right though the working is all wrong.

Of the seven who are right, DINAH MITE, JANET, MAGPIE, and TAFFY make
the same assumption as C. G. L. and Co. They then solve by a Quadratic.
MAGPIE also tries it by Arithmetical Progression, but fails to notice
that the first and last "coils" have special values.

ALUMNUS ETON attempts to prove what C. G. L. assumes by a particular
instance, taking a garden 6 by 5-1/2. He ought to have proved it
generally: what is true of one number is not always true of others. OLD
KING COLE solves it by an Arithmetical Progression. It is right, but too
lengthy to be worth as much as a Quadratic.

VINDEX proves it very neatly, by pointing out that a yard of walk
measured along the middle represents a square yard of garden, "whether
we consider the straight stretches of walk or the square yards at the
angles, in which the middle line goes half a yard in one direction and
then turns a right angle and goes half a yard in another direction."


CLASS LIST.

I.

   VINDEX.

II.

   ALUMNUS ETON.
   OLD KING COLE.

III.

   DINAH MITE.
   JANET.
   MAGPIE.
   TAFFY.


ANSWERS TO KNOT X.


 1. THE CHELSEA PENSIONERS.

_Problem._--If 70 per cent. have lost an eye, 75 per cent. an ear, 80
per cent. an arm, 85 per cent. a leg: what percentage, _at least_, must
have lost all four?

_Answer._--Ten.


_Solution._--(I adopt that of POLAR STAR, as being better than my own).
Adding the wounds together, we get 70 + 75 + 80 + 85 = 310, among 100
men; which gives 3 to each, and 4 to 10 men. Therefore the least
percentage is 10.

       *       *       *       *       *

Nineteen answers have been received. One is "5," but, as no working is
given with it, it must, in accordance with the rule, remain "a deed
without a name." JANET makes it "35 and 7/10ths." I am sorry she has
misunderstood the question, and has supposed that those who had lost an
ear were 75 per cent. _of those who had lost an eye_; and so on. Of
course, on this supposition, the percentages must all be multiplied
together. This she has done correctly, but I can give her no honours,
as I do not think the question will fairly bear her interpretation,
THREE SCORE AND TEN makes it "19 and 3/8ths." Her solution has given
me--I will not say "many anxious days and sleepless nights," for I wish
to be strictly truthful, but--some trouble in making any sense at all of
it. She makes the number of "pensioners wounded once" to be 310 ("per
cent.," I suppose!): dividing by 4, she gets 77 and a half as "average
percentage:" again dividing by 4, she gets 19 and 3/8ths as "percentage
wounded four times." Does she suppose wounds of different kinds to
"absorb" each other, so to speak? Then, no doubt, the _data_ are
equivalent to 77 pensioners with one wound each, and a half-pensioner
with a half-wound. And does she then suppose these concentrated wounds
to be _transferable_, so that 3/4ths of these unfortunates can obtain
perfect health by handing over their wounds to the remaining 1/4th?
Granting these suppositions, her answer is right; or rather, _if_ the
question had been "A road is covered with one inch of gravel, along 77
and a half per cent. of it. How much of it could be covered 4 inches
deep with the same material?" her answer _would_ have been right. But
alas, that _wasn't_ the question! DELTA makes some most amazing
assumptions: "let every one who has not lost an eye have lost an ear,"
"let every one who has not lost both eyes and ears have lost an arm."
Her ideas of a battle-field are grim indeed. Fancy a warrior who would
continue fighting after losing both eyes, both ears, and both arms! This
is a case which she (or "it?") evidently considers _possible_.

Next come eight writers who have made the unwarrantable assumption that,
because 70 per cent. have lost an eye, _therefore_ 30 per cent. have
_not_ lost one, so that they have _both_ eyes. This is illogical. If you
give me a bag containing 100 sovereigns, and if in an hour I come to you
(my face _not_ beaming with gratitude nearly so much as when I received
the bag) to say "I am sorry to tell you that 70 of these sovereigns are
bad," do I thereby guarantee the other 30 to be good? Perhaps I have not
tested them yet. The sides of this illogical octagon are as follows, in
alphabetical order:--ALGERNON BRAY, DINAH MITE, G. S. C., JANE E., J. D.
W., MAGPIE (who makes the delightful remark "therefore 90 per cent. have
two of something," recalling to one's memory that fortunate monarch,
with whom Xerxes was so much pleased that "he gave him ten of
everything!"), S. S. G., and TOKIO.

BRADSHAW OF THE FUTURE and T. R. do the question in a piecemeal
fashion--on the principle that the 70 per cent. and the 75 per cent.,
though commenced at opposite ends of the 100, must overlap by _at least_
45 per cent.; and so on. This is quite correct working, but not, I
think, quite the best way of doing it.

The other five competitors will, I hope, feel themselves sufficiently
glorified by being placed in the first class, without my composing a
Triumphal Ode for each!


CLASS LIST.

I.

   OLD CAT.
   OLD HEN.
   POLAR STAR.
   SIMPLE SUSAN.
   WHITE SUGAR.

II.

   BRADSHAW OF THE FUTURE.
   T. R.

III.

   ALGERNON BRAY.
   DINAH MITE.
   G. S. C.
   JANE E.
   J. D. W.
   MAGPIE.
   S. S. G.
   TOKIO.


 2. CHANGE OF DAY.

I must postpone, _sine die_, the geographical problem--partly because I
have not yet received the statistics I am hoping for, and partly because
I am myself so entirely puzzled by it; and when an examiner is himself
dimly hovering between a second class and a third how is he to decide
the position of others?


 3. THE SONS' AGES.

_Problem._--"At first, two of the ages are together equal to the third.
A few years afterwards, two of them are together double of the third.
When the number of years since the first occasion is two-thirds of the
sum of the ages on that occasion, one age is 21. What are the other two?

_Answer._--"15 and 18."

       *       *       *       *       *

_Solution._--Let the ages at first be _x_, _y_, (_x_ + _y_). Now, if _a_
+ _b_ = 2_c_, then (_a_-_n_) + (_b_-_n_) = 2(_c_-_n_), whatever be the
value of _n_. Hence the second relationship, if _ever_ true, was
_always_ true. Hence it was true at first. But it cannot be true that
_x_ and _y_ are together double of (_x_ + _y_). Hence it must be true of
(_x_ + _y_), together with _x_ or _y_; and it does not matter which we
take. We assume, then, (_x_ + _y_) + _x_ = 2_y_; _i.e._ _y_ = 2_x_.
Hence the three ages were, at first, _x_, 2_x_, 3_x_; and the number of
years, since that time is two-thirds of 6_x_, _i.e._ is 4_x_. Hence the
present ages are 5_x_, 6_x_, 7_x_. The ages are clearly _integers_,
since this is only "the year when one of my sons comes of age." Hence
7_x_ = 21, _x_ = 3, and the other ages are 15, 18.

       *       *       *       *       *

Eighteen answers have been received. One of the writers merely asserts
that the first occasion was 12 years ago, that the ages were then 9, 6,
and 3; and that on the second occasion they were 14, 11, and 8! As a
Roman father, I _ought_ to withhold the name of the rash writer; but
respect for age makes me break the rule: it is THREE SCORE AND TEN. JANE
E. also asserts that the ages at first were 9, 6, 3: then she calculates
the present ages, leaving the _second_ occasion unnoticed. OLD HEN is
nearly as bad; she "tried various numbers till I found one that fitted
_all_ the conditions"; but merely scratching up the earth, and pecking
about, is _not_ the way to solve a problem, oh venerable bird! And close
after OLD HEN prowls, with hungry eyes, OLD CAT, who calmly assumes, to
begin with, that the son who comes of age is the _eldest_. Eat your
bird, Puss, for you will get nothing from me!

There are yet two zeroes to dispose of. MINERVA assumes that, on _every_
occasion, a son comes of age; and that it is only such a son who is
"tipped with gold." Is it wise thus to interpret "now, my boys,
calculate your ages, and you shall have the money"? BRADSHAW OF THE
FUTURE says "let" the ages at first be 9, 6, 3, then assumes that the
second occasion was 6 years afterwards, and on these baseless
assumptions brings out the right answers. Guide _future_ travellers, an
thou wilt: thou art no Bradshaw for _this_ Age!

Of those who win honours, the merely "honourable" are two. DINAH MITE
ascertains (rightly) the relationship between the three ages at first,
but then _assumes_ one of them to be "6," thus making the rest of her
solution tentative. M. F. C. does the algebra all right up to the
conclusion that the present ages are 5_z_, 6_z_, and 7_z_; it then
assumes, without giving any reason, that 7_z_ = 21.

Of the more honourable, DELTA attempts a novelty--to discover _which_
son comes of age by elimination: it assumes, successively, that it is
the middle one, and that it is the youngest; and in each case it
_apparently_ brings out an absurdity. Still, as the proof contains the
following bit of algebra, "63 = 7_x_ + 4_y_; [** therefore] 21 = _x_ + 4
sevenths of _y_," I trust it will admit that its proof is not _quite_
conclusive. The rest of its work is good. MAGPIE betrays the deplorable
tendency of her tribe--to appropriate any stray conclusion she comes
across, without having any _strict_ logical right to it. Assuming _A_,
_B_, _C_, as the ages at first, and _D_ as the number of the years that
have elapsed since then, she finds (rightly) the 3 equations, 2_A_ =
_B_, _C_ = _B_ + _A_, _D_ = 2_B_. She then says "supposing that _A_ = 1,
then _B_ = 2, _C_ = 3, and _D_ = 4. Therefore for _A_, _B_, _C_, _D_,
four numbers are wanted which shall be to each other as 1:2:3:4." It is
in the "therefore" that I detect the unconscientiousness of this bird.
The conclusion _is_ true, but this is only because the equations are
"homogeneous" (_i.e._ having one "unknown" in each term), a fact which I
strongly suspect had not been grasped--I beg pardon, clawed--by her.
Were I to lay this little pitfall, "_A_ + 1 = _B_, _B_ + 1 = _C_;
supposing _A_ = 1, then _B_ = 2 and _C_ = 3. _Therefore_ for _A_, _B_,
_C_, three numbers are wanted which shall be to one another as 1:2:3,"
would you not flutter down into it, oh MAGPIE, as amiably as a Dove?
SIMPLE SUSAN is anything but simple to _me_. After ascertaining that the
3 ages at first are as 3:2:1, she says "then, as two-thirds of their
sum, added to one of them, = 21, the sum cannot exceed 30, and
consequently the highest cannot exceed 15." I suppose her (mental)
argument is something like this:--"two-thirds of sum, + one age, = 21;
[** therefore] sum, + 3 halves of one age, = 31 and a half. But 3 halves of
one age cannot be less than 1 and-a-half (here I perceive that SIMPLE
SUSAN would on no account present a guinea to a new-born baby!) hence
the sum cannot exceed 30." This is ingenious, but her proof, after that,
is (as she candidly admits) "clumsy and roundabout." She finds that
there are 5 possible sets of ages, and eliminates four of them. Suppose
that, instead of 5, there had been 5 million possible sets? Would SIMPLE
SUSAN have courageously ordered in the necessary gallon of ink and ream
of paper?

The solution sent in by C. R. is, like that of SIMPLE SUSAN, partly
tentative, and so does not rise higher than being Clumsily Right.

Among those who have earned the highest honours, ALGERNON BRAY solves
the problem quite correctly, but adds that there is nothing to exclude
the supposition that all the ages were _fractional_. This would make the
number of answers infinite. Let me meekly protest that I _never_
intended my readers to devote the rest of their lives to writing out
answers! E. M. RIX points out that, if fractional ages be admissible,
any one of the three sons might be the one "come of age"; but she
rightly rejects this supposition on the ground that it would make the
problem indeterminate. WHITE SUGAR is the only one who has detected an
oversight of mine: I had forgotten the possibility (which of course
ought to be allowed for) that the son, who came of age that _year_, need
not have done so by that _day_, so that he _might_ be only 20. This
gives a second solution, viz., 20, 24, 28. Well said, pure Crystal!
Verily, thy "fair discourse hath been as sugar"!


CLASS LIST.

I.

   ALGERNON BRAY.
   AN OLD FOGEY.
   E. M. RIX.
   G. S. C.
   S. S. G.
   TOKIO.
   T. R.
   WHITE SUGAR.

II.

   C. R.
   DELTA.
   MAGPIE.
   SIMPLE SUSAN.

III.

   DINAH MITE.
   M. F. C.

       *       *       *       *       *

I have received more than one remonstrance on my assertion, in the
Chelsea Pensioners' problem, that it was illogical to assume, from the
_datum_ "70 p. c. have lost an eye," that 30 p. c. have _not_. ALGERNON
BRAY states, as a parallel case, "suppose Tommy's father gives him 4
apples, and he eats one of them, how many has he left?" and says "I
think we are justified in answering, 3." I think so too. There is no
"must" here, and the _data_ are evidently meant to fix the answer
_exactly_: but, if the question were set me "how many _must_ he have
left?", I should understand the _data_ to be that his father gave him 4
_at least_, but _may_ have given him more.

I take this opportunity of thanking those who have sent, along with
their answers to the Tenth Knot, regrets that there are no more Knots to
come, or petitions that I should recall my resolution to bring them to
an end. I am most grateful for their kind words; but I think it wisest
to end what, at best, was but a lame attempt. "The stretched metre of an
antique song" is beyond my compass; and my puppets were neither
distinctly _in_ my life (like those I now address), nor yet (like Alice
and the Mock Turtle) distinctly _out_ of it. Yet let me at least fancy,
as I lay down the pen, that I carry with me into my silent life, dear
reader, a farewell smile from your unseen face, and a kindly farewell
pressure from your unfelt hand! And so, good night! Parting is such
sweet sorrow, that I shall say "good night!" till it be morrow.

THE END

LONDON: RICHARD CLAY AND SONS, PRINTERS.

[TURN OVER.




WORKS BY LEWIS CARROLL.


ALICE'S ADVENTURES IN WONDERLAND.

With Forty-two Illustrations by TENNIEL. Crown 8vo, cloth, gilt edges,
price 6_s._ Seventy-fifth Thousand.

TRANSLATIONS OF THE SAME--into French, by HENRI BU--into German, by
ANTONIE ZIMMERMANN--and into Italian, by T. PIETROCLA ROSSETTI--with
TENNIEL'S Illustrations. Crown 8vo, cloth, gilt edges, price 6_s._ each.

THROUGH THE LOOKING-GLASS, AND WHAT ALICE FOUND THERE. With Fifty
Illustrations by TENNIEL. Crown 8vo, cloth, gilt edges, price 6_s._
Fifty-sixth Thousand.

RHYME? AND REASON? With Sixty-five Illustrations by ARTHUR B. FROST, and
Nine by HENRY HOLIDAY. (This book is a reprint, with a few additions, of
the comic portion of "Phantasmagoria and other Poems," and of "The
Hunting of the Snark." Mr. Frost's pictures are new.) Crown 8vo, cloth,
coloured edges, price 7_s._ Fifty Thousand.

A TANGLED TALE. Reprinted from _The Monthly Packet_. With Six
Illustrations by Arthur B. Frost. Crown 8vo, 4_s._ 6_d._

       *       *       *       *       *

N.B. In selling the above-mentioned books to the Trade, Messrs.
Macmillan and Co. will abate 2_d._ in the shilling (no odd copies), and
allow 5 per cent. discount for payment within six months, and 10 per
cent. for cash. In selling them to the Public (for cash only) they will
allow 10 per cent. discount.

       *       *       *       *       *

MR. LEWIS CARROLL, having been requested to allow "AN EASTER GREETING"
(a leaflet, addressed to children, and frequently given with his books)
to be sold separately, has arranged with Messrs. Harrison, of 59, Pall
Mall, who will supply a single copy for 1_d._, or 12 for 9_d._, or 100
for 5_s._

MACMILLAN AND CO., LONDON.

LONDON: RICHARD CLAY AND SONS, PRINTERS.

       *       *       *       *       *




  EIGHT OR NINE
  WISE WORDS
  ABOUT
  Letter-Writing


  BY
  _LEWIS CARROLL_


  EMBERLIN AND SON
  4, MAGDALEN STREET
  OXFORD




  FIRST PUBLISHED
  1890.




Contents.


                                    PAGE.

  _On Stamp-Cases_                      5

  _How to begin a Letter_               9

  _How to go on with a Letter_         12

  _How to end a Letter_                21

  _On registering Correspondence_      23




 1. _On Stamp-Cases._


Some American writer has said "the snakes in this district may be divided
into one species--the venomous." The same principle applies here.
Postage-Stamp-Cases may be divided into one species, the "Wonderland."
Imitations of it will soon appear, no doubt: but they cannot include the
two Pictorial Surprises, which are copyright.

You don't see why I call them 'Surprises'? Well, take the Case in your
left-hand, and regard it attentively. You see Alice nursing the Duchess's
Baby? (An entirely new combination, by the way: it doesn't occur in the
book.) Now, with your right thumb and forefinger, lay hold of the little
book, and suddenly pull it out. _The Baby has turned into a Pig!_ If
_that_ doesn't surprise you, why, I suppose you wouldn't be surprised if
your own Mother-in-law suddenly turned into a Gyroscope!

This Case is _not_ intended to carry about in your pocket. Far from it.
People seldom want any other Stamps, on an emergency, than Penny-Stamps
for Letters, Sixpenny-Stamps for Telegrams, and a bit of Stamp-edging for
cut fingers (it makes capital sticking-plaster, and will stand three or
four washings, cautiously conducted): and all these are easily carried in
a purse or pocketbook. No, _this_ is meant to haunt your envelope-case, or
wherever you keep your writing-materials. What made me invent it was the
constantly wanting Stamps of other values, for foreign Letters, Parcel
Post, &c., and finding it very bothersome to get at the kind I wanted in
a hurry. Since I have possessed a "Wonderland Stamp Case", Life has been
bright and peaceful, and I have used no other. I believe the Queen's
laundress uses no other.

Each of the pockets will hold 6 stamps, comfortably. I would recommend you
to arrange the 6, before putting them in, something like a _bouquet_,
making them lean to the right and to the left alternately: thus there will
always be a free _corner_ to get hold of, so as to take them out, quickly
and easily, one by one: otherwise you will find them apt to come out two
or three at a time.

According to _my_ experience, the 5_d._, 9_d._, and 1_s._ Stamps are
hardly ever wanted, though I have constantly to replenish all the other
pockets. If your experience agrees with mine, you may find it convenient
to keep only a couple (say) of each of these 3 kinds, in the 1_s._
pocket, and to fill the other 2 pockets with extra 1_d._ stamps.




 2. _How to begin a Letter._


If the Letter is to be in answer to another, begin by getting out that
other letter and reading it through, in order to refresh your memory, as
to what it is you have to answer, and as to your correspondent's _present
address_ (otherwise you will be sending your letter to his regular address
in _London_, though he has been careful in writing to give you his
_Torquay_ address in full).

Next, Address and Stamp the Envelope. "What! Before writing the _Letter_?"
Most certainly. And I'll tell you what will happen if you don't. You will
go on writing till the last moment, and just in the middle of the last
sentence, you will become aware that 'time's up!' Then comes the hurried
wind-up--the wildly-scrawled signature--the hastily-fastened envelope,
which comes open in the post--the address, a mere hieroglyphic--the
horrible discovery that you've forgotten to replenish your Stamp-Case--the
frantic appeal, to every one in the house, to lend you a Stamp--the
headlong rush to the Post Office, arriving, hot and gasping, just after
the box has closed--and finally, a week afterwards, the return of the
Letter, from the Dead-Letter Office, marked "address illegible"!

Next, put your own address, _in full_, at the top of the note-sheet. It is
an aggravating thing----I speak from bitter experience----when a friend,
staying at some new address, heads his letter "Dover," simply, assuming
that you can get the rest of the address from his previous letter, which
perhaps you have destroyed.

Next, put the date _in full_. It is another aggravating thing, when you
wish, years afterwards, to arrange a series of letters, to find them dated
"Feb. 17", "Aug. 2", without any year to guide you as to which comes
first. And never, never, dear Madam (N.B. this remark is addressed to
ladies _only_: no _man_ would ever do such a thing), put "Wednesday",
simply, as the date!

"_That way madness lies._"




 3. _How to go on with a Letter._


Here is a golden Rule to begin with. _Write legibly._ The average temper
of the human race would be perceptibly sweetened, if everybody obeyed this
Rule! A great deal of the bad writing in the world comes simply from
writing _too quickly_. Of course you reply, "I do it to save _time_". A
very good object, no doubt: but what right have you to do it at your
friend's expense? Isn't _his_ time as valuable as yours? Years ago, I used
to receive letters from a friend----and very interesting letters
too----written in one of the most atrocious hands ever invented. It
generally took me about a _week_ to read one of his letters! I used to
carry it about in my pocket, and take it out at leisure times, to puzzle
over the riddles which composed it----holding it in different positions,
and at different distances, till at last the meaning of some hopeless
scrawl would flash upon me, when I at once wrote down the English under
it; and, when several had been thus guessed, the context would help one
with the others, till at last the whole series of hieroglyphics was
deciphered. If _all_ one's friends wrote like that, Life would be entirely
spent in reading their letters!

This Rule applies, specially, to names of people or places----and _most_
specially to _foreign names_. I got a letter once, containing some Russian
names, written in the same hasty scramble in which people often write
"yours sincerely". The _context_, of course, didn't help in the least: and
one spelling was just as likely as another, so far as _I_ knew: it was
necessary to write and tell my friend that I couldn't read any of them!

My second Rule is, don't fill _more_ than a page and a half with apologies
for not having written sooner!

The best subject, to _begin_ with, is your friend's last letter. Write
with the letter open before you. Answer his questions, and make any
remarks his letter suggests. _Then_ go on to what you want to say
yourself. This arrangement is more courteous, and pleasanter for the
reader, than to fill the letter with your own invaluable remarks, and then
hastily answer your friend's questions in a postscript. Your friend is
much more likely to enjoy your wit, _after_ his own anxiety for
information has been satisfied.

In referring to anything your friend has said in his letter, it is best to
_quote the exact words_, and not to give a summary of them in _your_
words. _A's_ impression, of what _B_ has said, expressed in _A's_ words,
will never convey to _B_ the meaning of his own words.

This is specially necessary when some point has arisen as to which the two
correspondents do not quite agree. There ought to be no opening for such
writing as "You are quite mistaken in thinking I said so-and-so. It was
not in the least my meaning, &c., &c.", which tends to make a
correspondence last for a lifetime.

A few more Rules may fitly be given here, for correspondence that has
unfortunately become _controversial_.

One is, _don't repeat yourself_. When once you have said your say, fully
and clearly, on a certain point, and have failed to convince your friend,
_drop that subject_: to repeat your arguments, all over again, will simply
lead to his doing the same; and so you will go on, like a Circulating
Decimal. _Did you ever know a Circulating Decimal come to an end?_

Another Rule is, when you have written a letter that you feel may possibly
irritate your friend, however necessary you may have felt it to so express
yourself, _put it aside till the next day_. Then read it over again, and
fancy it addressed to yourself. This will often lead to your writing it
all over again, taking out a lot of the vinegar and pepper, and putting in
honey instead, and thus making a _much_ more palatable dish of it! If,
when you have done your best to write inoffensively, you still feel that
it will probably lead to further controversy, _keep a copy of it_. There
is very little use, months afterwards, in pleading "I am almost sure I
never expressed myself as you say: to the best of my recollection I said
so-and-so". _Far_ better to be able to write "I did _not_ express myself
so: these are the words I used."

My fifth Rule is, if your friend makes a severe remark, either leave it
unnoticed, or make your reply distinctly _less_ severe: and if he makes a
friendly remark, tending towards 'making up' the little difference that
has arisen between you, let your reply be distinctly _more_ friendly. If,
in picking a quarrel, each party declined to go more than _three-eighths_
of the way, and if, in making friends, each was ready to go _five-eighths_
of the way--why, there would be more reconciliations than quarrels! Which
is like the Irishman's remonstrance to his gad-about daughter--"Shure,
you're _always_ goin' out! You go out _three_ times, for _wanst_ that you
come in!"

My sixth Rule (and my last remark about controversial correspondence) is,
_don't try to have the last word_! How many a controversy would be nipped
in the bud, if each was anxious to let the _other_ have the last word!
Never mind how telling a rejoinder you leave unuttered: never mind your
friend's supposing that you are silent from lack of anything to say: let
the thing drop, as soon as it is possible without discourtesy: remember
'speech is silvern, but silence is golden'! (N.B.--If you are a gentleman,
and your friend a lady, this Rule is superfluous: _you won't get the last
word_!)

My seventh Rule is, if it should ever occur to you to write, jestingly, in
_dispraise_ of your friend, be sure you exaggerate enough to make the
jesting _obvious_: a word spoken in _jest_, but taken as _earnest_, may
lead to very serious consequences. I have known it to lead to the
breaking-off of a friendship. Suppose, for instance, you wish to remind
your friend of a sovereign you have lent him, which he has forgotten to
repay--you might quite _mean_ the words "I mention it, as you seem to have
a conveniently bad memory for debts", in jest: yet there would be nothing
to wonder at if he took offence at that way of putting it. But, suppose
you wrote "Long observation of your career, as a pickpocket and a burglar,
has convinced me that my one lingering hope, for recovering that sovereign
I lent you, is to say 'Pay up, or I'll summons yer!'" he would indeed be a
matter-of-fact friend if he took _that_ as seriously meant!

My eighth Rule. When you say, in your letter, "I enclose cheque for 5",
or "I enclose John's letter for you to see", leave off writing for a
moment--go and get the document referred to--and _put it into the
envelope_. Otherwise, you are pretty certain to find it lying about,
_after the Post has gone_!

My ninth Rule. When you get to the end of a note-sheet, and find you have
more to say, take another piece of paper--a whole sheet, or a scrap, as
the case may demand: but, whatever you do, _don't cross_! Remember the old
proverb '_Cross-writing makes cross reading_'. "The _old_ proverb?" you
say, enquiringly. "_How_ old?" Well, not so _very_ ancient, I must
confess. In fact, I'm afraid I invented it while writing this paragraph!
Still, you know, 'old' is a _comparative_ term. I think you would be
_quite_ justified in addressing a chicken, just out of the shell, as "Old
boy!", _when compared_ with another chicken, that was only half-out!




 4. _How to end a Letter._


If doubtful whether to end with 'yours faithfully', or 'yours truly', or
'yours most truly', &c. (there are at least a dozen varieties, before you
reach 'yours affectionately'), refer to your correspondent's last letter,
and make your winding-up _at least as friendly as his_; in fact, even if a
shade _more_ friendly, it will do no harm!

A Postscript is a very useful invention: but it is _not_ meant (as so many
ladies suppose) to contain the real _gist_ of the letter: it serves rather
to throw into the shade any little matter we do _not_ wish to make a fuss
about. For example, your friend had promised to execute a commission for
you in town, but forgot it, thereby putting you to great inconvenience:
and he now writes to apologize for his negligence. It would be cruel, and
needlessly crushing, to make it the main subject of your reply. How much
more gracefully it comes in thus! "P.S. Don't distress yourself any more
about having omitted that little matter in town. I won't deny that it
_did_ put my plans out a little, at the time: but it's all right now. I
often forget things, myself: and 'those who live in glass-houses, mustn't
throw stones', you know!"

When you take your letters to the Post, _carry them in your hand_. If you
put them in your pocket you will take a long country-walk (I speak from
experience), passing the Post-Office _twice_, going and returning, and,
when you get home, will find them _still_ in your pocket.




 5. _On registering Correspondence._


Let me recommend you to keep a record of Letters Received and Sent. I have
kept one for many years, and have found it of the greatest possible
service, in many ways: it secures my _answering_ Letters, however long
they have to wait; it enables me to refer, for my own guidance, to the
details of previous correspondence, though the actual Letters may have
been destroyed long ago; and, most valuable feature of all, if any
difficulty arises, years afterwards, in connection with a half-forgotten
correspondence, it enables me to say, with confidence, "I did _not_ tell
you that he was 'an _invaluable_ servant in _every_ way', and that you
_couldn't_ 'trust him too much'. I have a _prcis_ of my letter. What I
said was 'he is a _valuable_ servant in _many_ ways, but _don't_ trust him
too much'. So, if he's cheated you, you really must not hold _me_
responsible for it!"

I will now give you a few simple Rules for making, and keeping, a
Letter-Register.

Get a blank book, containing (say) 200 leaves, about 4 inches wide and 7
high. It should be _well_ fastened into its cover, as it will have to be
opened and shut hundreds of times. Have a line ruled, in red ink, down
each margin of every page, an inch off the edge (the margin should be wide
enough to contain a number of 5 digits, easily: _I_ manage with a 3/4 inch
margin: but, unless you write very small you will find an inch more
comfortable).

Write a _prcis_ of each Letter, received or sent, in chronological
order. Let the entry of a 'received' Letter reach from the left-hand edge
to the right-hand marginal line; and the entry of a 'sent' Letter from the
left-hand marginal line to the right-hand edge. Thus the two kinds will be
quite distinct, and you can easily hunt through the 'received' Letters by
themselves, without being bothered with the 'sent' Letters; and _vice
vers_.

Use the _right-hand_ pages only: and, when you come to the end of the
book, turn it upside-down, and begin at the other end, still using
right-hand pages. You will find this much more comfortable than using
left-hand pages.

You will find it convenient to write, at the top of every sheet of a
'received' Letter, its Register-Number in full.

I will now give a few (ideal) specimen pages of my Letter-Register, and
make a few remarks on them: after which I think you will find it easy
enough to manage one for yourself.

      29217|              /90.                ||
    -------+                                  ||
    (217)  |Ap. 1  (Tu.)   _Jones, Mrs._  am  ||27518
    sendg, |as present  from  self and Mr.    ||
    J., a  |white elephant.                   ||225
    -------+----------------------------------||
    (218)  |do.   _Wilkins & Co._  bill,   for||28743
    grand  |piano,  175 10_s._ 6_d._      [pd||221, 2
    -------+----------------------------------||
    (219)  |do.  _Scareham, H._  [writes  from||
    'Grand | Hotel, Monte Carlo']  asking     ||
    to borr|ow  50 for a few weeks (!)       ||[symbol]
    -------+----------------------------------+--------
  [symbol]||(220)  do.   _Scareham, H._  would| like to
          ||know  _object_,  for  wh  loan is | asked,
          ||and  _security_ offered.          |
          ||----------------------------------+--------
       218||(221) Ap. 3.  _Wilkins & Co._     ||in pre-
          ||vious  letter,  now  before  me,  || you
          ||undertook  to  supply  one  for   ||120:
       246||decling to pay more.              ||
          ||----------------------------------+--------
     23514||(222) do.  _Cheetham & Sharp._    | have
     218  ||written    221--enclosing   previo|us let-
       228||ter--is law on my side?           |  [
    ------++----------------------------------++-------
    (223) ||Ap. 4.    _Manager,  Goods Statn_,||
    _G. N.||R._  White Elephant arrived,  ad- ||
    dresse||d  to you--send for it at once--  ||
    'very ||savage'.                          ||226
    -------+----------------------------------+--------
           |                                  |
           |                                  |


     29225 |               /90.               |
    ------++                                  |
       217||(225) Ap. 4. (F) _Jones,  Mrs._ th||anks,
          ||but no room for it at present,  am||send-
       230||ing it to Zoological Gardens.     ||
          ||----------------------------------++-------
       223||(226)   do.  _Manager,  Goods  Sta||tn, G._
          ||_N. R._ please  deliver, to bearer||of this
          ||note,  case  containg  White  Ele-||phant
          ||addressed to me.                  ||
          ||----------------------------------+--------
          ||(227)   do. _Director Zool. Garde |ns._ (en-
     223  ||closing  above  note  to R. W.  Ma|nager)
          ||call  for  valuable animal,  prese|nted to
       229||Gardens.                          |
    -------+----------------------------------+--------
    (228)  |Ap.  8.  _Cheetham  &  Sharp._ you||222
     misquo|te  enclosed letter, limit named  ||
     is 18|0.                                ||237
    -------+----------------------------------||-------
    (229)  |Ap. 9. _Director,  Zoo.  Gardens._||227
    case de|livered  to  us  contained 1  doz.||  230
     Port--|consumed    at   Directors'   Ban-||
     quet--|many thanks.                      ||
    -------+----------------------------------+--------
       225||(230)  do.  T _Jones, Mrs._ why   | call a
  [symbol]||doz. of Port a  'White Elephant'? |
    -------+----------------------------------+--------
    (231)  |do.  T  _Jones, Mrs._ 'it was a   ||[symbol]
    joke'. |                                  ||
    -------+----------------------------------+--------
           |                                  |
           |                                  |


     29233 |                /90.              |
    -------+                                  |
          ||(233)  Ap. 10.  (Th)  _Page & Co._|orderg
          ||Macaulay's   Essays   and   "Jane |Eyre"
       242||(cheap edtn).                     |
    -------+----------------------------------+--------
    (234)  |do.  _Aunt Jemima_--invitg  for   ||
    2 or 3 |days after the 15th.          [   || 236
    -------+----------------------------------||
    (235)  |do.  _Lon. and West. Bk._   have  ||
    recevd |250, pd to yr  Acct  fm  Parkins ||
    & Co.  |Calcutta                      [en ||
    -------+----------------------------------+--------
       234||(236)   do.   _Aunt   Jemima_--can|not
          ||possibly  come  this  month,  will|write
       239||when able.                        |   [
          ||----------------------------------+--------
       228||(237)   Ap.  11.  _Cheetham  and  |Co._ re-
       240||turn letter enclosed to you.      |    [
          ||----------------------------------+--------
          ||(238)   do.   _Morton, Philip._ Co|uld you
          ||lend    me   Browning's   'Dramati|s Per-
       245||son' for a day or 2?             |
    -------+----------------------------------+--------
    (239)  |Ap.  14.   _Aunt Jemima_, leav-   ||236
    ing  ho|use at end of month : address     ||
    '136,  |Royal Avenue, Bath.'       [      ||
    -------+----------------------------------||
    (240)  |Ap. 15.  _Cheetham  and  Co._,    ||237
    returng|letter as reqd, bill 6/6/8. [     ||244
    -------+----------------------------------+--------
           |                                  |
           |                                  |


     29242 |               /90.               |
    -------+                                  |
    (242)  |Ap. 15.  (Tu)  _Page & Co._ bill  ||} 233
    for boo|ks, as ordered, 15/6        [     ||}
    -------+----------------------------------||}
    (243)  |do.    _do._ books               ||} 247
    -------+----------------------------------+--------
       240||(244)   do.  _Cheetham and Co._  c|an un-
       248||derstand   the   6/8--what  is  6|for?
    -------+----------------------------------+--------
    (245)  |Ap. 17.     _Morton, P._   'Dra- ||238
    matis  |Person', as asked for.     [retd ||249
    -------+----------------------------------+--------
       221||(246)   do.   _Wilkins and Co._  w|ith
       250||bill,  175/10/6, and ch.  for  do.|   [en
          ||----------------------------------+--------
       243||(247)  do.   _Page and Co._  bill,| 15/6,
          ||postal [symbol]107258 for 15/- and|6 stps.
    -------+----------------------------------+--------
    (248)  |Ap. 18.  _Cheetham and Co._  it   ||244
    was a  |'clerical error' (!)              ||
    -------+----------------------------------+--------
       245||(249)  Ap. 19.  _Morton, P._  retu|rng
          ||Browning with many thanks.        |
    -------+----------------------------------+--------
    (250)  |do.  _Wilkins and Co._  receptd   ||246
    bill.  |                                  ||
    -------+----------------------------------+--------
           |                                  |
           |                                  |

I begin each page by putting, at the top left-hand corner, the next
entry-number I am going to use, _in full_ (the last 3 digits of each
entry-number are enough afterwards); and I put the date of the year, at
the top, in the centre.

I begin each entry with the last 3 digits of the entry-number, enclosed in
an oval (this is difficult to reproduce in print, so I have put
round-parentheses here). Then, for the _first_ entry in each page, I put
the day of the month and the day of the week: afterwards, 'do.' is enough
for the month-day, till it changes: I do not repeat the week-day.

Next, if the entry is _not_ a letter, I put a symbol for 'parcel' (see
Nos. 243, 245) or 'telegram' (see Nos. 230, 231) as the case may be.

Next, the name of the person, underlined (indicated here by italics).

If an entry needs special further attention, I put [____ at the end: and,
when it has been attended to, I fill in the appropriate symbol, e.g. in
No. 218, it showed that the bill had to be _paid_; in No. 222, that an
answer was really _needed_ (the '' means 'attended to'); in No. 234, that
I owed the old lady a visit; in No. 235, that the item had to be entered
in my account book; in No. 236, that I must not forget to write; in No.
239, that the address had to be entered in my address-book; in No. 245,
that the book had to be returned.

I give each entry the space of 2 lines, whether it fills them or not, in
order to have room for references. And, at the foot of each page I leave 2
or 3 lines _blank_ (often useful afterwards for entering omitted Letters)
and miss one or 2 numbers before I begin the next page.

At any odd moments of leisure, I 'make up' the entry-book, in various
ways, as follows:--

(1) I draw a _second_ line, at the right-hand end of the 'received'
entries, and at the left-hand end of the 'sent' entries. This I usually do
pretty well 'up to date'. In my Register the first line is _red_, the
second _blue_: here I distinguish them by making the first thin, and the
second _thick_.

(2) Beginning with the last entry, and going backwards, I read over the
names till I recognise one as having occurred already: I then link the two
entries together, by giving the one, that comes first in chronological
order, a 'foot-reference' (see Nos. 217, 225). I do not keep this
'up-to-date', but leave it till there are 4 or 5 pages to be done. I work
back till I come among entries that are all supplied with
'foot-references', when I once more glance through the last few pages, to
see if there are any entries not yet supplied with head-references:
_their_ predecessors may need a special search. If an entry is connected,
in subject, with another under a different name, I link them by
cross-references, distinguished from the head- and foot-references by
being written _further from the marginal line_ (see No. 229). When 2
consecutive entries have the same name, and are both of the same kind
(i.e. both 'received' or both 'sent') I bracket them (see Nos. 242, 243);
if of different kinds, I link them with the symbol used for Nos. 219, 220.

(3) Beginning at the earliest entry not yet done with, and going forwards,
I cross out every entry that has got a head- and foot-reference, and is
done with, by continuing the extra line _through_ it (see Nos. 221, 223,
225). Thus, wherever a _break_ occurs in this extra line, it shows there
is some matter still needing attention. I do not keep this anything like
'up to date', but leave it till there are 30 or 40 pages to look through
at a time. When the first page in the volume is thus completely crossed
out, I put a mark at the foot of the page to indicate this; and so with
pages 2, 3, &c. Hence, whenever I do this part of the 'making up', I need
not begin at the beginning of the volume, but only at the _earliest page
that has not got this mark_.

All this looks very complicated, when stated at full length: but you will
find it perfectly simple, when you have had a little practice, and will
come to regard the 'making-up' as a pleasant occupation for a rainy day,
or at any time that you feel disinclined for more severe mental work. In
the Game of Whist, Hoyle gives us one golden Rule, "When in doubt, win the
trick"--I find that Rule admirable for real life: when in doubt what to
do, I 'make-up' my Letter-Register!


THE END.




Works by Lewis Carroll.

PUBLISHED BY

MACMILLAN & CO., Ltd., LONDON.


Alice's Adventures in Wonderland. With Forty-two Illustrations by TENNIEL.
(First published in 1865.) Crown 8vo, cloth, gilt edges, price 6_s._ net.
Ninetieth Thousand.

The same; People's Edition. (First published in 1887.) Crown 8vo, cloth,
price 2_s._ 6_d._ net. One hundred and forty-third Thousand.

The same; Illustrated Pocket Classics for the Young. Fcap. 8vo, cloth,
with full gilt back and gilt top, 2_s._ net. Limp leather, with full gilt
back and gilt edges, 3_s._ net.

The same. 8vo, sewed, 6_d._; cloth, 1_s._

The same; Miniature Edition. Pott 8vo, 1_s._ net.

The same; Little Folks' Edition. Square 16mo. With Coloured Illustrations.
1_s._ net.

Aventures d'Alice au pays des Merveilles. Traduit de l'Anglais par HENRY
BUE. Ouvrage illustr de 42 Vignettes par JOHN TENNIEL. (First published
in 1869.) Crown 8vo, cloth, gilt edges, price 6_s._ net. Second Thousand.

Le Avventure d'Alice nel paese delle Meraviglie. Tradotte dall' Inglese da
T. PIETROCOLA-ROSSETTI. Con 42 Vignette di GIOVANNI TENNIEL. (First
published in 1872.) Crown 8vo, cloth, gilt edges, price 6_s._ net.

Alice's Adventures Under Ground. Being a Facsimile of the original MS.
Book, which was afterwards developed into "Alice's Adventures in
Wonderland." With Thirty-seven Illustrations by the Author. (Begun, July,
1862; finished, Feb., 1863; first published, in facsimile, in 1886.) Crown
8vo, cloth, gilt edges, price 4_s._ net. Fourth Thousand.

Through the Looking-Glass; and what Alice found there. With Fifty
Illustrations by TENNIEL. (First published in 1871.) Crown 8vo, cloth,
gilt edges, price 6_s._ net. Sixty-third Thousand.

The same; People's Edition. (First published in 1887.) Crown 8vo, cloth,
price 2_s._ 6_d._ net. Eighty-fourth Thousand.

The same; Illustrated Pocket Classics for the Young. Fcap. 8vo, cloth,
with full gilt back and gilt top, 2_s._ net. Limp leather, with full gilt
back and gilt edges, 3_s._ net.

The same. 8vo, sewed, 6_d._; cloth 1_s._

The same; Little Folks' Edition. Square 16mo. With Coloured Illustrations.
1_s._ 6_d._ net.

Alice's Adventures in Wonderland; and Through the Looking-Glass; People's
Editions. Both Books together in One Volume. (First published in 1887.)
Crown 8vo, cloth, price 4_s._ 6_d._ net.

The Hunting of the Snark. An Agony in Eight Fits. With Nine Illustrations,
and two large gilt designs on cover, by HENRY HOLIDAY. (First published in
1876.) Crown 8vo, cloth, gilt edges, price 4_s._ 6_d._ net. Twenty-third
Thousand.

Rhyme? and Reason? With Sixty-five Illustrations by ARTHUR B. FROST, and
Nine by HENRY HOLIDAY. (First published in 1883, being a reprint, with a
few additions, of the comic portions of "Phantasmagoria, and other Poems,"
published in 1869, and of "The Hunting of the Snark," published in 1876.)
Crown 8vo, cloth, gilt edges, price 6_s._ net. Eighth Thousand.

Sylvie and Bruno concluded. With Forty-six Illustrations by HARRY FURNISS.
(First published in 1893.) Fifth Thousand. Crown 8vo, cloth, gilt edges,
price 7_s._ 6_d._ net. People's Edition, 2_s._ 6_d._ net. N.B.--This book
contains 411 pages.

The Story of Sylvie and Bruno, In One Volume. With Illustrations by HARRY
FURNISS. Crown 8vo, 3_s._ 6_d._ net.

Three Sunsets, and other Poems. With Twelve Illustrations by E. GERTRUDE
THOMSON. Fcap. 4to, cloth, gilt edges, price 4_s._ net.

N.B.--This is a reprint, with a few additions, of the serious portion of
"Phantasmagoria, and other Poems," published in 1869.




Works by Lewis Carroll.

PUBLISHED BY CHATTO & WINDUS,

111 ST. MARTIN'S LANE, LONDON, W.C.


Price 1_s._ net, boards; 2_s._ net, bound in leather.

FEEDING THE MIND.

A lecture delivered in 1884.

With Preface by WILLIAM H. DRAPER.

ALWAYS IN STOCK AT

EMBERLIN & SON, OXFORD.

POSTAGE ONE PENNY.


ADVICE TO WRITERS.

Buy "THE WONDERLAND CASE FOR POSTAGE-STAMPS," invented by LEWIS CARROLL,
October 29, 1888, size 4 inches by 3, containing 12 separate pockets for
stamps of different values, 2 Coloured Pictorial Surprises taken from
_Alice in Wonderland_, and 8 or 9 Wise Words about Letter-Writing. It is
published by Messrs. EMBERLIN & SON, 4 Magdalen Street, Oxford. Price
1_s._

N.B.--If ordered by Post, an additional payment will be required, to cover
cost of postage, as follows:--

One, two, three, or four copies, 1_d._ Five to fourteen do., 3_d._ Each
subsequent fourteen or fraction thereof, 1_d._




  The Wonderland

  [Illustration]

  Postage-Stamp Case


  PUBLISHED BY
  EMBERLIN AND SON,
  4, MAGDALEN STREET,
  OXFORD.

  [Illustration]

  (POST FREE, 13d.)
  PRICE ONE SHILLING

  [Illustration]

  [Illustration]

  [Illustration]


  Invented by

  [Illustration]

  Lewis Carroll
  MDCCCLXXXIX





FEEDING THE MIND




UNIFORM WITH THE PRESENT VOLUME.

_1s. net each; leather, 2s. net each._

  PRAYERS WRITTEN AT VAILIMA.
    BY R. L. STEVENSON.

  A CHRISTMAS SERMON.
    BY R. L. STEVENSON.

LONDON: CHATTO & WINDUS.




  FEEDING THE MIND


  BY LEWIS CARROLL


  WITH A PREFATORY NOTE BY
  WILLIAM H. DRAPER


  LONDON
  CHATTO & WINDUS
  1907



[_All rights reserved_]




NOTE


_The history of this little sparkle from the pen of Lewis Carroll may soon
be told. It was in October of the year 1884 that he came on a visit to a
certain vicarage in Derbyshire, where he had promised, on the score of
friendship, to do what was for him a most unusual favour--to give a
lecture before a public audience._

_The writer well remembers his nervous, highly-strung manner as he stood
before the little room full of simple people, few of whom had any idea of
the world-wide reputation of that shy, slight figure before them._

_When the lecture was over, he handed the manuscript to me, saying: 'Do
what you like with it.'_

_The one for whose sake he did this kindness was not long after called_

  'Into the Silent Land.'

_So the beautifully-written MS., in his customary violet ink, has been
treasured for more than twenty years, only now and then being read over at
Christmastime to a friend or two by the study fire, always to meet with
the same welcome and glad acknowledgment that here was a genuine, though
little flame that could not have belonged to any other source but that
which all the world knew in_ Alice in Wonderland _and_ Through the
Looking-Glass.

_There may be, perhaps, many others who, gathering round a winter fire,
will be glad to read words, however few, from that bright source, and
whose memories will respond to the fresh touch of that cherished name._

_It remains to add but one or two more associations that cling to it and
make the remembrance more vivid still. While Lewis Carroll was staying in
the house, there came to call a certain genial and by no means shy Dean,
who, without realizing what he was doing, proceeded, in the presence of
other callers, to make some remark identifying Mr. Dodgson as the author
of his books._

_There followed an immense explosion immediately on the visitor's
departure, with a pathetic and serious request that, if there were any
risk of a repetition of the call, due warning might be given, and the
retreat secured._

_Probably not many readers of the immortal Alice have ever seen the
curious little whimsical paper called_

  EIGHT OR NINE WISE WORDS ABOUT LETTER-WRITING

_which their author had printed and used to send to his acquaintance,
accompanied by a small case for postage-stamps._

_It consists of forty pages, and is published by Emberlin and Son, Oxford;
and these are the contents:_

                                    PAGE
  ON STAMP-CASES,                      5
  HOW TO BEGIN A LETTER,               8
  HOW TO GO ON WITH A LETTER,         11
  HOW TO END A LETTER,                20
  ON REGISTERING CORRESPONDENCE,      22

_In this little script, also, there are the same sparkles of wit which
betoken that nimble pen, as, for example, under_ 'How to begin a Letter':

'"And never, never, dear madam" (N.B.--This remark is addressed to ladies
_only_. No _man_ would ever do such a thing), "put 'Wednesday' simply as
the date! "_That way madness lies!_"'

_From section 3_: 'How to go on with a Letter.'--'A great deal of the bad
writing in the world comes simply from writing too _quickly_. Of course
you reply, "I do it to save _time_." A very good object, no doubt, but
what right have you to do it at your friend's expense? Isn't _his_ time as
valuable as yours? Years ago I used to receive letters from a friend--and
very interesting letters too--written in one of the most atrocious hands
ever invented. It generally took me about a _week_ to read one of his
letters! I used to carry it about in my pocket and take it out at leisure
times, to puzzle over the riddles which composed it--holding it in
different positions and at different distances, till at last the meaning
of some hopeless scrawl would flash upon me, when I at once wrote down the
English under it. And when several had been thus guessed the context would
help one with the others, till at last the whole series of hieroglyphics
was deciphered. If _all_ one's friends wrote like that, life would be
entirely spent in reading their letters!'

_Rule for correspondence that has, unfortunately, become_ controversial.

'_Don't repeat yourself._--When once you have had your say fully and
clearly on a certain point, and have failed to convince your friend,
_drop that subject_. To repeat your arguments all over again, will simply
lead to his doing the same, and so you will go on like a circulating
decimal. _Did you ever know a circulating decimal come to an end?_'

       *       *       *       *       *

_Rule 5._--'If your friend makes a severe remark, either leave it
unnoticed, or make your reply distinctly less severe; and if he makes a
friendly remark, tending towards making up the little difference that has
arisen between you, let your reply be distinctly _more_ friendly.

       *       *       *       *       *

'If, in picking a quarrel, each party declined to go more than
_three-eighths_ of the way, and if in making friends, each was ready to go
_five-eighths_ of the way--why, there would be more reconciliations than
quarrels! Which is like the Irishman's remonstrance to his gad-about
daughter: "Shure, you're _always_ goin' out! You go out three times for
_wanst_ that you come in!"'

       *       *       *       *       *

_Rule 6._--'Don't try to get the last word.... (N.B.--If you are a
gentleman and your friend a lady, this rule is superfluous: _You won't get
the last word!_)'

       *       *       *       *       *

_Let the last word to-day be part of another rule, which gives a glimpse
into that gentle heart:_

'When you have written a letter that you feel may possibly irritate your
friend, however necessary you may have felt it to so express yourself,
_put it aside till the next day_. Then read it over again, and fancy it
addressed to yourself. This will often lead to your writing it all over
again, taking out a lot of the vinegar and pepper and putting in honey
instead, and thus making a _much_ more palatable dish of it!'

  'Quis desiderio sit pudor aut modus
  Tam cari capitis?'

W. H. D.

_November 1907._




FEEDING THE MIND


Breakfast, dinner, tea; in extreme cases, breakfast, luncheon, dinner,
tea, supper, and a glass of something hot at bedtime. What care we take
about feeding the lucky body! Which of us does as much for his mind? And
what causes the difference? Is the body so much the more important of the
two?

By no means: but life depends on the body being fed, whereas we can
continue to exist as animals (scarcely as men) though the mind be
utterly starved and neglected. Therefore Nature provides that, in case of
serious neglect of the body, such terrible consequences of discomfort and
pain shall ensue, as will soon bring us back to a sense of our duty: and
some of the functions necessary to life she does for us altogether,
leaving us no choice in the matter. It would fare but ill with many of us
if we were left to superintend our own digestion and circulation. 'Bless
me!' one would cry, 'I forgot to wind up my heart this morning! To think
that it has been standing still for the last three hours!' 'I can't walk
with you this afternoon,' a friend would say, 'as I have no less than
eleven dinners to digest. I had to let them stand over from last week,
being so busy, and my doctor says he will not answer for the consequences
if I wait any longer!'

Well, it is, I say, for us that the consequences of neglecting the body
can be clearly seen and felt; and it might be well for some if the mind
were equally visible and tangible--if we could take it, say, to the
doctor, and have its pulse felt.

'Why, what have you been doing with this mind lately? How have you fed it?
It looks pale, and the pulse is very slow.'

'Well, doctor, it has not had much regular food lately. I gave it a lot of
sugar-plums yesterday.'

'Sugar-plums! What kind?'

'Well, they were a parcel of conundrums, sir.'

'Ah, I thought so. Now just mind this: if you go on playing tricks like
that, you'll spoil all its teeth, and get laid up with mental indigestion.
You must have nothing but the plainest reading for the next few days. Take
care now! No novels on any account!'

       *       *       *       *       *

Considering the amount of painful experience many of us have had in
feeding and dosing the body, it would, I think, be quite worth our while
to try and translate some of the rules into corresponding ones for the
mind.

First, then, we should set ourselves to provide for our mind its _proper
kind_ of food. We very soon learn what will, and what will not, agree with
the body, and find little difficulty in refusing a piece of the tempting
pudding or pie which is associated in our memory with that terrible attack
of indigestion, and whose very name irresistibly recalls rhubarb and
magnesia; but it takes a great many lessons to convince us how
indigestible some of our favourite lines of reading are, and again and
again we make a meal of the unwholesome novel, sure to be followed by its
usual train of low spirits, unwillingness to work, weariness of
existence--in fact, by mental nightmare.

Then we should be careful to provide this wholesome food in _proper
amount_. Mental gluttony, or over-reading, is a dangerous propensity,
tending to weakness of digestive power, and in some cases to loss of
appetite: we know that bread is a good and wholesome food, but who would
like to try the experiment of eating two or three loaves at a sitting?

I have heard a physician telling his patient--whose complaint was merely
gluttony and want of exercise--that 'the earliest symptom of
hyper-nutrition is a deposition of adipose tissue,' and no doubt the fine
long words greatly consoled the poor man under his increasing load of
fat.

I wonder if there is such a thing in nature as a FAT MIND? I really think
I have met with one or two: minds which could not keep up with the slowest
trot in conversation; could not jump over a logical fence, to save their
lives; always got stuck fast in a narrow argument; and, in short, were fit
for nothing but to waddle helplessly through the world.

       *       *       *       *       *

Then, again, though the food be wholesome and in proper amount, we know
that we must not consume _too many kinds at once_. Take the thirsty a
quart of beer, or a quart of cider, or even a quart of cold tea, and he
will probably thank you (though not so heartily in the last case!). But
what think you his feelings would be if you offered him a tray containing
a little mug of beer, a little mug of cider, another of cold tea, one of
hot tea, one of coffee, one of cocoa, and corresponding vessels of milk,
water, brandy-and-water, and butter-milk? The sum total might be a quart,
but would it be the same thing to the haymaker?

       *       *       *       *       *

Having settled the proper kind, amount, and variety of our mental food, it
remains that we should be careful to allow _proper intervals_ between meal
and meal, and not swallow the food hastily without mastication, so that it
may be thoroughly digested; both which rules, for the body, are also
applicable at once to the mind.

First, as to the intervals: these are as really necessary as they are for
the body, with this difference only, that while the body requires three or
four hours' rest before it is ready for another meal, the mind will in
many cases do with three or four minutes. I believe that the interval
required is much shorter than is generally supposed, and from personal
experience, I would recommend anyone, who has to devote several hours
together to one subject of thought, to try the effect of such a break, say
once an hour, leaving off for five minutes only each time, but taking care
to throw the mind absolutely 'out of gear' for those five minutes, and
to turn it entirely to other subjects. It is astonishing what an amount of
impetus and elasticity the mind recovers during those short periods of
rest.

And then, as to the mastication of the food, the mental process answering
to this is simply _thinking over_ what we read. This is a very much
greater exertion of mind than the mere passive taking in the contents of
our Author. So much greater an exertion is it, that, as Coleridge says,
the mind often 'angrily refuses' to put itself to such trouble--so much
greater, that we are far too apt to neglect it altogether, and go on
pouring in fresh food on the top of the undigested masses already lying
there, till the unfortunate mind is fairly swamped under the flood. But
the greater the exertion the more valuable, we may be sure, is the effect.
One hour of steady thinking over a subject (a solitary walk is as good an
opportunity for the process as any other) is worth two or three of reading
only. And just consider another effect of this thorough digestion of the
books we read; I mean the arranging and 'ticketing,' so to speak, of the
subjects in our minds, so that we can readily refer to them when we want
them. Sam Slick tells us that he has learnt several languages in his life,
but somehow 'couldn't keep the parcels sorted' in his mind. And many a
mind that hurries through book after book, without waiting to digest or
arrange anything, gets into that sort of condition, and the unfortunate
owner finds himself far from fit really to support the character all his
friends give him.

'A thoroughly well-read man. Just you try him in any subject, now. You
can't puzzle him.'

You turn to the thoroughly well-read man. You ask him a question, say, in
English history (he is understood to have just finished reading Macaulay).
He smiles good-naturedly, tries to look as if he knew all about it, and
proceeds to dive into his mind for the answer. Up comes a handful of very
promising facts, but on examination they turn out to belong to the wrong
century, and are pitched in again. A second haul brings up a fact much
more like the real thing, but, unfortunately, along with it comes a tangle
of other things--a fact in political economy, a rule in arithmetic, the
ages of his brother's children, and a stanza of Gray's 'Elegy,' and among
all these, the fact he wants has got hopelessly twisted up and entangled.
Meanwhile, every one is waiting for his reply, and, as the silence is
getting more and more awkward, our well-read friend has to stammer out
some half-answer at last, not nearly so clear or so satisfactory as an
ordinary schoolboy would have given. And all this for want of making up
his knowledge into proper bundles and ticketing them.

Do you know the unfortunate victim of ill-judged mental feeding when you
see him? Can you doubt him? Look at him drearily wandering round a
reading-room, tasting dish after dish--we beg his pardon, book after
book--keeping to none. First a mouthful of novel; but no, faugh! he has
had nothing but that to eat for the last week, and is quite tired of the
taste. Then a slice of science; but you know at once what the result of
that will be--ah, of course, much too tough for _his_ teeth. And so on
through the whole weary round, which he tried (and failed in) yesterday,
and will probably try and fail in to-morrow.

Mr. Oliver Wendell Holmes, in his very amusing book, 'The Professor at the
Breakfast Table,' gives the following rule for knowing whether a human
being is young or old: 'The crucial experiment is this--offer a bulky bun
to the suspected individual just ten minutes before dinner. If this is
easily accepted and devoured, the fact of youth is established.' He tells
us that a human being, 'if young, will eat anything at any hour of the day
or night.'

To ascertain the healthiness of the _mental_ appetite of a human animal,
place in its hands a short, well-written, but not exciting treatise on
some popular subject--a mental _bun_, in fact. If it is read with eager
interest and perfect attention, _and if the reader can answer questions on
the subject afterwards_, the mind is in first-rate working order. If it be
politely laid down again, or perhaps lounged over for a few minutes, and
then, 'I can't read this stupid book! Would you hand me the second volume
of "The Mysterious Murder"?' you may be equally sure that there is
something wrong in the mental digestion.

If this paper has given you any useful hints on the important subject of
reading, and made you see that it is one's duty no less than one's
interest to 'read, mark, learn, and inwardly digest' the good books that
fall in your way, its purpose will be fulfilled.


BILLING AND SONS, LTD., PRINTERS, GUILDFORD





PHANTASMAGORIA AND OTHER POEMS




PHANTASMAGORIA



CANTO I--The Trystyng



One winter night, at half-past nine,
Cold, tired, and cross, and muddy,
I had come home, too late to dine,
And supper, with cigars and wine,
Was waiting in the study.

There was a strangeness in the room,
And Something white and wavy
Was standing near me in the gloom -
_I_ took it for the carpet-broom
Left by that careless slavey.

But presently the Thing began
To shiver and to sneeze:
On which I said "Come, come, my man!
That's a most inconsiderate plan.
Less noise there, if you please!"

"I've caught a cold," the Thing replies,
"Out there upon the landing."
I turned to look in some surprise,
And there, before my very eyes,
A little Ghost was standing!

He trembled when he caught my eye,
And got behind a chair.
"How came you here," I said, "and why?
I never saw a thing so shy.
Come out!  Don't shiver there!"

He said "I'd gladly tell you how,
And also tell you why;
But" (here he gave a little bow)
"You're in so bad a temper now,
You'd think it all a lie.

"And as to being in a fright,
Allow me to remark
That Ghosts have just as good a right
In every way, to fear the light,
As Men to fear the dark."

"No plea," said I, "can well excuse
Such cowardice in you:
For Ghosts can visit when they choose,
Whereas we Humans ca'n't refuse
To grant the interview."

He said "A flutter of alarm
Is not unnatural, is it?
I really feared you meant some harm:
But, now I see that you are calm,
Let me explain my visit.

"Houses are classed, I beg to state,
According to the number
Of Ghosts that they accommodate:
(The Tenant merely counts as WEIGHT,
With Coals and other lumber).

"This is a 'one-ghost' house, and you
When you arrived last summer,
May have remarked a Spectre who
Was doing all that Ghosts can do
To welcome the new-comer.

"In Villas this is always done -
However cheaply rented:
For, though of course there's less of fun
When there is only room for one,
Ghosts have to be contented.

"That Spectre left you on the Third -
Since then you've not been haunted:
For, as he never sent us word,
'Twas quite by accident we heard
That any one was wanted.

"A Spectre has first choice, by right,
In filling up a vacancy;
Then Phantom, Goblin, Elf, and Sprite -
If all these fail them, they invite
The nicest Ghoul that they can see.

"The Spectres said the place was low,
And that you kept bad wine:
So, as a Phantom had to go,
And I was first, of course, you know,
I couldn't well decline."

"No doubt," said I, "they settled who
Was fittest to be sent
Yet still to choose a brat like you,
To haunt a man of forty-two,
Was no great compliment!"

"I'm not so young, Sir," he replied,
"As you might think.  The fact is,
In caverns by the water-side,
And other places that I've tried,
I've had a lot of practice:

"But I have never taken yet
A strict domestic part,
And in my flurry I forget
The Five Good Rules of Etiquette
We have to know by heart."

My sympathies were warming fast
Towards the little fellow:
He was so utterly aghast
At having found a Man at last,
And looked so scared and yellow.

"At least," I said, "I'm glad to find
A Ghost is not a DUMB thing!
But pray sit down:  you'll feel inclined
(If, like myself, you have not dined)
To take a snack of something:

"Though, certainly, you don't appear
A thing to offer FOOD to!
And then I shall be glad to hear -
If you will say them loud and clear -
The Rules that you allude to."

"Thanks!  You shall hear them by and by.
This IS a piece of luck!"
"What may I offer you?" said I.
"Well, since you ARE so kind, I'll try
A little bit of duck.

"ONE slice!  And may I ask you for
Another drop of gravy?"
I sat and looked at him in awe,
For certainly I never saw
A thing so white and wavy.

And still he seemed to grow more white,
More vapoury, and wavier -
Seen in the dim and flickering light,
As he proceeded to recite
His "Maxims of Behaviour."



CANTO II--Hys Fyve Rules



"My First--but don't suppose," he said,
"I'm setting you a riddle -
Is--if your Victim be in bed,
Don't touch the curtains at his head,
But take them in the middle,

"And wave them slowly in and out,
While drawing them asunder;
And in a minute's time, no doubt,
He'll raise his head and look about
With eyes of wrath and wonder.

"And here you must on no pretence
Make the first observation.
Wait for the Victim to commence:
No Ghost of any common sense
Begins a conversation.

"If he should say 'HOW CAME YOU HERE?'
(The way that YOU began, Sir,)
In such a case your course is clear -
'ON THE BAT'S BACK, MY LITTLE DEAR!'
Is the appropriate answer.

"If after this he says no more,
You'd best perhaps curtail your
Exertions--go and shake the door,
And then, if he begins to snore,
You'll know the thing's a failure.

"By day, if he should be alone -
At home or on a walk -
You merely give a hollow groan,
To indicate the kind of tone
In which you mean to talk.

"But if you find him with his friends,
The thing is rather harder.
In such a case success depends
On picking up some candle-ends,
Or butter, in the larder.

"With this you make a kind of slide
(It answers best with suet),
On which you must contrive to glide,
And swing yourself from side to side -
One soon learns how to do it.

"The Second tells us what is right
In ceremonious calls:-
'FIRST BURN A BLUE OR CRIMSON LIGHT'
(A thing I quite forgot to-night),
'THEN SCRATCH THE DOOR OR WALLS.'"

I said "You'll visit HERE no more,
If you attempt the Guy.
I'll have no bonfires on MY floor -
And, as for scratching at the door,
I'd like to see you try!"

"The Third was written to protect
The interests of the Victim,
And tells us, as I recollect,
TO TREAT HIM WITH A GRAVE RESPECT,
AND NOT TO CONTRADICT HIM."

"That's plain," said I, "as Tare and Tret,
To any comprehension:
I only wish SOME Ghosts I've met
Would not so CONSTANTLY forget
The maxim that you mention!"

"Perhaps," he said, "YOU first transgressed
The laws of hospitality:
All Ghosts instinctively detest
The Man that fails to treat his guest
With proper cordiality.

"If you address a Ghost as 'Thing!'
Or strike him with a hatchet,
He is permitted by the King
To drop all FORMAL parleying -
And then you're SURE to catch it!

"The Fourth prohibits trespassing
Where other Ghosts are quartered:
And those convicted of the thing
(Unless when pardoned by the King)
Must instantly be slaughtered.

"That simply means 'be cut up small':
Ghosts soon unite anew.
The process scarcely hurts at all -
Not more than when YOU're what you call
'Cut up' by a Review.

"The Fifth is one you may prefer
That I should quote entire:-
THE KING MUST BE ADDRESSED AS 'SIR.'
THIS, FROM A SIMPLE COURTIER,
IS ALL THE LAWS REQUIRE:

"BUT, SHOULD YOU WISH TO DO THE THING
WITH OUT-AND-OUT POLITENESS,
ACCOST HIM AS 'MY GOBLIN KING!
AND ALWAYS USE, IN ANSWERING,
THE PHRASE 'YOUR ROYAL WHITENESS!'

"I'm getting rather hoarse, I fear,
After so much reciting :
So, if you don't object, my dear,
We'll try a glass of bitter beer -
I think it looks inviting."



CANTO III--Scarmoges



"And did you really walk," said I,
"On such a wretched night?
I always fancied Ghosts could fly -
If not exactly in the sky,
Yet at a fairish height."

"It's very well," said he, "for Kings
To soar above the earth:
But Phantoms often find that wings -
Like many other pleasant things -
Cost more than they are worth.

"Spectres of course are rich, and so
Can buy them from the Elves:
But WE prefer to keep below -
They're stupid company, you know,
For any but themselves:

"For, though they claim to be exempt
From pride, they treat a Phantom
As something quite beneath contempt -
Just as no Turkey ever dreamt
Of noticing a Bantam."

"They seem too proud," said I, "to go
To houses such as mine.
Pray, how did they contrive to know
So quickly that 'the place was low,'
And that I 'kept bad wine'?"

"Inspector Kobold came to you--"
The little Ghost began.
Here I broke in--"Inspector who?
Inspecting Ghosts is something new!
Explain yourself, my man!"

"His name is Kobold," said my guest:
"One of the Spectre order:
You'll very often see him dressed
In a yellow gown, a crimson vest,
And a night-cap with a border.

"He tried the Brocken business first,
But caught a sort of chill ;
So came to England to be nursed,
And here it took the form of THIRST,
Which he complains of still.

"Port-wine, he says, when rich and sound,
Warms his old bones like nectar:
And as the inns, where it is found,
Are his especial hunting-ground,
We call him the INN-SPECTRE."

I bore it--bore it like a man -
This agonizing witticism!
And nothing could be sweeter than
My temper, till the Ghost began
Some most provoking criticism.

"Cooks need not be indulged in waste;
Yet still you'd better teach them
Dishes should have SOME SORT of taste.
Pray, why are all the cruets placed
Where nobody can reach them?

"That man of yours will never earn
His living as a waiter!
Is that queer THING supposed to burn?
(It's far too dismal a concern
To call a Moderator).

"The duck was tender, but the peas
Were very much too old:
And just remember, if you please,
The NEXT time you have toasted cheese,
Don't let them send it cold.

"You'd find the bread improved, I think,
By getting better flour:
And have you anything to drink
That looks a LITTLE less like ink,
And isn't QUITE so sour?"

Then, peering round with curious eyes,
He muttered "Goodness gracious!"
And so went on to criticise -
"Your room's an inconvenient size:
It's neither snug nor spacious.

"That narrow window, I expect,
Serves but to let the dusk in--"
"But please," said I, "to recollect
'Twas fashioned by an architect
Who pinned his faith on Ruskin!"

"I don't care who he was, Sir, or
On whom he pinned his faith!
Constructed by whatever law,
So poor a job I never saw,
As I'm a living Wraith!

"What a re-markable cigar!
How much are they a dozen?"
I growled "No matter what they are!
You're getting as familiar
As if you were my cousin!

"Now that's a thing _I_ WILL NOT STAND,
And so I tell you flat."
"Aha," said he, "we're getting grand!"
(Taking a bottle in his hand)
"I'll soon arrange for THAT!"

And here he took a careful aim,
And gaily cried "Here goes!"
I tried to dodge it as it came,
But somehow caught it, all the same,
Exactly on my nose.

And I remember nothing more
That I can clearly fix,
Till I was sitting on the floor,
Repeating "Two and five are four,
But FIVE AND TWO are six."

What really passed I never learned,
Nor guessed:  I only know
That, when at last my sense returned,
The lamp, neglected, dimly burned -
The fire was getting low -

Through driving mists I seemed to see
A Thing that smirked and smiled:
And found that he was giving me
A lesson in Biography,
As if I were a child.



CANTO IV--Hys Nouryture



"Oh, when I was a little Ghost,
A merry time had we!
Each seated on his favourite post,
We chumped and chawed the buttered toast
They gave us for our tea."

"That story is in print!" I cried.
"Don't say it's not, because
It's known as well as Bradshaw's Guide!"
(The Ghost uneasily replied
He hardly thought it was).

"It's not in Nursery Rhymes?  And yet
I almost think it is -
'Three little Ghosteses' were set
'On posteses,' you know, and ate
Their 'buttered toasteses.'

"I have the book; so if you doubt it--"
I turned to search the shelf.
"Don't stir!" he cried.  "We'll do without it:
I now remember all about it;
I wrote the thing myself.

"It came out in a 'Monthly,' or
At least my agent said it did:
Some literary swell, who saw
It, thought it seemed adapted for
The Magazine he edited.

"My father was a Brownie, Sir;
My mother was a Fairy.
The notion had occurred to her,
The children would be happier,
If they were taught to vary.

"The notion soon became a craze;
And, when it once began, she
Brought us all out in different ways -
One was a Pixy, two were Fays,
Another was a Banshee;

"The Fetch and Kelpie went to school
And gave a lot of trouble;
Next came a Poltergeist and Ghoul,
And then two Trolls (which broke the rule),
A Goblin, and a Double -

"(If that's a snuff-box on the shelf,"
He added with a yawn,
"I'll take a pinch)--next came an Elf,
And then a Phantom (that's myself),
And last, a Leprechaun.

"One day, some Spectres chanced to call,
Dressed in the usual white:
I stood and watched them in the hall,
And couldn't make them out at all,
They seemed so strange a sight.

"I wondered what on earth they were,
That looked all head and sack;
But Mother told me not to stare,
And then she twitched me by the hair,
And punched me in the back.

"Since then I've often wished that I
Had been a Spectre born.
But what's the use?"  (He heaved a sigh.)
"THEY are the ghost-nobility,
And look on US with scorn.

"My phantom-life was soon begun:
When I was barely six,
I went out with an older one -
And just at first I thought it fun,
And learned a lot of tricks.

"I've haunted dungeons, castles, towers -
Wherever I was sent:
I've often sat and howled for hours,
Drenched to the skin with driving showers,
Upon a battlement.

"It's quite old-fashioned now to groan
When you begin to speak:
This is the newest thing in tone--"
And here (it chilled me to the bone)
He gave an AWFUL squeak.

"Perhaps," he added, "to YOUR ear
That sounds an easy thing?
Try it yourself, my little dear!
It took ME something like a year,
With constant practising.

"And when you've learned to squeak, my man,
And caught the double sob,
You're pretty much where you began:
Just try and gibber if you can!
That's something LIKE a job!

"I'VE tried it, and can only say
I'm sure you couldn't do it, e-
ven if you practised night and day,
Unless you have a turn that way,
And natural ingenuity.

"Shakspeare I think it is who treats
Of Ghosts, in days of old,
Who 'gibbered in the Roman streets,'
Dressed, if you recollect, in sheets -
They must have found it cold.

"I've often spent ten pounds on stuff,
In dressing as a Double;
But, though it answers as a puff,
It never has effect enough
To make it worth the trouble.

"Long bills soon quenched the little thirst
I had for being funny.
The setting-up is always worst:
Such heaps of things you want at first,
One must be made of money!

"For instance, take a Haunted Tower,
With skull, cross-bones, and sheet;
Blue lights to burn (say) two an hour,
Condensing lens of extra power,
And set of chains complete:

"What with the things you have to hire -
The fitting on the robe -
And testing all the coloured fire -
The outfit of itself would tire
The patience of a Job!

"And then they're so fastidious,
The Haunted-House Committee:
I've often known them make a fuss
Because a Ghost was French, or Russ,
Or even from the City!

"Some dialects are objected to -
For one, the IRISH brogue is:
And then, for all you have to do,
One pound a week they offer you,
And find yourself in Bogies!



CANTO V--Byckerment



"Don't they consult the 'Victims,' though?"
I said.  "They should, by rights,
Give them a chance--because, you know,
The tastes of people differ so,
Especially in Sprites."

The Phantom shook his head and smiled.
"Consult them?  Not a bit!
'Twould be a job to drive one wild,
To satisfy one single child -
There'd be no end to it!"

"Of course you can't leave CHILDREN free,"
Said I, "to pick and choose:
But, in the case of men like me,
I think 'Mine Host' might fairly be
Allowed to state his views."

He said "It really wouldn't pay -
Folk are so full of fancies.
We visit for a single day,
And whether then we go, or stay,
Depends on circumstances.

"And, though we don't consult 'Mine Host'
Before the thing's arranged,
Still, if he often quits his post,
Or is not a well-mannered Ghost,
Then you can have him changed.

"But if the host's a man like you -
I mean a man of sense;
And if the house is not too new--"
"Why, what has THAT," said I, "to do
With Ghost's convenience?"

"A new house does not suit, you know -
It's such a job to trim it:
But, after twenty years or so,
The wainscotings begin to go,
So twenty is the limit."

"To trim" was not a phrase I could
Remember having heard:
"Perhaps," I said, "you'll be so good
As tell me what is understood
Exactly by that word?"

"It means the loosening all the doors,"
The Ghost replied, and laughed:
"It means the drilling holes by scores
In all the skirting-boards and floors,
To make a thorough draught.

"You'll sometimes find that one or two
Are all you really need
To let the wind come whistling through -
But HERE there'll be a lot to do!"
I faintly gasped "Indeed!

"If I'd been rather later, I'll
Be bound," I added, trying
(Most unsuccessfully) to smile,
"You'd have been busy all this while,
Trimming and beautifying?"

"Why, no," said he; "perhaps I should
Have stayed another minute -
But still no Ghost, that's any good,
Without an introduction would
Have ventured to begin it.

"The proper thing, as you were late,
Was certainly to go:
But, with the roads in such a state,
I got the Knight-Mayor's leave to wait
For half an hour or so."

"Who's the Knight-Mayor?" I cried.  Instead
Of answering my question,
"Well, if you don't know THAT," he said,
"Either you never go to bed,
Or you've a grand digestion!

"He goes about and sits on folk
That eat too much at night:
His duties are to pinch, and poke,
And squeeze them till they nearly choke."
(I said "It serves them right!")

"And folk who sup on things like these--"
He muttered, "eggs and bacon -
Lobster--and duck--and toasted cheese -
If they don't get an awful squeeze,
I'm very much mistaken!

"He is immensely fat, and so
Well suits the occupation:
In point of fact, if you must know,
We used to call him years ago,
THE MAYOR AND CORPORATION!

"The day he was elected Mayor
I KNOW that every Sprite meant
To vote for ME, but did not dare -
He was so frantic with despair
And furious with excitement.

"When it was over, for a whim,
He ran to tell the King;
And being the reverse of slim,
A two-mile trot was not for him
A very easy thing.

"So, to reward him for his run
(As it was baking hot,
And he was over twenty stone),
The King proceeded, half in fun,
To knight him on the spot."

"'Twas a great liberty to take!"
(I fired up like a rocket).
"He did it just for punning's sake:
'The man,' says Johnson, 'that would make
A pun, would pick a pocket!'"

"A man," said he, "is not a King."
I argued for a while,
And did my best to prove the thing -
The Phantom merely listening
With a contemptuous smile.

At last, when, breath and patience spent,
I had recourse to smoking -
"Your AIM," he said, "is excellent:
But--when you call it ARGUMENT -
Of course you're only joking?"

Stung by his cold and snaky eye,
I roused myself at length
To say "At least I do defy
The veriest sceptic to deny
That union is strength!"

"That's true enough," said he, "yet stay--"
I listened in all meekness -
"UNION is strength, I'm bound to say;
In fact, the thing's as clear as day;
But ONIONS are a weakness."



CANTO VI--Dyscomfyture



As one who strives a hill to climb,
Who never climbed before:
Who finds it, in a little time,
Grow every moment less sublime,
And votes the thing a bore:

Yet, having once begun to try,
Dares not desert his quest,
But, climbing, ever keeps his eye
On one small hut against the sky
Wherein he hopes to rest:

Who climbs till nerve and force are spent,
With many a puff and pant:
Who still, as rises the ascent,
In language grows more violent,
Although in breath more scant:

Who, climbing, gains at length the place
That crowns the upward track.
And, entering with unsteady pace,
Receives a buffet in the face
That lands him on his back:

And feels himself, like one in sleep,
Glide swiftly down again,
A helpless weight, from steep to steep,
Till, with a headlong giddy sweep,
He drops upon the plain -

So I, that had resolved to bring
Conviction to a ghost,
And found it quite a different thing
From any human arguing,
Yet dared not quit my post

But, keeping still the end in view
To which I hoped to come,
I strove to prove the matter true
By putting everything I knew
Into an axiom:

Commencing every single phrase
With 'therefore' or 'because,'
I blindly reeled, a hundred ways,
About the syllogistic maze,
Unconscious where I was.

Quoth he "That's regular clap-trap:
Don't bluster any more.
Now DO be cool and take a nap!
Such a ridiculous old chap
Was never seen before!

"You're like a man I used to meet,
Who got one day so furious
In arguing, the simple heat
Scorched both his slippers off his feet!"
I said "THAT'S VERY CURIOUS!"

"Well, it IS curious, I agree,
And sounds perhaps like fibs:
But still it's true as true can be -
As sure as your name's Tibbs," said he.
I said "My name's NOT Tibbs."

"NOT Tibbs!" he cried--his tone became
A shade or two less hearty -
"Why, no," said I.  "My proper name
Is Tibbets--"  "Tibbets?"  "Aye, the same."
"Why, then YOU'RE NOT THE PARTY!"

With that he struck the board a blow
That shivered half the glasses.
"Why couldn't you have told me so
Three quarters of an hour ago,
You prince of all the asses?

"To walk four miles through mud and rain,
To spend the night in smoking,
And then to find that it's in vain -
And I've to do it all again -
It's really TOO provoking!

"Don't talk!" he cried, as I began
To mutter some excuse.
"Who can have patience with a man
That's got no more discretion than
An idiotic goose?

"To keep me waiting here, instead
Of telling me at once
That this was not the house!" he said.
"There, that'll do--be off to bed!
Don't gape like that, you dunce!"

"It's very fine to throw the blame
On ME in such a fashion!
Why didn't you enquire my name
The very minute that you came?"
I answered in a passion.

"Of course it worries you a bit
To come so far on foot -
But how was _I_ to blame for it?"
"Well, well!" said he.  "I must admit
That isn't badly put.

"And certainly you've given me
The best of wine and victual -
Excuse my violence," said he,
"But accidents like this, you see,
They put one out a little.

"'Twas MY fault after all, I find -
Shake hands, old Turnip-top!"
The name was hardly to my mind,
But, as no doubt he meant it kind,
I let the matter drop.

"Good-night, old Turnip-top, good-night!
When I am gone, perhaps
They'll send you some inferior Sprite,
Who'll keep you in a constant fright
And spoil your soundest naps.

"Tell him you'll stand no sort of trick;
Then, if he leers and chuckles,
You just be handy with a stick
(Mind that it's pretty hard and thick)
And rap him on the knuckles!

"Then carelessly remark 'Old coon!
Perhaps you're not aware
That, if you don't behave, you'll soon
Be chuckling to another tune -
And so you'd best take care!'

"That's the right way to cure a Sprite
Of such like goings-on -
But gracious me!  It's getting light!
Good-night, old Turnip-top, good-night!"
A nod, and he was gone.



CANTO VII--Sad Souvenaunce



"What's this?" I pondered.  "Have I slept?
Or can I have been drinking?"
But soon a gentler feeling crept
Upon me, and I sat and wept
An hour or so, like winking.

"No need for Bones to hurry so!"
I sobbed.  "In fact, I doubt
If it was worth his while to go -
And who is Tibbs, I'd like to know,
To make such work about?

"If Tibbs is anything like me,
It's POSSIBLE," I said,
"He won't be over-pleased to be
Dropped in upon at half-past three,
After he's snug in bed.

"And if Bones plagues him anyhow -
Squeaking and all the rest of it,
As he was doing here just now -
_I_ prophesy there'll be a row,
And Tibbs will have the best of it!"

Then, as my tears could never bring
The friendly Phantom back,
It seemed to me the proper thing
To mix another glass, and sing
The following Coronach.

'AND ART THOU GONE, BELOVED GHOST?
BEST OF FAMILIARS!
NAY THEN, FAREWELL, MY DUCKLING ROAST,
FAREWELL, FAREWELL, MY TEA AND TOAST,
MY MEERSCHAUM AND CIGARS!

THE HUES OF LIFE ARE DULL AND GRAY,
THE SWEETS OF LIFE INSIPID,
WHEN thou, MY CHARMER, ART AWAY -
OLD BRICK, OR RATHER, LET ME SAY,
OLD PARALLELEPIPED!'

Instead of singing Verse the Third,
I ceased--abruptly, rather:
But, after such a splendid word
I felt that it would be absurd
To try it any farther.

So with a yawn I went my way
To seek the welcome downy,
And slept, and dreamed till break of day
Of Poltergeist and Fetch and Fay
And Leprechaun and Brownie!

For year I've not been visited
By any kind of Sprite;
Yet still they echo in my head,
Those parting words, so kindly said,
"Old Turnip-top, good-night!"



ECHOES



Lady Clara Vere de Vere
Was eight years old, she said:
Every ringlet, lightly shaken, ran itself in golden thread.

She took her little porringer:
Of me she shall not win renown:
For the baseness of its nature shall have strength to drag her
down.

"Sisters and brothers, little Maid?
There stands the Inspector at thy door:
Like a dog, he hunts for boys who know not two and two are four."

"Kind words are more than coronets,"
She said, and wondering looked at me:
"It is the dead unhappy night, and I must hurry home to tea."



A SEA DIRGE



There are certain things--as, a spider, a ghost,
The income-tax, gout, an umbrella for three -
That I hate, but the thing that I hate the most
Is a thing they call the Sea.

Pour some salt water over the floor -
Ugly I'm sure you'll allow it to be:
Suppose it extended a mile or more,
THAT'S very like the Sea.

Beat a dog till it howls outright -
Cruel, but all very well for a spree:
Suppose that he did so day and night,
THAT would be like the Sea.

I had a vision of nursery-maids;
Tens of thousands passed by me -
All leading children with wooden spades,
And this was by the Sea.

Who invented those spades of wood?
Who was it cut them out of the tree?
None, I think, but an idiot could -
Or one that loved the Sea.

It is pleasant and dreamy, no doubt, to float
With 'thoughts as boundless, and souls as free':
But, suppose you are very unwell in the boat,
How do you like the Sea?

There is an insect that people avoid
(Whence is derived the verb 'to flee').
Where have you been by it most annoyed?
In lodgings by the Sea.

If you like your coffee with sand for dregs,
A decided hint of salt in your tea,
And a fishy taste in the very eggs -
By all means choose the Sea.

And if, with these dainties to drink and eat,
You prefer not a vestige of grass or tree,
And a chronic state of wet in your feet,
Then--I recommend the Sea.

For _I_ have friends who dwell by the coast -
Pleasant friends they are to me!
It is when I am with them I wonder most
That anyone likes the Sea.

They take me a walk:  though tired and stiff,
To climb the heights I madly agree;
And, after a tumble or so from the cliff,
They kindly suggest the Sea.

I try the rocks, and I think it cool
That they laugh with such an excess of glee,
As I heavily slip into every pool
That skirts the cold cold Sea.



Ye Carpette Knyghte



I have a horse--a ryghte good horse -
Ne doe Y envye those
Who scoure ye playne yn headye course
Tyll soddayne on theyre nose
They lyghte wyth unexpected force
Yt ys--a horse of clothes.

I have a saddel--"Say'st thou soe?
Wyth styrruppes, Knyghte, to boote?"
I sayde not that--I answere "Noe" -
Yt lacketh such, I woote:
Yt ys a mutton-saddel, loe!
Parte of ye fleecye brute.

I have a bytte--a ryghte good bytte -
As shall bee seene yn tyme.
Ye jawe of horse yt wyll not fytte;
Yts use ys more sublyme.
Fayre Syr, how deemest thou of yt?
Yt ys--thys bytte of rhyme.



HIAWATHA'S PHOTOGRAPHING



[In an age of imitation, I can claim no special merit for this
slight attempt at doing what is known to be so easy.  Any fairly
practised writer, with the slightest ear for rhythm, could compose,
for hours together, in the easy running metre of 'The Song of
Hiawatha.'  Having, then, distinctly stated that I challenge no
attention in the following little poem to its merely verbal jingle,
I must beg the candid reader to confine his criticism to its
treatment of the subject.]


From his shoulder Hiawatha
Took the camera of rosewood,
Made of sliding, folding rosewood;
Neatly put it all together.
In its case it lay compactly,
Folded into nearly nothing;

But he opened out the hinges,
Pushed and pulled the joints and hinges,
Till it looked all squares and oblongs,
Like a complicated figure
In the Second Book of Euclid.

This he perched upon a tripod -
Crouched beneath its dusky cover -
Stretched his hand, enforcing silence -
Said, "Be motionless, I beg you!"
Mystic, awful was the process.

All the family in order
Sat before him for their pictures:
Each in turn, as he was taken,
Volunteered his own suggestions,
His ingenious suggestions.

First the Governor, the Father:
He suggested velvet curtains
Looped about a massy pillar;
And the corner of a table,
Of a rosewood dining-table.
He would hold a scroll of something,
Hold it firmly in his left-hand;
He would keep his right-hand buried
(Like Napoleon) in his waistcoat;
He would contemplate the distance
With a look of pensive meaning,
As of ducks that die ill tempests.

Grand, heroic was the notion:
Yet the picture failed entirely:
Failed, because he moved a little,
Moved, because he couldn't help it.

Next, his better half took courage;
SHE would have her picture taken.
She came dressed beyond description,
Dressed in jewels and in satin
Far too gorgeous for an empress.
Gracefully she sat down sideways,
With a simper scarcely human,
Holding in her hand a bouquet
Rather larger than a cabbage.
All the while that she was sitting,
Still the lady chattered, chattered,
Like a monkey in the forest.
"Am I sitting still?" she asked him.
"Is my face enough in profile?
Shall I hold the bouquet higher?
Will it came into the picture?"
And the picture failed completely.

Next the Son, the Stunning-Cantab:
He suggested curves of beauty,
Curves pervading all his figure,
Which the eye might follow onward,
Till they centered in the breast-pin,
Centered in the golden breast-pin.
He had learnt it all from Ruskin
(Author of 'The Stones of Venice,'
'Seven Lamps of Architecture,'
'Modern Painters,' and some others);
And perhaps he had not fully
Understood his author's meaning;
But, whatever was the reason,
All was fruitless, as the picture
Ended in an utter failure.

Next to him the eldest daughter:
She suggested very little,
Only asked if he would take her
With her look of 'passive beauty.'

Her idea of passive beauty
Was a squinting of the left-eye,
Was a drooping of the right-eye,
Was a smile that went up sideways
To the corner of the nostrils.

Hiawatha, when she asked him,
Took no notice of the question,
Looked as if he hadn't heard it;
But, when pointedly appealed to,
Smiled in his peculiar manner,
Coughed and said it 'didn't matter,'
Bit his lip and changed the subject.

Nor in this was he mistaken,
As the picture failed completely.

So in turn the other sisters.

Last, the youngest son was taken:
Very rough and thick his hair was,
Very round and red his face was,
Very dusty was his jacket,
Very fidgety his manner.
And his overbearing sisters
Called him names he disapproved of:
Called him Johnny, 'Daddy's Darling,'
Called him Jacky, 'Scrubby School-boy.'
And, so awful was the picture,
In comparison the others
Seemed, to one's bewildered fancy,
To have partially succeeded.

Finally my Hiawatha
Tumbled all the tribe together,
('Grouped' is not the right expression),
And, as happy chance would have it
Did at last obtain a picture
Where the faces all succeeded:
Each came out a perfect likeness.

Then they joined and all abused it,
Unrestrainedly abused it,
As the worst and ugliest picture
They could possibly have dreamed of.
'Giving one such strange expressions -
Sullen, stupid, pert expressions.
Really any one would take us
(Any one that did not know us)
For the most unpleasant people!'
(Hiawatha seemed to think so,
Seemed to think it not unlikely).
All together rang their voices,
Angry, loud, discordant voices,
As of dogs that howl in concert,
As of cats that wail in chorus.

But my Hiawatha's patience,
His politeness and his patience,
Unaccountably had vanished,
And he left that happy party.
Neither did he leave them slowly,
With the calm deliberation,
The intense deliberation
Of a photographic artist:
But he left them in a hurry,
Left them in a mighty hurry,
Stating that he would not stand it,
Stating in emphatic language
What he'd be before he'd stand it.
Hurriedly he packed his boxes:
Hurriedly the porter trundled
On a barrow all his boxes:
Hurriedly he took his ticket:
Hurriedly the train received him:
Thus departed Hiawatha.



MELANCHOLETTA



With saddest music all day long
She soothed her secret sorrow:
At night she sighed "I fear 'twas wrong
Such cheerful words to borrow.
Dearest, a sweeter, sadder song
I'll sing to thee to-morrow."

I thanked her, but I could not say
That I was glad to hear it:
I left the house at break of day,
And did not venture near it
Till time, I hoped, had worn away
Her grief, for nought could cheer it!

My dismal sister!  Couldst thou know
The wretched home thou keepest!
Thy brother, drowned in daily woe,
Is thankful when thou sleepest;
For if I laugh, however low,
When thou'rt awake, thou weepest!

I took my sister t'other day
(Excuse the slang expression)
To Sadler's Wells to see the play
In hopes the new impression
Might in her thoughts, from grave to gay
Effect some slight digression.

I asked three gay young dogs from town
To join us in our folly,
Whose mirth, I thought, might serve to drown
My sister's melancholy:
The lively Jones, the sportive Brown,
And Robinson the jolly.

The maid announced the meal in tones
That I myself had taught her,
Meant to allay my sister's moans
Like oil on troubled water:
I rushed to Jones, the lively Jones,
And begged him to escort her.

Vainly he strove, with ready wit,
To joke about the weather -
To ventilate the last 'ON DIT' -
To quote the price of leather -
She groaned "Here I and Sorrow sit:
Let us lament together!"

I urged "You're wasting time, you know:
Delay will spoil the venison."
"My heart is wasted with my woe!
There is no rest--in Venice, on
The Bridge of Sighs!" she quoted low
From Byron and from Tennyson.

I need not tell of soup and fish
In solemn silence swallowed,
The sobs that ushered in each dish,
And its departure followed,
Nor yet my suicidal wish
To BE the cheese I hollowed.

Some desperate attempts were made
To start a conversation;
"Madam," the sportive Brown essayed,
"Which kind of recreation,
Hunting or fishing, have you made
Your special occupation?"

Her lips curved downwards instantly,
As if of india-rubber.
"Hounds IN FULL CRY I like," said she:
(Oh how I longed to snub her!)
"Of fish, a whale's the one for me,
IT IS SO FULL OF BLUBBER!"

The night's performance was "King John."
"It's dull," she wept, "and so-so!"
Awhile I let her tears flow on,
She said they soothed her woe so!
At length the curtain rose upon
'Bombastes Furioso.'

In vain we roared; in vain we tried
To rouse her into laughter:
Her pensive glances wandered wide
From orchestra to rafter -
"TIER UPON TIER!" she said, and sighed;
And silence followed after.



A VALENTINE



[Sent to a friend who had complained that I was glad enough to see
him when he came, but didn't seem to miss him if he stayed away.]


And cannot pleasures, while they last,
Be actual unless, when past,
They leave us shuddering and aghast,
With anguish smarting?
And cannot friends be firm and fast,
And yet bear parting?

And must I then, at Friendship's call,
Calmly resign the little all
(Trifling, I grant, it is and small)
I have of gladness,
And lend my being to the thrall
Of gloom and sadness?

And think you that I should be dumb,
And full dolorum omnium,
Excepting when YOU choose to come
And share my dinner?
At other times be sour and glum
And daily thinner?

Must he then only live to weep,
Who'd prove his friendship true and deep
By day a lonely shadow creep,
At night-time languish,
Oft raising in his broken sleep
The moan of anguish?

The lover, if for certain days
His fair one be denied his gaze,
Sinks not in grief and wild amaze,
But, wiser wooer,
He spends the time in writing lays,
And posts them to her.

And if the verse flow free and fast,
Till even the poet is aghast,
A touching Valentine at last
The post shall carry,
When thirteen days are gone and past
Of February.

Farewell, dear friend, and when we meet,
In desert waste or crowded street,
Perhaps before this week shall fleet,
Perhaps to-morrow.
I trust to find YOUR heart the seat
Of wasting sorrow.



THE THREE VOICES



The First Voice


He trilled a carol fresh and free,
He laughed aloud for very glee:
There came a breeze from off the sea:

It passed athwart the glooming flat -
It fanned his forehead as he sat -
It lightly bore away his hat,

All to the feet of one who stood
Like maid enchanted in a wood,
Frowning as darkly as she could.

With huge umbrella, lank and brown,
Unerringly she pinned it down,
Right through the centre of the crown.

Then, with an aspect cold and grim,
Regardless of its battered rim,
She took it up and gave it him.

A while like one in dreams he stood,
Then faltered forth his gratitude
In words just short of being rude:

For it had lost its shape and shine,
And it had cost him four-and-nine,
And he was going out to dine.

"To dine!" she sneered in acid tone.
"To bend thy being to a bone
Clothed in a radiance not its own!"

The tear-drop trickled to his chin:
There was a meaning in her grin
That made him feel on fire within.

"Term it not 'radiance,'" said he:
"'Tis solid nutriment to me.
Dinner is Dinner:  Tea is Tea."

And she "Yea so?  Yet wherefore cease?
Let thy scant knowledge find increase.
Say 'Men are Men, and Geese are Geese.'"

He moaned:  he knew not what to say.
The thought "That I could get away!"
Strove with the thought "But I must stay.

"To dine!" she shrieked in dragon-wrath.
"To swallow wines all foam and froth!
To simper at a table-cloth!

"Say, can thy noble spirit stoop
To join the gormandising troup
Who find a solace in the soup?

"Canst thou desire or pie or puff?
Thy well-bred manners were enough,
Without such gross material stuff."

"Yet well-bred men," he faintly said,
"Are not willing to be fed:
Nor are they well without the bread."

Her visage scorched him ere she spoke:
"There are," she said, "a kind of folk
Who have no horror of a joke.

"Such wretches live:  they take their share
Of common earth and common air:
We come across them here and there:

"We grant them--there is no escape -
A sort of semi-human shape
Suggestive of the man-like Ape."

"In all such theories," said he,
"One fixed exception there must be.
That is, the Present Company."

Baffled, she gave a wolfish bark:
He, aiming blindly in the dark,
With random shaft had pierced the mark.

She felt that her defeat was plain,
Yet madly strove with might and main
To get the upper hand again.

Fixing her eyes upon the beach,
As though unconscious of his speech,
She said "Each gives to more than each."

He could not answer yea or nay:
He faltered "Gifts may pass away."
Yet knew not what he meant to say.

"If that be so," she straight replied,
"Each heart with each doth coincide.
What boots it?  For the world is wide."

"The world is but a Thought," said he:
"The vast unfathomable sea
Is but a Notion--unto me."

And darkly fell her answer dread
Upon his unresisting head,
Like half a hundredweight of lead.

"The Good and Great must ever shun
That reckless and abandoned one
Who stoops to perpetrate a pun.

"The man that smokes--that reads the Times -
That goes to Christmas Pantomimes -
Is capable of ANY crimes!"

He felt it was his turn to speak,
And, with a shamed and crimson cheek,
Moaned "This is harder than Bezique!"

But when she asked him "Wherefore so?"
He felt his very whiskers glow,
And frankly owned "I do not know."

While, like broad waves of golden grain,
Or sunlit hues on cloistered pane,
His colour came and went again.

Pitying his obvious distress,
Yet with a tinge of bitterness,
She said "The More exceeds the Less."

"A truth of such undoubted weight,"
He urged, "and so extreme in date,
It were superfluous to state."

Roused into sudden passion, she
In tone of cold malignity:
"To others, yea:  but not to thee."

But when she saw him quail and quake,
And when he urged "For pity's sake!"
Once more in gentle tones she spake.

"Thought in the mind doth still abide
That is by Intellect supplied,
And within that Idea doth hide:

"And he, that yearns the truth to know,
Still further inwardly may go,
And find Idea from Notion flow:

"And thus the chain, that sages sought,
Is to a glorious circle wrought,
For Notion hath its source in Thought."

So passed they on with even pace:
Yet gradually one might trace
A shadow growing on his face.


The Second Voice


They walked beside the wave-worn beach;
Her tongue was very apt to teach,
And now and then he did beseech

She would abate her dulcet tone,
Because the talk was all her own,
And he was dull as any drone.

She urged "No cheese is made of chalk":
And ceaseless flowed her dreary talk,
Tuned to the footfall of a walk.

Her voice was very full and rich,
And, when at length she asked him "Which?"
It mounted to its highest pitch.

He a bewildered answer gave,
Drowned in the sullen moaning wave,
Lost in the echoes of the cave.

He answered her he knew not what:
Like shaft from bow at random shot,
He spoke, but she regarded not.

She waited not for his reply,
But with a downward leaden eye
Went on as if he were not by

Sound argument and grave defence,
Strange questions raised on "Why?" and "Whence?"
And wildly tangled evidence.

When he, with racked and whirling brain,
Feebly implored her to explain,
She simply said it all again.

Wrenched with an agony intense,
He spake, neglecting Sound and Sense,
And careless of all consequence:

"Mind--I believe--is Essence--Ent -
Abstract--that is--an Accident -
Which we--that is to say--I meant--"

When, with quick breath and cheeks all flushed,
At length his speech was somewhat hushed,
She looked at him, and he was crushed.

It needed not her calm reply:
She fixed him with a stony eye,
And he could neither fight nor fly.

While she dissected, word by word,
His speech, half guessed at and half heard,
As might a cat a little bird.

Then, having wholly overthrown
His views, and stripped them to the bone,
Proceeded to unfold her own.

"Shall Man be Man?  And shall he miss
Of other thoughts no thought but this,
Harmonious dews of sober bliss?

"What boots it?  Shall his fevered eye
Through towering nothingness descry
The grisly phantom hurry by?

"And hear dumb shrieks that fill the air;
See mouths that gape, and eyes that stare
And redden in the dusky glare?

"The meadows breathing amber light,
The darkness toppling from the height,
The feathery train of granite Night?

"Shall he, grown gray among his peers,
Through the thick curtain of his tears
Catch glimpses of his earlier years,

"And hear the sounds he knew of yore,
Old shufflings on the sanded floor,
Old knuckles tapping at the door?

"Yet still before him as he flies
One pallid form shall ever rise,
And, bodying forth in glassy eyes

"The vision of a vanished good,
Low peering through the tangled wood,
Shall freeze the current of his blood."

Still from each fact, with skill uncouth
And savage rapture, like a tooth
She wrenched some slow reluctant truth.

Till, like a silent water-mill,
When summer suns have dried the rill,
She reached a full stop, and was still.

Dead calm succeeded to the fuss,
As when the loaded omnibus
Has reached the railway terminus:

When, for the tumult of the street,
Is heard the engine's stifled beat,
The velvet tread of porters' feet.

With glance that ever sought the ground,
She moved her lips without a sound,
And every now and then she frowned.

He gazed upon the sleeping sea,
And joyed in its tranquillity,
And in that silence dead, but she

To muse a little space did seem,
Then, like the echo of a dream,
Harked back upon her threadbare theme.

Still an attentive ear he lent
But could not fathom what she meant:
She was not deep, nor eloquent.

He marked the ripple on the sand:
The even swaying of her hand
Was all that he could understand.

He saw in dreams a drawing-room,
Where thirteen wretches sat in gloom,
Waiting--he thought he knew for whom:

He saw them drooping here and there,
Each feebly huddled on a chair,
In attitudes of blank despair:

Oysters were not more mute than they,
For all their brains were pumped away,
And they had nothing more to say -

Save one, who groaned "Three hours are gone!"
Who shrieked "We'll wait no longer, John!
Tell them to set the dinner on!"

The vision passed:  the ghosts were fled:
He saw once more that woman dread:
He heard once more the words she said.

He left her, and he turned aside:
He sat and watched the coming tide
Across the shores so newly dried.

He wondered at the waters clear,
The breeze that whispered in his ear,
The billows heaving far and near,

And why he had so long preferred
To hang upon her every word:
"In truth," he said, "it was absurd."


The Third Voice


Not long this transport held its place:
Within a little moment's space
Quick tears were raining down his face

His heart stood still, aghast with fear;
A wordless voice, nor far nor near,
He seemed to hear and not to hear.

"Tears kindle not the doubtful spark.
If so, why not?  Of this remark
The bearings are profoundly dark."

"Her speech," he said, "hath caused this pain.
Easier I count it to explain
The jargon of the howling main,

"Or, stretched beside some babbling brook,
To con, with inexpressive look,
An unintelligible book."

Low spake the voice within his head,
In words imagined more than said,
Soundless as ghost's intended tread:

"If thou art duller than before,
Why quittedst thou the voice of lore?
Why not endure, expecting more?"

"Rather than that," he groaned aghast,
"I'd writhe in depths of cavern vast,
Some loathly vampire's rich repast."

"'Twere hard," it answered, "themes immense
To coop within the narrow fence
That rings THY scant intelligence."

"Not so," he urged, "nor once alone:
But there was something in her tone
That chilled me to the very bone.

"Her style was anything but clear,
And most unpleasantly severe;
Her epithets were very queer.

"And yet, so grand were her replies,
I could not choose but deem her wise;
I did not dare to criticise;

"Nor did I leave her, till she went
So deep in tangled argument
That all my powers of thought were spent."

A little whisper inly slid,
"Yet truth is truth:  you know you did."
A little wink beneath the lid.

And, sickened with excess of dread,
Prone to the dust he bent his head,
And lay like one three-quarters dead

The whisper left him--like a breeze
Lost in the depths of leafy trees -
Left him by no means at his ease.

Once more he weltered in despair,
With hands, through denser-matted hair,
More tightly clenched than then they were.

When, bathed in Dawn of living red,
Majestic frowned the mountain head,
"Tell me my fault," was all he said.

When, at high Noon, the blazing sky
Scorched in his head each haggard eye,
Then keenest rose his weary cry.

And when at Eve the unpitying sun
Smiled grimly on the solemn fun,
"Alack," he sighed, "what HAVE I done?"

But saddest, darkest was the sight,
When the cold grasp of leaden Night
Dashed him to earth, and held him tight.

Tortured, unaided, and alone,
Thunders were silence to his groan,
Bagpipes sweet music to its tone:

"What?  Ever thus, in dismal round,
Shall Pain and Mystery profound
Pursue me like a sleepless hound,

"With crimson-dashed and eager jaws,
Me, still in ignorance of the cause,
Unknowing what I broke of laws?"

The whisper to his ear did seem
Like echoed flow of silent stream,
Or shadow of forgotten dream,

The whisper trembling in the wind:
"Her fate with thine was intertwined,"
So spake it in his inner mind:

"Each orbed on each a baleful star:
Each proved the other's blight and bar:
Each unto each were best, most far:

"Yea, each to each was worse than foe:
Thou, a scared dullard, gibbering low,
AND SHE, AN AVALANCHE OF WOE!"



TEMA CON VARIAZIONI



[Why is it that Poetry has never yet been subjected to that process
of Dilution which has proved so advantageous to her sister-art
Music?  The Diluter gives us first a few notes of some well-known
Air, then a dozen bars of his own, then a few more notes of the
Air, and so on alternately:  thus saving the listener, if not from
all risk of recognising the melody at all, at least from the too-
exciting transports which it might produce in a more concentrated
form.  The process is termed "setting" by Composers, and any one,
that has ever experienced the emotion of being unexpectedly set
down in a heap of mortar, will recognise the truthfulness of this
happy phrase.

For truly, just as the genuine Epicure lingers lovingly over a
morsel of supreme Venison--whose every fibre seems to murmur
"Excelsior!"--yet swallows, ere returning to the toothsome dainty,
great mouthfuls of oatmeal-porridge and winkles:  and just as the
perfect Connoisseur in Claret permits himself but one delicate sip,
and then tosses off a pint or more of boarding-school beer:  so
also -


I never loved a dear Gazelle -
NOR ANYTHING THAT COST ME MUCH:
HIGH PRICES PROFIT THOSE WHO SELL,
BUT WHY SHOULD I BE FOND OF SUCH?

To glad me with his soft black eye
MY SON COMES TROTTING HOME FROM SCHOOL;
HE'S HAD A FIGHT BUT CAN'T TELL WHY -
HE ALWAYS WAS A LITTLE FOOL!

But, when he came to know me well,
HE KICKED ME OUT, HER TESTY SIRE:
AND WHEN I STAINED MY HAIR, THAT BELLE
MIGHT NOTE THE CHANGE, AND THUS ADMIRE

And love me, it was sure to dye
A MUDDY GREEN OR STARING BLUE:
WHILST ONE MIGHT TRACE, WITH HALF AN EYE,
THE STILL TRIUMPHANT CARROT THROUGH.



A GAME OF FIVES



Five little girls, of Five, Four, Three, Two, One:
Rolling on the hearthrug, full of tricks and fun.

Five rosy girls, in years from Ten to Six:
Sitting down to lessons--no more time for tricks.

Five growing girls, from Fifteen to Eleven:
Music, Drawing, Languages, and food enough for seven!

Five winsome girls, from Twenty to Sixteen:
Each young man that calls, I say "Now tell me which you MEAN!"

Five dashing girls, the youngest Twenty-one:
But, if nobody proposes, what is there to be done?

Five showy girls--but Thirty is an age
When girls may be ENGAGING, but they somehow don't ENGAGE.

Five dressy girls, of Thirty-one or more:
So gracious to the shy young men they snubbed so much before!

* * * *

Five passe girls--Their age?  Well, never mind!
We jog along together, like the rest of human kind:
But the quondam "careless bachelor" begins to think he knows
The answer to that ancient problem "how the money goes"!



POETA FIT, NON NASCITUR



"How shall I be a poet?
How shall I write in rhyme?
You told me once 'the very wish
Partook of the sublime.'
Then tell me how!  Don't put me off
With your 'another time'!"

The old man smiled to see him,
To hear his sudden sally;
He liked the lad to speak his mind
Enthusiastically;
And thought "There's no hum-drum in him,
Nor any shilly-shally."

"And would you be a poet
Before you've been to school?
Ah, well!  I hardly thought you
So absolute a fool.
First learn to be spasmodic -
A very simple rule.

"For first you write a sentence,
And then you chop it small;
Then mix the bits, and sort them out
Just as they chance to fall:
The order of the phrases makes
No difference at all.

'Then, if you'd be impressive,
Remember what I say,
That abstract qualities begin
With capitals alway:
The True, the Good, the Beautiful -
Those are the things that pay!

"Next, when you are describing
A shape, or sound, or tint;
Don't state the matter plainly,
But put it in a hint;
And learn to look at all things
With a sort of mental squint."

"For instance, if I wished, Sir,
Of mutton-pies to tell,
Should I say 'dreams of fleecy flocks
Pent in a wheaten cell'?"
"Why, yes," the old man said:  "that phrase
Would answer very well.

"Then fourthly, there are epithets
That suit with any word -
As well as Harvey's Reading Sauce
With fish, or flesh, or bird -
Of these, 'wild,' 'lonely,' 'weary,' 'strange,'
Are much to be preferred."

"And will it do, O will it do
To take them in a lump -
As 'the wild man went his weary way
To a strange and lonely pump'?"
"Nay, nay!  You must not hastily
To such conclusions jump.

"Such epithets, like pepper,
Give zest to what you write;
And, if you strew them sparely,
They whet the appetite:
But if you lay them on too thick,
You spoil the matter quite!

"Last, as to the arrangement:
Your reader, you should show him,
Must take what information he
Can get, and look for no im-
mature disclosure of the drift
And purpose of your poem.

"Therefore, to test his patience -
How much he can endure -
Mention no places, names, or dates,
And evermore be sure
Throughout the poem to be found
Consistently obscure.

"First fix upon the limit
To which it shall extend:
Then fill it up with 'Padding'
(Beg some of any friend):
Your great SENSATION-STANZA
You place towards the end."

"And what is a Sensation,
Grandfather, tell me, pray?
I think I never heard the word
So used before to-day:
Be kind enough to mention one
'Exempli gratia.'"

And the old man, looking sadly
Across the garden-lawn,
Where here and there a dew-drop
Yet glittered in the dawn,
Said "Go to the Adelphi,
And see the 'Colleen Bawn.'

'The word is due to Boucicault -
The theory is his,
Where Life becomes a Spasm,
And History a Whiz:
If that is not Sensation,
I don't know what it is.

"Now try your hand, ere Fancy
Have lost its present glow--"
"And then," his grandson added,
"We'll publish it, you know:
Green cloth--gold-lettered at the back -
In duodecimo!"

Then proudly smiled that old man
To see the eager lad
Rush madly for his pen and ink
And for his blotting-pad -
But, when he thought of PUBLISHING,
His face grew stern and sad.



SIZE AND TEARS



When on the sandy shore I sit,
Beside the salt sea-wave,
And fall into a weeping fit
Because I dare not shave -
A little whisper at my ear
Enquires the reason of my fear.

I answer "If that ruffian Jones
Should recognise me here,
He'd bellow out my name in tones
Offensive to the ear:
He chaffs me so on being stout
(A thing that always puts me out)."

Ah me!  I see him on the cliff!
Farewell, farewell to hope,
If he should look this way, and if
He's got his telescope!
To whatsoever place I flee,
My odious rival follows me!

For every night, and everywhere,
I meet him out at dinner;
And when I've found some charming fair,
And vowed to die or win her,
The wretch (he's thin and I am stout)
Is sure to come and cut me out!

The girls (just like them!) all agree
To praise J. Jones, Esquire:
I ask them what on earth they see
About him to admire?
They cry "He is so sleek and slim,
It's quite a treat to look at him!"

They vanish in tobacco smoke,
Those visionary maids -
I feel a sharp and sudden poke
Between the shoulder-blades -
"Why, Brown, my boy!  Your growing stout!"
(I told you he would find me out!)

"My growth is not YOUR business, Sir!"
"No more it is, my boy!
But if it's YOURS, as I infer,
Why, Brown, I give you joy!
A man, whose business prospers so,
Is just the sort of man to know!

"It's hardly safe, though, talking here -
I'd best get out of reach:
For such a weight as yours, I fear,
Must shortly sink the beach!" -
Insult me thus because I'm stout!
I vow I'll go and call him out!



ATALANTA IN CAMDEN-TOWN



Ay, 'twas here, on this spot,
In that summer of yore,
Atalanta did not
Vote my presence a bore,
Nor reply to my tenderest talk "She had
heard all that nonsense before."

She'd the brooch I had bought
And the necklace and sash on,
And her heart, as I thought,
Was alive to my passion;
And she'd done up her hair in the style that
the Empress had brought into fashion.

I had been to the play
With my pearl of a Peri -
But, for all I could say,
She declared she was weary,
That "the place was so crowded and hot, and
she couldn't abide that Dundreary."

Then I thought "Lucky boy!
'Tis for YOU that she whimpers!"
And I noted with joy
Those sensational simpers:
And I said "This is scrumptious!"--a
phrase I had learned from the Devonshire shrimpers.

And I vowed "'Twill be said
I'm a fortunate fellow,
When the breakfast is spread,
When the topers are mellow,
When the foam of the bride-cake is white,
and the fierce orange-blossoms are yellow!"

O that languishing yawn!
O those eloquent eyes!
I was drunk with the dawn
Of a splendid surmise -
I was stung by a look, I was slain by a tear,
by a tempest of sighs.

Then I whispered "I see
The sweet secret thou keepest.
And the yearning for ME
That thou wistfully weepest!
And the question is 'License or Banns?',
though undoubtedly Banns are the cheapest."

"Be my Hero," said I,
"And let ME be Leander!"
But I lost her reply -
Something ending with "gander" -
For the omnibus rattled so loud that no
mortal could quite understand her.



THE LANG COORTIN'



The ladye she stood at her lattice high,
Wi' her doggie at her feet;
Thorough the lattice she can spy
The passers in the street,

"There's one that standeth at the door,
And tirleth at the pin:
Now speak and say, my popinjay,
If I sall let him in."

Then up and spake the popinjay
That flew abune her head:
"Gae let him in that tirls the pin:
He cometh thee to wed."

O when he cam' the parlour in,
A woeful man was he!
"And dinna ye ken your lover agen,
Sae well that loveth thee?"

"And how wad I ken ye loved me, Sir,
That have been sae lang away?
And how wad I ken ye loved me, Sir?
Ye never telled me sae."

Said--"Ladye dear," and the salt, salt tear
Cam' rinnin' doon his cheek,
"I have sent the tokens of my love
This many and many a week.

"O didna ye get the rings, Ladye,
The rings o' the gowd sae fine?
I wot that I have sent to thee
Four score, four score and nine."

"They cam' to me," said that fair ladye.
"Wow, they were flimsie things!"
Said--"that chain o' gowd, my doggie to howd,
It is made o' thae self-same rings."

"And didna ye get the locks, the locks,
The locks o' my ain black hair,
Whilk I sent by post, whilk I sent by box,
Whilk I sent by the carrier?"

"They cam' to me," said that fair ladye;
"And I prithee send nae mair!"
Said--"that cushion sae red, for my doggie's head,
It is stuffed wi' thae locks o' hair."

"And didna ye get the letter, Ladye,
Tied wi' a silken string,
Whilk I sent to thee frae the far countrie,
A message of love to bring?"

"It cam' to me frae the far countrie
Wi' its silken string and a';
But it wasna prepaid," said that high-born maid,
"Sae I gar'd them tak' it awa'."

"O ever alack that ye sent it back,
It was written sae clerkly and well!
Now the message it brought, and the boon that it sought,
I must even say it mysel'."

Then up and spake the popinjay,
Sae wisely counselled he.
"Now say it in the proper way:
Gae doon upon thy knee!"

The lover he turned baith red and pale,
Went doon upon his knee:
"O Ladye, hear the waesome tale
That must be told to thee!

"For five lang years, and five lang years,
I coorted thee by looks;
By nods and winks, by smiles and tears,
As I had read in books.

"For ten lang years, O weary hours!
I coorted thee by signs;
By sending game, by sending flowers,
By sending Valentines.

"For five lang years, and five lang years,
I have dwelt in the far countrie,
Till that thy mind should be inclined
Mair tenderly to me.

"Now thirty years are gane and past,
I am come frae a foreign land:
I am come to tell thee my love at last -
O Ladye, gie me thy hand!"

The ladye she turned not pale nor red,
But she smiled a pitiful smile:
"Sic' a coortin' as yours, my man," she said
"Takes a lang and a weary while!"

And out and laughed the popinjay,
A laugh of bitter scorn:
"A coortin' done in sic' a way,
It ought not to be borne!"

Wi' that the doggie barked aloud,
And up and doon he ran,
And tugged and strained his chain o' gowd,
All for to bite the man.

"O hush thee, gentle popinjay!
O hush thee, doggie dear!
There is a word I fain wad say,
It needeth he should hear!"

Aye louder screamed that ladye fair
To drown her doggie's bark:
Ever the lover shouted mair
To make that ladye hark:

Shrill and more shrill the popinjay
Upraised his angry squall:
I trow the doggie's voice that day
Was louder than them all!

The serving-men and serving-maids
Sat by the kitchen fire:
They heard sic' a din the parlour within
As made them much admire.

Out spake the boy in buttons
(I ween he wasna thin),
"Now wha will tae the parlour gae,
And stay this deadlie din?"

And they have taen a kerchief,
Casted their kevils in,
For wha will tae the parlour gae,
And stay that deadlie din.

When on that boy the kevil fell
To stay the fearsome noise,
"Gae in," they cried, "whate'er betide,
Thou prince of button-boys!"

Syne, he has taen a supple cane
To swinge that dog sae fat:
The doggie yowled, the doggie howled
The louder aye for that.

Syne, he has taen a mutton-bane -
The doggie ceased his noise,
And followed doon the kitchen stair
That prince of button-boys!

Then sadly spake that ladye fair,
Wi' a frown upon her brow:
"O dearer to me is my sma' doggie
Than a dozen sic' as thou!

"Nae use, nae use for sighs and tears:
Nae use at all to fret:
Sin' ye've bided sae well for thirty years,
Ye may bide a wee langer yet!"

Sadly, sadly he crossed the floor
And tirled at the pin:
Sadly went he through the door
Where sadly he cam' in.

"O gin I had a popinjay
To fly abune my head,
To tell me what I ought to say,
I had by this been wed.

"O gin I find anither ladye,"
He said wi' sighs and tears,
"I wot my coortin' sall not be
Anither thirty years

"For gin I find a ladye gay,
Exactly to my taste,
I'll pop the question, aye or nay,
In twenty years at maist."



FOUR RIDDLES



[These consist of two Double Acrostics and two Charades.

No. I. was written at the request of some young friends, who had
gone to a ball at an Oxford Commemoration--and also as a specimen
of what might be done by making the Double Acrostic A CONNECTED
POEM instead of what it has hitherto been, a string of disjointed
stanzas, on every conceivable subject, and about as interesting to
read straight through as a page of a Cyclopaedia.  The first two
stanzas describe the two main words, and each subsequent stanza one
of the cross "lights."

No. II. was written after seeing Miss Ellen Terry perform in the
play of "Hamlet."  In this case the first stanza describes the two
main words.

No. III. was written after seeing Miss Marion Terry perform in Mr.
Gilbert's play of "Pygmalion and Galatea."  The three stanzas
respectively describe "My First," "My Second," and "My Whole."]


I

There was an ancient City, stricken down
With a strange frenzy, and for many a day
They paced from morn to eve the crowded town,
And danced the night away.

I asked the cause:  the aged man grew sad:
They pointed to a building gray and tall,
And hoarsely answered "Step inside, my lad,
And then you'll see it all."

* * * *

Yet what are all such gaieties to me
Whose thoughts are full of indices and surds?

x*x + 7x + 53 = 11/3

But something whispered "It will soon be done:
Bands cannot always play, nor ladies smile:
Endure with patience the distasteful fun
For just a little while!"

A change came o'er my Vision--it was night:
We clove a pathway through a frantic throng:
The steeds, wild-plunging, filled us with affright:
The chariots whirled along.

Within a marble hall a river ran -
A living tide, half muslin and half cloth:
And here one mourned a broken wreath or fan,
Yet swallowed down her wrath;

And here one offered to a thirsty fair
(His words half-drowned amid those thunders tuneful)
Some frozen viand (there were many there),
A tooth-ache in each spoonful.

There comes a happy pause, for human strength
Will not endure to dance without cessation;
And every one must reach the point at length
Of absolute prostration.

At such a moment ladies learn to give,
To partners who would urge them over-much,
A flat and yet decided negative -
Photographers love such.

There comes a welcome summons--hope revives,
And fading eyes grow bright, and pulses quicken:
Incessant pop the corks, and busy knives
Dispense the tongue and chicken.

Flushed with new life, the crowd flows back again:
And all is tangled talk and mazy motion -
Much like a waving field of golden grain,
Or a tempestuous ocean.

And thus they give the time, that Nature meant
For peaceful sleep and meditative snores,
To ceaseless din and mindless merriment
And waste of shoes and floors.

And One (we name him not) that flies the flowers,
That dreads the dances, and that shuns the salads,
They doom to pass in solitude the hours,
Writing acrostic-ballads.

How late it grows!  The hour is surely past
That should have warned us with its double knock?
The twilight wanes, and morning comes at last -
"Oh, Uncle, what's o'clock?"

The Uncle gravely nods, and wisely winks.
It MAY mean much, but how is one to know?
He opens his mouth--yet out of it, methinks,
No words of wisdom flow.


II


Empress of Art, for thee I twine
This wreath with all too slender skill.
Forgive my Muse each halting line,
And for the deed accept the will!

* * * *

O day of tears!  Whence comes this spectre grim,
Parting, like Death's cold river, souls that love?
Is not he bound to thee, as thou to him,
By vows, unwhispered here, yet heard above?

And still it lives, that keen and heavenward flame,
Lives in his eye, and trembles in his tone:
And these wild words of fury but proclaim
A heart that beats for thee, for thee alone!

But all is lost:  that mighty mind o'erthrown,
Like sweet bells jangled, piteous sight to see!
"Doubt that the stars are fire," so runs his moan,
"Doubt Truth herself, but not my love for thee!"

A sadder vision yet:  thine aged sire
Shaming his hoary locks with treacherous wile!
And dost thou now doubt Truth to be a liar?
And wilt thou die, that hast forgot to smile?

Nay, get thee hence!  Leave all thy winsome ways
And the faint fragrance of thy scattered flowers:
In holy silence wait the appointed days,
And weep away the leaden-footed hours.


III.


The air is bright with hues of light
And rich with laughter and with singing:
Young hearts beat high in ecstasy,
And banners wave, and bells are ringing:
But silence falls with fading day,
And there's an end to mirth and play.
Ah, well-a-day

Rest your old bones, ye wrinkled crones!
The kettle sings, the firelight dances.
Deep be it quaffed, the magic draught
That fills the soul with golden fancies!
For Youth and Pleasance will not stay,
And ye are withered, worn, and gray.
Ah, well-a-day!

O fair cold face!  O form of grace,
For human passion madly yearning!
O weary air of dumb despair,
From marble won, to marble turning!
"Leave us not thus!" we fondly pray.
"We cannot let thee pass away!"
Ah, well-a-day!


IV.


My First is singular at best:
More plural is my Second:
My Third is far the pluralest -
So plural-plural, I protest
It scarcely can be reckoned!

My First is followed by a bird:
My Second by believers
In magic art:  my simple Third
Follows, too often, hopes absurd
And plausible deceivers.

My First to get at wisdom tries -
A failure melancholy!
My Second men revered as wise:
My Third from heights of wisdom flies
To depths of frantic folly.

My First is ageing day by day:
My Second's age is ended:
My Third enjoys an age, they say,
That never seems to fade away,
Through centuries extended.

My Whole?  I need a poet's pen
To paint her myriad phases:
The monarch, and the slave, of men -
A mountain-summit, and a den
Of dark and deadly mazes -

A flashing light--a fleeting shade -
Beginning, end, and middle
Of all that human art hath made
Or wit devised!  Go, seek HER aid,
If you would read my riddle!



FAME'S PENNY-TRUMPET



[Affectionately dedicated to all "original researchers" who pant
for "endowment."]


Blow, blow your trumpets till they crack,
Ye little men of little souls!
And bid them huddle at your back -
Gold-sucking leeches, shoals on shoals!

Fill all the air with hungry wails -
"Reward us, ere we think or write!
Without your Gold mere Knowledge fails
To sate the swinish appetite!"

And, where great Plato paced serene,
Or Newton paused with wistful eye,
Rush to the chace with hoofs unclean
And Babel-clamour of the sty

Be yours the pay:  be theirs the praise:
We will not rob them of their due,
Nor vex the ghosts of other days
By naming them along with you.

They sought and found undying fame:
They toiled not for reward nor thanks:
Their cheeks are hot with honest shame
For you, the modern mountebanks!

Who preach of Justice--plead with tears
That Love and Mercy should abound -
While marking with complacent ears
The moaning of some tortured hound:

Who prate of Wisdom--nay, forbear,
Lest Wisdom turn on you in wrath,
Trampling, with heel that will not spare,
The vermin that beset her path!

Go, throng each other's drawing-rooms,
Ye idols of a petty clique:
Strut your brief hour in borrowed plumes,
And make your penny-trumpets squeak.

Deck your dull talk with pilfered shreds
Of learning from a nobler time,
And oil each other's little heads
With mutual Flattery's golden slime:

And when the topmost height ye gain,
And stand in Glory's ether clear,
And grasp the prize of all your pain -
So many hundred pounds a year -

Then let Fame's banner be unfurled!
Sing Paeans for a victory won!
Ye tapers, that would light the world,
And cast a shadow on the Sun -

Who still shall pour His rays sublime,
One crystal flood, from East to West,
When YE have burned your little time
And feebly flickered into rest!





RHYME? AND REASON?




[Illustration: "UPON A BATTLEMENT." _See_ p. 30.]




  RHYME?
  AND REASON?


  BY LEWIS CARROLL


  _WITH SIXTY-FIVE ILLUSTRATIONS_
  BY ARTHUR B. FROST

  _AND NINE_
  BY HENRY HOLIDAY


  I have had nor rhyme nor reason


  _PRICE SEVEN SHILLINGS_
  London
  MACMILLAN AND CO.
  1883
  [_All Rights Reserved_]



  London:
  R. CLAY, SONS, AND TAYLOR
  BREAD STREET HILL, E.C.




  Inscribed to a dear Child:
  in memory of golden summer hours
  and whispers of a summer sea.

         *       *       *       *       *

  Girt with a boyish garb for boyish task,
      Eager she wields her spade: yet loves as well
  Rest on a friendly knee, intent to ask
          The tale one loves to tell.

  Rude scoffer of the seething outer strife,
      Unmeet to read her pure and simple spright,
  Deem, if thou wilt, such hours a waste of life,
          Empty of all delight!

  Chat on, sweet Maid, and rescue from annoy
      Hearts that by wiser talk are unbeguiled;
  Ah, happy he who owns that tenderest joy,
          The heart-love of a child!

  Away, fond thoughts, and vex my soul no more!
      Work claims my wakeful nights, my busy days
  Albeit bright memories of that sunlit shore
          Yet haunt my dreaming gaze!




[Of the following poems, ECHOES, A GAME OF FIVES, the last three of the
FOUR RIDDLES, and FAME'S PENNY-TRUMPET, are here published for the first
time. The others have all appeared before, as have also the illustrations
to THE HUNTING OF THE SNARK.]




CONTENTS.


                                                        PAGE

  PHANTASMAGORIA, in Seven Cantos:--

        I. The Trystyng                                    1

       II. Hys Fyve Rules                                 10

      III. Scarmoges                                      18

       IV. Hys Nouryture                                  26

        V. Byckerment                                     34

       VI. Dyscomfyture                                   44

      VII. Sad Souvenaunce                                53

  ECHOES                                                  58

  A SEA DIRGE                                             59

  Y{E} CARPETTE KNYGHTE                                   64

  HIAWATHA'S PHOTOGRAPHING                                66

  MELANCHOLETTA                                           78

  A VALENTINE                                             84

  THE THREE VOICES:--

      The First Voice                                     87

      The Second Voice                                    98

      The Third Voice                                    109

  TMA CON VARIAZINI                                    118

  A GAME OF FIVES                                        120

  POETA FIT, NON NASCITUR                                123

  THE HUNTING OF THE SNARK, an Agony in Eight Fits:--

         I. THE LANDING                                  134

        II. THE BELLMAN'S SPEECH                         142

       III. THE BAKER'S TALE                             148

        IV. THE HUNTING                                  153

         V. THE BEAVER'S LESSON                          159

        VI. THE BARRISTER'S DREAM                        167

       VII. THE BANKER'S FATE                            173

      VIII. THE VANISHING                                177

  SIZE AND TEARS                                         181

  ATALANTA IN CAMDEN TOWN                                186

  THE LANG COORTIN'                                      190

  FOUR RIDDLES                                           202

  FAME'S PENNY-TRUMPET                                   211




PHANTASMAGORIA.


CANTO I.

The Trystyng.

  One winter night, at half-past nine,
      Cold, tired, and cross, and muddy,
  I had come home, too late to dine,
  And supper, with cigars and wine,
      Was waiting in the study.

  There was a strangeness in the room,
      And Something white and wavy
  Was standing near me in the gloom--
  _I_ took it for the carpet-broom
      Left by that careless slavey.

[Illustration]

  But presently the Thing began
      To shiver and to sneeze:
  On which I said "Come, come, my man!
  That's a most inconsiderate plan.
      Less noise there, if you please!"

  "I've caught a cold," the Thing replies,
      "Out there upon the landing."
  I turned to look in some surprise,
  And there, before my very eyes,
      A little Ghost was standing!

  He trembled when he caught my eye,
      And got behind a chair.
  "How came you here," I said, "and why?
  I never saw a thing so shy.
      Come out! Don't shiver there!"

  He said "I'd gladly tell you how,
      And also tell you why;
  But" (here he gave a little bow)
  "You're in so bad a temper now,
      You'd think it all a lie.

  "And as to being in a fright,
      Allow me to remark
  That Ghosts have just as good a right,
  In every way, to fear the light,
      As Men to fear the dark."

  "No plea," said I, "can well excuse
      Such cowardice in you:
  For Ghosts can visit when they choose,
  Whereas we Humans ca'n't refuse
      To grant the interview."

  He said "A flutter of alarm
      Is not unnatural, is it?
  I really feared you meant some harm:
  But, now I see that you are calm,
      Let me explain my visit.

  "Houses are classed, I beg to state,
      According to the number
  Of Ghosts that they accommodate:
  (The Tenant merely counts as _weight_,
      With Coals and other lumber).

  "This is a 'one-ghost' house, and you
      When you arrived last summer,
  May have remarked a Spectre who
  Was doing all that Ghosts can do
      To welcome the new-comer.

  "In Villas this is always done--
      However cheaply rented:
  For, though of course there's less of fun
  When there is only room for one,
      Ghosts have to be contented.

  "That Spectre left you on the Third--
      Since then you've not been haunted:
  For, as he never sent us word,
  'Twas quite by accident we heard
      That any one was wanted.

  "A Spectre has first choice, by right,
      In filling up a vacancy;
  Then Phantom, Goblin, Elf, and Sprite--
  If all these fail them, they invite
      The nicest Ghoul that they can see.

  "The Spectres said the place was low,
      And that you kept bad wine:
  So, as a Phantom had to go,
  And I was first, of course, you know,
      I couldn't well decline."

  "No doubt," said I, "they settled who
      Was fittest to be sent:
  Yet still to choose a brat like you,
  To haunt a man of forty-two,
      Was no great compliment!"

  "I'm not so young, Sir," he replied,
      "As you might think. The fact is,
  In caverns by the water-side,
  And other places that I've tried,
      I've had a lot of practice:

  "But I have never taken yet
      A strict domestic part,
  And in my flurry I forget
  The Five Good Rules of Etiquette
      We have to know by heart."

  My sympathies were warming fast
      Towards the little fellow:
  He was so utterly aghast
  At having found a Man at last,
      And looked so scared and yellow.

[Illustration: "IN CAVERNS BY THE WATER-SIDE"]

  "At least," I said, "I'm glad to find
      A Ghost is not a _dumb_ thing!
  But pray sit down: you'll feel inclined
  (If, like myself, you have not dined)
      To take a snack of something:

  "Though, certainly, you don't appear
      A thing to offer _food_ to!
  And then I shall be glad to hear--
  If you will say them loud and clear--
      The Rules that you allude to."

  "Thanks! You shall hear them by and by
      This _is_ a piece of luck!"
  "What may I offer you?" said I.
  "Well, since you _are_ so kind, I'll try
      A little bit of duck.

  "_One_ slice! And may I ask you for
      Another drop of gravy?"
  I sat and looked at him in awe,
  For certainly I never saw
      A thing so white and wavy.

[Illustration]

  And still he seemed to grow more white,
      More vapoury, and wavier--
  Seen in the dim and flickering light,
  As he proceeded to recite
      His "Maxims of Behaviour."


CANTO II.

Hys Fyve Rules.

  "My First--but don't suppose," he said,
      "I'm setting you a riddle--
  Is--if your Victim be in bed,
  Don't touch the curtains at his head,
      But take them in the middle,

  "And wave them slowly in and out,
      While drawing them asunder;
  And in a minute's time, no doubt,
  He'll raise his head and look about
      With eyes of wrath and wonder.

  "And here you must on no pretence
      Make the first observation.
  Wait for the Victim to commence:
  No Ghost of any common sense
      Begins a conversation.

[Illustration]

  "If he should say '_How came you here?_'
      (The way that _you_ began, Sir,)
  In such a case your course is clear--
  '_On the bat's back, my little dear!_'
      Is the appropriate answer.

  "If after this he says no more,
      You'd best perhaps curtail your
  Exertions--go and shake the door,
  And then, if he begins to snore,
      You'll know the thing's a failure.

  "By day, if he should be alone--
      At home or on a walk--
  You merely give a hollow groan,
  To indicate the kind of tone
      In which you mean to talk.

  "But if you find him with his friends,
      The thing is rather harder.
  In such a case success depends
  On picking up some candle-ends,
      Or butter, in the larder.

  "With this you make a kind of slide
      (It answers best with suet),
  On which you must contrive to glide,
  And swing yourself from side to side--
      One soon learns how to do it.

  "The Second tells us what is right
      In ceremonious calls:--
  '_First burn a blue or crimson light_'
  (A thing I quite forgot to-night),
      '_Then scratch the door or walls._'"

[Illustration: "AND SWING YOURSELF FROM SIDE TO SIDE"]

  I said "You'll visit _here_ no more,
      If you attempt the Guy.
  I'll have no bonfires on _my_ floor--
  And, as for scratching at the door,
      I'd like to see you try!"

  "The Third was written to protect
      The interests of the Victim,
  And tells us, as I recollect,
  _To treat him with a grave respect,
      And not to contradict him_."

  "That's plain," said I, "as Tare and Tret,
      To any comprehension:
  I only wish _some_ Ghosts I've met
  Would not so _constantly_ forget
      The maxim that you mention!"

  "Perhaps," he said, "_you_ first transgressed
      The laws of hospitality:
  All Ghosts instinctively detest
  The Man that fails to treat his guest
      With proper cordiality.

[Illustration]

  "If you address a Ghost as 'Thing!'
      Or strike him with a hatchet,
  He is permitted by the King
  To drop all _formal_ parleying--
      And then you're _sure_ to catch it!

  "The Fourth prohibits trespassing
      Where other Ghosts are quartered:
  And those convicted of the thing
  (Unless when pardoned by the King)
      Must instantly be slaughtered.

  "That simply means 'be cut up small':
      Ghosts soon unite anew:
  The process scarcely hurts at all--
  Not more than when _you're_ what you call
      'Cut up' by a Review.

  "The Fifth is one you may prefer
      That I should quote entire:--
  _The King must be addressed as 'Sir.'
  This, from a simple courtier,
      Is all the Laws require_:

  "_But, should you wish to do the thing
      With out-and-out politeness,
  Accost him as 'My Goblin King!'
  And always use, in answering,
      The phrase 'Your Royal Whiteness!'_

  "I'm getting rather hoarse, I fear,
      After so much reciting:
  So, if you don't object, my dear,
  We'll try a glass of bitter beer--
      I think it looks inviting."

[Illustration]


CANTO III.

Scarmoges.

  "And did you really walk," said I,
      "On such a wretched night?
  I always fancied Ghosts could fly--
  If not exactly in the sky,
      Yet at a fairish height."

  "It's very well," said he, "for Kings
      To soar above the earth:
  But Phantoms often find that wings--
  Like many other pleasant things--
      Cost more than they are worth.

  "Spectres of course are rich, and so
      Can buy them from the Elves:
  But _we_ prefer to keep below--
  They're stupid company, you know.
      For any but themselves:

[Illustration]

  "For, though they claim to be exempt
      From pride, they treat a Phantom
  As something quite beneath contempt--
  Just as no Turkey ever dreamt
      Of noticing a Bantam."

  "They seem too proud," said I, "to go
      To houses such as mine.
  Pray, how did they contrive to know
  So quickly that 'the place was low,'
      And that I 'kept bad wine'?"

  "Inspector Kobold came to you--"
      The little Ghost began.
  Here I broke in--"Inspector who?
  Inspecting Ghosts is something new!
      Explain yourself my man!"

  "His name is Kobold," said my guest:
      "One of the Spectre order:
  You'll very often see him dressed
  In a yellow gown, a crimson vest,
      And a night-cap with a border.

  "He tried the Brocken business first,
      But caught a sort of chill;
  So came to England to be nursed,
  And here it took the form of _thirst_,
      Which he complains of still.

[Illustration: "AND HERE IT TOOK THE FORM OF _THIRST_"]

  "Port-wine, he says, when rich and sound,
      Warms his old bones like nectar:
  And as the inns, where it is found,
  Are his especial hunting-ground,
      We call him the _Inn-Spectre_."

  I bore it--bore it like a man--
      This agonizing witticism!
  And nothing could be sweeter than
  My temper, till the Ghost began
      Some most provoking criticism.

  "Cooks need not be indulged in waste;
      Yet still you'd better teach them
  Dishes should have _some sort_ of taste.
  Pray, why are all the cruets placed
      Where nobody can reach them?

  "That man of yours will never earn
      His living as a waiter!
  Is that queer _thing_ supposed to burn?
  (It's far too dismal a concern
      To call a Moderator).

  "The duck was tender, but the peas
      Were very much too old:
  And just remember, if you please,
  The _next_ time you have toasted cheese,
      Don't let them send it cold.

  "You'd find the bread improved, I think,
      By getting better flour:
  And have you anything to drink
  That looks a _little_ less like ink,
      And isn't _quite_ so sour?"

  Then, peering round with curious eyes,
      He muttered "Goodness gracious!"
  And so went on to criticise--
  "Your room's an inconvenient size:
      It's neither snug nor spacious.

  "That narrow window, I expect,
      Serves but to let the dusk in--"
  "But please," said I, "to recollect
  'Twas fashioned by an architect
      Who pinned his faith on Ruskin!"

  "I don't care who he was, Sir, or
      On whom he pinned his faith!
  Constructed by whatever law,
  So poor a job I never saw,
      As I'm a living Wraith!

  "What a re-markable cigar!
      How much are they a dozen?"
  I growled "No matter what they are!
  You're getting as familiar
      As if you were my cousin!

  "Now that's a thing _I will not stand_,
      And so I tell you flat."
  "Aha," said he, "we're getting grand!"
  (Taking a bottle in his hand)
      "I'll soon arrange for _that_!"

  And here he took a careful aim,
      And gaily cried "Here goes!"
  I tried to dodge it as it came,
  But somehow caught it, all the same,
      Exactly on my nose.

  And I remember nothing more
      That I can clearly fix,
  Till I was sitting on the floor,
  Repeating "Two and five are four,
      But _five and two_ are six."

  What really passed I never learned,
      Nor guessed: I only know
  That, when at last my sense returned,
  The lamp, neglected, dimly burned--
      The fire was getting low--

  Through driving mists I seemed to see
      A Thing that smirked and smiled:
  And found that he was giving me
  A lesson in Biography,
      As if I were a child.

[Illustration]


CANTO IV.

Hys Nouryture.

  "Oh, when I was a little Ghost,
      A merry time had we!
  Each seated on his favourite post,
  We chumped and chawed the buttered toast
      They gave us for our tea."

  "That story is in print!" I cried.
      "Don't say it's not, because
  It's known as well as Bradshaw's Guide!"
  (The Ghost uneasily replied
      He hardly thought it was).

  "It's not in Nursery Rhymes? And yet
      I almost think it is--
  'Three little Ghosteses' were set
  'On posteses,' you know, and ate
      Their 'buttered toasteses.'

  "I have the book; so, if you doubt it--"
      I turned to search the shelf.
  "Don't stir!" he cried. "We'll do without it;
  I now remember all about it;
      I wrote the thing myself.

  "It came out in a 'Monthly,' or
      At least my agent said it did:
  Some literary swell, who saw
  It, thought it seemed adapted for
      The Magazine he edited.

  "My father was a Brownie, Sir;
      My mother was a Fairy.
  The notion had occurred to her,
  The children would be happier,
      If they were taught to vary.

  "The notion soon became a craze;
      And, when it once began, she
  Brought us all out in different ways--
  One was a Pixy, two were Fays,
      Another was a Banshee;

  "The Fetch and Kelpie went to school,
      And gave a lot of trouble;
  Next came a Poltergeist and Ghoul,
  And then two Trolls (which broke the rule),
      A Goblin, and a Double--

  "(If that's a snuff-box on the shelf,"
      He added with a yawn,
  "I'll take a pinch)--next came an Elf,
  And then a Phantom (that's myself),
      And last, a Leprechaun.

  "One day, some Spectres chanced to call,
      Dressed in the usual white:
  I stood and watched them in the hall,
  And couldn't make them out at all,
      They seemed so strange a sight.

[Illustration]

  "I wondered what on earth they were,
      That looked all head and sack;
  But Mother told me not to stare,
  And then she twitched me by the hair,
      And punched me in the back.

  "Since then I've often wished that I
      Had been a Spectre born.
  But what's the use?" (He heaved a sigh).
  "_They_ are the ghost-nobility,
      And look on _us_ with scorn.

  "My phantom-life was soon begun:
      When I was barely six,
  I went out with an older one--
  And just at first I thought it fun,
      And learned a lot of tricks.

  "I've haunted dungeons, castles, towers--
      Wherever I was sent:
  I've often sat and howled for hours,
  Drenched to the skin with driving showers,
      Upon a battlement.

  "It's quite old-fashioned now to groan
      When you begin to speak:
  This is the newest thing in tone--"
  And here (it chilled me to the bone)
      He gave an _awful_ squeak.

  "Perhaps," he added, "to _your_ ear
      That sounds an easy thing?
  Try it yourself, my little dear!
  It took _me_ something like a year,
      With constant practising.

  "And when you've learned to squeak, my man
      And caught the double sob,
  You're pretty much where you began:
  Just try and gibber if you can!
      That's something _like_ a job!

  "_I've_ tried it, and can only say
      I'm sure you couldn't do it, e-
  ven if you practised night and day,
  Unless you have a turn that way,
      And natural ingenuity.

  "Shakspeare I think it is who treats
      Of Ghosts, in days of old,
  Who 'gibbered in the Roman streets,'
  Dressed, if you recollect, in sheets--
      They must have found it cold.

  "I've often spent ten pounds on stuff,
      In dressing as a Double;
  But, though it answers as a puff,
  It never has effect enough
      To make it worth the trouble.

  "Long bills soon quenched the little thirst
      I had for being funny.
  The setting-up is always worst:
  Such heaps of things you want at first,
      One must be made of money!

[Illustration]

  "For instance, take a Haunted Tower,
      With skull, cross-bones, and sheet;
  Blue lights to burn (say) two an hour,
  Condensing lens of extra power,
      And set of chains complete:

  "What with the things you have to hire--
      The fitting on the robe--
  And testing all the coloured fire--
  The outfit of itself would tire
      The patience of a Job!

  "And then they're so fastidious,
      The Haunted-House Committee:
  I've often known them make a fuss
  Because a Ghost was French, or Russ,
      Or even from the City!

  "Some dialects are objected to--
      For one, the _Irish_ brogue is:
  And then, for all you have to do,
  One pound a week they offer you,
      And find yourself in Bogies!"


CANTO V.

Byckerment.

  "Don't they consult the 'Victims,' though?"
      I said. "They should, by rights,
  Give them a chance--because, you know,
  The tastes of people differ so,
      Especially in Sprites."

  The Phantom shook his head and smiled.
      "Consult them? Not a bit!
  'Twould be a job to drive one wild,
  To satisfy one single child--
      There'd be no end to it!"

  "Of course you can't leave _children_ free,"
      Said I, "to pick and choose:
  But, in the case of men like me,
  I think 'Mine Host' might fairly be
      Allowed to state his views."

  He said "It really wouldn't pay--
      Folk are so full of fancies.
  We visit for a single day,
  And whether then we go, or stay,
      Depends on circumstances.

  "And, though we don't consult 'Mine Host'
      Before the thing's arranged,
  Still, if he often quits his post,
  Or is not a well-mannered Ghost,
      Then you can have him changed.

  "But if the host's a man like you--
      I mean a man of sense;
  And if the house is not too new--"
  "Why, what has _that_," said I, "to do
      With Ghost's convenience?"

  "A new house does not suit, you know--
      It's such a job to trim it:
  But, after twenty years or so,
  The wainscotings begin to go,
      So twenty is the limit."

  "To trim" was not a phrase I could
      Remember having heard:
  "Perhaps," I said, "you'll be so good
  As tell me what is understood
      Exactly by that word?"

[Illustration]

  "It means the loosening all the doors,"
      The Ghost replied, and laughed:
  "It means the drilling holes by scores
  In all the skirting-boards and floors,
      To make a thorough draught.

  "You'll sometimes find that one or two
      Are all you really need
  To let the wind come whistling through--
  But _here_ there'll be a lot to do!"
      I faintly gasped "Indeed!

  "If I'd been rather later, I'll
      Be bound," I added, trying
  (Most unsuccessfully) to smile,
  "You'd have been busy all this while,
      Trimming and beautifying?"

  "Why, no," said he; "perhaps I should
      Have stayed another minute--
  But still no Ghost, that's any good,
  Without an introduction would
      Have ventured to begin it.

  "The proper thing, as you were late,
      Was certainly to go:
  But, with the roads in such a state,
  I got the Knight-Mayor's leave to wait
      For half an hour or so."

  "Who's the Knight-Mayor?" I cried. Instead
      Of answering my question,
  "Well! If you don't know _that_," he said,
  "Either you never go to bed,
      Or you've a grand digestion!

  "He goes about and sits on folk
      That eat too much at night:
  His duties are to pinch, and poke,
  And squeeze them till they nearly choke."
      (I said "It serves them right!")

  "And folk that sup on things like these--"
      He muttered, "eggs and bacon--
  Lobster--and duck--and toasted cheese--
  If they don't get an awful squeeze,
      I'm very much mistaken!

  "He is immensely fat, and so
      Well suits the occupation:
  In point of fact, if you must know,
  We used to call him, years ago,
      _The Mayor and Corporation_!

[Illustration: "HE GOES ABOUT AND SITS ON FOLK"]

  "The day he was elected Mayor
      I _know_ that every Sprite meant
  To vote for _me_, but did not dare--
  He was so frantic with despair
      And furious with excitement.

[Illustration]

  "When it was over, for a whim,
      He ran to tell the King;
  And being the reverse of slim,
  A two-mile trot was not for him
      A very easy thing.

  "So, to reward him for his run
      (As it was baking hot,
  And he was over twenty stone),
  The King proceeded, half in fun,
      To knight him on the spot."

  "'Twas a great liberty to take!"
      (I fired up like a rocket).
  "He did it just for punning's sake:
  'The man,' says Johnson, 'that would make
      A pun, would pick a pocket!'"

  "A man," said he, "is not a King."
      I argued for a while,
  And did my best to prove the thing--
  The Phantom merely listening
      With a contemptuous smile.

  At last, when, breath and patience spent,
      I had recourse to smoking--
  "Your _aim_," he said, "is excellent:
  But--when you call it _argument_--
      Of course you're only joking?"

[Illustration]

  Stung by his cold and snaky eye,
      I roused myself at length
  To say "At least I do defy
  The veriest sceptic to deny
      That union is strength!"

  "That's true enough," said he, "yet stay--"
      I listened in all meekness--
  "_Union_ is strength, I'm bound to say;
  In fact, the thing's as clear as day;
      But _onions_--are a weakness."


CANTO VI.

Dyscomfyture.

  As one who strives a hill to climb,
      Who never climbed before:
  Who finds it, in a little time,
  Grow every moment less sublime,
      And votes the thing a bore:

  Yet, having once begun to try,
      Dares not desert his quest,
  But, climbing, ever keeps his eye
  On one small hut against the sky,
      Wherein he hopes to rest:

  Who climbs till nerve and force are spent,
      With many a puff and pant:
  Who still, as rises the ascent,
  In language grows more violent,
      Although in breath more scant:

[Illustration]

  Who, climbing, gains at length the place
      That crowns the upward track;
  And, entering with unsteady pace,
  Receives a buffet in the face
      That lands him on his back:

  And feels himself, like one in sleep,
      Glide swiftly down again,
  A helpless weight, from steep to steep,
  Till, with a headlong giddy sweep,
      He drops upon the plain--

  So I, that had resolved to bring
      Conviction to a ghost,
  And found it quite a different thing
  From any human arguing,
      Yet dared not quit my post

  But, keeping still the end in view
      To which I hoped to come,
  I strove to prove the matter true
  By putting everything I knew
      Into an axiom:

  Commencing every single phrase
      With 'therefore' or 'because,'
  I blindly reeled, a hundred ways,
  About the syllogistic maze,
      Unconscious where I was.

  Quoth he "That's regular clap-trap:
      Don't bluster any more.
  Now _do_ be cool and take a nap!
  Such a ridiculous old chap
      Was never seen before!

  "You're like a man I used to meet,
      Who got one day so furious
  In arguing, the simple heat
  Scorched both his slippers off his feet!"
      I said "_That's very curious!_"

[Illustration: "SCORCHED BOTH HIS SLIPPERS OFF HIS FEET"]

  "Well, it _is_ curious, I agree,
      And sounds perhaps like fibs:
  But still it's true as true can be--
  As sure as your name's Tibbs," said he.
      I said "My name's _not_ Tibbs."

  "_Not_ Tibbs!" he cried--his tone became
      A shade or two less hearty--
  "Why, no," said I. "My proper name
  Is Tibbets--" "Tibbets?" "Aye, the same."
      "Why, then YOU'RE NOT THE PARTY!"

  With that he struck the board a blow
      That shivered half the glasses.
  "Why couldn't you have told me so
  Three quarters of an hour ago,
      You prince of all the asses?

  "To walk four miles through mud and rain,
      To spend the night in smoking,
  And then to find that it's in vain--
  And I've to do it all again--
      It's really _too_ provoking!

[Illustration]

  "Don't talk!" he cried, as I began
      To mutter some excuse.
  "Who can have patience with a man
  That's got no more discretion than
      An idiotic goose?

  "To keep me waiting here, instead
      Of telling me at once
  That this was not the house!" he said.
  "There, that'll do--be off to bed!
      Don't gape like that, you dunce!"

  "It's very fine to throw the blame
      On _me_ in such a fashion!
  Why didn't you enquire my name
  The very minute that you came?"
      I answered in a passion.

  "Of course it worries you a bit
      To come so far on foot--
  But how was _I_ to blame for it?"
  "Well, well!" said he. "I must admit
      That isn't badly put.

  "And certainly you've given me
      The best of wine and victual--
  Excuse my violence," said he,
  "But accidents like this, you see,
      They put one out a little.

  "'Twas _my_ fault after all, I find--
      Shake hands, old Turnip-top!"
  The name was hardly to my mind,
  But, as no doubt he meant it kind,
      I let the matter drop.

  "Good-night, old Turnip-top, good-night!
      When I am gone, perhaps
  They'll send you some inferior Sprite,
  Who'll keep you in a constant fright
      And spoil your soundest naps.

  "Tell him you'll stand no sort of trick;
      Then, if he leers and chuckles,
  You just be handy with a stick
  (Mind that it's pretty hard and thick)
      And rap him on the knuckles!

  "Then carelessly remark 'Old coon!
      Perhaps you're not aware
  That, if you don't behave, you'll soon
  Be chuckling to another tune--
      And so you'd best take care!'

  "That's the right way to cure a Sprite
      Of such-like goings-on--
  But gracious me! It's getting light!
  Good-night, old Turnip-top, good-night!"
      A nod, and he was gone.

[Illustration]


CANTO VII.

Sad Souvenaunce.

[Illustration]

  "What's this?" I pondered. "Have I slept?
      Or can I have been drinking?"
  But soon a gentler feeling crept
  Upon me, and I sat and wept
      An hour or so, like winking.

  "No need for Bones to hurry so!"
      I sobbed. "In fact, I doubt
  If it was worth his while to go--
  And who is Tibbs, I'd like to know,
      To make such work about?

  "If Tibbs is anything like me,
      It's _possible_," I said,
  "He won't be over-pleased to be
  Dropped in upon at half-past three,
      After he's snug in bed.

  "And if Bones plagues him anyhow--
      Squeaking and all the rest of it,
  As he was doing here just now--
  _I_ prophesy there'll be a row,
      And Tibbs will have the best of it!"

  Then, as my tears could never bring
      The friendly Phantom back,
  It seemed to me the proper thing
  To mix another glass, and sing
      The following Coronach.

[Illustration: "AND TIBBS WILL HAVE THE BEST OF IT"]

  '_And art thou gone, beloved Ghost?
      Best of Familiars!
  Nay then, farewell, my duckling roast,
  Farewell, farewell, my tea and toast,
      My meerschaum and cigars!_

  '_The hues of life are dull and gray,
      The sweets of life insipid,
  When thou, my charmer, art away--
  Old Brick, or rather, let me say,
      Old Parallelepiped!_'

  Instead of singing Verse the Third,
      I ceased--abruptly, rather:
  But, after such a splendid word,
  I felt that it would be absurd
      To try it any farther.

  So with a yawn I went my way
      To seek the welcome downy,
  And slept, and dreamed till break of day
  Of Poltergeist and Fetch and Fay
      And Leprechaun and Brownie!

  For years I've not been visited
      By any kind of Sprite;
  Yet still they echo in my head,
  Those parting words, so kindly said,
      "Old Turnip-top, good-night!"

[Illustration]




ECHOES.


          Lady Clara Vere de Vere
          Was eight years old, she said:
  Every ringlet, lightly shaken, ran itself in golden thread.

          She took her little porringer:
          Of me she shall not win renown:
  For the baseness of its nature shall have strength to drag her down.

          "Sisters and brothers, little Maid?
          There stands the Inspector at thy door:
  Like a dog, he hunts for boys who know not two and two are four."

          "Kind words are more than coronets,"
          She said, and wondering looked at me:
  "It is the dead unhappy night, and I must hurry home to tea."




A SEA DIRGE.

[Illustration]


  There are certain things--as, a spider, a ghost,
    The income-tax, gout, an umbrella for three--
  That I hate, but the thing that I hate the most
        Is a thing they call the Sea.

  Pour some salt water over the floor--
    Ugly I'm sure you'll allow it to be:
  Suppose it extended a mile or more,
        _That's_ very like the Sea.

  Beat a dog till it howls outright--
    Cruel, but all very well for a spree:
  Suppose that he did so day and night,
        _That_ would be like the Sea.

  I had a vision of nursery-maids;
    Tens of thousands passed by me--
  All leading children with wooden spades,
        And this was by the Sea.

  Who invented those spades of wood?
    Who was it cut them out of the tree?
  None, I think, but an idiot could--
        Or one that loved the Sea.

  It is pleasant and dreamy, no doubt, to float
    With 'thoughts as boundless, and souls as free':
  But, suppose you are very unwell in the boat,
        How do you like the Sea?

[Illustration: "AND THIS WAS BY THE SEA"]

  There is an insect that people avoid
    (Whence is derived the verb 'to flee').
  Where have you been by it most annoyed?
        In lodgings by the Sea.

  If you like your coffee with sand for dregs,
    A decided hint of salt in your tea,
  And a fishy taste in the very eggs--
        By all means choose the Sea.

  And if, with these dainties to drink and eat,
    You prefer not a vestige of grass or tree,
  And a chronic state of wet in your feet,
      Then--I recommend the Sea.

  For _I_ have friends who dwell by the coast--
    Pleasant friends they are to me!
  It is when I am with them I wonder most
        That any one likes the Sea.

  They take me a walk: though tired and stiff,
    To climb the heights I madly agree;
  And, after a tumble or so from the cliff,
        They kindly suggest the Sea.

  I try the rocks, and I think it cool
    That they laugh with such an excess of glee,
  As I heavily slip into every pool
        That skirts the cold cold Sea.

[Illustration]




Y{e} Carpette Knyghte.


  I have a horse--a ryghte goode horse--
      Ne doe I envye those
  Who scoure y{e} playne yn headye course
      Tyll soddayne on theyre nose
  They lyghte wyth unexpected force--
      Yt ys--a horse of clothes.

  I have a saddel--"Say'st thou soe?
      Wyth styrruppes, Knyghte, to boote?"
  I sayde not that--I answere "Noe"--
      Yt lacketh such, I woote:
  Yt ys a mutton-saddel, loe!
      Parte of y{e} fleecye brute.

  I have a bytte--a ryghte good bytte--
      As shall bee seene yn tyme.
  Y{e} jawe of horse yt wyll not fytte;
      Yts use ys more sublyme.
  Fayre Syr, how deemest thou of yt?
      Yt ys--thys bytte of rhyme.

[Illustration: "I HAVE A HORSE"]




HIAWATHA'S PHOTOGRAPHING.

[In an age of imitation, I can claim no special merit for this slight
attempt at doing what is known to be so easy. Any fairly practised writer,
with the slightest ear for rhythm, could compose, for hours together, in
the easy running metre of 'The Song of Hiawatha.' Having, then, distinctly
stated that I challenge no attention in the following little poem to its
merely verbal jingle, I must beg the candid reader to confine his
criticism to its treatment of the subject.]


  From his shoulder Hiawatha
  Took the camera of rosewood,
  Made of sliding, folding rosewood;
  Neatly put it all together.
  In its case it lay compactly,
  Folded into nearly nothing;
  But he opened out the hinges,
  Pushed and pulled the joints and hinges,
  Till it looked all squares and oblongs,
  Like a complicated figure
  In the Second Book of Euclid.

[Illustration]

    This he perched upon a tripod--
  Crouched beneath its dusky cover--
  Stretched his hand, enforcing silence--
  Said "Be motionless, I beg you!"
  Mystic, awful was the process.
    All the family in order
  Sat before him for their pictures:
  Each in turn, as he was taken,
  Volunteered his own suggestions,
  His ingenious suggestions.
    First the Governor, the Father:
  He suggested velvet curtains
  Looped about a massy pillar;
  And the corner of a table,
  Of a rosewood dining-table.
  He would hold a scroll of something,
  Hold it firmly in his left-hand;
  He would keep his right-hand buried
  (Like Napoleon) in his waistcoat;
  He would contemplate the distance
  With a look of pensive meaning,
  As of ducks that die in tempests.
    Grand, heroic was the notion:
  Yet the picture failed entirely:
  Failed, because he moved a little,
  Moved, because he couldn't help it.
    Next, his better half took courage;
  She would have her picture taken.
  _She_ came dressed beyond description,
  Dressed in jewels and in satin
  Far too gorgeous for an empress.

[Illustration: "FIRST THE GOVERNOR, THE FATHER"]

  Gracefully she sat down sideways,
  With a simper scarcely human,
  Holding in her hand a bouquet
  Rather larger than a cabbage.
  All the while that she was sitting,
  Still the lady chattered, chattered,
  Like a monkey in the forest.
  "Am I sitting still?" she asked him.
  "Is my face enough in profile?
  Shall I hold the bouquet higher?
  Will it come into the picture?"
  And the picture failed completely.
    Next the Son, the Stunning-Cantab:
  He suggested curves of beauty,
  Curves pervading all his figure,
  Which the eye might follow onward,
  Till they centered in the breast-pin,
  Centered in the golden breast-pin.
  He had learnt it all from Ruskin
  (Author of 'The Stones of Venice,'
  'Seven Lamps of Architecture,'
  'Modern Painters,' and some others);
  And perhaps he had not fully
  Understood his author's meaning;
  But, whatever was the reason,
  All was fruitless, as the picture
  Ended in an utter failure.

[Illustration: "NEXT THE SON, THE STUNNING-CANTAB"]

    Next to him the eldest daughter:
  She suggested very little,
  Only asked if he would take her
  With her look of 'passive beauty.'
    Her idea of passive beauty
  Was a squinting of the left-eye,
  Was a drooping of the right-eye,
  Was a smile that went up sideways
  To the corner of the nostrils.
    Hiawatha, when she asked him,
  Took no notice of the question,
  Looked as if he hadn't heard it;
  But, when pointedly appealed to,
  Smiled in his peculiar manner,
  Coughed and said it 'didn't matter,'
  Bit his lip and changed the subject.
    Nor in this was he mistaken,
  As the picture failed completely.
    So in turn the other sisters.

[Illustration: "NEXT TO HIM THE ELDEST DAUGHTER"]

    Last, the youngest son was taken:
  Very rough and thick his hair was,
  Very round and red his face was,
  Very dusty was his jacket,
  Very fidgety his manner.
  And his overbearing sisters
  Called him names he disapproved of:
  Called him Johnny, 'Daddy's Darling,'
  Called him Jacky, 'Scrubby School-boy.'
  And, so awful was the picture,
  In comparison the others
  Seemed, to one's bewildered fancy,
  To have partially succeeded.
    Finally my Hiawatha
  Tumbled all the tribe together,
  ('Grouped' is not the right expression),
  And, as happy chance would have it,
  Did at last obtain a picture
  Where the faces all succeeded:
  Each came out a perfect likeness.

[Illustration: "LAST, THE YOUNGEST SON WAS TAKEN"]

    Then they joined and all abused it,
  Unrestrainedly abused it,
  As the worst and ugliest picture
  They could possibly have dreamed of.
  Giving one such strange expressions--
  Sullen, stupid, pert expressions.
  Really any one would take us
  (Any one that did not know us)
  For the most unpleasant people!'
  (Hiawatha seemed to think so,
  Seemed to think it not unlikely).
  All together rang their voices,
  Angry, loud, discordant voices,
  As of dogs that howl in concert,
  As of cats that wail in chorus.
    But my Hiawatha's patience,
  His politeness and his patience,
  Unaccountably had vanished,
  And he left that happy party.
  Neither did he leave them slowly,
  With the calm deliberation,
  The intense deliberation
  Of a photographic artist:
  But he left them in a hurry,
  Left them in a mighty hurry,
  Stating that he would not stand it,
  Stating in emphatic language
  What he'd be before he'd stand it.
  Hurriedly he packed his boxes:
  Hurriedly the porter trundled
  On a barrow all his boxes:
  Hurriedly he took his ticket:
  Hurriedly the train received him:
  Thus departed Hiawatha.

[Illustration]




MELANCHOLETTA.


  With saddest music all day long
    She soothed her secret sorrow:
  At night she sighed "I fear 'twas wrong
    Such cheerful words to borrow.
  Dearest, a sweeter, sadder song
    I'll sing to thee to-morrow."

  I thanked her, but I could not say
    That I was glad to hear it:
  I left the house at break of day,
    And did not venture near it
  Till time, I hoped, had worn away
    Her grief, for nought could cheer it!

[Illustration: "AT NIGHT SHE SIGHED"]

  My dismal sister! Couldst thou know
    The wretched home thou keepest!
  Thy brother, drowned in daily woe,
    Is thankful when thou sleepest;
  For if I laugh, however low,
    When thou'rt awake, thou weepest!

  I took my sister t'other day
    (Excuse the slang expression)
  To Sadler's Wells to see the play,
    In hopes the new impression
  Might in her thoughts, from grave to gay
    Effect some slight digression.

  I asked three gay young dogs from town
    To join us in our folly,
  Whose mirth, I thought, might serve to drown
    My sister's melancholy:
  The lively Jones, the sportive Brown,
    And Robinson the jolly.

  The maid announced the meal in tones
    That I myself had taught her,
  Meant to allay my sister's moans
    Like oil on troubled water:
  I rushed to Jones, the lively Jones,
    And begged him to escort her.

  Vainly he strove, with ready wit,
    To joke about the weather--
  To ventilate the last '_on dit_'--
    To quote the price of leather--
  She groaned "Here I and Sorrow sit:
    Let us lament together!"

  I urged "You're wasting time, you know:
    Delay will spoil the venison."
  "My heart is wasted with my woe!
    There is no rest--in Venice, on
  The Bridge of Sighs!" she quoted low
    From Byron and from Tennyson.

  I need not tell of soup and fish
    In solemn silence swallowed,
  The sobs that ushered in each dish,
    And its departure followed,
  Nor yet my suicidal wish
    To _be_ the cheese I hollowed.

  Some desperate attempts were made
    To start a conversation;
  "Madam," the sportive Brown essayed,
    "Which kind of recreation,
  Hunting or fishing, have you made
    Your special occupation?"

  Her lips curved downwards instantly,
    As if of india-rubber.
  "Hounds _in full cry_ I like," said she:
    (Oh how I longed to snub her!)
  "Of fish, a whale's the one for me,
    _It is so full of blubber_!"

  The night's performance was "King John."
    "It's dull," she wept, "and so-so!"
  A while I let her tears flow on,
    She said they soothed her woe so!
  At length the curtain rose upon
    'Bombastes Furioso.'

  In vain we roared; in vain we tried
    To rouse her into laughter:
  Her pensive glances wandered wide
    From orchestra to rafter--
  "_Tier upon tier!_" she said, and sighed;
    And silence followed after.

[Illustration]




A VALENTINE.

[Sent to a friend who had complained that I was glad enough to see him
when he came, but didn't seem to miss him if he stayed away.]


  And cannot pleasures, while they last,
  Be actual unless, when past,
  They leave us shuddering and aghast,
          With anguish smarting?
  And cannot friends be firm and fast,
          And yet bear parting?

  And must I then, at Friendship's call,
  Calmly resign the little all
  (Trifling, I grant, it is and small)
          I have of gladness,
  And lend my being to the thrall
          Of gloom and sadness?

  And think you that I should be dumb,
  And full _dolorum omnium_,
  Excepting when _you_ choose to come
          And share my dinner?
  At other times be sour and glum
          And daily thinner?

  Must he then only live to weep,
  Who'd prove his friendship true and deep?
  By day a lonely shadow creep,
          At night-time languish,
  Oft raising in his broken sleep
          The moan of anguish?

  The lover, if for certain days
  His fair one be denied his gaze,
  Sinks not in grief and wild amaze,
          But, wiser wooer,
  He spends the time in writing lays,
          And posts them to her.

  And if the verse flow free and fast,
  Till even the poet is aghast,
  A touching Valentine at last
          The post shall carry,
  When thirteen days are gone and past
          Of February.

  Farewell, dear friend, and when we meet,
  In desert waste or crowded street,
          Perhaps before this week shall fleet,
  Perhaps to-morrow,
  I trust to find _your_ heart the seat
          Of wasting sorrow.




THE THREE VOICES.


The First Voice.

[Illustration]

  He trilled a carol fresh and free:
  He laughed aloud for very glee:
  There came a breeze from off the sea:

  It passed athwart the glooming flat--
  It fanned his forehead as he sat--
  It lightly bore away his hat,

  All to the feet of one who stood
  Like maid enchanted in a wood,
  Frowning as darkly as she could.

  With huge umbrella, lank and brown,
  Unerringly she pinned it down,
  Right through the centre of the crown.

  Then, with an aspect cold and grim,
  Regardless of its battered rim,
  She took it up and gave it him.

  A while like one in dreams he stood,
  Then faltered forth his gratitude
  In words just short of being rude:

  For it had lost its shape and shine,
  And it had cost him four-and-nine,
  And he was going out to dine.

[Illustration: "UNERRINGLY SHE PINNED IT DOWN."]

  "To dine!" she sneered in acid tone.
  "To bend thy being to a bone
  Clothed in a radiance not its own!"

  The tear-drop trickled to his chin:
  There was a meaning in her grin
  That made him feel on fire within.

  "Term it not 'radiance,'" said he:
  "'Tis solid nutriment to me.
  Dinner is Dinner: Tea is Tea."

  And she "Yea so? Yet wherefore cease?
  Let thy scant knowledge find increase.
  Say 'Men are Men, and Geese are Geese.'"

  He moaned: he knew not what to say.
  The thought "That I could get away!"
  Strove with the thought "But I must stay."

  "To dine!" she shrieked in dragon-wrath.
  "To swallow wines all foam and froth!
  To simper at a table-cloth!

  "Say, can thy noble spirit stoop
  To join the gormandising troop
  Who find a solace in the soup?

  "Canst thou desire or pie or puff?
  Thy well-bred manners were enough,
  Without such gross material stuff."

  "Yet well-bred men," he faintly said,
  "Are not unwilling to be fed:
  Nor are they well without the bread."

  Her visage scorched him ere she spoke:
  "There are," she said, "a kind of folk
  Who have no horror of a joke.

  "Such wretches live: they take their share
  Of common earth and common air:
  We come across them here and there:

  "We grant them--there is no escape--
  A sort of semi-human shape
  Suggestive of the man-like Ape."

  "In all such theories," said he,
  "One fixed exception there must be.
  That is, the Present Company."

  Baffled, she gave a wolfish bark:
  He, aiming blindly in the dark,
  With random shaft had pierced the mark.

  She felt that her defeat was plain,
  Yet madly strove with might and main
  To get the upper hand again.

  Fixing her eyes upon the beach,
  As though unconscious of his speech,
  She said "Each gives to more than each."

  He could not answer yea or nay:
  He faltered "Gifts may pass away."
  Yet knew not what he meant to say.

  "If that be so," she straight replied,
  "Each heart with each doth coincide.
  What boots it? For the world is wide."

[Illustration: "HE FALTERED 'GIFTS MAY PASS AWAY.'"]

  "The world is but a Thought," said he:
  "The vast unfathomable sea
  Is but a Notion--unto me."

  And darkly fell her answer dread
  Upon his unresisting head,
  Like half a hundredweight of lead.

  "The Good and Great must ever shun
  That reckless and abandoned one
  Who stoops to perpetrate a pun.

  "The man that smokes--that reads the _Times_--
  That goes to Christmas Pantomimes--
  Is capable of _any_ crimes!"

  He felt it was his turn to speak,
  And, with a shamed and crimson cheek,
  Moaned "This is harder than Bezique!"

  But when she asked him "Wherefore so?"
  He felt his very whiskers glow,
  And frankly owned "I do not know."

[Illustration: "THIS IS HARDER THAN BEZIQUE!"]

  While, like broad waves of golden grain,
  Or sunlit hues on cloistered pane,
  His colour came and went again.

  Pitying his obvious distress,
  Yet with a tinge of bitterness,
  She said "The More exceeds the Less."

  "A truth of such undoubted weight,"
  He urged, "and so extreme in date,
  It were superfluous to state."

  Roused into sudden passion, she
  In tone of cold malignity:
  "To others, yea: but not to thee."

  But when she saw him quail and quake,
  And when he urged "For pity's sake!"
  Once more in gentle tone she spake.

  "Thought in the mind doth still abide:
  That is by Intellect supplied,
  And within that Idea doth hide:

  "And he, that yearns the truth to know,
  Still further inwardly may go,
  And find Idea from Notion flow:

  "And thus the chain, that sages sought,
  Is to a glorious circle wrought,
  For Notion hath its source in Thought."

  So passed they on with even pace:
  Yet gradually one might trace
  A shadow growing on his face.

[Illustration]


The Second Voice.

[Illustration]

  They walked beside the wave-worn beach;
  Her tongue was very apt to teach,
  And now and then he did beseech

  She would abate her dulcet tone,
  Because the talk was all her own,
  And he was dull as any drone.

  She urged "No cheese is made of chalk":
  And ceaseless flowed her dreary talk,
  Tuned to the footfall of a walk.

  Her voice was very full and rich,
  And, when at length she asked him "Which?"
  It mounted to its highest pitch.

  He a bewildered answer gave,
  Drowned in the sullen moaning wave,
  Lost in the echoes of the cave.

  He answered her he knew not what:
  Like shaft from bow at random shot,
  He spoke, but she regarded not.

  She waited not for his reply,
  But with a downward leaden eye
  Went on as if he were not by:

  Sound argument and grave defence,
  Strange questions raised on "Why?" and "Whence?"
  And wildly tangled evidence.

  When he, with racked and whirling brain,
  Feebly implored her to explain,
  She simply said it all again.

  Wrenched with an agony intense,
  He spake, neglecting Sound and Sense,
  And careless of all consequence:

  "Mind--I believe--is Essence--Ent--
  Abstract--that is--an Accident--
  Which we--that is to say--I meant--"

  When, with quick breath and cheeks all flushed,
  At length his speech was somewhat hushed,
  She looked at him, and he was crushed.

  It needed not her calm reply:
  She fixed him with a stony eye,
  And he could neither fight nor fly,

  While she dissected, word by word,
  His speech, half guessed at and half heard,
  As might a cat a little bird.

[Illustration: "HE SPAKE, NEGLECTING SOUND AND SENSE."]

  Then, having wholly overthrown
  His views, and stripped them to the bone,
  Proceeded to unfold her own.

  "Shall Man be Man? And shall he miss
  Of other thoughts no thought but this,
  Harmonious dews of sober bliss?

  "What boots it? Shall his fevered eye
  Through towering nothingness descry
  The grisly phantom hurry by?

  "And hear dumb shrieks that fill the air;
  See mouths that gape, and eyes that stare
  And redden in the dusky glare?

  "The meadows breathing amber light,
  The darkness toppling from the height,
  The feathery train of granite Night?

  "Shall he, grown gray among his peers,
  Through the thick curtain of his tears
  Catch glimpses of his earlier years,

[Illustration: "SHALL MAN BE MAN?"]

  "And hear the sounds he knew of yore,
  Old shufflings on the sanded floor,
  Old knuckles tapping at the door?

  "Yet still before him as he flies
  One pallid form shall ever rise,
  And, bodying forth in glassy eyes

  "The vision of a vanished good,
  Low peering through the tangled wood,
  Shall freeze the current of his blood."

  Still from each fact, with skill uncouth
  And savage rapture, like a tooth
  She wrenched some slow reluctant truth.

  Till, like a silent water-mill,
  When summer suns have dried the rill,
  She reached a full stop, and was still.

  Dead calm succeeded to the fuss,
  As when the loaded omnibus
  Has reached the railway terminus:

  When, for the tumult of the street,
  Is heard the engine's stifled beat,
  The velvet tread of porters' feet.

  With glance that ever sought the ground,
  She moved her lips without a sound,
  And every now and then she frowned.

  He gazed upon the sleeping sea,
  And joyed in its tranquillity,
  And in that silence dead, but she

  To muse a little space did seem,
  Then, like the echo of a dream,
  Harped back upon her threadbare theme.

  Still an attentive ear he lent
  But could not fathom what she meant:
  She was not deep, nor eloquent.

  He marked the ripple on the sand:
  The even swaying of her hand
  Was all that he could understand.

  He saw in dreams a drawing-room,
  Where thirteen wretches sat in gloom,
  Waiting--he thought he knew for whom:

  He saw them drooping here and there,
  Each feebly huddled on a chair,
  In attitudes of blank despair:

  Oysters were not more mute than they,
  For all their brains were pumped away,
  And they had nothing more to say--

  Save one, who groaned "Three hours are gone!"
  Who shrieked "We'll wait no longer, John!
  Tell them to set the dinner on!"

  The vision passed: the ghosts were fled:
  He saw once more that woman dread:
  He heard once more the words she said.

  He left her, and he turned aside:
  He sat and watched the coming tide
  Across the shores so newly dried.

[Illustration: "HE SAT AND WATCHED THE COMING TIDE"]

  He wondered at the waters clear,
  The breeze that whispered in his ear,
  The billows heaving far and near,

  And why he had so long preferred
  To hang upon her every word:
  "In truth," he said, "it was absurd."

[Illustration]


The Third Voice.

[Illustration]

  Not long this transport held its place:
  Within a little moment's space
  Quick tears were raining down his face.

  His heart stood still, aghast with fear;
  A wordless voice, nor far nor near,
  He seemed to hear and not to hear.

  "Tears kindle not the doubtful spark.
  If so, why not? Of this remark
  The bearings are profoundly dark."

  "Her speech," he said, "hath caused this pain.
  Easier I count it to explain
  The jargon of the howling main,

  "Or, stretched beside some babbling brook,
  To con, with inexpressive look,
  An unintelligible book."

  Low spake the voice within his head,
  In words imagined more than said,
  Soundless as ghost's intended tread:

  "If thou art duller than before,
  Why quittedst thou the voice of lore?
  Why not endure, expecting more?"

  "Rather than that," he groaned aghast,
  "I'd writhe in depths of cavern vast,
  Some loathly vampire's rich repast."

[Illustration: "HE GROANED AGHAST"]

  "'Twere hard," it answered, "themes immense
  To coop within the narrow fence
  That rings _thy_ scant intelligence."

  "Not so," he urged, "nor once alone:
  But there was something in her tone
  That chilled me to the very bone.

  "Her style was anything but clear,
  And most unpleasantly severe;
  Her epithets were very queer.

  "And yet, so grand were her replies,
  I could not choose but deem her wise;
  I did not dare to criticise;

  "Nor did I leave her, till she went
  So deep in tangled argument
  That all my powers of thought were spent."

  A little whisper inly slid,
  "Yet truth is truth: you know you did."
  A little wink beneath the lid.

  And, sickened with excess of dread,
  Prone to the dust he bent his head,
  And lay like one three-quarters dead.

  The whisper left him--like a breeze
  Lost in the depths of leafy trees--
  Left him by no means at his ease.

  Once more he weltered in despair,
  With hands, through denser-matted hair,
  More tightly clenched than then they were.

  When, bathed in Dawn of living red,
  Majestic frowned the mountain head,
  "Tell me my fault," was all he said.

  When, at high Noon, the blazing sky
  Scorched in his head each haggard eye,
  Then keenest rose his weary cry.

  And when at Eve the unpitying sun
  Smiled grimly on the solemn fun,
  "Alack," he sighed, "what _have_ I done?"

[Illustration: "TORTURED, UNAIDED, AND ALONE"]

  But saddest, darkest was the sight,
  When the cold grasp of leaden Night
  Dashed him to earth, and held him tight.

  Tortured, unaided, and alone,
  Thunders were silence to his groan,
  Bagpipes sweet music to its tone:

  "What? Ever thus, in dismal round,
  Shall Pain and Mystery profound
  Pursue me like a sleepless hound,

  "With crimson-dashed and eager jaws,
  Me, still in ignorance of the cause,
  Unknowing what I broke of laws?"

  The whisper to his ear did seem
  Like echoed flow of silent stream,
  Or shadow of forgotten dream,

  The whisper trembling in the wind:
  "Her fate with thine was intertwined,"
  So spake it in his inner mind:

[Illustration: "A SCARED DULLARD, GIBBERING LOW"]

  "Each orbed on each a baleful star:
  Each proved the other's blight and bar:
  Each unto each were best, most far:

  "Yea, each to each was worse than foe:
  Thou, a scared dullard, gibbering low,
  AND SHE, AN AVALANCHE OF WOE!"




TMA CON VARIAZINI.

[Why is it that Poetry has never yet been subjected to that process of
Dilution which has proved so advantageous to her sister-art Music? The
Diluter gives us first a few notes of some well-known Air, then a dozen
bars of his own, then a few more notes of the Air, and so on alternately:
thus saving the listener, if not from all risk of recognising the melody
at all, at least from the too-exciting transports which it might produce
in a more concentrated form. The process is termed "setting" by Composers,
and any one, that has ever experienced the emotion of being unexpectedly
set down in a heap of mortar, will recognise the truthfulness of this
happy phrase.

For truly, just as the genuine Epicure lingers lovingly over a morsel of
supreme Venison--whose every fibre seems to murmur "Excelsior!"--yet
swallows, ere returning to the toothsome dainty, great mouthfuls of
oatmeal-porridge and winkles: and just as the perfect Connoisseur in
Claret permits himself but one delicate sip, and then tosses off a pint or
more of boarding-school beer: so also----


  I never loved a dear Gazelle--
    _Nor anything that cost me much:
  High prices profit those who sell,
    But why should I be fond of such?_

  To glad me with his soft black eye
    _My son comes trotting home from school;
  He's had a fight, but can't tell why--
    He always was a little fool!_

  But, when he came to know me well,
    _He kicked me out, her testy Sire:
  And when I stained my hair, that Belle,
    Might note the change, and thus admire_

  And love me, it was sure to dye
    _A muddy green or staring blue:
  Whilst one might trace, with half an eye,
    The still triumphant carrot through_.




A GAME OF FIVES.

[Illustration]


  Five little girls, of Five, Four, Three, Two, One:
  Rolling on the hearthrug, full of tricks and fun.

  Five rosy girls, in years from Ten to Six:
  Sitting down to lessons--no more time for tricks.

  Five growing girls, from Fifteen to Eleven:
  Music, Drawing, Languages, and food enough for seven!

  Five winsome girls, from Twenty to Sixteen:
  Each young man that calls, I say "Now tell me which you _mean_!"

[Illustration: "NOW TELL ME WHICH YOU _MEAN_!"]

  Five dashing girls, the youngest Twenty-one:
  But, if nobody proposes, what is there to be done?

  Five showy girls--but Thirty is an age
  When girls may be _engaging_, but they somehow don't _engage_.

  Five dressy girls, of Thirty-one or more:
  So gracious to the shy young men they snubbed so much before!

         *       *       *       *       *

  Five _pass_ girls--Their age? Well, never mind!
  We jog along together, like the rest of human kind:
  But the quondam "careless bachelor" begins to think he knows
  The answer to that ancient problem "how the money goes"!




POETA FIT, NON NASCITUR.

[Illustration]


  "How shall I be a poet?
    How shall I write in rhyme?
  You told me once 'the very wish
    Partook of the sublime.'
  Then tell me how! Don't put me off
    With your 'another time'!"

  The old man smiled to see him,
    To hear his sudden sally;
  He liked the lad to speak his mind
    Enthusiastically;
  And thought "There's no hum-drum in him,
    Nor any shilly-shally."

  "And would you be a poet
    Before you've been to school?
  Ah, well! I hardly thought you
    So absolute a fool.
  First learn to be spasmodic--
    A very simple rule.

  "For first you write a sentence,
    And then you chop it small;
  Then mix the bits, and sort them out
    Just as they chance to fall:
  The order of the phrases makes
    No difference at all.

  "Then, if you'd be impressive,
    Remember what I say,
  That abstract qualities begin
    With capitals alway:
  The True, the Good, the Beautiful--
    Those are the things that pay!

  "Next, when you are describing
    A shape, or sound, or tint;
  Don't state the matter plainly,
    But put it in a hint;
  And learn to look at all things
    With a sort of mental squint."

  "For instance, if I wished, Sir,
    Of mutton-pies to tell,
  Should I say 'dreams of fleecy flocks
    Pent in a wheaten cell'?"
  "Why, yes," the old man said: "that phrase
    Would answer very well.

  "Then fourthly, there are epithets
    That suit with any word--
  As well as Harvey's Reading Sauce
    With fish, or flesh, or bird--
  Of these, 'wild,' 'lonely,' 'weary,' 'strange,'
    Are much to be preferred."

  "And will it do, O will it do
    To take them in a lump--
  As 'the wild man went his weary way
    To a strange and lonely pump'?"
  "Nay, nay! You must not hastily
    To such conclusions jump.

  "Such epithets, like pepper,
    Give zest to what you write;
  And, if you strew them sparely,
    They whet the appetite:
  But if you lay them on too thick,
    You spoil the matter quite!

[Illustration: "THE WILD MAN WENT HIS WEARY WAY"]

  "Last, as to the arrangement:
    Your reader, you should show him,
  Must take what information he
    Can get, and look for no im-
  mature disclosure of the drift
    And purpose of your poem.

  "Therefore, to test his patience--
    How much he can endure--
  Mention no places, names, or dates,
    And evermore be sure
  Throughout the poem to be found
    Consistently obscure.

  "First fix upon the limit
    To which it shall extend:
  Then fill it up with 'Padding'
    (Beg some of any friend):
  Your great SENSATION-STANZA
    You place towards the end."

  "And what is a Sensation,
    Grandfather, tell me, pray?
  I think I never heard the word
    So used before to-day:
  Be kind enough to mention one
    '_Exempli grati_.'"

  And the old man, looking sadly
    Across the garden-lawn,
  Where here and there a dew-drop
    Yet glittered in the dawn,
  Said "Go to the Adelphi,
    And see the 'Colleen Bawn.'

  "The word is due to Boucicault--
    The theory is his,
  Where Life becomes a Spasm,
    And History a Whiz:
  If that is not Sensation,
    I don't know what it is.

  "Now try your hand, ere Fancy
    Have lost its present glow--"
  "And then," his grandson added,
    "We'll publish it, you know:
  Green cloth--gold-lettered at the back--
    In duodecimo!"

  Then proudly smiled that old man
    To see the eager lad
  Rush madly for his pen and ink
    And for his blotting-pad--
  But, when he thought of _publishing_,
    His face grew stern and sad.

[Illustration]




THE HUNTING OF THE SNARK,

An Agony in Eight Fits.


PREFACE.

If--and the thing is wildly possible--the charge of writing nonsense were
ever brought against the author of this brief but instructive poem, it
would be based, I feel convinced, on the line (in p. 144)

  "Then the bowsprit got mixed with the rudder sometimes:"

In view of this painful possibility, I will not (as I might) appeal
indignantly to my other writings as a proof that I am incapable of such a
deed: I will not (as I might) point to the strong moral purpose of this
poem itself, to the arithmetical principles so cautiously inculcated in
it, or to its noble teachings in Natural History--I will take the more
prosaic course of simply explaining how it happened.

The Bellman, who was almost morbidly sensitive about appearances, used to
have the bowsprit unshipped once or twice a week to be revarnished; and it
more than once happened, when the time came for replacing it, that no one
on board could remember which end of the ship it belonged to. They knew it
was not of the slightest use to appeal to the Bellman about it--he would
only refer to his Naval Code, and read out in pathetic tones Admiralty
Instructions which none of them had ever been able to understand--so it
generally ended in its being fastened on, anyhow, across the rudder. The
helmsman[1] used to stand by with tears in his eyes: _he_ knew it was all
wrong, but alas! Rule 42 of the Code, "_No one shall speak to the Man at
the Helm_," had been completed by the Bellman himself with the words "_and
the Man at the Helm shall speak to no one_." So remonstrance was
impossible, and no steering could be done till the next varnishing day.
During these bewildering intervals the ship usually sailed backwards.

As this poem is to some extent connected with the lay of the Jabberwock,
let me take this opportunity of answering a question that has often been
asked me, how to pronounce "slithy toves." The "i" in "slithy" is long, as
in "writhe"; and "toves" is pronounced so as to rhyme with "groves."
Again, the first "o" in "borogoves" is pronounced like the "o" in
"borrow." I have heard people try to give it the sound of the "o" in
"worry." Such is Human Perversity.

     [1] This office was usually undertaken by the Boots, who found in it
     a refuge from the Baker's constant complaints about the insufficient
     blacking of his three pair of boots.

This also seems a fitting occasion to notice the other hard words in that
poem. Humpty-Dumpty's theory, of two meanings packed into one word like a
portmanteau, seems to me the right explanation for all.

For instance, take the two words "fuming" and "furious." Make up your mind
that you will say both words, but leave it unsettled which you will say
first. Now open your mouth and speak. If your thoughts incline ever so
little towards "fuming," you will say "fuming-furious"; if they turn, by
even a hair's breadth towards "furious," you will say "furious-fuming";
but if you have that rarest of gifts, a perfectly balanced mind, you will
say "frumious."

Supposing that, when Pistol uttered the well-known words--

  "Under which king, Bezonian? Speak or die!"

Justice Shallow had felt certain that it was either William or Richard,
but had not been able to settle which, so that he could not possibly say
either name before the other, can it be doubted that, rather than die, he
would have gasped out "Rilchiam!"


Fit the First.

_THE LANDING._

  "Just the place for a Snark!" the Bellman cried,
    As he landed his crew with care;
  Supporting each man on the top of the tide
    By a finger entwined in his hair.

  "Just the place for a Snark! I have said it twice:
    That alone should encourage the crew.
  Just the place for a Snark! I have said it thrice:
    What I tell you three times is true."

  The crew was complete: it included a Boots--
    A maker of Bonnets and Hoods--
  A Barrister, brought to arrange their disputes--
    And a Broker, to value their goods.

[Illustration: "SUPPORTING EACH MAN ON THE TOP OF THE TIDE"]

  A Billiard-marker, whose skill was immense,
    Might perhaps have won more than his share--
  But a Banker, engaged at enormous expense,
    Had the whole of their cash in his care.

  There was also a Beaver, that paced on the deck,
    Or would sit making lace in the bow:
  And had often (the Bellman said) saved them from wreck,
    Though none of the sailors knew how.

  There was one who was famed for the number of things
    He forgot when he entered the ship:
  His umbrella, his watch, all his jewels and rings,
    And the clothes he had bought for the trip.

  He had forty-two boxes, all carefully packed,
    With his name painted clearly on each:
  But since he omitted to mention the fact,
    They were all left behind on the beach.

  The loss of his clothes hardly mattered, because
    He had seven coats on when he came,
  With three pair of boots--but the worst of it was
    He had wholly forgotten his name.

[Illustration: "HE HAD WHOLLY FORGOTTEN HIS NAME"]

  He would answer to "Hi!" or to any loud cry,
    Such as "Fry me!" or "Fritter my wig!"
  To "What-you-may-call-um!" or "What-was-his-name!"
    But especially "Thing-um-a jig!"

  While, for those who preferred a more forcible word,
    He had different names from these:
  His intimate friends called him "Candle-ends,"
    And his enemies "Toasted-cheese."

  "His form is ungainly--his intellect small--"
    (So the Bellman would often remark)--
  "But his courage is perfect! And that, after all,
    Is the thing that one needs with a Snark."

  He would joke with hynas, returning their stare
    With an impudent wag of the head:
  And he once went a walk, paw-in-paw, with a bear,
    "Just to keep up its spirits," he said.

  He came as a Baker: but owned, when too late--
    And it drove the poor Bellman half-mad--
  He could only bake Bride-cake--for which, I may state,
    No materials were to be had.

  The last of the crew needs especial remark,
    Though he looked an incredible dunce:
  He had just one idea--but, that one being "Snark,"
    The good Bellman engaged him at once.

  He came as a Butcher: but gravely declared,
    When the ship had been sailing a week,
  He could only kill Beavers. The Bellman looked scared,
    And was almost too frightened to speak:

  But at length he explained, in a tremulous tone,
    There was only one Beaver on board;
  And that was a tame one he had of his own,
    Whose death would be deeply deplored.

  The Beaver, who happened to hear the remark,
    Protested, with tears in its eyes,
  That not even the rapture of hunting the Snark
    Could atone for that dismal surprise!

  It strongly advised that the Butcher should be
    Conveyed in a separate ship:
  But the Bellman declared that would never agree
    With the plans he had made for the trip:

[Illustration: "THE BEAVER KEPT LOOKING THE OPPOSITE WAY"]

  Navigation was always a difficult art,
    Though with only one ship and one bell:
  And he feared he must really decline, for his part,
    Undertaking another as well.

  The Beaver's best course was, no doubt, to procure
    A second-hand dagger-proof coat--
  So the Baker advised it--and next, to insure
    Its life in some Office of note:

  This the Banker suggested, and offered for hire
    (On moderate terms), or for sale,
  Two excellent Policies, one Against Fire,
    And one Against Damage From Hail.

  Yet still, ever after that sorrowful day,
    Whenever the Butcher was by,
  The Beaver kept looking the opposite way,
    And appeared unaccountably shy.


Fit the Second.

_THE BELLMAN'S SPEECH._

  The Bellman himself they all praised to the skies--
    Such a carriage, such ease and such grace!
  Such solemnity, too! One could see he was wise,
    The moment one looked in his face!

  He had bought a large map representing the sea,
    Without the least vestige of land:
  And the crew were much pleased when they found it to be
    A map they could all understand.

  "What's the good of Mercator's North Poles and Equators,
    Tropics, Zones, and Meridian Lines?"
  So the Bellman would cry: and the crew would reply
    "They are merely conventional signs!

[Illustration: OCEAN-CHART.]

  "Other maps are such shapes, with their islands and capes!
    But we've got our brave Captain to thank"
  (So the crew would protest) "that he's bought _us_ the best--
    A perfect and absolute blank!"

  This was charming, no doubt: but they shortly found out
    That the Captain they trusted so well
  Had only one notion for crossing the ocean,
    And that was to tingle his bell.

  He was thoughtful and grave--but the orders he gave
    Were enough to bewilder a crew.
  When he cried "Steer to starboard, but keep her head larboard!"
    What on earth was the helmsman to do?

  Then the bowsprit got mixed with the rudder sometimes:
    A thing, as the Bellman remarked,
  That frequently happens in tropical climes,
    When a vessel is, so to speak, "snarked."

  But the principal failing occurred in the sailing,
    And the Bellman, perplexed and distressed,
  Said he _had_ hoped, at least, when the wind blew due East,
    That the ship would _not_ travel due West!

  But the danger was past--they had landed at last,
    With their boxes, portmanteaus, and bags:
  Yet at first sight the crew were not pleased with the view
    Which consisted of chasms and crags.

  The Bellman perceived that their spirits were low,
    And repeated in musical tone
  Some jokes he had kept for a season of woe--
    But the crew would do nothing but groan.

  He served out some grog with a liberal hand,
    And bade them sit down on the beach:
  And they could not but own that their Captain looked grand,
    As he stood and delivered his speech.

  "Friends, Romans, and countrymen, lend me your ears!
    (They were all of them fond of quotations:
  So they drank to his health, and they gave him three cheers
    While he served out additional rations).

  "We have sailed many months, we have sailed many weeks,
    (Four weeks to the month you may mark),
  But never as yet ('tis your Captain who speaks)
    Have we caught the least glimpse of a Snark!

  "We have sailed many weeks, we have sailed many days,
    (Seven days to the week I allow),
  But a Snark, on the which we might lovingly gaze,
    We have never beheld till now!

  "Come, listen, my men, while I tell you again
    The five unmistakable marks
  By which you may know, wheresoever you go,
    The warranted genuine Snarks.

  "Let us take them in order. The first is the taste,
    Which is meagre and hollow, but crisp:
  Like a coat that is rather too tight in the waist,
    With a flavour of Will-o-the wisp.

  "Its habit of getting up late you'll agree
    That it carries too far, when I say
  That it frequently breakfasts at five o'clock tea,
    And dines on the following day.

  "The third is its slowness in taking a jest.
    Should you happen to venture on one,
  It will sigh like a thing that is deeply distressed:
    And it always looks grave at a pun.

  "The fourth is its fondness for bathing-machines,
    Which it constantly carries about,
  And believes that they add to the beauty of scenes--
    A sentiment open to doubt.

  "The fifth is ambition. It next will be right
    To describe each particular batch:
  Distinguishing those that have feathers, and bite,
    From those that have whiskers, and scratch.

  "For, although common Snarks do no manner of harm,
    Yet I feel it my duty to say
  Some are Boojums--" The Bellman broke off in alarm,
    For the Baker had fainted away.


Fit the Third.

_THE BAKER'S TALE._

  They roused him with muffins--they roused him with ice--
    They roused him with mustard and cress--
  They roused him with jam and judicious advice--
    They set him conundrums to guess.

  When at length he sat up and was able to speak,
    His sad story he offered to tell;
  And the Bellman cried "Silence! Not even a shriek!"
    And excitedly tingled his bell.

  There was silence supreme! Not a shriek, not a scream;
    Scarcely even a howl or a groan,
  As the man they called "Ho!" told his story of woe
    In an antediluvian tone.

  "My father and mother were honest, though poor--"
    "Skip all that!" cried the Bellman in haste.
  "If it once becomes dark, there's no chance of a Snark--
    We have hardly a minute to waste!"

  "I skip forty years," said the Baker, in tears,
    "And proceed without further remark
  To the day when you took me aboard of your ship
    To help you in hunting the Snark.

  "A dear uncle of mine (after whom I was named)
    Remarked, when I bade him farewell--"
  "Oh, skip your dear uncle!" the Bellman exclaimed,
    As he angrily tingled his bell.

  "He remarked to me then," said that mildest of men,
    "'If your Snark be a Snark, that is right:
  Fetch it home by all means--you may serve it with greens
    And it's handy for striking a light.

  "'You may seek it with thimbles--and seek it with care;
    You may hunt it with forks and hope;
  You may threaten its life with a railway-share;
    You may charm it with smiles and soap--'"

  ("That's exactly the method," the Bellman bold
    In a hasty parenthesis cried,
  "That's exactly the way I have always been told
    That the capture of Snarks should be tried!")

  "'But oh, beamish nephew, beware of the day,
    If your Snark be a Boojum! For then
  You will softly and suddenly vanish away,
    And never be met with again!'

  "It is this, it is this that oppresses my soul,
    When I think of my uncle's last words:
  And my heart is like nothing so much as a bowl
    Brimming over with quivering curds!

  "It is this, it is this--" "We have had that before!"
    The Bellman indignantly said.
  And the Baker replied "Let me say it once more.
    It is this, it is this that I dread!

  "I engage with the Snark--every night after dark--
    In a dreamy delirious fight:
  I serve it with greens in those shadowy scenes,
    And I use it for striking a light:

[Illustration: "BUT OH, BEAMISH NEPHEW, BEWARE OF THE DAY"]

  "But if ever I meet with a Boojum, that day,
    In a moment (of this I am sure),
  I shall softly and suddenly vanish away--
    And the notion I cannot endure!"


Fit the Fourth.

_THE HUNTING._

  The Bellman looked uffish, and wrinkled his brow.
    "If only you'd spoken before!
  It's excessively awkward to mention it now,
    With the Snark, so to speak, at the door!

  "We should all of us grieve, as you well may believe,
    If you never were met with again--
  But surely, my man, when the voyage began,
    You might have suggested it then?

  "It's excessively awkward to mention it now--
    As I think I've already remarked."
  And the man they called "Hi!" replied, with a sigh,
    "I informed you the day we embarked.

  "You may charge me with murder--or want of sense--
    (We are all of us weak at times):
  But the slightest approach to a false pretence
    Was never among my crimes!

  "I said it in Hebrew--I said it in Dutch--
    I said it in German and Greek:
  But I wholly forgot (and it vexes me much)
    That English is what you speak!"

  "'Tis a pitiful tale," said the Bellman, whose face
    Had grown longer at every word:
  "But, now that you've stated the whole of your case,
    More debate would be simply absurd.

  "The rest of my speech" (he explained to his men)
    "You shall hear when I've leisure to speak it.
  But the Snark is at hand, let me tell you again!
    'Tis your glorious duty to seek it!

  "To seek it with thimbles, to seek it with care;
    To pursue it with forks and hope;
  To threaten its life with a railway-share;
    To charm it with smiles and soap!

[Illustration: "TO PURSUE IT WITH FORKS AND HOPE."]

  "For the Snark's a peculiar creature, that won't
    Be caught in a commonplace way.
  Do all that you know, and try all that you don't:
    Not a chance must be wasted to-day!

  "For England expects--I forbear to proceed:
    'Tis a maxim tremendous, but trite:
  And you'd best be unpacking the things that you need
    To rig yourselves out for the fight."

  Then the Banker endorsed a blank cheque (which he crossed),
    And changed his loose silver for notes:
  The Baker with care combed his whiskers and hair,
    And shook the dust out of his coats:

  The Boots and the Broker were sharpening a spade--
    Each working the grindstone in turn:
  But the Beaver went on making lace, and displayed
    No interest in the concern:

  Though the Barrister tried to appeal to its pride,
    And vainly proceeded to cite
  A number of cases, in which making laces
    Had been proved an infringement of right.

  The maker of Bonnets ferociously planned
    A novel arrangement of bows:
  While the Billiard-marker with quivering hand
    Was chalking the tip of his nose.

  But the Butcher turned nervous, and dressed himself fine,
    With yellow kid gloves and a ruff--
  Said he felt it exactly like going to dine,
    Which the Bellman declared was all "stuff."

  "Introduce me, now there's a good fellow," he said,
    "If we happen to meet it together!"
  And the Bellman, sagaciously nodding his head,
    Said "That must depend on the weather."

  The Beaver went simply galumphing about,
    At seeing the Butcher so shy:
  And even the Baker, though stupid and stout,
    Made an effort to wink with one eye.

  "Be a man!" cried the Bellman in wrath, as he heard
    The Butcher beginning to sob.
  "Should we meet with a Jubjub, that desperate bird,
    We shall need all our strength for the job!"


Fit the Fifth.

_THE BEAVER'S LESSON._

  They sought it with thimbles, they sought it with care
    They pursued it with forks and hope;
  They threatened its life with a railway-share;
    They charmed it with smiles and soap.

  Then the Butcher contrived an ingenious plan
    For making a separate sally;
  And had fixed on a spot unfrequented by man,
    A dismal and desolate valley.

  But the very same plan to the Beaver occurred:
    It had chosen the very same place:
  Yet neither betrayed, by a sign or a word,
    The disgust that appeared in his face.

  Each thought he was thinking of nothing but "Snark"
    And the glorious work of the day;
  And each tried to pretend that he did not remark
    That the other was going that way.

  But the valley grew narrow and narrower still,
    And the evening got darker and colder,
  Till (merely from nervousness, not from good will)
    They marched along shoulder to shoulder.

  Then a scream, shrill and high, rent the shuddering sky,
    And they knew that some danger was near:
  The Beaver turned pale to the tip of its tail,
    And even the Butcher felt queer.

  He thought of his childhood, left far far behind--
    That blissful and innocent state--
  The sound so exactly recalled to his mind
    A pencil that squeaks on a slate!

  "'Tis the voice of the Jubjub!" he suddenly cried.
    (This man, that they used to call "Dunce.")
  "As the Bellman would tell you," he added with pride,
    "I have uttered that sentiment once."

  "'Tis the note of the Jubjub! Keep count, I entreat;
    You will find I have told it you twice.
  'Tis the song of the Jubjub! The proof is complete,
    If only I've stated it thrice."

  The Beaver had counted with scrupulous care,
    Attending to every word:
  But it fairly lost heart, and outgrabe in despair,
    When the third repetition occurred.

  It felt that, in spite of all possible pains,
    It had somehow contrived to lose count,
  And the only thing now was to rack its poor brains
    By reckoning up the amount.

  "Two added to one--if that could but be done,"
    It said, "with one's fingers and thumbs!"
  Recollecting with tears how, in earlier years,
    It had taken no pains with its sums.

  "The thing can be done," said the Butcher, "I think.
    The thing must be done, I am sure.
  The thing shall be done! Bring me paper and ink,
    The best there is time to procure."

  The Beaver brought paper, portfolio, pens,
    And ink in unfailing supplies:
  While strange creepy creatures came out of their dens,
    And watched them with wondering eyes.

  So engrossed was the Butcher, he heeded them not,
    As he wrote with a pen in each hand,
  And explained all the while in a popular style
    Which the Beaver could well understand.

  "Taking Three as the subject to reason about--
    A convenient number to state--
  We add Seven, and Ten, and then multiply out
    By One Thousand diminished by Eight.

  "The result we proceed to divide, as you see,
    By Nine-Hundred-and-Ninety-and-Two:
  Then subtract Seventeen, and the answer must be
    Exactly and perfectly true.

  "The method employed I would gladly explain,
    While I have it so clear in my head,
  If I had but the time and you had but the brain--
    But much yet remains to be said.

[Illustration: "THE BEAVER BROUGHT PAPER, PORTFOLIO, PENS"]

  "In one moment I've seen what has hitherto been
    Enveloped in absolute mystery,
  And without extra charge I will give you at large
    A Lesson in Natural History."

  In his genial way he proceeded to say
    (Forgetting all laws of propriety,
  And that giving instruction, without introduction,
    Would have caused quite a thrill in Society),

  "As to temper the Jubjub's a desperate bird,
    Since it lives in perpetual passion:
  Its taste in costume is entirely absurd--
    It is ages ahead of the fashion:

  "But it knows any friend it has met once before:
    It never will look at a bribe:
  And in charity-meetings it stands at the door,
    And collects--though it does not subscribe.

  "Its flavour when cooked is more exquisite far
    Than mutton, or oysters, or eggs:
  (Some think it keeps best in an ivory jar,
    And some, in mahogany kegs:)

  "You boil it in sawdust: you salt it in glue:
    You condense it with locusts and tape:
  Still keeping one principal object in view--
    To preserve its symmetrical shape."

  The Butcher would gladly have talked till next day,
    But he felt that the Lesson must end,
  And he wept with delight in attempting to say
    He considered the Beaver his friend:

  While the Beaver confessed, with affectionate looks
    More eloquent even than tears,
  It had learned in ten minutes far more than all books
    Would have taught it in seventy years.

  They returned hand-in-hand, and the Bellman, unmanned
    (For a moment) with noble emotion,
  Said "This amply repays all the wearisome days
    We have spent on the billowy ocean!"

  Such friends, as the Beaver and Butcher became,
    Have seldom if ever been known;
  In winter or summer, 'twas always the same--
    You could never meet either alone.

  And when quarrels arose--as one frequently finds
    Quarrels will, spite of every endeavour--
  The song of the Jubjub recurred to their minds,
    And cemented their friendship for ever!


Fit the Sixth.

_THE BARRISTER'S DREAM._

  They sought it with thimbles, they sought it with care;
    They pursued it with forks and hope;
  They threatened its life with a railway-share;
    They charmed it with smiles and soap.

  But the Barrister, weary of proving in vain
    That the Beaver's lace-making was wrong,
  Fell asleep, and in dreams saw the creature quite plain
    That his fancy had dwelt on so long.

  He dreamed that he stood in a shadowy Court,
    Where the Snark, with a glass in its eye,
  Dressed in gown, bands, and wig, was defending a pig
    On the charge of deserting its sty.

[Illustration: "'YOU MUST KNOW--' SAID THE JUDGE: BUT THE SNARK EXCLAIMED
'FUDGE!'"]

  The Witnesses proved, without error or flaw,
    That the sty was deserted when found:
  And the Judge kept explaining the state of the law
    In a soft under-current of sound.

  The indictment had never been clearly expressed,
    And it seemed that the Snark had begun,
  And had spoken three hours, before any one guessed
    What the pig was supposed to have done.

  The Jury had each formed a different view
    (Long before the indictment was read),
  And they all spoke at once, so that none of them knew
    One word that the others had said.

  "You must know--" said the Judge: but the Snark exclaimed "Fudge!
    That statute is obsolete quite!
  Let me tell you, my friends, the whole question depends
    On an ancient manorial right.

  "In the matter of Treason the pig would appear
    To have aided, but scarcely abetted:
  While the charge of Insolvency fails, it is clear,
    If you grant the plea 'never indebted.'

  "The fact of Desertion I will not dispute:
    But its guilt, as I trust, is removed
  (So far as relates to the costs of this suit)
    By the Alibi which has been proved.

  "My poor client's fate now depends on your votes."
    Here the speaker sat down in his place,
  And directed the Judge to refer to his notes
    And briefly to sum up the case.

  But the Judge said he never had summed up before;
    So the Snark undertook it instead,
  And summed it so well that it came to far more
    Than the Witnesses ever had said!

  When the verdict was called for, the Jury declined,
    As the word was so puzzling to spell;
  But they ventured to hope that the Snark wouldn't mind
    Undertaking that duty as well.

  So the Snark found the verdict, although, as it owned,
    It was spent with the toils of the day:
  When it said the word "GUILTY!" the Jury all groaned
    And some of them fainted away.

  Then the Snark pronounced sentence, the Judge being quite
    Too nervous to utter a word:
  When it rose to its feet, there was silence like night,
    And the fall of a pin might be heard.

  "Transportation for life" was the sentence it gave,
    "And _then_ to be fined forty pound."
  The Jury all cheered, though the Judge said he feared
    That the phrase was not legally sound.

  But their wild exultation was suddenly checked
    When the jailer informed them, with tears,
  Such a sentence would have not the slightest effect,
    As the pig had been dead for some years.

  The Judge left the Court, looking deeply disgusted:
    But the Snark, though a little aghast,
  As the lawyer to whom the defence was intrusted,
    Went bellowing on to the last.

  Thus the Barrister dreamed, while the bellowing seemed
    To grow every moment more clear:
  Till he woke to the knell of a furious bell,
    Which the Bellman rang close at his ear.


Fit the Seventh.

_THE BANKER'S FATE._

  They sought it with thimbles, they sought it with care;
    They pursued it with forks and hope;
  They threatened its life with a railway-share;
    They charmed it with smiles and soap.

  And the Banker, inspired with a courage so new
    It was matter for general remark,
  Rushed madly ahead and was lost to their view
    In his zeal to discover the Snark.

  But while he was seeking with thimbles and care,
    A Bandersnatch swiftly drew nigh
  And grabbed at the Banker, who shrieked in despair,
    For he knew it was useless to fly.

  He offered large discount--he offered a cheque
    (Drawn "to bearer") for seven-pounds-ten:
  But the Bandersnatch merely extended its neck
    And grabbed at the Banker again.

  Without rest or pause--while those frumious jaws
    Went savagely snapping around--
  He skipped and he hopped, and he floundered and flopped,
    Till fainting he fell to the ground.

  The Bandersnatch fled as the others appeared
    Led on by that fear-stricken yell:
  And the Bellman remarked "It is just as I feared!"
    And solemnly tolled on his bell.

  He was black in the face, and they scarcely could trace
    The least likeness to what he had been:
  While so great was his fright that his waistcoat turned white--
    A wonderful thing to be seen!

[Illustration: "SO GREAT WAS HIS FRIGHT THAT HIS WAISTCOAT TURNED WHITE."]

  To the horror of all who were present that day,
    He uprose in full evening dress,
  And with senseless grimaces endeavoured to say
    What his tongue could no longer express.

  Down he sank in a chair--ran his hands through his hair--
    And chanted in mimsiest tones
  Words whose utter inanity proved his insanity,
    While he rattled a couple of bones.

  "Leave him here to his fate--it is getting so late!"
    The Bellman exclaimed in a fright.
  "We have lost half the day. Any further delay,
    And we sha'n't catch a Snark before night!"


Fit the Eighth.

_THE VANISHING._

  They sought it with thimbles, they sought it with care;
    They pursued it with forks and hope;
  They threatened its life with a railway-share;
    They charmed it with smiles and soap.

  They shuddered to think that the chase might fail,
    And the Beaver, excited at last,
  Went bounding along on the tip of its tail,
    For the daylight was nearly past.

  "There is Thingumbob shouting!" the Bellman said.
    "He is shouting like mad, only hark!
  He is waving his hands, he is wagging his head,
    He has certainly found a Snark!"

  They gazed in delight, while the Butcher exclaimed
    "He was always a desperate wag!"
  They beheld him--their Baker--their hero unnamed--
    On the top of a neighbouring crag,

  Erect and sublime, for one moment of time.
    In the next, that wild figure they saw
  (As if stung by a spasm) plunge into a chasm,
    While they waited and listened in awe.

  "It's a Snark!" was the sound that first came to their ears,
    And seemed almost too good to be true.
  Then followed a torrent of laughter and cheers:
    Then the ominous words "It's a Boo--"

  Then, silence. Some fancied they heard in the air
    A weary and wandering sigh
  That sounded like "--jum!" but the others declare
    It was only a breeze that went by.

[Illustration: "THEN, SILENCE"]

  They hunted till darkness came on, but they found
    Not a button, or feather, or mark,
  By which they could tell that they stood on the ground
    Where the Baker had met with the Snark.

  In the midst of the word he was trying to say,
    In the midst of his laughter and glee,
  He had softly and suddenly vanished away--
    For the Snark _was_ a Boojum, you see.




SIZE AND TEARS.

[Illustration]


  When on the sandy shore I sit,
    Beside the salt sea-wave,
  And fall into a weeping fit
    Because I dare not shave--
  A little whisper at my ear
  Enquires the reason of my fear.

  I answer "If that ruffian Jones
    Should recognise me here,
  He'd bellow out my name in tones
    Offensive to the ear:
  He chaffs me so on being stout
  (A thing that always puts me out)."

  Ah me! I see him on the cliff!
    Farewell, farewell to hope,
  If he should look this way, and if
    He's got his telescope!
  To whatsoever place I flee,
  My odious rival follows me!

  For every night, and everywhere,
    I meet him out at dinner;
  And when I've found some charming fair,
    And vowed to die or win her,
  The wretch (he's thin and I am stout)
  Is sure to come and cut me out!

[Illustration: "HE'S THIN AND I AM STOUT"]

  The girls (just like them!) all agree
    To praise J. Jones, Esquire:
  I ask them what on earth they see
    About him to admire?
  They cry "He is so sleek and slim,
  It's quite a treat to look at him!"

  They vanish in tobacco smoke,
    Those visionary maids--
  I feel a sharp and sudden poke
    Between the shoulder-blades--
  "Why, Brown, my boy! You're growing stout!"
  (I told you he would find me out!)

  "My growth is not _your_ business, Sir!"
    "No more it is, my boy!
  But if it's _yours_, as I infer,
    Why, Brown, I give you joy!
  A man, whose business prospers so,
  Is just the sort of man to know!

  "It's hardly safe, though, talking here--
    I'd best get out of reach:
  For such a weight as yours, I fear,
    Must shortly sink the beach!"--

  Insult me thus because I'm stout!
  I vow I'll go and call him out!

[Illustration]




ATALANTA IN CAMDEN-TOWN.


            Ay, 'twas here, on this spot,
              In that summer of yore,
            Atalanta did not
              Vote my presence a bore,
  Nor reply to my tenderest talk "She had heard all that nonsense before."

            She'd the brooch I had bought
              And the necklace and sash on,
            And her heart, as I thought,
              Was alive to my passion;
  And she'd done up her hair in the style that the Empress had brought
    into fashion.

[Illustration]

            I had been to the play
              With my pearl of a Peri--
            But, for all I could say,
              She declared she was weary,
  That "the place was so crowded and hot, and she couldn't abide that
    Dundreary."

            Then I thought "'Tis for me
              That she whines and she whimpers!"
            And it soothed me to see
              Those sensational simpers,
  And I said "This is scrumptious!"--a phrase I had learned from the
    Devonshire shrimpers.

            And I vowed "'Twill be said
              I'm a fortunate fellow,
            When the breakfast is spread,
              When the topers are mellow,
  When the foam of the bride-cake is white, and the fierce orange-blossoms
    are yellow!"

            O that languishing yawn!
              O those eloquent eyes!
            I was drunk with the dawn
              Of a splendid surmise--
  I was stung by a look, I was slain by a tear, by a tempest of sighs.

            And I whispered "'Tis time!
              Is not Love at its deepest?
            Shall we squander Life's prime,
              While thou waitest and weepest?
  Let us settle it, License or Banns?--though undoubtedly Banns are the
    cheapest."

            "Ah, my Hero," said I,
              "Let me be thy Leander!"
            But I lost her reply--
              Something ending with "gander"--
  For the omnibus rattled so loud that no mortal could quite understand
    her.




THE LANG COORTIN'.


  The ladye she stood at her lattice high,
      Wi' her doggie at her feet;
  Thorough the lattice she can spy
      The passers in the street.

  "There's one that standeth at the door,
      And tirleth at the pin:
  Now speak and say, my popinjay,
      If I sall let him in."

  Then up and spake the popinjay
      That flew abune her head:
  "Gae let him in that tirls the pin:
      He cometh thee to wed."

  O when he cam' the parlour in,
      A woeful man was he!
  "And dinna ye ken your lover agen,
      Sae well that loveth thee?"

[Illustration]

  "And how wad I ken ye loved me, Sir,
      That have been sae lang away?
  And how wad I ken ye loved me, Sir?
      Ye never telled me sae."

  Said--"Ladye dear," and the salt, salt tear
      Cam' rinnin' doon his cheek,
  "I have sent thee tokens of my love
      This many and many a week.

  "O didna ye get the rings, Ladye,
      The rings o' the gowd sae fine?
  I wot that I have sent to thee
      Four score, four score and nine."

  "They cam' to me," said that fair ladye.
      "Wow, they were flimsie things!"
  Said--"that chain o' gowd, my doggie to howd,
      It is made o' thae self-same rings."

  "And didna ye get the locks, the locks,
      The locks o' my ain black hair,
  Whilk I sent by post, whilk I sent by box,
      Whilk I sent by the carrier?"

  "They cam' to me," said that fair ladye;
      "And I prithee send nae mair!"
  Said--"that cushion sae red, for my doggie's head,
      It is stuffed wi' thae locks o' hair."

  "And didna ye get the letter, Ladye,
      Tied wi' a silken string,
  Whilk I sent to thee frae the far countrie,
      A message of love to bring?"

  "It cam' to me frae the far countrie
      Wi' its silken string and a';
  But it wasna prepaid," said that high-born maid,
      "Sae I gar'd them tak' it awa'."

  "O ever alack that ye sent it back,
      It was written sae clerkly and well!
  Now the message it brought, and the boon that it sought,
      I must even say it mysel'."

  Then up and spake the popinjay,
      Sae wisely counselled he.
  "Now say it in the proper way:
      Gae doon upon thy knee!"

  The lover he turned baith red and pale,
      Went doon upon his knee:
  "O Ladye, hear the waesome tale
      That must be told to thee!

  "For five lang years, and five lang years,
      I coorted thee by looks;
  By nods and winks, by smiles and tears,
      As I had read in books.

  "For ten lang years, O weary hours!
      I coorted thee by signs;
  By sending game, by sending flowers,
      By sending Valentines.

  "For five lang years, and five lang years,
      I have dwelt in the far countrie,
  Till that thy mind should be inclined
      Mair tenderly to me.

  "Now thirty years are gane and past,
      I am come frae a foreign land:
  I am come to tell thee my love at last--
      O Ladye, gie me thy hand!"

  The ladye she turned not pale nor red,
      But she smiled a pitiful smile:
  "Sic' a coortin' as yours, my man," she said
      "Takes a lang and a weary while!"

  And out and laughed the popinjay,
      A laugh of bitter scorn:
  "A coortin' done in sic' a way,
      It ought not to be borne!"

[Illustration: "AND OUT AND LAUGHED THE POPINJAY"]

  Wi' that the doggie barked aloud,
      And up and doon he ran,
  And tugged and strained his chain o' gowd,
      All for to bite the man.

  "O hush thee, gentle popinjay!
      O hush thee, doggie dear!
  There is a word I fain wad say,
      It needeth he should hear!"

  Aye louder screamed that ladye fair
      To drown her doggie's bark:
  Ever the lover shouted mair
      To make that ladye hark:

  Shrill and more shrill the popinjay
      Upraised his angry squall:
  I trow the doggie's voice that day
      Was louder than them all!

  The serving-men and serving-maids
      Sat by the kitchen fire:
  They heard sic' a din the parlour within
      As made them much admire.

[Illustration: "O HUSH THEE, GENTLE POPINJAY!"]

  Out spake the boy in buttons
      (I ween he wasna thin),
  "Now wha will tae the parlour gae,
      And stay this deadlie din?"

  And they have taen a kerchief,
      Casted their kevils in,
  For wha should tae the parlour gae,
      And stay that deadlie din.

  When on that boy the kevil fell
      To stay the fearsome noise,
  "Gae in," they cried, "whate'er betide,
      Thou prince of button-boys!"

  Syne, he has taen a supple cane
      To swinge that dog sae fat:
  The doggie yowled, the doggie howled
      The louder aye for that.

  Syne, he has taen a mutton-bane--
      The doggie ceased his noise,
  And followed doon the kitchen stair
      That prince of button-boys!

[Illustration: "THE DOGGIE CEASED HIS NOISE"]

  Then sadly spake that ladye fair,
      Wi' a frown upon her brow:
  "O dearer to me is my sma' doggie
      Than a dozen sic' as thou!

  "Nae use, nae use for sighs and tears:
      Nae use at all to fret:
  Sin' ye've bided sae well for thirty years,
      Ye may bide a wee langer yet!"

  Sadly, sadly he crossed the floor
      And tirld at the pin:
  Sadly went he through the door
      Where sadly he cam' in.

  "O gin I had a popinjay
      To fly abune my head,
  To tell me what I ought to say,
      I had by this been wed.

  "O gin I find anither ladye,"
      He said wi' sighs and tears,
  "I wot my coortin' sall not be
      Anither thirty years:

  "For gin I find a ladye gay,
      Exactly to my taste,
  I'll pop the question, aye or nay,
      In twenty years at maist."

[Illustration]




FOUR RIDDLES.

[These consist of two Double Acrostics and two Charades.

No. I. was written at the request of some young friends, who had gone to a
ball at an Oxford Commemoration--and also as a specimen of what might be
done by making the Double Acrostic _a connected poem_ instead of what it
has hitherto been, a string of disjointed stanzas, on every conceivable
subject, and about as interesting to read straight through as a page of a
Cyclopdia. The first two stanzas describe the two main words, and each
subsequent stanza one of the cross "lights."

No. II. was written after seeing Miss Ellen Terry perform in the play of
"Hamlet." In this case the first stanza describes the two main words.

No. III. was written after seeing Miss Marion Terry perform in Mr.
Gilbert's play of "Pygmalion and Galatea." The three stanzas respectively
describe "My First," "My Second," and "My Whole."]


I.

  There was an ancient City, stricken down
    With a strange frenzy, and for many a day
  They paced from morn to eve the crowded town,
              And danced the night away.

  I asked the cause: the aged man grew sad:
    They pointed to a building gray and tall,
  And hoarsely answered "Step inside, my lad,
              And then you'll see it all."

         *       *       *       *       *

  Yet what are all such gaieties to me
    Whose thoughts are full of indices and surds?
  x{2} + 7x + 53
              = 11/3.

  But something whispered "It will soon be done:
    Bands cannot always play, nor ladies smile:
  Endure with patience the distasteful fun
              For just a little while!"

  A change came o'er my Vision--it was night:
    We clove a pathway through a frantic throng:
  The steeds, wild-plunging, filled us with affright:
              The chariots whirled along.

  Within a marble hall a river ran--
    A living tide, half muslin and half cloth:
  And here one mourned a broken wreath or fan,
              Yet swallowed down her wrath;

  And here one offered to a thirsty fair
    (His words half-drowned amid those thunders tuneful)
  Some frozen viand (there were many there),
              A tooth-ache in each spoonful.

  There comes a happy pause, for human strength
    Will not endure to dance without cessation;
  And every one must reach the point at length
              Of absolute prostration.

  At such a moment ladies learn to give,
    To partners who would urge them over-much,
  A flat and yet decided negative--
              Photographers love such.

  There comes a welcome summons--hope revives,
    And fading eyes grow bright, and pulses quicken:
  Incessant pop the corks, and busy knives
              Dispense the tongue and chicken.

  Flushed with new life, the crowd flows back again:
    And all is tangled talk and mazy motion--
  Much like a waving field of golden grain,
              Or a tempestuous ocean.

  And thus they give the time, that Nature meant
    For peaceful sleep and meditative snores,
  To ceaseless din and mindless merriment
              And waste of shoes and floors.

  And One (we name him not) that flies the flowers,
    That dreads the dances, and that shuns the salads,
  They doom to pass in solitude the hours,
              Writing acrostic-ballads.

  How late it grows! The hour is surely past
    That should have warned us with its double-knock?
  The twilight wanes, and morning comes at last--
              "Oh, Uncle, what's o'clock?"

  The Uncle gravely nods, and wisely winks.
    It _may_ mean much, but how is one to know?
  He opes his mouth--yet out of it, methinks,
              No words of wisdom flow.


II.

  Empress of Art, for thee I twine
    This wreath with all too slender skill.
  Forgive my Muse each halting line,
    And for the deed accept the will!

         *       *       *       *       *

  O day of tears! Whence comes this spectre grim,
    Parting, like Death's cold river, souls that love?
  Is not he bound to thee, as thou to him,
    By vows, unwhispered here, yet heard above?

  And still it lives, that keen and heavenward flame,
    Lives in his eye, and trembles in his tone:
  And these wild words of fury but proclaim
    A heart that beats for thee, for thee alone!

  But all is lost: that mighty mind o'erthrown,
    Like sweet bells jangled, piteous sight to see!
  "Doubt that the stars are fire," so runs his moan,
    "Doubt Truth herself, but not my love for thee!"

  A sadder vision yet: thine aged sire
    Shaming his hoary locks with treacherous wile!
  And dost thou now doubt Truth to be a liar?
    And wilt thou die, that hast forgot to smile?

  Nay, get thee hence! Leave all thy winsome ways
    And the faint fragrance of thy scattered flowers:
  In holy silence wait the appointed days,
    And weep away the leaden-footed hours.


III.

  The air is bright with hues of light
    And rich with laughter and with singing:
  Young hearts beat high in ecstasy,
    And banners wave, and bells are ringing:
  But silence falls with fading day,
  And there's an end to mirth and play.
            Ah, well-a-day!

  Rest your old bones, ye wrinkled crones!
    The kettle sings, the firelight dances.
  Deep be it quaffed, the magic draught
    That fills the soul with golden fancies!
  For Youth and Pleasance will not stay,
  And ye are withered, worn, and gray.
            Ah, well-a-day!

  O fair cold face! O form of grace,
    For human passion madly yearning!
  O weary air of dumb despair,
    From marble won, to marble turning!
  "Leave us not thus!" we fondly pray.
  "We cannot let thee pass away!"
            Ah, well-a-day!


IV.

  My First is singular at best:
      More plural is my Second:
  My Third is far the pluralest--
  So plural-plural, I protest
      It scarcely can be reckoned!

  My First is followed by a bird:
      My Second by believers
  In magic art: my simple Third
  Follows, too often, hopes absurd
      And plausible deceivers.

  My First to get at wisdom tries--
      A failure melancholy!
  My Second men revered as wise:
  My Third from heights of wisdom flies
      To depths of frantic folly.

  My First is ageing day by day:
      My Second's age is ended:
  My Third enjoys an age, they say,
  That never seems to fade away,
      Through centuries extended.

  My Whole? I need a poet's pen
      To paint her myriad phases:
  The monarch, and the slave, of men--
  A mountain-summit, and a den
      Of dark and deadly mazes--

  A flashing light--a fleeting shade--
      Beginning, end, and middle
  Of all that human art hath made
  Or wit devised! Go, seek _her_ aid,
      If you would read my riddle!




FAME'S PENNY-TRUMPET.

[Affectionately dedicated to all "original researchers" who pant for
"endowment."]


  Blow, blow your trumpets till they crack,
    Ye little men of little souls!
  And bid them huddle at your back--
    Gold-sucking leeches, shoals on shoals!

  Fill all the air with hungry wails--
    "Reward us, ere we think or write!
  Without your Gold mere Knowledge fails
    To sate the swinish appetite!"

  And, where great Plato paced serene,
    Or Newton paused with wistful eye,
  Rush to the chace with hoofs unclean
    And Babel-clamour of the sty!

  Be yours the pay: be theirs the praise:
    We will not rob them of their due,
  Nor vex the ghosts of other days
    By naming them along with you.

  They sought and found undying fame:
    They toiled not for reward nor thanks:
  Their cheeks are hot with honest shame
    For you, the modern mountebanks!

  Who preach of Justice--plead with tears
    That Love and Mercy should abound--
  While marking with complacent ears
    The moaning of some tortured hound:

  Who prate of Wisdom--nay, forbear,
    Lest Wisdom turn on you in wrath,
  Trampling, with heel that will not spare,
    The vermin that beset her path!

  Go, throng each other's drawing-rooms,
    Ye idols of a petty clique:
  Strut your brief hour in borrowed plumes,
    And make your penny-trumpets squeak:

[Illustration: "GO, THRONG EACH OTHER'S DRAWING-ROOMS"]

  Deck your dull talk with pilfered shreds
    Of learning from a nobler time,
  And oil each other's little heads
    With mutual Flattery's golden slime:

  And when the topmost height ye gain,
    And stand in Glory's ether clear,
  And grasp the prize of all your pain--
    So many hundred pounds a year--

  Then let Fame's banner be unfurled!
    Sing Pans for a victory won!
  Ye tapers, that would light the world,
    And cast a shadow on the Sun--

  Who still shall pour His rays sublime,
    One crystal flood, from East to West,
  When ye have burned your little time
    And feebly flickered into rest!


THE END.




[TURN OVER.




WORKS BY LEWIS CARROLL.


ALICE'S ADVENTURES IN WONDERLAND. With Forty-two Illustrations by TENNIEL.
Crown 8vo, cloth, gilt edges, price 6_s._ Seventy-first Thousand.

TRANSLATIONS OF THE SAME--into French, by HENRI BU--into German, by
ANTONIE ZIMMERMANN--and into Italian, by T. PIETROCLA ROSSETTI--with
TENNIEL'S Illustrations. Crown 8vo, cloth, gilt edges, price 6_s._ each.

THROUGH THE LOOKING-GLASS, AND WHAT ALICE FOUND THERE. With Fifty
Illustrations by TENNIEL. Crown 8vo, cloth, gilt edges, price 6_s._
Fifty-second Thousand.

RHYME? AND REASON? With Sixty-five Illustrations by ARTHUR B. FROST, and
Nine by HENRY HOLIDAY. (This book is a reprint, with a few additions, of
the comic portion of "Phantasmagoria and other Poems," and of "The Hunting
of the Snark." Mr. Frost's pictures are new.) Crown 8vo, cloth, coloured
edges, price 7_s._


N.B. In selling the above-mentioned books to the Trade, Messrs. Macmillan
and Co. will abate 2_d._ in the shilling (no odd copies), and allow 5 per
cent. discount for payment within six months, and 10 per cent. for cash.
In selling them to the Public (for cash only) they will allow 10 per cent.
discount.


MR. LEWIS CARROLL, having been requested to allow "AN EASTER GREETING" (a
leaflet, addressed to children, and frequently given with his books) to be
sold separately, has arranged with Messrs. HARRISON, of 59, Pall Mall, who
will supply a single copy for 1_d._, or 12 for 9_d._, or 100 for 5_s._


MACMILLAN & CO., LONDON.

LONDON: R. CLAY, SONS, AND TAYLOR, PRINTERS.





SONGS FROM

ALICE IN WONDERLAND

AND

THROUGH THE LOOKING-GLASS


[Illustration]


WORDS BY LEWIS CARROLL

MUSIC BY LUCY E. BROADWOOD

ILLUSTRATIONS BY CHARLES FOLKARD


[Illustration]


A. & C. BLACK, LTD., 4, 5 & 6, SOHO SQUARE, LONDON, W. 1.

  _This Book is published by kind permission of
  Messrs. Macmillan & Co., Ltd._

Published, October, 1921.

[Illustration]




CONTENTS.


  SONGS FROM ALICE IN WONDERLAND.

                                                        PAGE

    HOW DOTH THE LITTLE CROCODILE                         11

    YOU ARE OLD, FATHER WILLIAM                           13

    TWINKLE, TWINKLE, LITTLE BAT!                         15

    PIG AND PEPPER                                        17

    THE LOBSTER QUADRILLE                                 19

    'TIS THE VOICE OF THE LOBSTER                         21

    BEAUTIFUL SOUP                                        23

    THE QUEEN OF HEARTS                                   24

    WHO STOLE THE TARTS?                                  25


  SONGS FROM THROUGH THE LOOKING-GLASS.

    JABBERWOCKY                                           29

    TWEEDLEDUM AND TWEEDLEDEE                             31

    THE WALRUS AND THE CARPENTER                          33

    HUMPTY, DUMPTY                                        35

    THE MESSAGE TO THE FISH                               37

    THE LION AND THE UNICORN                              39

    THE AGED, AGED MAN                                    41

    QUEEN ALICE                                           45

    THE FISH RIDDLE                                       47

    HUSH-A-BY, LADY                                       48

     It has been found necessary to slightly alter the original
     arrangement of the songs; "Pig and Pepper" and "Twinkle,
     twinkle, little Bat!" have been transposed, and "Hush-a-by,
     Lady" has been placed last instead of before "Queen Alice."

[Illustration: OFF WITH HIS HEAD]




ILLUSTRATIONS IN COLOUR

BY

CHARLES FOLKARD.


  A MAD TEA-PARTY                               FRONTISPIECE

                                                        PAGE

  YET YOU BALANCE AN EEL ON THE END OF YOUR NOSE         12

  SPEAK ROUGHLY TO YOUR LITTLE BOY                       16

  THE LOBSTER QUADRILLE                                  18

  BEAUTIFUL SOUP                                         22

  HE TOOK HIS VORPAL SWORD IN HAND                       28

  THE WALRUS AND THE CARPENTER                           32

  I WENT AND SHOUTED IN HIS EAR                          36

  I LOOK FOR BUTTERFLIES THAT SLEEP AMONG THE WHEAT      40

  THEN FILL UP THE GLASSES WITH TREACLE AND INK          44

  THE FISH RIDDLE                                        46

  ALICE AND HER FRIENDS                        ON THE COVER

[Illustration: DRINK ME]




[Illustration:

SONGS FROM

ALICE

IN

WONDERLAND]

[Illustration]




[Illustration: How doth the little Crocodile]


[Music:

    How doth the little crocodile
    Improve his shining tail,
    And pour the waters of the Nile
    On ev'ry golden scale!
    How cheerfully he seems to grin,
    How neatly spreads his claws,
    And welcomes little fishes in
    With gently smiling jaws!]

[Illustration]

[Illustration]




[Illustration: You are old, Father William]


[Music:

    "You are old, Father William," the young man said,
      "And your hair has become very white;
    And yet you incessantly stand on your head--
      Do you think, at your age, it is right?"

    "In my youth," Father William replied to his son,
      "I feared it might injure the brain;
    But, now that I'm perfectly sure I have none,
      Why I do it again and again."]

[Illustration]

    "You are old," said the youth, "as I mentioned before,
      And have grown most uncommonly fat;
    Yet you turned a back-somersault in at the door--
      Pray, what is the reason of that?"

    "In my youth," said the sage, as he shook his grey locks,
      "I kept all my limbs very supple
    By the use of this ointment--one shilling the box--
      Allow me to sell you a couple."

    "You are old," said the youth, "and your jaws are too weak
      For anything tougher than suet;
    Yet you finished the goose, with the bones and the beak--
      Pray, how did you manage to do it?"

    "In my youth," said his father, "I took to the law,
      And argued each case with my wife;
    And the muscular strength which it gave to my jaw,
      Has lasted the rest of my life."

    "You are old," said the youth; "one would hardly suppose
      That your eye was as steady as ever;
    Yet you balance an eel on the end of your nose--
      What made you so awfully clever?"

    "I have answered three questions, and that is enough,"
      Said his father; "don't give yourself airs!
    Do you think I can listen all day to such stuff?
      Be off, or I'll kick you down stairs!"

[Illustration]




[Illustration: Twinkle, twinkle, little Bat]


[Music:

    Twinkle, twinkle, little bat!
    How I wonder what you're at!
    Up above the world you fly,
    Like a tea-tray in the sky!]

[Illustration]

[Illustration]




[Illustration: Pig and Pepper]


[Music:

    "Speak roughly to your little boy,
      And beat him when he sneezes;
    He only does it to annoy,
      Because he knows it teases."
                Wow! Wow! Wow!]

    "I speak severely to my boy,
      I beat him when he sneezes;
    For he can thoroughly enjoy
      The pepper when he pleases."
                Wow! Wow! Wow!

[Illustration]

[Illustration]




[Illustration: The Lobster Quadrille]


[Music:

    "Will you walk a little faster?" said a whiting to a snail,
    "There's a porpoise close behind us, and he's treading on my tail.
    See how eagerly the lobsters and the turtles all advance!
    They are waiting on the shingle--will you come and join the dance?
    Will you, won't you, will you, won't you, will you join the dance?
    Will you, won't you, will you, won't you, won't you join the dance?"]

[Illustration]

    "You can really have no notion how delightful it will be
    When they take us up and throw us, with the lobsters, out to sea!"
    But the snail replied, "Too far, too far!" and gave a look askance--
    Said he thanked the whiting kindly, but he would not join the dance.
    Would not, could not, would not, could not, would not join the dance.
    Would not, could not, would not, could not, could not join the dance.

    "What matters it how far we go?" his scaly friend replied;
    "There is another shore, you know, upon the other side.
    The further off from England the nearer is to France--
    Then turn not pale, belovd snail, but come and join the dance.
    Will you, won't you, will you, won't you, will you join the dance?
    Will you, won't you, will you, won't you, won't you join the dance?"

[Illustration]




[Illustration: 'Tis the Voice of the Lobster]


[Music:

    'Tis the voice of the lobster; I heard him declare,
    "You have baked me too brown, I must sugar my hair."
    As a duck with its eyelids, so he with his nose
    Trims his belt and his buttons, and turns out his toes.]

[Illustration]

[Illustration]




[Illustration: Beautiful Soup]


[Music:

    Beautiful soup, so rich and green,
    Waiting in a hot tureen!
    Who for such dainties would not stoop?
    Soup of the ev'ning, beautiful soup!
    Soup of the ev'ning, beautiful soup!
          Beautiful soo-oop!
          Beautiful soo-oop!
    Soo-oop of the e-e-ev'ning,
          Beautiful, beautiful soo-oo-oop!]

    "Beautiful soup! Who cares for fish,
    Game, or any other dish?
    Who would not give all else for two p-
    ennyworth only of beautiful soup!
    Pennyworth only of beautiful soup!
          Beautiful soo-oop!
          Beautiful soo-oop!
    Soo-oop of the e-e-ev'ning,
          Beautiful, beautiful soo-oo-oop!"

[Illustration]

[Transcriber's Note: The hyphen at the end of the third line of the
second verse is deliberate in the original, so that "two p-"
pronounced as one syllable rhymes with "soup."]




[Illustration: The Queen of Hearts]


[Music:

    The Queen of Hearts, she made some tarts,
    All on a summer day:
    The Knave of Hearts, he stole those tarts,
    And took them quite away!]

[Illustration]




[Illustration: Who stole the Tarts]


[Music:

    They told me you had been to her,
      And mentioned me to him:
    She gave me a good character,
      But said I could not swim.

    He sent them word I had not gone
      (We know it to be true):
    If she should push the matter on,
      What would become of you?]

    I gave her one, they gave him two,
      You gave us three or more;
    They all returned from him to you,
      Though they were mine before.

    If I or she should chance to be
      Involved in this affair,
    He trusts to you to set them free,
      Exactly as we were.

    My notion was that you had been
      (Before she had this fit)
    An obstacle that came between
      Him, and ourselves, and it.

    Don't let him know she liked them best,
      For this must ever be
    A secret, kept from all the rest,
      Between yourself and me.

[Illustration]

[Illustration]




[Illustration:

  SONGS FROM
  THROUGH
  THE
  LOOKING-GLASS]

[Illustration]




[Illustration: Jabberwocky]


[Music:

    'Twas brillig, and the slithy toves
      Did gyre and gimble in the wabe;
    All mimsy were the borogoves,
      And the mome raths outgrabe.

    "Beware the Jabberwock, my son!
      The jaws that bite, the claws that catch!
    Beware the Jubjub bird, and shun
      The frumious Bandersnatch!"]

[Illustration]

    He took his vorpal sword in hand:
      Long time the manxome foe he sought--
    So rested he by the Tumtum tree,
      And stood awhile in thought.

    And as in uffish thought he stood,
      The Jabberwock, with eyes of flame,
    Came whiffling through the tulgey wood,
      And burbled as it came.

    One, two! One, two! And through and through
      The vorpal blade went snicker-snack!
    He left it dead, and with its head
      He went galumphing back.

    "And hast thou slain the Jabberwock?--
      Come to my arms, my beamish boy!
    O frabjous day! Callooh! Callay!"
      He chortled in his joy.

    'Twas brillig, and the slithy toves
      Did gyre and gimble in the wabe;
    All mimsy were the borogoves,
      And the mome raths outgrabe.

[Illustration]




[Illustration: Tweedledum and Tweedledee]


[Music:

    Tweedledum and Tweedledee
    Agreed to have a battle;
    For Tweedledum said Tweedledee
    Had spoiled his nice new rattle.

    Just then flew down a monstrous crow,
    As black as a tar barrel;
    Which frightened both the heroes so,
    They quite forgot their quarrel.]

[Illustration]

[Illustration]




[Illustration: The Walrus and the Carpenter]


[Music:

    The sun was shining on the sea,
      Shining with all his might:
    He did his very best to make
      The billows smooth and bright--
    And this was odd, because it was
      The middle of the night.]

    The moon was shining sulkily,
      Because she thought the sun
    Had got no bus'ness to be there
      After the day was done--
    "It's very rude of him," she said,
      "To come and spoil the fun!"

    The sea was wet as wet could be,
      The sands were dry as dry.
    You could not see a cloud, because
      No cloud was in the sky:
    No birds were flying overhead--
      There were no birds to fly.

    The Walrus and the Carpenter
      Were walking close at hand;
    They wept like anything to see
      Such quantities of sand:
    "If this were only cleared away,"
      They said, "it would be grand!"

    "If seven maids with seven mops
      Swept it for half a year,
    Do you suppose," the Walrus said,
      "That they could get it clear?"
    "I doubt it," said the Carpenter,
      And shed a bitter tear.

    "O, Oysters, come and walk with us!"
      The Walrus did beseech,
    "A pleasant walk, a pleasant talk,
      Along the briny beach:
    We cannot do with more than four,
      To give a hand to each."

    The eldest Oyster looked at him,
      But never a word he said:
    The eldest Oyster winked his eye,
      And shook his heavy head--
    Meaning to say he did not choose
      To leave the oyster-bed.

    But four young Oysters hurried up,
      All eager for the treat:
    Their coats were brushed, their faces washed,
      Their shoes were clean and neat--
    And this was odd, because, you know,
      They hadn't any feet!

    Four other Oysters followed them,
      And yet another four;
    And thick and fast they came at last,
      And more, and more, and more--
    All hopping through the frothy waves,
     And scrambling to the shore.

[Illustration]

    The Walrus and the Carpenter
      Walked on a mile or so,
    And then they rested on a rock
      Conveniently low;
    And all the little Oysters stood
      And waited in a row.

    "The time has come," the Walrus said,
      "To talk of many things:
    Of shoes--and ships--and sealing-wax--
      Of cabbages--and kings--
    And why the sea is boiling hot--
      And whether pigs have wings."

    "But wait a bit," the Oysters cried,
      "Before we have our chat;
    For some of us are out of breath,
      And all of us are fat!"
    "No hurry," said the Carpenter:
      They thanked him much for that.

    "A loaf of bread," the Walrus said,
      "Is chiefly what we need:
    Pepper and vinegar, besides,
      Are very good indeed--
    Now, if you're ready, Oysters dear,
      We can begin to feed."

    "But not on us!" the Oysters cried,
      Turning a little blue.
    "After such kindness, that would be
      A dismal thing to do!"
    "The night is fine," the Walrus said.
      "Do you admire the view?"

    "It was so kind of you to come!
      And you are very nice!"
    The Carpenter said nothing, but
      "Cut us another slice:
    I wish you were not quite so deaf--
      I've had to ask you twice!"

    "It seems a shame," the Walrus said,
      "To play them such a trick,
    After we've brought them out so far,
      And made them trot so quick!"
    The Carpenter said nothing, but
      "The butter's spread too thick!"

    "I weep for you," the Walrus said:
      "I deeply sympathize."
    With sobs and tears he sorted out
      Those of the largest size,
    Holding his pocket-handkerchief
      Before his streaming eyes.

    "Oh, Oysters," said the Carpenter,
      "You've had a pleasant run!
    Shall we be trotting home again?"
      But answer came there none--
    And this was scarcely odd, because
      They'd eaten every one.

[Illustration]




[Illustration: Humpty Dumpty]


[Music:

    Humpty Dumpty sat on a wall:
    Humpty Dumpty had a great fall.
    All the King's horses and all the King's men
    Couldn't put Humpty Dumpty in his place again.]

[Illustration]

[Illustration]




[Illustration: The Message to the Fish]


[Music:

    In winter, when the fields are white,
    I sing this song for your delight--

    In spring, when woods are getting green,
    I'll try and tell you what I mean.

    In summer, when the days are long,
    Perhaps you'll understand the song:

    In autumn, when the leaves are brown,
    Take pen and ink, and write it down.]

[Illustration]

    I sent a message to the fish:
    I told them "This is what I wish."

    The little fishes of the sea
    They sent an answer back to me.

    The little fishes' answer was
    "We cannot do it, sir, because--"

    I sent to them again to say
    "It will be better to obey."

    The fishes answered, with a grin,
    "Why, what a temper you are in!"

    I told them once, I told them twice:
    They would not listen to advice.

    I took a kettle large and new,
    Fit for the deed I had to do.

    My heart went hop, my heart went thump;
    I filled the kettle at the pump.

    Then some one came to me, and said,
    "The little fishes are in bed."

    I said to him, I said it plain,
    "Then you must wake them up again."

    I said it very loud and clear;
    I went and shouted in his ear.

    But he was very stiff and proud;
    He said, "You needn't shout so loud!"

    And he was very proud and stiff;
    He said, "I'd go and wake them, if--"

    I took a corkscrew from the shelf:
    I went to wake them up myself.

    And when I found the door was locked,
    I pulled and pushed, and kicked and knocked.

    And when I found the door was shut,
    I tried to turn the handle, but--

[Illustration]




[Illustration: The Lion and the Unicorn]


[Music:

    The Lion and the Unicorn were fighting for the Crown:
    The Lion beat the Unicorn all round the town.
    Some gave them white bread, some gave them brown;
    Some gave them plum cake, and drummed them out of town.]

[Illustration]

[Illustration]




[Illustration: The Aged, Aged Man]


[Music:

     Tune "I give thee all, I can no more," adapted by T. MOORE
     from H. BISHOP, arranged by L. BROADWOOD.

    I'll tell thee ev'rything I can;
      There's little to relate.
    I saw an aged, aged man,
      A-sitting on a gate.
    "Who are you, aged man?" I said.
      "And how is it you live?"
    And his answer trickled through my head
      Like water through a sieve.]

    He said, "I look for butterflies
      That sleep among the wheat:
    I make them into mutton pies,
      And sell them in the street.
    I sell them unto men," he said,
      "Who sail on stormy seas;
    And that's the way I get my bread--
      A trifle, if you please."

    But I was thinking of a plan
      To dye one's whiskers green,
    And always use so large a fan
      That they should not be seen.
    So, having no reply to give
      To what the old man said,
    I cried, "Come, tell me how you live!"
      And thumped him on the head.

    His accents mild took up the tale:
      He said "I go my ways,
    And when I find a mountain rill,
      I set it in a blaze;
    And thence they make a stuff they call
      Rowlands' Macassar Oil--
    Yet two-pence-halfpenny is all
      They give me for my toil!"

    But I was thinking of a way
      To feed oneself on batter,
    And so go on from day to day
      Getting a little fatter.
    I shook him well from side to side,
      Until his face was blue:
    "Come, tell me how you live," I cried,
      "And what it is you do!"

[Illustration]

    He said, "I hunt for haddocks' eyes
      Among the heather bright,
    And work them into waistcoat-buttons
      In the silent night.
    And these I do not sell for gold
      Or coin of silv'ry shine,
    But for a copper halfpenny,
      And that will purchase nine."

    "I sometimes dig for buttered rolls,
      Or set limed twigs for crabs;
    I sometimes search the grassy knolls
      For wheels of Hansom-cabs!
    And that's the way" (he gave a wink)
      "By which I get my wealth--
    And very gladly will I drink
      Your honour's noble health."

    I heard him then, for I had just
      Completed my design
    To keep the Menai bridge from rust
      By boiling it in wine.
    I thanked him much for telling me
      The way he got his wealth,
    But chiefly for his wish that he
      Might drink my noble health.

[Illustration]

[Music:

    And now, if e'er by chance I put
      My fingers into glue,
    Or madly squeeze a right-hand foot
      Into a left-hand shoe,
    Or if I drop upon my toe
      A very heavy weight,
    I weep, for it reminds me so
      Of that old man I used to know--
    Whose look was mild, whose speech was slow,
    Whose hair was whiter than the snow,
    Whose face was very like a crow,
    With eyes, like cinders, all a-glow,
    Who seem'd distracted with his woe,
    Who rocked his body to and fro,
    And muttered mumblingly and low,
    As if his mouth were full of dough;
    Who snorted like a buffalo
    That summer ev'ning, long ago,
      A-sitting on a gate!]

[Illustration]

[Illustration]




[Illustration: Queen Alice]


[Music:

    To the Looking-Glass world it was Alice that said,
    "I've a sceptre in hand, I've a crown on my head;
    Let the Looking-Glass creatures, whatever they be,
    Come and dine with the Red Queen, the White Queen, and me!"]

    Then fill up the glasses as quick as you can,
    And sprinkle the table with buttons and bran:
    Put cats in the coffee, and mice in the tea--
    And welcome Queen Alice with thirty-times-three!

    "Oh, Looking-Glass creatures," quoth Alice, "draw near!
    'Tis an honour to see me, a favour to hear:
    'Tis a privilege high to have dinner and tea
    Along with the Red Queen, the White Queen, and me!"

    Then fill up the glasses with treacle and ink,
    Or anything else that is pleasant to drink;
    Mix sand with the cider, and wool with the wine--
    And welcome Queen Alice with ninety-times-nine!

[Illustration]

[Illustration]




[Illustration: The Fish Riddle]


[Music:

    1. "First, the fish must be caught."
    That is easy: a baby, I think, could have caught it.
    "Next, the fish must be bought."
    That is easy: a penny, I think, would have bought it.
    "Now, cook me the fish!"
    That is easy, and will not take more than a minute.
    "Let it lie in a dish!"
    That is easy, because it already is in it!

    2. "Bring it here! Let me sup!"
    It is easy to set such a dish on the table.
    "Take the dish-cover up!"
    Ah, that is so hard that I fear I'm unable!
    For it holds it like glue--
    Holds the lid to the dish, while it lies in the middle:
    Which is easiest to do,
    Undish-cover the fish, or dish-cover the riddle?]

[Illustration]




[Illustration: Hush-a-by, Lady]


[Music:

    Hush-a-by, lady, in Alice's lap!
    Till the feast's ready we've time for a nap:
    When the feast's over we'll go to the ball--
    Red Queen, and White Queen, and Alice, and all!]

[Illustration]







SYLVIE and BRUNO  by  LEWIS CARROLL



Is all our Life, then but a dream
Seen faintly in the goldern gleam
Athwart Time's dark resistless stream?

Bowed to the earth with bitter woe
Or laughing at some raree-show
We flutter idly to and fro.

Man's little Day in haste we spend,
And, from its merry noontide, send
No glance to meet the silent end.





CONTENTS

Preface  [Moved to the end]

CHAPTER 1  Less Bread!  More Taxes!
CHAPTER 2  L'amie Inconnue
CHAPTER 3  Birthday Presents
CHAPTER 4  A Cunning Conspiracy
CHAPTER 5  A Beggar's Palace
CHAPTER 6  The Magic Locket
CHAPTER 7  The Barons Embassy
CHAPTER 8  A Ride on a Lion
CHAPTER 9  A Jester and a Bear
CHAPTER 10 The Other Professor
CHAPTER 11 Peter and Paul
CHAPTER 12 A Musical Gardener
CHAPTER 13 A Visit to Dogland
CHAPTER 14 Fairy-Sylvie
CHAPTER 15 Bruno's Revenge
CHAPTER 16 A Changed Crocodile
CHAPTER 17 The Three Badgers
CHAPTER 18 Queer Street, number forty
CHAPTER 19 How to make a Phlizz
CHAPTER 20 Light come, light go
CHAPTER 21 Through the Ivory Door
CHAPTER 22 Crossing the Line
CHAPTER 23 An outlandish watch
CHAPTER 24 The Frogs' Birthday-treat
CHAPTER 25 Looking Easward
Preface  [Moved to the end]






SYLVIE AND BRUNO


CHAPTER 1.

LESS BREAD!  MORE TAXES!

--and then all the people cheered again, and one man, who was more
excited than the rest, flung his hat high into the air, and shouted
(as well as I could make out) "Who roar for the Sub-Warden?"  Everybody
roared, but whether it was for the Sub-Warden, or not, did not clearly
appear: some were shouting "Bread!" and some "Taxes!", but no one
seemed to know what it was they really wanted.

All this I saw from the open window of the Warden's breakfast-saloon,
looking across the shoulder of the Lord Chancellor, who had sprung to
his feet the moment the shouting began, almost as if he had been
expecting it, and had rushed to the window which commanded the best
view of the market-place.

"What can it all mean?" he kept repeating to himself, as, with his
hands clasped behind him, and his gown floating in the air, he paced
rapidly up and down the room.  "I never heard such shouting before--
and at this time of the morning, too!  And with such unanimity!
Doesn't it strike you as very remarkable?"

I represented, modestly, that to my ears it appeared that they were
shouting for different things, but the Chancellor would not listen to
my suggestion for a moment.  "They all shout the same words, I assure
you!" he said: then, leaning well out of the window, he whispered to a
man who was standing close underneath, "Keep'em together, ca'n't you?
The Warden will be here directly.  Give'em the signal for the march up!"
All this was evidently not meant for my ears, but I could scarcely help
hearing it, considering that my chin was almost on the Chancellor's
shoulder.

The 'march up' was a very curious sight:

[Image...The march-up]

a straggling procession of men, marching two and two, began from the
other side of the market-place, and advanced in an irregular zig-zag
fashion towards the Palace, wildly tacking from side to side, like a
sailing vessel making way against an unfavourable wind so that the head
of the procession was often further from us at the end of one tack than
it had been at the end of the previous one.

Yet it was evident that all was being done under orders, for I noticed
that all eyes were fixed on the man who stood just under the window,
and to whom the Chancellor was continually whispering.  This man held
his hat in one hand and a little green flag in the other: whenever he
waved the flag the procession advanced a little nearer, when he dipped
it they sidled a little farther off, and whenever he waved his hat they
all raised a hoarse cheer.  "Hoo-roah!" they cried, carefully keeping
time with the hat as it bobbed up and down.  "Hoo-roah! Noo! Consti!
Tooshun! Less! Bread! More! Taxes!"

"That'll do, that'll do!" the Chancellor whispered.  "Let 'em rest a bit
till I give you the word.  He's not here yet!"  But at this moment the
great folding-doors of the saloon were flung open, and he turned with a
guilty start to receive His High Excellency.  However it was only Bruno,
and the Chancellor gave a little gasp of relieved anxiety.

"Morning!" said the little fellow, addressing the remark, in a general
sort of way, to the Chancellor and the waiters.  "Doos oo know where
Sylvie is?  I's looking for Sylvie!"

"She's with the Warden, I believe, y'reince!" the Chancellor replied
with a low bow.  There was, no doubt, a certain amount of absurdity in
applying this title (which, as of course you see without my telling
you, was nothing but 'your Royal Highness' condensed into one syllable)
to a small creature whose father was merely the Warden of Outland:
still, large excuse must be made for a man who had passed several years
at the Court of Fairyland, and had there acquired the almost impossible
art of pronouncing five syllables as one.

But the bow was lost upon Bruno, who had run out of the room, even
while the great feat of The Unpronounceable Monosyllable was being
triumphantly performed.

Just then, a single voice in the distance was understood to shout
"A speech from the Chancellor!"  "Certainly, my friends!" the Chancellor
replied with extraordinary promptitude.  "You shall have a speech!"
Here one of the waiters, who had been for some minutes busy making a
queer-looking mixture of egg and sherry, respectfully presented it on a
large silver salver.  The Chancellor took it haughtily, drank it off
thoughtfully, smiled benevolently on the happy waiter as he set down
the empty glass, and began.  To the best of my recollection this is what
he said.

"Ahem! Ahem! Ahem! Fellow-sufferers, or rather suffering fellows--"
("Don't call 'em names!" muttered the man under the window.
"I didn't say felons!" the Chancellor explained.)
"You may be sure that I always sympa--"
("'Ear, 'ear!" shouted the crowd, so loudly as quite to drown the
orator's thin squeaky voice) "--that I always sympa--" he repeated.
("Don't simper quite so much!" said the man under the window.
"It makes yer look a hidiot!"  And, all this time, "'Ear, 'ear!" went
rumbling round the market-place, like a peal of thunder.)
"That I always sympathise!" yelled the Chancellor, the first moment
there was silence.  "But your true friend is the Sub-Warden!
Day and night he is brooding on your wrongs--I should say your rights--
that is to say your wrongs--no, I mean your rights--"
("Don't talk no more!" growled the man under the window.
"You're making a mess of it!") At this moment the Sub-Warden entered
the saloon.  He was a thin man, with a mean and crafty face, and a
greenish-yellow complexion; and he crossed the room very slowly,
looking suspiciously about him as if be thought there might be a
savage dog hidden somewhere.  "Bravo!" he cried, patting the Chancellor
on the back.  "You did that speech very well indeed.
Why, you're a born orator, man!"

"Oh, that's nothing! the Chancellor replied, modestly, with downcast
eyes.  "Most orators are born, you know."

The Sub-Warden thoughtfully rubbed his chin.  "Why, so they are!" he
admitted.  "I never considered it in that light.  Still, you did it very
well.  A word in your ear!"

The rest of their conversation was all in whispers: so, as I could hear
no more, I thought I would go and find Bruno.

I found the little fellow standing in the passage, and being addressed
by one of the men in livery, who stood before him, nearly bent double
from extreme respectfulness, with his hands hanging in front of him
like the fins of a fish.  "His High Excellency," this respectful man was
saying, "is in his Study, y'reince!"  (He didn't pronounce this quite so
well as the Chancellor.) Thither Bruno trotted, and I thought it well
to follow him.

The Warden, a tall dignified man with a grave but very pleasant face,
was seated before a writing-table, which was covered with papers, and
holding on his knee one of the sweetest and loveliest little maidens it
has ever been my lot to see.  She looked four or five years older than
Bruno, but she had the same rosy cheeks and sparkling eyes, and the
same wealth of curly brown hair.  Her eager smiling face was turned
upwards towards her father's, and it was a pretty sight to see the
mutual love with which the two faces--one in the Spring of Life,
the other in its late Autumn--were gazing on each other.

"No, you've never seen him," the old man was saying: "you couldn't,
you know, he's been away so long--traveling from land to land,
and seeking for health, more years than you've been alive, little Sylvie!"
Here Bruno climbed upon his other knee, and a good deal of kissing,
on a rather complicated system, was the result.

"He only came back last night," said the Warden, when the kissing was
over: "he's been traveling post-haste, for the last thousand miles or
so, in order to be here on Sylvie's birthday.  But he's a very early
riser, and I dare say he's in the Library already.  Come with me and see
him.  He's always kind to children.  You'll be sure to like him."

"Has the Other Professor come too?"  Bruno asked in an awe-struck voice.

"Yes, they arrived together.  The Other Professor is--well, you won't
like him quite so much, perhaps.  He's a little more dreamy, you know."

"I wiss Sylvie was a little more dreamy," said Bruno.

"What do you mean, Bruno?" said Sylvie.

Bruno went on addressing his father.  "She says she ca'n't, oo know.
But I thinks it isn't ca'n't, it's wo'n't."

"Says she ca'n't dream!" the puzzled Warden repeated.

"She do say it," Bruno persisted.  "When I says to her 'Let's stop
lessons!', she says 'Oh, I ca'n't dream of letting oo stop yet!'"

"He always wants to stop lessons," Sylvie explained, "five minutes
after we begin!"

"Five minutes' lessons a day!" said the Warden.  "You won't learn much
at that rate, little man!"

"That's just what Sylvie says," Bruno rejoined.  "She says I wo'n't
learn my lessons.  And I tells her, over and over, I ca'n't learn 'em.
And what doos oo think she says?  She says 'It isn't ca'n't, it's
wo'n't!'"

"Let's go and see the Professor," the Warden said, wisely avoiding
further discussion.  The children got down off his knees, each secured a
hand, and the happy trio set off for the Library--followed by me.
I had come to the conclusion by this time that none of the party
(except, for a few moments, the Lord Chancellor) was in the least able
to see me.

"What's the matter with him?"  Sylvie asked, walking with a little extra
sedateness, by way of example to Bruno at the other side, who never
ceased jumping up and down.

[Image...Visiting the profesor]

"What was the matter--but I hope he's all right now--was lumbago,
and rheumatism, and that kind of thing.  He's been curing himself,
you know: he's a very learned doctor.  Why, he's actually invented
three new diseases, besides a new way of breaking your collar-bone!"

"Is it a nice way?" said Bruno.

"Well, hum, not very," the Warden said, as we entered the Library.
"And here is the Professor.  Good morning, Professor!  Hope you're quite
rested after your journey!"

A jolly-looking, fat little man, in a flowery dressing-gown, with a
large book under each arm, came trotting in at the other end of the
room, and was going straight across without taking any notice of the
children.  "I'm looking for Vol.  Three," he said.
"Do you happen to have seen it?"

"You don't see my children, Professor!" the Warden exclaimed, taking
him by the shoulders and turning him round to face them.

The Professor laughed violently: then he gazed at them through his
great spectacles, for a minute or two, without speaking.

At last he addressed Bruno.  "I hope you have had a good night, my child?"
Bruno looked puzzled.  "I's had the same night oo've had," he replied.
"There's only been one night since yesterday!"

It was the Professor's turn to look puzzled now.
He took off his spectacles, and rubbed them with his handkerchief.
Then he gazed at them again.  Then he turned to the Warden.
"Are they bound?" he enquired.

"No, we aren't," said Bruno, who thought himself quite able to answer
this question.

The Professor shook his head sadly.  "Not even half-bound?"

"Why would we be half-bound?" said Bruno.

"We're not prisoners!"

But the Professor had forgotten all about them by this time, and was
speaking to the Warden again.  "You'll be glad to hear," he was saying,
"that the Barometer's beginning to move--"

"Well, which way?" said the Warden--adding, to the children,
"Not that I care, you know.  Only he thinks it affects the weather.
He's a wonderfully clever man, you know.  Sometimes he says things that
only the Other Professor can understand.  Sometimes he says things that
nobody can understand!  Which way is it, Professor?  Up or down?"

"Neither!" said the Professor, gently clapping his hands.  "It's going
sideways--if I may so express myself."

"And what kind of weather does that produce?" said the Warden.
"Listen, children!  Now you'll hear something worth knowing!"

"Horizontal weather," said the Professor, and made straight for the
door, very nearly trampling on Bruno, who had only just time to get out
of his way.

"Isn't he learned?" the Warden said, looking after him with admiring
eyes.  "Positively he runs over with learning!"

"But he needn't run over me!" said Bruno.

The Professor was back in a moment: he had changed his dressing-gown
for a frock-coat, and had put on a pair of very strange-looking boots,
the tops of which were open umbrellas.  "I thought you'd like to see
them," he said.  "These are the boots for horizontal weather!"

[Image...Boots for horizontal weather]

"But what's the use of wearing umbrellas round one's knees?"

"In ordinary rain," the Professor admitted, "they would not be of much
use.  But if ever it rained horizontally, you know, they would be
invaluable--simply invaluable!"

"Take the Professor to the breakfast-saloon, children," said the
Warden.  "And tell them not to wait for me.  I had breakfast early,
as I've some business to attend to." The children seized the Professor's
hands, as familiarly as if they had known him for years, and hurried
him away.  I followed respectfully behind.


CHAPTER 2.

L'AMIE INCONNUE.

As we entered the breakfast-saloon, the Professor was saying "--and
he had breakfast by himself, early: so he begged you wouldn't wait for
him, my Lady.  This way, my Lady," he added, "this way!"  And then, with
(as it seemed to me) most superfluous politeness, he flung open the
door of my compartment, and ushered in "--a young and lovely lady!"
I muttered to myself with some bitterness.  "And this is, of course,
the opening scene of Vol. I.  She is the Heroine.  And I am one of those
subordinate characters that only turn up when needed for the
development of her destiny, and whose final appearance is outside the
church, waiting to greet the Happy Pair!"

"Yes, my Lady, change at Fayfield," were the next words I heard
(oh that too obsequious Guard!), "next station but one." And the door
closed, and the lady settled down into her corner, and the monotonous
throb of the engine (making one feel as if the train were some gigantic
monster, whose very circulation we could feel) proclaimed that we were
once more speeding on our way.  "The lady had a perfectly formed nose,"
I caught myself saying to myself, "hazel eyes, and lips--" and here
it occurred to me that to see, for myself, what "the lady" was really
like, would be more satisfactory than much speculation.

I looked round cautiously, and--was entirely disappointed of my
hope.  The veil, which shrouded her whole face, was too thick for me to
see more than the glitter of bright eyes and the hazy outline of what
might be a lovely oval face, but might also, unfortunately, be an
equally unlovely one.  I closed my eyes again, saying to myself
"--couldn't have a better chance for an experiment in Telepathy!
I'll think out her face, and afterwards test the portrait with the
original."

At first, no result at all crowned my efforts, though I 'divided my
swift mind,' now hither, now thither, in a way that I felt sure would
have made AEneas green with envy: but the dimly-seen oval remained as
provokingly blank as ever--a mere Ellipse, as if in some mathematical
diagram, without even the Foci that might be made to do duty as a nose
and a mouth.  Gradually, however, the conviction came upon me that I
could, by a certain concentration of thought, think the veil away,
and so get a glimpse of the mysterious face--as to which the two
questions, "is she pretty?" and "is she plain?", still hung suspended,
in my mind, in beautiful equipoise.

Success was partial--and fitful--still there was a result: ever and
anon, the veil seemed to vanish, in a sudden flash of light: but,
before I could fully realise the face, all was dark again.  In each such
glimpse, the face seemed to grow more childish and more innocent:
and, when I had at last thought the veil entirely away, it was,
unmistakeably, the sweet face of little Sylvie!

"So, either I've been dreaming about Sylvie," I said to myself,
"and this is the reality.  Or else I've really been with Sylvie,
and this is a dream!  Is Life itself a dream, I wonder?"

To occupy the time, I got out the letter, which had caused me to take
this sudden railway-journey from my London home down to a strange
fishing-town on the North coast, and read it over again:-

    "DEAR OLD FRIEND,

    "I'm sure it will be as great a pleasure to me, as it can possibly
    be to you, to meet once more after so many years: and of course I
    shall be ready to give you all the benefit of such medical skill as
    I have: only, you know, one mustn't violate professional etiquette!
    And you are already in the hands of a first-rate London doctor,
    with whom it would be utter affectation for me to pretend to compete.        (I make no doubt he
is right in saying the heart is affected:
    all your symptoms point that way.) One thing, at any rate, I have
    already done in my doctorial capacity--secured you a bedroom on the
    ground-floor, so that you will not need to ascend the stairs at all.

    "I shalt expect you by last train on Friday, in accordance with your
    letter: and, till then, I shalt say, in the words of the old song,
    'Oh for Friday nicht!  Friday's lang a-coming!'

    "Yours always,

    "ARTHUR FORESTER.

    "P.S.  Do you believe in Fate?"

This Postscript puzzled me sorely.  "He is far too sensible a man,"
I thought, "to have become a Fatalist.  And yet what else can he mean by
it?"  And, as I folded up the letter and put it away, I inadvertently
repeated the words aloud.  "Do you believe in Fate?"

The fair 'Incognita' turned her head quickly at the sudden question.
"No, I don't!" she said with a smile.  "Do you?"

"I--I didn't mean to ask the question!"  I stammered, a little taken
aback at having begun a conversation in so unconventional a fashion.

The lady's smile became a laugh--not a mocking laugh, but the laugh
of a happy child who is perfectly at her ease.  "Didn't you?" she said.
"Then it was a case of what you Doctors call 'unconscious cerebration'?"

"I am no Doctor," I replied.  "Do I look so like one?  Or what makes you
think it?"

She pointed to the book I had been reading, which was so lying that its
title, "Diseases of the Heart," was plainly visible.

"One needn't be a Doctor," I said, "to take an interest in medical
books.  There's another class of readers, who are yet more deeply
interested--"

"You mean the Patients?" she interrupted, while a look of tender pity
gave new sweetness to her face.  "But," with an evident wish to avoid a
possibly painful topic, "one needn't be either, to take an interest in
books of Science.  Which contain the greatest amount of Science,
do you think, the books, or the minds?"

"Rather a profound question for a lady!"  I said to myself, holding,
with the conceit so natural to Man, that Woman's intellect is
essentially shallow.  And I considered a minute before replying.
"If you mean living minds, I don't think it's possible to decide.
There is so much written Science that no living person has ever read:
and there is so much thought-out Science that hasn't yet been written.
But, if you mean the whole human race, then I think the minds have it:
everything, recorded in books, must have once been in some mind,
you know."

"Isn't that rather like one of the Rules in Algebra?" my Lady enquired.
("Algebra too!"  I thought with increasing wonder.) "I mean, if we
consider thoughts as factors, may we not say that the Least Common
Multiple of all the minds contains that of all the books; but not the
other way?"

"Certainly we may!"  I replied, delighted with the illustration.
"And what a grand thing it would be," I went on dreamily, thinking aloud
rather than talking, "if we could only apply that Rule to books!
You know, in finding the Least Common Multiple, we strike out a quantity
wherever it occurs, except in the term where it is raised to its
highest power.  So we should have to erase every recorded thought,
except in the sentence where it is expressed with the greatest
intensity."

My Lady laughed merrily.  "Some books would be reduced to blank paper,
I'm afraid!" she said.

"They would.  Most libraries would be terribly diminished in bulk.
But just think what they would gain in quality!"

"When will it be done?" she eagerly asked.  "If there's any chance of it
in my time, I think I'll leave off reading, and wait for it!"

"Well, perhaps in another thousand years or so--"

"Then there's no use waiting!", said my Lady.  "Let's sit down.
Uggug, my pet, come and sit by me!"

"Anywhere but by me!" growled the Sub-warden.  "The little wretch always
manages to upset his coffee!"

I guessed at once (as perhaps the reader will also have guessed, if,
like myself, he is very clever at drawing conclusions) that my Lady was
the Sub-Warden's wife, and that Uggug (a hideous fat boy, about the
same age as Sylvie, with the expression of a prize-pig) was their son.
Sylvie and Bruno, with the Lord Chancellor, made up a party of seven.

[Image...A portable plunge-bath]

"And you actually got a plunge-bath every morning?" said the Sub-Warden,
seemingly in continuation of a conversation with the Professor.
"Even at the little roadside-inns?"

"Oh, certainly, certainly!" the Professor replied with a smile on his
jolly face.  "Allow me to explain.  It is, in fact, a very simple problem
in Hydrodynamics.  (That means a combination of Water and Strength.)
If we take a plunge-bath, and a man of great strength (such as myself)
about to plunge into it, we have a perfect example of this science.
I am bound to admit," the Professor continued, in a lower tone and with
downcast eyes, "that we need a man of remarkable strength.  He must be
able to spring from the floor to about twice his own height, gradually
turning over as he rises, so as to come down again head first."

"Why, you need a flea, not a man!" exclaimed the Sub-Warden.

"Pardon me," said the Professor.  "This particular kind of bath is
not adapted for a flea.  Let us suppose," he continued, folding his
table-napkin into a graceful festoon, "that this represents what is
perhaps the necessity of this Age--the Active Tourist's Portable
Bath.  You may describe it briefly, if you like," looking at the
Chancellor, "by the letters A.T.P.B."

The Chancellor, much disconcerted at finding everybody looking at him,
could only murmur, in a shy whisper, "Precisely so!"

"One great advantage of this plunge-bath," continued the Professor,
"is that it requires only half-a-gallon of water--"

"I don't call it a plunge-bath," His Sub-Excellency remarked,
"unless your Active Tourist goes right under!"

"But he does go right under," the old man gently replied.  "The A.T.
hangs up the P. B. on a nail--thus.  He then empties the water-jug
into it--places the empty jug below the bag--leaps into the
air--descends head-first into the bag--the water rises round him to
the top of the bag--and there you are!" he triumphantly concluded.
"The A.T. is as much under water as if he'd gone a mile or two down
into the Atlantic!"

"And he's drowned, let us say, in about four minutes--"

"By no means!" the Professor answered with a proud smile.  "After about
a minute, he quietly turns a tap at the lower end of the P. B.--all
the water runs back into the jug and there you are again!"

"But how in the world is he to get out of the bag again?"

"That, I take it," said the Professor, "is the most beautiful part of
the whole invention.  All the way up the P.B., inside, are loops for the
thumbs; so it's something like going up-stairs, only perhaps less
comfortable; and, by the time the A. T. has risen out of the bag, all
but his head, he's sure to topple over, one way or the other--the Law
of Gravity secures that.  And there he is on the floor again!"

"A little bruised, perhaps?"

"Well, yes, a little bruised; but having had his plunge-bath: that's
the great thing."

"Wonderful!  It's almost beyond belief!" murmured the Sub-Warden.
The Professor took it as a compliment, and bowed with a gratified smile.

"Quite beyond belief!" my Lady added--meaning, no doubt, to be more
complimentary still.  The Professor bowed, but he didn't smile this
time.  "I can assure you," he said earnestly, "that, provided the bath
was made, I used it every morning.  I certainly ordered it--that I am
clear about--my only doubt is, whether the man ever finished making
it.  It's difficult to remember, after so many years--"

At this moment the door, very slowly and creakingly, began to open,
and Sylvie and Bruno jumped up, and ran to meet the well-known footstep.


CHAPTER 3.

BIRTHDAY-PRESENTS.

"It's my brother!" the Sub-warden exclaimed, in a warning whisper.
"Speak out, and be quick about it!"

The appeal was evidently addressed to the Lord Chancellor, who
instantly replied, in a shrill monotone, like a little boy repeating
the alphabet, "As I was remarking, your Sub-Excellency, this portentous
movement--"

"You began too soon!" the other interrupted, scarcely able to restrain
himself to a whisper, so great was his excitement.  "He couldn't have
heard you.  Begin again!"  "As I was remarking," chanted the obedient
Lord Chancellor, "this portentous movement has already assumed the
dimensions of a Revolution!"

"And what are the dimensions of a Revolution?"  The voice was genial and
mellow, and the face of the tall dignified old man, who had just
entered the room, leading Sylvie by the hand, and with Bruno riding
triumphantly on his shoulder, was too noble and gentle to have scared a
less guilty man: but the Lord Chancellor turned pale instantly,
and could hardly articulate the words "The dimensions your--
your High Excellency?  I--I--scarcely comprehend!"

"Well, the length, breadth, and thickness, if you like it better!"
And the old man smiled, half-contemptuously.

The Lord Chancellor recovered himself with a great effort, and pointed
to the open window.  "If your High Excellency will listen for a moment
to the shouts of the exasperated populace--" ("of the exasperated
populace!" the Sub-Warden repeated in a louder tone, as the Lord
Chancellor, being in a state of abject terror, had dropped almost into
a whisper) "--you will understand what it is they want. "

And at that moment there surged into the room a hoarse confused cry, in
which the only clearly audible words were "Less--bread--More--taxes!"
The old man laughed heartily.  "What in the world--" he was beginning:
but the Chancellor heard him not.  "Some mistake!" he muttered,
hurrying to the window, from which he shortly returned with an air of
relief.  "Now listen!" he exclaimed, holding up his hand impressively.
And now the words came quite distinctly, and with the regularity of the
ticking of a clock, "More--bread--Less taxes!'"

"More bread!" the Warden repeated in astonishment.  "Why, the new
Government Bakery was opened only last week, and I gave orders to sell
the bread at cost-price during the present scarcity!  What can they
expect more?"

"The Bakery's closed, y'reince!" the Chancellor said, more loudly and
clearly than he had spoken yet.  He was emboldened by the consciousness
that here, at least, he had evidence to produce: and he placed in the
Warden's hands a few printed notices, that were lying ready, with some
open ledgers, on a side-table.

"Yes, yes, I see!" the Warden muttered, glancing carelessly through
them.  "Order countermanded by my brother, and supposed to be my doing!
Rather sharp practice!  It's all right!" he added in a louder tone.
"My name is signed to it: so I take it on myself.  But what do they
mean by 'Less Taxes'?  How can they be less?  I abolished the last of
them a month ago!"

"It's been put on again, y'reince, and by y'reince's own orders!",
and other printed notices were submitted for inspection.

The Warden, whilst looking them over, glanced once or twice at the
Sub-Warden, who had seated himself before one of the open ledgers,
and was quite absorbed in adding it up; but he merely repeated
"It's all right.  I accept it as my doing."

"And they do say," the Chancellor went on sheepishly--looking much
more like a convicted thief than an Officer of State, "that a change of
Government, by the abolition of the Sub-Warden---I mean," he hastily
added, on seeing the Warden's look of astonishment, "the abolition of
the office of Sub-Warden, and giving the present holder the right to
act as Vice-Warden whenever the Warden is absent --would appease all
this seedling discontent I mean," he added, glancing at a paper he held
in his hand, "all this seething discontent!"

"For fifteen years," put in a deep but very harsh voice, "my husband
has been acting as Sub-Warden.  It is too long!  It is much too long!"
My Lady was a vast creature at all times: but, when she frowned and
folded her arms, as now, she looked more gigantic than ever, and made
one try to fancy what a haystack would look like, if out of temper.

"He would distinguish himself as a Vice!" my Lady proceeded, being far
too stupid to see the double meaning of her words.  "There has been no
such Vice in Outland for many a long year, as he would be!"

"What course would you suggest, Sister?" the Warden mildly enquired.

My Lady stamped, which was undignified: and snorted, which was
ungraceful.  "This is no jesting matter!" she bellowed.

"I will consult my brother, said the Warden.  "Brother!"

"--and seven makes a hundred and ninety-four, which is sixteen and
two-pence," the Sub-Warden replied.  "Put down two and carry sixteen."

The Chancellor raised his hands and eyebrows, lost in admiration.
"Such a man of business!" he murmured.

"Brother, could I have a word with you in my Study?" the Warden said in
a louder tone.  The Sub-Warden rose with alacrity, and the two left the
room together.

My Lady turned to the Professor, who had uncovered the urn, and was
taking its temperature with his pocket-thermometer.  "Professor!" she
began, so loudly and suddenly that even Uggug, who had gone to sleep in
his chair, left off snoring and opened one eye.  The Professor pocketed
his thermometer in a moment, clasped his hands, and put his head on one
side with a meek smile

"You were teaching my son before breakfast, I believe?" my Lady loftily
remarked.  "I hope he strikes you as having talent?"

"Oh, very much so indeed, my Lady!" the Professor hastily replied,
unconsciously rubbing his ear, while some painful recollection seemed
to cross his mind.  "I was very forcibly struck by His Magnificence,
I assure you!"

"He is a charming boy!" my Lady exclaimed.  "Even his snores are more
musical than those of other boys!"

If that were so, the Professor seemed to think, the snores of other boys
must be something too awful to be endured: but he was a cautious man,
and he said nothing.

"And he's so clever!" my Lady continued.  "No one will enjoy your
Lecture more by the way, have you fixed the time for it yet?
You've never given one, you know: and it was promised years ago,
before you--

"Yes, yes, my Lady, I know!  Perhaps next Tuesday or Tuesday week--"

"That will do very well," said my Lady, graciously.  "Of course you will
let the Other Professor lecture as well?"

"I think not, my Lady?  the Professor said with some hesitation.
"You see, he always stands with his back to the audience.
It does very well for reciting; but for lecturing--"

"You are quite right," said my Lady.  "And, now I come to think of it,
there would hardly be time for more than one Lecture.  And it will go
off all the better, if we begin with a Banquet, and a Fancy-dress
Ball--"

"It will indeed!" the Professor cried, with enthusiasm.

"I shall come as a Grass-hopper," my Lady calmly proceeded.
"What shall you come as, Professor?"

The Professor smiled feebly.  "I shall come as--as early as I can,
my Lady!"

"You mustn't come in before the doors are opened," said my Lady.

"I ca'n't," said the Professor.  "Excuse me a moment.  As this is Lady
Sylvie's birthday, I would like to--" and he rushed away.

Bruno began feeling in his pockets, looking more and more melancholy as
he did so: then he put his thumb in his mouth, and considered for a
minute: then he quietly left the room.

He had hardly done so before the Professor was back again, quite out of
breath.  "Wishing you many happy returns of the day, my dear child!"
he went on, addressing the smiling little girl, who had run to meet him.
"Allow me to give you a birthday-present.  It's a second-hand
pincushion, my dear.  And it only cost fourpence-halfpenny!"

"Thank you, it's very pretty!"  And Sylvie rewarded the old man with a
hearty kiss.

"And the pins they gave me for nothing!" the Professor added in high
glee.  "Fifteen of 'em, and only one bent!"

"I'll make the bent one into a hook!" said Sylvie.  "To catch Bruno
with, when he runs away from his lessons!"

"You ca'n't guess what my present is!" said Uggug, who had taken the
butter-dish from the table, and was standing behind her, with a wicked
leer on his face.

"No, I ca'n't guess," Sylvie said without looking up.  She was still
examining the Professor's pincushion.

"It's this!" cried the bad boy, exultingly, as he emptied the dish over
her, and then, with a grin of delight at his own cleverness, looked
round for applause.

Sylvie coloured crimson, as she shook off the butter from her frock:
but she kept her lips tight shut, and walked away to the window, where
she stood looking out and trying to recover her temper.

Uggug's triumph was a very short one: the Sub-Warden had returned,
just in time to be a witness of his dear child's playfulness,
and in another moment a skilfully-applied box on the ear had changed
the grin of delight into a howl of pain.

"My darling!" cried his mother, enfolding him in her fat arms.
"Did they box his ears for nothing?  A precious pet!"

"It's not for nothing!" growled the angry father.  "Are you aware,
Madam, that I pay the house-bills, out of a fixed annual sum?
The loss of all that wasted butter falls on me!  Do you hear, Madam!"

"Hold your tongue, Sir!"  My Lady spoke very quietly--almost in a
whisper.  But there was something in her look which silenced him.
"Don't you see it was only a joke?  And a very clever one, too!
He only meant that he loved nobody but her!  And, instead of being
pleased with the compliment, the spiteful little thing has gone away
in a huff!"

The Sub-Warden was a very good hand at changing a subject.  He walked
across to the window.  "My dear," he said, "is that a pig that I see
down below, rooting about among your flower-beds?"

"A pig!" shrieked my Lady, rushing madly to the window, and almost
pushing her husband out, in her anxiety to see for herself.  "Whose pig
is it?  How did it get in?  Where's that crazy Gardener gone?"

At this moment Bruno re-entered the room, and passing Uggug (who was
blubbering his loudest, in the hope of attracting notice) as if he was
quite used to that sort of thing, he ran up to Sylvie and threw his
arms round her.  "I went to my toy-cupboard," he said with a very
sorrowful face, "to see if there were somefin fit for a present for oo!
And there isn't nuffin!  They's all broken, every one!
And I haven't got no money left, to buy oo a birthday-present!
And I ca'n't give oo nuffin but this!" ("This" was a very earnest hug
and a kiss.)

"Oh, thank you, darling!" cried Sylvie.  "I like your present best of
all!" (But if so, why did she give it back so quickly?)

His Sub-Excellency turned and patted the two children on the head with
his long lean hands.  "Go away, dears!" he said.  "There's business to
talk over. "

Sylvie and Bruno went away hand in hand: but, on reaching the door,
Sylvie came back again and went up to Uggug timidly.  "I don't mind
about the butter," she said, "and I--I'm sorry he hurt you!"  And she
tried to shake hands with the little ruffian: but Uggug only blubbered
louder, and wouldn't make friends.  Sylvie left the room with a sigh.

The Sub-Warden glared angrily at his weeping son.  "Leave the room,
Sirrah!" he said, as loud as he dared.  His wife was still leaning out
of the window, and kept repeating "I ca'n't see that pig!  Where is it?"

"It's moved to the right now it's gone a little to the left," said the
Sub-Warden: but he had his back to the window, and was making signals
to the Lord Chancellor, pointing to Uggug and the door, with many a
cunning nod and wink.

[Image...Removal of Uggug]

The Chancellor caught his meaning at last, and, crossing the
room, took that interesting child by the ear the next moment he and
Uggug were out of the room, and the door shut behind them: but not
before one piercing yell had rung through the room, and reached the
ears of the fond mother.

"What is that hideous noise?" she fiercely asked, turning upon her
startled husband.

"It's some hyaena--or other," replied the Sub-Warden, looking vaguely
up to the ceiling, as if that was where they usually were to be found.
"Let us to business, my dear.  Here comes the Warden." And he picked up
from the floor a wandering scrap of manuscript, on which I just caught
the words 'after which Election duly holden the said Sibimet and
Tabikat his wife may at their pleasure assume Imperial--' before,
with a guilty look, he crumpled it up in his hand.


CHAPTER 4.

A CUNNING CONSPIRACY.

The Warden entered at this moment: and close behind him came the Lord
Chancellor, a little flushed and out of breath, and adjusting his wig,
which appeared to have been dragged partly off his head.

"But where is my precious child?" my Lady enquired, as the four took
their seats at the small side-table devoted to ledgers and bundles and
bills.

"He left the room a few minutes ago with the Lord Chancellor,"
the Sub-Warden briefly explained.

"Ah!" said my Lady, graciously smiling on that high official.
"Your Lordship has a very taking way with children!  I doubt if any
one could gain the ear of my darling Uggug so quickly as you can!"
For an entirely stupid woman, my Lady's remarks were curiously full of
meaning, of which she herself was wholly unconscious.

The Chancellor bowed, but with a very uneasy air.  "I think the Warden
was about to speak," he remarked, evidently anxious to change the
subject.

But my Lady would not be checked.  "He is a clever boy," she continued
with enthusiasm, "but he needs a man like your Lordship to draw him
out!"

The Chancellor bit his lip, and was silent.  He evidently feared that,
stupid as she looked, she understood what she said this time, and was
having a joke at his expense.  He might have spared himself all anxiety:
whatever accidental meaning her words might have, she herself never
meant anything at all.

"It is all settled!" the Warden announced, wasting no time over
preliminaries.  "The Sub-Wardenship is abolished, and my brother is
appointed to act as Vice-Warden whenever I am absent.  So, as I am going
abroad for a while, he will enter on his new duties at once."

"And there will really be a Vice after all?" my Lady enquired.

"I hope so!" the Warden smilingly replied.

My Lady looked much pleased, and tried to clap her hands: but you might
as well have knocked two feather-beds together, for any noise it made.
"When my husband is Vice," she said, "it will be the same as if we had
a hundred Vices!"

"Hear, hear!" cried the Sub-Warden.

"You seem to think it very remarkable," my Lady remarked with some
severity, "that your wife should speak the truth!"

"No, not remarkable at all!" her husband anxiously explained.
"Nothing is remarkable that you say, sweet one!"

My Lady smiled approval of the sentiment, and went on.
"And am I Vice-Wardeness?"

"If you choose to use that title," said the Warden:
"but 'Your Excellency' will be the proper style of address. And I trust
that both 'His Excellency' and 'Her Excellency' will observe the
Agreement I have drawn up.  The provision I am most anxious about
is this." He unrolled a large parchment scroll, and read aloud the words
"'item, that we will be kind to the poor.' The Chancellor worded it
for me," he added, glancing at that great Functionary.
"I suppose, now, that word 'item' has some deep legal meaning?"

"Undoubtedly!" replied the Chancellor, as articulately as he could with
a pen between his lips.  He was nervously rolling and unrolling several
other scrolls, and making room among them for the one the Warden had
just handed to him.  "These are merely the rough copies," he explained:
"and, as soon as I have put in the final corrections--" making a
great commotion among the different parchments, "--a semi-colon or
two that I have accidentally omitted--" here he darted about, pen in
hand, from one part of the scroll to another, spreading sheets of
blotting-paper over his corrections, "all will be ready for signing."

"Should it not be read out, first?" my Lady enquired.

"No need, no need!" the Sub-Warden and the Chancellor exclaimed at the
same moment, with feverish eagerness.

"No need at all," the Warden gently assented.  "Your husband and I have
gone through it together.  It provides that he shall exercise the full
authority of Warden, and shall have the disposal of the annual revenue
attached to the office, until my return, or, failing that, until Bruno
comes of age: and that he shall then hand over, to myself or to Bruno
as the case may be, the Wardenship, the unspent revenue, and the
contents of the Treasury, which are to be preserved, intact, under his
guardianship."

All this time the Sub-Warden was busy, with the Chancellor's help,
shifting the papers from side to side, and pointing out to the Warden
the place whew he was to sign.  He then signed it himself, and my Lady
and the Chancellor added their names as witnesses.

"Short partings are best," said the Warden.  "All is ready for my
journey.  My children are waiting below to see me off" He gravely kissed
my Lady, shook hands with his brother and the Chancellor, and left the
room.

[Image...'What a game!']

The three waited in silence till the sound of wheels announced
that the Warden was out of hearing: then, to my surprise, they broke
into peals of uncontrollable laughter.

"What a game, oh, what a game!" cried the Chancellor. And he and the
Vice-Warden joined hands, and skipped wildly about the room.  My Lady
was too dignified to skip, but she laughed like the neighing of a
horse, and waved her handkerchief above her head: it was clear to her
very limited understanding that something very clever had been done,
but what it was she had yet to learn.

"You said I should hear all about it when the Warden had gone,"
she remarked, as soon as she could make herself heard.

"And so you shall, Tabby!" her husband graciously replied, as he
removed the blotting-paper, and showed the two parchments lying side by
side.  "This is the one he read but didn't sign: and this is the one he
signed but didn't read!  You see it was all covered up, except the place
for signing the names--"

"Yes, yes!" my Lady interrupted eagerly, and began comparing the two
Agreements.

"'Item, that he shall exercise the authority of Warden, in the Warden's
absence.' Why, that's been changed into 'shall be absolute governor for
life, with the title of Emperor, if elected to that office by the
people.' What!  Are you Emperor, darling?"

"Not yet, dear," the Vice-Warden replied.  "It won't do to let this
paper be seen, just at present.  All in good time."

My Lady nodded, and read on.  "'Item, that we will be kind to the poor.'
Why, that's omitted altogether!"

"Course it is!" said her husband.  "We're not going to bother about the
wretches!"

"Good," said my Lady, with emphasis, and read on again.  "'Item, that
the contents of the Treasury be preserved intact.' Why, that's altered
into 'shall be at the absolute disposal of the Vice-Warden'!
"Well, Sibby, that was a clever trick!  All the Jewels, only think!
May I go and put them on directly?"

"Well, not just yet, Lovey," her husband uneasily replied.
"You see the public mind isn't quite ripe for it yet.  We must feel
our way.  Of course we'll have the coach-and-four out, at once.
And I'll take the title of Emperor, as soon as we can safely hold an
Election.  But they'll hardly stand our using the Jewels, as long as
they know the Warden's alive.  We must spread a report of his death.
A little Conspiracy--"

"A Conspiracy!" cried the delighted lady, clapping her hands.
"Of all things, I do like a Conspiracy!  It's so interesting!"

The Vice-Warden and the Chancellor interchanged a wink or two.  "Let her
conspire to her heart's content!" the cunning Chancellor whispered.
"It'll do no harm!"

"And when will the Conspiracy--"

"Hist!', her husband hastily interrupted her, as the door opened,
and Sylvie and Bruno came in, with their arms twined lovingly round each
other--Bruno sobbing convulsively, with his face hidden on his
sister's shoulder, and Sylvie more grave and quiet, but with tears
streaming down her cheeks.

"Mustn't cry like that!" the Vice-Warden said sharply, but without any
effect on the weeping children.  "Cheer 'em up a bit!" he hinted to my
Lady.

"Cake!" my Lady muttered to herself with great decision, crossing the
room and opening a cupboard, from which she presently returned with two
slices of plum-cake.  "Eat, and don't cry!" were her short and simple
orders: and the poor children sat down side by side, but seemed in no
mood for eating.

For the second time the door opened--or rather was burst open,
this time, as Uggug rushed violently into the room, shouting
"that old Beggars come again!"

"He's not to have any food--" the Vice-warden was beginning, but the
Chancellor interrupted him.  "It's all right," he said, in a low voice:
"the servants have their orders."

"He's just under here," said Uggug, who had gone to the window, and was
looking down into the court-yard.

"Where, my darling?" said his fond mother, flinging her arms round the
neck of the little monster.  All of us (except Sylvie and Bruno,
who took no notice of what was going on) followed her to the window.
The old Beggar looked up at us with hungry eyes.  "Only a crust of bread,
your Highness!" he pleaded.

[Image...'Drink this!']

He was a fine old man, but looked sadly ill and worn.
"A crust of bread is what I crave!" he repeated.  "A single crust,
and a little water!"

"Here's some water, drink this!"

Uggug bellowed, emptying a jug of water over his head.

"Well done, my boy!" cried the Vice-Warden.

"That's the way to settle such folk!"

"Clever boy!", the Wardeness chimed in.  "Hasn't he good spirits?"

"Take a stick to him!" shouted the Vice-Warden, as the old Beggar shook
the water from his ragged cloak, and again gazed meekly upwards.

"Take a red-hot poker to him!" my Lady again chimed in.

Possibly there was no red-hot poker handy: but some sticks were
forthcoming in a moment, and threatening faces surrounded the poor old
wanderer, who waved them back with quiet dignity.  "No need to break my
old bones," he said.  "I am going.  Not even a crust!"

"Poor, poor old man!" exclaimed a little voice at my side, half choked
with sobs.  Bruno was at the window, trying to throw out his slice of
plum-cake, but Sylvie held him back.

"He shalt have my cake!"  Bruno cried, passionately struggling out of
Sylvie's arms.

"Yes, yes, darling!"  Sylvie gently pleaded.  "But don't throw it out!
He's gone away, don't you see?  Let's go after him." And she led him out
of the room, unnoticed by the rest of the party, who were wholly
absorbed in watching the old Beggar.

The Conspirators returned to their seats, and continued their
conversation in an undertone, so as not to be heard by Uggug,
who was still standing at the window.

"By the way, there was something about Bruno succeeding to the
Wrardenship," said my Lady.  "How does that stand in the new Agreement?"

The Chancellor chuckled.  "Just the same, word for word," he said,
"with one exception, my Lady.  Instead of 'Bruno,' I've taken the
liberty to put in--" he dropped his voice to a whisper, "to put in
'Uggug,' you know!"

"Uggug, indeed!"  I exclaimed, in a burst of indignation I could no
longer control.  To bring out even that one word seemed a gigantic
effort: but, the cry once uttered, all effort ceased at once: a sudden
gust swept away the whole scene, and I found myself sitting up, staring
at the young lady in the opposite corner of the carriage, who had now
thrown back her veil, and was looking at me with an expression of
amused surprise.


CHAPTER 5.

A BEGGAR'S PALACE.

That I had said something, in the act of waking, I felt sure: the
hoarse stifled cry was still ringing in my ears, even if the startled
look of my fellow-traveler had not been evidence enough: but what could
I possibly say by way of apology?

"I hope I didn't frighten you?"  I stammered out at last.
"I have no idea what I said.  I was dreaming."

"You said 'Uggug indeed!'" the young lady replied, with quivering lips
that would curve themselves into a smile, in spite of all her efforts
to look grave.  "At least--you didn't say it--you shouted it!"

"I'm very sorry," was all I could say, feeling very penitent and
helpless.  "She has Sylvie's eyes!"  I thought to myself, half-doubting
whether, even now, I were fairly awake.  "And that sweet look of
innocent wonder is all Sylvie's too.  But Sylvie hasn't got that calm
resolute mouth nor that far-away look of dreamy sadness, like one that
has had some deep sorrow, very long ago--" And the thick-coming
fancies almost prevented my hearing the lady's next words.

"If you had had a 'Shilling Dreadful' in your hand," she proceeded,
"something about Ghosts or Dynamite or Midnight Murder--one could
understand it: those things aren't worth the shilling, unless they give
one a Nightmare.  But really--with only a medical treatise,
you know--" and she glanced, with a pretty shrug of contempt,
at the book over which I had fallen asleep.

Her friendliness, and utter unreserve, took me aback for a moment;
yet there was no touch of forwardness, or boldness, about the child for
child, almost, she seemed to be: I guessed her at scarcely over
twenty--all was the innocent frankness of some angelic visitant,
new to the ways of earth and the conventionalisms or, if you will,
the barbarisms--of Society.  "Even so," I mused, "will Sylvie look and
speak, in another ten years."

"You don't care for Ghosts, then," I ventured to suggest, unless they
are really terrifying?"

"Quite so," the lady assented.  "The regular Railway-Ghosts--I mean
the Ghosts of ordinary Railway-literature--are very poor affairs.
I feel inclined to say, with Alexander Selkirk, 'Their tameness is
shocking to me'!  And they never do any Midnight Murders.
They couldn't 'welter in gore,' to save their lives!"

"'Weltering in gore'  is a very expressive phrase, certainly.
Can it be done in any fluid, I wonder?"

"I think not," the lady readily replied--quite as if she had thought
it out, long ago.  "It has to be something thick.  For instance, you
might welter in bread-sauce.  That, being white, would be more suitable
for a Ghost, supposing it wished to welter!"

"You have a real good terrifying Ghost in that book?"  I hinted.

"How could you guess?" she exclaimed with the most engaging frankness,
and placed the volume in my hands.  I opened it eagerly, with a not
unpleasant thrill like what a good ghost-story gives one) at the
