that she was very much interested--but still she let me.  She, never cut
me short."

All the sympathies of Mr Powell were for Flora Anthony nee de Barral.
She was the only human being younger than himself on board that ship
since the _Ferndale_ carried no boys and was manned by a full crew of
able seamen.  Yes! their youth had created a sort of bond between them.
Mr Powell's open countenance must have appeared to her distinctly
pleasing amongst the mature, rough, crabbed or even inimical faces she
saw around her.  With the warm generosity of his age young Powell was on
her side, as it were, even before he knew that there were sides to be
taken on board that ship, and what this taking sides was about.  There
was a girl.  A nice girl.  He asked himself no questions.  Flora de
Barral was not so much younger in years than himself; but for some
reason, perhaps by contrast with the accepted idea of a captain's wife,
he could not regard her otherwise but as an extremely youthful creature.
At the same time, apart from her exalted position, she exercised over
him the supremacy a woman's earlier maturity gives her over a young man
of her own age.  As a matter of fact we can see that, without ever
having more than a half an hour's consecutive conversation together, and
the distances duly preserved, these two were becoming friends--under the
eye of the old man, I suppose.

How he first got in touch with his captain's wife Powell relates in this
way.  It was long before his memorable conversation with the mate and
shortly after getting clear of the channel.  It was gloomy weather; dead
head wind, blowing quite half a gale; the _Ferndale_ under reduced sail
was stretching close-hauled across the track of the homeward bound
ships, just moving through the water and no more, since there was no
object in pressing her and the weather looked threatening.  About ten
o'clock at night he was alone on the poop, in charge, keeping well aft
by the weather rail and staring to windward, when amongst the white,
breaking seas, under the black sky, he made out the lights of a ship.
He watched them for some time.  She was running dead before the wind of
course.  She will pass jolly close--he said to himself; and then
suddenly he felt a great mistrust of that approaching ship.  She's
heading straight for us--he thought.  It was not his business to get out
of the way.  On the contrary.  And his uneasiness grew by the
recollection of the forty tons of dynamite in the body of the
_Ferndale_; not the sort of cargo one thinks of with equanimity in
connection with a threatened collision.  He gazed at the two small
lights in the dark immensity filled with the angry noise of the seas.
They fascinated him till their plainness to his sight gave him a
conviction that there was danger there.  He knew in his mind what to do
in the emergency, but very properly he felt that he must call the
captain out at once.

He crossed the deck in one bound.  By the immemorial custom and usage of
the sea the captain's room is on the starboard side.  You would just as
soon expect your captain to have his nose at the back of his head as to
have his state-room on the port side of the ship.  Powell forgot all
about the direction on that point given him by the chief.  He flew over
as I said, stamped with his foot and then putting his face to the cowl
of the big ventilator shouted down there: "Please come on deck, sir," in
a voice which was not trembling or scared but which we may call fairly
expressive.  There could not be a mistake as to the urgence of the call.
But instead of the expected alert "All right!" and the sound of a rush
down there, he heard only a faint exclamation--then silence.

Think of his astonishment!  He remained there, his ear in the cowl of
the ventilator, his eyes fastened on those menacing sidelights dancing
on the gusts of wind which swept the angry darkness of the sea.  It was
as though he had waited an hour but it was something much less than a
minute before he fairly bellowed into the wide tube "Captain Anthony!"
An agitated "What is it?" was what he heard down there in Mrs Anthony's
voice, light rapid footsteps...  Why didn't she try to wake him up!  "I
want the captain," he shouted, then gave it up, making a dash at the
companion where a blue light was kept, resolved to act for himself.

On the way he glanced at the helmsman whose face lighted up by the
binnacle lamps was calm.  He said rapidly to him: "Stand by to spin that
helm up at the first word."  The answer "Ay, ay, sir," was delivered in
a steady voice.  Then Mr Powell after a shout for the watch on deck to
"lay aft," ran to the ship's side and struck the blue light on the rail.

A sort of nasty little spitting of sparks was all that came.  The light
(perhaps affected by damp) had failed to ignite.  The time of all these
various acts must be counted in seconds.  Powell confessed to me that at
this failure he experienced a paralysis of thought, of voice, of limbs.
The unexpectedness of this misfire positively overcame his faculties.
It was the only thing for which his imagination was not prepared.  It
was knocked clean over.  When it got up it was with the suggestion that
he must do something at once or there would be a broadside smash
accompanied by the explosion of dynamite, in which both ships would be
blown up and every soul on board of them would vanish off the earth in
an enormous flame and uproar.

He saw the catastrophe happening and at the same moment, before he could
open his mouth or stir a limb to ward off the vision, a voice very near
his ear, the measured voice of Captain Anthony said: "Wouldn't light--
eh?  Throw it down!  Jump for the flare-up."

The spring of activity in Mr Powell was released with great force.  He
jumped.  The flare-up was kept inside the companion with a box of
matches ready to hand.  Almost before he knew he had moved he was diving
under the companion slide.  He got hold of the can in the dark and tried
to strike a light.  But he had to press the flare-holder to his breast
with one arm, his fingers were damp and stiff, his hands trembled a
little.  One match broke.  Another went out.  In its flame he saw the
colourless face of Mrs Anthony a little below him, standing on the
cabin stairs.  Her eyes which were very close to his (he was in a
crouching posture on the top step) seemed to burn darkly in the
vanishing light.  On deck the captain's voice was heard sudden and
unexpectedly sardonic: "You had better look sharp, if you want to be in
time."

"Let me have the box," said Mrs Anthony in a hurried and familiar
whisper which sounded amused as if they had been a couple of children up
to some lark behind a wall.  He was glad of the offer which seemed to
him very natural, and without ceremony--

"Here you are.  Catch hold."

Their hands touched in the dark and she took the box while he held the
paraffin soaked torch in its iron holder.  He thought of warning her:
"Look out for yourself."  But before he had the time to finish the
sentence the flare blazed up violently between them and he saw her throw
herself back with an arm across her face.  "Hallo," he exclaimed; only
he could not stop a moment to ask if she was hurt.  He bolted out of the
companion straight into his captain who took the flare from him and held
it high above his head.

The fierce flame fluttered like a silk flag, throwing an angry swaying
glare mingled with moving shadows over the poop, lighting up the concave
surfaces of the sails, gleaming on the wet paint of the white rails.
And young Powell turned his eyes to windward with a catch in his breath.

The strange ship, a darker shape in the night, did not seem to be moving
onwards but only to grow more distinct right abeam, staring at the
_Ferndale_ with one green and one red eye which swayed and tossed as if
they belonged to the restless head of some invisible monster ambushed in
the night amongst the waves.  A moment, long like eternity, elapsed,
and, suddenly, the monster which seemed to take to itself the shape of a
mountain shut its green eye without as much as a preparatory wink.

Mr Powell drew a free breath.  "All right now," said Captain Anthony in
a quiet undertone.  He gave the blazing flare to Powell and walked aft
to watch the passing of that menace of destruction coming blindly with
its parti-coloured stare out of a blind night on the wings of a sweeping
wind.  Her very form could be distinguished now black and elongated
amongst the hissing patches of foam bursting along her path.

As is always the case with a ship running before wind and sea she did
not seem to an onlooker to move very fast; but to be progressing
indolently in long leisurely bounds and pauses in the midst of the
overtaking waves.  It was only when actually passing the stern within
easy hail of the _Ferndale_ that her headlong speed became apparent to
the eye.  With the red light shut off and soaring like an immense shadow
on the crest of a wave she was lost to view in one great, forward swing,
melting into the lightless space.

"Close shave," said Captain Anthony in an indifferent voice just
raised-enough to be heard in the wind.  "A blind lot on board that ship.
Put out the flare now."

Silently Mr Powell inverted the holder, smothering the flame in the
can, bringing about by the mere turn of his wrist the fall of darkness
upon the poop.  And at the same time vanished out of his mind's eye the
vision of another flame enormous and fierce shooting violently from a
white churned patch of the sea, lighting up the very clouds and carrying
upwards in its volcanic rush flying spars, corpses, the fragments of two
destroyed ships.  It vanished and there was an immense relief.  He told
me he did not know how scared he had been, not generally but of that
very thing his imagination had conjured, till it was all over.  He
measured it (for fear is a great tension) by the feeling of slack
weariness which came over him all at once.

He walked to the companion and stooping low to put the flare in its
usual place saw in the darkness the motionless pale oval of Mrs
Anthony's face.  She whispered quietly:

"Is anything going to happen?  What is it?"

"It's all over now," he whispered back.

He remained bent low, his head inside the cover staring at that white
ghostly oval.  He wondered she had not rushed out on deck.  She had
remained quietly there.  This was pluck.  Wonderful self-restraint.  And
it was not stupidity on her part.  She knew there was imminent danger
and probably had some notion of its nature.

"You stayed here waiting for what would come," he murmured admiringly.

"Wasn't that the best thing to do?" she asked.

He didn't know.  Perhaps.  He confessed he could not have done it.  Not
he.  His flesh and blood could not have stood it.  He would have felt he
must see what was coming.  Then he remembered that the flare might have
scorched her face, and expressed his concern.

"A bit.  Nothing to hurt.  Smell the singed hair?"

There was a sort of gaiety in her tone.  She might have been frightened
but she certainly was not overcome and suffered from no reaction.  This
confirmed and augmented if possible Mr Powell's good opinion of her as
a "jolly girl," though it seemed to him positively monstrous to refer in
such terms to one's captain's wife.  "But she doesn't look it," he
thought in extenuation and was going to say something more to her about
the lighting of that flare when another voice was heard in the
companion, saying some indistinct words.  Its tone was contemptuous; it
came from below, from the bottom of the stairs.  It was a voice in the
cabin.  And the only other voice which could be heard in the main cabin
at this time of the evening was the voice of Mrs Anthony's father.  The
indistinct white oval sank from Mr Powell's sight so swiftly as to take
him by surprise.  For a moment he hung at the opening of the companion
and now that her slight form was no longer obstructing the narrow and
winding staircase the voices came up louder but the words were still
indistinct.  The old gentleman was excited about something and Mrs
Anthony was "managing him" as Powell expressed it.  They moved away from
the bottom of the stairs and Powell went away from the companion.  Yet
he fancied he had heard the words "Lost to me" before he withdrew his
head.  They had been uttered by Mr Smith.

Captain Anthony had not moved away from the taffrail.  He remained in
the very position he took up to watch the other ship go by rolling and
swinging all shadowy in the uproar of the following seas.  He stirred
not; and Powell keeping near by did not dare speak to him, so
enigmatical in its contemplation of the night did his figure appear to
his young eyes: indistinct--and in its immobility staring into gloom,
the prey of some incomprehensible grief, longing or regret.

Why is it that the stillness of a human being is often so impressive, so
suggestive of evil--as if our proper fate were a ceaseless agitation?
The stillness of Captain Anthony became almost intolerable to his second
officer.  Mr Powell loitering about the skylight wanted his captain off
the deck now.  "Why doesn't he go below?" he asked himself impatiently.
He ventured a cough.

Whether the effect of the cough or not Captain Anthony spoke.  He did
not move the least bit.  With his back remaining turned to the whole
length of the ship he asked Mr Powell with some brusqueness if the
chief mate had neglected to instruct him that the captain was to be
found on the port side.

"Yes, sir," said Mr Powell approaching his back.  "The mate told me to
stamp on the port side when I wanted you; but I didn't remember at the
moment."

"You should remember," the captain uttered with an effort.  Then added
mumbling "I don't want Mrs Anthony frightened.  Don't you see?"

"She wasn't this time," Powell said innocently: "She lighted the
flare-up for me, sir."

"This time," Captain Anthony exclaimed and turned round.  "Mrs Anthony
lighted the flare?  Mrs Anthony!..."  Powell explained that she was in
the companion all the time.

"All the time," repeated the captain.  It seemed queer to Powell that
instead of going himself to see the captain should ask him:

"Is she there now?"  Powell said, that she had gone below after the ship
had passed clear of the _Ferndale_.  Captain Anthony made a movement
towards the companion himself, when Powell added the information.  "Mr
Smith called to Mrs Anthony from the saloon, sir.  I believe they are
talking there now."

He was surprised to see the captain give up the idea of going below
after all.

He began to walk the poop instead regardless of the cold, of the damp
wind and of the sprays.  And yet he had nothing on but his sleeping suit
and slippers.  Powell placing himself on the break of the poop kept a
look-out.  When after some time he turned his head to steal a glance at
his eccentric captain he could not see his active and shadowy figure
swinging to and fro.  The second mate of the _Ferndale_ walked aft
peering about and addressed the seaman who steered.

"Captain gone below?"

"Yes, sir," said the fellow who with a quid of tobacco bulging out his
left cheek kept his eyes on the compass card.  "This minute.  He
laughed."

"Laughed," repeated Powell incredulously.  "Do you mean the captain did?
You must be mistaken.  What would he want to laugh for?"

"Don't know, sir."

The elderly sailor displayed a profound indifference towards human
emotions.  However, after a longish pause he conceded a few words more
to the second officer's weakness.  "Yes.  He was walking the deck as
usual when suddenly he laughed a little and made for the companion.
Thought of something funny all at once."

Something funny!  That Mr Powell could not believe.  He did not ask
himself why, at the time.  Funny thoughts come to men, though, in all
sorts of situations; they come to all sorts of men.  Nevertheless Mr
Powell was shocked to learn that Captain Anthony had laughed without
visible cause on a certain night.  The impression for some reason was
disagreeable.  And it was then, while finishing his watch, with the
chilly gusts of wind sweeping at him out of the darkness where the short
sea of the soundings growled spitefully all round the ship, that it
occurred to his unsophisticated mind that perhaps things are not what
they are confidently expected to be; that it was possible that Captain
Anthony was not a happy man.--In so far you will perceive he was to a
certain extent prepared for the apoplectic and sensitive Franklin's
lamentations about his captain.  And though he treated them with a
contempt which was in a great measure sincere, yet he admitted to me
that deep down within him an inexplicable and uneasy suspicion that all
was not well in that cabin, so unusually cut off from the rest of the
ship, came into being and grew against his will...



PART TWO, CHAPTER 4.

ANTHONY AND FLORA.

Marlow emerged out of the shadow of the bookcase to get himself a cigar
from a box which stood on a little table by my side.  In the full light
of the room I saw in his eyes that slightly mocking expression with
which he habitually covers up his sympathetic impulses of mirth and pity
before the unreasonable complications the idealism of mankind puts into
the simple but poignant problem of conduct on this earth.

He selected and lit the cigar with affected care, then turned upon me.
I had been looking at him silently.

"I suppose," he said, the mockery of his eyes giving a pellucid quality
to his tone, "that you think it's high time I told you something
definite.  I mean something about that psychological cabin mystery of
discomfort (for it's obvious that it must be psychological) which
affected so profoundly Mr Franklin the chief mate, and had even
disturbed the serene innocence of Mr Powell, the second of the ship
_Ferndale_, commanded by Roderick Anthony--the son of the poet, you
know."

"You are going to confess now that you have failed to find it out," I
said in pretended indignation.

"It would serve you right if I told you that I have.  But I won't.  I
haven't failed.  I own though that for a time, I was puzzled.  However,
I have now seen our Powell many times under the most favourable
conditions--and besides I came upon a most unexpected source of
information...  But never mind that.  The means don't concern you except
in so far as they belong to the story.  I'll admit that for some time
the old-maiden-lady-like occupation of putting two and two together
failed to procure a coherent theory.  I am speaking now as an
investigator--a man of deductions.  With what we know of Roderick
Anthony and Flora de Barral I could not deduct an ordinary marital
quarrel beautifully matured in less than a year--could I.  If you ask me
what is an ordinary marital quarrel I will tell you, that it is a
difference about nothing; I mean, these nothings which, as Mr Powell
told us when we first met him, shore people are so prone to start a row
about, and nurse into hatred from an idle sense of wrong, from perverted
ambition, for spectacular reasons too.  There are on earth no actors too
humble and obscure not to have a gallery; that gallery which envenoms
the play by stealthy jeers, counsels of anger, amused comments or words
of perfidious compassion.  However, the Anthonys were free from all
demoralising influences.  At sea, you know, there is no gallery.  You
hear no tormenting echoes of your own littleness there, where either a
great elemental voice roars defiantly under the sky or else an elemental
silence seems to be part of the infinite stillness of the universe."

Remembering Flora de Barral in the depths of moral misery, and Roderick
Anthony carried away by a gust of tempestuous tenderness, I asked
myself, Is it all forgotten already?  What could they have found to
estrange them from each other with this rapidity and this thoroughness
so far from all temptations, in the peace of the sea and in an isolation
so complete that if it had not been the jealous devotion of the
sentimental Franklin stimulating the attention of Powell, there would
have been no record, no evidence of it at all.

I must confess at once that it was Flora de Barral whom I suspected.  In
this world as at present organised women are the suspected half of the
population.  There are good reasons for that.  These reasons are so
discoverable with a little reflection that it is not worth my while to
set them out for you.  I will only mention this: that the part falling
to women's share being all "influence" has an air of occult and
mysterious action, something not altogether trustworthy like all natural
forces which, for us, work in the dark because of our imperfect
comprehension.

"If women were not a force of nature, blind in its strength and
capricious in its power, they would not be mistrusted.  As it is one
can't help it.  You will say that this force having been in the person
of Flora de Barral captured by Anthony ...  Why yes.  He had dealt with
her masterfully.  But man has captured electricity too.  It lights him
on his way, it warms his home, it will even cook his dinner for him--
very much like a woman.  But what sort of conquest would you call it?
He knows nothing of it.  He has got to be mighty careful what he is
about with his captive.  And the greater the demand he makes on it in
the exultation of his pride the more likely it is to turn on him and
burn him to a cinder..."

"A far-fetched enough parallel," I observed coldly to Marlow.  He had
returned to the armchair in the shadow of the bookcase.  "But accepting
the meaning you have in your mind it reduces itself to the knowledge of
how to use it.  And if you mean that this ravenous Anthony--"

"Ravenous is good," interrupted Marlow.  "He was a-hungering and
a-thirsting for femininity to enter his life in a way no mere feminist
could have the slightest conception of.  I reckon that this accounts for
much of Fyne's disgust with him.  Good little Fyne.  You have no idea
what infernal mischief he had worked during his call at the hotel.  But
then who could have suspected Anthony of being a heroic creature.  There
are several kinds of heroism and one of them at least is idiotic.  It is
the one which wears the aspect of sublime delicacy.  It is apparently
the one of which the son of the delicate poet was capable."

He certainly resembled his father, who, by the way, wore out two women
without any satisfaction to himself, because they did not come up to his
supra-refined standard of the delicacy which is so perceptible in his
verses.  That's your poet.  He demands too much from others.  The
inarticulate son had set up a standard for himself with that need for
embodying in his conduct the dreams, the passion, the impulses the poet
puts into arrangements of verses, which are dearer to him than his own
self--and may make his own self appear sublime in the eyes of other
people, and even in his own eyes.

Did Anthony wish to appear sublime in his own eyes?  I should not like
to make that charge; though indeed there are other, less noble,
ambitions at which the world does not dare to smile.  But I don't think
so; I do not even think that there was in what he did a conscious and
lofty confidence in himself, a particularly pronounced sense of power
which leads men so often into impossible or equivocal situations.
Looked at abstractedly (the way in which truth is often seen in its real
shape) his life had been a life of solitude and silence--and desire.

Chance had thrown that girl in his way; and if we may smile at his
violent conquest of Flora de Barral we must admit also that this eager
appropriation was truly the act of a man of solitude and desire; a man
also, who, unless a complete imbecile, must have been a man of long and
ardent reveries wherein the faculty of sincere passion matures slowly in
the unexplored recesses of the heart.  And I know also that a passion,
dominating or tyrannical, invading the whole man and subjugating all his
faculties to its own unique end, may conduct him whom it spurs and
drives, into all sorts of adventures, to the brink of unfathomable
dangers, to the limits of folly, and madness, and death.

To the man then of a silence made only more impressive by the
inarticulate thunders and mutters of the great seas, an utter stranger
to the clatter of tongues, there comes the muscular little Fyne, the
most marked representative of that mankind whose voice is so strange to
him, the husband of his sister, a personality standing out from the
misty and remote multitude.  He comes and throws at him more talk than
he had ever heard boomed out in an hour, and certainly touching the
deepest things Anthony had ever discovered in himself, and flings words
like "unfair" whose very sound is abhorrent to him.  Unfair!  Undue
advantage!  He!  Unfair to that girl?  Cruel to her!

No scorn could stand against the impression of such charges advanced
with heat and conviction.  They shook him.  They were yet vibrating in
the air of that stuffy hotel-room, terrific, disturbing, impossible to
get rid of, when the door opened and Flora de Barral entered.

He did not even notice that she was late.  He was sitting on a sofa
plunged in gloom.  Was it true?  Having himself always said exactly what
he meant he imagined that people (unless they were liars, which of
course his brother-in-law could not be) never said more than they meant.
The deep chest voice of little Fyne was still in his ear.  "He knows,"
Anthony said to himself.  He thought he had better go away and never see
her again.  But she stood there before him accusing and appealing.  How
could he abandon her?  That was out of the question.  She had no one.
Or rather she had someone.  That father.  Anthony was willing to take
him at her valuation.  This father may have been the victim of the most
atrocious injustice.  But what could a man coming out of jail do?  An
old man too.  And then--what sort of man?  What would become of them
both?  Anthony shuddered slightly and the faint smile with which Flora
had entered the room faded on her lips.  She was used to his impetuous
tenderness.  She was no longer afraid of it.  But she had never seen him
look like this before, and she suspected at once some new cruelty of
life.  He got up with his usual ardour but as if sobered by a momentous
resolve and said:

"No.  I can't let you out of my sight.  I have seen you.  You have told
me your story.  You are honest.  You have never told me you loved me."

She waited, saying to herself that he had never given her time, that he
had never asked her!  And that, in truth, she did not know!

I am inclined to believe that she did not.  As abundance of experience
is not precisely her lot in life, a woman is seldom an expert in matters
of sentiment.  It is the man who can and generally does "see himself"
pretty well inside and out.  Women's self-possession is an outward
thing; inwardly they flutter, perhaps because they are, or they feel
themselves to be, encaged.  All this speaking generally.  In Flora de
Barral's particular case ever since Anthony had suddenly broken his way
into her hopeless and cruel existence she lived like a person liberated
from a condemned cell by a natural cataclysm, a tempest, an earthquake;
not absolutely terrified, because nothing can be worse than the eve of
execution, but stunned, bewildered--abandoning herself passively.  She
did not want to make a sound, to move a limb.  She hadn't the strength.
What was the good?  And deep down, almost unconsciously she was seduced
by the feeling of being supported by this violence.  A sensation she had
never experienced before in her life.

She felt as if this whirlwind were calming down somehow!  As if this
feeling of support, which was tempting her to close her eyes deliriously
and let herself be carried on and on into the unknown undefiled by vile
experiences, were less certain, had wavered threateningly.  She tried to
read something in his face, in that energetic kindly face to which she
had become accustomed so soon.  But she was not yet capable of
understanding its expression.  Scared, discouraged on the threshold of
adolescence, plunged in moral misery of the bitterest kind, she had not
learned to read--not that sort of language.

If Anthony's love had been as egoistic as love generally is, it would
have been greater than the egoism of his vanity--or of his generosity,
if you like--and all this could not have happened.  He would not have
hit upon that renunciation at which one does not know whether to grin or
shudder.  It is true too that then his love would not have fastened
itself upon the unhappy daughter of de Barral.  But it was a love born
of that rare pity which is not akin to contempt because rooted in an
overwhelmingly strong capacity for tenderness--the tenderness of the
fiery predatory kind--the tenderness of silent solitary men, the
voluntary, passionate outcasts of their kind.  At the same time I am
forced to think that his vanity must have been enormous.

"What big eyes she has," he said to himself amazed.  No wonder.  She was
staring at him with all the might of her soul awakening slowly from a
poisoned sleep, in which it could only quiver with pain but could
neither expand nor move.  He plunged into them breathless and tense,
deep, deep, like a mad sailor taking a desperate dive from the masthead
into the blue unfathomable sea so many men have execrated and loved at
the same time.  And his vanity was immense.  It had been touched to the
quick by that muscular little feminist, Fyne.  "I!  I!  Take advantage
of her helplessness.  I!  Unfair to that creature--that wisp of mist,
that white shadow homeless in an ugly dirty world.  I could blow her
away with a breath," he was saying to himself with horror.  "Never!"
All the supremely refined delicacy of tenderness, expressed in so many
fine lines of verse by Carleon Anthony, grew to the size of a passion
filling with inward sobs the big frame of the man who had never in his
life read a single one of those famous sonnets singing of the most
highly civilised, chivalrous love, of those sonnets which ...  You know
there's a volume of them.  My edition has the portrait of the author at
thirty, and when I showed it to Mr Powell the other day he exclaimed:
"Wonderful!  One would think this the portrait of Captain Anthony
himself if..."  I wanted to know what that if was.  But Powell could not
say.  There was something--a difference.  No doubt there was--in
fineness perhaps.  The father, fastidious, cerebral, morbidly shrinking
from all contacts, could only sing in harmonious numbers of what the son
felt with a dumb and reckless sincerity.

Possessed by most strong men's touching illusion as to the frailness of
women and their spiritual fragility, it seemed to Anthony that he would
be destroying, breaking something very precious inside that being.  In
fact nothing less than partly murdering her.  This seems a very extreme
effect to flow from Fyne's words.  But Anthony, unaccustomed to the
chatter of the firm earth, never stayed to ask himself what value these
words could have in Fyne's mouth.  And indeed the mere dark sound of
them was utterly abhorrent to his native rectitude, sea-salted, hardened
in the winds of wide horizons, open as the day.

He wished to blurt out his indignation but she regarded him with an
expectant air which checked him.  His visible discomfort made her
uneasy.  He could only repeat "Oh yes.  You are perfectly honest.  You
might have, but I dare say you are right.  At any rate you have never
said anything to me which you didn't mean."

"Never," she whispered after a pause.

He seemed distracted, choking with an emotion she could not understand
because it resembled embarrassment, a state of mind inconceivable in
that man.

She wondered what it was she had said; remembering that in very truth
she had hardly spoken to him except when giving him the bare outline of
her story which he seemed to have hardly had the patience to hear,
waving it perpetually aside with exclamations of horror and anger, with
fiercely sombre mutters "Enough!  Enough!" and with alarming starts from
a forced stillness, as though he meant to rush out at once and take
vengeance on somebody.  She was saying to herself that he caught her
words in the air, never letting her finish her thought.  Honest.
Honest.  Yes certainly she had been that.  Her letter to Mrs Fyne had
been prompted by honesty.  But she reflected sadly that she had never
known what to say to him.  That perhaps she had nothing to say.

"But you'll find out that I can be honest too," he burst out in a
menacing tone, she had learned to appreciate with an amused thrill.

She waited for what was coming.  But he hung in the wind.  He looked
round the room with disgust as if he could see traces on the walls of
all the casual tenants that had ever passed through it.  People had
quarrelled in that room; they had been ill in it, there had been misery
in that room, wickedness, crime perhaps--death most likely.  This was
not a fit place.  He snatched up his hat.  He had made up his mind.  The
ship--the ship he had known ever since she came off the stocks, his
home--her shelter--the uncontaminated, honest ship, was the place.

"Let us go on board.  We'll talk there," he said.  "And you will have to
listen to me.  For whatever happens, no matter what they say, I cannot
let you go."

You can't say that (misgivings or no misgivings) she could have done
anything else but go on board.  It was the appointed business of that
morning.  During the drive he was silent.  Anthony was the last man to
condemn conventionally any human being, to scorn and despise even
deserved misfortune.  He was ready to take old de Barral--the convict--
on his daughter's valuation without the slightest reserve.  But love
like his, though it may drive one into risky folly by the proud
consciousness of its own strength, has a sagacity of its own.  And now,
as if lifted up into a higher and serene region by its purpose of
renunciation, it gave him leisure to reflect for the first time in these
last few days.  He said to himself: "I don't know that man.  She does
not know him either.  She was barely sixteen when they locked him up.
She was a child.  What will he say?  What will he do?  No, he concluded,
I cannot leave her behind with that man who would come into the world as
if out of a grave."

They went on board in silence, and it was after showing her round and
when they had returned to the saloon that he assailed her in his fiery,
masterful fashion.  At first she did not understand.  Then when she
understood that he was giving her her liberty she went stiff all over,
her hand resting on the edge of the table, her face set like a carving
of white marble.  It was all over.  It was as that abominable governess
had said.  She was insignificant, contemptible.  Nobody could love her.
Humiliation clung to her like a cold shroud--never to be shaken off,
unwarmed by this madness of generosity.

"Yes.  Here.  Your home.  I can't give it to you and go away, but it is
big enough for us two.  You need not be afraid.  If you say so I shall
not even look at you.  Remember that grey head of which you have been
thinking night and day.  Where is it going to rest?  Where else if not
here, where nothing evil can touch it.  Don't you understand that I
won't let you buy shelter from me at the cost of your very soul.  I
won't.  You are too much part of me.  I have, found myself since I came
upon you and I would rather sell my own soul to the devil than let you
go out of my keeping.  But I must have the right."

He went away brusquely to shut the door leading on deck and came back
the whole length of the cabin repeating:

"I must have the legal right.  Are you ashamed of letting people think
you are my wife?"

He opened his arms as if to clasp her to his breast but mastered the
impulse and shook his clenched hands at her, repeating: "I must have the
right if only for your father's sake.  I must have the right.  Where
would you take him?  To that infernal cardboard box-maker.  I don't know
what keeps me from hunting him up in his virtuous home and bashing his
head in.  I can't bear the thought.  Listen to me, Flora!  Do you hear
what I am saying to you?  You are not so proud that you can't understand
that I as a man have my pride too?"

He saw a tear glide down her white cheek from under each lowered eyelid.
Then, abruptly, she walked out of the cabin.  He stood for a moment,
concentrated, reckoning his own strength, interrogating his heart,
before he followed her hastily.  Already she had reached the wharf.

At the sound of his pursuing footsteps her strength failed her.  Where
could she escape from this?  From this new perfidy of life taking upon
itself the form of magnanimity.  His very voice was changed.  The
sustaining whirlwind had let her down, to stumble on again, weakened by
the fresh stab, bereft of moral support which is wanted in life more
than all the charities of material help.  She had never had it.  Never.
Not from the Fynes.  But where to go?  Oh yes, this dock--a placid sheet
of water close at hand.  But there was that old man with whom she had
walked hand in hand on the parade by the sea.  She seemed to see him
coming to meet her, pitiful, a little greyer, with an appealing look and
an extended, tremulous arm.  It was for her now to take the hand of that
wronged man more helpless than a child.  But where could she lead him?
Where?  And what was she to say to him?  What words of cheer, of courage
and of hope?  There were none.  Heaven and earth were mute, unconcerned
at their meeting.  But this other man was coming up behind her.  He was
very close now.  His fiery person seemed to radiate heat, a tingling
vibration into the atmosphere.  She was exhausted, careless, afraid to
stumble, ready to fall.  She fancied she could hear his breathing.  A
wave of languid warmth overtook her, she seemed to lose touch with the
ground under her feet; and when she felt him slip his hand under her arm
she made no attempt to disengage herself from that grasp which closed
upon her limb, insinuating and firm.

He conducted her through the dangers of the quayside.  Her sight was
dim.  A moving truck was like a mountain gliding by.  Men passed by as
if in a mist; and the buildings, the sheds, the unexpected open spaces,
the ships, had strange, distorted, dangerous shapes.  She said to
herself that it was good not to be bothered with what all these things
meant in the scheme of creation (if indeed anything had a meaning), or
were just piled-up matter without any sense.  She felt how she had
always been unrelated to this world.  She was hanging on to it merely by
that one arm grasped firmly just above the elbow.  It was a captivity.
So be it.  Till they got out into the street and saw the hansom waiting
outside the gates Anthony spoke only once, beginning brusquely but in a
much gentler tone than she had ever heard from his lips.

"Of course I ought to have known that you could not care for a man like
me, a stranger.  Silence gives consent.  Yes?  Eh?  I don't want any of
that sort of consent.  And unless some day you find you can speak--No!
No!  I shall never ask you.  For all the sign I will give you you may go
to your grave with sealed lips.  But what I have said you must do!"

He bent his head over her with tender care.  At the same time she felt
her arm pressed and shaken inconspicuously, but in an undeniable manner.
"You must do it."  A little shake that no passer-by could notice; and
this was going on in a deserted part of the dock.  "It must be done.
You are listening to me--eh? or would you go again to my sister?"

His ironic tone, perhaps from want of use, had an awful grating
ferocity.

"Would you go to her?" he pursued in the same strange voice.  "Your best
friend!  And say nicely--I am sorry.  Would you?  No!  You couldn't.
There are things that even you, poor dear lost girl, couldn't stand.
Eh?  Die rather.  That's it.  Of course.  Or can you be thinking of
taking your father to that infernal cousin's house.  No!  Don't speak.
I can't bear to think of it.  I would follow you there and smash the
door!"

The catch in his voice astonished her by its resemblance to a sob.  It
frightened her too.  The thought that came to her head was: "He
mustn't."  He was putting her into the hansom.  "Oh!  He mustn't, he
mustn't."  She was still more frightened by the discovery that he was
shaking all over.  Bewildered, shrinking into the far off corner,
avoiding his eyes, she yet saw the quivering of his mouth and made a
wild attempt at a smile, which broke the rigidity of her lips and set
her teeth chattering suddenly.

"I am not coming with you," he was saying.  "I'll tell the man--I can't.
Better not.  What is it?  Are you cold?  Come!  What is it?  Only to go
to a confounded stuffy room, a hole of an office.  Not a quarter of an
hour.  I'll come for you--in ten days.  Don't think of it too much.
Think of no man, woman or child of all that silly crowd cumbering the
ground.  Don't think of me either.  Think of yourself.  Ha!  Nothing
will be able to touch you then--at last.  Say nothing.  Don't move.
I'll have everything arranged; and as long as you don't hate the sight
of me--and you don't--there's nothing to be frightened about.  One of
their silly offices with a couple of ink-slingers of no consequence;
poor, scribbling devils."

The hansom drove away with Flora de Barral inside, without movement,
without thought, only too glad to rest, to be alone and still moving
away without effort, in solitude and silence.

Anthony roamed the streets for hours without being able to remember in
the evening where he had been--in the manner of a happy and exulting
lover.  But nobody could have thought so from his face, which bore no
signs of blissful anticipation.  Exulting indeed he was but it was a
special sort of exultation which seemed to take him by the throat like
an enemy.

Anthony's last words to Flora referred to the registry office where they
were married ten days later.  During that time Anthony saw no one or
anything, though he went about restlessly, here and there, amongst men
and things.  This special state is peculiar to common lovers, who are
known to have no eyes for anything except for the contemplation, actual
or inward, of one human form which for them contains the soul of the
whole world in all its beauty, perfection, variety and infinity.  It
must be extremely pleasant.  But felicity was denied to Roderick
Anthony's contemplation.  He was not a common sort of lover; and he was
punished for it as if Nature (which it is said abhors a vacuum) were so
very conventional as to abhor every sort of exceptional conduct.
Roderick Anthony had begun already to suffer.  That is why perhaps he
was so industrious in going about amongst his fellow-men who would have
been surprised and humiliated, had they known how little solidity and
even existence they had in his eyes.  But they could not suspect
anything so queer.  They saw nothing extraordinary in him during that
fortnight.  The proof of this is that they were willing to transact
business with him.  Obviously they were; since it is then that the offer
of chartering his ship for the special purpose of proceeding to the
Western Islands was put in his way by a firm of shipbrokers who had no
doubt of his sanity.

He probably looked sane enough for all the practical purposes of
commercial life.  But I am not so certain that he really was quite sane
at that time.

However, he jumped at the offer.  Providence itself was offering him
this opportunity to accustom the girl to sea-life by a comparatively
short trip.  This was the time when everything that happened, everything
he heard, casual words, unrelated phrases, seemed a provocation or an
encouragement, confirmed him in his resolution.  And indeed to be busy
with material affairs is the best preservative against reflection,
fears, doubts--all these things which stand in the way of achievement.
I suppose a fellow proposing to cut his throat would experience a sort
of relief while occupied in stropping his razor carefully.

And Anthony was extremely careful in preparing for himself and for the
luckless Flora, an impossible existence.  He went about it with no more
tremors than if he had been stuffed with rags or made of iron instead of
flesh and blood.  An existence, mind you, which, on shore, in the thick
of mankind, of varied interests, of distractions, of infinite
opportunities to preserve your distance from each other, is hardly
conceivable; but on board ship, at sea, _en tete-a-tete_ for days and
weeks and months together, could mean nothing but mental torture, an
exquisite absurdity of torment.  He was a simple soul.  His hopelessly
masculine ingenuousness is displayed in a touching way by his care to
procure some woman to attend on Flora.  The condition of guaranteed
perfect respectability gave him moments of anxious thought.  When he
remembered suddenly his steward's wife he must have exclaimed _eureka_
with particular exultation.  One does not like to call Anthony an ass.
But really to put any woman within scenting distance of such a secret
and suppose that she would not track it out!  No woman, however simple,
could be as ingenuous as that.  I don't know how Flora de Barral
qualified him in her thoughts when he told her of having done this
amongst other things intended to make her comfortable.  I should think
that, for all _her_ simplicity, she must have been appalled.  He stood
before her on the appointed day outwardly calmer than she had ever seen
him before.  And this very calmness, that scrupulous attitude which he
felt bound in honour to assume then and for ever, unless she would
condescend to make a sign at some future time, added to the heaviness of
her heart innocent of the most pardonable guile.

The night before she had slept better than she had done for the past ten
nights.  Both youth and weariness will assert themselves in the end
against the tyranny of nerve-racking stress.  She had slept but she woke
up with her eyes full of tears.  There were no traces of them when she
met him in the shabby little parlour downstairs.  She had swallowed them
up.  She was not going to let him see.  She felt bound in honour to
accept the situation for ever and ever unless--Ah, unless ...  She
dissembled all her sentiments but it was not duplicity on her part.  All
she wanted was to get at the truth; to see what would come of it.

She beat him at his own honourable game and the thoroughness of her
serenity disconcerted Anthony a bit.  It was he who stammered when it
came to talking.  The suppressed fierceness of his character carried him
on after the first word or two masterfully enough.  But it was as if
they both had taken a bite of the same bitter fruit.  He was thinking
with mournful regret not unmixed with surprise: "That fellow Fyne has
been telling me the truth.  She does not care for me a bit."  It
humiliated him and also increased his compassion for the girl who in
this darkness of life, buffeted and despairing, had fallen into the grip
of his stronger will, abandoning herself to his arms as on a night of
shipwreck.  Flora on her side with partial insight (for women are never
blind with the complete masculine blindness) looked on him with some
pity; and she felt pity for herself too.  It was a rejection, a casting
out; nothing new to her.  But she who supposed all her sensibility dead
by this time, discovered in herself a resentment of this ultimate
betrayal.  She had no resignation for this one.  With a sort of mental
sullenness she said to herself: "Well, I am here.  I am here without any
nonsense.  It is not my fault that I am a mere worthless object of
pity."

And these things which she could tell herself with a clear conscience
served her better than the passionate obstinacy of purpose could serve
Roderick Anthony.  She was much more sure of herself than he was.  Such
are the advantages of mere rectitude over the most exalted generosity.

And so they went out to get married, the people of the house where she
lodged having no suspicion of anything of the sort.  They were only
excited at a "gentleman friend" (a very fine man too) calling on Miss
Smith for the first time since she had come to live in the house.  When
she returned, for she did come back alone, there were allusions made to
that outing.  She had to take her meals with these rather vulgar people.
The woman of the house, a scraggy, genteel person, tried even to
provoke confidences.  Flora's white face with the deep blue eyes did not
strike their hearts as it did the heart of Captain Anthony, as the very
face of the suffering world.  Her pained reserve had no power to awe
them into decency.

Well, she returned alone--as in fact might have been expected.  After
leaving the Registry Office Flora de Barral and Roderick Anthony had
gone for a walk in a park.  It must have been an East-End park but I am
not sure.  Anyway that's what they did.  It was a sunny day.  He said to
her: "Everything I have in the world belongs to you.  I have seen to
that without troubling my brother-in-law.  They have no call to
interfere."

She walked with her hand resting lightly on his arm.  He had offered it
to her on coming out of the Registry Office, and she had accepted it
silently.  Her head drooped, she seemed to be turning matters over in
her mind.  She said, alluding to the Fynes: "They have been very good to
me."  At that he exclaimed:

"They have never understood you.  Well, not properly.  My sister is not
a bad woman, but..."

Flora didn't protest; asking herself whether he imagined that he himself
understood her so much better.  Anthony dismissing his family out of his
thoughts went on: "Yes.  Everything is yours.  I have kept nothing back.
As to the piece of paper we have just got from that miserable
quill-driver if it wasn't for the law, I wouldn't mind if you tore it up
here, now, on this spot.  But don't you do it.  Unless you should some
day feel that--"

He choked, unexpectedly.  She, reflective, hesitated a moment then
making up her mind bravely.

"Neither am I keeping anything back from you."

She had said it!  But he in his blind generosity assumed that she was
alluding to her deplorable history and hastened to mutter:

"Of course!  Of course!  Say no more.  I have been lying awake thinking
of it all no end of times."

He made a movement with his other arm as if restraining himself from
shaking an indignant fist at the universe; and she never even attempted
to look at him.  His voice sounded strangely, incredibly lifeless in
comparison with these tempestuous accents that in the broad fields, in
the dark garden had seemed to shake the very earth under her weary and
hopeless feet.

She regretted them.  Hearing the sigh which escaped her Anthony instead
of shaking his fist at the universe began to pat her hand resting on his
arm and then desisted, suddenly, as though he had burnt himself.  Then
after a silence:

"You will have to go by yourself to-morrow.  I ...  No, I think I
mustn't come.  Better not.  What you two will have to say to each
other--"

She interrupted him quickly:

"Father is an innocent man.  He was cruelly wronged."

"Yes.  That's why," Anthony insisted earnestly.  "And you are the only
human being that can make it up to him.  You alone must reconcile him
with the world if anything can.  But of course you shall.  You'll have
to find words.  Oh you'll know.  And then the sight of you, alone, would
soothe--"

"He's the gentlest of men," she interrupted again.

Anthony shook his head.  "It would take no end of generosity, no end of
gentleness to forgive such a dead set.  For my part I, would have liked
better to have been killed and done with at once.  It could not have
been worse for you--and I suppose it was of you that he was thinking
most while those infernal lawyers were badgering him in court.  Of you.
And now I think of it perhaps the sight of you may bring it all back to
him.  All these years, all these years--and you his child left alone in
the world.  I would have gone crazy.  For even if he had done wrong--"

"But he hasn't," insisted Flora de Barral with a quite unexpected
fierceness.  "You mustn't even suppose it.  Haven't you read the
accounts of the trial?"

"I am not supposing anything," Anthony defended himself.  He just
remembered hearing of the trial.  He assured her that he was away from
England, the second voyage of the _Ferndale_.  He was crossing the
Pacific from Australia at the time and didn't see any papers for weeks
and weeks.  He interrupted himself to suggest:

"You had better tell him at once that you are happy."

He had stammered a little, and Flora de Barral uttered a deliberate and
concise "Yes."

A short silence ensued.  She withdrew her hand from his arm.  They
stopped.  Anthony looked as if a totally unexpected catastrophe had
happened.

"Ah," he said.  "You mind..."

"No!  I think I had better," she murmured.

"I dare say.  I dare say.  Bring him along straight on board to-morrow.
Stop nowhere."

She had a movement of vague gratitude, a momentary feeling of peace
which she referred to the man before her.  She looked up at Anthony.
His face was sombre.  He was miles away and muttered as if to himself:

"Where could he want to stop though?"

"There's not a single being on earth that I would want to look at his
dear face now, to whom I would willingly take him," she said extending
her hand frankly and with a slight break in her voice, "but you--
Roderick."

He took that hand, felt it very small and delicate in his broad palm.

"That's right.  That's right," he said with a conscious and hasty
heartiness and, as if suddenly ashamed of the sound of his voice, turned
half round and absolutely walked away from the motionless girl.  He even
resisted the temptation to look back till it was too late.  The gravel
path lay empty to the very gate of the park.  She was gone--vanished.
He had an impression that he had missed some sort of chance.  He felt
sad.  That excited sense of his own conduct which had kept him up for
the last ten days buoyed him no more.  He had succeeded!

He strolled on aimlessly a prey to gentle melancholy.  He walked and
walked.  There were but few people about in this breathing space of a
poor neighbourhood.  Under certain conditions of life there is precious
little time left for mere breathing.  But still a few here and there
were indulging in that luxury; yet few as they were Captain Anthony,
though the least exclusive of men, resented their presence.  Solitude
had been his best friend.  He wanted some place where he could sit down
and be alone.  And in his need his thoughts turned to the sea which had
given him so much of that congenial solitude.  There, if always with his
ship (but that was an integral part of him) he could always be as
solitary as he chose.  Yes.  Get out to sea!

The night of the town with its strings of lights, rigid, and crossed
like a net of flames, thrown over the sombre immensity of walls, closed
round him, with its artificial brilliance overhung by an emphatic
blackness, its unnatural animation of a restless, overdriven humanity.
His thoughts which somehow were inclined to pity every passing figure,
every single person glimpsed under a street lamp, fixed themselves at
last upon a figure which certainly could not have been seen under the
lamps on that particular night.  A figure unknown to him.  A figure shut
up within high unscaleable walls of stone or bricks till next morning
...  The figure of Flora de Barral's father.  De Barral the financier--
the convict.

There is something in that word with its suggestions of guilt and
retribution which arrests the thought.  We feel ourselves in the
presence of the power of organised society--a thing mysterious in itself
and still more mysterious in its effect.  Whether guilty or innocent, it
was as if old de Barral had been down to the Nether Regions.  Impossible
to imagine what he would bring out from there to the light of this world
of uncondemned men.  What would he think?  What would he have to say?
And what was one to say to him?

Anthony, a little awed, as one is by a range of feelings stretching
beyond one's grasp, comforted himself by the thought that probably the
old fellow would have little to say.  He wouldn't want to talk about it.
No man would.  It must have been a real hell to him.

And then Anthony, at the end of the day in which he had gone through a
marriage ceremony with Flora de Barral, ceased to think of Flora's
father except, as in some sort, the captive of his triumph.  He turned
to the mental contemplation of the white, delicate and appealing face
with great blue eyes which he had seen weep and wonder and look
profoundly at him, sometimes with incredulity, sometimes with doubt and
pain, but always irresistible in the power to find their way right into
his breast, to stir there a deep response which was something more than
love--he said to himself,--as men understand it.  More?  Or was it only
something other?  Yes.  It was something other.  More or less.
Something as incredible as the fulfilment of an amazing and startling
dream in which he could take the world in his arms--all the suffering
world--not to possess its pathetic fairness but to console and cherish
its sorrow.

Anthony walked slowly to the ship and that night slept without dreams.



PART TWO, CHAPTER 5.

THE GREAT DE BARRAL.

Renovated certainly the saloon of the _Ferndale_ was to receive the
"strange woman."  The mellowness of its old-fashioned, tarnished
decoration was gone.  And Anthony looking round saw the glitter, the
gleams, the colour of new things, untried, unused, very bright--too
bright.  The workmen had gone only last night; and the last piece of
work they did was the hanging of the heavy curtains which looped midway
the length of the saloon--divided it in two if released, cutting off the
after-end with its companion-way leading direct on the poop, from the
forepart with its outlet on the deck; making a privacy within a privacy,
as though Captain Anthony could not place obstacles enough between his
new happiness and the men who shared his life at sea.  He inspected that
arrangement with an approving eye then made a particular visitation of
the whole, ending by opening a door which led into a large state-room
made of two knocked into one.  It was very well furnished and had,
instead of the usual bed-place of such cabins, an elaborate swinging cot
of the latest pattern.  Anthony tilted it a little by way of trial.
"The old man will be very comfortable in here," he said to himself, and
stepped back into the saloon closing the door gently.  Then another
thought occurred to him obvious under the circumstances but strangely
enough presenting itself for the first time.  "Jove!  Won't he get a
shock," thought Roderick Anthony.

He went hastily on deck.  "Mr Franklin, Mr Franklin."

The mate was not very far.  "Oh!  Here you are.  Miss ...  Mrs
Anthony'll be coming on board presently.  Just give me a call when you
see the cab."

Then, without noticing the gloominess of the mate's countenance he went
in again.  Not a friendly word, not a professional remark, or a small
joke, not as much as a simple and inane "fine day."  Nothing.  Just
turned about and went in.

We know that, when the moment came, he thought better of it and decided
to meet Flora's father in that privacy of the main cabin which he had
been so careful to arrange.  Why Anthony appeared to shrink from the
contact, he who was sufficiently self-confident not only to face but to
absolutely create a situation almost insane in its audacious generosity,
is difficult to explain.  Perhaps when he came on the poop for a glance
he found that man so different outwardly from what he expected that he
decided to meet him for the first time out of everybody's sight.
Possibly the general secrecy of his relation to the girl might have
influenced him.  Truly he may well have been dismayed.  That man's
coming brought him face to face with the necessity to speak and act a
lie; to appear what he was not and what he could never be, unless,
unless--

In short, we'll say if you like that for various reasons, all having to
do with the delicate rectitude of his nature, Roderick Anthony (a man of
whom his chief mate used to say: he doesn't know what fear is) was
frightened.  There is a Nemesis which overtakes generosity too, like all
the other imprudences of men who dare to be lawless and proud...

"Why do you say this?"  I inquired, for Marlow had stopped abruptly and
kept silent in the shadow of the bookcase.

"I say this because that man whom chance had thrown in Flora's way was
both: lawless and proud.  Whether he knew anything about it or not it
does not matter.  Very likely not.  One may fling a glove in the face of
nature and in the face of one's own moral endurance quite innocently,
with a simplicity which wears the aspect of perfectly Satanic conceit.
However, as I have said it does not matter.  It's a transgression all
the same and has got to be paid for in the usual way.  But never mind
that.  I paused because, like Anthony, I find a difficulty, a sort of
dread in coming to grips with old de Barral."

You remember I had a glimpse of him once.  He was not an imposing
personality: tall, thin, straight, stiff, faded, moving with short steps
and with a gliding motion, speaking in an even low voice.  When the sea
was rough he wasn't much seen on deck--at least not walking.  He caught
hold of things then and dragged himself along as far as the after
skylight where he would sit for hours.  Our, then young, friend offered
once to assist him and this service was the first beginning of a sort of
friendship.  He clung hard to one--Powell says, with no figurative
intention.  Powell was always on the lookout to assist, and to assist
mainly Mrs Anthony, because he clung so jolly hard to her that Powell
was afraid of her being dragged down notwithstanding that she very soon
became very sure-footed in all sorts of weather.  And Powell was the
only one ready to assist at hand because Anthony (by that time) seemed
to be afraid to come near them; the unforgiving Franklin always looked
wrathfully the other way; the boatswain, if up there, acted likewise but
sheepishly; and any hands that happened to be on the poop (a feeling
spreads mysteriously all over a ship) shunned him as though he had been
the devil.

We know how he arrived on board.  For my part I know so little of
prisons that I haven't the faintest notion how one leaves them.  It
seems as abominable an operation as the other, the shutting up with its
mental suggestions of bang, snap, crash and the empty silence outside--
where an instant before you were--you _were_--and now no longer are.
Perfectly devilish.  And the release!  I don't know which is worse.  How
do they do it?  Pull the string, door flies open, man flies through: Out
you go!  _Adios_!  And in the space where a second before you were not,
in the silent space there is a figure going away, limping.  Why limping?
I don't know.  That's how I see it.  One has a notion of a maiming,
crippling process; of the individual coming back damaged in some subtle
way.  I admit it is a fantastic hallucination, but I can't help it.  Of
course I know that the proceedings of the best machine-made humanity are
employed with judicious care and so on.  I am absurd, no doubt, but
still...  Oh yes it's idiotic.  When I pass one of these places ... did
you notice that there is something infernal about the aspect of every
individual stone or brick of them, something malicious as if matter were
enjoying its revenge of the contemptuous spirit of man.  Did you notice?
You didn't?  Eh?  Well I am perhaps a little mad on that point.  When I
pass one of these places I must avert my eyes.  I couldn't have gone to
meet de Barral.  I should have shrunk from the ordeal.  You'll notice
that it looks as if Anthony (a brave man indubitably) had shirked it
too.  Little Fyne's flight of fancy picturing three people in the fatal
four-wheeler--you remember?--went wide of the truth.  There were only
two people in the four-wheeler.  Flora did not shrink.  Women can stand
anything.  The dear creatures have no imagination when it comes to solid
facts of life.  In sentimental regions--I won't say.  It's another thing
altogether.  There they shrink from or rush to embrace ghosts of their
own creation just the same as any fool-man would.

"No.  I suppose the girl Flora went on that errand reasonably.  And
then, why!  This was the moment for which she had lived.  It was her
only point of contact with existence.  Oh yes.  She had been assisted by
the Fynes.  And kindly.  Certainly.  Kindly.  But that's not enough.
There is a kind way of assisting our fellow-creatures which is enough to
break their hearts while it saves their outer envelope.  How cold, how
infernally cold she must have felt--unless when she was made to burn
with indignation or shame.  Man, we know, cannot live by bread alone but
hang me if I don't believe that some women could live by love alone.  If
there be a flame in human beings fed by varied ingredients earthly and
spiritual which tinge it in different hues, then I seem to see the
colour of theirs.  It is azure ...  What the devil are you laughing
at..."

Marlow jumped up and strode out of the shadow as if lifted by
indignation but there was the flicker of a smile on his lips.  "You say
I don't know women.  Maybe.  It's just as well not to come too close to
the shrine.  But I have a clear notion of _woman_.  In all of them,
termagant, flirt, crank, washerwoman, blue-stocking, outcast and even in
the ordinary fool of the ordinary commerce there is something left, if
only a spark.  And when there is a spark there can always be a flame..."

He went back into the shadow and sat down again.

"I don't mean to say that Flora de Barral was one of the sort that could
live by love alone.  In fact she had managed to live without.  But
still, in the distrust of herself and of others she looked for love, any
kind of love, as women will.  And that confounded jail was the only spot
where she could see it--for she had no reason to distrust her father."

She was there in good time.  I see her gazing across the road at these
walls which are, properly speaking, awful.  You do indeed seem to feel
along the very lines and angles of the unholy bulk, the fall of time,
drop by drop, hour by hour, leaf by leaf, with a gentle and implacable
slowness.  And a voiceless melancholy comes over one, invading,
overpowering like a dream, penetrating and mortal like poison.

When de Barral came out she experienced a sort of shock to see that he
was exactly as she remembered him.  Perhaps a little smaller.  Otherwise
unchanged.  You come out in the same clothes, you know.  I can't tell
whether he was looking for her.  No doubt he was.  Whether he recognised
her?  Very likely.  She crossed the road and at once there was
reproduced at a distance of years, as if by some mocking witchcraft, the
sight so familiar on the Parade at Brighton of the financier de Barral
walking with his only daughter.  One comes out of prison in the same
clothes one wore on the day of condemnation, no matter how long one has
been put away there.  Oh, they last!  They last!  But there is something
which is preserved by prison life even better than one's discarded
clothing.  It is the force, the vividness of one's sentiments.  A
monastery will do that too; but in the unholy claustration of a jail you
are thrown back wholly upon yourself--for God and Faith are not there.
The people outside disperse their affections, you hoard yours, you nurse
them into intensity.  What they let slip, what they forget in the
movement and changes of free life, you hold on to, amplify, exaggerate
into a rank growth of memories.  They can look with a smile at the
troubles and pains of the past; but you can't.  Old pains keep on
gnawing at your heart, old desires, old deceptions, old dreams,
assailing you in the dead stillness of your present where nothing moves
except the irrecoverable minutes of your life.

De Barral was out and, for a time speechless, being led away almost
before he had taken possession of the free world, by his daughter.
Flora controlled herself well.  They walked along quickly for some
distance.  The cab had been left round the corner--round several corners
for all I know.  He was flustered, out of breath, when she helped him in
and followed herself.  Inside that rolling box, turning towards that
recovered presence with her heart too full for words she felt the desire
of tears she had managed to keep down abandon her suddenly, her
half-mournful, half-triumphant exultation subside, every fibre of her
body, relaxed in tenderness, go stiff in the close look she took at his
face.  He _was_ different.  There was something.  Yes, there was
something between them, something hard and impalpable, the ghost of
these high walls.

How old he was, how unlike!

She shook off this impression, amazed and frightened by it of course.
And remorseful too.  Naturally.  She threw her arms round his neck.  He
returned that hug awkwardly, as if not in perfect control of his arms,
with a fumbling and uncertain pressure.  She hid her face on his breast.
It was as though she were pressing it against a stone.  They released
each other and presently the cab was rolling along at a jog-trot to the
docks with those two people as far apart as they could get from each
other, in opposite corners.

After a silence given up to mutual examination he uttered his first
coherent sentence outside the walls of the prison.

"What has done for me was envy.  Envy.  There was a lot of them just
bursting with it every time they looked my way.  I was doing too well.
So they went to the Public Prosecutor--"

She said hastily "Yes!  Yes!  I know," and he glared as if resentful
that the child had turned into a young woman without waiting for him to
come out.  "What do you know about it?" he asked.  "You were too young."
His speech was soft.  The old voice, the old voice!  It gave her a
thrill.  She recognised its pointless gentleness always the same no
matter what he had to say.  And she remembered that he never had much to
say when he came down to see her.  It was she who chattered, chattered,
on their walks, while stiff and with a rigidly-carried head, he dropped
a gentle word now and then.

Moved by these recollections waking up within her, she explained to him
that within the last year she had read and studied the report of the
trial.

"I went through the files of several papers, papa."

He looked at her suspiciously.  The reports were probably very
incomplete.  No doubt the reporters had garbled his evidence.  They were
determined to give him no chance either in court or before the public
opinion.  It was a conspiracy...  "My counsel was a fool too," he added.
"Did you notice?  A perfect fool."

She laid her hand on his arm soothingly.  "Is it worth while talking
about that awful time?  It is so far away now."  She shuddered slightly
at the thought of all the horrible years which had passed over her young
head; never guessing that for him the time was but yesterday.  He folded
his arms on his breast, leaned back in his corner and bowed his head.
But in a little while he made her jump by asking suddenly:

"Who has got hold of the Lone Valley Railway?  That's what they were
after mainly.  Somebody has got it.  Parfitts and Co. grabbed it--eh?
Or was it that fellow Warner..."

"I--I don't know," she said quite scared by the twitching of his lips.

"Don't know!" he exclaimed softly.  Hadn't her cousin told her?  Oh yes.
She had left them--of course.  Why did she?  It was his first question
about herself but she did not answer it.  She did not want to talk of
these horrors.  They were impossible to describe.  She perceived though
that he had not expected an answer, because she heard him muttering to
himself that: "There was half a million's worth of work done and
material accumulated there."

"You mustn't think of these things, papa," she said firmly.  And he
asked her with that invariable gentleness, in which she seemed now to
detect some rather ugly shades, what else had he to think about?
Another year or two, if they had only left him alone, he and everybody
else would have been all right, rolling in money; and she, his daughter,
could have married anybody--anybody.  A lord.

All this was to him like yesterday, a long yesterday a yesterday gone
over innumerable times, analysed meditated upon for years.  It had a
vividness and force for that old man of which his daughter who had not
been shut out of the world could have no idea.  She was to him the only
living figure out of that past, and it was perhaps in perfect good faith
that he added, coldly, inexpressive and thin-lipped: "I lived only for
you, I may say.  I suppose you understand that.  There were only you and
me."

Moved by this declaration, wondering that it did not warm her heart
more, she murmured a few endearing words while the uppermost thought in
her mind was that she must tell him now of the situation.  She had
expected to be questioned anxiously about herself--and while she desired
it she shrank from the answers she would have to make.  But her father
seemed strangely, unnaturally incurious.  It looked as if there would be
no questions.  Still this was an opening.  This seemed to be the time
for her to begin.  And she began.  She began by saying that she had
always felt like that.  There were two of them, to live for each other.
And if he only knew what she had gone through!

Ensconced in his corner, with his arms folded, he stared out of the cab
window at the street.  How little he was changed after all.  It was the
unmovable expression, the faded stare she used to see on the esplanade
whenever walking by his side hand in hand she raised her eyes to his
face--while she chattered, chattered.  It was the same stiff, silent
figure which at a word from her would turn rigidly into a shop and buy
her anything it occurred to her that she would like to have.  Flora de
Barral's voice faltered.  He bent on her that well-remembered glance in
which she had never read anything as a child, except the consciousness
of her existence.  And that was enough for a child who had never known
demonstrative affection.  But she had lived a life so starved of all
feeling that this was no longer enough for her.  What was the good of
telling him the story of all these miseries now past and gone, of all
those bewildering difficulties and humiliations?  What she _must_ tell
him was difficult enough to say.  She approached it by remarking
cheerfully:

"You haven't even asked me where I am taking you."

He started like a somnambulist awakened suddenly, and there was now some
meaning in his stare; a sort of alarmed speculation.  He opened his
mouth slowly.  Flora struck in with forced gaiety.  "You would never
guess."

He waited, still more startled and suspicious.  "Guess!  Why don't you
tell me?"

He uncrossed his arms and leaned forward towards her.  She got hold of
one of his hands.  "You _must know_ first..."  She paused, made an
effort: "I am married, papa."

For a moment they kept perfectly still in that cab rolling on at a
steady jog-trot through a narrow city street full of bustle.  Whatever
she expected she did not expect to feel his hand snatched away from her
grasp as if from a burn or a contamination.  De Barral fresh from the
stagnant torment of the prison (where nothing happens) had not expected
that sort of news.  It seemed to stick in his throat.  In strangled low
tones he cried out, "You--married?  You, Flora!  When?  Married!  What
for?  Who to?  Married?"

His eyes which were blue like hers, only faded, without depth, seemed to
start out of their orbits.  He did really look as if he were choking.
He even put his hand to his collar...

"You know," continued Marlow out of the shadow of the bookcase and
nearly invisible in the depths of the armchair, "the only time I saw him
he had given me the impression of absolute rigidity, as though he had
swallowed a poker.  But it seems that he could collapse.  I can hardly
picture this to myself.  I understand that he did collapse to a certain
extent in his corner of the cab.  The unexpected had crumpled him up.
She regarded him perplexed, pitying, a little disillusioned, and nodded
at him gravely: Yes.  Married.  What she did not like was to see him
smile in a manner far from encouraging to the devotion of a daughter.
There was something unintentionally savage in it.  Old de Barral could
not quite command his muscles, as yet.  But he had recovered command of
his gentle voice.

"You were just saying that in this wide world there we were, only you
and I, to stick to each other."

She was dimly aware of the scathing intention lurking in these soft low
tones, in these words which appealed to her poignantly.  She defended
herself.  Never, never for a single moment had she ceased to think of
him.  Neither did he cease to think of her, he said, with as much
sinister emphasis as he was capable of.

"But, papa," she cried, "I haven't been shut up like you."  She didn't
mind speaking of it because he was innocent.  He hadn't been understood.
It was a misfortune of the most cruel kind but no more disgraceful than
an illness, a maiming accident or some other visitation of blind fate.
"I wish I had been too.  But I was alone out in the world, the horrid
world, that very world which had used you so badly."

"And you couldn't go about in it without finding somebody to fall in
love with?" he said.  A jealous rage affected his brain like the fumes
of wine, rising from some secret depths of his being so long deprived of
all emotions.  The hollows at the corners of his lips became more
pronounced in the puffy roundness of his cheeks.  Images, visions,
obsess with particular force, men withdrawn from the sights and sounds
of active life.  "And I did nothing but think of you!" he exclaimed
under his breath, contemptuously.  "Think of you!  You haunted me, I
tell you."

Flora said to herself that there was a being who loved her.  "Then we
have been haunting each other," she declared with a pang of remorse.
For indeed he had haunted her nearly out of the world, into a final and
irremediable desertion.  "Some day I shall tell you...  No.  I don't
think I can ever tell you.  There was a time when I was mad.  But what's
the good?  It's all over now.  We shall forget all this.  There shall be
nothing to remind us."

De Barral moved his shoulders.

"I should think you were mad to tie yourself to ...  How long is it
since you are married?"

She answered "Not long" that being the only answer she dared to make.
Everything was so different from what she imagined it would be.  He
wanted to know why she had said nothing of it in any of her letters; in
her last letter.  She said:

"It was after."

"So recently!" he wondered.  "Couldn't you wait at least till I came
out?  You could have told me; asked me; consulted me!  Let me see--"

She shook her head negatively.  And he was appalled.  He thought to
himself: Who can he be?  Some miserable, silly youth without a penny.
Or perhaps some scoundrel?  Without making any expressive movement he
wrung his loosely-clasped hands till the joints cracked.  He looked at
her.  She was pretty.  Some low scoundrel who will cast her off.  Some
plausible vagabond...  "You couldn't wait--eh?"

Again she made a slight negative sign.

Why not?  What was the hurry?  She cast down her eyes.  "It had to be.
Yes.  It was sudden, but it had to be."

He leaned towards her, his mouth open, his eyes wild with virtuous
anger, but meeting the absolute candour of her raised glance threw
himself back into his corner again.

"So tremendously in love with each other--was that it?  Couldn't let a
father have his daughter all to himself even for a day after--after such
a separation.  And you know I never had anyone, I had no friends.  What
did I want with those people one meets in the City.  The best of them
are ready to cut your throat.  Yes!  Business men, gentlemen, any sort
of men and women--out of spite, or to get something.  Oh yes, they can
talk fair enough if they think there's something to be got out of
you..."  His voice was a mere breath yet every word came to Flora as
distinctly as if charged with all the moving power of passion.--"My
girl, I looked at them making up to me and I would say to myself: What
do I care for all that!  I am a business man.  I am the great Mr de
Barral (yes, yes, some of them twisted their mouths at it, but I _was_
the great Mr de Barral) and I have my little girl.  I wanted nobody and
I have never had anybody."

A true emotion had unsealed his lips but the words that came out of them
were no louder than the murmur of a light wind.  It died away.

"That's just it," said Flora de Barral under her breath.  Without
removing his eyes from her he took off his hat.  It was a tall hat.  The
hat of the trial.  The hat of the thumb-nail sketches in the illustrated
papers.  One comes out in the same clothes, but seclusion counts!  It is
well-known that lurid visions haunt secluded men, monks, hermits--then
why not prisoners?  De Barral the convict took off the silk hat of the
financier de Barral and deposited it on the front seat of the cab.  Then
he blew out his cheeks.  He was red in the face.

"And then what happens?" he began again in his contained voice.  "Here I
am, overthrown, broken by envy, malice and all uncharitableness.  I come
out--and what do I find?  I find that my girl Flora has gone and married
some man or other, perhaps a fool, how do I know; or perhaps--anyway not
good enough."

"Stop, papa."

"A silly love affair as likely as not," he continued monotonously, his
thin lips writhing between the ill-omened sunk corners.  "And a very
suspicious thing it is too, on the part of a loving daughter."

She tried to interrupt him but he went on till she actually clapped her
hand on his mouth.  He rolled his eyes a bit but when she took her hand
away he remained silent.

"Wait.  I must tell you...  And first of all, papa, understand this, for
everything's in that: he is the most generous man in the world.  He
is..."

De Barral very still in his corner uttered with an effort:

"You are in love with him."

"Papa!  He came to me.  I was thinking of you.  I had no eyes for
anybody.  I could no longer bear to think of you.  It was then that he
came.  Only then.  At that time when--when I was going to give up."

She gazed into his faded blue eyes as if yearning to be understood, to
be given encouragement, peace--a word of sympathy.  He declared without
animation:

"I would like to break his neck."

She had the mental exclamation of the overburdened.  "Oh my God!" and
watched him with frightened eyes.  But he did not appear insane or in
any other way formidable.  This comforted her.  The silence lasted for
some little time.  Then suddenly he asked:

"What's your name then?"

For a moment in the profound trouble of the task before her she did not
understand what the question meant.  Then, her face faintly flushing,
she whispered: "Anthony."

Her father, a red spot on each cheek, leaned his head back wearily in
the corner of the cab.

"Anthony.  What is he?  Where did he spring from?"

"Papa, it was in the country, on a road--"

He groaned, "On a road," and closed his eyes.

"It's too long to explain to you now.  We shall have lots of time.
There are things I could not tell you now.  But some day.  Some day.
For now nothing can part us.  Nothing.  We are safe as long as we live--
nothing can ever come between us."

"You are infatuated with the fellow," he remarked, without opening his
eyes.  And she said: "I believe in him," in a low voice.  "You and I
must believe in him?"

"Who the devil is he?"

"He's the brother of the lady--you know Mrs Fyne, she knew mother--who
was so kind to me.  I was staying in the country, in a cottage, with Mr
and Mrs Fyne.  It was there that we met.  He came on a visit.  He
noticed me.  I--well--we are married now."

She was thankful that his eyes were shut.  It made it easier to talk of
the future she had arranged, which now was an unalterable thing.  She
did not enter on the path of confidences.  That was impossible.  She
felt he would not understand her.  She felt also that he suffered.  Now
and then a great anxiety gripped her heart with a mysterious sense of
guilt--as though she had betrayed him into the hands of an enemy.  With
his eyes shut he had an air of weary and pious meditation.  She was a
little afraid of it.  Next moment a great pity for him filled her heart.
And in the background there was remorse.  His face twitched now and
then just perceptibly.  He managed to keep his eyelids down till he
heard that the `husband' was a sailor and that he, the father, was being
taken straight on board ship ready to sail away from this abominable
world of treacheries, and scorns and envies and lies, away, away over
the blue sea, the sure, the inaccessible, the uncontaminated and
spacious refuge for wounded souls.

Something like that.  Not the very words perhaps but such was the
general sense of her overwhelming argument--the argument of refuge.

I don't think she gave a thought to material conditions.  But as part of
that argument set forth breathlessly, as if she were afraid that if she
stopped for a moment she could never go on again, she mentioned that
generosity of a stormy type, which had come to her from the sea, had
caught her up on the brink of unmentionable failure, had whirled her
away in its first ardent gust and could be trusted now, implicitly
trusted, to carry them both, side by side, into absolute safety.

She believed it, she affirmed it.  He understood thoroughly at last, and
at once the interior of that cab, of an aspect so pacific in the eyes of
the people on the pavements, became the scene of a great agitation.  The
generosity of Roderick Anthony--the son of the poet--affected the
ex-financier de Barral in a manner which must have brought home to Flora
de Barral the extreme arduousness of the business of being a woman.
Being a woman is a terribly difficult trade since it consists
principally of dealings with men.  This man--the man inside the cab--
cast off his stiff placidity and behaved like an animal.  I don't mean
it in an offensive sense.  What he did was to give way to an instinctive
panic.  Like some wild creature scared by the first touch of a net
falling on its back, old de Barral began to struggle, lank and angular,
against the empty air--as much of it as there was in the cab--with
staring eyes and gasping mouth from which his daughter shrank as far as
she could in the confined space.

"Stop the cab.  Stop him I tell you.  Let me get out!" were the
strangled exclamations she heard.  Why?  What for?  To do what?  He
would hear nothing.  She cried to him "Papa!  Papa!  What do you want to
do?"  And all she got from him was: "Stop.  I must get out.  I want to
think.  I must get out to think."

It was a mercy that he didn't attempt to open the door at once.  He only
stuck his head and shoulders out of the window crying to the cabman.
She saw the consequences, the cab stopping, a crowd collecting around a
raving old gentleman.--In this terrible business of being a woman so
full of fine shades, of delicate perplexities (and very small rewards)
you can never know what rough work you may have to do, at any moment.
Without hesitation Flora seized her father round the body and pulled
back--being astonished at the ease with which she managed to make him
drop into his seat again.  She kept him there resolutely with one hand
pressed against his breast, and leaning across him, she, in her turn put
her head and shoulders out of the window.  By then the cab had drawn up
to the curbstone and was stopped.  "No!  I've changed my mind.  Go on
please where you were told first.  To the docks."

She wondered at the steadiness of her own voice.  She heard a grunt from
the driver and the cab began to roll again.  Only then she sank into her
place keeping a watchful eye on her companion.  He was hardly anything
more by this time.  Except for her childhood's impressions he was just--
a man.  Almost a stranger.  How was one to deal with him?  And there was
the other too.  Also almost a stranger.  The trade of being a woman was
very difficult.  Too difficult.  Flora closed her eyes saying to
herself: "If I think too much about it I shall go mad."  And then
opening them she asked her father if the prospect of living always with
his daughter and being taken care of by her affection away from the
world, which had no honour to give to his grey hairs, was such an awful
prospect.

"Tell me, is it so bad as that?"

She put that question sadly, without bitterness.  The famous--or
notorious--de Barral had lost his rigidity now.  He was bent.  Nothing
more deplorably futile than a bent poker.  He said nothing.  She added
gently, suppressing an uneasy remorseful sigh:

"And it might have been worse.  You might have found no one, no one in
all this town, no one in all the world, not even me!  Poor papa!"

She made a conscience-stricken movement towards him thinking: "Oh!  I am
horrible, I am horrible."  And old de Barral, scared, tired, bewildered
by the extraordinary shocks of his liberation, swayed over and actually
leaned his head on her shoulder, as if sorrowing over his regained
freedom.

The movement by itself was touching.  Flora supporting him lightly
imagined that he was crying; and at the thought that had she smashed in
a quarry that shoulder, together with some other of her bones, this grey
and pitiful head would have had nowhere to rest, she too gave way to
tears.  They flowed quietly, easing her overstrained nerves.  Suddenly
he pushed her away from him so that her head struck the side of the cab,
pushing himself away too from her as if something had stung him.

All the warmth went out of her emotion.  The very last tears turned cold
on her cheek.  But their work was done.  She had found courage,
resolution, as women do, in a good cry.  With his hand covering the
upper part of his face whether to conceal his eyes or to shut out an
unbearable sight, he was stiffening up in his corner to his usual
poker-like consistency.  She regarded him in silence.  His thin
obstinate lips moved.  He uttered the name of the cousin--the man, you
remember, who did not approve of the Fynes, and whom rightly or wrongly
little Fyne suspected of interested motives, in view of de Barral having
possibly put away some plunder, somewhere before the smash.

I may just as well tell you at once that I don't know anything more of
him.  But de Barral was of the opinion, speaking in his low voice from
under his hand, that this relation would have been only too glad to have
secured his guidance.

"Of course I could not come forward in my own name, or person.  But the
advice of a man of my experience is as good as a fortune to anybody
wishing to venture into finance.  The same sort of thing can be done
again."

He shuffled his feet a little, let fall his hand; and turning carefully
toward his daughter his puffy round cheeks, his round chin resting on
his collar, he bent on her the faded, resentful gaze of his pale eyes,
which were wet.

"The start is really only a matter of judicious advertising.  There's no
difficulty.  And here you go and..."

He turned his face away.  "After all I am still de Barral, _the_ de
Barral.  Didn't you remember that?"

"Papa," said Flora; "listen.  It's you who must remember that there is
no longer a de Barral..."  He looked at her sideways anxiously.  "There
is Mr Smith, whom no harm, no trouble, no wicked lies of evil people
can ever touch."

"Mr Smith," he breathed out slowly.  "Where does he belong to?  There's
not even a Miss Smith."

"There is your Flora."

"My Flora!  You went and--I can't bear to think of it.  It's horrible."

"Yes.  It was horrible enough at times," she said with feeling, because
somehow, obscurely, what this man said appealed to her as if it were her
own thought clothed in an enigmatic emotion.  "I think with shame
sometimes how I--No not yet.  I shall not tell you.  At least not now."

The cab turned into the gateway of the dock.  Flora handed the tall hat
to her father.  "Here, papa.  And please be good.  I suppose you love
me.  If you don't, then I wonder who--"

He put the hat on, and stiffened hard in his corner, kept a sidelong
glance on his girl.  "Try to be nice for my sake.  Think of the years I
have been waiting for you.  I do indeed want support--and peace.  A
little peace."

She clasped his arm suddenly with both hands pressing with all her might
as if to crush the resistance she felt in him.  "I could not have peace
if I did not have you with me.  I won't let you go.  Not after all I
went through.  I won't."  The nervous force of her grip frightened him a
little.  She laughed suddenly.  "It's absurd.  It's as if I were asking
you for a sacrifice.  What am I afraid of?  Where could you go?  I mean
now, to-day, to-night?  You can't tell me.  Have you thought of it?
Well I have been thinking of it for the last year.  Longer.  I nearly
went mad trying to find out.  I believe I was mad for a time or else I
should never have thought..."

"This was as near as she came to a confession," remarked Marlow in a
changed tone.  "The confession I mean of that walk to the top of the
quarry which she reproached herself with so bitterly.  And he made of it
what his fancy suggested.  It could not possibly be a just notion.  The
cab stopped alongside the ship and they got out in the manner described
by the sensitive Franklin.  I don't know if they suspected each other's
sanity at the end of that drive.  But that is possible.  We all seem a
little mad to each other; an excellent arrangement for the bulk of
humanity which finds in it an easy motive of forgiveness.  Flora crossed
the quarter-deck with a rapidity born of apprehension.  It had grown
unbearable.  She wanted this business over.  She was thankful on looking
back to see he was following her.  `If he bolts away,' she thought,
`then I shall know that I am of no account indeed!  That no one loves
me, that words and actions and protestations and everything in the world
is false--and I shall jump into the dock.  _That_ at least won't lie.'"

Well I don't know.  If it had come to that she would have been most
likely fished out, what with her natural want of luck and the good many
people on the quay and on board.  And just where the _Ferndale_ was
moored there hung on a wall (I know the berth) a coil of line, a pole,
and a life-buoy kept there on purpose to save people who tumble into the
dock.  It's not so easy to get away from life's betrayals as she
thought.  However it did not come to that.  He followed her with his
quick gliding walk.  Mr Smith!  The liberated convict de Barral passed
off the solid earth for the last time, vanished for ever, and there was
Mr Smith added to that world of waters which harbours so many queer
fishes.  An old gentleman in a silk hat, darting wary glances.  He
followed, because mere existence has its claims which are obeyed
mechanically.  I have no doubt he presented a respectable figure.
Father-in-law.  Nothing more respectable.  But he carried in his heart
the confused pain of dismay and affection, of involuntary repulsion and
pity.  Very much like his daughter.  Only in addition he felt a furious
jealousy of the man he was going to see.

A residue of egoism remains in every affection--even paternal.  And this
man in the seclusion of his prison had thought himself into such a sense
of ownership of that single human being he had to think about, as may
well be inconceivable to us who have not had to serve a long (and
wickedly unjust) sentence of penal servitude.  She was positively the
only thing, the one point where his thoughts found a resting-place, for
years.  She was the only outlet for his imagination.  He had not much of
that faculty to be sure, but there was in it the force of concentration.
He felt outraged, and perhaps it was an absurdity on his part, but I
venture to suggest rather in degree than in kind.  I have a notion that
no usual, normal father is pleased at parting with his daughter.  No.
Not even when he rationally appreciates "Jane being taken off his hands"
or perhaps is able to exult at an excellent match.  At bottom, quite
deep down, down in the dark (in some cases only by digging), there is to
be found a certain repugnance...  With mothers of course it is
different.  Women are more loyal, not to each other, but to their common
femininity which they behold triumphant with a secret and proud
satisfaction.

The circumstances of that match added to Mr Smith's indignation.  And
if he followed his daughter into that ship's cabin it was as if into a
house of disgrace and only because he was still bewildered by the
suddenness of the thing.  His will, so long lying fallow, was overborne
by her determination and by a vague fear of that regained liberty.

You will be glad to hear that Anthony, though he did shirk the welcome
on the quay, behaved admirably, with the simplicity of a man who has no
small meannesses and makes no mean reservations.  His eyes did not
flinch and his tongue did not falter.  He was, I have it on the best
authority, admirable in his earnestness, in his sincerity and also in
his restraint.  He was perfect.  Nevertheless the vital force of his
unknown individuality addressing him so familiarly was enough to fluster
Mr Smith.  Flora saw her father trembling in all his exiguous length,
though he held himself stiffer than ever if that was possible.  He
muttered a little and at last managed to utter, not loud of course but
very distinctly: "I am here under protest," the corners of his mouth
sunk disparagingly, his eyes stony.  "I am here under protest.  I have
been locked up by a conspiracy.  I--"

He raised his hands to his forehead--his silk hat was on the table rim
upwards; he had put it there with a despairing gesture as he came in--he
raised his hands to his forehead.  "It seems to me unfair.  I--" He
broke off again.  Anthony looked at Flora who stood by the side of her
father.

"Well, sir, you will soon get used to me.  Surely you and she must have
had enough of shore people and their confounded half-and-half ways to
last you both for a lifetime.  A particularly merciful lot they are too.
You ask Flora.  I am alluding to my own sister, her best friend, and
not a bad woman either as they go."

The captain of the _Ferndale_ checked himself.  "Lucky thing I was there
to step in.  I want you to make yourself at home, and before long--"

The faded stare of the Great de Barral silenced Anthony by its
inexpressive fixity.  He signalled with his eyes to Flora towards the
door of the state-room fitted specially to receive Mr Smith, the free
man.  She seized the free man's hat off the table and took him
caressingly under the arm.  "Yes!  This is home, come and see your room.
Papa!"

Anthony himself threw open the door and Flora took care to shut it
carefully behind herself and her father.

"See," she began but desisted because it was clear that he would look at
none of the contrivances for his comfort.

She herself had hardly seen them before.  He was looking only at the new
carpet and she waited till he should raise his eyes.

He didn't do that but spoke in his usual voice.  "So this is your
husband, that ...  And I locked up!"

"Papa, what's the good of harping on that," she remonstrated no louder.
"He is kind."

"And you went and ... married him so that he should be kind to me.  Is
that it?  How did you know that I wanted anybody to be kind to me?"

"How strange you are!" she said thoughtfully.

"It's hard for a man who has gone through what I have gone through to
feel like other people.  Has that occurred to you?..."  He looked up at
last...  "Mrs Anthony, I can't bear the sight of the fellow."  She met
his eyes without flinching and he added, "You want to go to him now."
His mild automatic manner seemed the effect of tremendous
self-restraint--and yet she remembered him always like that.  She felt
cold all over.

"Why, of course, I must go to him," she said with a slight start.

He gnashed his teeth at her and she went out.

Anthony had not moved from the spot.  One of his hands was resting on
the table.  She went up to him, stopped, then deliberately moved still
closer.  "Thank you, Roderick."

"You needn't thank me," he murmured.  "It's I who..."

"No, perhaps I needn't.  You do what you like.  But you are doing it
well."

He sighed then hardly above a whisper because they were near the
state-room door, "Upset, eh?"

She made no sign, no sound of any kind.  The thorough falseness of the
position weighed on them both.  But he was the braver of the two.  "I
dare say.  At first.  Did you think of telling him you were happy?"

"He never asked me," she smiled faintly at him.  She was disappointed by
his quietness.  "I did not say more than I was absolutely obliged to
say--of myself."  She was beginning to be irritated with this man a
little.  "I told him I had been very lucky," she said suddenly
despondent, missing Anthony's masterful manner, that something arbitrary
and tender which, after the first scare, she had accustomed herself to
look forward to with pleasurable apprehension.  He was contemplating her
rather blankly.  She had not taken off her outdoor things, hat, gloves.
She was like a caller.  And she had a movement suggesting the end of a
not very satisfactory business call.  "Perhaps it would be just as well
if we went ashore.  Time yet."

He gave her a glimpse of his unconstrained self in the low vehement "You
dare!" which sprang to his lips and out of them with a most menacing
inflexion.

"You dare ...  What's the matter now?"

These last words were shot out not at her but at some target behind her
back.  Looking over her shoulder she saw the bald head with black
bunches of hair of the congested and devoted Franklin (he had his cap in
his hand) gazing sentimentally from the saloon doorway with his lobster
eyes.  He was heard from the distance in a tone of injured innocence
reporting that the berthing master was alongside and that he wanted to
move the ship into the basin before the crew came on board.

His captain growled "Well, let him," and waved away the ulcerated and
pathetic soul behind these prominent eyes which lingered on the
offensive woman while the mate backed out slowly.  Anthony turned to
Flora.

"You could not have meant it.  You are as straight as they make them."

"I am trying to be."

"Then don't joke in that way.  Think of what would become of--me."

"Oh yes.  I forgot.  No, I didn't mean it.  It wasn't a joke.  It was
forgetfulness.  You wouldn't have been wronged.  I couldn't have gone.
I--I am too tired."

He saw she was swaying where she stood and restrained himself violently
from taking her into his arms, his frame trembling with fear as though
he had been tempted to an act of unparalleled treachery.  He stepped
aside and lowering his eyes pointed to the door of the stern-cabin.  It
was only after she passed by him that he looked up and thus he did not
see the angry glance she gave him before she moved on.  He looked after
her.  She tottered slightly just before reaching the door and flung it
to behind her nervously.

Anthony--he had felt this crash as if the door had been slammed inside
his very breast--stood for a moment without moving and then shouted for
Mrs Brown.  This was the steward's wife, his lucky inspiration to make
Flora comfortable.  "Mrs Brown!  Mrs Brown!"  At last she appeared
from somewhere.  "Mrs Anthony has come on board.  Just gone into the
cabin.  Hadn't you better see if you can be of any assistance?"

"Yes, sir."

And again he was alone with the situation he had created in the
hardihood and inexperience of his heart.  He thought he had better go on
deck.  In fact he ought to have been there before.  At any rate it would
be the usual thing for him to be on deck.  But a sound of muttering and
of faint thuds somewhere near by arrested his attention.  They proceeded
from Mr Smith's room, he perceived.  It was very extraordinary.  "He's
talking to himself," he thought.  "He seems to be thumping the bulkhead
with his fists--or his head."

Anthony's eyes grew big with wonder while he listened to these noises.
He became so attentive that he did not notice Mrs Brown till she
actually stopped before him for a moment to say:

"Mrs Anthony doesn't want any assistance, sir."

This was you understand the voyage before Mr Powell--young Powell
then--joined the _Ferndale_; chance having arranged that he should get
his start in life in that particular ship of all the ships then in the
port of London.  The most unrestful ship that ever sailed out of any
port on earth.  I am not alluding to her sea-going qualities.  Mr
Powell tells me she was as steady as a church.  I mean unrestful in the
sense, for instance in which this planet of ours is unrestful--a matter
of an uneasy atmosphere disturbed by passions, jealousies, loves, hates
and the troubles of transcendental good intentions, which, though
ethically valuable, I have no doubt cause often more unhappiness than
the plots of the most evil tendency.  For those who refuse to believe in
chance he, I mean Mr Powell, must have been obviously predestined to
add his native ingenuousness to the sum of all the others carried by the
honest ship _Ferndale_.  He was too ingenuous.  Everybody on board was,
exception being made of Mr Smith who, however, was simple enough in his
way, with that terrible simplicity of the fixed idea, for which there is
also another name men pronounce with dread and aversion.  His fixed idea
was to save his girl from the man who had possessed himself of her (I
use these words on purpose because the image they suggest was clearly in
Mr Smith's mind), possessed himself unfairly of her while he, the
father, was locked up.

"I won't rest till I have got you away from that man," he would murmur
to her after long periods of contemplation.  We know from Powell how he
used to sit on the skylight near the long deck-chair on which Flora was
reclining, gazing into her face from above with an air of guardianship
and investigation at the same time.

It is almost impossible to say if he ever had considered the event
rationally.  The avatar of de Barral into Mr Smith had not been
effected without a shock--that much one must recognise.  It may be that
it drove all practical considerations out of his mind, making room for
awful and precise visions which nothing could dislodge afterwards.  And
it might have been the tenacity, the unintelligent tenacity, of the man
who had persisted in throwing millions of other people's thrift into the
Lone Valley Railway, the Labrador Docks, the Spotted Leopard Copper
Mine, and other grotesque speculations exposed during the famous de
Barral trial, amongst murmurs of astonishment mingled with bursts of
laughter.  For it is in the Courts of Law that Comedy finds its last
refuge in our deadly serious world.  As to tears and lamentations, these
were not heard in the august precincts of comedy, because they were
indulged in privately in several thousand homes, where, with a fine
dramatic effect, hunger had taken the place of Thrift.

But there was one at least who did not laugh in court.  That person was
the accused.  The notorious de Barral did not laugh because he was
indignant.  He was impervious to words, to facts, to inferences.  It
would have been impossible to make him see his guilt or his folly--
either by evidence or argument--if anybody had tried to argue.

Neither did his daughter Flora try to argue with him.  The cruelty of
her position was so great, its complications so thorny, if I may express
myself so, that a passive attitude was yet her best refuge--as it had
been before her of so many women.

For that sort of inertia in woman is always enigmatic and therefore
menacing.  It makes one pause.  A woman may be a fool, a sleepy fool, an
agitated fool, a too awfully noxious fool, and she may even be simply
stupid.  But she is never dense.  She's never made of wood through and
through as some men are.  There is in woman always, somewhere, a spring.
Whatever men don't know about women (and it may be a lot or it may be
very little) men and even fathers do know that much.  And that is why so
many men are afraid of them.

Mr Smith I believe was afraid of his daughter's quietness though of
course he interpreted it in his own way.

He would, as Mr Powell depicts, sit on the skylight and bend over the
reclining girl, wondering what there was behind the lost gaze under the
darkened eyelids in the still eyes.  He would look and look and then he
would say, whisper rather, it didn't take much for his voice to drop to
a mere breath--he would declare, transferring his faded stare to the
horizon, that he would never rest till he had "got her away from that
man."

"You don't know what you are saying, papa."

She would try not to show her weariness, the nervous strain of these two
men's antagonism around her person which was the cause of her languid
attitudes.  For as a matter of fact the sea agreed with her.

As likely as not Anthony would be walking on the other side of the deck.
The strain was making him restless.  He couldn't sit still anywhere.
He had tried shutting himself up in his cabin; but that was no good.  He
would jump up to rush on deck and tramp, tramp up and down that poop
till he felt ready to drop, without being able to wear down the
agitation of his soul, generous indeed, but weighted by its envelope of
blood and muscle and bone; handicapped by the brain creating precise
images and everlastingly speculating, speculating--looking out for
signs, watching for symptoms.

And Mr Smith with a slight backward jerk of his small head at the
footsteps on the other side of the skylight would insist in his awful,
hopelessly gentle voice that he knew very well what he was saying.
Hadn't she given herself to that man while he was locked up.

"Helpless, in jail, with no one to think of, nothing to look forward to,
but my daughter.  And then when they let me out at last I find her
gone--for it amounts to this.  Sold.  Because you've sold yourself; you
know you have."

With his round unmoved face, a lot of fine white hair waving in the
wind-eddies of the spanker, his glance levelled over the sea he seemed
to be addressing the universe across her reclining form.  She would
protest sometimes.

"I wish you would not talk like this, papa.  You are only tormenting me,
and tormenting yourself."

"Yes, I am tormented enough," he admitted meaningly.  But it was not
talking about it that tormented him.  It was thinking of it.  And to sit
and look at it was worse for him than it possibly could have been for
her to go and give herself up, bad as that must have been.

"For of course you suffered.  Don't tell me you didn't?  You must have."

She had renounced very soon all attempts at protests.  It was useless.
It might have made things worse; and she did not want to quarrel with
her father, the only human being that really cared for her, absolutely,
evidently, completely--to the end.  There was in him no pity, no
generosity, nothing whatever of these fine things--it was for _her_, for
her very own self such as it was, that this human being cared.  This
certitude would have made her put up with worse torments.  For, of
course, she too was being tormented.  She felt also helpless, as if the
whole enterprise had been too much for her.  This is the sort of
conviction which makes for quietude.  She was becoming a fatalist.

What must have been rather appalling were the necessities of daily life,
the intercourse of current trifles.  That naturally had to go on.  They
wished good morning to each other, they sat down together to meals--and
I believe there would be a game of cards now and then in the evening,
especially at first.  What frightened her most was the duplicity of her
father, at least what looked like duplicity, when she remembered his
persistent, insistent whispers on deck.  However her father was a
taciturn person as far back as she could remember him best--on the
Parade.  It was she who chattered, never troubling herself to discover
whether he was pleased or displeased.  And now she couldn't fathom his
thoughts.  Neither did she chatter to him.  Anthony with a forced
friendly smile as if frozen to his lips seemed only too thankful at not
being made to speak.  Mr Smith sometimes forgot himself while studying
his hand so long that Flora had to recall him to himself by a murmured
"Papa--your lead."  Then he apologised by a faint as if inward
ejaculation "Beg your pardon, Captain."  Naturally she addressed Anthony
as Roderick and he addressed her as Flora.  This was all the acting that
was necessary to judge from the wincing twitch of the old man's mouth at
every uttered "Flora."  On hearing the rare "Rodericks" he had sometimes
a scornful grimace as faint and faded and colourless as his whole stiff
personality.

He would be the first to retire.  He was not infirm.  With him too the
life on board ship seemed to agree; but from a sense of duty, of
affection, or to placate his hidden fury, his daughter always
accompanied him to his state-room "to make him comfortable."  She
lighted his lamp, helped him into his dressing-gown or got him a book
from a bookcase fitted in there--but this last rarely, because Mr Smith
used to declare "I am no reader" with something like pride in his low
tones.  Very often after kissing her good-night on the forehead he would
treat her to some such fretful remark: "It's like being in jail--'pon my
word.  I suppose that man is out there waiting for you.  Head jailer!
Ough!"

She would smile vaguely; murmur a conciliatory "How absurd."  But once,
out of patience, she said quite sharply "Leave off.  It hurts me.  One
would think you hate me."

"It isn't you I hate," he went on monotonously breathing at her.  "No,
it isn't you.  But if I saw that you loved that man I think I could hate
you too."

That word struck straight at her heart.  "You wouldn't be the first
then," she muttered bitterly.  But he was busy with his fixed idea and
uttered an awfully equable "But you don't!  Unfortunate girl!"

She looked at him steadily for a time then said:

"Good-night, papa."

As a matter of fact Anthony very seldom waited for her alone at the
table with the scattered cards, glasses, water-jug, bottles and so on.
He took no more opportunities to be alone with her than was absolutely
necessary for the edification of Mrs Brown.  Excellent, faithful woman;
the wife of his still more excellent and faithful steward.  And Flora
wished all these excellent people, devoted to Anthony, she wished them
all further; and especially the nice, pleasant-spoken Mrs Brown with
her beady, mobile eyes and her "Yes certainly, ma'am," which seemed to
her to have a mocking sound.  And so this short trip--to the Western
Islands only--came to an end.  It was so short that when young Powell
joined the _Ferndale_ by a memorable stroke of chance, no more than
seven months had elapsed since the--let us say the liberation of the
convict de Barral and his avatar into Mr Smith.

For the time the ship was loading in London Anthony took a cottage near
a little country station in Essex, to house Mr Smith and Mr Smith's
daughter.  It was altogether his idea.  How far it was necessary for Mr
Smith to seek rural retreat I don't know.  Perhaps to some extent it was
a judicious arrangement.  There were some obligations incumbent on the
liberated de Barral (in connection with reporting himself to the police
I imagine) which Mr Smith was not anxious to perform.  De Barral had to
vanish; the theory was that de Barral had vanished, and it had to be
upheld.  Poor Flora liked the country, even if the spot had nothing more
to recommend it than its retired character.

Now and then Captain Anthony ran down; but as the station was a real
wayside one, with no early morning trains up, he could never stay for
more than the afternoon.  It appeared that he must sleep in town so as
to be early on board his ship.  The weather was magnificent and whenever
the captain of the _Ferndale_ was seen on a brilliant afternoon coming
down the road Mr Smith would seize his stick and toddle off for a
solitary walk.  But whether he would get tired or because it gave him
some satisfaction to see "that man" go away--or for some cunning reason
of his own, he was always back before the hour of Anthony's departure.
On approaching the cottage he would see generally "that man" lying on
the grass in the orchard at some distance from his daughter seated in a
chair brought out of the cottage's living-room.  Invariably Mr Smith
made straight for them and as invariably had the feeling that his
approach was not disturbing a very intimate conversation.  He sat with
them, through a silent hour or so, and then it would be time for Anthony
to go.  Mr Smith, perhaps from discretion, would casually vanish a
minute or so before, and then watch through the diamond panes of an
upstairs room "that man" take a lingering look outside the gate at the
invisible Flora, lift his hat, like a caller, and go off down the road.
Then only Mr Smith would join his daughter again.

These were the bad moments for her.  Not always, of course, but
frequently.  It was nothing extraordinary to hear Mr Smith begin gently
with some observation like this:

"That man is getting tired of you."

He would never pronounce Anthony's name.  It was always "that man."

Generally she would remain mute with wide open eyes gazing at nothing
between the gnarled fruit trees.  Once, however, she got up and walked
into the cottage.  Mr Smith followed her carrying the chair.  He banged
it down resolutely and in that smooth inexpressive tone so many ears
used to bend eagerly to catch when it came from the Great de Barral he
said:

"Let's get away."

She had the strength of mind not to spin round.  On the contrary she
went on to a shabby bit of a mirror on the wall.  In the greenish glass
her own face looked far off like the livid face of a drowned corpse at
the bottom of a pool.  She laughed faintly.

"I tell you that man's getting--"

"Papa," she interrupted him.  "I have no illusions as to myself.  It has
happened to me before but--"

Her voice failing her suddenly her father struck in with quite an
unwonted animation.  "Let's make a rush for it, then."

Having mastered both her fright and her bitterness, she turned round,
sat down and allowed her astonishment to be seen.  Mr Smith sat down
too, his knees together and bent at right angles, his thin legs parallel
to each other and his hands resting on the arms of the wooden armchair.
His hair had grown long, his head was set stiffly, there was something
fatuously venerable in his aspect.

"You can't care for him.  Don't tell me.  I understand your motive.  And
I have called you an unfortunate girl.  You are that as much as if you
had gone on the streets.  Yes.  Don't interrupt me, Flora.  I was
everlastingly being interrupted at the trial and I can't stand it any
more.  I won't be interrupted by my own child.  And when I think that it
is on the very day before they let me out that you..."

He had wormed this fact out of her by that time because Flora had got
tired of evading the question.  He had been very much struck and
distressed.  Was that the trust she had in him?  Was that a proof of
confidence and love?  The very day before!  Never given him even half a
chance.  It was as at the trial.  They never gave him a chance.  They
would not give him time.  And there was his own daughter acting exactly
as his bitterest enemies had done.  Not giving him time!

The monotony of that subdued voice nearly lulled her dismay to sleep.
She listened to the unavoidable things he was saying.

"But what induced that man to marry you?  Of course he's a gentleman.
One can see that.  And that makes it worse.  Gentlemen don't understand
anything about city affairs--finance.  Why!--the people who started the
cry after me were a firm of gentlemen.  The counsel, the judge--all
gentlemen--quite out of it!  No notion of ...  And then he's a sailor
too.  Just a skipper--"

"My grandfather was nothing else," she interrupted.  And he made an
angular gesture of impatience.

"Yes.  But what does a silly sailor know of business?  Nothing.  No
conception.  He can have no idea of what it means to be the daughter of
Mr de Barral--even after his enemies had smashed him.  What on earth
induced him--"

She made a movement because the level voice was getting on her nerves.
And he paused, but only to go on again in the same tone with the remark:

"Of course you are pretty.  And that's why you are lost--like many other
poor girls.  Unfortunate is the word for you."

She said: "It may be.  Perhaps it is the right word; but listen, papa.
I mean to be honest."

He began to exhale more speeches.

"Just the sort of man to get tired and then leave you and go off with
his beastly ship.  And anyway you can never be happy with him.  Look at
his face.  I want to save you.  You see I was not perhaps a very good
husband to your poor mother.  She would have done better to have left me
long before she died.  I have been thinking it all over.  I won't have
you unhappy."

He ran his eyes over her with an attention which was surprisingly
noticeable.  Then said, "H'm!  Yes.  Let's clear out before it is too
late.  Quietly, you and I."

She said as if inspired and with that calmness which despair often
gives: "There is no money to go away with, papa."

He rose up straightening himself as though he were a hinged figure.  She
said decisively:

"And of course you wouldn't think of deserting me, papa?"

"Of course not," sounded his subdued tone.  And he left her, gliding
away with his walk which Mr Powell described to me as being as level
and wary as his voice.  He walked as if he were carrying a glass full of
water on his head.

Flora naturally said nothing to Anthony of that edifying conversation.
His generosity might have taken alarm at it and she did not want to be
left behind to manage her father alone.  And moreover she was too
honest.  She would be honest at whatever cost.  She would not be the
first to speak.  Never.  And the thought came into her head: "I am
indeed an unfortunate creature!"

It was by the merest coincidence that Anthony coming for the afternoon
two days later had a talk with Mr Smith in the orchard.  Flora for some
reason or other had left them for a moment; and Anthony took that
opportunity to be frank with Mr Smith.  He said: "It seems to me, sir,
that you think Flora has not done very well for herself.  Well, as to
that I can't say anything.  All I want you to know is that I have tried
to do the right thing."  And then he explained that he had willed
everything he was possessed of to her.  "She didn't tell you, I
suppose?"

Mr Smith shook his head slightly.  And Anthony, trying to be friendly,
was just saying that he proposed to keep the ship away from home for at
least two years: "I think, sir, that from every point of view it would
be best," when Flora came back and the conversation, cut short in that
direction, languished and died.  Later in the evening, after Anthony had
been gone for hours, on the point of separating for the night, Mr Smith
remarked suddenly to his daughter after a long period of brooding:

"A will is nothing.  One tears it up.  One makes another."  Then after
reflecting for a minute he added unemotionally:

"One tells lies about it."

Flora, patient, steeled against every hurt and every disgust to the
point of wondering at herself, said: "You push your dislike of--of--
Roderick too far, papa.  You have no regard for me.  You hurt me."

He, as ever inexpressive to the point of terrifying her sometimes by the
contrast of his placidity and his words, turned away from her a pair of
faded eyes.

"I wonder how far _your_ dislike goes," he began.  "His very name sticks
in your throat.  I've noticed it.  It hurts me.  What do you think of
that?  You might remember that you are not the only person that's hurt
by your folly, by your hastiness, by your recklessness."  He brought
back his eyes to her face.  "And the very day before they were going to
let me out."  His feeble voice failed him altogether, the narrow
compressed lips only trembling for a time before he added with that
extraordinary equanimity of tone, "I call it sinful."

Flora made no answer.  She judged it simpler, kinder and certainly safer
to let him talk himself out.  This, Mr Smith, being naturally taciturn,
never took very long to do.  And we must not imagine that this sort of
thing went on all the time.  She had a few good days in that cottage.
The absence of Anthony was a relief and his visits were pleasurable.
She was quieter.  He was quieter too.  She was almost sorry when the
time to join the ship arrived.  It was a moment of anguish, of
excitement; they arrived at the dock in the evening and Flora after
"making her father comfortable" according to established usage lingered
in the state-room long enough to notice that he was surprised.  She
caught his pale eyes observing her quite stonily.  Then she went out
after a cheery good-night.

Contrary to her hopes she found Anthony yet in the saloon.  Sitting in
his armchair at the head of the table he was picking up some business
papers which he put hastily in his breast-pocket and got up.  He asked
her if her day, travelling up to town and then doing some shopping, had
tired her.  She shook her head.  Then he wanted to know in a
half-jocular way how she felt about going away, and for a long voyage
this time.

"Does it matter how I feel?" she asked in a tone that cast a gloom over
his face.  He answered with repressed violence which she did not expect:

"No, it does not matter, because I cannot go without you.  I've told
you...  You know it.  You don't think I could."

"I assure you I haven't the slightest wish to evade my obligations," she
said steadily.  "Even if I could.  Even if I dared, even if I had to die
for it!"

He looked thunderstruck.  They stood facing each other at the end of the
saloon.  Anthony stuttered.  "Oh no.  You won't die.  You don't mean it.
You have taken kindly to the sea."

She laughed, but she felt angry.

"No, I don't mean it.  I tell you I don't mean to evade my obligations.
I shall live on ... feeling a little crushed, nevertheless."

"Crushed!" he repeated.  "What's crushing you?"

"Your magnanimity," she said sharply.  But her voice was softened after
a time.  "Yet I don't know.  There is a perfection in it--do you
understand me, Roderick?--which makes it almost possible to bear."

He sighed, looked away, and remarked that it was time to put out the
lamp in the saloon.  The permission was only till ten o'clock.

"But you needn't mind that so much in your cabin.  Just see that the
curtains of the ports are drawn close and that's all.  The steward might
have forgotten to do it.  He lighted your reading lamp in there before
he went ashore for a last evening with his wife.  I don't know if it was
wise to get rid of Mrs Brown.  You will have to look after yourself,
Flora."

He was quite anxious; but Flora as a matter of fact congratulated
herself on the absence of Mrs Brown.  No sooner had she closed the door
of her state-room than she murmured fervently, "Yes!  Thank goodness,
she is gone."  There would be no gentle knock, followed by her
appearance with her equivocal stare and the intolerable: "Can I do
anything for you, ma'am?" which poor Flora had learned to fear and hate
more than any voice or any words on board that ship--her only refuge
from the world which had no use for her for her imperfections and for
her troubles.

Mrs Brown had been very much vexed at her dismissal.  The Browns were a
childless couple and the arrangement had suited them perfectly.  Their
resentment was very bitter.  Mrs Brown had to remain ashore alone with
her rage, but the steward was nursing his on board.  Poor Flora had no
greater enemy, the aggrieved mate had no greater sympathiser.  And Mrs
Brown, with a woman's quick power of observation and inference (the
putting of two and two together) had come to a certain conclusion which
she had imparted to her husband before leaving the ship.  The morose
steward permitted himself once to make an allusion to it in Powell's
hearing.  It was in the officers' mess-room at the end of a meal while
he lingered after putting a fruit pie on the table.  He and the chief
mate started a dialogue about the alarming change in the captain, the
sallow steward looking down with a sinister frown, Franklin rolling
upwards his eyes, sentimental in a red face.  Young Powell had heard a
lot of that sort of thing by that time.  It was growing monotonous; it
had always sounded to him a little absurd.  He struck in impatiently
with the remark that such lamentations over a man merely because he had
taken a wife seemed to him like lunacy.

Franklin muttered, "Depends on what the wife is up to."  The steward
leaning against the bulkhead near the door glowered at Powell, that
newcomer, that ignoramus, that stranger without right or privileges.  He
snarled:

"Wife!  Call her a wife, do you?"

"What the devil do you mean by this?" exclaimed young Powell.

"I know what I know.  My old woman has not been six months on board for
nothing.  You had better ask her when we get back."

And meeting sullenly the withering stare of Mr Powell the steward
retreated backwards.

Our young friend turned at once upon the mate.  "And you let that
confounded bottle-washer talk like this before you, Mr Franklin.  Well,
I am astonished."

"Oh, it isn't what you think.  It isn't what you think."  Mr Franklin
looked more apoplectic than ever.  "If it comes to that I _could_
astonish you.  But it's no use.  I myself can hardly ...  You couldn't
understand.  I hope you won't try to make mischief.  There was a time,
young fellow, when I would have dared any man--any man, you hear?--to
make mischief between me and Captain Anthony.  But not now.  Not now.
There's a change!  Not in me though..."

Young Powell rejected with indignation any suggestion of making
mischief.  "Who do you take me for?" he cried.  "Only you had better
tell that steward to be careful what he says before me or I'll spoil his
good looks for him for a month and will leave him to explain the why of
it to the captain the best way he can."

This speech established Powell as a champion of Mrs Anthony.  Nothing
more bearing on the question was ever said before him.  He did not care
for the steward's black looks; Franklin, never conversational even at
the best of times and avoiding now the only topic near his heart,
addressed him only on matters of duty.  And for that, too, Powell cared
very little.  The woes of the apoplectic mate had begun to bore him long
before.  Yet he felt lonely a bit at times.  Therefore the little
intercourse with Mrs Anthony either in one dog-watch or the other was
something to be looked forward to.  The captain did not mind it.  That
was evident from his manner.  One night he inquired (they were then
alone on the poop) what they had been talking about that evening?
Powell had to confess that it was about the ship.  Mrs Anthony had been
asking him questions.

"Takes interest--eh?" jerked out the captain moving rapidly up and down
the weather-side of the poop.

"Yes, sir.  Mrs Anthony seems to get hold wonderfully of what one's
telling her."

"Sailor's granddaughter.  One of the old school.  Old sea-dog of the
best kind, I believe," ejaculated the captain, swinging past his
motionless second officer and leaving the words behind him like a trail
of sparks succeeded by a perfect conversational darkness, because, for
the next two hours till he left the deck, he didn't open his lips again.

On another occasion ... we mustn't forget that the ship had crossed the
line and was adding up south latitude every day by then--on another
occasion, about seven in the evening, Powell on duty, heard his name
uttered softly in the companion.  The captain was on the stairs,
thin-faced, his eyes sunk, on his arm a Shetland wool wrap.

"Mr Powell--here."

"Yes, sir."

"Give this to Mrs Anthony.  Evenings are getting chilly."

And the haggard face sank out of sight.  Mrs Anthony was surprised on
seeing the shawl.

"The captain wants you to put this on," explained young Powell, and as
she raised herself in her seat he dropped it on her shoulders.  She
wrapped herself up closely.

"Where was the captain?" she asked.

"He was in the companion.  Called me on purpose," said Powell, and then
retreated discreetly, because she looked as though she didn't want to
talk any more that evening.  Mr Smith--the old gentleman--was as usual
sitting on the skylight near her head, brooding over the long chair but
by no means inimical, as far as his unreadable face went, to those
conversations of the two youngest people on board.  In fact they seemed
to give him some pleasure.  Now and then he would raise his faded china
eyes to the animated face of Mr Powell thoughtfully.  When the young
sailor was by, the old man became less rigid, and when his daughter, on
rare occasions, smiled at some artless tale of Mr Powell, the
inexpressive face of Mr Smith reflected dimly that flash of evanescent
mirth.  For Mr Powell had come now to entertain his captain's wife with
anecdotes from the not very distant past when he was a boy, on board
various ships,--funny things do happen on board ship.  Flora was quite
surprised at times to find herself amused.  She was even heard to laugh
twice in the course of a month.  It was not a loud sound but it was
startling enough at the after-end of the _Ferndale_ where low tones or
silence were the rule.  The second time this happened the captain
himself must have been startled somewhere down below; because he emerged
from the depths of his unobtrusive existence and began his tramping on
the opposite side of the poop.

Almost immediately he called his young second officer over to him.  This
was not done in displeasure.  The glance he fastened on Mr Powell
conveyed a sort of approving wonder.  He engaged him in desultory
conversation as if for the only purpose of keeping a man who could
provoke such a sound, near his person.  Mr Powell felt himself liked.
He felt it.  Liked by that haggard, restless man who threw at him
disconnected phrases to which his answers were, "Yes, sir", "No, sir,"
"Oh, certainly", "I suppose so, sir,"--and might have been clearly
anything else for all the other cared.

It was then, Mr Powell told me, that he discovered in himself an
already old-established liking for Captain Anthony.  He also felt sorry
for him without being able to discover the origins of that sympathy of
which he had become so suddenly aware.

Meantime Mr Smith, bending forward stiffly as though he had a hinged
back, was speaking to his daughter.

She was a child no longer.  He wanted to know if she believed in--in
hell.  In eternal punishment?

His peculiar voice, as if filtered through cotton-wool was inaudible on
the other side of the deck.  Poor Flora, taken very much unawares, made
an inarticulate murmur, shook her head vaguely, and glanced in the
direction of the pacing Anthony who was not looking her way.  It was no
use glancing in that direction.  Of young Powell, leaning against the
mizzen-mast and facing his captain she could only see the shoulder and
part of a blue serge back.

And the unworried, unaccented voice of her father went on tormenting
her.

"You see, you must understand.  When I came out of jail it was with joy.
That is, my soul was fairly torn in two--but anyway to see you happy--I
had made up my mind to that.  Once I could be sure that you were happy
then of course I would have had no reason to care for life--strictly
speaking--which is all right for an old man; though naturally--no reason
to wish for death either.  But this sort of life!  What sense, what
meaning, what value has it either for you or for me?  It's just sitting
down to look at the death, that's coming, coming.  What else is it?  I
don't know how you can put up with that.  I don't think you can stand it
for long.  Some day you will jump overboard."

Captain Anthony had stopped for a moment staring ahead from the break of
the poop, and poor Flora sent at his back a look of despairing appeal
which would have moved a heart of stone.  But as though she had done
nothing he did not stir in the least.  She got out of the long chair and
went towards the companion.  Her father followed carrying a few small
objects, a handbag, her handkerchief, a book.  They went down together.

It was only then that Captain Anthony turned, looked at the place they
had vacated and resumed his tramping, but not his desultory conversation
with his second officer.  His nervous exasperation had grown so much
that now very often he used to lose control of his voice.  If he did not
watch himself it would suddenly die in his throat.  He had to make sure
before he ventured on the simplest saying, an order, a remark on the
wind, a simple good morning.  That's why his utterance was abrupt, his
answers to people startlingly brusque and often not forthcoming at all.

It happens to the most resolute of men to find himself at grips not only
with unknown forces, but with a well-known force the real might of which
he had not understood.  Anthony had discovered that he was not the proud
master but the chafing captive of his generosity.  It rose in front of
him like a wall which his respect for himself forbade him to scale.  He
said to himself: "Yes, I was a fool--but she has trusted me!"  Trusted!
A terrible word to any man somewhat exceptional in a world in which
success has never been found in renunciation and good faith.  And it
must also be said, in order not to make Anthony more stupidly sublime
than he was, that the behaviour of Flora kept him at a distance.  The
girl was afraid to add to the exasperation of her father.  It was her
unhappy lot to be made more wretched by the only affection which she
could not suspect.  She could not be angry with it, however, and out of
deference for that exaggerated sentiment she hardly dared to look
otherwise than by stealth at the man whose masterful compassion had
carried her off.  And quite unable to understand the extent of Anthony's
delicacy, she said to herself that "he didn't care."  He probably was
beginning at bottom to detest her--like the governess, like the maiden
lady, like the German woman, like Mrs Fyne, like Mr Fyne--only he was
extraordinary, he was generous.  At the same time she had moments of
irritation.  He was violent, headstrong--perhaps stupid.  Well, he had
had his way.

A man who has had his way is seldom happy, for generally he finds that
the way does not lead very far on this earth of desires which can never
be fully satisfied.  Anthony had entered with extreme precipitation the
enchanted gardens of Armida saying to himself "At last!"  As to Armida,
herself, he was not going to offer her any violence.  But now he had
discovered that all the enchantment was in Armida herself, in Armida's
smiles.  This Armida did not smile.  She existed, unapproachable, behind
the blank wall of his renunciation.  His force, fit for action,
experienced the impatience, the indignation, almost the despair of his
vitality arrested, bound, stilled, progressively worn down, frittered
away by Time; by that force blind and insensible, which seems inert and
yet uses one's life up by its imperceptible action, dropping minute
after minute on one's living heart like drops of water wearing down a
stone.

He upbraided himself.  What else could he have expected?  He had rushed
in like a ruffian; he had dragged the poor defenceless thing by the hair
of her head, as it were, on board that ship.  It was really atrocious.
Nothing assured him that his person could be attractive to this or any
other woman.  And his proceedings were enough in themselves to make
anyone odious.  He must have been bereft of his senses.  She must
fatally detest and fear him.  Nothing could make up for such brutality.
And yet somehow he resented this very attitude which seemed to him
completely justifiable.  Surely he was not too monstrous (morally) to be
looked at frankly sometimes.  But no!  She wouldn't.  Well, perhaps,
some day...  Only he was not going ever to attempt to beg for
forgiveness.  With the repulsion she felt for his person she would
certainly misunderstand the most guarded words, the most careful
advances.  Never!  Never!

It would occur to Anthony at the end of such meditations that death was
not an unfriendly visitor after all.  No wonder then that even young
Powell, his faculties having been put on the alert, began to think that
there was something unusual about the man who had given him his chance
in life.  Yes, decidedly, his captain was "strange."  There was
something wrong somewhere, he said to himself, never guessing that his
young and candid eyes were in the presence of a passion profound,
tyrannical and mortal, discovering its own existence, astounded at
feeling itself helpless and dismayed at finding itself incurable.

Powell had never before felt this mysterious uneasiness so strongly as
on that evening when it had been his good fortune to make Mrs Anthony
laugh a little by his artless prattle.  Standing out of the way, he had
watched his captain walk the weather-side of the poop, he took full
cognizance of his liking for that inexplicably strange man and saw him
swerve towards the companion and go down below with sympathetic if
utterly uncomprehending eyes.

Shortly afterwards, Mr Smith came up alone and manifested a desire for
a little conversation.  He, too, if not so mysterious as the captain,
was not very comprehensible to Mr Powell's uninformed candour.  He
often favoured thus the second officer.  His talk alluded somewhat
enigmatically and often without visible connection to Mr Powell's
friendliness towards himself and his daughter.  "For I am well aware
that we have no friends on board this ship, my dear young man," he would
add, "except yourself.  Flora feels that too."

And Mr Powell, flattered and embarrassed, could but emit a vague murmur
of protest.  For the statement was true in a sense, though the fact was
in itself insignificant.  The feelings of the ship's company could not
possibly matter to the captain's wife and to Mr Smith--her father.  Why
the latter should so often allude to it was what surprised our Mr
Powell.  This was by no means the first occasion.  More like the
twentieth rather.  And in his weak voice, with his monotonous
intonation, leaning over the rail and looking at the water the other
continued this conversation, or rather his remarks, remarks of such a
monstrous nature that Mr Powell had no option but to accept them for
gruesome jesting.

"For instance," said Mr Smith, "that mate, Franklin, I believe he would
just as soon see us both overboard as not."

"It's not so bad as that," laughed Mr Powell, feeling uncomfortable,
because his mind did not accommodate itself easily to exaggeration of
statement.  "He isn't a bad chap really," he added, very conscious of
Mr Franklin's offensive manner of which instances were not far to seek.
"He's such a fool as to be jealous.  He has been with the captain for
years.  It's not for me to say, perhaps, but I think the captain has
spoiled all that gang of old servants.  They are like a lot of pet old
dogs.  Wouldn't let anybody come near him if they could help it.  I've
never seen anything like it.  And the second mate, I believe, was like
that too."

"Well, he isn't here, luckily.  There would have been one more enemy,"
said Mr Smith.  "There's enough of them without him.  And you being
here instead of him makes it much more pleasant for my daughter and
myself.  One feels there may be a friend in need.  For really, for a
woman all alone on board ship amongst a lot of unfriendly men..."

"But Mrs Anthony is not alone," exclaimed Powell.  "There's you, and
there's the..."

Mr Smith interrupted him.

"Nobody's immortal.  And there are times when one feels ashamed to live.
Such an evening as this for instance."

It was a lovely evening; the colours of a splendid sunset had died out
and the breath of a warm breeze seemed to have smoothed out the sea.
Away to the south the sheet lightning was like the flashing of an
enormous lantern hidden under the horizon.  In order to change the
conversation Mr Powell said:

"Anyway no one can charge you with being a Jonah, Mr Smith.  We have
had a magnificent quick passage so far.  The captain ought to be
pleased.  And I suppose you are not sorry either."

This diversion was not successful.  Mr Smith emitted a sort of bitter
chuckle and said: "Jonah!  That's the fellow that was thrown overboard
by some sailors.  It seems to me it's very easy at sea to get rid of a
person one does not like.  The sea does not give up its dead as the
earth does."

"You forget the whale, sir," said young Powell.

Mr Smith gave a start.  "Eh?  What whale?  Oh!  Jonah.  I wasn't
thinking of Jonah.  I was thinking of this passage which seems so quick
to you.  But only think what it is to me?  It isn't a life, going about
the sea like this.  And, for instance, if one were to fall ill, there
isn't a doctor to find out what's the matter with one.  It's worrying.
It makes me anxious at times."

"Is Mrs Anthony not feeling well?" asked Powell.  But Mr Smith's
remark was not meant for Mrs Anthony.  She was well.  He himself was
well.  It was the captain's health that did not seem quite satisfactory.
Had Mr Powell noticed his appearance?

Mr Powell didn't know enough of the captain to judge.  He couldn't
tell.  But he observed thoughtfully that Mr Franklin had been saying
the same thing.  And Franklin had known the captain for years.  The mate
was quite worried about it.

This intelligence startled Mr Smith considerably.  "Does he think he is
in danger of dying?" he exclaimed with an animation quite extraordinary
for him, which horrified Mr Powell.

"Heavens!  Die!  No!  Don't you alarm yourself, sir.  I've never heard a
word about danger from Mr Franklin."

"Well, well," sighed Mr Smith and left the poop for the saloon rather
abruptly.

As a matter of fact Mr Franklin had been on deck for some considerable
time.  He had come to relieve young Powell; but seeing him engaged in
talk with the "enemy"--with one of the "enemies" at least--had kept at a
distance, which, the poop of the _Ferndale_ being over seventy feet
long, he had no difficulty in doing.  Mr Powell saw him at the head of
the ladder leaning on his elbow, melancholy and silent.  "Oh!  Here you
are, sir."

"Here I am.  Here I've been ever since six o'clock.  Didn't want to
interrupt the pleasant conversation.  If you like to put in half of your
watch below jawing with a dear friend, that's not my affair.  Funny
taste though."

"He isn't a bad chap," said the impartial Powell.

The mate snorted angrily, tapping the deck with his foot; then: "Isn't
he?  Well, give him my love when you come together again for another
nice long yarn."

"I say, Mr Franklin, I wonder the captain don't take offence at your
manners."

"The captain.  I wish to goodness he would start a row with me.  Then I
should know at least I am somebody on board.  I'd welcome it, Mr
Powell.  I'd rejoice.  And dam' me I would talk back too till I roused
him.  He's a shadow of himself.  He walks about his ship like a ghost.
He's fading away right before our eyes.  But of course you don't see.
You don't care a hang.  Why should you?"

Mr Powell did not wait for more.  He went down on the main deck.
Without taking the mate's jeremiads seriously he put them beside the
words of Mr Smith.  He had grown already attached to Captain Anthony.
There was something not only attractive but compelling in the man.  Only
it is very difficult for youth to believe in the menace of death.  Not
in the fact itself, but in its proximity to a breathing, moving,
talking, superior human being, showing no sign of disease.  And Mr
Powell thought that this talk was all nonsense.  But his curiosity was
awakened.  There was something, and at any time some circumstance might
occur ...  No, he would never find out ...  There was nothing to find
out, most likely.  Mr Powell went to his room where he tried to read a
book he had already read a good many times.  Presently a bell rang for
the officers' supper.



PART TWO, CHAPTER 6.

A MOONLESS NIGHT, THICK WITH STARS ABOVE, VERY DARK ON THE WATER.

In the mess-room Powell found Mr Franklin hacking at a piece of cold
salt beef with a table knife.  The mate, fiery in the face and rolling
his eyes over that task, explained that the carver belonging to the
mess-room could not be found.  The steward, present also, complained
savagely of the cook.  The fellow got things into his galley and then
lost them.  Mr Franklin tried to pacify him with mournful firmness.

"There, there!  That will do.  We who have been all these years together
in the ship have other things to think about than quarrelling among
ourselves."

Mr Powell thought with exasperation: "Here he goes again," for this
utterance had nothing cryptic for him.  The steward having withdrawn
morosely, he was not surprised to hear the mate strike the usual note.
That morning the mizzen topsail-tie had carried away (probably a
defective link) and something like forty feet of chain and wire-rope,
mixed up with a few heavy iron blocks, had crashed down from aloft on
the poop with a terrifying racket.

"Did you notice the captain then, Mr Powell.  Did you notice?"

Powell confessed frankly that he was too scared himself when all that
lot of gear came down on deck to notice anything.

"The gin-block missed his head by an inch," went on the mate
impressively.  "I wasn't three feet from him.  And what did he do?  Did
he shout, or jump, or even look aloft to see if the yard wasn't coming
down too about our ears in a dozen pieces?  It's a marvel it didn't.
No, he just stopped short--no wonder; he must have felt the wind of that
iron gin-block on his face--looked down at it, there, lying close to his
foot--and went on again.  I believe he didn't even blink.  It isn't
natural.  The man is stupefied."

He sighed ridiculously and Mr Powell had suppressed a grin, when the
mate added as if he couldn't contain himself:

"He will be taking to drink next.  Mark my words.  That's the next
thing."

Mr Powell was disgusted.

"You are so fond of the captain and yet you don't seem to care what you
say about him.  I haven't been with him for seven years, but I know he
isn't the sort of man that takes to drink.  And then--why the devil
should he?"

"Why the devil, you ask.  Devil--eh?  Well, no man is safe from the
devil--and that's answer enough for you," wheezed Mr Franklin not
unkindly.  "There was a time, a long time ago, when I nearly took to
drink myself.  What do you say to that?"

Mr Powell expressed a polite incredulity.  The thick, congested mate
seemed on the point of bursting with despondency.  "That was bad example
though.  I was young and fell into dangerous company, made a fool of
myself--yes, as true as you see me sitting here.  Drank to forget.
Thought it a great dodge."

Powell looked at the grotesque Franklin with awakened interest and with
that half-amused sympathy with which we receive unprovoked confidences
from men with whom we have no sort of affinity.  And at the same time he
began to look upon him more seriously.  Experience has its prestige.
And the mate continued:

"If it hadn't been for the old lady, I would have gone to the devil.  I
remembered her in time.  Nothing like having an old lady to look after
to steady a chap and make him face things.  But as bad luck would have
it, Captain Anthony has no mother living, not a blessed soul belonging
to him as far as I know.  Oh, ay, I fancy he said once something to me
of a sister.  But she's married.  She don't need him.  Yes.  In the old
days he used to talk to me as if we had been brothers," exaggerated the
mate sentimentally.  "`Franklin,'--he would say--`this ship is my
nearest relation and she isn't likely to turn against me.  And I suppose
you are the man I've known the longest in the world.'  That's how he
used to speak to me.  Can I turn my back on him?  He has turned his back
on his ship; that's what it has come to.  He has no one now but his old
Franklin.  But what's a fellow to do to put things back as they were and
should be.  Should be--I say!"

His starting eyes had a terrible fixity.  Mr Powell's irresistible
thought, "he resembles a boiled lobster in distress," was followed by
annoyance.  "Good Lord," he said, "you don't mean to hint that Captain
Anthony has fallen into bad company.  What is it you want to save him
from?"

"I do mean it," affirmed the mate, and the very absurdity of the
statement made it impressive--because it seemed so absolutely audacious.
"Well, you have a cheek," said young Powell, feeling mentally helpless.
"I have a notion the captain would half kill you if he were to know how
you carry on."

"And welcome," uttered the fervently devoted Franklin.  "I am willing,
if he would only clear the ship afterwards of that ...  You are but a
youngster and you may go and tell him what you like.  Let him knock the
stuffing out of his old Franklin first and think it over afterwards.
Anything to pull him together.  But of course you wouldn't.  You are all
right.  Only you don't know that things are sometimes different from
what they look.  There are friendships that are no friendships, and
marriages that are no marriages...  Phoo!  Likely to be right--wasn't
it?  Never a hint to me.  I go off on leave and when I come back, there
it is--all over, settled!  Not a word beforehand.  No warning.  If only:
`What do you think of it, Franklin?'--or anything of the sort.  And
that's a man who hardly ever did anything without asking my advice.
Why!  He couldn't take over a new coat from the tailor without ... first
thing, directly the fellow came on board with some new clothes, whether
in London or in China, it would be: `Pass the word along there for Mr
Franklin.  Mr Franklin wanted in the cabin.'  In I would go.  `Just
look at my back, Franklin.  Fits all right, doesn't it?'  And I would
say: `First-rate, sir,' or whatever was the truth of it.  That or
anything else.  Always the truth of it.  Always.  And well he knew it;
and that's why he dared not speak right out.  Talking about workmen,
alterations, cabins...  Phoo! ... instead of a straightforward--`Wish me
joy, Mr Franklin!'  Yes, that was the way to let me know.  God only
knows what they are--perhaps she isn't his daughter any more than she
is...  She doesn't resemble that old fellow.  Not a bit.  Not a bit.
It's very awful.  You may well open your mouth, young man.  But for
goodness' sake, you who are mixed up with that lot, keep your eyes and
ears open too in case--in case of--I don't know what.  Anything.  One
wonders what can happen here at sea!  Nothing.  Yet when a man is called
a jailer behind his back."

Mr Franklin hid his face in his hands for a moment and Powell shut his
mouth, which indeed had been open.  He slipped out of the mess-room
noiselessly.  "The mate's crazy," he thought.  It was his firm
conviction.  Nevertheless, that evening, he felt his inner tranquillity
disturbed at last by the force and obstinacy of this craze.  He couldn't
dismiss it with the contempt it deserved.  Had the word "jailer" really
been pronounced?  A strange word for the mate to even _imagine_ he had
heard.  A senseless, unlikely word.  But this word being the only clear
and definite statement in these grotesque and dismal ravings was
comparatively restful to his mind.  Powell's mind rested on it still
when he came up at eight o'clock to take charge of the deck.  It was a
moonless night, thick with stars above, very dark on the water.  A
steady air from the west kept the sails asleep.  Franklin mustered both
watches in low tones as if for a funeral, then approaching Powell:

"The course is east-south-east," said the chief mate distinctly.

"East-south-east, sir."

"Everything's set, Mr Powell."

"All right, sir."

The other lingered, his sentimental eyes gleamed silvery in the shadowy
face.  "A quiet night before us.  I don't know that there are any
special orders.  A settled, quiet night.  I dare say you won't see the
captain.  Once upon a time this was the watch he used to come up and
start a chat with either of us then on deck.  But now he sits in that
infernal stern-cabin and mopes.  Jailer--eh?"

Mr Powell walked away from the mate and when at some distance said,
"Damn!" quite heartily.  It was a confounded nuisance.  It had ceased to
be funny; that hostile word "jailer" had given the situation an air of
reality.

Franklin's grotesque mortal envelope had disappeared from the poop to
seek its needful repose, if only the worried soul would let it rest a
while.  Mr Powell, half sorry for the thick little man, wondered
whether it would let him.  For himself, he recognised that the charm of
a quiet watch on deck when one may let one's thoughts roam in space and
time had been spoiled without remedy.  What shocked him most was the
implied aspersion of complicity on Mrs Anthony.  It angered him.  In
his own words to me, he felt very "enthusiastic" about Mrs Anthony.
"Enthusiastic" is good; especially as he couldn't exactly explain to me
what he meant by it.  But he felt enthusiastic, he says.  That silly
Franklin must have been dreaming.  That was it.  He had dreamed it all.
Ass.  Yet the injurious word stuck in Powell's mind with its associated
ideas of prisoner, of escape.  He became very uncomfortable.  And just
then (it might have been half an hour or more since he had relieved
Franklin) just then Mr Smith came up on the poop alone, like a gliding
shadow and leaned over the rail by his side.  Young Powell was affected
disagreeably by his presence.  He made a movement to go away but the
other began to talk--and Powell remained where he was as if retained by
a mysterious compulsion.  The conversation started by Mr Smith had
nothing peculiar.  He began to talk of mail-boats in general and in the
end seemed anxious to discover what were the services from Port
Elizabeth to London.  Mr Powell did not know for certain but imagined
that there must be communication with England at least twice a month.
"Are you thinking of leaving us, sir; of going home by steam?  Perhaps
with Mrs Anthony," he asked anxiously.

"No!  No!  How can I?"  Mr Smith got quite agitated, for him, which did
not amount to much.  He was just asking for the sake of something to
talk about.  No idea at all of going home.  One could not always do what
one wanted and that's why there were moments when one felt ashamed to
live.  This did not mean that one did not want to live.  Oh no!

He spoke with careless slowness, pausing frequently and in such a low
voice that Powell had to strain his hearing to catch the phrases dropped
overboard as it were.  And indeed they seemed not worth the effort.  It
was like the aimless talk of a man pursuing a secret train of thought
far removed from the idle words we so often utter only to keep in touch
with our fellow beings.  An hour passed.  It seemed as though Mr Smith
could not make up his mind to go below.  He repeated himself.  Again he
spoke of lives which one was ashamed of.  It was necessary to put up
with such lives as long as there was no way out, no possible issue.  He
even alluded once more to mail-boat services on the East coast of Africa
and young Powell had to tell him once more that he knew nothing about
them.

"Every fortnight, I thought you said," insisted Mr Smith.  He stirred,
seemed to detach himself from the rail with difficulty.  His long,
slender figure straightened into stiffness, as if hostile to the
enveloping soft peace of air and sea and sky, emitted into the night a
weak murmur which Mr Powell fancied was the word, "Abominable" repeated
three times, but which passed into the faintly louder declaration: "The
moment has come--to go to bed," followed by a just audible sigh.

"I sleep very well," added Mr Smith in his restrained tone.  "But it is
the moment one opens one's eyes that is horrible at sea.  These days!
Oh, these days!  I wonder how anybody can..."

"I like the life," observed Mr Powell.

"Oh, you.  You have only yourself to think of.  You have made your bed.
Well, it's very pleasant to feel that you are friendly to us.  My
daughter has taken quite a liking to you, Mr Powell."

He murmured, "Good-night" and glided away rigidly.  Young Powell asked
himself with some distaste what was the meaning of these utterances.
His mind had been worried at last into that questioning attitude by no
other person than the grotesque Franklin.  Suspicion was not natural to
him.  And he took good care to carefully separate in his thoughts Mrs
Anthony from this man of enigmatic words--her father.  Presently he
observed that the sheen of the two deck dead-lights of Mr Smith's room
had gone out.  The old gentleman had been surprisingly quick in getting
into bed.  Shortly afterwards the lamp in the foremost skylight of the
saloon was turned out; and this was the sign that the steward had taken
in the tray and had retired for the night.

Young Powell had settled down to the regular officer-of-the-watch tramp
in the dense shadow of the world decorated with stars high above his
head, and on earth only a few gleams of light about the ship.  The lamp
in the after skylight was kept burning through the night.  There were
also the dead-lights of the stern-cabins glimmering dully in the deck
far aft, catching his eye when he turned to walk that way.  The brasses
of the wheel glittered too, with the dimly lit figure of the man
detached, as if phosphorescent, against the black and spangled
background of the horizon.

Young Powell, in the silence of the ship, reinforced by the great silent
stillness of the world, said to himself that there was something
mysterious in such beings as the absurd Franklin, and even in such
beings as himself.  It was a strange and almost improper thought to
occur to the officer of the watch of a ship on the high seas on no
matter how quiet a night.  Why on earth was he bothering his head?  Why
couldn't he dismiss all these people from his mind?  It was as if the
mate had infected him with his own diseased devotion.  He would not have
believed it possible that he should be so foolish.  But he was--clearly.
He was foolish in a way totally unforeseen by himself.  Pushing this
self-analysis further, he reflected that the springs of his conduct were
just as obscure.

"I may be catching myself any time doing things of which I have no
conception," he thought.  And as he was passing near the mizzen-mast he
perceived a coil of rope left lying on the deck by the oversight of the
sweepers.  By an impulse which had nothing mysterious in it, he stooped
as he went by with the intention of picking it up and hanging it up on
its proper pin.  This movement brought his head down to the level of the
glazed end of the after skylight--the lighted skylight of the most
private part of the saloon, consecrated to the exclusiveness of Captain
Anthony's married life; the part, let me remind you, cut off from the
rest of that forbidden space by a pair of heavy curtains.  I mention
these curtains because at this point Mr Powell himself recalled the
existence of that unusual arrangement, to my mind.

He recalled them with simple-minded compunction at that distance of
time.  He said: "You understand that directly I stooped to pick up that
coil of running gear--the spanker foot-outhaul, it was--I perceived that
I could see right into that part of the saloon the curtains were meant
to make particularly private.  Do you understand me?" he insisted.

I told him that I understood; and he proceeded to call my attention to
the wonderful linking up of small facts, with something of awe left yet,
after all these years, at the precise workmanship of chance, fate,
providence, call it what you will!  "For, observe, Marlow," he said,
making at me very round eyes which contrasted funnily with the austere
touch of grey on his temples, "observe, my dear fellow, that everything
depended on the men who cleared up the poop in the evening leaving that
coil of rope on the deck, and on the topsail-tie carrying away in a most
incomprehensible and surprising manner earlier in the day, and the end
of the chain whipping round the coaming and shivering to bits the
coloured glass-pane at the end of the skylight.  It had the arms of the
city of Liverpool on it; I don't know why unless because the _Ferndale_
was registered in Liverpool.  It was very thick plate-glass.  Anyhow,
the upper part got smashed, and directly we had attended to things aloft
Mr Franklin had set the carpenter to patch up the damage with some
pieces of plain glass.  I don't know where they got them; I think the
people who fitted up new bookcases in the captain's room had left some
spare panes.  Chips was there the whole afternoon on his knees, messing
with putty and red-lead.  It wasn't a neat job when it was done, not by
any means, but it would serve to keep the weather out and let the light
in.  Clear glass.  And of course I was not thinking of it.  I just
stooped to pick up that rope and found my head within three inches of
that clear glass, and--dash it all!  I found myself out.  Not half an
hour before I was saying to myself that it was impossible to tell what
was in people's heads or at the back of their talk, or what they were
likely to be up to.  And here I found myself up to as low a trick as you
can well think of.  For, after I had stooped, there I remained prying,
spying, anyway looking, where I had no business to look.  Not
consciously at first, may be.  He who has eyes, you know, nothing can
stop him from seeing things as long as there are things to see in front
of him.  What I saw at first was the end of the table and the tray
clamped on to it, a patent tray for sea use, fitted with holders for a
couple of decanters, water-jug and glasses.  The glitter of these things
caught my eye first; but what I saw next was the captain down there,
alone as far as I could see; and I could see pretty well the whole of
that part up to the cottage piano, dark against the satin-wood panelling
of the bulkhead.  And I remained looking.  I did.  And I don't know that
I was ashamed of myself either, then.  It was the fault of that
Franklin, always talking of the man, making free with him to that extent
that really he seemed to have become our property, his and mine, in a
way.  It's funny, but one had that feeling about Captain Anthony.  To
watch him was not so much worse than listening to Franklin talking him
over.  Well, it's no use making excuses for what's inexcusable.  I
watched; but I dare say you know that there could have been nothing
inimical in this low behaviour of mine.  On the contrary.  I'll tell you
now what he was doing.  He was helping himself out of a decanter.  I saw
every movement, and I said to myself mockingly as though jeering at
Franklin in my thoughts `Hallo!  Here's the captain taking to drink at
last.'  He poured a little brandy or whatever it was into a long glass,
filled it with water, drank about a fourth of it and stood the glass
back into the holder.  Every sign of a bad drinking bout, I was saying
to myself, feeling quite amused at the notions of that Franklin.  He
seemed to me an enormous ass; with his jealousy and his fears.  At that
rate a month would not have been enough for anybody to get drunk.  The
captain sat down in one of the swivel armchairs fixed around the table;
I had him right under me and as he turned the chair slightly, I was
looking, I may say, down his back.  He took another little sip and then
reached for a book which was lying on the table.  I had not noticed it
before.  Altogether the proceedings of a desperate drunkard--weren't
they?  He opened the book and held it before his face.  If this was the
way he took to drink, then I needn't worry.  He was in no danger from
that, and as to any other, I assure you no human being could have looked
safer than he did down there.  I felt the greatest contempt for Franklin
just then, while I looked at Captain Anthony sitting there with a glass
of weak brandy-and-water at his elbow and reading in the cabin of his
ship, on a quiet night--the quietest, perhaps the finest, of a
prosperous passage.  And if you wonder why I didn't leave off my ugly
spying I will tell you how it was.  Captain Anthony was a great reader
just about that time; and I, too, I have a great liking for books.  To
this day I can't come near a book but I must know what it is about.  It
was a thickish volume he had there, small close print, double columns--I
can see it now.  What I wanted to make out was the title at the top of
the page.  I have very good eyes but he wasn't holding it conveniently--
I mean for me up there.  Well, it was a history of some kind, that much
I read and then suddenly he bangs the book face down on the table, jumps
up as if something had bitten him and walks away aft.

"Funny thing shame is.  I had been behaving badly and aware of it in a
way, but I didn't feel really ashamed till the fright of being found out
in my honourable occupation drove me from it.  I slunk away to the
forward end of the poop and lounged about there, my face and ears
burning and glad it was a dark night, expecting every moment to hear the
captain's footsteps behind me.  For I made sure he was coming on deck.
Presently I thought I had rather meet him face to face and I walked
slowly aft prepared to see him emerge from the companion before I got
that far.  I even thought of his having detected me by some means.  But
it was impossible, unless he had eyes in the top of his head.  I had
never had a view of his face down there.  It was impossible; I was safe;
and I felt very mean, yet, explain it as you may, I seemed not to care.
And the captain not appearing on deck, I had the impulse to go on being
mean.  I wanted another peep.  I really don't know what was the beastly
influence except that Mr Franklin's talk was enough to demoralise any
man by raising a sort of unhealthy curiosity which did away in my case
with all the restraints of common decency.

"I did not mean to run the risk of being caught squatting in a
suspicious attitude by the captain.  There was also the helmsman to
consider.  So what I did--I am surprised at my low cunning--was to sit
down naturally on the skylight-seat and then by bending forward I found
that, as I expected, I could look down through the upper part of the
end-pane.  The worst that could happen to me then, if I remained too
long in that position, was to be suspected by the seaman aft at the
wheel of having gone to sleep there.  For the rest my ears would give me
sufficient warning of any movements in the companion.

"But in that way my angle of view was changed.  The field too was
smaller.  The end of the table, the tray and the swivel-chair I had
right under my eyes.  The captain had not come back yet.  The piano I
could not see now; but on the other hand I had a very oblique downward
view of the curtains drawn across the cabin and cutting off the forward
part of it just about the level of the skylight-end and only an inch or
so from the end of the table.  They were heavy stuff, travelling on a
thick brass rod with some contrivance to keep the rings from sliding to
and fro when the ship rolled.  But just then the ship was as still
almost as a model shut up in a glass case while the curtains, joined
closely, and, perhaps on purpose, made a little too long moved no more
than a solid wall."

Marlow got up to get another cigar.  The night was getting on to what I
may call its deepest hour, the hour most favourable to evil purposes of
men's hate, despair or greed--to whatever can whisper into their ears
the unlawful counsels of protest against things that are; the hour of
ill-omened silence and chill and stagnation, the hour when the criminal
plies his trade and the victim of sleeplessness reaches the lowest depth
of dreadful discouragement; the hour before the first sight of dawn.  I
know it, because while Marlow was crossing the room I looked at the
clock on the mantelpiece.  He however never looked that way though it is
possible that he, too, was aware of the passage of time.  He sat down
heavily.

"Our friend Powell," he began again, "was very anxious that I should
understand the topography of that cabin.  I was interested more by its
moral atmosphere, that tension of falsehood, of desperate acting, which
tainted the pure sea-atmosphere into which the magnanimous Anthony had
carried off his conquest and--well--his self-conquest too, trying to act
at the same time like a beast of prey, a pure spirit and the `most
generous of men.'  Too big an order clearly because he was nothing of a
monster but just a common mortal, a little more self-willed and
self-confident than most, may be, both in his roughness and in his
delicacy."

As to the delicacy of Mr Powell's proceedings I'll say nothing.  He
found a sort of depraved excitement in watching an unconscious man--and
such an attractive and mysterious man as Captain Anthony at that.  He
wanted another peep at him.  He surmised that the captain must come back
soon because of the glass two-thirds full and also of the book put down
so brusquely.  God knows what sudden pang had made Anthony jump up so.
I am convinced he used reading as an opiate against the pain of his
magnanimity which like all abnormal growths was gnawing at his healthy
substance with cruel persistence.  Perhaps he had rushed into his cabin
simply to groan freely in absolute and delicate secrecy.  At any rate he
tarried there.  And young Powell would have grown weary and compunctious
at last if it had not become manifest to him that he had not been alone
in the highly incorrect occupation of watching the movements of Captain
Anthony.

Powell explained to me that no sound did or perhaps could reach him from
the saloon.  The first sign--and we must remember that he was using his
eyes for all they were worth--was an unaccountable movement of the
curtain.  It was wavy and very slight; just perceptible in fact to the
sharpened faculties of a secret watcher; for it can't be denied that our
wits are much more alert when engaged in wrong-doing (in which one
mustn't be found out) than in a righteous occupation.

He became suspicious, with no one and nothing definite in his mind.  He
was suspicious of the curtain itself and observed it.  It looked very
innocent.  Then just as he was ready to put it down to a trick of
imagination he saw trembling movements where the two curtains joined.
Yes!  Somebody else besides himself had been watching Captain Anthony.
He owns artlessly that this roused his indignation.  It was really too
much of a good thing.  In this state of intense antagonism he was
startled to observe tips of fingers fumbling with the dark stuff.  Then
they grasped the edge of the further curtain and hung on there, just
fingers and knuckles and nothing else.  It made an abominable sight.  He
was looking at it with unaccountable repulsion when a hand came into
view; a short, puffy, old, freckled hand projecting into the lamplight,
followed by a white wrist, an arm in a grey coat-sleeve, up to the
elbow, beyond the elbow, extended tremblingly towards the tray.  Its
appearance was weird and nauseous, fantastic and silly.  But instead of
grabbing the bottle as Powell expected, this hand, tremulous with senile
eagerness, swerved to the glass, rested on its edge for a moment (or so
it looked from above) and went back with a jerk.  The gripping fingers
of the other hand vanished at the same time, and young Powell staring at
the motionless curtains could indulge for a moment the notion that he
had been dreaming.

But that notion did not last long.  Powell, after repressing his first
impulse to spring for the companion and hammer at the captain's door,
took steps to have himself relieved by the boatswain.  He was in a state
of distraction as to his feelings and yet lucid as to his mind.  He
remained on the skylight so as to keep his eye on the tray.

Still the captain did not appear in the saloon.  "If he had," said Mr
Powell, "I knew what to do.  I would have put my elbow through the pane
instantly--crash."

I asked him why?

"It was the quickest dodge for getting him away from that tray," he
explained.  "My throat was so dry that I didn't know if I could shout
loud enough.  And this was not a case for shouting, either."

The boatswain, sleepy and disgusted, arriving on the poop, found the
second officer doubled up over the end of the skylight in a pose which
might have been that of severe pain.  And his voice was so changed that
the man, though naturally vexed at being turned out, made no comment on
the plea of sudden indisposition which young Powell put forward.

The rapidity with which the sick man got off the poop must have
astonished the boatswain.  But Powell, at the moment he opened the door
leading into the saloon from the quarter-deck, had managed to control
his agitation.  He entered swiftly but without noise and found himself
in the dark part of the saloon, the strong sheen of the lamp on the
other side of the curtains visible only above the rod on which they ran.
The door of Mr Smith's cabin was in that dark part.  He passed by it
assuring himself by a quick side glance that it was imperfectly closed.
"Yes," he said to me.  "The old man must have been watching through the
crack.  Of that I am certain; but it was not for me that he was watching
and listening.  Horrible!  Surely he must have been startled to hear and
see somebody he did not expect.  He could not possibly guess why I was
coming in, but I suppose he must have been concerned."  Concerned
indeed!  He must have been thunderstruck, appalled.

Powell's only distinct aim was to remove the suspected tumbler.  He had
no other plan, no other intention, no other thought.  Do away with it in
some manner.  Snatch it up and run out with it.

You know that complete mastery of one fixed idea, not a reasonable but
an emotional mastery, a sort of concentrated exaltation.  Under its
empire men rush blindly through fire and water and opposing violence,
and nothing can stop them--unless, sometimes, a grain of sand.  For his
blind purpose (and clearly the thought of Mrs Anthony was at the bottom
of it) Mr Powell had plenty of time.  What checked him at the crucial
moment was the familiar, harmless aspect of common things, the steady
light, the open book on the table, the solitude, the peace, the
home-like effect of the place.  He held the glass in his hand; all he
had to do was to vanish back beyond the curtains, flee with it
noiselessly into the night on deck, fling it unseen overboard.  A minute
or less.  And then all that would have happened would have been the
wonder at the utter disappearance of a glass tumbler, a ridiculous
riddle in pantry-affairs beyond the wit of anyone on board to solve.
The grain of sand against which Powell stumbled in his headlong career
was a moment of incredulity as to the truth of his own conviction
because it had failed to affect the safe aspect of familiar things.  He
doubted his eyes too.  He must have dreamt it all!  "I am dreaming now,"
he said to himself.  And very likely for a few seconds he must have
looked like a man in a trance or profoundly asleep on his feet, and with
a glass of brandy-and-water in his hand.

What woke him up and, at the same time, fixed his feet immovably to the
spot, was a voice asking him what he was doing there in tones of
thunder.  Or so it sounded to his ears.  Anthony, opening the door of
his stern-cabin had naturally exclaimed.  What else could you expect?
And the exclamation must have been fairly loud if you consider the
nature of the sight which met his eye.  There, before him, stood his
second officer, a seemingly decent, well-bred young man, who, being on
duty, had left the deck and had sneaked into the saloon, apparently for
the inexpressibly mean purpose of drinking up what was left of his
captain's brandy-and-water.  There he was, caught absolutely with the
glass in his hand.

But the very monstrosity of appearances silenced Anthony after the first
exclamation; and young Powell felt himself pierced through and through
by the overshadowed glance of his captain.  Anthony advanced quietly.
The first impulse of Mr Powell, when discovered, had been to dash the
glass on the deck.  He was in a sort of panic.  But deep down within him
his wits were working, and the idea that if he did that he could prove
nothing and that the story he had to tell was completely incredible,
restrained him.  The captain came forward slowly.  With his eyes now
close to his, Powell, spell-bound, numb all over, managed to lift one
finger to the deck above mumbling the explanatory words, "Boatswain on
the poop."

The captain moved his head slightly as much as to say, "That's all
right"--and this was all.  Powell had no voice, no strength.  The air
was unbreathable, thick, sticky, odious, like hot jelly in which all
movements became difficult.  He raised the glass a little with immense
difficulty and moved his trammelled lips sufficiently to form the words:

"Doctored."

Anthony glanced at it for an instant, only for an instant, and again
fastened his eyes on the face of his second mate.  Powell added a
fervent "I believe" and put the glass down on the tray.  The captain's
glance followed the movement and returned sternly to his face.  The
young man pointed a finger once more upwards and squeezed out of his
iron-bound throat six consecutive words of further explanation.
"Through the skylight.  The white pane."

The captain raised his eyebrows very much at this, while young Powell,
ashamed but desperate, nodded insistently several times.  He meant to
say that: Yes.  Yes.  He had done that thing.  He had been spying...
The captain's gaze became thoughtful.  And, now the confession was over,
the iron-bound feeling of Powell's throat passed away giving place to a
general anxiety which from his breast seemed to extend to all the limbs
and organs of his body.  His legs trembled a little, his vision was
confused, his mind became blankly expectant.  But he was alert enough.
At a movement of Anthony he screamed in a strangled whisper.

"Don't, sir!  Don't touch it."

The captain pushed aside Powell's extended arm, took up the glass and
raised it slowly against the lamplight.  The liquid, of very pale amber
colour, was clear, and by a glance the captain seemed to call Powell's
attention to the fact.  Powell tried to pronounce the word, "dissolved"
but he only thought of it with great energy which however failed to move
his lips.  Only when Anthony had put down the glass and turned to him he
recovered such a complete command of his voice that he could keep it
down to a hurried, forcible whisper--a whisper that shook him.

"Doctored!  I swear it!  I have seen.  Doctored!  I have seen."

Not a feature of the captain's face moved.  His was a calm to take one's
breath away.  It did so to young Powell.  Then for the first time
Anthony made himself heard to the point.

"You did! ...  Who was it?"

And Powell gasped freely at last.  "A hand," he whispered fearfully, "a
hand and the arm--only the arm--like that."

He advanced his own, slow, stealthy, tremulous in faithful reproduction,
the tips of two fingers and the thumb pressed together and hovering
above the glass for an instant--then the swift jerk back, after the
deed.

"Like that," he repeated growing excited.  "From behind this."  He
grasped the curtain and glaring at the silent Anthony flung it back
disclosing the forepart of the saloon.  There was on one to be seen.

Powell had not expected to see anybody.  "But," he said to me, "I knew
very well there was an ear listening and an eye glued to the crack of a
cabin door.  Awful thought.  And that door was in that part of the
saloon remaining in the shadow of the other half of the curtain.  I
pointed at it and I suppose that old man inside saw me pointing.  The
captain had a wonderful self-command.  You couldn't have guessed
anything from his face.  Well, it was perhaps more thoughtful than
usual.  And indeed this was something to think about.  But I couldn't
think steadily.  My brain would give a sort of jerk and then go dead
again.  I had lost all notion of time, and I might have been looking at
the captain for days and months for all I knew before I heard him
whisper to me fiercely: `Not a word!'  This jerked me out of that trance
I was in and I said `No!  No!  I didn't mean even you.'"

"I wanted to explain my conduct, my intentions, but I read in his eyes
that he understood me and I was only too glad to leave off.  And there
we were looking at each other, dumb, brought up short by the question
`What next?'

"I thought Captain Anthony was a man of iron till I saw him suddenly
fling his head to the right and to the left fiercely, like a wild animal
at bay not knowing which way to break out..."

"Truly," commented Marlow, "brought to bay was not a bad comparison; a
better one than Mr Powell was aware of.  At that moment the appearance
of Flora could not but bring the tension to the breaking point.  She
came out in all innocence but not without vague dread.  Anthony's
exclamation on first seeing Powell had reached her in her cabin, where,
it seems, she was brushing her hair.  She had heard the very words.
`What are you doing here?'  And the unwonted loudness of the voice--his
voice--breaking the habitual stillness of that hour would have startled
a person having much less reason to be constantly apprehensive, than the
captive of Anthony's masterful generosity.  She had no means to guess to
whom the question was addressed and it echoed in her heart, as Anthony's
voice always did.  Followed complete silence.  She waited, anxious,
expectant, till she could stand the strain no longer, and with the weary
mental appeal of the overburdened.  `My God!  What is it now?' she
opened the door of her room and looked into the saloon.  Her first
glance fell on Powell.  For a moment, seeing only the second officer
with Anthony, she felt relieved and made as if to draw back; but her
sharpened perception detected something suspicious in their attitudes,
and she came forward slowly.

"I was the first to see Mrs Anthony," related Powell, "because I was
facing aft.  The captain, noticing my eyes, looked quickly over his
shoulder and at once put his finger to his lips to caution me.  As if I
were likely to let out anything before her!  Mrs Anthony had on a
dressing-gown of some grey stuff with red facings and a thick red cord
round her waist.  Her hair was down.  She looked a child; a pale-faced
child with big blue eyes and a red mouth a little open showing a glimmer
of white teeth.  The light fell strongly on her as she came up to the
end of the table.  A strange child though; she hardly affected one like
a child, I remember.  Do you know," exclaimed Mr Powell, who clearly
must have been, like many seamen, an industrious reader, "do you know
what she looked like to me with those big eyes and something appealing
in her whole expression.  She looked like a forsaken elf.  Captain
Anthony had moved towards her to keep her away from my end of the table,
where the tray was.  I had never seen them so near to each other before,
and it made a great contrast.  It was wonderful, for, with his beard cut
to a point, his swarthy, sunburnt complexion, thin nose and his lean
head there was something African, something Moorish in Captain Anthony.
His neck was bare; he had taken off his coat and collar and had drawn on
his sleeping jacket in the time that he had been absent from the saloon.
I seem to see him now.  Mrs Anthony too.  She looked from him to me--I
suppose I looked guilty or frightened--and from me to him, trying to
guess what there was between us two.  Then she burst out with a `What
has happened?' which seemed addressed to me.  I mumbled `Nothing!
Nothing, ma'am,' which she very likely did not hear.

"You must not think that all this had lasted a long time.  She had taken
fright at our behaviour and turned to the captain pitifully.  `What is
it you are concealing from me?'  A straight question--eh?  I don't know
what answer the captain would have made.  Before he could even raise his
eyes to her she cried out `Ah!  Here's papa!' in a sharp tone of relief,
but directly afterwards she looked to me as if she were holding her
breath with apprehension.  I was so interested in her that, how shall I
say it, her exclamation made no connection in my brain at first.  I also
noticed that she had sidled up a little nearer to Captain Anthony,
before it occurred to me to turn my head.  I can tell you my neck
stiffened in the twisted position from the shock of actually seeing that
old man!  He had dared!  I suppose you think I ought to have looked upon
him as mad.  But I couldn't.  It would have been certainly easier.  But
I could _not_.  You should have seen him.  First of all he was
completely dressed with his very cap still on his head just as when he
left me on deck two hours before, saying in his soft voice: `The moment
has come to go to bed'--while he meant to go and do that thing and hide
in his dark cabin, and watch the stuff do its work.  A cold shudder ran
down my back.  He had his hands in the pockets of his jacket, his arms
were pressed close to his thin, upright body, and he shuffled across the
cabin with his short steps.  There was a red patch on each of his old
soft cheeks as if somebody had been pinching them.  He drooped his head
a little, and looked with a sort of underhand expectation at the captain
and Mrs Anthony standing close together at the other end of the saloon.
The calculating horrible impudence of it!  His daughter was there; and
I am certain he had seen the captain putting his finger on his lips to
warn me.  And then he had coolly come out!  He passed my imagination, I
assure you.  After that one shiver his presence killed every faculty in
me--wonder, horror, indignation.  I felt nothing in particular just as
if he were still the old gentleman who used to talk to me familiarly
every day on deck.  Would you believe it?"

"Mr Powell challenged my powers of wonder at this internal phenomenon,"
went on Marlow after a slight pause.  "But even if they had not been
fully engaged, together with all my powers of attention in following the
facts of the case, I would not have been astonished by his statements
about himself.  Taking into consideration his youth they were by no
means incredible; or, at any rate, they were the least incredible part
of the whole.  They were also the least interesting part.  The interest
was elsewhere, and there of course all he could do was to look at the
surface.  The inwardness of what was passing before his eyes was hidden
from him, who had looked on, more impenetrably than from me who at a
distance of years was listening to his words.  That what presently
happened at this crisis in Flora de Barral's fate was beyond his power
of comment, seemed in a sense natural.  And his own presence on the
scene was so strangely motived that it was left for me to marvel alone
at this young man, a completely chance-comer, having brought it about on
that night."

Each situation created either by folly or wisdom has its psychological
moment.  The behaviour of young Powell with its mixture of boyish
impulses combined with instinctive prudence, had not created it--I can't
say that--but had discovered it to the very people involved.  What would
have happened if he had made a noise about his discovery?  But he
didn't.  His head was full of Mrs Anthony and he behaved with a
discretion beyond his years.  Some nice children often do; and surely it
is not from reflection.  They have their own inspirations.  Young
Powell's inspiration consisted in being "enthusiastic" about Mrs
Anthony.  `Enthusiastic' is really good.  And he was amongst them like a
child, sensitive, impressionable, plastic--but unable to find for
himself any sort of comment.

I don't know how much mine may be worth; but I believe that just then
the tension of the false situation was at its highest.  Of all the forms
offered to us by life it is the one demanding a couple to realise it
fully, which is the most imperative.  Pairing off is the fate of
mankind.  And if two beings thrown together, mutually attracted, resist
the necessity, fail in understanding and voluntarily stop short of the--
the embrace, in the noblest meaning of the word, then they are
committing a sin against life, the call of which is simple.  Perhaps
sacred.  And the punishment of it is an invasion of complexity, a
tormenting, forcibly tortuous involution of feelings, the deepest form
of suffering from which indeed something significant may come at last,
which may be criminal or heroic, may be madness or wisdom--or even a
straight if despairing decision.

Powell on taking his eyes off the old gentleman noticed Captain Anthony,
swarthy as an African, by the side of Flora whiter than the lilies, take
his handkerchief out and wipe off his forehead the sweat of anguish--
like a man who is overcome.  "And no wonder," commented Mr Powell here.
Then the captain said, "Hadn't you better go back to your room."  This
was to Mrs Anthony.  He tried to smile at her.  "Why do you look
startled?  This night is like any other night."

"Which," Powell again commented to me earnestly, "was a lie...  No
wonder he sweated."  You see from this the value of Powell's comments.
Mrs Anthony then said: "Why are you sending me away?"

"Why!  That you should go to sleep.  That you should rest."  And Captain
Anthony frowned.  Then sharply, "You stay here, Mr Powell.  I shall
want you presently."

As a matter of fact Powell had not moved.  Flora did not mind his
presence.  He himself had the feeling of being of no account to those
three people.  He was looking at Mrs Anthony as unabashed as the
proverbial cat looking at a king.  Mrs Anthony glanced at him.  She did
not move, gripped by an inexplicable premonition.  She had arrived at
the very limit of her endurance as the object of Anthony's magnanimity;
she was the prey of an intuitive dread of she did not know what
mysterious influence; she felt herself being pushed back into that
solitude, that moral loneliness, which had made all her life
intolerable.  And then, in that close communion established again with
Anthony, she felt--as on that night in the garden--the force of his
personal fascination.  The passive quietness with which she looked at
him gave her the appearance of a person bewitched--or, say, mesmerically
put to sleep--beyond any notion of her surroundings.

After telling Mr Powell not to go away the captain remained silent.
Suddenly Mrs Anthony pushed back her loose hair with a decisive gesture
of her arms and moved still nearer to him.  "Here's papa up yet," she
said, but she did not look towards Mr Smith.  "Why is it?  And you?  I
can't go on like this, Roderick--between you two.  Don't."

Anthony interrupted her as if something had untied his tongue.

"Oh yes.  Here's your father.  And ...  Why not.  Perhaps it is just as
well you came out.  Between us two?  Is that it?  I won't pretend I
don't understand.  I am not blind.  But I can't fight any longer for
what I haven't got.  I don't know what you imagine has happened.
Something has though.  Only you needn't be afraid.  No shadow can touch
you--because I give up.  I can't say we had much talk about it, your
father and I, but, the long and the short of it is, that I must learn to
live without you--which I have told you was impossible.  I was speaking
the truth.  But I have done fighting, or waiting, or hoping.  Yes.  You
shall go."

At this point Mr Powell who (he confessed to me) was listening with
uncomprehending awe, heard behind his back a triumphant chuckling sound.
It gave him the shudders, he said, to mention it now; but at the time,
except for another chill down the spine, it had not the power to destroy
his absorption in the scene before his eyes, and before his ears too,
because just then Captain Anthony raised his voice grimly.  Perhaps he
too had heard the chuckle of the old man.

"Your father has found an argument which makes me pause, if it does not
convince me.  No!  I can't answer it.  I--I don't want to answer it.  I
simply surrender.  He shall have his way with you--and with me.  Only,"
he added in a gloomy lowered tone which struck Mr Powell as if a pedal
had been put down, "only it shall take a little time.  I have never lied
to you.  Never.  I renounce not only my chance but my life.  In a few
days, directly we get into port, the very moment we do, I, who have said
I could never let you go, I shall let you go."

To the innocent beholder Anthony seemed at this point to become
physically exhausted.  My view is that the utter falseness of his, I may
say, aspirations, the vanity of grasping the empty air, had come to him
with an overwhelming force, leaving him disarmed before the other's mad
and sinister sincerity.  As he had said himself he could not fight for
what he did not possess; he could not face such a thing as this for the
sake of his mere magnanimity.  The normal alone can overcome the
abnormal.  He could not even reproach that man over there.  "I own
myself beaten," he said in a firmer tone.  "You are free.  I let you off
since I must."

Powell, the onlooker, affirms that at these incomprehensible words Mrs
Anthony stiffened into the very image of astonishment, with a frightened
stare and frozen lips.  But next minute a cry came out from her heart,
not very loud but of a quality which made not only Captain Anthony (he
was not looking at her), not only him but also the more distant (and
equally unprepared) young man, catch their breath: "But I don't want to
be let off," she cried.

She was so still that one asked oneself whether the cry had come from
her.  The restless shuffle behind Powell's back stopped short, the
intermittent shadowy chuckling ceased too.  Young Powell, glancing
round, saw Mr Smith raise his head with his faded eyes very still,
puckered at the corners, like a man perceiving something coming at him
from a great distance.  And Mrs Anthony's voice reached Powell's ears,
entreating and indignant.

"You can't cast me off like this, Roderick.  I won't go away from you.
I won't--"

Powell turned about and discovered then that what Mr Smith was
puckering his eyes at, was the sight of his daughter clinging round
Captain Anthony's neck--a sight not in itself improper, but which had
the power to move young Powell with a bashfully profound emotion.  It
was different from his emotion while spying at the revelations of the
skylight, but in this case too he felt the discomfort, if not the guilt,
of an unseen beholder.  Experience was being piled-up on his young
shoulders.  Mrs Anthony's hair hung back in a dark mass like the hair
of a drowned woman.  She looked as if she would let go and sink to the
floor if the captain were to withhold his sustaining arm.  But the
captain obviously had no such intention.  Standing firm and still he
gazed with sombre eyes at Mr Smith.  For a time the low convulsive
sobbing of Mr Smith's daughter was the only sound to trouble the
silence.  The strength of Anthony's clasp pressing Flora to his breast
could not be doubted even at that distance, and suddenly, awakening to
his opportunity, he began to partly support her, partly carry her in the
direction of her cabin.  His head was bent over her solicitously, then
recollecting himself, with a glance full of unwonted fire, his voice
ringing in a note unknown to Mr Powell, he cried to him, "Don't you go
on deck yet.  I want you to stay down here till I come back.  There are
some instructions I want to give you."

And before the young man could answer, Anthony had disappeared in the
stern-cabin, burdened and exulting.

"Instructions," commented Mr Powell.  "That was all right.  Very
likely; but they would be such instructions as, I thought to myself, no
ship's officer perhaps had ever been given before.  It made me feel a
little sick to think what they would be dealing with, probably.  But
there!  Everything that happens on board ship on the high seas has got
to be dealt with somehow.  There are no special people to fly to for
assistance.  And there I was with that old man left in my charge.  When
he noticed me looking at him he started to shuffle again athwart the
saloon.  He kept his hands rammed in his pockets, he was as stiff-backed
as ever, only his head hung down.  After a bit he says in his gentle
soft tone: `Did you see it?'"

There were in Powell's head no special words to fit the horror of his
feelings.  So he said--he had to say something, "Good God!  What were
you thinking of, Mr Smith, to try to..."  And then he left off.  He
dared not utter the awful word poison.  Mr Smith stopped his prowl.

"Think!  What do you know of thinking?  I don't think.  There is
something in my head that thinks.  The thoughts in men, it's like being
drunk with liquor or--You can't stop them.  A man who thinks will think
anything.  No.  But have you seen it.  Have you?"

"I tell you I have!  I am certain!" said Powell forcibly.  "I was
looking at you all the time.  You've done something to the drink in that
glass."

Then Powell lost his breath somehow.  Mr Smith looked at him curiously,
with mistrust.

"My good young man, I don't know what you are talking about.  I ask
you--have you seen?  Who would have believed it? with her arms round his
neck.  When!  Oh!  Ha!  Ha!  You did see!  Didn't you?  It wasn't a
delusion--was it?  Her arms round ...  But I have never wholly trusted
her."

"Then I flew out at him, said Mr Powell.  I told him he was jolly lucky
to have fallen upon Captain Anthony.  A man in a million.  He started
again shuffling to and fro.  `You too,' he said mournfully, keeping his
eyes down.  `Eh?  Wonderful man?  But have you a notion who I am?
Listen!  I have been the Great Mr de Barral.  So they printed it in the
papers while they were getting up a conspiracy.  And I have been doing
time.  And now I am brought low.'  His voice died down to a mere breath.
`Brought low.'"

He took his hands out of his pocket, dragged the cap down on his head
and stuck them back into his pockets, exactly as if preparing himself to
go out into a great wind.  "But not so low as to put up with this
disgrace, to see her, fast in this fellow's clutches, without doing
something.  She wouldn't listen to me.  Frightened?  Silly?  I had to
think of some way to get her out of this.  Did _you_ think she cared for
him?  No!  Would anybody have thought so?  No!  She pretended it was for
my sake.  She couldn't understand that if I hadn't been an old man I
would have flown at his throat months ago.  As it was I was tempted
every time he looked at her.  My girl.  Ough!  Any man but this.  And
all the time the wicked little fool was lying to me.  It was their plot,
their conspiracy!  These conspiracies are the devil.  She has been
leading me on, till she has fairly put my head under the heel of that
jailer, of that scoundrel, of her husband...  Treachery!  Bringing me
low.  Lower than herself.  In the dirt.  That's what it means.  Doesn't
it?  Under his heel!"

He paused in his restless shuffle and again, seizing his cap with both
hands, dragged it furiously right down on his ears.  Powell had lost
himself in listening to these broken ravings, in looking at that old
feverish face when, suddenly, quick as lightning, Mr Smith spun round,
snatched up the captain's glass and with a stifled, hurried exclamation,
"Here's luck," tossed the liquor down his throat.

"I know now the meaning of the word `Consternation,'" went on Mr
Powell.  "That was exactly my state of mind.  I thought to myself
directly: There's nothing in that drink.  I have been dreaming, I have
made the awfullest mistake!"

Mr Smith put the glass down.  He stood before Powell unharmed, quieted
down, in a listening attitude, his head inclined on one side, chewing
his thin lips.  Suddenly he blinked queerly, grabbed Powell's shoulder
and collapsed, subsiding all at once as though he had gone soft all
over, as a piece of silk stuff collapses.  Powell seized his arm
instinctively and checked his fall; but as soon as Mr Smith was fairly
on the floor he jerked himself free and backed away.  Almost as quick he
rushed forward again and tried to lift up the body.  But directly he
raised his shoulders he knew that the man was dead!  Dead!

He lowered him down gently.  He stood over him without fear or any other
feeling, almost indifferent, far away, as it were.  And then he made
another start and, if he had not kept Mrs Anthony always in his mind,
he would have let out a yell for help.  He staggered to her cabin door,
and, as it was, his call for "Captain Anthony" burst out of him much too
loud; but he made a great effort of self-control.  "I am waiting for my
orders, sir," he said outside that door distinctly, in a steady tone.

It was very still in there; still as death.  Then he heard a shuffle of
feet and the captain's voice "All right.  Coming."  He leaned his back
against the bulkhead as you see a drunken man sometimes propped up
against a wall, half doubled up.  In that attitude the captain found
him, when he came out, pulling the door to after him quickly.  At once
Anthony let his eyes run all over the cabin.  Powell, without a word,
clutched his forearm, led him round the end of the table and began to
justify himself.  "I couldn't stop him," he whispered shakily.  "He was
too quick for me.  He drank it up and fell down."  But the captain was
not listening.  He was looking down at Mr Smith, thinking perhaps that
it was a mere chance his own body was not lying there.  They did not
want to speak.  They made signs to each other with their eyes.  The
captain grasped Powell's shoulder as if in a vice and glanced at Mrs
Anthony's cabin door, and it was enough.  He knew that the young man
understood him.  Rather!  Silence!  Silence for ever about this.  Their
very glances became stealthy.  Powell looked from the body to the door
of the dead man's state-room.  The captain nodded and let him go; and
then Powell crept over, hooked the door open and crept back with fearful
glances towards Mrs Anthony's cabin.  They stooped over the corpse.
Captain Anthony lifted up the shoulders.

Mr Powell shuddered.  "I'll never forget that interminable journey
across the saloon, step by step, holding our breath.  For part of the
way the drawn half of the curtain concealed us from view had Mrs
Anthony opened her door; but I didn't draw a free breath till after we
laid the body down on the swinging cot.  The reflection of the saloon
light left most of the cabin in the shadow.  Mr Smith's rigid, extended
body looked shadowy too, shadowy and alive.  You know he always carried
himself as stiff as a poker.  We stood by the cot as though waiting for
him to make us a sign that he wanted to be left alone.  The captain
threw his arm over my shoulder and said in my very ear: `The steward'll
find him in the morning.'

"I made no answer.  It was for him to say.  It was perhaps the best way.
It's no use talking about my thoughts.  They were not concerned with
myself, nor yet with that old man who terrified me more now than when he
was alive.  Him whom I pitied was the captain.  He whispered: `I am
certain of you, Mr Powell.  You had better go on deck now.  As to
me...' and I saw him raise his hands to his head as if distracted.  But
his last words before we stole out that cabin stick to my mind with the
very tone of his mutter--to himself, not to me:--

"No!  No!  I am not going to stumble now over that corpse."

"This is what our Mr Powell had to tell me," said Marlow, changing his
tone.  I was glad to learn that Flora de Barral had been saved from
_that_ sinister shadow at least falling upon her path.

We sat silent then, my mind running on the end of de Barral, on the
irresistible pressure of imaginary griefs, crushing conscience,
scruples, prudence, under their ever-expanding volume; on the sombre and
venomous irony in the obsession which had mastered that old man.

"Well," I said.

"The steward found him," Mr Powell roused himself.  "He went in there
with a cup of tea at five and of course dropped it.  I was on watch
again.  He reeled up to me on deck pale as death.  I had been expecting
it; and yet I could hardly speak.  `Go and tell the captain quietly,' I
managed to say.  He ran off muttering `My God!  My God!' and I'm hanged
if he didn't get hysterical while trying to tell the captain, and start
screaming in the saloon, `Fully dressed!  Dead!  Fully dressed!'  Mrs
Anthony ran out of course but she didn't get hysterical.  Franklin, who
was there too, told me that she hid her face on the captain's breast and
then he went out and left them there.  It was days before Mrs Anthony
was seen on deck.  The first time I spoke to her she gave me her hand
and said, `My poor father was quite fond of you, Mr Powell.'  She
started wiping her eyes and I fled to the other side of the deck.  One
would like to forget all this had ever come near her."

But clearly he could not, because after lighting his pipe he began
musing aloud: "Very strong stuff it must have been.  I wonder where he
got it.  It could hardly be at a common chemist.  Well, he had it from
somewhere--a mere pinch it must have been, no more."

"I have my theory," observed Marlow, "which to a certain extent does
away with the added horror of a coldly premeditated crime.  Chance had
stepped in there too.  It was not Mr Smith who obtained the poison.  It
was the Great de Barral.  And it was not meant for the obscure,
magnanimous conqueror of Flora de Barral; it was meant for the notorious
financier whose enterprises had nothing to do with magnanimity.  He had
his physician in his days of greatness.  I even seem to remember that
the man was called at the trial on some small point or other.  I can
imagine that de Barral went to him when he saw, as he could hardly help
seeing, the possibility of a `triumph of envious rivals'--a heavy
sentence."

I doubt if for love or even for money, but I think possibly, from pity
that man provided him with what Mr Powell called "strong stuff."  From
what Powell saw of the very act I am fairly certain it must have been
contained in a capsule and that he had it about him on the last day of
his trial, perhaps secured by a stitch in his waistcoat pocket.  He
didn't use it.  Why?  Did he think of his child at the last moment?  Was
it want of courage?  We can't tell.  But he found it in his clothes when
he came out of jail.  It had escaped investigation if there was any.
Chance had armed him.  And chance alone, the chance of Mr Powell's
life, forced him to turn the abominable weapon against himself.

I imparted my theory to Mr Powell who accepted it at once as, in a
sense, favourable to the father of Mrs Anthony.  Then he waved his
hand.  "Don't let us think of it."

I acquiesced and very soon he observed dreamily:

"I was with Captain and Mrs Anthony sailing all over the world for near
on six years.  Almost as long as Franklin."

"Oh yes!  What about Franklin?"  I asked.

Powell smiled.  "He left the _Ferndale_ a year or so afterwards, and I
took his place.  Captain Anthony recommended him for a command.  You
don't think Captain Anthony would chuck a man aside like an old glove.
But of course Mrs Anthony did not like him very much.  I don't think
she ever let out a whisper against him but Captain Anthony could read
her thoughts."

And again Powell seemed to lose himself in the past.  I asked, for
suddenly the vision of the Fynes passed through my mind.

"Any children?"

Powell gave a start.  "No!  No!  Never had any children," and again
subsided, puffing at his short briar pipe.

"Where are they now?"  I inquired next as if anxious to ascertain that
all Fyne's fears had been misplaced and vain as our fears often are;
that there were no undesirable cousins for his dear girls, no danger of
intrusion on their spotless home.  Powell looked round at me slowly, his
pipe smouldering in his hand.

"Don't you know?" he uttered in a deep voice.

"Know what?"

"That the _Ferndale_ was lost this four years or more.  Sunk.
Collision.  And Captain Anthony went down with her."

"You don't say so!"  I cried quite affected as if I had known Captain
Anthony personally.  "Was--was Mrs Anthony lost too?"

"You might as well ask if I was lost," Mr Powell rejoined so testily as
to surprise me.  "You see me here,--don't you."

He was quite huffy, but noticing my wondering stare he smoothed his
ruffled plumes.  And in a musing tone.

"Yes.  Good men go out as if there was no use for them in the world.  It
seems as if there were things that, as the Turks say, are written.  Or
else fate has a try and sometimes misses its mark.  You remember that
close shave we had of being run down at night, I told you of, my first
voyage with them.  This go it was just at dawn.  A flat calm and a fog
thick enough to slice with a knife.  Only there were no explosives on
board.  I was on deck and I remember the cursed, murderous thing looming
up alongside and Captain Anthony (we were both on deck) calling out,
`Good God!  What's this!  Shout for all hands, Powell, to save
themselves.  There's no dynamite on board now.  I am going to get the
wife!...'  I yelled, all the watch on deck yelled.  Crash!"

Mr Powell gasped at the recollection.  "It was a Belgian Green Star
liner, the _Westland_," he went on, "commanded by one of those
stop-for-nothing skippers.  Flaherty was his name and I hope he will die
without absolution.  She cut half through the old _Ferndale_ and after
the blow there was a silence like death.  Next I heard the captain back
on deck shouting, `Set your engines slow ahead,' and a howl of `Yes,
yes,' answering him from her forecastle; and then a whole crowd of
people up there began making a row in the fog.  They were throwing ropes
down to us in dozens, I must say.  I and the captain fastened one of
them under Mrs Anthony's arms: I remember she had a sort of dim smile
on her face."

"Haul up carefully," I shouted to the people on the steamer's deck.
"You've got a woman on that line."

The captain saw her landed up there safe.  And then we made a rush round
our decks to see no one was left behind.  As we got back the captain
says: "Here she's gone at last, Powell; the dear old thing!  Run down at
sea."

"Indeed she is gone," I said.  "But it might have been worse.  Shin up
this rope, sir, for God's sake.  I will steady it for you."

"What are you thinking about," he says angrily.  "It isn't my turn.  Up
with you."

These were the last words he ever spoke on earth I suppose.  I knew he
meant to be the last to leave his ship, so I swarmed up as quick as I
could, and those damned lunatics up there grab at me from above, lug me
in, drag me along aft through the row and the riot of the silliest
excitement I ever did see.  Somebody hails from the bridge, "Have you
got them all on board?" and a dozen silly asses start yelling all
together, "All saved!  All saved," and then that accursed Irishman on
the bridge, with me roaring No!  No! till I thought my head would burst,
rings his engines astern.  He rings the engines astern--I fighting like
mad to make myself heard!  And of course...

I saw tears, a shower of them fall down Mr Powell's face.  His voice
broke.

"The _Ferndale_ went down like a stone and Captain Anthony went down
with her, the finest man's soul that ever left a sailor's body.  I raved
like a maniac, like a devil, with a lot of fools crowding round me and
asking, `Aren't you the captain?'

"I wasn't fit to tie the shoe-strings of the man you have drowned," I
screamed at them...  Well!  Well!  I could see for myself that it was no
good lowering a boat.  You couldn't have seen her alongside.  No use.
And only think, Marlow, it was I who had to go and tell Mrs Anthony.
They had taken her down below somewhere, first-class saloon.  I had to
go and tell her!  That Flaherty, God forgive him, comes to me as white
as a sheet, "I think you are the proper person."  God forgive him.  I
wished to die a hundred times.  A lot of kind ladies, passengers, were
chattering excitedly around Mrs Anthony--a real parrot house.  The
ship's doctor went before me.  He whispers right and left and then there
falls a sudden hush.  Yes, I wished myself dead.  But Mrs Anthony was a
brick.

Here Mr Powell fairly burst into tears.  "No one could help loving
Captain Anthony.  I leave you to imagine what he was to her.  Yet before
the week was out it was she who was helping me to pull myself together."

"Is Mrs Anthony in England now?"  I asked after a while.

He wiped his eyes without any false shame.  "Oh yes."  He began to look
for matches, and while diving for the box under the table added: "And
not very far from here either.  That little village up there--you know."

"No!  Really!  Oh I see!"

Mr Powell smoked austerely, very detached.  But I could not let him off
like this.  The sly beggar.  So this was the secret of his passion for
sailing about the river, the reason of his fondness for that creek.

"And I suppose," I said, "that you are still as `enthusiastic' as ever.
Eh?  If I were you I would just mention my enthusiasm to Mrs Anthony.
Why not?"

He caught his falling pipe neatly.  But if what the French call
_effarement_ was ever expressed on a human countenance it was on this
occasion, testifying to his modesty, his sensibility and his innocence.
He looked afraid of somebody overhearing my audacious--almost
sacrilegious hint--as if there had not been a mile and a half of lonely
marshland and dykes between us and the nearest human habitation.  And
then perhaps he remembered the soothing fact for he allowed a gleam to
light up his eyes, like the reflection of some inward fire tended in the
sanctuary of his heart by a devotion as pure as that of any vestal.

It flashed and went out.  He smiled a bashful smile, sighed:

"Pah!  Foolishness.  You ought to know better," he said, more sad than
annoyed.  "But I forgot that you never knew Captain Anthony," he added
indulgently.

I reminded him that I knew Mrs Anthony; even before he--an old friend
now--had ever set eyes on her.  And as he told me that Mrs Anthony had
heard of our meetings I wondered whether she would care to see me.  Mr
Powell volunteered no opinion then; but next time we lay in the creek he
said, "She will be very pleased.  You had better go to-day."

The afternoon was well advanced before I approached the cottage.  The
amenity of a fine day in its decline surrounded me with a beneficent, a
calming influence; I felt it in the silence of the shady lane, in the
pure air, in the blue sky.  It is difficult to retain the memory of the
conflicts, miseries, temptations and crimes of men's self-seeking
existence when one is alone with the charming serenity of the
unconscious nature.  Breathing the dreamless peace around the
picturesque cottage I was approaching, it seemed to me that it must
reign everywhere, over all the globe of water and land and in the hearts
of all the dwellers on this earth.

Flora came down to the garden-gate to meet me, no longer the perversely
tempting, sorrowful, wisp of white mist drifting in the complicated bad
dream of existence: Neither did she look like a forsaken elf.  I
stammered out stupidly, "Again in the country, Miss ...  Mrs.."  She
was very good, returned the pressure of my hand, but we were slightly
embarrassed.  Then we laughed a little.  Then we became grave.

I am no lover of day-breaks.  You know how thin, equivocal, is the light
of the dawn.  But she was now her true self, she was like a fine
tranquil afternoon--and not so very far advanced either.  A woman not
much over thirty, with a dazzling complexion and a little colour, a lot
of hair, a smooth brow, a fine chin, and only the eyes of the Flora of
the old days, absolutely unchanged.

In the room into which she led me we found a Miss Somebody--I didn't
catch the name,--an unobtrusive, even an indistinct, middle-aged person
in black.  A companion.  All very proper.  She came and went and even
sat down at times in the room, but a little apart, with some sewing.  By
the time she had brought in a lighted lamp I had heard all the details
which really matter in this story.  Between me and her who was once
Flora de Barral the conversation was not likely to keep strictly to the
weather.

The lamp had a rosy shade; and its glow wreathed her in perpetual
blushes, made her appear wonderfully young as she sat before me in a
deep, high-backed armchair.  I asked:

"Tell me what is it you said in that famous letter which so upset Mrs
Fyne, and caused little Fyne to interfere in this offensive manner?"

"It was simply crude," she said earnestly.  "I was feeling reckless and
I wrote recklessly.  I knew she would disapprove and I wrote foolishly.
It was the echo of her own stupid talk.  I said that I did not love her
brother but that I had no scruples whatever in marrying him."

She paused, hesitating, then with a shy half-laugh:

"I really believed I was selling myself, Mr Marlow.  And I was proud of
it.  What I suffered afterwards I couldn't tell you; because I only
discovered my love for my poor Roderick through agonies of rage and
humiliation.  I came to suspect him of despising me; but I could not put
it to the test because of my father.  Oh!  I would not have been too
proud.  But I had to spare poor papa's feelings.  Roderick was perfect,
but I felt as though I were on the rack and not allowed even to cry out.
Papa's prejudice against Roderick was my greatest grief.  It was
distracting.  It frightened me.  Oh!  I have been miserable!  That night
when my poor father died suddenly I am certain they had some sort of
discussion, about me.  But I did not want to hold out any longer against
my own heart!  I could not."

She stopped short, then impulsively:

"Truth will out, Mr Marlow."

"Yes," I said.

She went on musingly.

"Sorrow and happiness were mingled at first like darkness and light.
For months I lived in a dusk of feelings.  But it was quiet.  It was
warm..."

Again she paused, then going back in her thoughts.  "No!  There was no
harm in that letter.  It was simply foolish.  What did I know of life
then?  Nothing.  But Mrs Fyne ought to have known better.  She wrote a
letter to her brother, a little later.  Years afterwards Roderick
allowed me to glance at it.  I found in it this sentence: `For years I
tried to make a friend of that girl; but I warn you once more that she
has the nature of a heartless adventuress' ...  `Adventuress!' repeated
Flora slowly.  `So be it.  I have had a fine adventure.'"

"It was fine, then," I said interested.

"The finest in the world!  Only think!  I loved and I was loved,
untroubled, at peace, without remorse, without fear.  All the world, all
life were transformed for me.  And how much I have seen!  How good
people were to me!  Roderick was so much liked everywhere.  Yes, I have
known kindness and safety.  The most familiar things appeared lighted up
with a new light, clothed with a loveliness I had never suspected.  The
sea itself! ...  You are a sailor.  You have lived your life on it.  But
do you know how beautiful it is, how strong, how charming, how friendly,
how mighty..."

I listened amazed and touched.  She was silent only a little while.

"It was too good to last.  But nothing can rob me of it now...  Don't
think that I repine.  I am not even sad now.  Yes, I have been happy.
But I remember also the time when I was unhappy beyond endurance, beyond
desperation.  Yes.  You remember that.  And later on, too.  There was a
time on board the _Ferndale_ when the only moments of relief I knew were
when I made Mr Powell talk to me a little on the poop.  You like him?--
Don't you?"

"Excellent fellow," I said warmly.  "You see him often?"

"Of course.  I hardly know another soul in the world.  I am alone.  And
he has plenty of time on his hands.  His aunt died a few years ago.
He's doing nothing, I believe."

"He is fond of the sea," I remarked.  "He loves it."

"He seems to have given it up," she murmured.

"I wonder why?"

She remained silent.  "Perhaps it is because he loves something else
better," I went on.  "Come, Mrs Anthony, don't let me carry away from
here the idea that you are a selfish person, hugging the memory of your
past happiness, like a rich man his treasure, forgetting the poor at the
gate."

I rose to go, for it was getting late.  She got up in some agitation and
went out with me into the fragrant darkness of the garden.  She detained
my hand for a moment and then in the very voice of the Flora of old
days, with the exact intonation, showing the old mistrust, the old doubt
of herself, the old scar of the blow received in childhood, pathetic and
funny, she murmured, "Do you think it possible that he should care for
me?"

"Just ask him yourself.  You are brave."

"Oh, I am brave enough," she said with a sigh.

"Then do.  For if you don't you will be wronging that patient man
cruelly."

I departed leaving her dumb.  Next day, seeing Powell making
preparations to go ashore, I asked him to give my regards to Mrs
Anthony.  He promised he would.

"Listen, Powell," I said.  "We got to know each other by chance?"

"Oh, quite!" he admitted, adjusting his hat.

"And the science of life consists in seizing every chance that presents
itself," I pursued.  "Do you believe that?"

"Gospel truth," he declared innocently.

"Well, don't forget it."

"Oh, I!  I don't expect now anything to present itself," he said,
jumping ashore.

He didn't turn up at high water.  I set my sail and just as I had cast
off from the bank, round the black barn, in the dusk, two figures
appeared and stood silent, indistinct.

"Is that you, Powell?"  I hailed.

"And Mrs Anthony," his voice came impressively through the silence of
the great marsh.  "I am not sailing to-night.  I have to see Mrs
Anthony home."

"Then I must even go alone," I cried.

Flora's voice wished me "_bon voyage_" in a most friendly but tremulous
tone.

"You shall hear from me before long," shouted Powell, suddenly, just as
my boat had cleared the mouth of the creek.

"This was yesterday," added Marlow, lolling in the armchair lazily.  "I
haven't heard yet; but I expect to hear any moment...  What on earth are
you grinning at in this sarcastic manner?  I am not afraid of going to
church with a friend.  Hang it all, for all my belief in Chance I am not
exactly a pagan..."







THE END OF THE TETHER


By Joseph Conrad




I

For a long time after the course of the steamer _Sofala_ had been
altered for the land, the low swampy coast had retained its appearance
of a mere smudge of darkness beyond a belt of glitter. The sunrays
seemed to fall violently upon the calm sea--seemed to shatter themselves
upon an adamantine surface into sparkling dust, into a dazzling vapor
of light that blinded the eye and wearied the brain with its unsteady
brightness.

Captain Whalley did not look at it. When his Serang, approaching the
roomy cane arm-chair which he filled capably, had informed him in a low
voice that the course was to be altered, he had risen at once and had
remained on his feet, face forward, while the head of his ship swung
through a quarter of a circle. He had not uttered a single word, not
even the word to steady the helm. It was the Serang, an elderly, alert,
little Malay, with a very dark skin, who murmured the order to the
helmsman. And then slowly Captain Whalley sat down again in the
arm-chair on the bridge and fixed his eyes on the deck between his feet.

He could not hope to see anything new upon this lane of the sea. He had
been on these coasts for the last three years. From Low Cape to Malantan
the distance was fifty miles, six hours' steaming for the old ship with
the tide, or seven against. Then you steered straight for the land, and
by-and-by three palms would appear on the sky, tall and slim, and with
their disheveled heads in a bunch, as if in confidential criticism of
the dark mangroves. The Sofala would be headed towards the somber
strip of the coast, which at a given moment, as the ship closed with
it obliquely, would show several clean shining fractures--the brimful
estuary of a river. Then on through a brown liquid, three parts water
and one part black earth, on and on between the low shores, three parts
black earth and one part brackish water, the Sofala would plow her way
up-stream, as she had done once every month for these seven years or
more, long before he was aware of her existence, long before he had ever
thought of having anything to do with her and her invariable voyages.
The old ship ought to have known the road better than her men, who had
not been kept so long at it without a change; better than the faithful
Serang, whom he had brought over from his last ship to keep the
captain's watch; better than he himself, who had been her captain for
the last three years only. She could always be depended upon to make her
courses. Her compasses were never out. She was no trouble at all to
take about, as if her great age had given her knowledge, wisdom, and
steadiness. She made her landfalls to a degree of the bearing, and
almost to a minute of her allowed time. At any moment, as he sat on
the bridge without looking up, or lay sleepless in his bed, simply by
reckoning the days and the hours he could tell where he was--the precise
spot of the beat. He knew it well too, this monotonous huckster's
round, up and down the Straits; he knew its order and its sights and its
people. Malacca to begin with, in at daylight and out at dusk, to cross
over with a rigid phosphorescent wake this highway of the Far East.
Darkness and gleams on the water, clear stars on a black sky, perhaps
the lights of a home steamer keeping her unswerving course in the
middle, or maybe the elusive shadow of a native craft with her mat sails
flitting by silently--and the low land on the other side in sight
at daylight. At noon the three palms of the next place of call, up a
sluggish river. The only white man residing there was a retired young
sailor, with whom he had become friendly in the course of many voyages.
Sixty miles farther on there was another place of call, a deep bay with
only a couple of houses on the beach. And so on, in and out, picking
up coastwise cargo here and there, and finishing with a hundred miles'
steady steaming through the maze of an archipelago of small islands up
to a large native town at the end of the beat. There was a three days'
rest for the old ship before he started her again in inverse order,
seeing the same shores from another bearing, hearing the same voices
in the same places, back again to the Sofala's port of registry on
the great highway to the East, where he would take up a berth nearly
opposite the big stone pile of the harbor office till it was time to
start again on the old round of 1600 miles and thirty days. Not a very
enterprising life, this, for Captain Whalley, Henry Whalley, otherwise
Dare-devil Harry--Whalley of the Condor, a famous clipper in her day.
No. Not a very enterprising life for a man who had served famous firms,
who had sailed famous ships (more than one or two of them his own); who
had made famous passages, had been the pioneer of new routes and new
trades; who had steered across the unsurveyed tracts of the South Seas,
and had seen the sun rise on uncharted islands. Fifty years at sea, and
forty out in the East ("a pretty thorough apprenticeship," he used
to remark smilingly), had made him honorably known to a generation of
shipowners and merchants in all the ports from Bombay clear over to
where the East merges into the West upon the coast of the two Americas.
His fame remained writ, not very large but plain enough, on the
Admiralty charts. Was there not somewhere between Australia and China a
Whalley Island and a Condor Reef? On that dangerous coral formation the
celebrated clipper had hung stranded for three days, her captain and
crew throwing her cargo overboard with one hand and with the other, as
it were, keeping off her a flotilla of savage war-canoes. At that time
neither the island nor the reef had any official existence. Later the
officers of her Majesty's steam vessel Fusilier, dispatched to make a
survey of the route, recognized in the adoption of these two names the
enterprise of the man and the solidity of the ship. Besides, as anyone
who cares may see, the "General Directory," vol. ii. p. 410, begins the
description of the "Malotu or Whalley Passage" with the words: "This
advantageous route, first discovered in 1850 by Captain Whalley in the
ship Condor," &c., and ends by recommending it warmly to sailing vessels
leaving the China ports for the south in the months from December to
April inclusive.

This was the clearest gain he had out of life. Nothing could rob him
of this kind of fame. The piercing of the Isthmus of Suez, like the
breaking of a dam, had let in upon the East a flood of new ships, new
men, new methods of trade. It had changed the face of the Eastern seas
and the very spirit of their life; so that his early experiences meant
nothing whatever to the new generation of seamen.

In those bygone days he had handled many thousands of pounds of his
employers' money and of his own; he had attended faithfully, as by law
a shipmaster is expected to do, to the conflicting interests of owners,
charterers, and underwriters. He had never lost a ship or consented to
a shady transaction; and he had lasted well, outlasting in the end the
conditions that had gone to the making of his name. He had buried his
wife (in the Gulf of Petchili), had married off his daughter to the man
of her unlucky choice, and had lost more than an ample competence in the
crash of the notorious Travancore and Deccan Banking Corporation, whose
downfall had shaken the East like an earthquake. And he was sixty-five
years old.


II


His age sat lightly enough on him; and of his ruin he was not ashamed.
He had not been alone to believe in the stability of the Banking
Corporation. Men whose judgment in matters of finance was as expert as
his seamanship had commended the prudence of his investments, and had
themselves lost much money in the great failure. The only difference
between him and them was that he had lost his all. And yet not his all.
There had remained to him from his lost fortune a very pretty little
bark, Fair Maid, which he had bought to occupy his leisure of a retired
sailor--"to play with," as he expressed it himself.

He had formally declared himself tired of the sea the year preceding his
daughter's marriage. But after the young couple had gone to settle in
Melbourne he found out that he could not make himself happy on shore. He
was too much of a merchant sea-captain for mere yachting to satisfy him.
He wanted the illusion of affairs; and his acquisition of the Fair
Maid preserved the continuity of his life. He introduced her to his
acquaintances in various ports as "my last command." When he grew too
old to be trusted with a ship, he would lay her up and go ashore to be
buried, leaving directions in his will to have the bark towed out and
scuttled decently in deep water on the day of the funeral. His daughter
would not grudge him the satisfaction of knowing that no stranger would
handle his last command after him. With the fortune he was able to leave
her, the value of a 500-ton bark was neither here nor there. All this
would be said with a jocular twinkle in his eye: the vigorous old man
had too much vitality for the sentimentalism of regret; and a little
wistfully withal, because he was at home in life, taking a genuine
pleasure in its feelings and its possessions; in the dignity of his
reputation and his wealth, in his love for his daughter, and in his
satisfaction with the ship--the plaything of his lonely leisure.

He had the cabin arranged in accordance with his simple ideal of comfort
at sea. A big bookcase (he was a great reader) occupied one side of his
stateroom; the portrait of his late wife, a flat bituminous oil-painting
representing the profile and one long black ringlet of a young woman,
faced his bed-place. Three chronometers ticked him to sleep and greeted
him on waking with the tiny competition of their beats. He rose at five
every day. The officer of the morning watch, drinking his early cup
of coffee aft by the wheel, would hear through the wide orifice of the
copper ventilators all the splashings, blowings, and splutterings of
his captain's toilet. These noises would be followed by a sustained
deep murmur of the Lord's Prayer recited in a loud earnest voice. Five
minutes afterwards the head and shoulders of Captain Whalley emerged
out of the companion-hatchway. Invariably he paused for a while on the
stairs, looking all round at the horizon; upwards at the trim of the
sails; inhaling deep draughts of the fresh air. Only then he would step
out on the poop, acknowledging the hand raised to the peak of the cap
with a majestic and benign "Good morning to you." He walked the deck
till eight scrupulously. Sometimes, not above twice a year, he had to
use a thick cudgel-like stick on account of a stiffness in the hip--a
slight touch of rheumatism, he supposed. Otherwise he knew nothing of
the ills of the flesh. At the ringing of the breakfast bell he went
below to feed his canaries, wind up the chronometers, and take the
head of the table. From there he had before his eyes the big carbon
photographs of his daughter, her husband, and two fat-legged babies
--his grandchildren--set in black frames into the maplewood bulkheads
of the cuddy. After breakfast he dusted the glass over these portraits
himself with a cloth, and brushed the oil painting of his wife with a
plumate kept suspended from a small brass hook by the side of the heavy
gold frame. Then with the door of his stateroom shut, he would sit down
on the couch under the portrait to read a chapter out of a thick pocket
Bible--her Bible. But on some days he only sat there for half an hour
with his finger between the leaves and the closed book resting on his
knees. Perhaps he had remembered suddenly how fond of boat-sailing she
used to be.

She had been a real shipmate and a true woman too. It was like an
article of faith with him that there never had been, and never could be,
a brighter, cheerier home anywhere afloat or ashore than his home under
the poop-deck of the Condor, with the big main cabin all white and gold,
garlanded as if for a perpetual festival with an unfading wreath. She
had decorated the center of every panel with a cluster of home flowers.
It took her a twelvemonth to go round the cuddy with this labor of love.
To him it had remained a marvel of painting, the highest achievement of
taste and skill; and as to old Swinburne, his mate, every time he
came down to his meals he stood transfixed with admiration before the
progress of the work. You could almost smell these roses, he declared,
sniffing the faint flavor of turpentine which at that time pervaded the
saloon, and (as he confessed afterwards) made him somewhat less hearty
than usual in tackling his food. But there was nothing of the sort to
interfere with his enjoyment of her singing. "Mrs. Whalley is a regular
out-and-out nightingale, sir," he would pronounce with a judicial air
after listening profoundly over the skylight to the very end of the
piece. In fine weather, in the second dog-watch, the two men could hear
her trills and roulades going on to the accompaniment of the piano in
the cabin. On the very day they got engaged he had written to London
for the instrument; but they had been married for over a year before it
reached them, coming out round the Cape. The big case made part of the
first direct general cargo landed in Hong-kong harbor--an event that to
the men who walked the busy quays of to-day seemed as hazily remote as
the dark ages of history. But Captain Whalley could in a half hour of
solitude live again all his life, with its romance, its idyl, and its
sorrow. He had to close her eyes himself. She went away from under the
ensign like a sailor's wife, a sailor herself at heart. He had read
the service over her, out of her own prayer-book, without a break in his
voice. When he raised his eyes he could see old Swinburne facing him
with his cap pressed to his breast, and his rugged, weather-beaten,
impassive face streaming with drops of water like a lump of chipped red
granite in a shower. It was all very well for that old sea-dog to cry.
He had to read on to the end; but after the splash he did not remember
much of what happened for the next few days. An elderly sailor of the
crew, deft at needlework, put together a mourning frock for the child
out of one of her black skirts.

He was not likely to forget; but you cannot dam up life like a sluggish
stream. It will break out and flow over a man's troubles, it will close
upon a sorrow like the sea upon a dead body, no matter how much love has
gone to the bottom. And the world is not bad. People had been very
kind to him; especially Mrs. Gardner, the wife of the senior partner
in Gardner, Patteson, & Co., the owners of the Condor. It was she who
volunteered to look after the little one, and in due course took her to
England (something of a journey in those days, even by the overland
mail route) with her own girls to finish her education. It was ten years
before he saw her again.

As a little child she had never been frightened of bad weather; she
would beg to be taken up on deck in the bosom of his oilskin coat to
watch the big seas hurling themselves upon the Condor. The swirl and
crash of the waves seemed to fill her small soul with a breathless
delight. "A good boy spoiled," he used to say of her in joke. He had
named her Ivy because of the sound of the word, and obscurely fascinated
by a vague association of ideas. She had twined herself tightly round
his heart, and he intended her to cling close to her father as to a
tower of strength; forgetting, while she was little, that in the nature
of things she would probably elect to cling to someone else. But
he loved life well enough for even that event to give him a certain
satisfaction, apart from his more intimate feeling of loss.

After he had purchased the Fair Maid to occupy his loneliness, he
hastened to accept a rather unprofitable freight to Australia simply for
the opportunity of seeing his daughter in her own home. What made him
dissatisfied there was not to see that she clung now to somebody else,
but that the prop she had selected seemed on closer examination "a
rather poor stick"--even in the matter of health. He disliked his
son-in-law's studied civility perhaps more than his method of
handling the sum of money he had given Ivy at her marriage. But of his
apprehensions he said nothing. Only on the day of his departure, with
the hall-door open already, holding her hands and looking steadily into
her eyes, he had said, "You know, my dear, all I have is for you and the
chicks. Mind you write to me openly." She had answered him by an almost
imperceptible movement of her head. She resembled her mother in
the color of her eyes, and in character--and also in this, that she
understood him without many words.

Sure enough she had to write; and some of these letters made Captain
Whalley lift his white eye-brows. For the rest he considered he was
reaping the true reward of his life by being thus able to produce on
demand whatever was needed. He had not enjoyed himself so much in a
way since his wife had died. Characteristically enough his son-in-law's
punctuality in failure caused him at a distance to feel a sort of
kindness towards the man. The fellow was so perpetually being jammed on
a lee shore that to charge it all to his reckless navigation would be
manifestly unfair. No, no! He knew well what that meant. It was bad
luck. His own had been simply marvelous, but he had seen in his life too
many good men--seamen and others--go under with the sheer weight of bad
luck not to recognize the fatal signs. For all that, he was cogitating
on the best way of tying up very strictly every penny he had to leave,
when, with a preliminary rumble of rumors (whose first sound reached
him in Shanghai as it happened), the shock of the big failure came;
and, after passing through the phases of stupor, of incredulity, of
indignation, he had to accept the fact that he had nothing to speak of
to leave.

Upon that, as if he had only waited for this catastrophe, the unlucky
man, away there in Melbourne, gave up his unprofitable game, and sat
down--in an invalid's bath-chair at that too. "He will never walk
again," wrote the wife. For the first time in his life Captain Whalley
was a bit staggered.

The Fair Maid had to go to work in bitter earnest now. It was no longer
a matter of preserving alive the memory of Dare-devil Harry Whalley in
the Eastern Seas, or of keeping an old man in pocket-money and clothes,
with, perhaps, a bill for a few hundred first-class cigars thrown in at
the end of the year. He would have to buckle-to, and keep her going hard
on a scant allowance of gilt for the ginger-bread scrolls at her stem
and stern.

This necessity opened his eyes to the fundamental changes of the world.
Of his past only the familiar names remained, here and there, but
the things and the men, as he had known them, were gone. The name of
Gardner, Patteson, & Co. was still displayed on the walls of warehouses
by the waterside, on the brass plates and window-panes in the business
quarters of more than one Eastern port, but there was no longer a
Gardner or a Patteson in the firm. There was no longer for Captain
Whalley an arm-chair and a welcome in the private office, with a bit of
business ready to be put in the way of an old friend, for the sake of
bygone services. The husbands of the Gardner girls sat behind the desks
in that room where, long after he had left the employ, he had kept his
right of entrance in the old man's time. Their ships now had yellow
funnels with black tops, and a time-table of appointed routes like a
confounded service of tramways. The winds of December and June were all
one to them; their captains (excellent young men he doubted not) were,
to be sure, familiar with Whalley Island, because of late years the
Government had established a white fixed light on the north end (with
a red danger sector over the Condor Reef), but most of them would have
been extremely surprised to hear that a flesh-and-blood Whalley still
existed--an old man going about the world trying to pick up a cargo here
and there for his little bark.

And everywhere it was the same. Departed the men who would have nodded
appreciatively at the mention of his name, and would have thought
themselves bound in honor to do something for Dare-devil Harry Whalley.
Departed the opportunities which he would have known how to seize; and
gone with them the white-winged flock of clippers that lived in the
boisterous uncertain life of the winds, skimming big fortunes out of
the foam of the sea. In a world that pared down the profits to an
irreducible minimum, in a world that was able to count its disengaged
tonnage twice over every day, and in which lean charters were snapped up
by cable three months in advance, there were no chances of fortune for
an individual wandering haphazard with a little bark--hardly indeed any
room to exist.

He found it more difficult from year to year. He suffered greatly from
the smallness of remittances he was able to send his daughter. Meantime
he had given up good cigars, and even in the matter of inferior cheroots
limited himself to six a day. He never told her of his difficulties, and
she never enlarged upon her struggle to live. Their confidence in each
other needed no explanations, and their perfect understanding endured
without protestations of gratitude or regret. He would have been shocked
if she had taken it into her head to thank him in so many words, but
he found it perfectly natural that she should tell him she needed two
hundred pounds.

He had come in with the Fair Maid in ballast to look for a freight in
the Sofala's port of registry, and her letter met him there. Its tenor
was that it was no use mincing matters. Her only resource was in opening
a boarding-house, for which the prospects, she judged, were good. Good
enough, at any rate, to make her tell him frankly that with two hundred
pounds she could make a start. He had torn the envelope open, hastily,
on deck, where it was handed to him by the ship-chandler's runner, who
had brought his mail at the moment of anchoring. For the second time
in his life he was appalled, and remained stock-still at the cabin door
with the paper trembling between his fingers. Open a boarding-house! Two
hundred pounds for a start! The only resource! And he did not know where
to lay his hands on two hundred pence.

All that night Captain Whalley walked the poop of his anchored ship, as
though he had been about to close with the land in thick weather, and
uncertain of his position after a run of many gray days without a sight
of sun, moon, or stars. The black night twinkled with the guiding lights
of seamen and the steady straight lines of lights on shore; and all
around the Fair Maid the riding lights of ships cast trembling trails
upon the water of the roadstead. Captain Whalley saw not a gleam
anywhere till the dawn broke and he found out that his clothing was
soaked through with the heavy dew.

His ship was awake. He stopped short, stroked his wet beard, and
descended the poop ladder backwards, with tired feet. At the sight
of him the chief officer, lounging about sleepily on the quarterdeck,
remained open-mouthed in the middle of a great early-morning yawn.

"Good morning to you," pronounced Captain Whalley solemnly, passing into
the cabin. But he checked himself in the doorway, and without looking
back, "By the bye," he said, "there should be an empty wooden case put
away in the lazarette. It has not been broken up--has it?"

The mate shut his mouth, and then asked as if dazed, "What empty case,
sir?"

"A big flat packing-case belonging to that painting in my room. Let it
be taken up on deck and tell the carpenter to look it over. I may want
to use it before long."

The chief officer did not stir a limb till he had heard the door of the
captain's state-room slam within the cuddy. Then he beckoned aft the
second mate with his forefinger to tell him that there was something "in
the wind."

When the bell rang Captain Whalley's authoritative voice boomed out
through a closed door, "Sit down and don't wait for me." And his
impressed officers took their places, exchanging looks and whispers
across the table. What! No breakfast? And after apparently knocking
about all night on deck, too! Clearly, there was something in the wind.
In the skylight above their heads, bowed earnestly over the plates,
three wire cages rocked and rattled to the restless jumping of the
hungry canaries; and they could detect the sounds of their "old
man's" deliberate movements within his state-room. Captain Whalley was
methodically winding up the chronometers, dusting the portrait of
his late wife, getting a clean white shirt out of the drawers, making
himself ready in his punctilious unhurried manner to go ashore. He could
not have swallowed a single mouthful of food that morning. He had made
up his mind to sell the Fair Maid.


III


Just at that time the Japanese were casting far and wide for ships
of European build, and he had no difficulty in finding a purchaser, a
speculator who drove a hard bargain, but paid cash down for the Fair
Maid, with a view to a profitable resale. Thus it came about that
Captain Whalley found himself on a certain afternoon descending the
steps of one of the most important post-offices of the East with a slip
of bluish paper in his hand. This was the receipt of a registered letter
enclosing a draft for two hundred pounds, and addressed to Melbourne.
Captain Whalley pushed the paper into his waistcoat-pocket, took his
stick from under his arm, and walked down the street.

It was a recently opened and untidy thoroughfare with rudimentary
side-walks and a soft layer of dust cushioning the whole width of
the road. One end touched the slummy street of Chinese shops near the
harbor, the other drove straight on, without houses, for a couple of
miles, through patches of jungle-like vegetation, to the yard gates
of the new Consolidated Docks Company. The crude frontages of the new
Government buildings alternated with the blank fencing of vacant plots,
and the view of the sky seemed to give an added spaciousness to the
broad vista. It was empty and shunned by natives after business
hours, as though they had expected to see one of the tigers from the
neighborhood of the New Waterworks on the hill coming at a loping canter
down the middle to get a Chinese shopkeeper for supper. Captain Whalley
was not dwarfed by the solitude of the grandly planned street. He
had too fine a presence for that. He was only a lonely figure walking
purposefully, with a great white beard like a pilgrim, and with a thick
stick that resembled a weapon. On one side the new Courts of Justice had
a low and unadorned portico of squat columns half concealed by a few old
trees left in the approach. On the other the pavilion wings of the
new Colonial Treasury came out to the line of the street. But Captain
Whalley, who had now no ship and no home, remembered in passing that
on that very site when he first came out from England there had stood a
fishing village, a few mat huts erected on piles between a muddy tidal
creek and a miry pathway that went writhing into a tangled wilderness
without any docks or waterworks.

No ship--no home. And his poor Ivy away there had no home either. A
boarding-house is no sort of home though it may get you a living. His
feelings were horribly rasped by the idea of the boarding-house. In his
rank of life he had that truly aristocratic temperament characterized by
a scorn of vulgar gentility and by prejudiced views as to the derogatory
nature of certain occupations. For his own part he had always preferred
sailing merchant ships (which is a straightforward occupation) to buying
and selling merchandise, of which the essence is to get the better of
somebody in a bargain--an undignified trial of wits at best. His father
had been Colonel Whalley (retired) of the H. E. I. Company's service,
with very slender means besides his pension, but with distinguished
connections. He could remember as a boy how frequently waiters at the
inns, country tradesmen and small people of that sort, used to "My lord"
the old warrior on the strength of his appearance.

Captain Whalley himself (he would have entered the Navy if his father
had not died before he was fourteen) had something of a grand air which
would have suited an old and glorious admiral; but he became lost like
a straw in the eddy of a brook amongst the swarm of brown and yellow
humanity filling a thoroughfare, that by contrast with the vast and
empty avenue he had left seemed as narrow as a lane and absolutely
riotous with life. The walls of the houses were blue; the shops of the
Chinamen yawned like cavernous lairs; heaps of nondescript merchandise
overflowed the gloom of the long range of arcades, and the fiery
serenity of sunset took the middle of the street from end to end with a
glow like the reflection of a fire. It fell on the bright colors and the
dark faces of the bare-footed crowd, on the pallid yellow backs of the
half-naked jostling coolies, on the accouterments of a tall Sikh trooper
with a parted beard and fierce mustaches on sentry before the gate of
the police compound. Looming very big above the heads in a red haze of
dust, the tightly packed car of the cable tramway navigated cautiously
up the human stream, with the incessant blare of its horn, in the manner
of a steamer groping in a fog.

Captain Whalley emerged like a diver on the other side, and in the
desert shade between the walls of closed warehouses removed his hat to
cool his brow. A certain disrepute attached to the calling of a
landlady of a boarding-house. These women were said to be rapacious,
unscrupulous, untruthful; and though he contemned no class of his
fellow-creatures--God forbid!--these were suspicions to which it was
unseemly that a Whalley should lay herself open. He had not expostulated
with her, however. He was confident she shared his feelings; he was
sorry for her; he trusted her judgment; he considered it a merciful
dispensation that he could help her once more,--but in his aristocratic
heart of hearts he would have found it more easy to reconcile himself to
the idea of her turning seamstress. Vaguely he remembered reading years
ago a touching piece called the "Song of the Shirt." It was all very
well making songs about poor women. The granddaughter of Colonel
Whalley, the landlady of a boarding-house! Pooh! He replaced his hat,
dived into two pockets, and stopping a moment to apply a flaring match
to the end of a cheap cheroot, blew an embittered cloud of smoke at a
world that could hold such surprises.

Of one thing he was certain--that she was the own child of a clever
mother. Now he had got over the wrench of parting with his ship, he
perceived clearly that such a step had been unavoidable. Perhaps he had
been growing aware of it all along with an unconfessed knowledge. But
she, far away there, must have had an intuitive perception of it, with
the pluck to face that truth and the courage to speak out--all the
qualities which had made her mother a woman of such excellent counsel.

It would have had to come to that in the end! It was fortunate she had
forced his hand. In another year or two it would have been an utterly
barren sale. To keep the ship going he had been involving himself deeper
every year. He was defenseless before the insidious work of adversity,
to whose more open assaults he could present a firm front; like a
cliff that stands unmoved the open battering of the sea, with a lofty
ignorance of the treacherous backwash undermining its base. As it was,
every liability satisfied, her request answered, and owing no man a
penny, there remained to him from the proceeds a sum of five hundred
pounds put away safely. In addition he had upon his person some forty
odd dollars--enough to pay his hotel bill, providing he did not linger
too long in the modest bedroom where he had taken refuge.

Scantily furnished, and with a waxed floor, it opened into one of
the side-verandas. The straggling building of bricks, as airy as a
bird-cage, resounded with the incessant flapping of rattan screens
worried by the wind between the white-washed square pillars of the
sea-front. The rooms were lofty, a ripple of sunshine flowed over the
ceilings; and the periodical invasions of tourists from some passenger
steamer in the harbor flitted through the wind-swept dusk of the
apartments with the tumult of their unfamiliar voices and impermanent
presences, like relays of migratory shades condemned to speed headlong
round the earth without leaving a trace. The babble of their irruptions
ebbed out as suddenly as it had arisen; the draughty corridors and
the long chairs of the verandas knew their sight-seeing hurry or
their prostrate repose no more; and Captain Whalley, substantial and
dignified, left well-nigh alone in the vast hotel by each light-hearted
skurry, felt more and more like a stranded tourist with no aim in view,
like a forlorn traveler without a home. In the solitude of his room he
smoked thoughtfully, gazing at the two sea-chests which held all that he
could call his own in this world. A thick roll of charts in a sheath
of sailcloth leaned in a corner; the flat packing-case containing the
portrait in oils and the three carbon photographs had been pushed under
the bed. He was tired of discussing terms, of assisting at surveys, of
all the routine of the business. What to the other parties was merely
the sale of a ship was to him a momentous event involving a radically
new view of existence. He knew that after this ship there would be no
other; and the hopes of his youth, the exercise of his abilities, every
feeling and achievement of his manhood, had been indissolubly connected
with ships. He had served ships; he had owned ships; and even the years
of his actual retirement from the sea had been made bearable by the idea
that he had only to stretch out his hand full of money to get a ship. He
had been at liberty to feel as though he were the owner of all the
ships in the world. The selling of this one was weary work; but when
she passed from him at last, when he signed the last receipt, it was as
though all the ships had gone out of the world together, leaving him on
the shore of inaccessible oceans with seven hundred pounds in his hands.

Striding firmly, without haste, along the quay, Captain Whalley averted
his glances from the familiar roadstead. Two generations of seamen born
since his first day at sea stood between him and all these ships at the
anchorage. His own was sold, and he had been asking himself, What next?

From the feeling of loneliness, of inward emptiness,--and of loss
too, as if his very soul had been taken out of him forcibly,--there had
sprung at first a desire to start right off and join his daughter.
"Here are the last pence," he would say to her; "take them, my dear. And
here's your old father: you must take him too."

His soul recoiled, as if afraid of what lay hidden at the bottom of
this impulse. Give up! Never! When one is thoroughly weary all sorts of
nonsense come into one's head. A pretty gift it would have been for a
poor woman--this seven hundred pounds with the incumbrance of a hale old
fellow more than likely to last for years and years to come. Was he not
as fit to die in harness as any of the youngsters in charge of these
anchored ships out yonder? He was as solid now as ever he had been. But
as to who would give him work to do, that was another matter. Were he,
with his appearance and antecedents, to go about looking for a junior's
berth, people, he was afraid, would not take him seriously; or else if
he succeeded in impressing them, he would maybe obtain their pity, which
would be like stripping yourself naked to be kicked. He was not anxious
to give himself away for less than nothing. He had no use for anybody's
pity. On the other hand, a command--the only thing he could try for with
due regard for common decency--was not likely to be lying in wait
for him at the corner of the next street. Commands don't go a-begging
nowadays. Ever since he had come ashore to carry out the business of
the sale he had kept his ears open, but had heard no hint of one being
vacant in the port. And even if there had been one, his successful past
itself stood in his way. He had been his own employer too long. The only
credential he could produce was the testimony of his whole life. What
better recommendation could anyone require? But vaguely he felt that
the unique document would be looked upon as an archaic curiosity of the
Eastern waters, a screed traced in obsolete words--in a half-forgotten
language.


IV


Revolving these thoughts, he strolled on near the railings of the quay,
broad-chested, without a stoop, as though his big shoulders had never
felt the burden of the loads that must be carried between the cradle
and the grave. No single betraying fold or line of care disfigured the
reposeful modeling of his face. It was full and untanned; and the upper
part emerged, massively quiet, out of the downward flow of silvery hair,
with the striking delicacy of its clear complexion and the powerful
width of the forehead. The first cast of his glance fell on you candid
and swift, like a boy's; but because of the ragged snowy thatch of the
eyebrows the affability of his attention acquired the character of a
dark and searching scrutiny. With age he had put on flesh a little, had
increased his girth like an old tree presenting no symptoms of decay;
and even the opulent, lustrous ripple of white hairs upon his chest
seemed an attribute of unquenchable vitality and vigor.

Once rather proud of his great bodily strength, and even of his personal
appearance, conscious of his worth, and firm in his rectitude, there had
remained to him, like the heritage of departed prosperity, the tranquil
bearing of a man who had proved himself fit in every sort of way for the
life of his choice. He strode on squarely under the projecting brim of
an ancient Panama hat. It had a low crown, a crease through its whole
diameter, a narrow black ribbon. Imperishable and a little discolored,
this headgear made it easy to pick him out from afar on thronged wharves
and in the busy streets. He had never adopted the comparatively modern
fashion of pipeclayed cork helmets. He disliked the form; and he hoped
he could manage to keep a cool head to the end of his life without all
these contrivances for hygienic ventilation. His hair was cropped close,
his linen always of immaculate whiteness; a suit of thin gray flannel,
worn threadbare but scrupulously brushed, floated about his burly limbs,
adding to his bulk by the looseness of its cut. The years had mellowed
the good-humored, imperturbable audacity of his prime into a temper
carelessly serene; and the leisurely tapping of his iron-shod stick
accompanied his footfalls with a self-confident sound on the flagstones.
It was impossible to connect such a fine presence and this unruffled
aspect with the belittling troubles of poverty; the man's whole
existence appeared to pass before you, facile and large, in the freedom
of means as ample as the clothing of his body.

The irrational dread of having to break into his five hundred pounds for
personal expenses in the hotel disturbed the steady poise of his mind.
There was no time to lose. The bill was running up. He nourished the
hope that this five hundred would perhaps be the means, if everything
else failed, of obtaining some work which, keeping his body and soul
together (not a matter of great outlay), would enable him to be of use
to his daughter. To his mind it was her own money which he employed, as
it were, in backing her father and solely for her benefit. Once at work,
he would help her with the greater part of his earnings; he was good for
many years yet, and this boarding-house business, he argued to himself,
whatever the prospects, could not be much of a gold-mine from the first
start. But what work? He was ready to lay hold of anything in an honest
way so that it came quickly to his hand; because the five hundred pounds
must be preserved intact for eventual use. That was the great point.
With the entire five hundred one felt a substance at one's back; but
it seemed to him that should he let it dwindle to four-fifty or even
four-eighty, all the efficiency would be gone out of the money, as though
there were some magic power in the round figure. But what sort of work?

Confronted by that haunting question as by an uneasy ghost, for whom he
had no exorcising formula, Captain Whalley stopped short on the apex
of a small bridge spanning steeply the bed of a canalized creek with
granite shores. Moored between the square blocks a seagoing Malay prau
floated half hidden under the arch of masonry, with her spars lowered
down, without a sound of life on board, and covered from stem to stern
with a ridge of palm-leaf mats. He had left behind him the overheated
pavements bordered by the stone frontages that, like the sheer face of
cliffs, followed the sweep of the quays; and an unconfined spaciousness
of orderly and sylvan aspect opened before him its wide plots of rolled
grass, like pieces of green carpet smoothly pegged out, its long ranges
of trees lined up in colossal porticos of dark shafts roofed with a
vault of branches.

Some of these avenues ended at the sea. It was a terraced shore; and
beyond, upon the level expanse, profound and glistening like the gaze
of a dark-blue eye, an oblique band of stippled purple lengthened itself
indefinitely through the gap between a couple of verdant twin islets.
The masts and spars of a few ships far away, hull down in the outer
roads, sprang straight from the water in a fine maze of rosy lines
penciled on the clear shadow of the eastern board. Captain Whalley gave
them a long glance. The ship, once his own, was anchored out there. It
was staggering to think that it was open to him no longer to take a boat
at the jetty and get himself pulled off to her when the evening came. To
no ship. Perhaps never more. Before the sale was concluded, and till the
purchase-money had been paid, he had spent daily some time on board the
Fair Maid. The money had been paid this very morning, and now, all at
once, there was positively no ship that he could go on board of when he
liked; no ship that would need his presence in order to do her work--to
live. It seemed an incredible state of affairs, something too bizarre
to last. And the sea was full of craft of all sorts. There was that prau
lying so still swathed in her shroud of sewn palm-leaves--she too had
her indispensable man. They lived through each other, this Malay he had
never seen, and this high-sterned thing of no size that seemed to be
resting after a long journey. And of all the ships in sight, near and
far, each was provided with a man, the man without whom the finest ship
is a dead thing, a floating and purposeless log.

After his one glance at the roadstead he went on, since there was
nothing to turn back for, and the time must be got through somehow. The
avenues of big trees ran straight over the Esplanade, cutting each other
at diverse angles, columnar below and luxuriant above. The interlaced
boughs high up there seemed to slumber; not a leaf stirred overhead:
and the reedy cast-iron lampposts in the middle of the road, gilt like
scepters, diminished in a long perspective, with their globes of white
porcelain atop, resembling a barbarous decoration of ostriches' eggs
displayed in a row. The flaming sky kindled a tiny crimson spark upon
the glistening surface of each glassy shell.

With his chin sunk a little, his hands behind his back, and the end of
his stick marking the gravel with a faint wavering line at his heels,
Captain Whalley reflected that if a ship without a man was like a body
without a soul, a sailor without a ship was of not much more account
in this world than an aimless log adrift upon the sea. The log might be
sound enough by itself, tough of fiber, and hard to destroy--but what of
that! And a sudden sense of irremediable idleness weighted his feet like
a great fatigue.

A succession of open carriages came bowling along the newly opened
sea-road. You could see across the wide grass-plots the discs of
vibration made by the spokes. The bright domes of the parasols swayed
lightly outwards like full-blown blossoms on the rim of a vase; and
the quiet sheet of dark-blue water, crossed by a bar of purple, made a
background for the spinning wheels and the high action of the horses,
whilst the turbaned heads of the Indian servants elevated above the line
of the sea horizon glided rapidly on the paler blue of the sky. In an
open space near the little bridge each turn-out trotted smartly in a
wide curve away from the sunset; then pulling up sharp, entered the main
alley in a long slow-moving file with the great red stillness of the sky
at the back. The trunks of mighty trees stood all touched with red on
the same side, the air seemed aflame under the high foliage, the
very ground under the hoofs of the horses was red. The wheels turned
solemnly; one after another the sunshades drooped, folding their colors
like gorgeous flowers shutting their petals at the end of the day. In
the whole half-mile of human beings no voice uttered a distinct word,
only a faint thudding noise went on mingled with slight jingling sounds,
and the motionless heads and shoulders of men and women sitting in
couples emerged stolidly above the lowered hoods--as if wooden. But one
carriage and pair coming late did not join the line.

It fled along in a noiseless roll; but on entering the avenue one of the
dark bays snorted, arching his neck and shying against the steel-tipped
pole; a flake of foam fell from the bit upon the point of a satiny
shoulder, and the dusky face of the coachman leaned forward at once over
the hands taking a fresh grip of the reins. It was a long dark-green
landau, having a dignified and buoyant motion between the sharply
curved C-springs, and a sort of strictly official majesty in its supreme
elegance. It seemed more roomy than is usual, its horses seemed slightly
bigger, the appointments a shade more perfect, the servants perched
somewhat higher on the box. The dresses of three women--two young
and pretty, and one, handsome, large, of mature age--seemed to fill
completely the shallow body of the carriage. The fourth face was that
of a man, heavy lidded, distinguished and sallow, with a somber, thick,
iron-gray imperial and mustaches, which somehow had the air of solid
appendages. His Excellency--

The rapid motion of that one equipage made all the others appear utterly
inferior, blighted, and reduced to crawl painfully at a snail's pace.
The landau distanced the whole file in a sort of sustained rush; the
features of the occupant whirling out of sight left behind an impression
of fixed stares and impassive vacancy; and after it had vanished in full
flight as it were, notwithstanding the long line of vehicles hugging the
curb at a walk, the whole lofty vista of the avenue seemed to lie open
and emptied of life in the enlarged impression of an august solitude.

Captain Whalley had lifted his head to look, and his mind, disturbed in
its meditation, turned with wonder (as men's minds will do) to matters
of no importance. It struck him that it was to this port, where he had
just sold his last ship, that he had come with the very first he had
ever owned, and with his head full of a plan for opening a new trade
with a distant part of the Archipelago. The then governor had given
him no end of encouragement. No Excellency he--this Mr. Denham--this
governor with his jacket off; a man who tended night and day, so to
speak, the growing prosperity of the settlement with the self-forgetful
devotion of a nurse for a child she loves; a lone bachelor who lived as
in a camp with the few servants and his three dogs in what was called
then the Government Bungalow: a low-roofed structure on the half-cleared
slope of a hill, with a new flagstaff in front and a police orderly on
the veranda. He remembered toiling up that hill under a heavy sun for
his audience; the unfurnished aspect of the cool shaded room; the long
table covered at one end with piles of papers, and with two guns, a
brass telescope, a small bottle of oil with a feather stuck in the neck
at the other--and the flattering attention given to him by the man in
power. It was an undertaking full of risk he had come to expound, but a
twenty minutes' talk in the Government Bungalow on the hill had made it
go smoothly from the start. And as he was retiring Mr. Denham, already
seated before the papers, called out after him, "Next month the Dido
starts for a cruise that way, and I shall request her captain officially
to give you a look in and see how you get on." The Dido was one of the
smart frigates on the China station--and five-and-thirty years make a
big slice of time. Five-and-thirty years ago an enterprise like his had
for the colony enough importance to be looked after by a Queen's ship.
A big slice of time. Individuals were of some account then. Men like
himself; men, too, like poor Evans, for instance, with his red face,
his coal-black whiskers, and his restless eyes, who had set up the first
patent slip for repairing small ships, on the edge of the forest, in
a lonely bay three miles up the coast. Mr. Denham had encouraged that
enterprise too, and yet somehow poor Evans had ended by dying at
home deucedly hard up. His son, they said, was squeezing oil out of
cocoa-nuts for a living on some God-forsaken islet of the Indian Ocean;
but it was from that patent slip in a lonely wooded bay that had sprung
the workshops of the Consolidated Docks Company, with its three
graving basins carved out of solid rock, its wharves, its jetties,
its electric-light plant, its steam-power houses--with its gigantic
sheer-legs, fit to lift the heaviest weight ever carried afloat, and
whose head could be seen like the top of a queer white monument peeping
over bushy points of land and sandy promontories, as you approached the
New Harbor from the west.

There had been a time when men counted: there were not so many carriages
in the colony then, though Mr. Denham, he fancied, had a buggy. And
Captain Whalley seemed to be swept out of the great avenue by the swirl
of a mental backwash. He remembered muddy shores, a harbor without
quays, the one solitary wooden pier (but that was a public work) jutting
out crookedly, the first coal-sheds erected on Monkey Point, that caught
fire mysteriously and smoldered for days, so that amazed ships came
into a roadstead full of sulphurous smoke, and the sun hung blood-red
at midday. He remembered the things, the faces, and something more
besides--like the faint flavor of a cup quaffed to the bottom, like a
subtle sparkle of the air that was not to be found in the atmosphere of
to-day.

In this evocation, swift and full of detail like a flash of magnesium
light into the niches of a dark memorial hall, Captain Whalley
contemplated things once important, the efforts of small men, the growth
of a great place, but now robbed of all consequence by the greatness
of accomplished facts, by hopes greater still; and they gave him for a
moment such an almost physical grip upon time, such a comprehension of
our unchangeable feelings, that he stopped short, struck the ground with
his stick, and ejaculated mentally, "What the devil am I doing here!" He
seemed lost in a sort of surprise; but he heard his name called out in
wheezy tones once, twice--and turned on his heels slowly.

He beheld then, waddling towards him autocratically, a man of an
old-fashioned and gouty aspect, with hair as white as his own, but with
shaved, florid cheeks, wearing a necktie--almost a neckcloth--whose
stiff ends projected far beyond his chin; with round legs, round arms,
a round body, a round face--generally producing the effect of his short
figure having been distended by means of an air-pump as much as the
seams of his clothing would stand. This was the Master-Attendant of the
port. A master-attendant is a superior sort of harbor-master; a person,
out in the East, of some consequence in his sphere; a Government
official, a magistrate for the waters of the port, and possessed of vast
but ill-defined disciplinary authority over seamen of all classes.
This particular Master-Attendant was reported to consider it miserably
inadequate, on the ground that it did not include the power of life
and death. This was a jocular exaggeration. Captain Eliott was fairly
satisfied with his position, and nursed no inconsiderable sense of such
power as he had. His conceited and tyrannical disposition did not allow
him to let it dwindle in his hands for want of use. The uproarious,
choleric frankness of his comments on people's character and conduct
caused him to be feared at bottom; though in conversation many pretended
not to mind him in the least, others would only smile sourly at the
mention of his name, and there were even some who dared to pronounce him
"a meddlesome old ruffian." But for almost all of them one of Captain
Eliott's outbreaks was nearly as distasteful to face as a chance of
annihilation.


V


As soon as he had come up quite close he said, mouthing in a growl--

"What's this I hear, Whalley? Is it true you're selling the Fair Maid?"

Captain Whalley, looking away, said the thing was done--money had been
paid that morning; and the other expressed at once his approbation of
such an extremely sensible proceeding. He had got out of his trap to
stretch his legs, he explained, on his way home to dinner. Sir Frederick
looked well at the end of his time. Didn't he?

Captain Whalley could not say; had only noticed the carriage going past.

The Master-Attendant, plunging his hands into the pockets of an
alpaca jacket inappropriately short and tight for a man of his age and
appearance, strutted with a slight limp, and with his head reaching only
to the shoulder of Captain Whalley, who walked easily, staring straight
before him. They had been good comrades years ago, almost intimates. At
the time when Whalley commanded the renowned Condor, Eliott had charge
of the nearly as famous Ringdove for the same owners; and when the
appointment of Master-Attendant was created, Whalley would have been the
only other serious candidate. But Captain Whalley, then in the prime of
life, was resolved to serve no one but his own auspicious Fortune. Far
away, tending his hot irons, he was glad to hear the other had been
successful. There was a worldly suppleness in bluff Ned Eliott that
would serve him well in that sort of official appointment. And they
were so dissimilar at bottom that as they came slowly to the end of the
avenue before the Cathedral, it had never come into Whalley's head that
he might have been in that man's place--provided for to the end of his
days.

The sacred edifice, standing in solemn isolation amongst the converging
avenues of enormous trees, as if to put grave thoughts of heaven into
the hours of ease, presented a closed Gothic portal to the light and
glory of the west. The glass of the rosace above the ogive glowed like
fiery coal in the deep carvings of a wheel of stone. The two men faced
about.

"I'll tell you what they ought to do next, Whalley," growled Captain
Eliott suddenly.

"Well?"

"They ought to send a real live lord out here when Sir Frederick's time
is up. Eh?"

Captain Whalley perfunctorily did not see why a lord of the right sort
should not do as well as anyone else. But this was not the other's point
of view.

"No, no. Place runs itself. Nothing can stop it now. Good enough for a
lord," he growled in short sentences. "Look at the changes in our time.
We need a lord here now. They have got a lord in Bombay."

He dined once or twice every year at the Government House--a
many-windowed, arcaded palace upon a hill laid out in roads and gardens.
And lately he had been taking about a duke in his Master-Attendant's
steam-launch to visit the harbor improvements. Before that he had "most
obligingly" gone out in person to pick out a good berth for the ducal
yacht. Afterwards he had an invitation to lunch on board. The duchess
herself lunched with them. A big woman with a red face. Complexion quite
sunburnt. He should think ruined. Very gracious manners. They were going
on to Japan. . . .

He ejaculated these details for Captain Whalley's edification, pausing
to blow out his cheeks as if with a pent-up sense of importance, and
repeatedly protruding his thick lips till the blunt crimson end of his
nose seemed to dip into the milk of his mustache. The place ran itself;
it was fit for any lord; it gave no trouble except in its Marine
department--in its Marine department he repeated twice, and after
a heavy snort began to relate how the other day her Majesty's
Consul-General in French Cochin-China had cabled to him--in his official
capacity--asking for a qualified man to be sent over to take charge of a
Glasgow ship whose master had died in Saigon.

"I sent word of it to the officers' quarters in the Sailors' Home," he
continued, while the limp in his gait seemed to grow more accentuated
with the increasing irritation of his voice. "Place's full of them.
Twice as many men as there are berths going in the local trade. All
hungry for an easy job. Twice as many--and--What d'you think,
Whalley? . . ."

He stopped short; his hands clenched and thrust deeply downwards, seemed
ready to burst the pockets of his jacket. A slight sigh escaped Captain
Whalley.

"Hey? You would think they would be falling over each other. Not a bit
of it. Frightened to go home. Nice and warm out here to lie about a
veranda waiting for a job. I sit and wait in my office. Nobody. What
did they suppose? That I was going to sit there like a dummy with the
Consul-General's cable before me? Not likely. So I looked up a list of
them I keep by me and sent word for Hamilton--the worst loafer of them
all--and just made him go. Threatened to instruct the steward of the
Sailors' Home to have him turned out neck and crop. He did not think
the berth was good enough--if--you--please. 'I've your little records by
me,' said I. 'You came ashore here eighteen months ago, and you haven't
done six months' work since. You are in debt for your board now at the
Home, and I suppose you reckon the Marine Office will pay in the end.
Eh? So it shall; but if you don't take this chance, away you go to
England, assisted passage, by the first homeward steamer that comes
along. You are no better than a pauper. We don't want any white paupers
here.' I scared him. But look at the trouble all this gave me."

"You would not have had any trouble," Captain Whalley said almost
involuntarily, "if you had sent for me."

Captain Eliott was immensely amused; he shook with laughter as he
walked. But suddenly he stopped laughing. A vague recollection had
crossed his mind. Hadn't he heard it said at the time of the Travancore
and Deccan smash that poor Whalley had been cleaned out completely.
"Fellow's hard up, by heavens!" he thought; and at once he cast a
sidelong upward glance at his companion. But Captain Whalley was smiling
austerely straight before him, with a carriage of the head inconceivable
in a penniless man--and he became reassured. Impossible. Could not
have lost everything. That ship had been only a hobby of his. And the
reflection that a man who had confessed to receiving that very morning a
presumably large sum of money was not likely to spring upon him a demand
for a small loan put him entirely at his ease again. There had come a
long pause in their talk, however, and not knowing how to begin again,
he growled out soberly, "We old fellows ought to take a rest now."

"The best thing for some of us would be to die at the oar," Captain
Whalley said negligently.

"Come, now. Aren't you a bit tired by this time of the whole show?"
muttered the other sullenly.

"Are you?"

Captain Eliott was. Infernally tired. He only hung on to his berth so
long in order to get his pension on the highest scale before he went
home. It would be no better than poverty, anyhow; still, it was the only
thing between him and the workhouse. And he had a family. Three girls,
as Whalley knew. He gave "Harry, old boy," to understand that these
three girls were a source of the greatest anxiety and worry to him.
Enough to drive a man distracted.

"Why? What have they been doing now?" asked Captain Whalley with a sort
of amused absent-mindedness.

"Doing! Doing nothing. That's just it. Lawn-tennis and silly novels from
morning to night. . . ."

If one of them at least had been a boy. But all three! And, as ill-luck
would have it, there did not seem to be any decent young fellows left
in the world. When he looked around in the club he saw only a lot of
conceited popinjays too selfish to think of making a good woman happy.
Extreme indigence stared him in the face with all that crowd to keep at
home. He had cherished the idea of building himself a little house in
the country--in Surrey--to end his days in, but he was afraid it was out
of the question, . . . and his staring eyes rolled upwards with such
a pathetic anxiety that Captain Whalley charitably nodded down at him,
restraining a sort of sickening desire to laugh.

"You must know what it is yourself, Harry. Girls are the very devil for
worry and anxiety."

"Ay! But mine is doing well," Captain Whalley pronounced slowly, staring
to the end of the avenue.

The Master-Attendant was glad to hear this. Uncommonly glad. He
remembered her well. A pretty girl she was.

Captain Whalley, stepping out carelessly, assented as if in a dream.

"She was pretty."

The procession of carriages was breaking up.

One after another they left the file to go off at a trot, animating the
vast avenue with their scattered life and movement; but soon the aspect
of dignified solitude returned and took possession of the straight wide
road. A syce in white stood at the head of a Burmah pony harnessed to a
varnished two-wheel cart; and the whole thing waiting by the curb seemed
no bigger than a child's toy forgotten under the soaring trees. Captain
Eliott waddled up to it and made as if to clamber in, but refrained;
and keeping one hand resting easily on the shaft, he changed the
conversation from his pension, his daughters, and his poverty back again
to the only other topic in the world--the Marine Office, the men and the
ships of the port.

He proceeded to give instances of what was expected of him; and his
thick voice drowsed in the still air like the obstinate droning of an
enormous bumble-bee. Captain Whalley did not know what was the force or
the weakness that prevented him from saying good-night and walking away.
It was as though he had been too tired to make the effort. How queer.
More queer than any of Ned's instances. Or was it that overpowering
sense of idleness alone that made him stand there and listen to these
stories. Nothing very real had ever troubled Ned Eliott; and gradually
he seemed to detect deep in, as if wrapped up in the gross wheezy
rumble, something of the clear hearty voice of the young captain of the
Ringdove. He wondered if he too had changed to the same extent; and it
seemed to him that the voice of his old chum had not changed so very
much--that the man was the same. Not a bad fellow the pleasant, jolly
Ned Eliott, friendly, well up to his business--and always a bit of a
humbug. He remembered how he used to amuse his poor wife. She could read
him like an open book. When the Condor and the Ringdove happened to be
in port together, she would frequently ask him to bring Captain Eliott
to dinner. They had not met often since those old days. Not once in five
years, perhaps. He regarded from under his white eyebrows this man he
could not bring himself to take into his confidence at this juncture;
and the other went on with his intimate outpourings, and as remote from
his hearer as though he had been talking on a hill-top a mile away.

He was in a bit of a quandary now as to the steamer Sofala. Ultimately
every hitch in the port came into his hands to undo. They would miss
him when he was gone in another eighteen months, and most likely some
retired naval officer had been pitchforked into the appointment--a man
that would understand nothing and care less. That steamer was a coasting
craft having a steady trade connection as far north as Tenasserim; but
the trouble was she could get no captain to take her on her regular
trip. Nobody would go in her. He really had no power, of course, to
order a man to take a job. It was all very well to stretch a point on
the demand of a consul-general, but . . .

"What's the matter with the ship?" Captain Whalley interrupted in
measured tones.

"Nothing's the matter. Sound old steamer. Her owner has been in my
office this afternoon tearing his hair."

"Is he a white man?" asked Whalley in an interested voice.

"He calls himself a white man," answered the Master-Attendant scornfully;
"but if so, it's just skin-deep and no more. I told him that to his face
too."

"But who is he, then?"

"He's the chief engineer of her. See _that_, Harry?"

"I see," Captain Whalley said thoughtfully. "The engineer. I see."

How the fellow came to be a shipowner at the same time was quite a
tale. He came out third in a home ship nearly fifteen years ago, Captain
Eliott remembered, and got paid off after a bad sort of row both with
his skipper and his chief. Anyway, they seemed jolly glad to get rid of
him at all costs. Clearly a mutinous sort of chap. Well, he remained out
here, a perfect nuisance, everlastingly shipped and unshipped, unable
to keep a berth very long; pretty nigh went through every engine-room
afloat belonging to the colony. Then suddenly, "What do you think
happened, Harry?"

Captain Whalley, who seemed lost in a mental effort as of doing a sum
in his head, gave a slight start. He really couldn't imagine. The
Master-Attendant's voice vibrated dully with hoarse emphasis. The man
actually had the luck to win the second prize in the Manilla lottery.
All these engineers and officers of ships took tickets in that gamble.
It seemed to be a perfect mania with them all.

Everybody expected now that he would take himself off home with his
money, and go to the devil in his own way. Not at all. The Sofala,
judged too small and not quite modern enough for the sort of trade
she was in, could be got for a moderate price from her owners, who had
ordered a new steamer from Europe. He rushed in and bought her. This man
had never given any signs of that sort of mental intoxication the mere
fact of getting hold of a large sum of money may produce--not till he
got a ship of his own; but then he went off his balance all at once:
came bouncing into the Marine Office on some transfer business, with his
hat hanging over his left eye and switching a little cane in his hand,
and told each one of the clerks separately that "Nobody could put him
out now. It was his turn. There was no one over him on earth, and there
never would be either." He swaggered and strutted between the desks,
talking at the top of his voice, and trembling like a leaf all the
while, so that the current business of the office was suspended for the
time he was in there, and everybody in the big room stood open-mouthed
looking at his antics. Afterwards he could be seen during the hottest
hours of the day with his face as red as fire rushing along up and down
the quays to look at his ship from different points of view: he seemed
inclined to stop every stranger he came across just to let them know
"that there would be no longer anyone over him; he had bought a ship;
nobody on earth could put him out of his engine-room now."

Good bargain as she was, the price of the Sofala took up pretty near all
the lottery-money. He had left himself no capital to work with. That did
not matter so much, for these were the halcyon days of steam
coasting trade, before some of the home shipping firms had thought of
establishing local fleets to feed their main lines. These, when once
organized, took the biggest slices out of that cake, of course; and
by-and-by a squad of confounded German tramps turned up east of Suez
Canal and swept up all the crumbs. They prowled on the cheap to and fro
along the coast and between the islands, like a lot of sharks in the
water ready to snap up anything you let drop. And then the high old
times were over for good; for years the Sofala had made no more, he
judged, than a fair living. Captain Eliott looked upon it as his duty
in every way to assist an English ship to hold her own; and it stood to
reason that if for want of a captain the Sofala began to miss her trips
she would very soon lose her trade. There was the quandary. The man was
too impracticable. "Too much of a beggar on horseback from the first,"
he explained. "Seemed to grow worse as the time went on. In the last
three years he's run through eleven skippers; he had tried every single
man here, outside of the regular lines. I had warned him before that
this would not do. And now, of course, no one will look at the Sofala. I
had one or two men up at my office and talked to them; but, as they said
to me, what was the good of taking the berth to lead a regular dog's
life for a month and then get the sack at the end of the first trip? The
fellow, of course, told me it was all nonsense; there has been a plot
hatching for years against him. And now it had come. All the horrid
sailors in the port had conspired to bring him to his knees, because he
was an engineer."

Captain Eliott emitted a throaty chuckle.

"And the fact is, that if he misses a couple more trips he need never
trouble himself to start again. He won't find any cargo in his old
trade. There's too much competition nowadays for people to keep their
stuff lying about for a ship that does not turn up when she's expected.
It's a bad lookout for him. He swears he will shut himself on board and
starve to death in his cabin rather than sell her--even if he could find
a buyer. And that's not likely in the least. Not even the Japs would
give her insured value for her. It isn't like selling sailing-ships.
Steamers _do_ get out of date, besides getting old."

"He must have laid by a good bit of money though," observed Captain
Whalley quietly.

The Harbor-master puffed out his purple cheeks to an amazing size.

"Not a stiver, Harry. Not--a--single--sti-ver."

He waited; but as Captain Whalley, stroking his beard slowly, looked
down on the ground without a word, he tapped him on the forearm,
tiptoed, and said in a hoarse whisper--

"The Manilla lottery has been eating him up."

He frowned a little, nodding in tiny affirmative jerks. They all were
going in for it; a third of the wages paid to ships' officers ("in my
port," he snorted) went to Manilla. It was a mania. That fellow Massy
had been bitten by it like the rest of them from the first; but after
winning once he seemed to have persuaded himself he had only to try
again to get another big prize. He had taken dozens and scores of
tickets for every drawing since. What with this vice and his ignorance
of affairs, ever since he had improvidently bought that steamer he had
been more or less short of money.

This, in Captain Eliott's opinion, gave an opening for a sensible
sailor-man with a few pounds to step in and save that fool from
the consequences of his folly. It was his craze to quarrel with his
captains. He had had some really good men too, who would have been too
glad to stay if he would only let them. But no. He seemed to think
he was no owner unless he was kicking somebody out in the morning and
having a row with the new man in the evening. What was wanted for him
was a master with a couple of hundred or so to take an interest in the
ship on proper conditions. You don't discharge a man for no fault, only
because of the fun of telling him to pack up his traps and go ashore,
when you know that in that case you are bound to buy back his share. On
the other hand, a fellow with an interest in the ship is not likely to
throw up his job in a huff about a trifle. He had told Massy that. He
had said: "'This won't do, Mr. Massy. We are getting very sick of you
here in the Marine Office. What you must do now is to try whether you
could get a sailor to join you as partner. That seems to be the only
way.' And that was sound advice, Harry."

Captain Whalley, leaning on his stick, was perfectly still all over, and
his hand, arrested in the act of stroking, grasped his whole beard. And
what did the fellow say to that?

The fellow had the audacity to fly out at the Master-Attendant. He had
received the advice in a most impudent manner. "I didn't come here to
be laughed at," he had shrieked. "I appeal to you as an Englishman and a
shipowner brought to the verge of ruin by an illegal conspiracy of your
beggarly sailors, and all you condescend to do for me is to tell me to
go and get a partner!" . . . The fellow had presumed to stamp with rage
on the floor of the private office. Where was he going to get a partner?
Was he being taken for a fool? Not a single one of that contemptible lot
ashore at the "Home" had twopence in his pocket to bless himself with.
The very native curs in the bazaar knew that much. . . . "And it's true
enough, Harry," rumbled Captain Eliott judicially. "They are much more
likely one and all to owe money to the Chinamen in Denham Road for the
clothes on their backs. 'Well,' said I, 'you make too much noise over it
for my taste, Mr. Massy. Good morning.' He banged the door after him; he
dared to bang my door, confound his cheek!"

The head of the Marine department was out of breath with indignation;
then recollecting himself as it were, "I'll end by being late to
dinner--yarning with you here . . . wife doesn't like it."

He clambered ponderously into the trap; leaned out sideways, and only
then wondered wheezily what on earth Captain Whalley could have been
doing with himself of late. They had had no sight of each other for
years and years till the other day when he had seen him unexpectedly in
the office.

What on earth . . .

Captain Whalley seemed to be smiling to himself in his white beard.

"The earth is big," he said vaguely.

The other, as if to test the statement, stared all round from his
driving-seat. The Esplanade was very quiet; only from afar, from very
far, a long way from the seashore, across the stretches of grass,
through the long ranges of trees, came faintly the toot--toot--toot of
the cable car beginning to roll before the empty peristyle of the Public
Library on its three-mile journey to the New Harbor Docks.

"Doesn't seem to be so much room on it," growled the Master-Attendant,
"since these Germans came along shouldering us at every turn. It was not
so in our time."

He fell into deep thought, breathing stertorously, as though he had been
taking a nap open-eyed. Perhaps he too, on his side, had detected in the
silent pilgrim-like figure, standing there by the wheel, like an arrested
wayfarer, the buried lineaments of the features belonging to the young
captain of the Condor. Good fellow--Harry Whalley--never very talkative.
You never knew what he was up to--a bit too off-hand with people of
consequence, and apt to take a wrong view of a fellow's actions. Fact
was he had a too good opinion of himself. He would have liked to tell
him to get in and drive him home to dinner. But one never knew. Wife
would not like it.

"And it's funny to think, Harry," he went on in a big, subdued drone,
"that of all the people on it there seems only you and I left to
remember this part of the world as it used to be . . ."

He was ready to indulge in the sweetness of a sentimental mood had it
not struck him suddenly that Captain Whalley, unstirring and without
a word, seemed to be awaiting something--perhaps expecting . . . He
gathered the reins at once and burst out in bluff, hearty growls--

"Ha! My dear boy. The men we have known--the ships we've sailed--ay! and
the things we've done . . ."

The pony plunged--the syce skipped out of the way. Captain Whalley
raised his arm.

"Good-by."


VI

The sun had set. And when, after drilling a deep hole with his stick, he
moved from that spot the night had massed its army of shadows under the
trees. They filled the eastern ends of the avenues as if only waiting
the signal for a general advance upon the open spaces of the world; they
were gathering low between the deep stone-faced banks of the canal. The
Malay prau, half-concealed under the arch of the bridge, had not altered
its position a quarter of an inch. For a long time Captain Whalley
stared down over the parapet, till at last the floating immobility
of that beshrouded thing seemed to grow upon him into something
inexplicable and alarming. The twilight abandoned the zenith; its
reflected gleams left the world below, and the water of the canal seemed
to turn into pitch. Captain Whalley crossed it.

The turning to the right, which was his way to his hotel, was only
a very few steps farther. He stopped again (all the houses of the
sea-front were shut up, the quayside was deserted, but for one or two
figures of natives walking in the distance) and began to reckon the
amount of his bill. So many days in the hotel at so many dollars a
day. To count the days he used his fingers: plunging one hand into his
pocket, he jingled a few silver coins. All right for three days more;
and then, unless something turned up, he must break into the five
hundred--Ivy's money--invested in her father. It seemed to him that
the first meal coming out of that reserve would choke him--for certain.
Reason was of no use. It was a matter of feeling. His feelings had never
played him false.

He did not turn to the right. He walked on, as if there still had been
a ship in the roadstead to which he could get himself pulled off in
the evening. Far away, beyond the houses, on the slope of an indigo
promontory closing the view of the quays, the slim column of a
factory-chimney smoked quietly straight up into the clear air. A
Chinaman, curled down in the stern of one of the half-dozen sampans
floating off the end of the jetty, caught sight of a beckoning hand.
He jumped up, rolled his pigtail round his head swiftly, tucked in two
rapid movements his wide dark trousers high up his yellow thighs, and
by a single, noiseless, finlike stir of the oars, sheered the sampan
alongside the steps with the ease and precision of a swimming fish.

"Sofala," articulated Captain Whalley from above; and the Chinaman,
a new emigrant probably, stared upwards with a tense attention as if
waiting to see the queer word fall visibly from the white man's lips.
"Sofala," Captain Whalley repeated; and suddenly his heart failed him.
He paused. The shores, the islets, the high ground, the low points, were
dark: the horizon had grown somber; and across the eastern sweep of
the shore the white obelisk, marking the landing-place of the
telegraph-cable, stood like a pale ghost on the beach before the dark
spread of uneven roofs, intermingled with palms, of the native town.
Captain Whalley began again.

"Sofala. Savee So-fa-la, John?"

This time the Chinaman made out that bizarre sound, and grunted his
assent uncouthly, low down in his bare throat. With the first yellow
twinkle of a star that appeared like the head of a pin stabbed deep into
the smooth, pale, shimmering fabric of the sky, the edge of a keen chill
seemed to cleave through the warm air of the earth. At the moment of
stepping into the sampan to go and try for the command of the Sofala
Captain Whalley shivered a little.


When on his return he landed on the quay again Venus, like a choice
jewel set low on the hem of the sky, cast a faint gold trail behind him
upon the roadstead, as level as a floor made of one dark and
polished stone. The lofty vaults of the avenues were black--all
black overhead--and the porcelain globes on the lamp-posts resembled
egg-shaped pearls, gigantic and luminous, displayed in a row whose
farther end seemed to sink in the distance, down to the level of his
knees. He put his hands behind his back. He would now consider calmly
the discretion of it before saying the final word to-morrow. His feet
scrunched the gravel loudly--the discretion of it. It would have been
easier to appraise had there been a workable alternative. The honesty
of it was indubitable: he meant well by the fellow; and periodically
his shadow leaped up intense by his side on the trunks of the trees,
to lengthen itself, oblique and dim, far over the grass--repeating his
stride.

The discretion of it. Was there a choice? He seemed already to have lost
something of himself; to have given up to a hungry specter something of
his truth and dignity in order to live. But his life was necessary. Let
poverty do its worst in exacting its toll of humiliation. It was certain
that Ned Eliott had rendered him, without knowing it, a service for
which it would have been impossible to ask. He hoped Ned would not think
there had been something underhand in his action. He supposed that now
when he heard of it he would understand--or perhaps he would only think
Whalley an eccentric old fool. What would have been the good of telling
him--any more than of blurting the whole tale to that man Massy? Five
hundred pounds ready to invest. Let him make the best of that. Let him
wonder. You want a captain--I want a ship. That's enough. B-r-r-r-r.
What a disagreeable impression that empty, dark, echoing steamer had
made upon him. . . .

A laid-up steamer was a dead thing and no mistake; a sailing-ship
somehow seems always ready to spring into life with the breath of the
incorruptible heaven; but a steamer, thought Captain Whalley, with her
fires out, without the warm whiffs from below meeting you on her decks,
without the hiss of steam, the clangs of iron in her breast--lies there
as cold and still and pulseless as a corpse.

In the solitude of the avenue, all black above and lighted below,
Captain Whalley, considering the discretion of his course, met, as it
were incidentally, the thought of death. He pushed it aside with dislike
and contempt. He almost laughed at it; and in the unquenchable vitality
of his age only thought with a kind of exultation how little he needed
to keep body and soul together. Not a bad investment for the poor
woman this solid carcass of her father. And for the rest--in case of
anything--the agreement should be clear: the whole five hundred to
be paid back to her integrally within three months. Integrally. Every
penny. He was not to lose any of her money whatever else had to go--a
little dignity--some of his self-respect. He had never before allowed
anybody to remain under any sort of false impression as to himself.
Well, let that go--for her sake. After all, he had never _said_ anything
misleading--and Captain Whalley felt himself corrupt to the marrow of
his bones. He laughed a little with the intimate scorn of his worldly
prudence. Clearly, with a fellow of that sort, and in the peculiar
relation they were to stand to each other, it would not have done to
blurt out everything. He did not like the fellow. He did not like his
spells of fawning loquacity and bursts of resentfulness. In the end--a
poor devil. He would not have liked to stand in his shoes. Men were
not evil, after all. He did not like his sleek hair, his queer way of
standing at right angles, with his nose in the air, and glancing along
his shoulder at you. No. On the whole, men were not bad--they were only
silly or unhappy.

Captain Whalley had finished considering the discretion of that
step--and there was the whole long night before him. In the full light
his long beard would glisten like a silver breastplate covering his
heart; in the spaces between the lamps his burly figure passed less
distinct, loomed very big, wandering, and mysterious. No; there was
not much real harm in men: and all the time a shadow marched with him,
slanting on his left hand--which in the East is a presage of evil.

. . . . . . .

"Can you make out the clump of palms yet, Serang?" asked Captain Whalley
from his chair on the bridge of the Sofala approaching the bar of Batu
Beru.

"No, Tuan. By-and-by see." The old Malay, in a blue dungaree suit,
planted on his bony dark feet under the bridge awning, put his hands
behind his back and stared ahead out of the innumerable wrinkles at the
corners of his eyes.

Captain Whalley sat still, without lifting his head to look for himself.
Three years--thirty-six times. He had made these palms thirty-six times
from the southward. They would come into view at the proper time. Thank
God, the old ship made her courses and distances trip after trip, as
correct as clockwork. At last he murmured again--

"In sight yet?"

"The sun makes a very great glare, Tuan."

"Watch well, Serang."

"Ya, Tuan."

A white man had ascended the ladder from the deck noiselessly, and had
listened quietly to this short colloquy. Then he stepped out on the
bridge and began to walk from end to end, holding up the long cherrywood
stem of a pipe. His black hair lay plastered in long lanky wisps
across the bald summit of his head; he had a furrowed brow, a yellow
complexion, and a thick shapeless nose. A scanty growth of whisker did
not conceal the contour of his jaw. His aspect was of brooding care;
and sucking at a curved black mouthpiece, he presented such a heavy
overhanging profile that even the Serang could not help reflecting
sometimes upon the extreme unloveliness of some white men.

Captain Whalley seemed to brace himself up in his chair, but gave no
recognition whatever to his presence. The other puffed jets of smoke;
then suddenly--

"I could never understand that new mania of yours of having this Malay
here for your shadow, partner."

Captain Whalley got up from the chair in all his imposing stature and
walked across to the binnacle, holding such an unswerving course that
the other had to back away hurriedly, and remained as if intimidated,
with the pipe trembling in his hand. "Walk over me now," he muttered in
a sort of astounded and discomfited whisper. Then slowly and distinctly
he said--

"I--am--not--dirt." And then added defiantly, "As you seem to think."

The Serang jerked out--

"See the palms now, Tuan."

Captain Whalley strode forward to the rail; but his eyes, instead of
going straight to the point, with the assured keen glance of a sailor,
wandered irresolutely in space, as though he, the discoverer of new
routes, had lost his way upon this narrow sea.

Another white man, the mate, came up on the bridge. He was tall, young,
lean, with a mustache like a trooper, and something malicious in the
eye. He took up a position beside the engineer. Captain Whalley, with
his back to them, inquired--

"What's on the log?"

"Eighty-five," answered the mate quickly, and nudged the engineer with
his elbow.

Captain Whalley's muscular hands squeezed the iron rail with an
extraordinary force; his eyes glared with an enormous effort; he knitted
his eyebrows, the perspiration fell from under his hat,--and in a
faint voice he murmured, "Steady her, Serang--when she is on the proper
bearing."

The silent Malay stepped back, waited a little, and lifted his arm
warningly to the helmsman. The wheel revolved rapidly to meet the swing
of the ship. Again the mate nudged the engineer. But Massy turned upon
him.

"Mr. Sterne," he said violently, "let me tell you--as a shipowner--that
you are no better than a confounded fool."


VII

Sterne went down smirking and apparently not at all disconcerted, but
the engineer Massy remained on the bridge, moving about with uneasy
self-assertion. Everybody on board was his inferior--everyone without
exception. He paid their wages and found them in their food. They ate
more of his bread and pocketed more of his money than they were worth;
and they had no care in the world, while he alone had to meet all the
difficulties of shipowning. When he contemplated his position in all its
menacing entirety, it seemed to him that he had been for years the
prey of a band of parasites: and for years he had scowled at everybody
connected with the Sofala except, perhaps, at the Chinese firemen
who served to get her along. Their use was manifest: they were an
indispensable part of the machinery of which he was the master.

When he passed along his decks he shouldered those he came across
brutally; but the Malay deck hands had learned to dodge out of his way.
He had to bring himself to tolerate them because of the necessary manual
labor of the ship which must be done. He had to struggle and plan and
scheme to keep the Sofala afloat--and what did he get for it? Not even
enough respect. They could not have given him enough of that if all
their thoughts and all their actions had been directed to that end. The
vanity of possession, the vainglory of power, had passed away by this
time, and there remained only the material embarrassments, the fear
of losing that position which had turned out not worth having, and an
anxiety of thought which no abject subservience of men could repay.

He walked up and down. The bridge was his own after all. He had paid
for it; and with the stem of the pipe in his hand he would stop short at
times as if to listen with a profound and concentrated attention to the
deadened beat of the engines (his own engines) and the slight grinding
of the steering chains upon the continuous low wash of water alongside.
But for these sounds, the ship might have been lying as still as if
moored to a bank, and as silent as if abandoned by every living soul;
only the coast, the low coast of mud and mangroves with the three palms
in a bunch at the back, grew slowly more distinct in its long straight
line, without a single feature to arrest attention. The native
passengers of the Sofala lay about on mats under the awnings; the smoke
of her funnel seemed the only sign of her life and connected with her
gliding motion in a mysterious manner.

Captain Whalley on his feet, with a pair of binoculars in his hand and
the little Malay Serang at his elbow, like an old giant attended by a
wizened pigmy, was taking her over the shallow water of the bar.

This submarine ridge of mud, scoured by the stream out of the soft
bottom of the river and heaped up far out on the hard bottom of the sea,
was difficult to get over. The alluvial coast having no distinguishing
marks, the bearings of the crossing-place had to be taken from the shape
of the mountains inland. The guidance of a form flattened and uneven
at the top like a grinder tooth, and of another smooth, saddle-backed
summit, had to be searched for within the great unclouded glare that
seemed to shift and float like a dry fiery mist, filling the air,
ascending from the water, shrouding the distances, scorching to the eye.
In this veil of light the near edge of the shore alone stood out almost
coal-black with an opaque and motionless solidity. Thirty miles away
the serrated range of the interior stretched across the horizon, its
outlines and shades of blue, faint and tremulous like a background
painted on airy gossamer on the quivering fabric of an impalpable
curtain let down to the plain of alluvial soil; and the openings of the
estuary appeared, shining white, like bits of silver let into the square
pieces snipped clean and sharp out of the body of the land bordered with
mangroves.

On the forepart of the bridge the giant and the pigmy muttered to each
other frequently in quiet tones. Behind them Massy stood sideways with
an expression of disdain and suspense on his face. His globular eyes
were perfectly motionless, and he seemed to have forgotten the long pipe
he held in his hand.

On the fore-deck below the bridge, steeply roofed with the white slopes
of the awnings, a young lascar seaman had clambered outside the rail.
He adjusted quickly a broad band of sail canvas under his armpits,
and throwing his chest against it, leaned out far over the water. The
sleeves of his thin cotton shirt, cut off close to the shoulder,
bared his brown arm of full rounded form and with a satiny skin like a
woman's. He swung it rigidly with the rotary and menacing action of a
slinger: the 14-lb. weight hurtled circling in the air, then suddenly
flew ahead as far as the curve of the bow. The wet thin line swished
like scratched silk running through the dark fingers of the man, and
the plunge of the lead close to the ship's side made a vanishing silvery
scar upon the golden glitter; then after an interval the voice of the
young Malay uplifted and long-drawn declared the depth of the water in
his own language.

"Tiga stengah," he cried after each splash and pause, gathering the line
busily for another cast. "Tiga stengah," which means three fathom and a
half. For a mile or so from seaward there was a uniform depth of water
right up to the bar. "Half-three. Half-three. Half-three,"--and his
modulated cry, returned leisurely and monotonous, like the repeated
call of a bird, seemed to float away in sunshine and disappear in the
spacious silence of the empty sea and of a lifeless shore lying
open, north and south, east and west, without the stir of a single
cloud-shadow or the whisper of any other voice.

The owner-engineer of the Sofala remained very still behind the two
seamen of different race, creed, and color; the European with the
time-defying vigor of his old frame, the little Malay, old, too, but
slight and shrunken like a withered brown leaf blown by a chance wind
under the mighty shadow of the other. Very busy looking forward at the
land, they had not a glance to spare; and Massy, glaring at them from
behind, seemed to resent their attention to their duty like a personal
slight upon himself.

This was unreasonable; but he had lived in his own world of unreasonable
resentments for many years. At last, passing his moist palm over the
rare lanky wisps of coarse hair on the top of his yellow head, he began
to talk slowly.

"A leadsman, you want! I suppose that's your correct mail-boat style.
Haven't you enough judgment to tell where you are by looking at the
land? Why, before I had been a twelvemonth in the trade I was up to that
trick--and I am only an engineer. I can point to you from here where the
bar is, and I could tell you besides that you are as likely as not to
stick her in the mud in about five minutes from now; only you would call
it interfering, I suppose. And there's that written agreement of ours,
that says I mustn't interfere."

His voice stopped. Captain Whalley, without relaxing the set severity of
his features, moved his lips to ask in a quick mumble--

"How near, Serang?"

"Very near now, Tuan," the Malay muttered rapidly.

"Dead slow," said the Captain aloud in a firm tone.

The Serang snatched at the handle of the telegraph. A gong clanged down
below. Massy with a scornful snigger walked off and put his head down
the engineroom skylight.

"You may expect some rare fooling with the engines, Jack," he bellowed.
The space into which he stared was deep and full of gloom; and the gray
gleams of steel down there seemed cool after the intense glare of the
sea around the ship. The air, however, came up clammy and hot on his
face. A short hoot on which it would have been impossible to put any
sort of interpretation came from the bottom cavernously. This was the
way in which the second engineer answered his chief.

He was a middle-aged man with an inattentive manner, and apparently
wrapped up in such a taciturn concern for his engines that he seemed
to have lost the use of speech. When addressed directly his only answer
would be a grunt or a hoot, according to the distance. For all the years
he had been in the Sofala he had never been known to exchange as much
as a frank Good-morning with any of his shipmates. He did not seem aware
that men came and went in the world; he did not seem to see them at all.
Indeed he never recognized his ship mates on shore. At table (the four
white men of the Sofala messed together) he sat looking into his plate
dispassionately, but at the end of the meal would jump up and bolt down
below as if a sudden thought had impelled him to rush and see whether
somebody had not stolen the engines while he dined. In port at the end
of the trip he went ashore regularly, but no one knew where he spent
his evenings or in what manner. The local coasting fleet had preserved
a wild and incoherent tale of his infatuation for the wife of a sergeant
in an Irish infantry regiment. The regiment, however, had done its turn
of garrison duty there ages before, and was gone somewhere to the other
side of the earth, out of men's knowledge. Twice or perhaps three times
in the course of the year he would take too much to drink. On these
occasions he returned on board at an earlier hour than usual; ran
across the deck balancing himself with his spread arms like a tight-rope
walker; and locking the door of his cabin, he would converse and argue
with himself the livelong night in an amazing variety of tones; storm,
sneer, and whine with an inexhaustible persistence. Massy in his berth
next door, raising himself on his elbow, would discover that his second
had remembered the name of every white man that had passed through the
Sofala for years and years back. He remembered the names of men that had
died, that had gone home, that had gone to America: he remembered in his
cups the names of men whose connection with the ship had been so short
that Massy had almost forgotten its circumstances and could barely
recall their faces. The inebriated voice on the other side of the
bulkhead commented upon them all with an extraordinary and ingenious
venom of scandalous inventions. It seems they had all offended him in
some way, and in return he had found them all out. He muttered darkly;
he laughed sardonically; he crushed them one after another; but of his
chief, Massy, he babbled with an envious and naive admiration. Clever
scoundrel! Don't meet the likes of him every day. Just look at him. Ha!
Great! Ship of his own. Wouldn't catch _him_ going wrong. No fear--the
beast! And Massy, after listening with a gratified smile to these
artless tributes to his greatness, would begin to shout, thumping at the
bulkhead with both fists--

"Shut up, you lunatic! Won't you let me go to sleep, you fool!"

But a half smile of pride lingered on his lips; outside the solitary
lascar told off for night duty in harbor, perhaps a youth fresh from
a forest village, would stand motionless in the shadows of the deck
listening to the endless drunken gabble. His heart would be thumping
with breathless awe of white men: the arbitrary and obstinate men who
pursue inflexibly their incomprehensible purposes,--beings with weird
intonations in the voice, moved by unaccountable feelings, actuated by
inscrutable motives.



VIII

For a while after his second's answering hoot Massy hung over the
engine-room gloomily. Captain Whalley, who, by the power of five hundred
pounds, had kept his command for three years, might have been suspected
of never having seen that coast before. He seemed unable to put down his
glasses, as though they had been glued under his contracted eyebrows.
This settled frown gave to his face an air of invincible and just
severity; but his raised elbow trembled slightly, and the perspiration
poured from under his hat as if a second sun had suddenly blazed up at
the zenith by the side of the ardent still globe already there, in whose
blinding white heat the earth whirled and shone like a mote of dust.

From time to time, still holding up his glasses, he raised his other
hand to wipe his streaming face. The drops rolled down his cheeks, fell
like rain upon the white hairs of his beard, and brusquely, as if guided
by an uncontrollable and anxious impulse, his arm reached out to the
stand of the engine-room telegraph.

The gong clanged down below. The balanced vibration of the dead-slow
speed ceased together with every sound and tremor in the ship, as if the
great stillness that reigned upon the coast had stolen in through
her sides of iron and taken possession of her innermost recesses. The
illusion of perfect immobility seemed to fall upon her from the luminous
blue dome without a stain arching over a flat sea without a stir. The
faint breeze she had made for herself expired, as if all at once the air
had become too thick to budge; even the slight hiss of the water on her
stem died out. The narrow, long hull, carrying its way without a ripple,
seemed to approach the shoal water of the bar by stealth. The plunge of
the lead with the mournful, mechanical cry of the lascar came at longer
and longer intervals; and the men on her bridge seemed to hold their
breath. The Malay at the helm looked fixedly at the compass card, the
Captain and the Serang stared at the coast.

Massy had left the skylight, and, walking flat-footed, had returned
softly to the very spot on the bridge he had occupied before. A slow,
lingering grin exposed his set of big white teeth: they gleamed evenly
in the shade of the awning like the keyboard of a piano in a dusky room.

At last, pretending to talk to himself in excessive astonishment, he
said not very loud--

"Stop the engines now. What next, I wonder?"

He waited, stooping from the shoulders, his head bowed, his glance
oblique. Then raising his voice a shade--

"If I dared make an absurd remark I would say that you haven't the
stomach to . . ."

But a yelling spirit of excitement, like some frantic soul wandering
unsuspected in the vast stillness of the coast, had seized upon the body
of the lascar at the lead. The languid monotony of his sing-song changed
to a swift, sharp clamor. The weight flew after a single whir, the line
whistled, splash followed splash in haste. The water had shoaled, and
the man, instead of the drowsy tale of fathoms, was calling out the
soundings in feet.

"Fifteen feet. Fifteen, fifteen! Fourteen, fourteen . . ."

Captain Whalley lowered the arm holding the glasses. It descended slowly
as if by its own weight; no other part of his towering body stirred; and
the swift cries with their eager warning note passed him by as though he
had been deaf.

Massy, very still, and turning an attentive ear, had fastened his eyes
upon the silvery, close-cropped back of the steady old head. The ship
herself seemed to be arrested but for the gradual decrease of depth
under her keel.

"Thirteen feet . . . Thirteen! Twelve!" cried the leadsman anxiously
below the bridge. And suddenly the barefooted Serang stepped away
noiselessly to steal a glance over the side.

Narrow of shoulder, in a suit of faded blue cotton, an old gray felt hat
rammed down on his head, with a hollow in the nape of his dark neck, and
with his slender limbs, he appeared from the back no bigger than a boy
of fourteen. There was a childlike impulsiveness in the curiosity with
which he watched the spread of the voluminous, yellowish convolutions
rolling up from below to the surface of the blue water like massive
clouds driving slowly upwards on the unfathomable sky. He was not
startled at the sight in the least. It was not doubt, but the certitude
that the keel of the Sofala must be stirring the mud now, which made him
peep over the side.

His peering eyes, set aslant in a face of the Chinese type, a little old
face, immovable, as if carved in old brown oak, had informed him long
before that the ship was not headed at the bar properly. Paid off from
the Fair Maid, together with the rest of the crew, after the completion
of the sale, he had hung, in his faded blue suit and floppy gray hat,
about the doors of the Harbor Office, till one day, seeing Captain
Whalley coming along to get a crew for the Sofala, he had put himself
quietly in the way, with his bare feet in the dust and an upward mute
glance. The eyes of his old commander had fallen on him favorably--it
must have been an auspicious day--and in less than half an hour the
white men in the "Ofiss" had written his name on a document as Serang of
the fire-ship Sofala. Since that time he had repeatedly looked at that
estuary, upon that coast, from this bridge and from this side of the
bar. The record of the visual world fell through his eyes upon his
unspeculating mind as on a sensitized plate through the lens of a
camera. His knowledge was absolute and precise; nevertheless, had he
been asked his opinion, and especially if questioned in the downright,
alarming manner of white men, he would have displayed the hesitation of
ignorance. He was certain of his facts--but such a certitude counted for
little against the doubt what answer would be pleasing. Fifty years ago,
in a jungle village, and before he was a day old, his father (who died
without ever seeing a white face) had had his nativity cast by a man of
skill and wisdom in astrology, because in the arrangement of the stars
may be read the last word of human destiny. His destiny had been to
thrive by the favor of various white men on the sea. He had swept the
decks of ships, had tended their helms, had minded their stores, had
risen at last to be a Serang; and his placid mind had remained as
incapable of penetrating the simplest motives of those he served as they
themselves were incapable of detecting through the crust of the earth
the secret nature of its heart, which may be fire or may be stone. But
he had no doubt whatever that the Sofala was out of the proper track for
crossing the bar at Batu Beru.

It was a slight error. The ship could not have been more than twice her
own length too far to the northward; and a white man at a loss for a
cause (since it was impossible to suspect Captain Whalley of blundering
ignorance, of want of skill, or of neglect) would have been inclined to
doubt the testimony of his senses. It was some such feeling that kept
Massy motionless, with his teeth laid bare by an anxious grin. Not so
the Serang. He was not troubled by any intellectual mistrust of his
senses. If his captain chose to stir the mud it was well. He had known
in his life white men indulge in outbreaks equally strange. He was only
genuinely interested to see what would come of it. At last, apparently
satisfied, he stepped back from the rail.

He had made no sound: Captain Whalley, however, seemed to have observed
the movements of his Serang. Holding his head rigidly, he asked with a
mere stir of his lips--

"Going ahead still, Serang?"

"Still going a little, Tuan," answered the Malay. Then added casually,
"She is over."

The lead confirmed his words; the depth of water increased at every
cast, and the soul of excitement departed suddenly from the lascar swung
in the canvas belt over the Sofala's side. Captain Whalley ordered the
lead in, set the engines ahead without haste, and averting his eyes from
the coast directed the Serang to keep a course for the middle of the
entrance.

Massy brought the palm of his hand with a loud smack against his thigh.

"You grazed on the bar. Just look astern and see if you didn't. Look at
the track she left. You can see it plainly. Upon my soul, I thought you
would! What made you do that? What on earth made you do that? I believe
you are trying to scare me."

He talked slowly, as it were circumspectly, keeping his prominent black
eyes on his captain. There was also a slight plaintive note in his
rising choler, for, primarily, it was the clear sense of a wrong
suffered undeservedly that made him hate the man who, for a beggarly
five hundred pounds, claimed a sixth part of the profits under the three
years' agreement. Whenever his resentment got the better of the awe
the person of Captain Whalley inspired he would positively whimper with
fury.

"You don't know what to invent to plague my life out of me. I would not
have thought that a man of your sort would condescend . . ."

He paused, half hopefully, half timidly, whenever Captain Whalley made
the slightest movement in the deck-chair, as though expecting to be
conciliated by a soft speech or else rushed upon and hunted off the
bridge.

"I am puzzled," he went on again, with the watchful unsmiling baring of
his big teeth. "I don't know what to think. I do believe you are trying
to frighten me. You very nearly planted her on the bar for at least
twelve hours, besides getting the engines choked with mud. Ships can't
afford to lose twelve hours on a trip nowadays--as you ought to know
very well, and do know very well to be sure, only . . ."

His slow volubility, the sideways cranings of his neck, the black
glances out of the very corners of his eyes, left Captain Whalley
unmoved. He looked at the deck with a severe frown. Massy waited for
some little time, then began to threaten plaintively.

"You think you've got me bound hand and foot in that agreement. You
think you can torment me in any way you please. Ah! But remember it has
another six weeks to run yet. There's time for me to dismiss you before
the three years are out. You will do yet something that will give me the
chance to dismiss you, and make you wait a twelvemonth for your money
before you can take yourself off and pull out your five hundred, and
leave me without a penny to get the new boilers for her. You gloat over
that idea--don't you? I do believe you sit here gloating. It's as if I
had sold my soul for five hundred pounds to be everlastingly damned in
the end. . . ."

He paused, without apparent exasperation, then continued evenly--

". . . With the boilers worn out and the survey hanging over my head,
Captain Whalley--Captain Whalley, I say, what do you do with your
money? You must have stacks of money somewhere--a man like you must. It
stands to reason. I am not a fool, you know, Captain Whalley--partner."

Again he paused, as though he had done for good. He passed his tongue
over his lips, gave a backward glance at the Serang conning the ship
with quiet whispers and slight signs of the hand. The wash of the
propeller sent a swift ripple, crested with dark froth, upon a long flat
spit of black slime. The Sofala had entered the river; the trail she had
stirred up over the bar was a mile astern of her now, out of sight, had
disappeared utterly; and the smooth, empty sea along the coast was left
behind in the glittering desolation of sunshine. On each side of her,
low down, the growth of somber twisted mangroves covered the semi-liquid
banks; and Massy continued in his old tone, with an abrupt start, as if
his speech had been ground out of him, like the tune of a music-box, by
turning a handle.

"Though if anybody ever got the best of me, it is you. I don't mind
saying this. I've said it--there! What more can you want? Isn't that
enough for your pride, Captain Whalley. You got over me from the first.
It's all of a piece, when I look back at it. You allowed me to insert
that clause about intemperance without saying anything, only looking
very sick when I made a point of it going in black on white. How could
I tell what was wrong about you. There's generally something wrong
somewhere. And, lo and behold! when you come on board it turns out that
you've been in the habit of drinking nothing but water for years and
years."

His dogmatic reproachful whine stopped. He brooded profoundly, after
the manner of crafty and unintelligent men. It seemed inconceivable
that Captain Whalley should not laugh at the expression of disgust that
overspread the heavy, yellow countenance. But Captain Whalley never
raised his eyes--sitting in his arm-chair, outraged, dignified, and
motionless.

"Much good it was to me," Massy remonstrated monotonously, "to insert a
clause for dismissal for intemperance against a man who drinks nothing
but water. And you looked so upset, too, when I read my draft in
the lawyer's office that morning, Captain Whalley,--you looked so
crestfallen, that I made sure I had gone home on your weak spot. A
shipowner can't be too careful as to the sort of skipper he gets. You
must have been laughing at me in your sleeve all the blessed time. . . .
Eh? What are you going to say?"

Captain Whalley had only shuffled his feet slightly. A dull animosity
became apparent in Massy's sideways stare.

"But recollect that there are other grounds of dismissal. There's
habitual carelessness, amounting to incompetence--there's gross and
persistent neglect of duty. I am not quite as big a fool as you try to
make me out to be. You have been careless of late--leaving everything
to that Serang. Why! I've seen you letting that old fool of a Malay
take bearings for you, as if you were too big to attend to your work
yourself. And what do you call that silly touch-and-go manner in which
you took the ship over the bar just now? You expect me to put up with
that?"

Leaning on his elbow against the ladder abaft the bridge, Sterne, the
mate, tried to hear, blinking the while from the distance at the second
engineer, who had come up for a moment, and stood in the engine-room
companion. Wiping his hands on a bunch of cotton waste, he looked about
with indifference to the right and left at the river banks slipping
astern of the Sofala steadily.

Massy turned full at the chair. The character of his whine became again
threatening.

"Take care. I may yet dismiss you and freeze to your money for a year. I
may . . ."

But before the silent, rigid immobility of the man whose money had come
in the nick of time to save him from utter ruin, his voice died out in
his throat.

"Not that I want you to go," he resumed after a silence, and in an
absurdly insinuating tone. "I want nothing better than to be friends
and renew the agreement, if you will consent to find another couple of
hundred to help with the new boilers, Captain Whalley. I've told you
before. She must have new boilers; you know it as well as I do. Have you
thought this over?"

He waited. The slender stem of the pipe with its bulky lump of a bowl at
the end hung down from his thick lips. It had gone out. Suddenly he took
it from between his teeth and wrung his hands slightly.

"Don't you believe me?" He thrust the pipe bowl into the pocket of his
shiny black jacket.

"It's like dealing with the devil," he said. "Why don't you speak? At
first you were so high and mighty with me I hardly dared to creep about
my own deck. Now I can't get a word from you. You don't seem to see me
at all. What does it mean? Upon my soul, you terrify me with this deaf
and dumb trick. What's going on in that head of yours? What are you
plotting against me there so hard that you can't say a word? You will
never make me believe that you--you--don't know where to lay your hands
on a couple of hundred. You have made me curse the day I was born. . . ."

"Mr. Massy," said Captain Whalley suddenly, without stirring.

The engineer started violently.

"If that is so I can only beg you to forgive me."

"Starboard," muttered the Serang to the helmsman; and the Sofala began
to swing round the bend into the second reach.

"Ough!" Massy shuddered. "You make my blood run cold. What made you come
here? What made you come aboard that evening all of a sudden, with your
high talk and your money--tempting me? I always wondered what was your
motive? You fastened yourself on me to have easy times and grow fat on
my life blood, I tell you. Was that it? I believe you are the greatest
miser in the world, or else why . . ."

"No. I am only poor," interrupted Captain Whalley, stonily.

"Steady," murmured the Serang. Massy turned away with his chin on his
shoulder.

"I don't believe it," he said in his dogmatic tone. Captain Whalley
made no movement. "There you sit like a gorged vulture--exactly like a
vulture."

He embraced the middle of the reach and both the banks in one blank
unseeing circular glance, and left the bridge slowly.


IX

On turning to descend Massy perceived the head of Sterne the mate
loitering, with his sly confident smile, his red mustaches and blinking
eyes, at the foot of the ladder.

Sterne had been a junior in one of the larger shipping concerns before
joining the Sofala. He had thrown up his berth, he said, "on general
principles." The promotion in the employ was very slow, he complained,
and he thought it was time for him to try and get on a bit in the world.
It seemed as though nobody would ever die or leave the firm; they all
stuck fast in their berths till they got mildewed; he was tired of
waiting; and he feared that when a vacancy did occur the best servants
were by no means sure of being treated fairly. Besides, the captain he
had to serve under--Captain Provost--was an unaccountable sort of man,
and, he fancied, had taken a dislike to him for some reason or other.
For doing rather more than his bare duty as likely as not. When he
had done anything wrong he could take a talking to, like a man; but
he expected to be treated like a man too, and not to be addressed
invariably as though he were a dog. He had asked Captain Provost plump
and plain to tell him where he was at fault, and Captain Provost, in a
most scornful way, had told him that he was a perfect officer, and that
if he disliked the way he was being spoken to there was the gangway--he
could take himself off ashore at once. But everybody knew what sort of
man Captain Provost was. It was no use appealing to the office. Captain
Provost had too much influence in the employ. All the same, they had to
give him a good character. He made bold to say there was nothing in the
world against him, and, as he had happened to hear that the mate of the
Sofala had been taken to the hospital that morning with a sunstroke, he
thought there would be no harm in seeing whether he would not do. . . .

He had come to Captain Whalley freshly shaved, red-faced, thin-flanked,
throwing out his lean chest; and had recited his little tale with an
open and manly assurance. Now and then his eyelids quivered slightly,
his hand would steal up to the end of the flaming mustache; his eyebrows
were straight, furry, of a chestnut color, and the directness of his
frank gaze seemed to tremble on the verge of impudence. Captain Whalley
had engaged him temporarily; then, the other man having been ordered
home by the doctors, he had remained for the next trip, and then the
next. He had now attained permanency, and the performance of his duties
was marked by an air of serious, single-minded application. Directly
he was spoken to, he began to smile attentively, with a great deference
expressed in his whole attitude; but there was in the rapid winking
which went on all the time something quizzical, as though he had
possessed the secret of some universal joke cheating all creation and
impenetrable to other mortals.

Grave and smiling he watched Massy come down step by step; when the
chief engineer had reached the deck he swung about, and they found
themselves face to face. Matched as to height and utterly dissimilar,
they confronted each other as if there had been something between
them--something else than the bright strip of sunlight that, falling
through the wide lacing of two awnings, cut crosswise the narrow
planking of the deck and separated their feet as it were a stream;
something profound and subtle and incalculable, like an unexpressed
understanding, a secret mistrust, or some sort of fear.

At last Sterne, blinking his deep-set eyes and sticking forward his
scraped, clean-cut chin, as crimson as the rest of his face, murmured--

"You've seen? He grazed! You've seen?"

Massy, contemptuous, and without raising his yellow, fleshy countenance,
replied in the same pitch--

"Maybe. But if it had been you we would have been stuck fast in the
mud."

"Pardon me, Mr. Massy. I beg to deny it. Of course a shipowner may say
what he jolly well pleases on his own deck. That's all right; but I beg
to . . ."

"Get out of my way!"

The other had a slight start, the impulse of suppressed indignation
perhaps, but held his ground. Massy's downward glance wandered right and
left, as though the deck all round Sterne had been bestrewn with eggs
that must not be broken, and he had looked irritably for places where
he could set his feet in flight. In the end he too did not move, though
there was plenty of room to pass on.

"I heard you say up there," went on the mate--"and a very just remark it
was too--that there's always something wrong. . . ."

"Eavesdropping is what's wrong with _you_, Mr. Sterne."

"Now, if you would only listen to me for a moment, Mr. Massy, sir, I
could . . ."

"You are a sneak," interrupted Massy in a great hurry, and even managed
to get so far as to repeat, "a common sneak," before the mate had broken
in argumentatively--

"Now, sir, what is it you want? You want . . ."

"I want--I want," stammered Massy, infuriated and astonished--"I want.
How do you know that I want anything? How dare you? . . . What do you
mean? . . . What are you after--you . . ."

"Promotion." Sterne silenced him with a sort of candid bravado. The
engineer's round soft cheeks quivered still, but he said quietly
enough--

"You are only worrying my head off," and Sterne met him with a confident
little smile.

"A chap in business I know (well up in the world he is now) used to tell
me that this was the proper way. 'Always push on to the front,' he would
say. 'Keep yourself well before your boss. Interfere whenever you get a
chance. Show him what you know. Worry him into seeing you.' That was his
advice. Now I know no other boss than you here. You are the owner, and
no one else counts for _that_ much in my eyes. See, Mr. Massy? I want to
get on. I make no secret of it that I am one of the sort that means to
get on. These are the men to make use of, sir. You haven't arrived at
the top of the tree, sir, without finding that out--I dare say."

"Worry your boss in order to get on," mumbled Massy, as if awestruck by
the irreverent originality of the idea. "I shouldn't wonder if this was
just what the Blue Anchor people kicked you out of the employ for. Is
that what you call getting on? You shall get on in the same way here if
you aren't careful--I can promise you."

At this Sterne hung his head, thoughtful, perplexed, winking hard at
the deck. All his attempts to enter into confidential relations with
his owner had led of late to nothing better than these dark threats
of dismissal; and a threat of dismissal would check him at once into a
hesitating silence as though he were not sure that the proper time for
defying it had come. On this occasion he seemed to have lost his tongue
for a moment, and Massy, getting in motion, heavily passed him by with
an abortive attempt at shouldering. Sterne defeated it by stepping
aside. He turned then swiftly, opening his mouth very wide as if to
shout something after the engineer, but seemed to think better of it.

Always--as he was ready to confess--on the lookout for an opening to
get on, it had become an instinct with him to watch the conduct of his
immediate superiors for something "that one could lay hold of." It was
his belief that no skipper in the world would keep his command for a
day if only the owners could be "made to know." This romantic and
naive theory had led him into trouble more than once, but he remained
incorrigible; and his character was so instinctively disloyal that
whenever he joined a ship the intention of ousting his commander out
of the berth and taking his place was always present at the back of his
head, as a matter of course. It filled the leisure of his waking hours
with the reveries of careful plans and compromising discoveries--the
dreams of his sleep with images of lucky turns and favorable accidents.
Skippers had been known to sicken and die at sea, than which nothing
could be better to give a smart mate a chance of showing what he's made
of. They also would tumble overboard sometimes: he had heard of one or
two such cases. Others again . . . But, as it were constitutionally,
he was faithful to the belief that the conduct of no single one of them
would stand the test of careful watching by a man who "knew what's what"
and who kept his eyes "skinned pretty well" all the time.

After he had gained a permanent footing on board the Sofala he allowed
his perennial hope to rise high. To begin with, it was a great advantage
to have an old man for captain: the sort of man besides who in the
nature of things was likely to give up the job before long from one
cause or another. Sterne was greatly chagrined, however, to notice that
he did not seem anyway near being past his work yet. Still, these
old men go to pieces all at once sometimes. Then there was the
owner-engineer close at hand to be impressed by his zeal and steadiness.
Sterne never for a moment doubted the obvious nature of his own merits
(he was really an excellent officer); only, nowadays, professional merit
alone does not take a man along fast enough. A chap must have some push
in him, and must keep his wits at work too to help him forward. He made
up his mind to inherit the charge of this steamer if it was to be done
at all; not indeed estimating the command of the Sofala as a very great
catch, but for the reason that, out East especially, to make a start is
everything, and one command leads to another.

He began by promising himself to behave with great circumspection;
Massy's somber and fantastic humors intimidated him as being outside
one's usual sea experience; but he was quite intelligent enough to
realize almost from the first that he was there in the presence of an
exceptional situation. His peculiar prying imagination penetrated it
quickly; the feeling that there was in it an element which eluded his
grasp exasperated his impatience to get on. And so one trip came to an
end, then another, and he had begun his third before he saw an opening
by which he could step in with any sort of effect. It had all been very
queer and very obscure; something had been going on near him, as if
separated by a chasm from the common life and the working routine of
the ship, which was exactly like the life and the routine of any other
coasting steamer of that class.

Then one day he made his discovery.

It came to him after all these weeks of watchful observation and puzzled
surmises, suddenly, like the long-sought solution of a riddle that
suggests itself to the mind in a flash. Not with the same authority,
however. Great heavens! Could it be that? And after remaining
thunderstruck for a few seconds he tried to shake it off with
self-contumely, as though it had been the product of an unhealthy bias
towards the Incredible, the Inexplicable, the Unheard-of--the Mad!

This--the illuminating moment--had occurred the trip before, on the
return passage. They had just left a place of call on the mainland
called Pangu; they were steaming straight out of a bay. To the east a
massive headland closed the view, with the tilted edges of the rocky
strata showing through its ragged clothing of rank bushes and thorny
creepers. The wind had begun to sing in the rigging; the sea along the
coast, green and as if swollen a little above the line of the horizon,
seemed to pour itself over, time after time, with a slow and thundering
fall, into the shadow of the leeward cape; and across the wide opening
the nearest of a group of small islands stood enveloped in the hazy
yellow light of a breezy sunrise; still farther out the hummocky tops
of other islets peeped out motionless above the water of the channels
between, scoured tumultuously by the breeze.

The usual track of the Sofala both going and returning on every trip led
her for a few miles along this reefinfested region. She followed a broad
lane of water, dropping astern, one after another, these crumbs of the
earth's crust resembling a squadron of dismasted hulks run in disorder
upon a foul ground of rocks and shoals. Some of these fragments of land
appeared, indeed, no bigger than a stranded ship; others, quite flat,
lay awash like anchored rafts, like ponderous, black rafts of stone;
several, heavily timbered and round at the base, emerged in squat domes
of deep green foliage that shuddered darkly all over to the flying touch
of cloud shadows driven by the sudden gusts of the squally season. The
thunderstorms of the coast broke frequently over that cluster; it turned
then shadowy in its whole extent; it turned more dark, and as if more
still in the play of fire; as if more impenetrably silent in the peals
of thunder; its blurred shapes vanished--dissolving utterly at times
in the thick rain--to reappear clear-cut and black in the stormy light
against the gray sheet of the cloud--scattered on the slaty round table
of the sea. Unscathed by storms, resisting the work of years, unfretted
by the strife of the world, there it lay unchanged as on that day, four
hundred years ago, when first beheld by Western eyes from the deck of a
high-pooped caravel.

It was one of these secluded spots that may be found on the busy sea,
as on land you come sometimes upon the clustered houses of a hamlet
untouched by men's restlessness, untouched by their need, by their
thought, and as if forgotten by time itself. The lives of uncounted
generations had passed it by, and the multitudes of seafowl, urging
their way from all the points of the horizon to sleep on the outer rocks
of the group, unrolled the converging evolutions of their flight in
long somber streamers upon the glow of the sky. The palpitating cloud of
their wings soared and stooped over the pinnacles of the rocks, over
the rocks slender like spires, squat like martello towers; over the
pyramidal heaps like fallen ruins, over the lines of bald bowlders
showing like a wall of stones battered to pieces and scorched by
lightning--with the sleepy, clear glimmer of water in every breach. The
noise of their continuous and violent screaming filled the air.

This great noise would meet the Sofala coming up from Batu Beru; it
would meet her on quiet evenings, a pitiless and savage clamor enfeebled
by distance, the clamor of seabirds settling to rest, and struggling for
a footing at the end of the day. No one noticed it especially on board;
it was the voice of their ship's unerring landfall, ending the steady
stretch of a hundred miles. She had made good her course, she had run
her distance till the punctual islets began to emerge one by one, the
points of rocks, the hummocks of earth . . . and the cloud of birds
hovered--the restless cloud emitting a strident and cruel uproar, the
sound of the familiar scene, the living part of the broken land beneath,
of the outspread sea, and of the high sky without a flaw.

But when the Sofala happened to close with the land after sunset she
would find everything very still there under the mantle of the night.
All would be still, dumb, almost invisible--but for the blotting out of
the low constellations occulted in turns behind the vague masses of the
islets whose true outlines eluded the eye amongst the dark spaces of the
heaven: and the ship's three lights, resembling three stars--the red and
the green with the white above--her three lights, like three companion
stars wandering on the earth, held their unswerving course for the
passage at the southern end of the group. Sometimes there were human
eyes open to watch them come nearer, traveling smoothly in the somber
void; the eyes of a naked fisherman in his canoe floating over a reef.
He thought drowsily: "Ha! The fire-ship that once in every moon goes in
and comes out of Pangu bay." More he did not know of her. And just as he
had detected the faint rhythm of the propeller beating the calm water
a mile and a half away, the time would come for the Sofala to alter her
course, the lights would swing off him their triple beam--and disappear.

A few miserable, half-naked families, a sort of outcast tribe of
long-haired, lean, and wild-eyed people, strove for their living in this
lonely wilderness of islets, lying like an abandoned outwork of the land
at the gates of the bay. Within the knots and loops of the rocks the
water rested more transparent than crystal under their crooked and leaky
canoes, scooped out of the trunk of a tree: the forms of the bottom
undulated slightly to the dip of a paddle; and the men seemed to hang
in the air, they seemed to hang inclosed within the fibers of a dark,
sodden log, fishing patiently in a strange, unsteady, pellucid, green
air above the shoals.

Their bodies stalked brown and emaciated as if dried up in the sunshine;
their lives ran out silently; the homes where they were born, went to
rest, and died--flimsy sheds of rushes and coarse grass eked out with a
few ragged mats--were hidden out of sight from the open sea. No glow
of their household fires ever kindled for a seaman a red spark upon the
blind night of the group: and the calms of the coast, the flaming long
calms of the equator, the unbreathing, concentrated calms like the deep
introspection of a passionate nature, brooded awfully for days and weeks
together over the unchangeable inheritance of their children; till at
last the stones, hot like live embers, scorched the naked sole, till
the water clung warm, and sickly, and as if thickened, about the legs of
lean men with girded loins, wading thigh-deep in the pale blaze of the
shallows. And it would happen now and then that the Sofala, through some
delay in one of the ports of call, would heave in sight making for Pangu
bay as late as noonday.

Only a blurring cloud at first, the thin mist of her smoke would arise
mysteriously from an empty point on the clear line of sea and sky. The
taciturn fishermen within the reefs would extend their lean arms towards
the offing; and the brown figures stooping on the tiny beaches, the
brown figures of men, women, and children grubbing in the sand in search
of turtles' eggs, would rise up, crooked elbow aloft and hand over
the eyes, to watch this monthly apparition glide straight on, swerve
off--and go by. Their ears caught the panting of that ship; their eyes
followed her till she passed between the two capes of the mainland going
at full speed as though she hoped to make her way unchecked into the
very bosom of the earth.

On such days the luminous sea would give no sign of the dangers lurking
on both sides of her path. Everything remained still, crushed by the
overwhelming power of the light; and the whole group, opaque in the
sunshine,--the rocks resembling pinnacles, the rocks resembling spires,
the rocks resembling ruins; the forms of islets resembling beehives,
resembling mole-hills, the islets recalling the shapes of haystacks, the
contours of ivy-clad towers,--would stand reflected together upside
down in the unwrinkled water, like carved toys of ebony disposed on the
silvered plate-glass of a mirror.

The first touch of blowing weather would envelop the whole at once in
the spume of the windward breakers, as if in a sudden cloudlike burst
of steam; and the clear water seemed fairly to boil in all the passages.
The provoked sea outlined exactly in a design of angry foam the wide
base of the group; the submerged level of broken waste and refuse left
over from the building of the coast near by, projecting its dangerous
spurs, all awash, far into the channel, and bristling with wicked long
spits often a mile long: with deadly spits made of froth and stones.

And even nothing more than a brisk breeze--as on that morning, the
voyage before, when the Sofala left Pangu bay early, and Mr. Sterne's
discovery was to blossom out like a flower of incredible and evil aspect
from the tiny seed of instinctive suspicion,--even such a breeze had
enough strength to tear the placid mask from the face of the sea. To
Sterne, gazing with indifference, it had been like a revelation to
behold for the first time the dangers marked by the hissing livid
patches on the water as distinctly as on the engraved paper of a chart.
It came into his mind that this was the sort of day most favorable for a
stranger attempting the passage: a clear day, just windy enough for the
sea to break on every ledge, buoying, as it were, the channel plainly
to the sight; whereas during a calm you had nothing to depend on but the
compass and the practiced judgment of your eye. And yet the successive
captains of the Sofala had had to take her through at night more than
once. Nowadays you could not afford to throw away six or seven hours
of a steamer's time. That you couldn't. But then use is everything, and
with proper care . . . The channel was broad and safe enough; the main
point was to hit upon the entrance correctly in the dark--for if a man
got himself involved in that stretch of broken water over yonder he
would never get out with a whole ship--if he ever got out at all.

This was Sterne's last train of thought independent of the great
discovery. He had just seen to the securing of the anchor, and had
remained forward idling away a moment or two. The captain was in charge
on the bridge. With a slight yawn he had turned away from his survey of
the sea and had leaned his shoulders against the fish davit.

These, properly speaking, were the very last moments of ease he was to
know on board the Sofala. All the instants that came after were to be
pregnant with purpose and intolerable with perplexity. No more idle,
random thoughts; the discovery would put them on the rack, till
sometimes he wished to goodness he had been fool enough not to make
it at all. And yet, if his chance to get on rested on the discovery of
"something wrong," he could not have hoped for a greater stroke of luck.


X

The knowledge was too disturbing, really. There was "something wrong"
with a vengeance, and the moral certitude of it was at first simply
frightful to contemplate. Sterne had been looking aft in a mood so idle,
that for once he was thinking no harm of anyone. His captain on the
bridge presented himself naturally to his sight. How insignificant, how
casual was the thought that had started the train of discovery--like
an accidental spark that suffices to ignite the charge of a tremendous
mine!

Caught under by the breeze, the awnings of the foredeck bellied upwards
and collapsed slowly, and above their heavy flapping the gray stuff of
Captain Whalley's roomy coat fluttered incessantly around his arms and
trunk. He faced the wind in full light, with his great silvery beard
blown forcibly against his chest; the eyebrows overhung heavily the
shadows whence his glance appeared to be staring ahead piercingly.
Sterne could just detect the twin gleam of the whites shifting under the
shaggy arches of the brow. At short range these eyes, for all the man's
affable manner, seemed to look you through and through. Sterne never
could defend himself from that feeling when he had occasion to speak
with his captain. He did not like it. What a big heavy man he appeared
up there, with that little shrimp of a Serang in close attendance--as
was usual in this extraordinary steamer! Confounded absurd custom that.
He resented it. Surely the old fellow could have looked after his ship
without that loafing native at his elbow. Sterne wriggled his shoulders
with disgust. What was it? Indolence or what?

That old skipper must have been growing lazy for years. They all grew
lazy out East here (Sterne was very conscious of his own unimpaired
activity); they got slack all over. But he towered very erect on the
bridge; and quite low by his side, as you see a small child looking over
the edge of a table, the battered soft hat and the brown face of the
Serang peeped over the white canvas screen of the rail.

No doubt the Malay was standing back, nearer to the wheel; but the
great disparity of size in close association amused Sterne like the
observation of a bizarre fact in nature. They were as queer fish out of
the sea as any in it.

He saw Captain Whalley turn his head quickly to speak to his Serang;
the wind whipped the whole white mass of the beard sideways. He would
be directing the chap to look at the compass for him, or what not. Of
course. Too much trouble to step over and see for himself. Sterne's
scorn for that bodily indolence which overtakes white men in the East
increased on reflection. Some of them would be utterly lost if they
hadn't all these natives at their beck and call; they grew perfectly
shameless about it too. He was not of that sort, thank God! It wasn't
in him to make himself dependent for his work on any shriveled-up little
Malay like that. As if one could ever trust a silly native for anything
in the world! But that fine old man thought differently, it seems. There
they were together, never far apart; a pair of them, recalling to the
mind an old whale attended by a little pilot-fish.

The fancifulness of the comparison made him smile. A whale with an
inseparable pilot-fish! That's what the old man looked like; for it
could not be said he looked like a shark, though Mr. Massy had called
him that very name. But Mr. Massy did not mind what he said in his
savage fits. Sterne smiled to himself--and gradually the ideas evoked
by the sound, by the imagined shape of the word pilot-fish; the ideas
of aid, of guidance needed and received, came uppermost in his mind:
the word pilot awakened the idea of trust, of dependence, the idea of
welcome, clear-eyed help brought to the seaman groping for the land
in the dark: groping blindly in fogs: feeling their way in the thick
weather of the gales that, filling the air with a salt mist blown up
from the sea, contract the range of sight on all sides to a shrunken
horizon that seems within reach of the hand.

A pilot sees better than a stranger, because his local knowledge, like
a sharper vision, completes the shapes of things hurriedly glimpsed;
penetrates the veils of mist spread over the land by the storms of the
sea; defines with certitude the outlines of a coast lying under the pall
of fog, the forms of landmarks half buried in a starless night as in a
shallow grave. He recognizes because he already knows. It is not to
his far-reaching eye but to his more extensive knowledge that the pilot
looks for certitude; for this certitude of the ship's position on
which may depend a man's good fame and the peace of his conscience, the
justification of the trust deposited in his hands, with his own life
too, which is seldom wholly his to throw away, and the humble lives of
others rooted in distant affections, perhaps, and made as weighty as
the lives of kings by the burden of the awaiting mystery. The pilot's
knowledge brings relief and certitude to the commander of a ship; the
Serang, however, in his fanciful suggestion of a pilot-fish attending a
whale, could not in any way be credited with a superior knowledge. Why
should he have it? These two men had come on that run together--the
white and the brown--on the same day: and of course a white man would
learn more in a week than the best native would in a month. He was
made to stick to the skipper as though he were of some use--as the
pilot-fish, they say, is to the whale. But how--it was very marked--how?
A pilot-fish--a pilot--a . . . But if not superior knowledge then . . .

Sterne's discovery was made. It was repugnant to his imagination,
shocking to his ideas of honesty, shocking to his conception of mankind.
This enormity affected one's outlook on what was possible in this world:
it was as if for instance the sun had turned blue, throwing a new and
sinister light on men and nature. Really in the first moment he had felt
sickish, as though he had got a blow below the belt: for a second the
very color of the sea seemed changed--appeared queer to his wandering
eye; and he had a passing, unsteady sensation in all his limbs as though
the earth had started turning the other way.

A very natural incredulity succeeding this sense of upheaval brought a
measure of relief. He had gasped; it was over. But afterwards during all
that day sudden paroxysms of wonder would come over him in the midst
of his occupations. He would stop and shake his head. The revolt of
his incredulity had passed away almost as quick as the first emotion
of discovery, and for the next twenty-four hours he had no sleep. That
would never do. At meal-times (he took the foot of the table set up
for the white men on the bridge) he could not help losing himself in
a fascinated contemplation of Captain Whalley opposite. He watched the
deliberate upward movements of the arm; the old man put his food to his
lips as though he never expected to find any taste in his daily bread,
as though he did not know anything about it. He fed himself like a
somnambulist. "It's an awful sight," thought Sterne; and he watched the
long period of mournful, silent immobility, with a big brown hand
lying loosely closed by the side of the plate, till he noticed the two
engineers to the right and left looking at him in astonishment. He would
close his mouth in a hurry then, and lowering his eyes, wink rapidly at
his plate. It was awful to see the old chap sitting there; it was even
awful to think that with three words he could blow him up sky-high.
All he had to do was to raise his voice and pronounce a single short
sentence, and yet that simple act seemed as impossible to attempt as
moving the sun out of its place in the sky. The old chap could eat in
his terrific mechanical way; but Sterne, from mental excitement, could
not--not that evening, at any rate.

He had had ample time since to get accustomed to the strain of the
meal-hours. He would never have believed it. But then use is everything;
only the very potency of his success prevented anything resembling
elation. He felt like a man who, in his legitimate search for a loaded
gun to help him on his way through the world, chances to come upon a
torpedo--upon a live torpedo with a shattering charge in its head and
a pressure of many atmospheres in its tail. It is the sort of weapon to
make its possessor careworn and nervous. He had no mind to be blown up
himself; and he could not get rid of the notion that the explosion was
bound to damage him too in some way.

This vague apprehension had restrained him at first. He was able now to
eat and sleep with that fearful weapon by his side, with the conviction
of its power always in mind. It had not been arrived at by any
reflective process; but once the idea had entered his head, the
conviction had followed overwhelmingly in a multitude of observed little
facts to which before he had given only a languid attention. The abrupt
and faltering intonations of the deep voice; the taciturnity put on
like an armor; the deliberate, as if guarded, movements; the long
immobilities, as if the man he watched had been afraid to disturb the
very air: every familiar gesture, every word uttered in his hearing,
every sigh overheard, had acquired a special significance, a
confirmatory import.

Every day that passed over the Sofala appeared to Sterne simply crammed
full with proofs--with incontrovertible proofs. At night, when off duty,
he would steal out of his cabin in pyjamas (for more proofs) and stand
a full hour, perhaps, on his bare feet below the bridge, as absolutely
motionless as the awning stanchion in its deck socket near by. On the
stretches of easy navigation it is not usual for a coasting captain to
remain on deck all the time of his watch. The Serang keeps it for him as
a matter of custom; in open water, on a straight course, he is usually
trusted to look after the ship by himself. But this old man seemed
incapable of remaining quietly down below. No doubt he could not sleep.
And no wonder. This was also a proof. Suddenly in the silence of the
ship panting upon the still, dark sea, Sterne would hear a low voice
above him exclaiming nervously--

"Serang!"

"Tuan!"

"You are watching the compass well?"

"Yes, I am watching, Tuan."

"The ship is making her course?"

"She is, Tuan. Very straight."

"It is well; and remember, Serang, that the order is that you are to
mind the helmsmen and keep a lookout with care, the same as if I were
not on deck."

Then, when the Serang had made his answer, the low tones on the bridge
would cease, and everything round Sterne seemed to become more still
and more profoundly silent. Slightly chilled and with his back aching a
little from long immobility, he would steal away to his room on the
port side of the deck. He had long since parted with the last vestige
of incredulity; of the original emotions, set into a tumult by the
discovery, some trace of the first awe alone remained. Not the awe of
the man himself--he could blow him up sky-high with six words--rather it
was an awestruck indignation at the reckless perversity of avarice (what
else could it be?), at the mad and somber resolution that for the
sake of a few dollars more seemed to set at naught the common rule
of conscience and pretended to struggle against the very decree of
Providence.

You could not find another man like this one in the whole round
world--thank God. There was something devilishly dauntless in the
character of such a deception which made you pause.

Other considerations occurring to his prudence had kept him tongue-tied
from day to day. It seemed to him now that it would yet have been easier
to speak out in the first hour of discovery. He almost regretted
not having made a row at once. But then the very monstrosity of the
disclosure . . . Why! He could hardly face it himself, let alone
pointing it out to somebody else. Moreover, with a desperado of that
sort one never knew. The object was not to get him out (that was as well
as done already), but to step into his place. Bizarre as the thought
seemed he might have shown fight. A fellow up to working such a fraud
would have enough cheek for anything; a fellow that, as it were, stood
up against God Almighty Himself. He was a horrid marvel--that's what he
was: he was perfectly capable of brazening out the affair scandalously
till he got him (Sterne) kicked out of the ship and everlastingly
damaged his prospects in this part of the East. Yet if you want to get
on something must be risked. At times Sterne thought he had been unduly
timid of taking action in the past; and what was worse, it had come to
this, that in the present he did not seem to know what action to take.

Massy's savage moroseness was too disconcerting. It was an incalculable
factor of the situation. You could not tell what there was behind that
insulting ferocity. How could one trust such a temper; it did not put
Sterne in bodily fear for himself, but it frightened him exceedingly as
to his prospects.

Though of course inclined to credit himself with exceptional powers of
observation, he had by now lived too long with his discovery. He had
gone on looking at nothing else, till at last one day it occurred to him
that the thing was so obvious that no one could miss seeing it. There
were four white men in all on board the Sofala. Jack, the second
engineer, was too dull to notice anything that took place out of his
engine-room. Remained Massy--the owner--the interested person--nearly
going mad with worry. Sterne had heard and seen more than enough on
board to know what ailed him; but his exasperation seemed to make him
deaf to cautious overtures. If he had only known it, there was the very
thing he wanted. But how could you bargain with a man of that sort? It
was like going into a tiger's den with a piece of raw meat in your hand.
He was as likely as not to rend you for your pains. In fact, he was
always threatening to do that very thing; and the urgency of the case,
combined with the impossibility of handling it with safety, made Sterne
in his watches below toss and mutter open-eyed in his bunk, for hours,
as though he had been burning with fever.

Occurrences like the crossing of the bar just now were extremely
alarming to his prospects. He did not want to be left behind by some
swift catastrophe. Massy being on the bridge, the old man had to brace
himself up and make a show, he supposed. But it was getting very bad
with him, very bad indeed, now. Even Massy had been emboldened to find
fault this time; Sterne, listening at the foot of the ladder, had heard
the other's whimpering and artless denunciations. Luckily the beast was
very stupid and could not see the why of all this. However, small blame
to him; it took a clever man to hit upon the cause. Nevertheless, it was
high time to do something. The old man's game could not be kept up for
many days more.

"I may yet lose my life at this fooling--let alone my chance," Sterne
mumbled angrily to himself, after the stooping back of the chief
engineer had disappeared round the corner of the skylight. Yes, no
doubt--he thought; but to blurt out his knowledge would not advance his
prospects. On the contrary, it would blast them utterly as likely as
not. He dreaded another failure. He had a vague consciousness of not
being much liked by his fellows in this part of the world; inexplicably
enough, for he had done nothing to them. Envy, he supposed. People were
always down on a clever chap who made no bones about his determination
to get on. To do your duty and count on the gratitude of that brute
Massy would be sheer folly. He was a bad lot. Unmanly! A vicious man!
Bad! Bad! A brute! A brute without a spark of anything human about him;
without so much as simple curiosity even, or else surely he would have
responded in some way to all these hints he had been given. . . . Such
insensibility was almost mysterious. Massy's state of exasperation
seemed to Sterne to have made him stupid beyond the ordinary silliness
of shipowners.

Sterne, meditating on the embarrassments of that stupidity, forgot
himself completely. His stony, unwinking stare was fixed on the planks
of the deck.

The slight quiver agitating the whole fabric of the ship was more
perceptible in the silent river, shaded and still like a forest
path. The Sofala, gliding with an even motion, had passed beyond the
coast-belt of mud and mangroves. The shores rose higher, in firm sloping
banks, and the forest of big trees came down to the brink. Where the
earth had been crumbled by the floods it showed a steep brown cut,
denuding a mass of roots intertwined as if wrestling underground; and in
the air, the interlaced boughs, bound and loaded with creepers, carried
on the struggle for life, mingled their foliage in one solid wall
of leaves, with here and there the shape of an enormous dark pillar
soaring, or a ragged opening, as if torn by the flight of a cannonball,
disclosing the impenetrable gloom within, the secular inviolable shade
of the virgin forest. The thump of the engines reverberated regularly
like the strokes of a metronome beating the measure of the vast silence,
the shadow of the western wall had fallen across the river, and the
smoke pouring backwards from the funnel eddied down behind the ship,
spread a thin dusky veil over the somber water, which, checked by the
flood-tide, seemed to lie stagnant in the whole straight length of the
reaches.

Sterne's body, as if rooted on the spot, trembled slightly from top to
toe with the internal vibration of the ship; from under his feet came
sometimes a sudden clang of iron, the noisy burst of a shout below; to
the right the leaves of the tree-tops caught the rays of the low sun,
and seemed to shine with a golden green light of their own shimmering
around the highest boughs which stood out black against a smooth blue
sky that seemed to droop over the bed of the river like the roof of a
tent. The passengers for Batu Beru, kneeling on the planks, were engaged
in rolling their bedding of mats busily; they tied up bundles, they
snapped the locks of wooden chests. A pockmarked peddler of small wares
threw his head back to drain into his throat the last drops out of an
earthenware bottle before putting it away in a roll of blankets. Knots
of traveling traders standing about the deck conversed in low tones;
the followers of a small Rajah from down the coast, broad-faced, simple
young fellows in white drawers and round white cotton caps with their
colored sarongs twisted across their bronze shoulders, squatted on their
hams on the hatch, chewing betel with bright red mouths as if they had
been tasting blood. Their spears, lying piled up together within the
circle of their bare toes, resembled a casual bundle of dry bamboos; a
thin, livid Chinaman, with a bulky package wrapped up in leaves already
thrust under his arm, gazed ahead eagerly; a wandering Kling rubbed his
teeth with a bit of wood, pouring over the side a bright stream of water
out of his lips; the fat Rajah dozed in a shabby deck-chair,--and at the
turn of every bend the two walls of leaves reappeared running parallel
along the banks, with their impenetrable solidity fading at the top to
a vaporous mistiness of countless slender twigs growing free, of young
delicate branches shooting from the topmost limbs of hoary trunks,
of feathery heads of climbers like delicate silver sprays standing up
without a quiver. There was not a sign of a clearing anywhere; not a
trace of human habitation, except when in one place, on the bare end of
a low point under an isolated group of slender tree-ferns, the jagged,
tangled remnants of an old hut on piles appeared with that peculiar
aspect of ruined bamboo walls that look as if smashed with a club.
Farther on, half hidden under the drooping bushes, a canoe containing a
man and a woman, together with a dozen green cocoanuts in a heap, rocked
helplessly after the Sofala had passed, like a navigating contrivance of
venturesome insects, of traveling ants; while two glassy folds of water
streaming away from each bow of the steamer across the whole width of
the river ran with her up stream smoothly, fretting their outer ends
into a brown whispering tumble of froth against the miry foot of each
bank.

"I must," thought Sterne, "bring that brute Massy to his bearings. It's
getting too absurd in the end. Here's the old man up there buried in his
chair--he may just as well be in his grave for all the use he'll ever be
in the world--and the Serang's in charge. Because that's what he is.
In charge. In the place that's mine by rights. I must bring that savage
brute to his bearings. I'll do it at once, too . . ."

When the mate made an abrupt start, a little brown half-naked boy, with
large black eyes, and the string of a written charm round his neck,
became panic-struck at once. He dropped the banana he had been munching,
and ran to the knee of a grave dark Arab in flowing robes, sitting like
a Biblical figure, incongruously, on a yellow tin trunk corded with a
rope of twisted rattan. The father, unmoved, put out his hand to pat the
little shaven poll protectingly.


XI

Sterne crossed the deck upon the track of the chief engineer. Jack,
the second, retreating backwards down the engine-room ladder, and still
wiping his hands, treated him to an incomprehensible grin of white teeth
out of his grimy hard face; Massy was nowhere to be seen. He must have
gone straight into his berth. Sterne scratched at the door softly, then,
putting his lips to the rose of the ventilator, said--

"I must speak to you, Mr. Massy. Just give me a minute or two."

"I am busy. Go away from my door."

"But pray, Mr. Massy . . ."

"You go away. D'you hear? Take yourself off altogether--to the other
end of the ship--quite away . . ." The voice inside dropped low. "To the
devil."

Sterne paused: then very quietly--

"It's rather pressing. When do you think you will be at liberty, sir?"

The answer to this was an exasperated "Never"; and at once Sterne, with
a very firm expression of face, turned the handle.

Mr. Massy's stateroom--a narrow, one-berth cabin--smelt strongly of
soap, and presented to view a swept, dusted, unadorned neatness, not
so much bare as barren, not so much severe as starved and lacking in
humanity, like the ward of a public hospital, or rather (owing to the
small size) like the clean retreat of a desperately poor but exemplary
person. Not a single photograph frame ornamented the bulkheads; not a
single article of clothing, not as much as a spare cap, hung from the
brass hooks. All the inside was painted in one plain tint of pale blue;
two big sea-chests in sailcloth covers and with iron padlocks fitted
exactly in the space under the bunk. One glance was enough to embrace
all the strip of scrubbed planks within the four unconcealed corners.
The absence of the usual settee was striking; the teak-wood top of the
washing-stand seemed hermetically closed, and so was the lid of the
writing-desk, which protruded from the partition at the foot of the
bed-place, containing a mattress as thin as a pancake under a threadbare
blanket with a faded red stripe, and a folded mosquito-net against
the nights spent in harbor. There was not a scrap of paper anywhere in
sight, no boots on the floor, no litter of any sort, not a speck of
dust anywhere; no traces of pipe-ash even, which, in a heavy smoker, was
morally revolting, like a manifestation of extreme hypocrisy; and the
bottom of the old wooden arm-chair (the only seat there), polished
with much use, shone as if its shabbiness had been waxed. The screen
of leaves on the bank, passing as if unrolled endlessly in the round
opening of the port, sent a wavering network of light and shade into the
place.

Sterne, holding the door open with one hand, had thrust in his head and
shoulders. At this amazing intrusion Massy, who was doing absolutely
nothing, jumped up speechless.

"Don't call names," murmured Sterne hurriedly. "I won't be called names.
I think of nothing but your good, Mr. Massy."

A pause as of extreme astonishment followed. They both seemed to have
lost their tongues. Then the mate went on with a discreet glibness.

"You simply couldn't conceive what's going on on board your ship.
It wouldn't enter your head for a moment. You are too good--too--too
upright, Mr. Massy, to suspect anybody of such a . . . It's enough to
make your hair stand on end."

He watched for the effect: Massy seemed dazed, uncomprehending. He only
passed the palm of his hand on the coal-black wisps plastered across
the top of his head. In a tone suddenly changed to confidential audacity
Sterne hastened on.

"Remember that there's only six weeks left to run . . ." The other was
looking at him stonily . . . "so anyhow you shall require a captain for
the ship before long."

Then only, as if that suggestion had scarified his flesh in the manner
of red-hot iron, Massy gave a start and seemed ready to shriek. He
contained himself by a great effort.

"Require a captain," he repeated with scathing slowness. "Who requires
a captain? You dare to tell me that I need any of you humbugging sailors
to run my ship. You and your likes have been fattening on me for years.
It would have hurt me less to throw my money overboard. Pam--pe--red
us--e--less f-f-f-frauds. The old ship knows as much as the best of
you." He snapped his teeth audibly and growled through them, "The silly
law requires a captain."

Sterne had taken heart of grace meantime.

"And the silly insurance people too, as well," he said lightly. "But
never mind that. What I want to ask is: Why shouldn't _I_ do, sir? I
don't say but you could take a steamer about the world as well as any of
us sailors. I don't pretend to tell _you_ that it is a very great trick
. . ." He emitted a short, hollow guffaw, familiarly . . . "I didn't
make the law--but there it is; and I am an active young fellow! I
quite hold with your ideas; I know your ways by this time, Mr. Massy. I
wouldn't try to give myself airs like that--that--er lazy specimen of an
old man up there."

He put a marked emphasis on the last sentence, to lead Massy away from
the track in case . . . but he did not doubt of now holding his success.
The chief engineer seemed nonplused, like a slow man invited to catch
hold of a whirligig of some sort.

"What you want, sir, is a chap with no nonsense about him, who would be
content to be your sailing-master. Quite right, too. Well, I am fit for
the work as much as that Serang. Because that's what it amounts to.
Do you know, sir, that a dam' Malay like a monkey is in charge of your
ship--and no one else. Just listen to his feet pit-patting above us on
the bridge--real officer in charge. He's taking her up the river while
the great man is wallowing in the chair--perhaps asleep; and if he is,
that would not make it much worse either--take my word for it."

He tried to thrust himself farther in. Massy, with lowered forehead, one
hand grasping the back of the arm-chair, did not budge.

"You think, sir, that the man has got you tight in his agreement . . ."
Massy raised a heavy snarling face at this . . . "Well, sir, one can't
help hearing of it on board. It's no secret. And it has been the talk on
shore for years; fellows have been making bets about it. No, sir!
It's _you_ who have got him at your mercy. You will say that you can't
dismiss him for indolence. Difficult to prove in court, and so on. Why,
yes. But if you say the word, sir, I can tell you something about his
indolence that will give you the clear right to fire him out on the spot
and put me in charge for the rest of this very trip--yes, sir, before
we leave Batu Beru--and make him pay a dollar a day for his keep till
we get back, if you like. Now, what do you think of that? Come, sir.
Say the word. It's really well worth your while, and I am quite ready to
take your bare word. A definite statement from you would be as good as a
bond."

His eyes began to shine. He insisted. A simple statement,--and he
thought to himself that he would manage somehow to stick in his berth as
long as it suited him. He would make himself indispensable; the ship had
a bad name in her port; it would be easy to scare the fellows off. Massy
would have to keep him.

"A definite statement from me would be enough," Massy repeated slowly.

"Yes, sir. It would." Sterne stuck out his chin cheerily and blinked at
close quarters with that unconscious impudence which had the power to
enrage Massy beyond anything.

The engineer spoke very distinctly.

"Listen well to me, then, Mr. Sterne: I wouldn't--d'ye hear?--I wouldn't
promise you the value of two pence for anything _you_ can tell me."

He struck Sterne's arm away with a smart blow, and catching hold of
the handle pulled the door to. The terrific slam darkened the cabin
instantaneously to his eye as if after the flash of an explosion.
At once he dropped into the chair. "Oh, no! You don't!" he whispered
faintly.

The ship had in that place to shave the bank so close that the gigantic
wall of leaves came gliding like a shutter against the port; the
darkness of the primeval forest seemed to flow into that bare cabin with
the odor of rotting leaves, of sodden soil--the strong muddy smell of
the living earth steaming uncovered after the passing of a deluge. The
bushes swished loudly alongside; above there was a series of crackling
sounds, with a sharp rain of small broken branches falling on the
bridge; a creeper with a great rustle snapped on the head of a boat
davit, and a long, luxuriant green twig actually whipped in and out of
the open port, leaving behind a few torn leaves that remained suddenly
at rest on Mr. Massy's blanket. Then, the ship sheering out in the
stream, the light began to return but did not augment beyond a subdued
clearness: for the sun was very low already, and the river, wending its
sinuous course through a multitude of secular trees as if at the
bottom of a precipitous gorge, had been already invaded by a deepening
gloom--the swift precursor of the night.

"Oh, no, you don't!" murmured the engineer again. His lips trembled
almost imperceptibly; his hands too, a little: and to calm himself
he opened the writing-desk, spread out a sheet of thin grayish
paper covered with a mass of printed figures and began to scan them
attentively for the twentieth time this trip at least.

With his elbows propped, his head between his hands, he seemed to lose
himself in the study of an abstruse problem in mathematics. It was the
list of the winning numbers from the last drawing of the great lottery
which had been the one inspiring fact of so many years of his existence.
The conception of a life deprived of that periodical sheet of paper had
slipped away from him entirely, as another man, according to his nature,
would not have been able to conceive a world without fresh air, without
activity, or without affection. A great pile of flimsy sheets had been
growing for years in his desk, while the Sofala, driven by the faithful
Jack, wore out her boilers in tramping up and down the Straits, from
cape to cape, from river to river, from bay to bay; accumulating by that
hard labor of an overworked, starved ship the blackened mass of these
documents. Massy kept them under lock and key like a treasure. There
was in them, as in the experience of life, the fascination of hope, the
excitement of a half-penetrated mystery, the longing of a half-satisfied
desire.

For days together, on a trip, he would shut himself up in his berth with
them: the thump of the toiling engines pulsated in his ear; and he
would weary his brain poring over the rows of disconnected figures,
bewildering by their senseless sequence, resembling the hazards of
destiny itself. He nourished a conviction that there must be some logic
lurking somewhere in the results of chance. He thought he had seen
its very form. His head swam; his limbs ached; he puffed at his pipe
mechanically; a contemplative stupor would soothe the fretfulness of his
temper, like the passive bodily quietude procured by a drug, while the
intellect remains tensely on the stretch. Nine, nine, aught, four,
two. He made a note. The next winning number of the great prize was
forty-seven thousand and five. These numbers of course would have to
be avoided in the future when writing to Manilla for the tickets. He
mumbled, pencil in hand . . . "and five. Hm . . . hm." He wetted his
finger: the papers rustled. Ha! But what's this? Three years ago, in the
September drawing, it was number nine, aught, four, two that took the
first prize. Most remarkable. There was a hint there of a definite rule!
He was afraid of missing some recondite principle in the overwhelming
wealth of his material. What could it be? and for half an hour he would
remain dead still, bent low over the desk, without twitching a muscle.
At his back the whole berth would be thick with a heavy body of smoke,
as if a bomb had burst in there, unnoticed, unheard.

At last he would lock up the desk with the decision of unshaken
confidence, jump and go out. He would walk swiftly back and forth on
that part of the foredeck which was kept clear of the lumber and of the
bodies of the native passengers. They were a great nuisance, but they
were also a source of profit that could not be disdained. He needed
every penny of profit the Sofala could make. Little enough it was, in
all conscience! The incertitude of chance gave him no concern, since
he had somehow arrived at the conviction that, in the course of years,
every number was bound to have his winning turn. It was simply a matter
of time and of taking as many tickets as he could afford for every
drawing. He generally took rather more; all the earnings of the ship
went that way, and also the wages he allowed himself as chief engineer.
It was the wages he paid to others that he begrudged with a reasoned
and at the same time a passionate regret. He scowled at the lascars with
their deck brooms, at the quartermasters rubbing the brass rails with
greasy rags; he was eager to shake his fist and roar abuse in bad Malay
at the poor carpenter--a timid, sickly, opium-fuddled Chinaman, in loose
blue drawers for all costume, who invariably dropped his tools and fled
below, with streaming tail and shaking all over, before the fury of that
"devil." But it was when he raised up his eyes to the bridge where one
of these sailor frauds was always planted by law in charge of his ship
that he felt almost dizzy with rage. He abominated them all; it was an
old feud, from the time he first went to sea, an unlicked cub with a
great opinion of himself, in the engine-room. The slights that had
been put upon him. The persecutions he had suffered at the hands of
skippers--of absolute nobodies in a steamship after all. And now that
he had risen to be a shipowner they were still a plague to him: he
had absolutely to pay away precious money to the conceited useless
loafers:--As if a fully qualified engineer--who was the owner as
well--were not fit to be trusted with the whole charge of a ship. Well!
he made it pretty warm for them; but it was a poor consolation. He had
come in time to hate the ship too for the repairs she required, for the
coal-bills he had to pay, for the poor beggarly freights she earned.
He would clench his hand as he walked and hit the rail a sudden blow,
viciously, as though she could be made to feel pain. And yet he could
not do without er; he needed her; he must hang on to her tooth and nail
to keep his head above water till the expected flood of fortune came
sweeping up and landed him safely on the high shore of his ambition.

It was now to do nothing, nothing whatever, and have plenty of money
to do it on. He had tasted of power, the highest form of it his limited
experience was aware of--the power of shipowning. What a deception!
Vanity of vanities! He wondered at his folly. He had thrown away the
substance for the shadow. Of the gratification of wealth he did not know
enough to excite his imagination with any visions of luxury. How
could he--the child of a drunken boiler-maker--going straight from the
workshop into the engine-room of a north-country collier! But the notion
of the absolute idleness of wealth he could very well conceive. He
reveled in it, to forget his present troubles; he imagined himself
walking about the streets of Hull (he knew their gutters well as a boy)
with his pockets full of sovereigns. He would buy himself a house; his
married sisters, their husbands, his old workshop chums, would render
him infinite homage. There would be nothing to think of. His word would
be law. He had been out of work for a long time before he won his prize,
and he remembered how Carlo Mariani (commonly known as Paunchy Charley),
the Maltese hotel-keeper at the slummy end of Denham Street, had
cringed joyfully before him in the evening, when the news had come.
Poor Charley, though he made his living by ministering to various abject
vices, gave credit for their food to many a piece of white wreckage. He
was naively overjoyed at the idea of his old bills being paid, and
he reckoned confidently on a spell of festivities in the cavernous
grog-shop downstairs. Massy remembered the curious, respectful looks of
the "trashy" white men in the place. His heart had swelled within him.
Massy had left Charley's infamous den directly he had realized the
possibilities open to him, and with his nose in the air. Afterwards the
memory of these adulations was a great sadness.

This was the true power of money,--and no trouble with it, nor any
thinking required either. He thought with difficulty and felt vividly;
to his blunt brain the problems offered by any ordered scheme of life
seemed in their cruel toughness to have been put in his way by the
obvious malevolence of men. As a shipowner everyone had conspired to
make him a nobody. How could he have been such a fool as to purchase
that accursed ship. He had been abominably swindled; there was no end
to this swindling; and as the difficulties of his improvident ambition
gathered thicker round him, he really came to hate everybody he had
ever come in contact with. A temper naturally irritable and an amazing
sensitiveness to the claims of his own personality had ended by making
of life for him a sort of inferno--a place where his lost soul had been
given up to the torment of savage brooding.

But he had never hated anyone so much as that old man who had turned up
one evening to save him from an utter disaster,--from the conspiracy of
the wretched sailors. He seemed to have fallen on board from the sky.
His footsteps echoed on the empty steamer, and the strange deep-toned
voice on deck repeating interrogatively the words, "Mr. Massy, Mr. Massy
there?" had been startling like a wonder. And coming up from the depths
of the cold engine-room, where he had been pottering dismally with a
candle amongst the enormous shadows, thrown on all sides by the skeleton
limbs of machinery, Massy had been struck dumb by astonishment in the
presence of that imposing old man with a beard like a silver plate,
towering in the dusk rendered lurid by the expiring flames of sunset.

"Want to see me on business? What business? I am doing no business.
Can't you see that this ship is laid up?" Massy had turned at bay before
the pursuing irony of his disaster. Afterwards he could not believe his
ears. What was that old fellow getting at? Things don't happen that way.
It was a dream. He would presently wake up and find the man vanished
like a shape of mist. The gravity, the dignity, the firm and courteous
tone of that athletic old stranger impressed Massy. He was almost
afraid. But it was no dream. Five hundred pounds are no dream. At once
he became suspicious. What did it mean? Of course it was an offer to
catch hold of for dear life. But what could there be behind?

Before they had parted, after appointing a meeting in a solicitor's
office early on the morrow, Massy was asking himself, What is his
motive? He spent the night in hammering out the clauses of the
agreement--a unique instrument of its sort whose tenor got bruited
abroad somehow and became the talk and wonder of the port.

Massy's object had been to secure for himself as many ways as possible
of getting rid of his partner without being called upon at once to pay
back his share. Captain Whalley's efforts were directed to making the
money secure. Was it not Ivy's money--a part of her fortune whose only
other asset was the time-defying body of her old father? Sure of his
forbearance in the strength of his love for her, he accepted, with
stately serenity, Massy's stupidly cunning paragraphs against his
incompetence, his dishonesty, his drunkenness, for the sake of other
stringent stipulations. At the end of three years he was at liberty to
withdraw from the partnership, taking his money with him. Provision was
made for forming a fund to pay him off. But if he left the Sofala before
the term, from whatever cause (barring death), Massy was to have a whole
year for paying. "Illness?" the lawyer had suggested: a young man fresh
from Europe and not overburdened with business, who was rather amused.
Massy began to whine unctuously, "How could he be expected? . . ."

"Let that go," Captain Whalley had said with a superb confidence in his
body. "Acts of God," he added. In the midst of life we are in death, but
he trusted his Maker with a still greater fearlessness--his Maker who
knew his thoughts, his human affections, and his motives. His Creator
knew what use he was making of his health--how much he wanted it . . .
"I trust my first illness will be my last. I've never been ill that I
can remember," he had remarked. "Let it go."

But at this early stage he had already awakened Massy's hostility by
refusing to make it six hundred instead of five. "I cannot do that," was
all he had said, simply, but with so much decision that Massy desisted
at once from pressing the point, but had thought to himself, "Can't! Old
curmudgeon. _Won't_ He must have lots of money, but he would like to get
hold of a soft berth and the sixth part of my profits for nothing if he
only could."

And during these years Massy's dislike grew under the restraint
of something resembling fear. The simplicity of that man appeared
dangerous. Of late he had changed, however, had appeared less formidable
and with a lessened vigor of life, as though he had received a secret
wound. But still he remained incomprehensible in his simplicity,
fearlessness, and rectitude. And when Massy learned that he meant to
leave him at the end of the time, to leave him confronted with the
problem of boilers, his dislike blazed up secretly into hate.

It had made him so clear-eyed that for a long time now Mr. Sterne could
have told him nothing he did not know. He had much ado in trying to
terrorize that mean sneak into silence; he wanted to deal alone with the
situation; and--incredible as it might have appeared to Mr. Sterne--he
had not yet given up the desire and the hope of inducing that hated
old man to stay. Why! there was nothing else to do, unless he were to
abandon his chances of fortune. But now, suddenly, since the crossing of
the bar at Batu Beru things seemed to be coming rapidly to a point. It
disquieted him so much that the study of the winning numbers failed
to soothe his agitation: and the twilight in the cabin deepened, very
somber.

He put the list away, muttering once more, "Oh, no, my boy, you don't.
Not if I know it." He did not mean the blinking, eavesdropping humbug to
force his action. He took his head again into his hands; his immobility
confined in the darkness of this shut-up little place seemed to make
him a thing apart infinitely removed from the stir and the sounds of the
deck.

He heard them: the passengers were beginning to jabber excitedly;
somebody dragged a heavy box past his door. He heard Captain Whalley's
voice above--

"Stations, Mr. Sterne." And the answer from somewhere on deck forward--

"Ay, ay, sir."

"We shall moor head up stream this time; the ebb has made."

"Head up stream, sir."

"You will see to it, Mr. Sterne."

The answer was covered by the autocratic clang on the engine-room
gong. The propeller went on beating slowly: one, two, three; one, two,
three--with pauses as if hesitating on the turn. The gong clanged time
after time, and the water churned this way and that by the blades was
making a great noisy commotion alongside. Mr. Massy did not move. A
shore-light on the other bank, a quarter of a mile across the river,
drifted, no bigger than a tiny star, passing slowly athwart the circle
of the port. Voices from Mr. Van Wyk's jetty answered the hails from the
ship; ropes were thrown and missed and thrown again; the swaying flame
of a torch carried in a large sampan coming to fetch away in state the
Rajah from down the coast cast a sudden ruddy glare into his cabin,
over his very person. Mr. Massy did not move. After a few last ponderous
turns the engines stopped, and the prolonged clanging of the gong
signified that the captain had done with them. A great number of boats
and canoes of all sizes boarded the off-side of the Sofala. Then after
a time the tumult of splashing, of cries, of shuffling feet, of packages
dropped with a thump, the noise of the native passengers going
away, subsided slowly. On the shore, a voice, cultivated, slightly
authoritative, spoke very close alongside--

"Brought any mail for me this time?"

"Yes, Mr. Van Wyk." This was from Sterne, answering over the rail in a
tone of respectful cordiality. "Shall I bring it up to you?"

But the voice asked again--

"Where's the captain?"

"Still on the bridge, I believe. He hasn't left his chair. Shall I . . ."

The voice interrupted negligently.

"I will come on board."

"Mr. Van Wyk," Sterne suddenly broke out with an eager effort, "will you
do me the favor . . ."

The mate walked away quickly towards the gangway. A silence fell. Mr.
Massy in the dark did not move.

He did not move even when he heard slow shuffling footsteps pass his
cabin lazily. He contented himself to bellow out through the closed
door--

"You--Jack!"

The footsteps came back without haste; the door handle rattled, and the
second engineer appeared in the opening, shadowy in the sheen of the
skylight at his back, with his face apparently as black as the rest of
his figure.

"We have been very long coming up this time," Mr. Massy growled, without
changing his attitude.

"What do you expect with half the boiler tubes plugged up for leaks."
The second defended himself loquaciously.

"None of your lip," said Massy.

"None of your rotten boilers--I say," retorted his faithful subordinate
without animation, huskily. "Go down there and carry a head of steam on
them yourself--if you dare. I don't."

"You aren't worth your salt then," Massy said. The other made a faint
noise which resembled a laugh but might have been a snarl.

"Better go slow than stop the ship altogether," he admonished his
admired superior. Mr. Massy moved at last. He turned in his chair, and
grinding his teeth--

"Dam' you and the ship! I wish she were at the bottom of the sea. Then
you would have to starve."

The trusty second engineer closed the door gently.

Massy listened. Instead of passing on to the bathroom where he should
have gone to clean himself, the second entered his cabin, which was next
door. Mr. Massy jumped up and waited. Suddenly he heard the lock snap in
there. He rushed out and gave a violent kick to the door.

"I believe you are locking yourself up to get drunk," he shouted.

A muffled answer came after a while.

"My own time."

"If you take to boozing on the trip I'll fire you out," Massy cried.

An obstinate silence followed that threat. Massy moved away perplexed.
On the bank two figures appeared, approaching the gangway. He heard a
voice tinged with contempt--

"I would rather doubt your word. But I shall certainly speak to him of
this."

The other voice, Sterne's, said with a sort of regretful formality--

"Thanks. That's all I want. I must do my duty."

Mr. Massy was surprised. A short, dapper figure leaped lightly on the
deck and nearly bounded into him where he stood beyond the circle of
light from the gangway lamp. When it had passed towards the bridge,
after exchanging a hurried "Good evening," Massy said surlily to Sterne
who followed with slow steps--

"What is it you're making up to Mr. Van Wyk for, now?"

"Far from it, Mr. Massy. I am not good enough for Mr. Van Wyk. Neither
are you, sir, in his opinion, I am afraid. Captain Whalley is, it seems.
He's gone to ask him to dine up at the house this evening."

Then he murmured to himself darkly--

"I hope he will like it."


XII

Mr. Van Wyk, the white man of Batu Beru, an ex-naval officer who,
for reasons best known to himself, had thrown away the promise of a
brilliant career to become the pioneer of tobacco-planting on that
remote part of the coast, had learned to like Captain Whalley. The
appearance of the new skipper had attracted his attention. Nothing more
unlike all the diverse types he had seen succeeding each other on the
bridge of the Sofala could be imagined.

At that time Batu Beru was not what it has become since: the center of
a prosperous tobacco-growing district, a tropically suburban-looking
little settlement of bungalows in one long street shaded with two rows
of trees, embowered by the flowering and trim luxuriance of the gardens,
with a three-mile-long carriage-road for the afternoon drives and a
first-class Resident with a fat, cheery wife to lead the society of
married estate-managers and unmarried young fellows in the service of the
big companies.

All this prosperity was not yet; and Mr. Van Wyk prospered alone on the
left bank on his deep clearing carved out of the forest, which came down
above and below to the water's edge. His lonely bungalow faced across
the river the houses of the Sultan: a restless and melancholy old ruler
who had done with love and war, for whom life no longer held any savor
(except of evil forebodings) and time never had any value. He was afraid
of death, and hoped he would die before the white men were ready to take
his country from him. He crossed the river frequently (with never
less than ten boats crammed full of people), in the wistful hope of
extracting some information on the subject from his own white man. There
was a certain chair on the veranda he always took: the dignitaries of
the court squatted on the rugs and skins between the furniture: the
inferior people remained below on the grass plot between the house and
the river in rows three or four deep all along the front. Not seldom the
visit began at daybreak. Mr. Van Wyk tolerated these inroads. He would
nod out of his bedroom window, tooth-brush or razor in hand, or pass
through the throng of courtiers in his bathing robe. He appeared and
disappeared humming a tune, polished his nails with attention, rubbed
his shaved face with _eau-de-Cologne_, drank his early tea, went out to
see his coolies at work: returned, looked through some papers on his
desk, read a page or two in a book or sat before his cottage piano
leaning back on the stool, his arms extended, fingers on the keys, his
body swaying slightly from side to side. When absolutely forced to speak
he gave evasive vaguely soothing answers out of pure compassion: the
same feeling perhaps made him so lavishly hospitable with the aerated
drinks that more than once he left himself without soda-water for a whole
week. That old man had granted him as much land as he cared to have
cleared: it was neither more nor less than a fortune.

Whether it was fortune or seclusion from his kind that Mr. Van Wyk
sought, he could not have pitched upon a better place. Even the
mail-boats of the subsidized company calling on the veriest clusters of
palm-thatched hovels along the coast steamed past the mouth of Batu Beru
river far away in the offing. The contract was old: perhaps in a few
years' time, when it had expired, Batu Beru would be included in the
service; meantime all Mr. Van Wyk's mail was addressed to Malacca,
whence his agent sent it across once a month by the Sofala. It followed
that whenever Massy had run short of money (through taking too many
lottery tickets), or got into a difficulty about a skipper, Mr. Van Wyk
was deprived of his letter and newspapers. In so far he had a personal
interest in the fortunes of the Sofala. Though he considered himself
a hermit (and for no passing whim evidently, since he had stood eight
years of it already), he liked to know what went on in the world.

Handy on the veranda upon a walnut _etagere_ (it had come last year by the
Sofala)--everything came by the Sofala there lay, piled up under bronze
weights, a pile of the Times' weekly edition, the large sheets of the
Rotterdam Courant, the Graphic in its world-wide green wrappers, an
illustrated Dutch publication without a cover, the numbers of a German
magazine with covers of the "_Bismarck malade_" color. There were also
parcels of new music--though the piano (it had come years ago by the
Sofala in the damp atmosphere of the forests was generally out of tune.)
It was vexing to be cut off from everything for sixty days at a stretch
sometimes, without any means of knowing what was the matter. And when
the Sofala reappeared Mr. Van Wyk would descend the steps of the veranda
and stroll over the grass plot in front of his house, down to the
waterside, with a frown on his white brow.

"You've been laid up after an accident, I presume."

He addressed the bridge, but before anybody could answer Massy was sure
to have already scrambled ashore over the rail and pushed in, squeezing
the palms of his hands together, bowing his sleek head as if gummed all
over the top with black threads and tapes. And he would be so enraged
at the necessity of having to offer such an explanation that his moaning
would be positively pitiful, while all the time he tried to compose his
big lips into a smile.

"No, Mr. Van Wyk. You would not believe it. I couldn't get one of those
wretches to take the ship out. Not a single one of the lazy beasts could
be induced, and the law, you know, Mr. Van Wyk . . ."

He moaned at great length apologetically; the words conspiracy, plot,
envy, came out prominently, whined with greater energy. Mr. Van Wyk,
examining with a faint grimace his polished finger-nails, would say,
"H'm. Very unfortunate," and turn his back on him.

Fastidious, clever, slightly skeptical, accustomed to the best society
(he had held a much-envied shore appointment at the Ministry of Marine
for a year preceding his retreat from his profession and from Europe),
he possessed a latent warmth of feeling and a capacity for sympathy
which were concealed by a sort of haughty, arbitrary indifference of
manner arising from his early training; and by a something an enemy
might have called foppish, in his aspect--like a distorted echo of past
elegance. He managed to keep an almost military discipline amongst the
coolies of the estate he had dragged into the light of day out of the
tangle and shadows of the jungle; and the white shirt he put on every
evening with its stiff glossy front and high collar looked as if he had
meant to preserve the decent ceremony of evening-dress, but had wound
a thick crimson sash above his hips as a concession to the wilderness,
once his adversary, now his vanquished companion.

Moreover, it was a hygienic precaution. Worn wide open in front, a short
jacket of some airy silken stuff floated from his shoulders. His fluffy,
fair hair, thin at the top, curled slightly at the sides; a carefully
arranged mustache, an ungarnished forehead, the gleam of low patent
shoes peeping under the wide bottom of trowsers cut straight from the
same stuff as the gossamer coat, completed a figure recalling, with its
sash, a pirate chief of romance, and at the same time the elegance of
a slightly bald dandy indulging, in seclusion, a taste for unorthodox
costume.

It was his evening get-up. The proper time for the Sofala to arrive
at Batu Beru was an hour before sunset, and he looked picturesque, and
somehow quite correct too, walking at the water's edge on the background
of grass slope crowned with a low long bungalow with an immensely steep
roof of palm thatch, and clad to the eaves in flowering creepers. While
the Sofala was being made fast he strolled in the shade of the few trees
left near the landing-place, waiting till he could go on board. Her
white men were not of his kind. The old Sultan (though his wistful
invasions were a nuisance) was really much more acceptable to his
fastidious taste. But still they were white; the periodical visits of
the ship made a break in the well-filled sameness of the days without
disturbing his privacy. Moreover, they were necessary from a business
point of view; and through a strain of preciseness in his nature he was
irritated when she failed to appear at the appointed time.

The cause of the irregularity was too absurd, and Massy, in his opinion,
was a contemptible idiot. The first time the Sofala reappeared under the
new agreement swinging out of the bend below, after he had almost given
up all hope of ever seeing her again, he felt so angry that he did not
go down at once to the landing-place. His servants had come running to
him with the news, and he had dragged a chair close against the front
rail of the veranda, spread his elbows out, rested his chin on his
hands, and went on glaring at her fixedly while she was being made fast
opposite his house. He could make out easily all the white faces on
board. Who on earth was that kind of patriarch they had got there on the
bridge now?

At last he sprang up and walked down the gravel path. It was a fact
that the very gravel for his paths had been imported by the Sofala.
Exasperated out of his quiet superciliousness, without looking at anyone
right or left, he accosted Massy straightway in so determined a manner
that the engineer, taken aback, began to stammer unintelligibly. Nothing
could be heard but the words: "Mr. Van Wyk . . . Indeed, Mr. Van Wyk
. . . For the future, Mr. Van Wyk"--and by the suffusion of blood Massy's
vast bilious face acquired an unnatural orange tint, out of which the
disconcerted coal-black eyes shone in an extraordinary manner.

"Nonsense. I am tired of this. I wonder you have the impudence to come
alongside my jetty as if I had it made for your convenience alone."

Massy tried to protest earnestly. Mr. Van Wyk was very angry. He had
a good mind to ask that German firm--those people in Malacca--what was
their name?--boats with green funnels. They would be only too glad
of the opening to put one of their small steamers on the run. Yes;
Schnitzler, Jacob Schnitzler, would in a moment. Yes. He had decided to
write without delay.

In his agitation Massy caught up his falling pipe.

"You don't mean it, sir!" he shrieked.

"You shouldn't mismanage your business in this ridiculous manner."

Mr. Van Wyk turned on his heel. The other three whites on the bridge had
not stirred during the scene. Massy walked hastily from side to side,
puffed out his cheeks, suffocated.

"Stuck up Dutchman!"

And he moaned out feverishly a long tale of griefs. The efforts he had
made for all these years to please that man. This was the return you
got for it, eh? Pretty. Write to Schnitzler--let in the green-funnel
boats--get an old Hamburg Jew to ruin him. No, really he could laugh.
. . . He laughed sobbingly. . . . Ha! ha! ha! And make him carry the
letter in his own ship presumably.

He stumbled across a grating and swore. He would not hesitate to fling
the Dutchman's correspondence overboard--the whole confounded bundle.
He had never, never made any charge for that accommodation. But Captain
Whalley, his new partner, would not let him probably; besides, it would
be only putting off the evil day. For his own part he would make a hole
in the water rather than look on tamely at the green funnels overrunning
his trade.

He raved aloud. The China boys hung back with the dishes at the foot of
the ladder. He yelled from the bridge down at the deck, "Aren't we going
to have any chow this evening at all?" then turned violently to Captain
Whalley, who waited, grave and patient, at the head of the table,
smoothing his beard in silence now and then with a forbearing gesture.

"You don't seem to care what happens to me. Don't you see that this
affects your interests as much as mine? It's no joking matter."

He took the foot of the table growling between his teeth.

"Unless you have a few thousands put away somewhere. I haven't."

Mr. Van Wyk dined in his thoroughly lit-up bungalow, putting a point of
splendor in the night of his clearing above the dark bank of the river.
Afterwards he sat down to his piano, and in a pause he became aware
of slow footsteps passing on the path along the front. A plank or two
creaked under a heavy tread; he swung half round on the music-stool,
listening with his fingertips at rest on the keyboard. His little
terrier barked violently, backing in from the veranda. A deep voice
apologized gravely for "this intrusion." He walked out quickly.

At the head of the steps the patriarchal figure, who was the new captain
of the Sofala apparently (he had seen a round dozen of them, but not
one of that sort), towered without advancing. The little dog barked
unceasingly, till a flick of Mr. Van Wyk's handkerchief made him spring
aside into silence. Captain Whalley, opening the matter, was met by a
punctiliously polite but determined opposition.

They carried on their discussion standing where they had come face to
face. Mr. Van Wyk observed his visitor with attention. Then at last, as
if forced out of his reserve--

"I am surprised that you should intercede for such a confounded fool."

This outbreak was almost complimentary, as if its meaning had been,
"That such a man as you should intercede!" Captain Whalley let it pass
by without flinching. One would have thought he had heard nothing. He
simply went on to state that he was personally interested in putting
things straight between them. Personally . . .

But Mr. Van Wyk, really carried away by his disgust with Massy, became
very incisive--

"Indeed--if I am to be frank with you--his whole character does not seem
to me particularly estimable or trustworthy . . ."

Captain Whalley, always straight, seemed to grow an inch taller and
broader, as if the girth of his chest had suddenly expanded under his
beard.

"My dear sir, you don't think I came here to discuss a man with whom I
am--I am--h'm--closely associated."

A sort of solemn silence lasted for a moment. He was not used to asking
favors, but the importance he attached to this affair had made him
willing to try. . . . Mr. Van Wyk, favorably impressed, and suddenly
mollified by a desire to laugh, interrupted--

"That's all right if you make it a personal matter; but you can do no
less than sit down and smoke a cigar with me."

A slight pause, then Captain Whalley stepped forward heavily. As to the
regularity of the service, for the future he made himself responsible
for it; and his name was Whalley--perhaps to a sailor (he was speaking
to a sailor, was he not?) not altogether unfamiliar. There was a
lighthouse now, on an island. Maybe Mr. Van Wyk himself . . .

"Oh yes. Oh indeed." Mr. Van Wyk caught on at once. He indicated a
chair. How very interesting. For his own part he had seen some service
in the last Acheen War, but had never been so far East. Whalley Island?
Of course. Now that was very interesting. What changes his guest must
have seen since.

"I can look further back even--on a whole half-century."

Captain Whalley expanded a bit. The flavor of a good cigar (it was a
weakness) had gone straight to his heart, also the civility of that
young man. There was something in that accidental contact of which he
had been starved in his years of struggle.

The front wall retreating made a square recess furnished like a room.
A lamp with a milky glass shade, suspended below the slope of the high
roof at the end of a slender brass chain, threw a bright round of light
upon a little table bearing an open book and an ivory paper-knife. And,
in the translucent shadows beyond, other tables could be seen, a number
of easy-chairs of various shapes, with a great profusion of skin rugs
strewn on the teakwood planking all over the veranda. The flowering
creepers scented the air. Their foliage clipped out between the uprights
made as if several frames of thick unstirring leaves reflecting the
lamplight in a green glow. Through the opening at his elbow Captain
Whalley could see the gangway lantern of the Sofala burning dim by the
shore, the shadowy masses of the town beyond the open lustrous darkness
of the river, and, as if hung along the straight edge of the projecting
eaves, a narrow black strip of the night sky full of stars--resplendent.
The famous cigar in hand he had a moment of complacency.

"A trifle. Somebody must lead the way. I just showed that the thing
could be done; but you men brought up to the use of steam cannot
conceive the vast importance of my bit of venturesomeness to the Eastern
trade of the time. Why, that new route reduced the average time of a
southern passage by eleven days for more than half the year. Eleven
days! It's on record. But the remarkable thing--speaking to a sailor--I
should say was . . ."

He talked well, without egotism, professionally. The powerful voice,
produced without effort, filled the bungalow even into the empty rooms
with a deep and limpid resonance, seemed to make a stillness outside;
and Mr. Van Wyk was surprised by the serene quality of its tone, like
the perfection of manly gentleness. Nursing one small foot, in a
silk sock and a patent leather shoe, on his knee, he was immensely
entertained. It was as if nobody could talk like this now, and the
overshadowed eyes, the flowing white beard, the big frame, the
serenity, the whole temper of the man, were an amazing survival from the
prehistoric times of the world coming up to him out of the sea.

Captain Whalley had been also the pioneer of the early trade in the Gulf
of Pe-tchi-li. He even found occasion to mention that he had buried
his "dear wife" there six-and-twenty years ago. Mr. Van Wyk, impassive,
could not help speculating in his mind swiftly as to the sort of woman
that would mate with such a man. Did they make an adventurous and
well-matched pair? No. Very possible she had been small, frail, no
doubt very feminine--or most likely commonplace with domestic instincts,
utterly insignificant. But Captain Whalley was no garrulous bore, and
shaking his head as if to dissipate the momentary gloom that had settled
on his handsome old face, he alluded conversationally to Mr. Van Wyk's
solitude.

Mr. Van Wyk affirmed that sometimes he had more company than he wanted.
He mentioned smilingly some of the peculiarities of his intercourse with
"My Sultan." He made his visits in force. Those people damaged his grass
plot in front (it was not easy to obtain some approach to a lawn in
the tropics) and the other day had broken down some rare bushes he had
planted over there. And Captain Whalley remembered immediately that,
in 'forty-seven, the then Sultan, "this man's grandfather," had been
notorious as a great protector of the piratical fleets of praus from
farther East. They had a safe refuge in the river at Batu Beru. He
financed more especially a Balinini chief called Haji Daman. Captain
Whalley, nodding significantly his bushy white eyebrows, had very good
reason to know something of that. The world had progressed since that
time.

Mr. Van Wyk demurred with unexpected acrimony. Progressed in what? he
wanted to know.

Why, in knowledge of truth, in decency, in justice, in order--in honesty
too, since men harmed each other mostly from ignorance. It was, Captain
Whalley concluded quaintly, more pleasant to live in.

Mr. Van Wyk whimsically would not admit that Mr. Massy, for instance,
was more pleasant naturally than the Balinini pirates.

The river had not gained much by the change. They were in their way
every bit as honest. Massy was less ferocious than Haji Daman no doubt,
but . . .

"And what about you, my good sir?" Captain Whalley laughed a deep soft
laugh. "_You_ are an improvement, surely."

He continued in a vein of pleasantry. A good cigar was better than a
knock on the head--the sort of welcome he would have found on this
river forty or fifty years ago. Then leaning forward slightly, he became
earnestly serious. It seems as if, outside their own sea-gypsy
tribes, these rovers had hated all mankind with an incomprehensible,
bloodthirsty hatred. Meantime their depredations had been stopped, and
what was the consequence? The new generation was orderly, peaceable,
settled in prosperous villages. He could speak from personal knowledge.
And even the few survivors of that time--old men now--had changed so
much, that it would have been unkind to remember against them that they
had ever slit a throat in their lives. He had one especially in his
mind's eye: a dignified, venerable headman of a certain large coast
village about sixty miles sou'west of Tampasuk. It did one's heart
good to see him--to hear that man speak. He might have been a ferocious
savage once. What men wanted was to be checked by superior intelligence,
by superior knowledge, by superior force too--yes, by force held in
trust from God and sanctified by its use in accordance with His declared
will. Captain Whalley believed a disposition for good existed in every
man, even if the world were not a very happy place as a whole. In the
wisdom of men he had not so much confidence. The disposition had to be
helped up pretty sharply sometimes, he admitted. They might be silly,
wrongheaded, unhappy; but naturally evil--no. There was at bottom a
complete harmlessness at least . . .

"Is there?" Mr. Van Wyk snapped acrimoniously.

Captain Whalley laughed at the interjection, in the good humor of large,
tolerating certitude. He could look back at half a century, he pointed
out. The smoke oozed placidly through the white hairs hiding his kindly
lips.

"At all events," he resumed after a pause, "I am glad that they've had
no time to do you much harm as yet."

This allusion to his comparative youthfulness did not offend Mr. Van
Wyk, who got up and wriggled his shoulders with an enigmatic half-smile.
They walked out together amicably into the starry night towards the
river-side. Their footsteps resounded unequally on the dark path. At the
shore end of the gangway the lantern, hung low to the handrail, threw
a vivid light on the white legs and the big black feet of Mr. Massy
waiting about anxiously. From the waist upwards he remained shadowy,
with a row of buttons gleaming up to the vague outline of his chin.

"You may thank Captain Whalley for this," Mr. Van Wyk said curtly to him
before turning away.

The lamps on the veranda flung three long squares of light between
the uprights far over the grass. A bat flitted before his face like a
circling flake of velvety blackness. Along the jasmine hedge the night
air seemed heavy with the fall of perfumed dew; flowerbeds bordered the
path; the clipped bushes uprose in dark rounded clumps here and there
before the house; the dense foliage of creepers filtered the sheen of
the lamplight within in a soft glow all along the front; and everything
near and far stood still in a great immobility, in a great sweetness.

Mr. Van Wyk (a few years before he had had occasion to imagine himself
treated more badly than anybody alive had ever been by a woman) felt
for Captain Whalley's optimistic views the disdain of a man who had once
been credulous himself. His disgust with the world (the woman for a
time had filled it for him completely) had taken the form of activity
in retirement, because, though capable of great depth of feeling, he was
energetic and essentially practical. But there was in that uncommon old
sailor, drifting on the outskirts of his busy solitude, something that
fascinated his skepticism. His very simplicity (amusing enough) was like
a delicate refinement of an upright character. The striking dignity
of manner could be nothing else, in a man reduced to such a humble
position, but the expression of something essentially noble in the
character. With all his trust in mankind he was no fool; the serenity
of his temper at the end of so many years, since it could not obviously
have been appeased by success, wore an air of profound wisdom. Mr. Van
Wyk was amused at it sometimes. Even the very physical traits of the
old captain of the Sofala, his powerful frame, his reposeful mien, his
intelligent, handsome face, the big limbs, the benign courtesy, the
touch of rugged severity in the shaggy eyebrows, made up a seductive
personality. Mr. Van Wyk disliked littleness of every kind, but there
was nothing small about that man, and in the exemplary regularity of
many trips an intimacy had grown up between them, a warm feeling
at bottom under a kindly stateliness of forms agreeable to his
fastidiousness.

They kept their respective opinions on all worldly matters. His other
convictions Captain Whalley never intruded. The difference of their
ages was like another bond between them. Once, when twitted with the
uncharitableness of his youth, Mr. Van Wyk, running his eye over the
vast proportions of his interlocutor, retorted in friendly banter--

"Oh. You'll come to my way of thinking yet. You'll have plenty of time.
Don't call yourself old: you look good for a round hundred."

But he could not help his stinging incisiveness, and though moderating
it by an almost affectionate smile, he added--

"And by then you will probably consent to die from sheer disgust."

Captain Whalley, smiling too, shook his head. "God forbid!"

He thought that perhaps on the whole he deserved something better than
to die in such sentiments. The time of course would have to come, and he
trusted to his Maker to provide a manner of going out of which he need
not be ashamed. For the rest he hoped he would live to a hundred if need
be: other men had been known; it would be no miracle. He expected no
miracles.

The pronounced, argumentative tone caused Mr. Van Wyk to raise his head
and look at him steadily. Captain Whalley was gazing fixedly with a rapt
expression, as though he had seen his Creator's favorable decree written
in mysterious characters on the wall. He kept perfectly motionless for
a few seconds, then got his vast bulk on to his feet so impetuously that
Mr. Van Wyk was startled.

He struck first a heavy blow on his inflated chest: and, throwing out
horizontally a big arm that remained steady, extended in the air like
the limb of a tree on a windless day--

"Not a pain or an ache there. Can you see this shake in the least?"

His voice was low, in an awing, confident contrast with the headlong
emphasis of his movements. He sat down abruptly.

"This isn't to boast of it, you know. I am nothing," he said in his
effortless strong voice, that seemed to come out as naturally as a river
flows. He picked up the stump of the cigar he had laid aside, and added
peacefully, with a slight nod, "As it happens, my life is necessary; it
isn't my own, it isn't--God knows."

He did not say much for the rest of the evening, but several times Mr.
Van Wyk detected a faint smile of assurance flitting under the heavy
mustache.

Later on Captain Whalley would now and then consent to dine "at the
house." He could even be induced to drink a glass of wine. "Don't think
I am afraid of it, my good sir," he explained. "There was a very good
reason why I should give it up."

On another occasion, leaning back at ease, he remarked, "You have
treated me most--most humanely, my dear Mr. Van Wyk, from the very
first."

"You'll admit there was some merit," Mr. Van Wyk hinted slyly. "An
associate of that excellent Massy. . . . Well, well, my dear captain, I
won't say a word against him."

"It would be no use your saying anything against him," Captain Whalley
affirmed a little moodily. "As I've told you before, my life--my work,
is necessary, not for myself alone. I can't choose" . . . He paused,
turned the glass before him right round. . . . "I have an only child--a
daughter."

The ample downward sweep of his arm over the table seemed to suggest
a small girl at a vast distance. "I hope to see her once more before I
die. Meantime it's enough to know that she has me sound and solid, thank
God. You can't understand how one feels. Bone of my bone, flesh of my
flesh; the very image of my poor wife. Well, she . . ."

Again he paused, then pronounced stoically the words, "She has a hard
struggle."

And his head fell on his breast, his eyebrows remained knitted, as by
an effort of meditation. But generally his mind seemed steeped in the
serenity of boundless trust in a higher power. Mr. Van Wyk wondered
sometimes how much of it was due to the splendid vitality of the man,
to the bodily vigor which seems to impart something of its force to the
soul. But he had learned to like him very much.


XIII

This was the reason why Mr. Sterne's confidential communication,
delivered hurriedly on the shore alongside the dark silent ship,
had disturbed his equanimity. It was the most incomprehensible and
unexpected thing that could happen; and the perturbation of his spirit
was so great that, forgetting all about his letters, he ran rapidly up
the bridge ladder.

The portable table was being put together for dinner to the left of the
wheel by two pig-tailed "boys," who as usual snarled at each other
over the job, while another, a doleful, burly, very yellow Chinaman,
resembling Mr. Massy, waited apathetically with the cloth over his arm
and a pile of thick dinner-plates against his chest. A common cabin lamp
with its globe missing, brought up from below, had been hooked to the
wooden framework of the awning; the side-screens had been lowered all
round; Captain Whalley filling the depths of the wicker-chair seemed to
sit benumbed in a canvas tent crudely lighted, and used for the storing
of nautical objects; a shabby steering-wheel, a battered brass binnacle
on a stout mahogany stand, two dingy life-buoys, an old cork fender
lying in a corner, dilapidated deck-lockers with loops of thin rope
instead of door-handles.

He shook off the appearance of numbness to return Mr. Van Wyk's
unusually brisk greeting, but relapsed directly afterwards. To accept
a pressing invitation to dinner "up at the house" cost him another very
visible physical effort. Mr. Van Wyk, perplexed, folded his arms, and
leaning back against the rail, with his little, black, shiny feet well
out, examined him covertly.

"I've noticed of late that you are not quite yourself, old friend."

He put an affectionate gentleness into the last two words. The real
intimacy of their intercourse had never been so vividly expressed
before.

"Tut, tut, tut!"

The wicker-chair creaked heavily.

"Irritable," commented Mr. Van Wyk to himself; and aloud, "I'll expect
to see you in half an hour, then," he said negligently, moving off.

"In half an hour," Captain Whalley's rigid silvery head repeated behind
him as if out of a trance.

Amidships, below, two voices, close against the engineroom, could be
heard answering each other--one angry and slow, the other alert.

"I tell you the beast has locked himself in to get drunk."

"Can't help it now, Mr. Massy. After all, a man has a right to shut
himself up in his cabin in his own time."

"Not to get drunk."

"I heard him swear that the worry with the boilers was enough to drive
any man to drink," Sterne said maliciously.

Massy hissed out something about bursting the door in. Mr. Van Wyk, to
avoid them, crossed in the dark to the other side of the deserted deck.
The planking of the little wharf rattled faintly under his hasty feet.

"Mr. Van Wyk! Mr. Van Wyk!"

He walked on: somebody was running on the path. "You've forgotten to get
your mail."

Sterne, holding a bundle of papers in his hand, caught up with him.

"Oh, thanks."

But, as the other continued at his elbow, Mr. Van Wyk stopped short.
The overhanging eaves, descending low upon the lighted front of the
bungalow, threw their black straight-edged shadow into the great body of
the night on that side. Everything was very still. A tinkle of cutlery
and a slight jingle of glasses were heard. Mr. Van Wyk's servants were
laying the table for two on the veranda.

"I'm afraid you give me no credit whatever for my good intentions in the
matter I've spoken to you about," said Sterne.

"I simply don't understand you."

"Captain Whalley is a very audacious man, but he will understand that
his game is up. That's all that anybody need ever know of it from me.
Believe me, I am very considerate in this, but duty is duty. I don't
want to make a fuss. All I ask you, as his friend, is to tell him from
me that the game's up. That will be sufficient."

Mr. Van Wyk felt a loathsome dismay at this queer privilege of
friendship. He would not demean himself by asking for the slightest
explanation; to drive the other away with contumely he did not think
prudent--as yet, at any rate. So much assurance staggered him. Who
could tell what there could be in it, he thought? His regard for Captain
Whalley had the tenacity of a disinterested sentiment, and his practical
instinct coming to his aid, he concealed his scorn.

"I gather, then, that this is something grave."

"Very grave," Sterne assented solemnly, delighted at having produced
an effect at last. He was ready to add some effusive protestations
of regret at the "unavoidable necessity," but Mr. Van Wyk cut him
short--very civilly, however.

Once on the veranda Mr. Van Wyk put his hands in his pockets, and,
straddling his legs, stared down at a black panther skin lying on the
floor before a rocking-chair. "It looks as if the fellow had not the
pluck to play his own precious game openly," he thought.

This was true enough. In the face of Massy's last rebuff Sterne dared
not declare his knowledge. His object was simply to get charge of the
steamer and keep it for some time. Massy would never forgive him for
forcing himself on; but if Captain Whalley left the ship of his own
accord, the command would devolve upon him for the rest of the trip;
so he hit upon the brilliant idea of scaring the old man away. A vague
menace, a mere hint, would be enough in such a brazen case; and, with
a strange admixture of compassion, he thought that Batu Beru was a
very good place for throwing up the sponge. The skipper could go ashore
quietly, and stay with that Dutchman of his. Weren't these two as thick
as thieves together? And on reflection he seemed to see that there was a
way to work the whole thing through that great friend of the old
man's. This was another brilliant idea. He had an inborn preference for
circuitous methods. In this particular case he desired to remain in the
background as much as possible, to avoid exasperating Massy needlessly.
No fuss! Let it all happen naturally.

Mr. Van Wyk all through the dinner was conscious of a sense of isolation
that invades sometimes the closeness of human intercourse. Captain
Whalley failed lamentably and obviously in his attempts to eat
something. He seemed overcome by a strange absentmindedness. His hand
would hover irresolutely, as if left without guidance by a preoccupied
mind. Mr. Van Wyk had heard him coming up from a long way off in the
profound stillness of the river-side, and had noticed the irresolute
character of the footfalls. The toe of his boot had struck the bottom
stair as though he had come along mooning with his head in the air
right up to the steps of the veranda. Had the captain of the Sofala been
another sort of man he would have suspected the work of age there. But
one glance at him was enough. Time--after, indeed, marking him for its
own--had given him up to his usefulness, in which his simple faith would
see a proof of Divine mercy. "How could I contrive to warn him?" Mr. Van
Wyk wondered, as if Captain Whalley had been miles and miles away, out
of sight and earshot of all evil. He was sickened by an immense disgust
of Sterne. To even mention his threat to a man like Whalley would be
positively indecent. There was something more vile and insulting in
its hint than in a definite charge of crime--the debasing taint of
blackmailing. "What could anyone bring against him?" he asked himself.
This was a limpid personality. "And for what object?" The Power that man
trusted had thought fit to leave him nothing on earth that envy could
lay hold of, except a bare crust of bread.

"Won't you try some of this?" he asked, pushing a dish slightly.
Suddenly it seemed to Mr. Van Wyk that Sterne might possibly be coveting
the command of the Sofala. His cynicism was quite startled by what
looked like a proof that no man may count himself safe from his kind
unless in the very abyss of misery. An intrigue of that sort was hardly
worth troubling about, he judged; but still, with such a fool as Massy
to deal with, Whalley ought to and must be warned.

At this moment Captain Whalley, bolt upright, the deep cavities of the
eyes overhung by a bushy frown, and one large brown hand resting on each
side of his empty plate, spoke across the tablecloth abruptly--"Mr. Van
Wyk, you've always treated me with the most humane consideration."

"My dear captain, you make too much of a simple fact that I am not
a savage." Mr. Van Wyk, utterly revolted by the thought of Sterne's
obscure attempt, raised his voice incisively, as if the mate had been
hiding somewhere within earshot. "Any consideration I have been able to
show was no more than the rightful due of a character I've learned to
regard by this time with an esteem that nothing can shake."

A slight ring of glass made him lift his eyes from the slice of
pine-apple he was cutting into small pieces on his plate. In changing
his position Captain Whalley had contrived to upset an empty tumbler.

Without looking that way, leaning sideways on his elbow, his other
hand shading his brow, he groped shakily for it, then desisted. Van Wyk
stared blankly, as if something momentous had happened all at once.
He did not know why he should feel so startled; but he forgot Sterne
utterly for the moment.

"Why, what's the matter?"

And Captain Whalley, half-averted, in a deadened, agitated voice,
muttered--

"Esteem!"

"And I may add something more," Mr. Van Wyk, very steady-eyed,
pronounced slowly.

"Hold! Enough!" Captain Whalley did not change his attitude or raise his
voice. "Say no more! I can make you no return. I am too poor even for
that now. Your esteem is worth having. You are not a man that would
stoop to deceive the poorest sort of devil on earth, or make a ship
unseaworthy every time he takes her to sea."

Mr. Van Wyk, leaning forward, his face gone pink all over, with the
starched table-napkin over his knees, was inclined to mistrust his
senses, his power of comprehension, the sanity of his guest.

"Where? Why? In the name of God!--what's this? What ship? I don't
understand who . . ."

"Then, in the name of God, it is I! A ship's unseaworthy when her
captain can't see. I am going blind."

Mr. Van Wyk made a slight movement, and sat very still afterwards for
a few seconds; then, with the thought of Sterne's "The game's up," he
ducked under the table to pick up the napkin which had slipped off his
knees. This was the game that was up. And at the same time the muffled
voice of Captain Whalley passed over him--

"I've deceived them all. Nobody knows."

He emerged flushed to the eyes. Captain Whalley, motionless under the
full blaze of the lamp, shaded his face with his hand.

"And you had that courage?"

"Call it by what name you like. But you are a humane
man--a--a--gentleman, Mr. Van Wyk. You may have asked me what I had done
with my conscience."

He seemed to muse, profoundly silent, very still in his mournful pose.

"I began to tamper with it in my pride. You begin to see a lot of things
when you are going blind. I could not be frank with an old chum even.
I was not frank with Massy--no, not altogether. I knew he took me for
a wealthy sailor fool, and I let him. I wanted to keep up my
importance--because there was poor Ivy away there--my daughter. What did
I want to trade on his misery for? I did trade on it--for her. And now,
what mercy could I expect from him? He would trade on mine if he knew
it. He would hunt the old fraud out, and stick to the money for a year.
Ivy's money. And I haven't kept a penny for myself. How am I going to
live for a year. A year! In a year there will be no sun in the sky for
her father."

His deep voice came out, awfully veiled, as though he had been
overwhelmed by the earth of a landslide, and talking to you of the
thoughts that haunt the dead in their graves. A cold shudder ran down
Mr. Van Wyk's back.

"And how long is it since you have . . .?" he began.

"It was a long time before I could bring myself to believe in this--this
visitation." Captain Whalley spoke with gloomy patience from under his
hand.

He had not thought he had deserved it. He had begun by deceiving himself
from day to day, from week to week. He had the Serang at hand there--an
old servant. It came on gradually, and when he could no longer deceive
himself . . .

His voice died out almost.

"Rather than give her up I set myself to deceive you all."

"It's incredible," whispered Mr. Van Wyk. Captain Whalley's appalling
murmur flowed on.

"Not even the sign of God's anger could make me forget her. How could I
forsake my child, feeling my vigor all the time--the blood warm within
me? Warm as yours. It seems to me that, like the blinded Samson, I
would find the strength to shake down a temple upon my head. She's a
struggling woman--my own child that we used to pray over together, my
poor wife and I. Do you remember that day I as well as told you that I
believed God would let me live to a hundred for her sake? What sin is
there in loving your child? Do you see it? I was ready for her sake
to live for ever. I half believed I would. I've been praying for death
since. Ha! Presumptuous man--you wanted to live . . ."

A tremendous, shuddering upheaval of that big frame, shaken by a gasping
sob, set the glasses jingling all over the table, seemed to make the
whole house tremble to the roof-tree. And Mr. Van Wyk, whose feeling of
outraged love had been translated into a form of struggle with nature,
understood very well that, for that man whose whole life had been
conditioned by action, there could exist no other expression for all the
emotions; that, to voluntarily cease venturing, doing, enduring, for his
child's sake, would have been exactly like plucking his warm love for
her out of his living heart. Something too monstrous, too impossible,
even to conceive.

Captain Whalley had not changed his attitude, that seemed to express
something of shame, sorrow, and defiance.

"I have even deceived you. If it had not been for that word 'esteem.'
These are not the words for me. I would have lied to you. Haven't I
lied to you? Weren't you going to trust your property on board this very
trip?"

"I have a floating yearly policy," Mr. Van Wyk said almost unwittingly,
and was amazed at the sudden cropping up of a commercial detail.

"The ship is unseaworthy, I tell you. The policy would be invalid if it
were known . . ."

"We shall share the guilt, then."

"Nothing could make mine less," said Captain Whalley.

He had not dared to consult a doctor; the man would have perhaps asked
who he was, what he was doing; Massy might have heard something. He had
lived on without any help, human or divine. The very prayers stuck in
his throat. What was there to pray for? and death seemed as far as ever.
Once he got into his cabin he dared not come out again; when he sat down
he dared not get up; he dared not raise his eyes to anybody's face;
he felt reluctant to look upon the sea or up to the sky. The world was
fading before his great fear of giving himself away. The old ship was
his last friend; he was not afraid of her; he knew every inch of her
deck; but at her too he hardly dared to look, for fear of finding he
could see less than the day before. A great incertitude enveloped him.
The horizon was gone; the sky mingled darkly with the sea. Who was this
figure standing over yonder? what was this thing lying down there? And
a frightful doubt of the reality of what he could see made even the
remnant of sight that remained to him an added torment, a pitfall always
open for his miserable pretense. He was afraid to stumble inexcusably
over something--to say a fatal Yes or No to a question. The hand of God
was upon him, but it could not tear him away from his child. And, as if
in a nightmare of humiliation, every featureless man seemed an enemy.

He let his hand fall heavily on the table. Mr. Van Wyk, arms down,
chin on breast, with a gleam of white teeth pressing on the lower lip,
meditated on Sterne's "The game's up."

"The Serang of course does not know."

"Nobody," said Captain Whalley, with assurance.

"Ah yes. Nobody. Very well. Can you keep it up to the end of the trip?
That is the last under the agreement with Massy."

Captain Whalley got up and stood erect, very stately, with the great
white beard lying like a silver breastplate over the awful secret of his
heart. Yes; that was the only hope there was for him of ever seeing her
again, of securing the money, the last he could do for her, before he
crept away somewhere--useless, a burden, a reproach to himself. His
voice faltered.

"Think of it! Never see her any more: the only human being besides
myself now on earth that can remember my wife. She's just like her
mother. Lucky the poor woman is where there are no tears shed over
those they loved on earth and that remain to pray not to be led into
temptation--because, I suppose, the blessed know the secret of grace in
God's dealings with His created children."

He swayed a little, said with austere dignity--

"I don't. I know only the child He has given me."

And he began to walk. Mr. Van Wyk, jumping up, saw the full meaning
of the rigid head, the hesitating feet, the vaguely extended hand.
His heart was beating fast; he moved a chair aside, and instinctively
advanced as if to offer his arm. But Captain Whalley passed him by,
making for the stairs quite straight.

"He could not see me at all out of his line," Van Wyk thought, with a
sort of awe. Then going to the head of the stairs, he asked a little
tremulously--

"What is it like--like a mist--like . . ."

Captain Whalley, half-way down, stopped, and turned round undismayed to
answer.

"It is as if the light were ebbing out of the world. Have you ever
watched the ebbing sea on an open stretch of sands withdrawing farther
and farther away from you? It is like this--only there will be no flood
to follow. Never. It is as if the sun were growing smaller, the stars
going out one by one. There can't be many left that I can see by this.
But I haven't had the courage to look of late . . ." He must have been
able to make out Mr. Van Wyk, because he checked him by an authoritative
gesture and a stoical--

"I can get about alone yet."

It was as if he had taken his line, and would accept no help from men,
after having been cast out, like a presumptuous Titan, from his heaven.
Mr. Van Wyk, arrested, seemed to count the footsteps right out of
earshot. He walked between the tables, tapping smartly with his heels,
took up a paper-knife, dropped it after a vague glance along the blade;
then happening upon the piano, struck a few chords again and again,
vigorously, standing up before the keyboard with an attentive poise
of the head like a piano-tuner; closing it, he pivoted on his heels
brusquely, avoided the little terrier sleeping trustfully on crossed
forepaws, came upon the stairs next, and, as though he had lost his
balance on the top step, ran down headlong out of the house. His
servants, beginning to clear the table, heard him mutter to himself
(evil words no doubt) down there, and then after a pause go away with a
strolling gait in the direction of the wharf.

The bulwarks of the Sofala lying alongside the bank made a low, black
wall on the undulating contour of the shore. Two masts and a funnel
uprose from behind it with a great rake, as if about to fall: a solid,
square elevation in the middle bore the ghostly shapes of white boats,
the curves of davits, lines of rail and stanchions, all confused and
mingling darkly everywhere; but low down, amidships, a single lighted
port stared out on the night, perfectly round, like a small, full moon,
whose yellow beam caught a patch of wet mud, the edge of trodden grass,
two turns of heavy cable wound round the foot of a thick wooden post in
the ground.

Mr. Van Wyk, peering alongside, heard a muzzy boastful voice apparently
jeering at a person called Prendergast. It mouthed abuse thickly,
choked; then pronounced very distinctly the word "Murphy," and chuckled.
Glass tinkled tremulously. All these sounds came from the lighted port.
Mr. Van Wyk hesitated, stooped; it was impossible to look through unless
he went down into the mud.

"Sterne," he said, half aloud.

The drunken voice within said gladly--

"Sterne--of course. Look at him blink. Look at him! Sterne, Whalley,
Massy. Massy, Whalley, Sterne. But Massy's the best. You can't come over
him. He would just love to see you starve."

Mr. Van Wyk moved away, made out farther forward a shadowy head stuck
out from under the awnings as if on the watch, and spoke quietly in
Malay, "Is the mate asleep?"

"No. Here, at your service."

In a moment Sterne appeared, walking as noiselessly as a cat on the
wharf.

"It's so jolly dark, and I had no idea you would be down to-night."

"What's this horrible raving?" asked Mr. Van Wyk, as if to explain the
cause of a shudder than ran over him audibly.

"Jack's broken out on a drunk. That's our second. It's his way. He will
be right enough by to-morrow afternoon, only Mr. Massy will keep on
worrying up and down the deck. We had better get away."

He muttered suggestively of a talk "up at the house." He had long
desired to effect an entrance there, but Mr. Van Wyk nonchalantly
demurred: it would not, he feared, be quite prudent, perhaps; and
the opaque black shadow under one of the two big trees left at the
landing-place swallowed them up, impenetrably dense, by the side of the
wide river, that seemed to spin into threads of glitter the light of
a few big stars dropped here and there upon its outspread and flowing
stillness.

"The situation is grave beyond doubt," Mr. Van Wyk said. Ghost-like in
their white clothes they could not distinguish each others' features,
and their feet made no sound on the soft earth. A sort of purring was
heard. Mr. Sterne felt gratified by such a beginning.

"I thought, Mr. Van Wyk, a gentleman of your sort would see at once how
awkwardly I was situated."

"Yes, very. Obviously his health is bad. Perhaps he's breaking up. I
see, and he himself is well aware--I assume I am speaking to a man of
sense--he is well aware that his legs are giving out."

"His legs--ah!" Mr. Sterne was disconcerted, and then turned sulky.
"You may call it his legs if you like; what I want to know is whether he
intends to clear out quietly. That's a good one, too! His legs! Pooh!"

"Why, yes. Only look at the way he walks." Mr. Van Wyk took him up in a
perfectly cool and undoubting tone. "The question, however, is whether
your sense of duty does not carry you too far from your true interest.
After all, I too could do something to serve you. You know who I am."

"Everybody along the Straits has heard of you, sir."

Mr. Van Wyk presumed that this meant something favorable. Sterne had
a soft laugh at this pleasantry. He should think so! To the opening
statement, that the partnership agreement was to expire at the end of
this very trip, he gave an attentive assent. He was aware. One heard of
nothing else on board all the blessed day long. As to Massy, it was no
secret that he was in a jolly deep hole with these worn-out boilers. He
would have to borrow somewhere a couple of hundred first of all to pay
off the captain; and then he would have to raise money on mortgage upon
the ship for the new boilers--that is, if he could find a lender at all.
At best it meant loss of time, a break in the trade, short earnings
for the year--and there was always the danger of having his connection
filched away from him by the Germans. It was whispered about that he
had already tried two firms. Neither would have anything to do with
him. Ship too old, and the man too well known in the place. . . .
Mr. Sterne's final rapid winking remained buried in the deep darkness
sibilating with his whispers.

"Supposing, then, he got the loan," Mr. Van Wyk resumed in a deliberate
undertone, "on your own showing he's more than likely to get a
mortgagee's man thrust upon him as captain. For my part, I know that I
would make that very stipulation myself if I had to find the money.
And as a matter of fact I am thinking of doing so. It would be worth
my while in many ways. Do you see how this would bear on the case under
discussion?"

"Thank you, sir. I am sure you couldn't get anybody that would care more
for your interests."

"Well, it suits my interest that Captain Whalley should finish his time.
I shall probably take a passage with you down the Straits. If that can
be done, I'll be on the spot when all these changes take place, and in a
position to look after _your_ interests."

"Mr. Van Wyk, I want nothing better. I am sure I am infinitely . . ."

"I take it, then, that this may be done without any trouble."

"Well, sir, what risk there is can't be helped; but (speaking to you as
my employer now) the thing is more safe than it looks. If anybody had
told me of it I wouldn't have believed it, but I have been looking on
myself. That old Serang has been trained up to the game. There's nothing
the matter with his--his--limbs, sir. He's got used to doing things
himself in a remarkable way. And let me tell you, sir, that Captain
Whalley, poor man, is by no means useless. Fact. Let me explain to you,
sir. He stiffens up that old monkey of a Malay, who knows well enough
what to do. Why, he must have kept captain's watches in all sorts of
country ships off and on for the last five-and-twenty years. These
natives, sir, as long as they have a white man close at the back, will
go on doing the right thing most surprisingly well--even if left quite
to themselves. Only the white man must be of the sort to put starch into
them, and the captain is just the one for that. Why, sir, he has drilled
him so well that now he needs hardly speak at all. I have seen that
little wrinkled ape made to take the ship out of Pangu Bay on a blowy
morning and on all through the islands; take her out first-rate, sir,
dodging under the old man's elbow, and in such quiet style that you
could not have told for the life of you which of the two was doing the
work up there. That's where our poor friend would be still of use to
the ship even if--if--he could no longer lift a foot, sir. Provided the
Serang does not know that there's anything wrong."

"He doesn't."

"Naturally not. Quite beyond his apprehension. They aren't capable of
finding out anything about us, sir."

"You seem to be a shrewd man," said Mr. Van Wyk in a choked mutter, as
though he were feeling sick.

"You'll find me a good enough servant, sir."

Mr. Sterne hoped now for a handshake at least, but unexpectedly, with a
"What's this? Better not to be seen together," Mr. Van Wyk's white shape
wavered, and instantly seemed to melt away in the black air under
the roof of boughs. The mate was startled. Yes. There was that faint
thumping clatter.

He stole out silently from under the shade. The lighted port-hole shone
from afar. His head swam with the intoxication of sudden success. What
a thing it was to have a gentleman to deal with! He crept aboard, and
there was something weird in the shadowy stretch of empty decks, echoing
with shouts and blows proceeding from a darker part amidships. Mr. Massy
was raging before the door of the berth: the drunken voice within flowed
on undisturbed in the violent racket of kicks.

"Shut up! Put your light out and turn in, you confounded swilling
pig--you! D'you hear me, you beast?"

The kicking stopped, and in the pause the muzzy oracular voice announced
from within--

"Ah! Massy, now--that's another thing. Massy's deep."

"Who's that aft there? You, Sterne? He'll drink himself into a fit of
horrors." The chief engineer appeared vague and big at the corner of the
engineroom.

"He will be good enough for duty to-morrow. I would let him be, Mr.
Massy."

Sterne slipped away into his berth, and at once had to sit down. His
head swam with exultation. He got into his bunk as if in a dream. A
feeling of profound peace, of pacific joy, came over him. On deck all
was quiet.

Mr. Massy, with his ear against the door of Jack's cabin, listened
critically to a deep stertorous breathing within. This was a dead-drunk
sleep. The bout was over: tranquilized on that score, he too went in,
and with slow wriggles got out of his old tweed jacket. It was a garment
with many pockets, which he used to put on at odd times of the day,
being subject to sudden chilly fits, and when he felt warmed he would
take it off and hang it about anywhere all over the ship. It would
be seen swinging on belaying-pins, thrown over the heads of winches,
suspended on people's very door-handles for that matter. Was he not the
owner? But his favorite place was a hook on a wooden awning stanchion on
the bridge, almost against the binnacle. He had even in the early days
more than one tussle on that point with Captain Whalley, who desired the
bridge to be kept tidy. He had been overawed then. Of late, though, he
had been able to defy his partner with impunity. Captain Whalley never
seemed to notice anything now. As to the Malays, in their awe of that
scowling man not one of the crew would dream of laying a hand on the
thing, no matter where or what it swung from.

With an unexpectedness which made Mr. Massy jump and drop the coat
at his feet, there came from the next berth the crash and thud of a
headlong, jingling, clattering fall. The faithful Jack must have dropped
to sleep suddenly as he sat at his revels, and now had gone over chair
and all, breaking, as it seemed by the sound, every single glass and
bottle in the place. After the terrific smash all was still for a time
in there, as though he had killed himself outright on the spot. Mr.
Massy held his breath. At last a sleepy uneasy groaning sigh was exhaled
slowly on the other side of the bulkhead.

"I hope to goodness he's too drunk to wake up now," muttered Mr. Massy.

The sound of a softly knowing laugh nearly drove him to despair. He
swore violently under his breath. The fool would keep him awake all
night now for certain. He cursed his luck. He wanted to forget his
maddening troubles in sleep sometimes. He could detect no movements.
Without apparently making the slightest attempt to get up, Jack went on
sniggering to himself where he lay; then began to speak, where he had
left off as it were--

"Massy! I love the dirty rascal. He would like to see his poor old Jack
starve--but just you look where he has climbed to." . . . He hiccoughed
in a superior, leisurely manner. . . . "Ship-owning it with the best.
A lottery ticket you want. Ha! ha! I will give you lottery tickets, my
boy. Let the old ship sink and the old chum starve--that's right. He
don't go wrong--Massy don't. Not he. He's a genius--that man is. That's
the way to win your money. Ship and chum must go."

"The silly fool has taken it to heart," muttered Massy to himself. And,
listening with a softened expression of face for any slight sign of
returning drowsiness, he was discouraged profoundly by a burst of
laughter full of joyful irony.

"Would like to see her at the bottom of the sea! Oh, you clever, clever
devil! Wish her sunk, eh? I should think you would, my boy; the damned
old thing and all your troubles with her. Rake in the insurance money
--turn your back on your old chum--all's well--gentleman again."

A grim stillness had come over Massy's face. Only his big black eyes
rolled uneasily. The raving fool. And yet it was all true. Yes. Lottery
tickets, too. All true. What? Beginning again? He wished he
wouldn't. . . .

But it was even so. The imaginative drunkard on the other side of the
bulkhead shook off the deathlike stillness that after his last words had
fallen on the dark ship moored to a silent shore.

"Don't you dare to say anything against George Massy, Esquire. When he's
tired of waiting he will do away with her. Look out! Down she goes--chum
and all. He'll know how to . . ."

The voice hesitated, weary, dreamy, lost, as if dying away in a vast
open space.

". . . Find a trick that will work. He's up to it--never fear . . ."

He must have been very drunk, for at last the heavy sleep gripped him
with the suddenness of a magic spell, and the last word lengthened
itself into an interminable, noisy, in-drawn snore. And then even the
snoring stopped, and all was still.

But it seemed as though Mr. Massy had suddenly come to doubt the
efficacy of sleep as against a man's troubles; or perhaps he had found
the relief he needed in the stillness of a calm contemplation that
may contain the vivid thoughts of wealth, of a stroke of luck, of long
idleness, and may bring before you the imagined form of every desire;
for, turning about and throwing his arms over the edge of his bunk, he
stood there with his feet on his favorite old coat, looking out through
the round port into the night over the river. Sometimes a breath of wind
would enter and touch his face, a cool breath charged with the damp,
fresh feel from a vast body of water. A glimmer here and there was all
he could see of it; and once he might after all suppose he had dozed
off, since there appeared before his vision, unexpectedly and connected
with no dream, a row of flaming and gigantic figures--three naught seven
one two--making up a number such as you may see on a lottery ticket.
And then all at once the port was no longer black: it was pearly gray,
framing a shore crowded with houses, thatched roof beyond thatched
roof, walls of mats and bamboo, gables of carved teak timber. Rows
of dwellings raised on a forest of piles lined the steely band of the
river, brimful and still, with the tide at the turn. This was Batu
Beru--and the day had come.

Mr. Massy shook himself, put on the tweed coat, and, shivering nervously
as if from some great shock, made a note of the number. A fortunate,
rare hint that. Yes; but to pursue fortune one wanted money--ready cash.

Then he went out and prepared to descend into the engine-room. Several
small jobs had to be seen to, and Jack was lying dead drunk on the
floor of his cabin, with the door locked at that. His gorge rose at
the thought of work. Ay! But if you wanted to do nothing you had to get
first a good bit of money. A ship won't save you. He cursed the Sofala.
True, all true. He was tired of waiting for some chance that would rid
him at last of that ship that had turned out a curse on his life.


XIV

The deep, interminable hoot of the steam-whistle had, in its grave,
vibrating note, something intolerable, which sent a slight shudder down
Mr. Van Wyk's back. It was the early afternoon; the Sofala was leaving
Batu Beru for Pangu, the next place of call. She swung in the stream,
scantily attended by a few canoes, and, gliding on the broad river,
became lost to view from the Van Wyk bungalow.

Its owner had not gone this time to see her off. Generally he came down
to the wharf, exchanged a few words with the bridge while she cast off,
and waved his hand to Captain Whalley at the last moment. This day he
did not even go as far as the balustrade of the veranda. "He couldn't
see me if I did," he said to himself. "I wonder whether he can make out
the house at all." And this thought somehow made him feel more alone
than he had ever felt for all these years. What was it? six or seven?
Seven. A long time.

He sat on the veranda with a closed book on his knee, and, as it were,
looked out upon his solitude, as if the fact of Captain Whalley's
blindness had opened his eyes to his own. There were many sorts of
heartaches and troubles, and there was no place where they could not
find a man out. And he felt ashamed, as though he had for six years
behaved like a peevish boy.

His thought followed the Sofala on her way. On the spur of the moment he
had acted impulsively, turning to the thing most pressing. And what else
could he have done? Later on he should see. It seemed necessary that
he should come out into the world, for a time at least. He had
money--something could be arranged; he would grudge no time, no trouble,
no loss of his solitude. It weighed on him now--and Captain Whalley
appeared to him as he had sat shading his eyes, as if, being deceived in
the trust of his faith, he were beyond all the good and evil that can be
wrought by the hands of men.

Mr. Van Wyk's thoughts followed the Sofala down the river, winding about
through the belt of the coast forest, between the buttressed shafts of
the big trees, through the mangrove strip, and over the bar. The ship
crossed it easily in broad daylight, piloted, as it happened, by Mr.
Sterne, who took the watch from four to six, and then went below to hug
himself with delight at the prospect of being virtually employed by a
rich man--like Mr. Van Wyk. He could not see how any hitch could occur
now. He did not seem able to get over the feeling of being "fixed up at
last." From six to eight, in the course of duty, the Serang looked alone
after the ship. She had a clear road before her now till about three
in the morning, when she would close with the Pangu group. At eight Mr.
Sterne came out cheerily to take charge again till midnight. At ten he
was still chirruping and humming to himself on the bridge, and about
that time Mr. Van Wyk's thought abandoned the Sofala. Mr. Van Wyk had
fallen asleep at last.

Massy, blocking the engine-room companion, jerked himself into his tweed
jacket surlily, while the second waited with a scowl.

"Oh. You came out? You sot! Well, what have you got to say for
yourself?"

He had been in charge of the engines till then. A somber fury darkened
his mind: a hot anger against the ship, against the facts of life,
against the men for their cheating, against himself too--because of an
inward tremor of his heart.

An incomprehensible growl answered him.

"What? Can't you open your mouth now? You yelp out your infernal rot
loud enough when you are drunk. What do you mean by abusing people in
that way?--you old useless boozer, you!"

"Can't help it. Don't remember anything about it. You shouldn't listen."

"You dare to tell me! What do you mean by going on a drunk like this!"

"Don't ask me. Sick of the dam' boilers--you would be. Sick of life."

"I wish you were dead, then. You've made me sick of you. Don't you
remember the uproar you made last night? You miserable old soaker!"

"No; I don't. Don't want to. Drink is drink."

"I wonder what prevents me from kicking you out. What do you want here?"

"Relieve you. You've been long enough down there, George."

"Don't you George me--you tippling old rascal, you! If I were to die
to-morrow you would starve. Remember that. Say Mr. Massy."

"Mr. Massy," repeated the other stolidly.

Disheveled, with dull blood-shot eyes, a snuffy, grimy shirt, greasy
trowsers, naked feet thrust into ragged slippers, he bolted in head down
directly Massy had made way for him.

The chief engineer looked around. The deck was empty as far as the
taffrail. All the native passengers had left in Batu Beru this time, and
no others had joined. The dial of the patent log tinkled periodically
in the dark at the end of the ship. It was a dead calm, and, under the
clouded sky, through the still air that seemed to cling warm, with a
seaweed smell, to her slim hull, on a sea of somber gray and unwrinkled,
the ship moved on an even keel, as if floating detached in empty space.
But Mr. Massy slapped his forehead, tottered a little, caught hold of a
belaying-pin at the foot of the mast.

"I shall go mad," he muttered, walking across the deck unsteadily. A
shovel was scraping loose coal down below--a fire-door clanged. Sterne
on the bridge began whistling a new tune.

Captain Whalley, sitting on the couch, awake and fully dressed, heard
the door of his cabin open. He did not move in the least, waiting to
recognize the voice, with an appalling strain of prudence.

A bulkhead lamp blazed on the white paint, the crimson plush, the
brown varnish of mahogany tops. The white wood packing-case under the
bed-place had remained unopened for three years now, as though Captain
Whalley had felt that, after the Fair Maid was gone, there could be
no abiding-place on earth for his affections. His hands rested on his
knees; his handsome head with big eyebrows presented a rigid profile to
the doorway. The expected voice spoke out at last.

"Once more, then. What am I to call you?"

Ha! Massy. Again. The weariness of it crushed his heart--and the pain of
shame was almost more than he could bear without crying out.

"Well. Is it to be 'partner' still?"

"You don't know what you ask."

"I know what I want . . ."

Massy stepped in and closed the door.

". . . And I am going to have a try for it with you once more."

His whine was half persuasive, half menacing.

"For it's no manner of use to tell me that you are poor. You don't spend
anything on yourself, that's true enough; but there's another name for
that. You think you are going to have what you want out of me for three
years, and then cast me off without hearing what I think of you. You
think I would have submitted to your airs if I had known you had only a
beggarly five hundred pounds in the world. You ought to have told me."

"Perhaps," said Captain Whalley, bowing his head. "And yet it has saved
you." . . . Massy laughed scornfully. . . . "I have told you often
enough since."

"And I don't believe you now. When I think how I let you lord it over
my ship! Do you remember how you used to bullyrag me about my coat and
_your_ bridge? It was in his way. _His_ bridge! 'And I won't be a party
to this--and I couldn't think of doing that.' Honest man! And now it all
comes out. 'I am poor, and I can't. I have only this five hundred in the
world.'"

He contemplated the immobility of Captain Whalley, that seemed to
present an inconquerable obstacle in his path. His face took a mournful
cast.

"You are a hard man."

"Enough," said Captain Whalley, turning upon him. "You shall get nothing
from me, because I have nothing of mine to give away now."

"Tell that to the marines!"

Mr. Massy, going out, looked back once; then the door closed, and
Captain Whalley, alone, sat as still as before. He had nothing of his
own--even his past of honor, of truth, of just pride, was gone. All his
spotless life had fallen into the abyss. He had said his last good-by
to it. But what belonged to _her_, that he meant to save. Only a little
money. He would take it to her in his own hands--this last gift of a man
that had lasted too long. And an immense and fierce impulse, the very
passion of paternity, flamed up with all the unquenched vigor of his
worthless life in a desire to see her face.

Just across the deck Massy had gone straight to his cabin, struck a
light, and hunted up the note of the dreamed number whose figures had
flamed up also with the fierceness of another passion. He must contrive
somehow not to miss a drawing. That number meant something. But what
expedient could he contrive to keep himself going?

"Wretched miser!" he mumbled.

If Mr. Sterne could at no time have told him anything new about his
partner, he could have told Mr. Sterne that another use could be made of
a man's affliction than just to kick him out, and thus defer the term of
a difficult payment for a year. To keep the secret of the affliction
and induce him to stay was a better move. If without means, he would be
anxious to remain; and that settled the question of refunding him his
share. He did not know exactly how much Captain Whalley was disabled;
but if it so happened that he put the ship ashore somewhere for good and
all, it was not the owner's fault--was it? He was not obliged to know
that there was anything wrong. But probably nobody would raise such a
point, and the ship was fully insured. He had had enough self-restraint
to pay up the premiums. But this was not all. He could not believe
Captain Whalley to be so confoundedly destitute as not to have some more
money put away somewhere. If he, Massy, could get hold of it, that would
pay for the boilers, and everything went on as before. And if she
got lost in the end, so much the better. He hated her: he loathed the
troubles that took his mind off the chances of fortune. He wished her
at the bottom of the sea, and the insurance money in his pocket. And
as, baffled, he left Captain Whalley's cabin, he enveloped in the same
hatred the ship with the worn-out boilers and the man with the dimmed
eyes.

And our conduct after all is so much a matter of outside suggestion,
that had it not been for his Jack's drunken gabble he would have there
and then had it out with this miserable man, who would neither help, nor
stay, nor yet lose the ship. The old fraud! He longed to kick him out.
But he restrained himself. Time enough for that--when he liked. There
was a fearful new thought put into his head. Wasn't he up to it after
all? How that beast Jack had raved! "Find a safe trick to get rid of
her." Well, Jack was not so far wrong. A very clever trick had occurred
to him. Aye! But what of the risk?

A feeling of pride--the pride of superiority to common prejudices--crept
into his breast, made his heart beat fast, his mouth turn dry. Not
everybody would dare; but he was Massy, and he was up to it!

Six bells were struck on deck. Eleven! He drank a glass of water, and
sat down for ten minutes or so to calm himself. Then he got out of his
chest a small bull's-eye lantern of his own and lit it.

Almost opposite his berth, across the narrow passage under the bridge,
there was, in the iron deck-structure covering the stokehold fiddle and
the boiler-space, a storeroom with iron sides, iron roof, iron-plated
floor, too, on account of the heat below. All sorts of rubbish was shot
there: it had a mound of scrap-iron in a corner; rows of empty oil-cans;
sacks of cotton-waste, with a heap of charcoal, a deck-forge, fragments
of an old hencoop, winch-covers all in rags, remnants of lamps, and a
brown felt hat, discarded by a man dead now (of a fever on the Brazil
coast), who had been once mate of the Sofala, had remained for years
jammed forcibly behind a length of burst copper pipe, flung at some
time or other out of the engine-room. A complete and imperious blackness
pervaded that Capharnaum of forgotten things. A small shaft of light
from Mr. Massy's bull's-eye fell slanting right through it.

His coat was unbuttoned; he shot the bolt of the door (there was no
other opening), and, squatting before the scrap-heap, began to pack his
pockets with pieces of iron. He packed them carefully, as if the rusty
nuts, the broken bolts, the links of cargo chain, had been so much gold
he had that one chance to carry away. He packed his side-pockets till
they bulged, the breast pocket, the pockets inside. He turned over the
pieces. Some he rejected. A small mist of powdered rust began to rise
about his busy hands. Mr. Massy knew something of the scientific basis
of his clever trick. If you want to deflect the magnetic needle of a
ship's compass, soft iron is the best; likewise many small pieces in
the pockets of a jacket would have more effect than a few large ones,
because in that way you obtain a greater amount of surface for weight in
your iron, and it's surface that tells.

He slipped out swiftly--two strides sufficed--and in his cabin he
perceived that his hands were all red--red with rust. It disconcerted
him, as though he had found them covered with blood: he looked himself
over hastily. Why, his trowsers too! He had been rubbing his rusty palms
on his legs.

He tore off the waistband button in his haste, brushed his coat, washed
his hands. Then the air of guilt left him, and he sat down to wait.

He sat bolt upright and weighted with iron in his chair. He had a hard,
lumpy bulk against each hip, felt the scrappy iron in his pockets touch
his ribs at every breath, the downward drag of all these pounds hanging
upon his shoulders. He looked very dull too, sitting idle there, and his
yellow face, with motionless black eyes, had something passive and sad
in its quietness.

When he heard eight bells struck above his head, he rose and made ready
to go out. His movements seemed aimless, his lower lip had dropped a
little, his eyes roamed about the cabin, and the tremendous tension of
his will had robbed them of every vestige of intelligence.

With the last stroke of the bell the Serang appeared noiselessly on the
bridge to relieve the mate. Sterne overflowed with good nature, since he
had nothing more to desire.

"Got your eyes well open yet, Serang? It's middling dark; I'll wait till
you get your sight properly."

The old Malay murmured, looked up with his worn eyes, sidled away into
the light of the binnacle, and, crossing his hands behind his back,
fixed his eyes on the compass-card.

"You'll have to keep a good look-out ahead for land, about half-past
three. It's fairly clear, though. You have looked in on the captain as
you came along--eh? He knows the time? Well, then, I am off."

At the foot of the ladder he stood aside for the captain. He watched him
go up with an even, certain tread, and remained thoughtful for a moment.
"It's funny," he said to himself, "but you can never tell whether that
man has seen you or not. He might have heard me breathe this time."

He was a wonderful man when all was said and done. They said he had had
a name in his day. Mr. Sterne could well believe it; and he concluded
serenely that Captain Whalley must be able to see people more or less
--as himself just now, for instance--but not being certain of anybody,
had to keep up that unnoticing silence of manner for fear of giving
himself away. Mr. Sterne was a shrewd guesser.

This necessity of every moment brought home to Captain Whalley's heart
the humiliation of his falsehood. He had drifted into it from paternal
love, from incredulity, from boundless trust in divine justice meted out
to men's feelings on this earth. He would give his poor Ivy the benefit
of another month's work; perhaps the affliction was only temporary.
Surely God would not rob his child of his power to help, and cast him
naked into a night without end. He had caught at every hope; and when
the evidence of his misfortune was stronger than hope, he tried not to
believe the manifest thing.

In vain. In the steadily darkening universe a sinister clearness fell
upon his ideas. In the illuminating moments of suffering he saw life,
men, all things, the whole earth with all her burden of created nature,
as he had never seen them before.

Sometimes he was seized with a sudden vertigo and an overwhelming
terror; and then the image of his daughter appeared. Her, too, he had
never seen so clearly before. Was it possible that he should ever be
unable to do anything whatever for her? Nothing. And not see her any
more? Never.

Why? The punishment was too great for a little presumption, for a little
pride. And at last he came to cling to his deception with a fierce
determination to carry it out to the end, to save her money intact, and
behold her once more with his own eyes. Afterwards--what? The idea of
suicide was revolting to the vigor of his manhood. He had prayed for
death till the prayers had stuck in his throat. All the days of his life
he had prayed for daily bread, and not to be led into temptation, in a
childlike humility of spirit. Did words mean anything? Whence did the
gift of speech come? The violent beating of his heart reverberated in
his head--seemed to shake his brain to pieces.

He sat down heavily in the deck-chair to keep the pretense of his watch.
The night was dark. All the nights were dark now.

"Serang," he said, half aloud.

"Ada, Tuan. I am here."

"There are clouds on the sky?"

"There are, Tuan."

"Let her be steered straight. North."

"She is going north, Tuan."

The Serang stepped back. Captain Whalley recognized Massy's footfalls on
the bridge.

The engineer walked over to port and returned, passing behind the chair
several times. Captain Whalley detected an unusual character as of
prudent care in this prowling. The near presence of that man brought
with it always a recrudescence of moral suffering for Captain Whalley.
It was not remorse. After all, he had done nothing but good to the poor
devil. There was also a sense of danger--the necessity of a greater
care.

Massy stopped and said--

"So you still say you must go?"

"I must indeed."

"And you couldn't at least leave the money for a term of years?"

"Impossible."

"Can't trust it with me without your care, eh?"

Captain Whalley remained silent. Massy sighed deeply over the back of
the chair.

"It would just do to save me," he said in a tremulous voice.

"I've saved you once."

The chief engineer took off his coat with careful movements, and
proceeded to feel for the brass hook screwed into the wooden stanchion.
For this purpose he placed himself right in front of the binnacle, thus
hiding completely the compass-card from the quartermaster at the wheel.
"Tuan!" the lascar at last murmured softly, meaning to let the white man
know that he could not see to steer.

Mr. Massy had accomplished his purpose. The coat was hanging from the
nail, within six inches of the binnacle. And directly he had stepped
aside the quartermaster, a middle-aged, pock-marked, Sumatra Malay,
almost as dark as a negro, perceived with amazement that in that short
time, in this smooth water, with no wind at all, the ship had gone
swinging far out of her course. He had never known her get away like
this before. With a slight grunt of astonishment he turned the wheel
hastily to bring her head back north, which was the course. The grinding
of the steering-chains, the chiding murmurs of the Serang, who had come
over to the wheel, made a slight stir, which attracted Captain Whalley's
anxious attention. He said, "Take better care." Then everything settled
to the usual quiet on the bridge. Mr. Massy had disappeared.

But the iron in the pockets of the coat had done its work; and the
Sofala, heading north by the compass, made untrue by this simple device,
was no longer making a safe course for Pangu Bay.

The hiss of water parted by her stem, the throb of her engines, all the
sounds of her faithful and laborious life, went on uninterrupted in the
great calm of the sea joining on all sides the motionless layer of cloud
over the sky. A gentle stillness as vast as the world seemed to wait
upon her path, enveloping her lovingly in a supreme caress. Mr. Massy
thought there could be no better night for an arranged shipwreck.

Run up high and dry on one of the reefs east of Pangu--wait for
daylight--hole in the bottom--out boats--Pangu Bay same evening. That's
about it. As soon as she touched he would hasten on the bridge, get hold
of the coat (nobody would notice in the dark), and shake it upside-down
over the side, or even fling it into the sea. A detail. Who could
guess? Coat been seen hanging there from that hook hundreds of times.
Nevertheless, when he sat down on the lower step of the bridge-ladder
his knees knocked together a little. The waiting part was the worst
of it. At times he would begin to pant quickly, as though he had been
running, and then breathe largely, swelling with the intimate sense of
a mastered fate. Now and then he would hear the shuffle of the Serang's
bare feet up there: quiet, low voices would exchange a few words, and
lapse almost at once into silence. . . .

"Tell me directly you see any land, Serang."

"Yes, Tuan. Not yet."

"No, not yet," Captain Whalley would agree.

The ship had been the best friend of his decline. He had sent all the
money he had made by and in the Sofala to his daughter. His thought
lingered on the name. How often he and his wife had talked over the cot
of the child in the big stern-cabin of the Condor; she would grow up,
she would marry, she would love them, they would live near her and look
at her happiness--it would go on without end. Well, his wife was dead,
to the child he had given all he had to give; he wished he could come
near her, see her, see her face once, live in the sound of her
voice, that could make the darkness of the living grave ready for him
supportable. He had been starved of love too long. He imagined her
tenderness.

The Serang had been peering forward, and now and then glancing at the
chair. He fidgeted restlessly, and suddenly burst out close to Captain
Whalley--

"Tuan, do you see anything of the land?"

The alarmed voice brought Captain Whalley to his feet at once. He! See!
And at the question, the curse of his blindness seemed to fall on him
with a hundredfold force.

"What's the time?" he cried.

"Half-past three, Tuan."

"We are close. You _must_ see. Look, I say. Look."

Mr. Massy, awakened by the sudden sound of talking from a short doze on
the lowest step, wondered why he was there. Ah! A faintness came over
him. It is one thing to sow the seed of an accident and another to see
the monstrous fruit hanging over your head ready to fall in the sound of
agitated voices.

"There's no danger," he muttered thickly.

The horror of incertitude had seized upon Captain Whalley, the miserable
mistrust of men, of things--of the very earth. He had steered that very
course thirty-six times by the same compass--if anything was certain
in this world it was its absolute, unerring correctness. Then what had
happened? Did the Serang lie? Why lie? Why? Was he going blind too?

"Is there a mist? Look low on the water. Low down, I say."

"Tuan, there's no mist. See for yourself."

Captain Whalley steadied the trembling of his limbs by an effort.
Should he stop the engines at once and give himself away. A gust of
irresolution swayed all sorts of bizarre notions in his mind. The
unusual had come, and he was not fit to deal with it. In this passage of
inexpressible anguish he saw her face--the face of a young girl--with
an amazing strength of illusion. No, he must not give himself away after
having gone so far for her sake. "You steered the course? You made it?
Speak the truth."

"Ya, Tuan. On the course now. Look."

Captain Whalley strode to the binnacle, which to him made such a dim
spot of light in an infinity of shapeless shadow. By bending his face
right down to the glass he had been able before . . .

Having to stoop so low, he put out, instinctively, his arm to where he
knew there was a stanchion to steady himself against. His hand closed
on something that was not wood but cloth. The slight pull adding to the
weight, the loop broke, and Mr. Massy's coat falling, struck the deck
heavily with a dull thump, accompanied by a lot of clicks.

"What's this?"

Captain Whalley fell on his knees, with groping hands extended in a
frank gesture of blindness. They trembled, these hands feeling for the
truth. He saw it. Iron near the compass. Wrong course. Wreck her! His
ship. Oh no. Not that.

"Jump and stop her!" he roared out in a voice not his own.

He ran himself--hands forward, a blind man, and while the clanging of
the gong echoed still all over the ship, she seemed to butt full tilt
into the side of a mountain.

It was low water along the north side of the strait. Mr. Massy had not
reckoned on that. Instead of running aground for half her length, the
Sofala butted the sheer ridge of a stone reef which would have been
awash at high water. This made the shock absolutely terrific. Everybody
in the ship that was standing was thrown down headlong: the shaken
rigging made a great rattling to the very trucks. All the lights went
out: several chain-guys, snapping, clattered against the funnel: there
were crashes, pings of parted wire-rope, splintering sounds, loud
cracks, the masthead lamp flew over the bows, and all the doors about
the deck began to bang heavily. Then, after having hit, she rebounded,
hit the second time the very same spot like a battering-ram. This
completed the havoc: the funnel, with all the guys gone, fell over with
a hollow sound of thunder, smashing the wheel to bits, crushing the
frame of the awnings, breaking the lockers, filling the bridge with
a mass of splinters, sticks, and broken wood. Captain Whalley picked
himself up and stood knee-deep in wreckage, torn, bleeding, knowing the
nature of the danger he had escaped mostly by the sound, and holding Mr.
Massy's coat in his arms.

By this time Sterne (he had been flung out of his bunk) had set the
engines astern. They worked for a few turns, then a voice bawled out,
"Get out of the damned engine-room, Jack!"--and they stopped; but the
ship had gone clear of the reef and lay still, with a heavy cloud of
steam issuing from the broken deckpipes, and vanishing in wispy shapes
into the night. Notwithstanding the suddenness of the disaster there was
no shouting, as if the very violence of the shock had half-stunned the
shadowy lot of people swaying here and there about her decks. The voice
of the Serang pronounced distinctly above the confused murmurs--

"Eight fathom." He had heaved the lead.

Mr. Sterne cried out next in a strained pitch--

"Where the devil has she got to? Where are we?"

Captain Whalley replied in a calm bass--

"Amongst the reefs to the eastward."

"You know it, sir? Then she will never get out again."

"She will be sunk in five minutes. Boats, Sterne. Even one will save you
all in this calm."

The Chinaman stokers went in a disorderly rush for the port boats.
Nobody tried to check them. The Malays, after a moment of confusion,
became quiet, and Mr. Sterne showed a good countenance. Captain Whalley
had not moved. His thoughts were darker than this night in which he had
lost his first ship.

"He made me lose a ship."

Another tall figure standing before him amongst the litter of the smash
on the bridge whispered insanely--

"Say nothing of it."

Massy stumbled closer. Captain Whalley heard the chattering of his
teeth.

"I have the coat."

"Throw it down and come along," urged the chattering voice.
"B-b-b-b-boat!"

"You will get fifteen years for this."

Mr. Massy had lost his voice. His speech was a mere dry rustling in his
throat.

"Have mercy!"

"Had you any when you made me lose my ship? Mr. Massy, you shall get
fifteen years for this!"

"I wanted money! Money! My own money! I will give you some money. Take
half of it. You love money yourself."

"There's a justice . . ."

Massy made an awful effort, and in a strange, half choked utterance--

"You blind devil! It's you that drove me to it."

Captain Whalley, hugging the coat to his breast, made no sound. The
light had ebbed for ever from the world--let everything go. But this man
should not escape scot-free.

Sterne's voice commanded--

"Lower away!"

The blocks rattled.

"Now then," he cried, "over with you. This way. You, Jack, here. Mr.
Massy! Mr. Massy! Captain! Quick, sir! Let's get--

"I shall go to prison for trying to cheat the insurance, but you'll get
exposed; you, honest man, who has been cheating me. You are poor. Aren't
you? You've nothing but the five hundred pounds. Well, you have nothing
at all now. The ship's lost, and the insurance won't be paid."

Captain Whalley did not move. True! Ivy's money! Gone in this wreck.
Again he had a flash of insight. He was indeed at the end of his tether.

Urgent voices cried out together alongside. Massy did not seem able
to tear himself away from the bridge. He chattered and hissed
despairingly--

"Give it up to me! Give it up!"

"No," said Captain Whalley; "I could not give it up. You had better go.
Don't wait, man, if you want to live. She's settling down by the head
fast. No; I shall keep it, but I shall stay on board."

Massy did not seem to understand; but the love of life, awakened
suddenly, drove him away from the bridge.

Captain Whalley laid the coat down, and stumbled amongst the heaps of
wreckage to the side.

"Is Mr. Massy in with you?" he called out into the night.

Sterne from the boat shouted--

"Yes; we've got him. Come along, sir. It's madness to stay longer."

Captain Whalley felt along the rail carefully, and, without a word, cast
off the painter. They were expecting him still down there. They were
waiting, till a voice suddenly exclaimed--

"We are adrift! Shove off!"

"Captain Whalley! Leap! . . . pull up a little . . . leap! You can
swim."

In that old heart, in that vigorous body, there was, that nothing should
be wanting, a horror of death that apparently could not be overcome
by the horror of blindness. But after all, for Ivy he had carried his
point, walking in his darkness to the very verge of a crime. God had not
listened to his prayers. The light had finished ebbing out of the world;
not a glimmer. It was a dark waste; but it was unseemly that a Whalley
who had gone so far to carry a point should continue to live. He must
pay the price.

"Leap as far as you can, sir; we will pick you up."

They did not hear him answer. But their shouting seemed to remind him of
something. He groped his way back, and sought for Mr. Massy's coat. He
could swim indeed; people sucked down by the whirlpool of a sinking ship
do come up sometimes to the surface, and it was unseemly that a Whalley,
who had made up his mind to die, should be beguiled by chance into a
struggle. He would put all these pieces of iron into his own pockets.

They, looking from the boat, saw the Sofala, a black mass upon a black
sea, lying still at an appalling cant. No sound came from her. Then,
with a great bizarre shuffling noise, as if the boilers had broken
through the bulkheads, and with a faint muffled detonation, where the
ship had been there appeared for a moment something standing upright and
narrow, like a rock out of the sea. Then that too disappeared.


When the Sofala failed to come back to Batu Beru at the proper time, Mr.
Van Wyk understood at once that he would never see her any more. But he
did not know what had happened till some months afterwards, when, in a
native craft lent him by his Sultan, he had made his way to the Sofala's
port of registry, where already her existence and the official inquiry
into her loss was beginning to be forgotten.

It had not been a very remarkable or interesting case, except for the
fact that the captain had gone down with his sinking ship. It was the
only life lost; and Mr. Van Wyk would not have been able to learn any
details had it not been for Sterne, whom he met one day on the quay
near the bridge over the creek, almost on the very spot where Captain
Whalley, to preserve his daughter's five hundred pounds intact, had
turned to get a sampan which would take him on board the Sofala.

From afar Mr. Van Wyk saw Sterne blink straight at him and raise his
hand to his hat. They drew into the shade of a building (it was a bank),
and the mate related how the boat with the crew got into Pangu Bay about
six hours after the accident, and how they had lived for a fortnight in
a state of destitution before they found an opportunity to get away from
that beastly place. The inquiry had exonerated everybody from all blame.
The loss of the ship was put down to an unusual set of the current.
Indeed, it could not have been anything else: there was no other way
to account for the ship being set seven miles to the eastward of her
position during the middle watch.

"A piece of bad luck for me, sir."

Sterne passed his tongue on his lips, and glanced aside. "I lost the
advantage of being employed by you, sir. I can never be sorry enough.
But here it is: one man's poison, another man's meat. This could not
have been handier for Mr. Massy if he had arranged that shipwreck
himself. The most timely total loss I've ever heard of."

"What became of that Massy?" asked Mr. Van Wyk.

"He, sir? Ha! ha! He would keep on telling me that he meant to buy
another ship; but as soon as he had the money in his pocket he cleared
out for Manilla by mail-boat early in the morning. I gave him chase
right aboard, and he told me then he was going to make his fortune dead
sure in Manilla. I could go to the devil for all he cared. And yet he as
good as promised to give me the command if I didn't talk too much."

"You never said anything . . ." Mr. Van Wyk began.

"Not I, sir. Why should I? I mean to get on, but the dead aren't in my
way," said Sterne. His eyelids were beating rapidly, then drooped for an
instant. "Besides, sir, it would have been an awkward business. You made
me hold my tongue just a bit too long."

"Do you know how it was that Captain Whalley remained on board? Did he
really refuse to leave? Come now! Or was it perhaps an accidental . . .?"

"Nothing!" Sterne interrupted with energy. "I tell you I yelled for him
to leap overboard. He simply _must_ have cast off the painter of the
boat himself. We all yelled to him--that is, Jack and I. He wouldn't
even answer us. The ship was as silent as a grave to the last. Then the
boilers fetched away, and down she went. Accident! Not it! The game was
up, sir, I tell you."

This was all that Sterne had to say.

Mr. Van Wyk had been of course made the guest of the club for a
fortnight, and it was there that he met the lawyer in whose office had
been signed the agreement between Massy and Captain Whalley.

"Extraordinary old man," he said. "He came into my office from nowhere
in particular as you may say, with his five hundred pounds to place, and
that engineer fellow following him anxiously. And now he is gone out
a little inexplicably, just as he came. I could never understand him
quite. There was no mystery at all about that Massy, eh? I wonder
whether Whalley refused to leave the ship. It would have been foolish.
He was blameless, as the court found."

Mr. Van Wyk had known him well, he said, and he could not believe in
suicide. Such an act would not have been in character with what he knew
of the man.

"It is my opinion, too," the lawyer agreed. The general theory was that
the captain had remained too long on board trying to save something of
importance. Perhaps the chart which would clear him, or else something
of value in his cabin. The painter of the boat had come adrift of itself
it was supposed. However, strange to say, some little time before that
voyage poor Whalley had called in his office and had left with him a
sealed envelope addressed to his daughter, to be forwarded to her in
case of his death. Still it was nothing very unusual, especially in a
man of his age. Mr. Van Wyk shook his head. Captain Whalley looked good
for a hundred years.

"Perfectly true," assented the lawyer. "The old fellow looked as though
he had come into the world full-grown and with that long beard. I could
never, somehow, imagine him either younger or older--don't you know.
There was a sense of physical power about that man too. And perhaps that
was the secret of that something peculiar in his person which struck
everybody who came in contact with him. He looked indestructible by
any ordinary means that put an end to the rest of us. His deliberate,
stately courtesy of manner was full of significance. It was as though
he were certain of having plenty of time for everything. Yes, there was
something indestructible about him; and the way he talked sometimes you
might have thought he believed it himself. When he called on me last
with that letter he wanted me to take charge of, he was not depressed
at all. Perhaps a shade more deliberate in his talk and manner. Not
depressed in the least. Had he a presentiment, I wonder? Perhaps! Still
it seems a miserable end for such a striking figure."

"Oh yes! It was a miserable end," Mr. Van Wyk said, with so much fervor
that the lawyer looked up at him curiously; and afterwards, after
parting with him, he remarked to an acquaintance--

"Queer person that Dutch tobacco-planter from Batu Beru. Know anything
of him?"

"Heaps of money," answered the bank manager. "I hear he's going home
by the next mail to form a company to take over his estates. Another
tobacco district thrown open. He's wise, I think. These good times won't
last for ever."

In the southern hemisphere Captain Whalley's daughter had no
presentiment of evil when she opened the envelope addressed to her in
the lawyer's handwriting. She had received it in the afternoon; all the
boarders had gone out, her boys were at school, her husband sat upstairs
in his big arm-chair with a book, thin-faced, wrapped up in rugs to the
waist. The house was still, and the grayness of a cloudy day lay against
the panes of three lofty windows.

In a shabby dining-room, where a faint cold smell of dishes lingered all
the year round, sitting at the end of a long table surrounded by
many chairs pushed in with their backs close against the edge of the
perpetually laid table-cloth, she read the opening sentence: "Most
profound regret--painful duty--your father is no more--in accordance
with his instructions--fatal casualty--consolation--no blame attached to
his memory. . . ."

Her face was thin, her temples a little sunk under the smooth bands of
black hair, her lips remained resolutely compressed, while her dark eyes
grew larger, till at last, with a low cry, she stood up, and instantly
stooped to pick up another envelope which had slipped off her knees on
to the floor.

She tore it open, snatched out the inclosure. . . .

"My dearest child," it said, "I am writing this while I am able yet to
write legibly. I am trying hard to save for you all the money that is
left; I have only kept it to serve you better. It is yours. It shall not
be lost: it shall not be touched. There's five hundred pounds. Of what
I have earned I have kept nothing back till now. For the future, if I
live, I must keep back some--a little--to bring me to you. I must come
to you. I must see you once more.

"It is hard to believe that you will ever look on these lines. God
seems to have forgotten me. I want to see you--and yet death would be
a greater favor. If you ever read these words, I charge you to begin by
thanking a God merciful at last, for I shall be dead then, and it will
be well. My dear, I am at the end of my tether."

The next paragraph began with the words: "My sight is going . . ."

She read no more that day. The hand holding up the paper to her eyes
fell slowly, and her slender figure in a plain black dress walked
rigidly to the window. Her eyes were dry: no cry of sorrow or whisper of
thanks went up to heaven from her lips. Life had been too hard, for all
the efforts of his love. It had silenced her emotions. But for the first
time in all these years its sting had departed, the carking care of
poverty, the meanness of a hard struggle for bread. Even the image of
her husband and of her children seemed to glide away from her into the
gray twilight; it was her father's face alone that she saw, as though he
had come to see her, always quiet and big, as she had seen him last, but
with something more august and tender in his aspect.

She slipped his folded letter between the two buttons of her plain black
bodice, and leaning her forehead against a window-pane remained there
till dusk, perfectly motionless, giving him all the time she could
spare. Gone! Was it possible? My God, was it possible! The blow had come
softened by the spaces of the earth, by the years of absence. There had
been whole days when she had not thought of him at all--had no time. But
she had loved him, she felt she had loved him, after all.




FALK

A REMINISCENCE


By Joseph Conrad



Several of us, all more or less connected with the sea, were dining in
a small river-hostelry not more than thirty miles from London, and less
than twenty from that shallow and dangerous puddle to which our coasting
men give the grandiose name of "German Ocean." And through the wide
windows we had a view of the Thames; an enfilading view down the Lower
Hope Reach. But the dinner was execrable, and all the feast was for the
eyes.

That flavour of salt-water which for so many of us had been the very
water of life permeated our talk. He who hath known the bitterness of
the Ocean shall have its taste forever in his mouth. But one or two
of us, pampered by the life of the land, complained of hunger. It was
impossible to swallow any of that stuff. And indeed there was a strange
mustiness in everything. The wooden dining-room stuck out over the mud
of the shore like a lacustrine dwelling; the planks of the floor seemed
rotten; a decrepit old waiter tottered pathetically to and fro before
an antediluvian and worm-eaten sideboard; the chipped plates might have
been disinterred from some kitchen midden near an inhabited lake; and
the chops recalled times more ancient still. They brought forcibly to
one's mind the night of ages when the primeval man, evolving the first
rudiments of cookery from his dim consciousness, scorched lumps of flesh
at a fire of sticks in the company of other good fellows; then, gorged
and happy, sat him back among the gnawed bones to tell his artless tales
of experience--the tales of hunger and hunt--and of women, perhaps!

But luckily the wine happened to be as old as the waiter. So,
comparatively empty, but upon the whole fairly happy, we sat back and
told our artless tales. We talked of the sea and all its works. The
sea never changes, and its works for all the talk of men are wrapped in
mystery. But we agreed that the times were changed. And we talked of old
ships, of sea-accidents, of break-downs, dismastings; and of a man who
brought his ship safe to Liverpool all the way from the River Platte
under a jury rudder. We talked of wrecks, of short rations and of
heroism--or at least of what the newspapers would have called heroism
at sea--a manifestation of virtues quite different from the heroism of
primitive times. And now and then falling silent all together we gazed
at the sights of the river.

A P. & O. boat passed bound down. "One gets jolly good dinners on board
these ships," remarked one of our band. A man with sharp eyes read
out the name on her bows: Arcadia. "What a beautiful model of a ship!"
murmured some of us. She was followed by a small cargo steamer, and the
flag they hauled down aboard while we were looking showed her to be a
Norwegian. She made an awful lot of smoke; and before it had quite blown
away, a high-sided, short, wooden barque, in ballast and towed by a
paddle-tug, appeared in front of the windows. All her hands were forward
busy setting up the headgear; and aft a woman in a red hood, quite alone
with the man at the wheel, paced the length of the poop back and forth,
with the grey wool of some knitting work in her hands.

"German I should think," muttered one. "The skipper has his wife on
board," remarked another; and the light of the crimson sunset all
ablaze behind the London smoke, throwing a glow of Bengal light upon the
barque's spars, faded away from the Hope Reach.

Then one of us, who had not spoken before, a man of over fifty, that had
commanded ships for a quarter of a century, looking after the barque now
gliding far away, all black on the lustre of the river, said:

This reminds me of an absurd episode in my life, now many years ago,
when I got first the command of an iron barque, loading then in a
certain Eastern seaport. It was also the capital of an Eastern kingdom,
lying up a river as might be London lies up this old Thames of ours.
No more need be said of the place; for this sort of thing might have
happened anywhere where there are ships, skippers, tugboats, and orphan
nieces of indescribable splendour. And the absurdity of the episode
concerns only me, my enemy Falk, and my friend Hermann.

There seemed to be something like peculiar emphasis on the words "My
friend Hermann," which caused one of us (for we had just been speaking
of heroism at sea) to say idly and nonchalantly:

"And was this Hermann a hero?"

Not at all, said our grizzled friend. No hero at all. He was a
Schiff-fuhrer: Ship-conductor. That's how they call a Master Mariner
in Germany. I prefer our way. The alliteration is good, and there is
something in the nomenclature that gives to us as a body the sense
of corporate existence: Apprentice, Mate, Master, in the ancient and
honourable craft of the sea. As to my friend Hermann, he might have
been a consummate master of the honourable craft, but he was called
officially Schiff-fuhrer, and had the simple, heavy appearance of a
well-to-do farmer, combined with the good-natured shrewdness of a small
shopkeeper. With his shaven chin, round limbs, and heavy eyelids he did
not look like a toiler, and even less like an adventurer of the sea.
Still, he toiled upon the seas, in his own way, much as a shopkeeper
works behind his counter. And his ship was the means by which he
maintained his growing family.

She was a heavy, strong, blunt-bowed affair, awakening the ideas of
primitive solidity, like the wooden plough of our forefathers. And there
were, about her, other suggestions of a rustic and homely nature. The
extraordinary timber projections which I have seen in no other vessel
made her square stern resemble the tail end of a miller's waggon. But
the four stern ports of her cabin, glazed with six little greenish panes
each, and framed in wooden sashes painted brown, might have been the
windows of a cottage in the country. The tiny white curtains and the
greenery of flower pots behind the glass completed the resemblance. On
one or two occasions when passing under stern I had detected from my
boat a round arm in the act of tilting a watering pot, and the bowed
sleek head of a maiden whom I shall always call Hermann's niece, because
as a matter of fact I've never heard her name, for all my intimacy with
the family.

This, however, sprang up later on. Meantime in common with the rest
of the shipping in that Eastern port, I was left in no doubt as to
Hermann's notions of hygienic clothing. Evidently he believed in
wearing good stout flannel next his skin. On most days little frocks and
pinafores could be seen drying in the mizzen rigging of his ship, or
a tiny row of socks fluttering on the signal halyards; but once a
fortnight the family washing was exhibited in force. It covered the
poop entirely. The afternoon breeze would incite to a weird and flabby
activity all that crowded mass of clothing, with its vague suggestions
of drowned, mutilated and flattened humanity. Trunks without heads waved
at you arms without hands; legs without feet kicked fantastically with
collapsible flourishes; and there were long white garments that, taking
the wind fairly through their neck openings edged with lace, became for
a moment violently distended as by the passage of obese and invisible
bodies. On these days you could make out that ship at a great distance
by the multi-coloured grotesque riot going on abaft her mizzen mast.

She had her berth just ahead of me, and her name was Diana,--Diana not
of Ephesus but of Bremen. This was proclaimed in white letters a foot
long spaced widely across the stern (somewhat like the lettering of a
shop-sign) under the cottage windows. This ridiculously unsuitable name
struck one as an impertinence towards the memory of the most charming
of goddesses; for, apart from the fact that the old craft was physically
incapable of engaging in any sort of chase, there was a gang of four
children belonging to her. They peeped over the rail at passing boats
and occasionally dropped various objects into them. Thus, sometime
before I knew Hermann to speak to, I received on my hat a horrid
rag-doll belonging to Hermann's eldest daughter. However, these
youngsters were upon the whole well behaved. They had fair heads, round
eyes, round little knobby noses, and they resembled their father a good
deal.

This Diana of Bremen was a most innocent old ship, and seemed to know
nothing of the wicked sea, as there are on shore households that know
nothing of the corrupt world. And the sentiments she suggested were
unexceptionable and mainly of a domestic order. She was a home. All
these dear children had learned to walk on her roomy quarter-deck. In
such thoughts there is something pretty, even touching. Their teeth, I
should judge, they had cut on the ends of her running gear. I have
many times observed the baby Hermann (Nicholas) engaged in gnawing the
whipping of the fore-royal brace. Nicholas' favourite place of residence
was under the main fife-rail. Directly he was let loose he would
crawl off there, and the first seaman who came along would bring him,
carefully held aloft in tarry hands, back to the cabin door. I fancy
there must have been a standing order to that effect. In the course of
these transportations the baby, who was the only peppery person in the
ship, tried to smite these stalwart young German sailors on the face.

Mrs. Hermann, an engaging, stout housewife, wore on board baggy blue
dresses with white dots. When, as happened once or twice I caught her at
an elegant little wash-tub rubbing hard on white collars, baby's socks,
and Hermann's summer neckties, she would blush in girlish confusion, and
raising her wet hands greet me from afar with many friendly nods. Her
sleeves would be rolled up to the elbows, and the gold hoop of her
wedding ring glittered among the soapsuds. Her voice was pleasant, she
had a serene brow, smooth bands of very fair hair, and a good-humoured
expression of the eyes. She was motherly and moderately talkative. When
this simple matron smiled, youthful dimples broke out on her fresh broad
cheeks. Hermann's niece on the other hand, an orphan and very silent, I
never saw attempt a smile. This, however, was not gloom on her part but
the restraint of youthful gravity.

They had carried her about with them for the last three years, to help
with the children and be company for Mrs. Hermann, as Hermann mentioned
once to me. It had been very necessary while they were all little, he
had added in a vexed manner. It was her arm and her sleek head that
I had glimpsed one morning, through the stern-windows of the cabin,
hovering over the pots of fuchsias and mignonette; but the first time I
beheld her full length I surrendered to her proportions. They fix her
in my mind, as great beauty, great intelligence, quickness of wit
or kindness of heart might have made some her other woman equally
memorable.

With her it was form and size. It was her physical personality that had
this imposing charm. She might have been witty, intelligent, and kind to
an exceptional degree. I don't know, and this is not to the point. All
I know is that she was built on a magnificent scale. Built is the only
word. She was constructed, she was erected, as it were, with a regal
lavishness. It staggered you to see this reckless expenditure of
material upon a chit of a girl. She was youthful and also perfectly
mature, as though she had been some fortunate immortal. She was heavy
too, perhaps, but that's nothing. It only added to that notion of
permanence. She was barely nineteen. But such shoulders! Such round
arms! Such a shadowing forth of mighty limbs when with three long
strides she pounced across the deck upon the overturned Nicholas--it's
perfectly indescribable! She seemed a good, quiet girl, vigilant as
to Lena's needs, Gustav's tumbles, the state of Carl's dear little
nose--conscientious, hardworking, and all that. But what magnificent
hair she had! Abundant, long, thick, of a tawny colour. It had the sheen
of precious metals. She wore it plaited tightly into one single tress
hanging girlishly down her back and its end reached down to her waist.
The massiveness of it surprised you. On my word it reminded one of a
club. Her face was big, comely, of an unruffled expression. She had a
good complexion, and her blue eyes were so pale that she appeared to
look at the world with the empty white candour of a statue. You could
not call her good-looking. It was something much more impressive.
The simplicity of her apparel, the opulence of her form, her imposing
stature, and the extraordinary sense of vigorous life that seemed to
emanate from her like a perfume exhaled by a flower, made her beautiful
with a beauty of a rustic and olympian order. To watch her reaching up
to the clothes-line with both arms raised high above her head, caused
you to fall a musing in a strain of pagan piety. Excellent Mrs.
Hermann's baggy cotton gowns had some sort of rudimentary frills at neck
and bottom, but this girl's print frocks hadn't even a wrinkle; nothing
but a few straight folds in the skirt falling to her feet, and these,
when she stood still, had a severe and statuesque quality. She was
inclined naturally to be still whether sitting or standing. However, I
don't mean to say she was statuesque. She was too generously alive; but
she could have stood for an allegoric statue of the Earth. I don't mean
the worn-out earth of our possession, but a young Earth, a virginal
planet undisturbed by the vision of a future teeming with the monstrous
forms of life and death, clamorous with the cruel battles of hunger and
thought.

The worthy Hermann himself was not very entertaining, though his English
was fairly comprehensible. Mrs. Hermann, who always let off one speech
at least at me in an hospitable, cordial tone (and in Platt-Deutsch I
suppose) I could not understand. As to their niece, however satisfactory
to look upon (and she inspired you somehow with a hopeful view as to
the prospects of mankind) she was a modest and silent presence, mostly
engaged in sewing, only now and then, as I observed, falling over that
work into a state of maidenly meditation. Her aunt sat opposite her,
sewing also, with her feet propped on a wooden footstool. On the other
side of the deck Hermann and I would get a couple of chairs out of the
cabin and settle down to a smoking match, accompanied at long intervals
by the pacific exchange of a few words. I came nearly every evening.
Hermann I would find in his shirt sleeves. As soon as he returned from
the shore on board his ship he commenced operations by taking off his
coat; then he put on his head an embroidered round cap with a tassel,
and changed his boots for a pair of cloth slippers. Afterwards he smoked
at the cabin-door, looking at his children with an air of civic virtue,
till they got caught one after another and put to bed in various
staterooms. Lastly, we would drink some beer in the cabin, which
was furnished with a wooden table on cross legs, and with black
straight-backed chairs--more like a farm kitchen than a ship's cuddy.
The sea and all nautical affairs seemed very far removed from the
hospitality of this exemplary family.

And I liked this because I had a rather worrying time on board my own
ship. I had been appointed ex-officio by the British Consul to take
charge of her after a man who had died suddenly, leaving for the
guidance of his successor some suspiciously unreceipted bills, a few
dry-dock estimates hinting at bribery, and a quantity of vouchers for
three years' extravagant expenditure; all these mixed up together in a
dusty old violin-case lined with ruby velvet. I found besides a large
account-book, which, when opened, hopefully turned out to my infinite
consternation to be filled with verses--page after page of rhymed
doggerel of a jovial and improper character, written in the neatest
minute hand I ever did see. In the same fiddle-case a photograph of my
predecessor, taken lately in Saigon, represented in front of a garden
view, and in company of a female in strange draperies, an elderly,
squat, rugged man of stern aspect in a clumsy suit of black broadcloth,
and with the hair brushed forward above the temples in a manner
reminding one of a boar's tusks. Of a fiddle, however, the only trace
on board was the case, its empty husk as it were; but of the two last
freights the ship had indubitably earned of late, there were not even
the husks left. It was impossible to say where all that money had gone
to. It wasn't on board. It had not been remitted home; for a letter
from the owners, preserved in a desk evidently by the merest accident,
complained mildly enough that they had not been favoured by a scratch
of the pen for the last eighteen months. There were next to no stores on
board, not an inch of spare rope or a yard of canvas. The ship had been
run bare, and I foresaw no end of difficulties before I could get her
ready for sea.

As I was young then--not thirty yet--I took myself and my troubles very
seriously. The old mate, who had acted as chief mourner at the captain's
funeral, was not particularly pleased at my coming. But the fact is the
fellow was not legally qualified for command, and the Consul was bound,
if at all possible, to put a properly certificated man on board. As to
the second mate, all I can say his name was Tottersen, or something like
that. His practice was to wear on his head, in that tropical climate, a
mangy fur cap. He was, without exception, the stupidest man I had ever
seen on board ship. And he looked it too. He looked so confoundedly
stupid that it was a matter of surprise for me when he answered to his
name.

I drew no great comfort from their company, to say the least of it;
while the prospect of making a long sea passage with those two fellows
was depressing. And my other thoughts in solitude could not be of a
gay complexion. The crew was sickly, the cargo was coming very slow; I
foresaw I would have lots of trouble with the charterers, and doubted
whether they would advance me enough money for the ship's expenses.
Their attitude towards me was unfriendly. Altogether I was not getting
on. I would discover at odd times (generally about midnight) that I
was totally inexperienced, greatly ignorant of business, and hopelessly
unfit for any sort of command; and when the steward had to be taken to
the hospital ill with choleraic symptoms I felt bereaved of the only
decent person at the after end of the ship. He was fully expected to
recover, but in the meantime had to be replaced by some sort of servant.
And on the recommendation of a certain Schomberg, the proprietor of the
smaller of the two hotels in the place, I engaged a Chinaman. Schomberg,
a brawny, hairy Alsatian, and an awful gossip, assured me that it was
all right. "First-class boy that. Came in the suite of his Excellency
Tseng the Commissioner--you know. His Excellency Tseng lodged with me
here for three weeks."

He mouthed the Chinese Excellency at me with great unction, though
the specimen of the "suite" did not seem very promising. At the time,
however, I did not know what an untrustworthy humbug Schomberg was. The
"boy" might have been forty or a hundred and forty for all you could
tell--one of those Chinamen of the death's-head type of face and
completely inscrutable. Before the end of the third day he had revealed
himself as a confirmed opium-smoker, a gambler, a most audacious thief,
and a first-class sprinter. When he departed at the top of his speed
with thirty-two golden sovereigns of my own hard-earned savings it was
the last straw. I had reserved that money in case my difficulties came
to the worst. Now it was gone I felt as poor and naked as a fakir. I
clung to my ship, for all the bother she caused me, but what I could not
bear were the long lonely evenings in her cuddy, where the atmosphere,
made smelly by a leaky lamp, was agitated by the snoring of the mate.
That fellow shut himself up in his stuffy cabin punctually at eight, and
made gross and revolting noises like a water-logged trump. It was odious
not to be able to worry oneself in comfort on board one's own ship.
Everything in this world, I reflected, even the command of a nice little
barque, may be made a delusion and a snare for the unwary spirit of
pride in man.

From such reflections I was glad to make any escape on board that Bremen
Diana. There apparently no whisper of the world's iniquities had ever
penetrated. And yet she lived upon the wide sea: and the sea tragic
and comic, the sea with its horrors and its peculiar scandals, the sea
peopled by men and ruled by iron necessity is indubitably a part of the
world. But that patriarchal old tub, like some saintly retreat, echoed
nothing of it. She was world proof. Her venerable innocence apparently
had put a restraint on the roaring lusts of the sea. And yet I have
known the sea too long to believe in its respect for decency. An
elemental force is ruthlessly frank. It may, of course, have been
Hermann's skilful seamanship, but to me it looked as if the allied
oceans had refrained from smashing these high bulwarks, unshipping
the lumpy rudder, frightening the children, and generally opening this
family's eyes out of sheer reticence. It looked like reticence. The
ruthless disclosure was in the end left for a man to make; a man strong
and elemental enough and driven to unveil some secrets of the sea by the
power of a simple and elemental desire.

This, however, occurred much later, and meantime I took sanctuary in
that serene old ship early every evening. The only person on board that
seemed to be in trouble was little Lena, and in due course I perceived
that the health of the rag-doll was more than delicate. This object led
a sort of "in extremis" existence in a wooden box placed against the
starboard mooring-bitts, tended and nursed with the greatest sympathy
and care by all the children, who greatly enjoyed pulling long faces and
moving with hushed footsteps. Only the baby--Nicholas--looked on with a
cold, ruffianly leer, as if he had belonged to another tribe altogether.
Lena perpetually sorrowed over the box, and all of them were in deadly
earnest. It was wonderful the way these children would work up their
compassion for that bedraggled thing I wouldn't have touched with a pair
of tongs. I suppose they were exercising and developing their racial
sentimentalism by the means of that dummy. I was only surprised that
Mrs. Hermann let Lena cherish and hug that bundle of rags to that
extent, it was so disreputably and completely unclean. But Mrs. Hermann
would raise her fine womanly eyes from her needlework to look on with
amused sympathy, and did not seen to see it, somehow, that this
object of affection was a disgrace to the ship's purity. Purity, not
cleanliness, is the word. It was pushed so far that I seemed to detect
in this too a sentimental excess, as if dirt had been removed in
very love. It is impossible to give you an idea of such a meticulous
neatness. It was as if every morning that ship had been arduously
explored with--with toothbrushes. Her very bowsprit three times a week
had its toilette made with a cake of soap and a piece of soft flannel.
Arrayed--I _must_ say arrayed--arrayed artlessly in dazzling white paint
as to wood and dark green as to ironwork the simple-minded distribution
of these colours evoked the images of simple-minded peace, of arcadian
felicity; and the childish comedy of disease and sorrow struck me
sometimes as an abominably real blot upon that ideal state.

I enjoyed it greatly, and on my part I brought a little mild excitement
into it. Our intimacy arose from the pursuit of that thief. It was in
the evening, and Hermann, who, contrary to his habits, had stayed on
shore late that day, was extricating himself backwards out of a little
gharry on the river bank, opposite his ship, when the hunt passed.
Realising the situation as though he had eyes in his shoulder-blades, he
joined us with a leap and took the lead. The Chinaman fled silent like
a rapid shadow on the dust of an extremely oriental road. I followed. A
long way in the rear my mate whooped like a savage. A young moon threw
a bashful light on a plain like a monstrous waste ground: the
architectural mass of a Buddhist temple far away projected itself
in dead black on the sky. We lost the thief of course; but in my
disappointment I had to admire Hermann's presence of mind. The velocity
that stodgy man developed in the interests of a complete stranger earned
my warm gratitude--there was something truly cordial in his exertions.

He seemed as vexed as myself at our failure, and would hardly listen to
my thanks. He said it was "nothings," and invited me on the spot to
come on board his ship and drink a glass of beer with him. We poked
sceptically for a while amongst the bushes, peered without conviction
into a ditch or two. There was not a sound: patches of slime glimmered
feebly amongst the reeds. Slowly we trudged back, drooping under the
thin sickle of the moon, and I heard him mutter to himself, "Himmel!
Zwei und dreissig Pfund!" He was impressed by the figure of my loss. For
a long time we had ceased to hear the mate's whoops and yells.

Then he said to me, "Everybody has his troubles," and as we went on
remarked that he would never have known anything of mine hadn't he by an
extraordinary chance been detained on shore by Captain Falk. He didn't
like to stay late ashore--he added with a sigh. The something doleful in
his tone I put to his sympathy with my misfortune, of course.

On board the Diana Mrs. Hermann's fine eyes expressed much interest and
commiseration. We had found the two women sewing face to face under the
open skylight in the strong glare of the lamp. Hermann walked in first,
starting in the very doorway to pull off his coat, and encouraging
me with loud, hospitable ejaculations: "Come in! This way! Come in,
captain!" At once, coat in hand, he began to tell his wife all about
it. Mrs. Hermann put the palms of her plump hands together; I smiled
and bowed with a heavy heart: the niece got up from her sewing to
bring Hermann's slippers and his embroidered calotte, which he assumed
pontifically, talking (about me) all the time. Billows of white stuff
lay between the chairs on the cabin floor; I caught the words "Zwei und
dreissig Pfund" repeated several times, and presently came the beer,
which seemed delicious to my throat, parched with running and the
emotions of the chase.

I didn't get away till well past midnight, long after the women had
retired. Hermann had been trading in the East for three years or more,
carrying freights of rice and timber mostly. His ship was well known in
all the ports from Vladivostok to Singapore. She was his own property.
The profits had been moderate, but the trade answered well enough while
the children were small yet. In another year or so he hoped he would
be able to sell the old Diana to a firm in Japan for a fair price. He
intended to return home, to Bremen, by mail boat, second class, with
Mrs. Hermann and the children. He told me all this stolidly, with slow
puffs at his pipe. I was sorry when knocking the ashes out he began
to rub his eyes. I would have sat with him till morning. What had I to
hurry on board my own ship for? To face the broken rifled drawer in my
state-room. Ugh! The very thought made me feel unwell.

I became their daily guest, as you know. I think that Mrs. Hermann from
the first looked upon me as a romantic person. I did not, of course,
tear my hair _coram populo_ over my loss, and she took it for lordly
indifference. Afterwards, I daresay, I did tell them some of my
adventures--such as they were--and they marvelled greatly at the extent
of my experience. Hermann would translate what he thought the most
striking passages. Getting up on his legs, and as if delivering a
lecture on a phenomenon, he addressed himself, with gestures, to the two
women, who would let their sewing sink slowly on their laps. Meantime
I sat before a glass of Hermann's beer, trying to look modest. Mrs.
Hermann would glance at me quickly, emit slight "Ach's!" The girl never
made a sound. Never. But she too would sometimes raise her pale eyes
to look at me in her unseeing gentle way. Her glance was by no means
stupid; it beamed out soft and diffuse as the moon beams upon a
landscape--quite differently from the scrutinising inspection of the
stars. You were drowned in it, and imagined yourself to appear blurred.
And yet this same glance when turned upon Christian Falk must have been
as efficient as the searchlight of a battle-ship.

Falk was the other assiduous visitor on board, but from his behaviour
he might have been coming to see the quarter-deck capstan. He certainly
used to stare at it a good deal when keeping us company outside the
cabin door, with one muscular arm thrown over the back of the chair, and
his big shapely legs, in very tight white trousers, extended far out and
ending in a pair of black shoes as roomy as punts. On arrival he would
shake Hermann's hand with a mutter, bow to the women, and take up his
careless and misanthropic attitude by our side. He departed abruptly,
with a jump, going through the performance of grunts, handshakes, bow,
as if in a panic. Sometimes, with a sort of discreet and convulsive
effort, he approached the women and exchanged a few low words with them,
half a dozen at most. On these occasions Hermann's usual stare became
positively glassy and Mrs. Hermann's kind countenance would colour up.
The girl herself never turned a hair.

Falk was a Dane or perhaps a Norwegian, I can't tell now. At all events
he was a Scandinavian of some sort, and a bloated monopolist to boot.
It is possible he was unacquainted with the word, but he had a clear
perception of the thing itself. His tariff of charges for towing ships
in and out was the most brutally inconsiderate document of the sort I
had ever seen. He was the commander and owner of the only tug-boat on
the river, a very trim white craft of 150 tons or more, as elegantly
neat as a yacht, with a round wheel-house rising like a glazed turret
high above her sharp bows, and with one slender varnished pole mast
forward. I daresay there are yet a few shipmasters afloat who remember
Falk and his tug very well. He extracted his pound and a half of
flesh from each of us merchant-skippers with an inflexible sort of
indifference which made him detested and even feared. Schomberg used to
remark: "I won't talk about the fellow. I don't think he has six drinks
from year's end to year's end in my place. But my advice is, gentlemen,
don't you have anything to do with him, if you can help it."

This advice, apart from unavoidable business relations, was easy to
follow because Falk intruded upon no one. It seems absurd to compare a
tugboat skipper to a centaur: but he reminded me somehow of an engraving
in a little book I had as a boy, which represented centaurs at a stream,
and there was one, especially in the foreground, prancing bow and arrows
in hand, with regular severe features and an immense curled wavy beard,
flowing down his breast. Falk's face reminded me of that centaur.
Besides, he was a composite creature. Not a man-horse, it is true, but
a man-boat. He lived on board his tug, which was always dashing up and
down the river from early morn till dewy eve.

In the last rays of the setting sun, you could pick out far away down
the reach his beard borne high up on the white structure, foaming up
stream to anchor for the night. There was the white-clad man's body, and
the rich brown patch of the hair, and nothing below the waist but the
'thwart-ship white lines of the bridge-screens, that lead the eye to the
sharp white lines of the bows cleaving the muddy water of the river.

Separated from his boat to me at least he seemed incomplete. The tug
herself without his head and torso on the bridge looked mutilated as it
were. But he left her very seldom. All the time I remained in harbour
I saw him only twice on shore. On the first occasion it was at my
charterers, where he came in misanthropically to get paid for towing out
a French barque the day before. The second time I could hardly believe
my eyes, for I beheld him reclining under his beard in a cane-bottomed
chair in the billiard-room of Schomberg's hotel.

It was very funny to see Schomberg ignoring him pointedly. The
artificiality of it contrasted strongly with Falk's natural unconcern.
The big Alsatian talked loudly with his other customers, going from one
little table to the other, and passing Falk's place of repose with his
eyes fixed straight ahead. Falk sat there with an untouched glass at his
elbow. He must have known by sight and name every white man in the room,
but he never addressed a word to anybody. He acknowledged my presence by
a drop of his eyelids, and that was all. Sprawling there in the chair,
he would, now and again, draw the palms of both his hands down his face,
giving at the same time a slight, almost imperceptible, shudder.

It was a habit he had, and of course I was perfectly familiar with it,
since you could not remain an hour in his company without being made to
wonder at such a movement breaking some long period of stillness. It was
a passionate and inexplicable gesture. He used to make it at all sorts
of times; as likely as not after he had been listening to little Lena's
chatter about the suffering doll, for instance. The Hermann children
always besieged him about his legs closely, though, in a gentle way, he
shrank from them a little. He seemed, however, to feel a great affection
for the whole family. For Hermann himself especially. He sought his
company. In this case, for instance, he must have been waiting for him,
because as soon as he appeared Falk rose hastily, and they went out
together. Then Schomberg expounded in my hearing to three or four people
his theory that Falk was after Captain Hermann's niece, and asserted
confidently that nothing would come of it. It was the same last year
when Captain Hermann was loading here, he said.

Naturally, I did not believe Schomberg, but I own that for a time I
observed closely what went on. All I discovered was some impatience on
Hermann's part. At the sight of Falk, stepping over the gangway, the
excellent man would begin to mumble and chew between his teeth something
that sounded like German swear-words. However, as I've said, I'm not
familiar with the language, and Hermann's soft, round-eyed countenance
remained unchanged. Staring stolidly ahead he greeted him with, "Wie
gehts," or in English, "How are you?" with a throaty enunciation. The
girl would look up for an instant and move her lips slightly: Mrs.
Hermann let her hands rest on her lap to talk volubly to him for a
minute or so in her pleasant voice before she went on with her sewing
again. Falk would throw himself into a chair, stretch his big legs, as
like as not draw his hands down his face passionately. As to myself, he
was not pointedly impertinent: it was rather as though he could not be
bothered with such trifles as my existence; and the truth is that being
a monopolist he was under no necessity to be amiable. He was sure to get
his own extortionate terms out of me for towage whether he frowned
or smiled. As a matter of fact, he did neither: but before many days
elapsed he managed to astonish me not a little and to set Schomberg's
tongue clacking more than ever.

It came about in this way. There was a shallow bar at the mouth of the
river which ought to have been kept down, but the authorities of the
State were piously busy gilding afresh the great Buddhist Pagoda just
then, and I suppose had no money to spare for dredging operations. I
don't know how it may be now, but at the time I speak of that sandbank
was a great nuisance to the shipping. One of its consequences was that
vessels of a certain draught of water, like Hermann's or mine, could not
complete their loading in the river. After taking in as much as possible
of their cargo, they had to go outside to fill up. The whole procedure
was an unmitigated bore. When you thought you had as much on board as
your ship could carry safely over the bar, you went and gave notice to
your agents. They, in their turn, notified Falk that so-and-so was ready
to go out. Then Falk (ostensibly when it fitted in with his other work,
but, if the truth were known, simply when his arbitrary spirit moved
him), after ascertaining carefully in the office that there was enough
money to meet his bill, would come along unsympathetically, glaring
at you with his yellow eyes from the bridge, and would drag you out
dishevelled as to rigging, lumbered as to the decks, with unfeeling
haste, as if to execution. And he would force you too to take the end of
his own wire hawser, for the use of which there was of course an extra
charge. To your shouted remonstrances against that extortion this
towering trunk with one hand on the engine-room telegraph only shook its
bearded head above the splash, the racket, and the clouds of smoke
in which the tug, backing and filling in the smother of churning
paddle-wheels behaved like a ferocious and impatient creature. He had
her manned by the cheekiest gang of lascars I ever did see, whom he
allowed to bawl at you insolently, and, once fast, he plucked you out
of your berth as if he did not care what he smashed. Eighteen miles down
the river you had to go behind him, and then three more along the
coast to where a group of uninhabited rocky islets enclosed a sheltered
anchorage. There you would have to lie at single anchor with your naked
spars showing to seaward over these barren fragments of land scattered
upon a very intensely blue sea. There was nothing to look at besides but
a bare coast, the muddy edge of the brown plain with the sinuosities
of the river you had left, traced in dull green, and the Great Pagoda
uprising lonely and massive with shining curves and pinnacles like the
gorgeous and stony efflorescence of tropical rocks. You had nothing to
do but to wait fretfully for the balance of your cargo, which was sent
out of the river with the greatest irregularity. And it was open to
you to console yourself with the thought that, after all, this stage
of bother meant that your departure from these shores was indeed
approaching at last.

We both had to go through that stage, Hermann and I, and there was a
sort of tacit emulation between the ships as to which should be ready
first. We kept on neck and neck almost to the finish, when I won
the race by going personally to give notice in the forenoon; whereas
Hermann, who was very slow in making up his mind to go ashore, did not
get to the agents' office till late in the day. They told him there that
my ship was first on turn for next morning, and I believe he told them
he was in no hurry. It suited him better to go the day after.

That evening, on board the Diana, he sat with his plump knees well
apart, staring and puffing at the curved mouthpiece of his pipe.
Presently he spoke with some impatience to his niece about putting the
children to bed. Mrs. Hermann, who was talking to Falk, stopped short
and looked at her husband uneasily, but the girl got up at once and
drove the children before her into the cabin. In a little while Mrs.
Hermann had to leave us to quell what, from the sounds inside, must have
been a dangerous mutiny. At this Hermann grumbled to himself. For half
an hour longer Falk left alone with us fidgeted on his chair, sighed
lightly, then at last, after drawing his hands down his face, got up,
and as if renouncing the hope of making himself understood (he hadn't
opened his mouth once) he said in English: "Well.... Good night,
Captain Hermann." He stopped for a moment before my chair and looked
down fixedly; I may even say he glared: and he went so far as to make a
deep noise in his throat. There was in all this something so marked
that for the first time in our limited intercourse of nods and grunts he
excited in me something like interest. But next moment he disappointed
me--for he strode away hastily without a nod even.

His manner was usually odd it is true, and I certainly did not pay much
attention to it; but that sort of obscure intention, which seemed to
lurk in his nonchalance like a wary old carp in a pond, had never before
come so near the surface. He had distinctly aroused my expectations. I
would have been unable to say what it was I expected, but at all events
I did not expect the absurd developments he sprung upon me no later than
the break of the very next day.

I remember only that there was, on that evening, enough point in his
behaviour to make me, after he had fled, wonder audibly what he might
mean. To this Hermann, crossing his legs with a swing and settling
himself viciously away from me in his chair, said: "That fellow don't
know himself what he means."

There might have been some insight in such a remark. I said nothing,
and, still averted, he added: "When I was here last year he was just the
same." An eruption of tobacco smoke enveloped his head as if his temper
had exploded like gunpowder.

I had half a mind to ask him point blank whether he, at least, didn't
know why Falk, a notoriously unsociable man, had taken to visiting his
ship with such assiduity. After all, I reflected suddenly, it was a
most remarkable thing. I wonder now what Hermann would have said. As it
turned out he didn't let me ask. Forgetting all about Falk apparently,
he started a monologue on his plans for the future: the selling of the
ship, the going home; and falling into a reflective and calculating
mood he mumbled between regular jets of smoke about the expense. The
necessity of disbursing passage money for all his tribe seemed to
disturb him in a manner that was the more striking because otherwise
he gave no signs of a miserly disposition. And yet he fussed over the
prospect of that voyage home in a mail boat like a sedentary grocer
who has made up his mind to see the world. He was racially thrifty I
suppose, and for him there must have been a great novelty in finding
himself obliged to pay for travelling--for sea travelling which was the
normal state of life for the family--from the very cradle for most of
them. I could see he grudged prospectively every single shilling which
must be spent so absurdly. It was rather funny. He would become doleful
over it, and then again, with a fretful sigh, he would suppose there
was nothing for it now but to take three second-class tickets--and there
were the four children to pay for besides. A lot of money that to spend
at once. A big lot of money.

I sat with him listening (not for the first time) to these
heart-searchings till I grew thoroughly sleepy, and then I left him and
turned in on board my ship. At daylight I was awakened by a yelping of
shrill voices, accompanied by a great commotion in the water, and the
short, bullying blasts of a steam-whistle. Falk with his tug had come
for me.

I began to dress. It was remarkable that the answering noise on board my
ship together with the patter of feet above my head ceased suddenly. But
I heard more remote guttural cries which seemed to express surprise and
annoyance. Then the voice of my mate reached me howling expostulations
to somebody at a distance. Other voices joined, apparently indignant;
a chorus of something that sounded like abuse replied. Now and then the
steam-whistle screeched.

Altogether that unnecessary uproar was distracting, but down there in my
cabin I took it calmly. In another moment, I thought, I should be going
down that wretched river, and in another week at the most I should be
totally quit of the odious place and all the odious people in it.

Greatly cheered by the idea, I seized the hair-brushes and looking at
myself in the glass began to use them. Suddenly a hush fell upon the
noise outside, and I heard (the ports of my cabin were thrown open)--I
heard a deep calm voice, not on board my ship, however, hailing
resolutely in English, but with a strong foreign twang, "Go ahead!"

There may be tides in the affairs of men which taken at the flood...
and so on. Personally I am still on the look out for that important
turn. I am, however, afraid that most of us are fated to flounder for
ever in the dead water of a pool whose shores are arid indeed. But
I know that there are often in men's affairs unexpectedly--even
irrationally--illuminating moments when an otherwise insignificant
sound, perhaps only some perfectly commonplace gesture, suffices
to reveal to us all the unreason, all the fatuous unreason, of our
complacency. "Go ahead" are not particularly striking words even when
pronounced with a foreign accent; yet they petrified me in the very
act of smiling at myself in the glass. And then, refusing to believe my
ears, but already boiling with indignation, I ran out of the cabin and
up on deck.

It was incredibly true. It was perfectly true. I had no eyes for
anything but the Diana. It was she, then, was being taken away. She was
already out of her berth and shooting athwart the river. "The way this
loonatic plucked that ship out is a caution," said the awed voice of my
mate close to my ear. "Hey! Hallo! Falk! Hermann! What's this infernal
trick?" I yelled in a fury.

Nobody heard me. Falk certainly could not hear me. His tug was turning
at full speed away under the other bank. The wire hawser between her and
the Diana, stretched as taut as a harp-string, vibrated alarmingly.

The high black craft careened over to the awful strain. A loud crack
came out of her, followed by the tearing and splintering of wood.
"There!" said the awed voice in my ear. "He's carried away their towing
chock." And then, with enthusiasm, "Oh! Look! Look! sir, Look! at them
Dutchmen skipping out of the way on the forecastle. I hope to goodness
he'll break a few of their shins before he's done with 'em."

I yelled my vain protests. The rays of the rising sun coursing level
along the plain warmed my back, but I was hot enough with rage. I
could not have believed that a simple towing operation could suggest so
plainly the idea of abduction, of rape. Falk was simply running off with
the Diana.

The white tug careered out into the middle of the river. The red floats
of her paddle-wheels revolving with mad rapidity tore up the whole reach
into foam. The Diana in mid-stream waltzed round with as much grace
as an old barn, and flew after her ravisher. Through the ragged fog of
smoke driving headlong upon the water I had a glimpse of Falk's square
motionless shoulders under a white hat as big as a cart-wheel, of his
red face, his yellow staring eyes, his great beard. Instead of keeping
a lookout ahead, he was deliberately turning his back on the river to
glare at his tow. The tall heavy craft, never so used before in her
life, seemed to have lost her senses; she took a wild sheer against her
helm, and for a moment came straight at us, menacing and clumsy, like
a runaway mountain. She piled up a streaming, hissing, boiling wave
half-way up her blunt stem, my crew let out one great howl,--and then we
held our breaths. It was a near thing. But Falk had her! He had her in
his clutch. I fancied I could hear the steel hawser ping as it surged
across the Diana's forecastle, with the hands on board of her bolting
away from it in all directions. It was a near thing. Hermann, with his
hair rumpled, in a snuffy flannel shirt and a pair of mustard-coloured
trousers, had rushed to help with the wheel. I saw his terrified round
face; I saw his very teeth uncovered by a sort of ghastly fixed grin;
and in a great leaping tumult of water between the two ships the Diana
whisked past so close that I could have flung a hair-brush at his head,
for, it seems, I had kept them in my hands all the time. Meanwhile
Mrs. Hermann sat placidly on the skylight, with a woollen shawl on
her shoulders. The excellent woman in response to my indignant
gesticulations fluttered a handkerchief, nodding and smiling in the
kindest way imaginable. The boys, only half-dressed, were jumping about
the poop in great glee, displaying their gaudy braces; and Lena in a
short scarlet petticoat, with peaked elbows and thin bare arms, nursed
the rag-doll with devotion. The whole family passed before my sight as
if dragged across a scene of unparalleled violence. The last I saw was
Hermann's niece with the baby Hermann in her arms standing apart from
the others. Magnificent in her close-fitting print frock she displayed
something so commanding in the manifest perfection of her figure that
the sun seemed to be rising for her alone. The flood of light brought
out the opulence of her form and the vigour of her youth in a glorifying
way. She went by perfectly motionless and as if lost in meditation; only
the hem of her skirt stirred in the draught; the sun rays broke on her
sleek tawny hair; that bald-headed ruffian, Nicholas, was whacking her
on the shoulder. I saw his tiny fat arm rise and fall in a workmanlike
manner. And then the four cottage windows of the Diana came into view
retreating swiftly down the river. The sashes were up, and one of the
white calico curtains was fluttered straight out like a streamer above
the agitated water of the wake.

To be thus tricked out of one's turn was an unheard of occurrence. In
my agent's office, where I went to complain at once, they protested with
apologies they couldn't understand how the mistake arose: but Schomberg
when I dropped in later to get some tiffin, though surprised to see me,
was perfectly ready with an explanation. I found him seated at the end
of a long narrow table, facing his wife--a scraggy little woman, with
long ringlets and a blue tooth, who smiled abroad stupidly and looked
frightened when you spoke to her. Between them a waggling punkah fanned
twenty cane-bottomed chairs and two rows of shiny plates. Three
Chinamen in white jackets loafed with napkins in their hands around that
desolation. Schomberg's pet table d'hote was not much of a success that
day. He was feeding himself ferociously and seemed to overflow with
bitterness.

He began by ordering in a brutal voice the chops to be brought back for
me, and turning in his chair: "Mistake they told you? Not a bit of it!
Don't you believe it for a moment, captain! Falk isn't a man to make
mistakes unless on purpose." His firm conviction was that Falk had been
trying all along to curry favour on the cheap with Hermann. "On the
cheap--mind you! It doesn't cost him a cent to put that insult upon you,
and Captain Hermann gets in a day ahead of your ship. Time's money! Eh?
You are very friendly with Captain Hermann I believe, but a man is bound
to be pleased at any little advantage he may get. Captain Hermann is a
good business man, and there's no such thing as a friend in business. Is
there?" He leaned forward and began to cast stealthy glances as usual.
"But Falk is, and always was, a miserable fellow. I would despise him."

I muttered, grumpily, that I had no particular respect for Falk.

"I would despise him," he insisted, with an appearance of anxiety which
would have amused me if I had not been fathoms deep in discontent. To a
young man fairly conscientious and as well-meaning as only the young
man can be, the current ill-usage of life comes with a peculiar cruelty.
Youth that is fresh enough to believe in guilt, in innocence, and in
itself, will always doubt whether it have not perchance deserved its
fate. Sombre of mind and without appetite, I struggled with the
chop while Mrs. Schomberg sat with her everlasting stupid grin and
Schomberg's talk gathered way like a slide of rubbish.

"Let me tell you. It's all about that girl. I don't know what Captain
Hermann expects, but if he asked me I could tell him something about
Falk. He's a miserable fellow. That man is a perfect slave. That's what
I call him. A slave. Last year I started this table d'hote, and sent
cards out--you know. You think he had one meal in the house? Give the
thing a trial? Not once. He has got hold now of a Madras cook--a blamed
fraud that I hunted out of my cookhouse with a rattan. He was not fit to
cook for white men. No, not for the white men's dogs either; but, see,
any damned native that can boil a pot of rice is good enough for Mr.
Falk. Rice and a little fish he buys for a few cents from the fishing
boats outside is what he lives on. You would hardly credit it--eh? A
white man, too...."

He wiped his lips, using the napkin with indignation, and looking at me.
It flashed through my mind in the midst of my depression that if all the
meat in the town was like these table d'hote chops, Falk wasn't so far
wrong. I was on the point of saying this, but Schomberg's stare was
intimidating. "He's a vegetarian, perhaps," I murmured instead.

"He's a miser. A miserable miser," affirmed the hotel-keeper with great
force. "The meat here is not so good as at home--of course. And dear
too. But look at me. I only charge a dollar for the tiffin, and one
dollar and fifty cents for the dinner. Show me anything cheaper. Why am
I doing it? There's little profit in this game. Falk wouldn't look
at it. I do it for the sake of a lot of young white fellows here that
hadn't a place where they could get a decent meal and eat it decently in
good company. There's first-rate company always at my table."

The convinced way he surveyed the empty chairs made me feel as if I had
intruded upon a tiffin of ghostly Presences.

"A white man should eat like a white man, dash it all," he burst out
impetuously. "Ought to eat meat, must eat meat. I manage to get meat for
my patrons all the year round. Don't I? I am not catering for a dam' lot
of coolies: Have another chop captain.... No? You, boy--take away!"

He threw himself back and waited grimly for the curry. The half-closed
jalousies darkened the room pervaded by the smell of fresh whitewash:
a swarm of flies buzzed and settled in turns, and poor Mrs. Schomberg's
smile seemed to express the quintessence of all the imbecility that had
ever spoken, had ever breathed, had ever been fed on infamous buffalo
meat within these bare walls. Schomberg did not open his lips till he
was ready to thrust therein a spoonful of greasy rice. He rolled his
eyes ridiculously before he swallowed the hot stuff, and only then broke
out afresh.

"It is the most degrading thing. They take the dish up to the wheelhouse
for him with a cover on it, and he shuts both the doors before he begins
to eat. Fact! Must be ashamed of himself. Ask the engineer. He can't
do without an engineer--don't you see--and as no respectable man can be
expected to put up with such a table, he allows them fifteen dollars
a month extra mess money. I assure you it is so! You just ask Mr.
Ferdinand da Costa. That's the engineer he has now. You may have seen
him about my place, a delicate dark young man, with very fine eyes and a
little moustache. He arrived here a year ago from Calcutta. Between you
and me, I guess the money-lenders there must have been after him. He
rushes here for a meal every chance he can get, for just please tell me
what satisfaction is that for a well-educated young fellow to feed all
alone in his cabin--like a wild beast? That's what Falk expects his
engineers to put up with for fifteen dollars extra. And the rows on
board every time a little smell of cooking gets about the deck! You
wouldn't believe! The other day da Costa got the cook to fry a steak for
him--a turtle steak it was too, not beef at all--and the fat caught
or something. Young da Costa himself was telling me of it here in this
room. 'Mr. Schomberg'--says he-'if I had let a cylinder cover blow off
through the skylight by my negligence Captain Falk couldn't have been
more savage. He frightened the cook so that he won't put anything on the
fire for me now.' Poor da Costa had tears in his eyes. Only try to put
yourself in his place, captain: a sensitive, gentlemanly young fellow.
Is he expected to eat his food raw? But that's your Falk all over. Ask
any one you like. I suppose the fifteen dollars extra he has to give
keep on rankling--in there."

And Schomberg tapped his manly breast. I sat half stunned by his
irrelevant babble. Suddenly he gripped my forearm in an impressive and
cautious manner, as if to lead me into a very cavern of confidence.

"It's nothing but enviousness," he said in a lowered tone, which had a
stimulating effect upon my wearied hearing. "I don't suppose there
is one person in this town that he isn't envious of. I tell you he's
dangerous. Even I myself am not safe from him. I know for certain he
tried to poison...."

"Oh, come now," I cried, revolted.

"But I know for certain. The people themselves came and told me of it.
He went about saying everywhere I was a worse pest to this town than the
cholera. He had been talking against me ever since I opened this hotel.
And he poisoned Captain Hermann's mind too. Last time the Diana was
loading here Captain Hermann used to come in every day for a drink or a
cigar. This time he hasn't been here twice in a week. How do you account
for that?"

He squeezed my arm till he extorted from me some sort of mumble.

"He makes ten times the money I do. I've another hotel to fight against,
and there is no other tug on the river. I am not in his way, am I? He
wouldn't be fit to run an hotel if he tried. But that's just his nature.
He can't bear to think I am making a living. I only hope it makes him
properly wretched. He's like that in everything. He would like to keep a
decent table well enough. But no--for the sake of a few cents. Can't do
it. It's too much for him. That's what I call being a slave to it. But
he's mean enough to kick up a row when his nose gets tickled a bit. See
that? That just paints him. Miserly and envious. You can't account for
it any other way. Can you? I have been studying him these three years."

He was anxious I should assent to his theory. And indeed on thinking it
over it would have been plausible enough if there hadn't been always the
essential falseness of irresponsibility in Schomberg's chatter. However,
I was not disposed to investigate the psychology of Falk. I was engaged
just then in eating despondently a piece of stale Dutch cheese, being
too much crushed to care what I swallowed myself, let along bothering my
head about Falk's ideas of gastronomy. I could expect from their study
no clue to his conduct in matters of business, which seemed to me
totally unrestrained by morality or even by the commonest sort of
decency. How insignificant and contemptible I must appear, for the
fellow to dare treat me like this--I reflected suddenly, writhing in
silent agony. And I consigned Falk and all his peculiarities to the
devil with so much mental fervour as to forget Schomberg's existence,
till he grabbed my arm urgently. "Well, you may think and think till
every hair of your head falls off, captain; but you can't explain it in
any other way."

For the sake of peace and quietness I admitted hurriedly that I
couldn't: persuaded that now he would leave off. But the only result was
to make his moist face shine with the pride of cunning. He removed his
hand for a moment to scare a black mass of flies off the sugar-basin and
caught hold of my arm again.

"To be sure. And in the same way everybody is aware he would like to get
married. Only he can't. Let me quote you an instance. Well, two years
ago a Miss Vanlo, a very ladylike girl, came from home to keep house for
her brother, Fred, who had an engineering shop for small repairs by
the water side. Suddenly Falk takes to going up to their bungalow after
dinner, and sitting for hours in the verandah saying nothing. The poor
girl couldn't tell for the life of her what to do with such a man, so
she would keep on playing the piano and singing to him evening after
evening till she was ready to drop. And it wasn't as if she had been
a strong young woman either. She was thirty, and the climate had been
playing the deuce with her. Then--don't you know--Fred had to sit up with
them for propriety, and during whole weeks on end never got a single
chance to get to bed before midnight. That was not pleasant for a tired
man--was it? And besides Fred had worries then because his shop didn't
pay and he was dropping money fast. He just longed to get away from here
and try his luck somewhere else, but for the sake of his sister he hung
on and on till he ran himself into debt over his ears--I can tell you.
I, myself, could show a handful of his chits for meals and drinks in
my drawer. I could never find out tho' where he found all the money at
last. Can't be but he must have got something out of that brother of
his, a coal merchant in Port Said. Anyhow he paid everybody before he
left, but the girl nearly broke her heart. Disappointment, of course,
and at her age, don't you know.... Mrs. Schomberg here was very
friendly with her, and she could tell you. Awful despair. Fainting
fits. It was a scandal. A notorious scandal. To that extent that old Mr.
Siegers--not your present charterer, but Mr. Siegers the father, the old
gentleman who retired from business on a fortune and got buried at sea
going home, _he_ had to interview Falk in his private office. He was a man
who could speak like a Dutch Uncle, and, besides, Messrs. Siegers had
been helping Falk with a good bit of money from the start. In fact you
may say they made him as far as that goes. It so happened that just at
the time he turned up here, their firm was chartering a lot of sailing
ships every year, and it suited their business that there should be good
towing facilities on the river. See?... Well--there's always an
ear at the keyhole--isn't there? In fact," he lowered his tone
confidentially, "in this case a good friend of mine; a man you can see
here any evening; only they conversed rather low. Anyhow my friend's
certain that Falk was trying to make all sorts of excuses, and old
Mr. Siegers was coughing a lot. And yet Falk wanted all the time to be
married too. Why! It's notorious the man has been longing for years to
make a home for himself. Only he can't face the expense. When it comes
to putting his hand in his pocket--it chokes him off. That's the truth
and no other. I've always said so, and everybody agrees with me by this
time. What do you think of that--eh?"

He appealed confidently to my indignation, but having a mind to annoy
him I remarked, "that it seemed to me very pitiful--if true."

He bounced in his chair as if I had run a pin into him. I don't know
what he might have said, only at that moment we heard through the half
open door of the billiard-room the footsteps of two men entering from
the verandah, a murmur of two voices; at the sharp tapping of a coin on
a table Mrs. Schomberg half rose irresolutely. "Sit still," he hissed at
her, and then, in an hospitable, jovial tone, contrasting amazingly with
the angry glance that had made his wife sink in her chair, he cried very
loud: "Tiffin still going on in here, gentlemen."

There was no answer, but the voices dropped suddenly. The head Chinaman
went out. We heard the clink of ice in the glasses, pouring sounds, the
shuffling of feet, the scraping of chairs. Schomberg, after wondering in
a low mutter who the devil could be there at this time of the day, got
up napkin in hand to peep through the doorway cautiously. He retreated
rapidly on tip-toe, and whispering behind his hand informed me that
it was Falk, Falk himself who was in there, and, what's more, he had
Captain Hermann with him.

The return of the tug from the outer Roads was unexpected but possible,
for Falk had taken away the Diana at half-past five, and it was now two
o'clock. Schomberg wished me to observe that neither of these men would
spend a dollar on a tiffin, which they must have wanted. But by the time
I was ready to leave the dining-room Falk had gone. I heard the last of
his big boots on the planks of the verandah. Hermann was sitting quite
alone in the large, wooden room with the two lifeless billiard tables
shrouded in striped covers, mopping his face diligently. He wore
his best go-ashore clothes, a stiff collar, black coat, large white
waistcoat, grey trousers. A white cotton sunshade with a cane handle
reposed between his legs, his side whiskers were neatly brushed, his
chin had been freshly shaved; and he only distantly resembled the
dishevelled and terrified man in a snuffy night shirt and ignoble old
trousers I had seen in the morning hanging on to the wheel of the Diana.

He gave a start at my entrance, and addressed me at once in some
confusion, but with genuine eagerness. He was anxious to make it clear
he had nothing to do with what he called the "tam pizness" of the
morning. It was most inconvenient. He had reckoned upon another day up
in town to settle his bills and sign certain papers. There were also
some few stores to come, and sundry pieces of "my ironwork," as he
called it quaintly, landed for repairs, had been left behind. Now he
would have to hire a native boat to take all this out to the ship. It
would cost five or six dollars perhaps. He had had no warning from
Falk. Nothing.... He hit the table with his dumpy fist.... Der
verfluchte Kerl came in the morning like a "tam' ropper," making a great
noise, and took him away. His mate was not prepared, his ship was moored
fast--he protested it was shameful to come upon a man in that way.
Shameful! Yet such was the power Falk had on the river that when I
suggested in a chilling tone that he might have simply refused to have
his ship moved, Hermann was quite startled at the idea. I never realised
so well before that this is an age of steam. The exclusive possession
of a marine boiler had given Falk the whip-hand of us all. Hermann,
recovering, put it to me appealingly that I knew very well how unsafe it
was to contradict that fellow. At this I only smiled distantly.

"Der Kerl!" he cried. He was sorry he had not refused. He was indeed.
The damage! The damage! What for all that damage! There was no occasion
for damage. Did I know how much damage he had done? It gave me a certain
satisfaction to tell him that I had heard his old waggon of a ship crack
fore and aft as she went by. "You passed close enough to me," I added
significantly.

He threw both his hands up to heaven at the recollection. One of them
grasped by the middle the white parasol, and he resembled curiously
a caricature of a shop-keeping citizen in one of his own German comic
papers. "Ach! That was dangerous," he cried. I was amused. But directly
he added with an appearance of simplicity, "The side of your iron ship
would have been crushed in like--like this matchbox."

"Would it?" I growled, much less amused now; but by the time I had
decided that this remark was not meant for a dig at me he had
worked himself into a high state of resentfulness against Falk. The
inconvenience, the damage, the expense! Gottferdam! Devil take the
fellow. Behind the bar Schomberg with a cigar in his teeth, pretended
to be writing with a pencil on a large sheet of paper; and as Hermann's
excitement increased it made me comfortingly aware of my own calmness
and superiority. But it occurred to me while I listened to his
revilings, that after all the good man had come up in the tug. There
perhaps--since he must come to town--he had no option. But evidently he
had had a drink with Falk, either accepted or offered. How was that? So
I checked him by saying loftily that I hoped he would make Falk pay for
every penny of the damage.

"That's it! That's it! Go for him," called out Schomberg from the bar,
flinging his pencil down and rubbing his hands.

We ignored his noise. But Hermann's excitement suddenly went off
the boil as when you remove a saucepan from the fire. I urged on his
consideration that he had done now with Falk and Falk's confounded tug.
He, Hermann, would not, perhaps, turn up again in this part of the world
for years to come, since he was going to sell the Diana at the end
of this very trip ("Go home passenger in a mail boat," he murmured
mechanically). He was therefore safe from Falk's malice. All he had to
do was to race off to his consignees and stop payment of the towage bill
before Falk had the time to get in and lift the money.

Nothing could have been less in the spirit of my advice than the
thoughtful way in which he set about to make his parasol stay propped
against the edge of the table.

While I watched his concentrated efforts with astonishment he threw at
me one or two perplexed, half-shy glances. Then he sat down. "That's all
very well," he said reflectively.

It cannot be doubted that the man had been thrown off his balance by
being hauled out of the harbour against his wish. His stolidity had been
profoundly stirred, else he would never have made up his mind to ask me
unexpectedly whether I had not remarked that Falk had been casting eyes
upon his niece. "No more than myself," I answered with literal truth.
The girl was of the sort one necessarily casts eyes at in a sense. She
made no noise, but she filled most satisfactorily a good bit of space.

"But you, captain, are not the same kind of man," observed Hermann.

I was not, I am happy to say, in a position to deny this. "What about
the lady?" I could not help asking. At this he gazed for a time into
my face, earnestly, and made as if to change the subject. I heard him
beginning to mutter something unexpected, about his children growing
old enough to require schooling. He would have to leave them ashore with
their grandmother when he took up that new command he expected to get in
Germany.

This constant harping on his domestic arrangements was funny. I suppose
it must have been like the prospect of a complete alteration in his
life. An epoch. He was going, too, to part with the Diana! He had served
in her for years. He had inherited her. From an uncle, if I remember
rightly. And the future loomed big before him, occupying his thought
exclusively with all its aspects as on the eve of a venturesome
enterprise. He sat there frowning and biting his lip, and suddenly he
began to fume and fret.

I discovered to my momentary amusement that he seemed to imagine I
could, should or ought, have caused Falk in some way to pronounce
himself. Such a hope was incomprehensible, but funny. Then the contact
with all this foolishness irritated me. I said crossly that I had seen
no symptoms, but if there were any--since he, Hermann, was so sure--then
it was still worse. What pleasure Falk found in humbugging people in
just that way I couldn't say. It was, however, my solemn duty to warn
him. It had lately, I said, come to my knowledge that there was a man
(not a very long time ago either) who had been taken in just like this.

All this passed in undertones, and at this point Schomberg, exasperated
at our secrecy, went out of the room slamming the door with a crash
that positively lifted us in our chairs. This, or else what I had said,
huffed my Hermann, He supposed, with a contemptuous toss of his head
towards the door which trembled yet, that I had got hold of some of
that man's silly tales. It looked, indeed, as though his mind had been
thoroughly poisoned against Schomberg. "His tales were--they were," he
repeated, seeking for the word--"trash." They were trash, he reiterated,
and moreover I was young yet...

This horrid aspersion (I regret I am no longer exposed to that sort of
insult) made me huffy too. I felt ready in my own mind to back up every
assertion of Schomberg's and on any subject. In a moment, devil only
knows why, Hermann and I were looking at each other most inimically.
He caught up his hat without more ado and I gave myself the pleasure of
calling after him:

"Take my advice and make Falk pay for breaking up your ship. You aren't
likely to get anything else out of him."

When I got on board my ship later on, the old mate, who was very full of
the events of the morning, remarked:

"I saw the tug coming back from the outer Roads just before two P.M."
(He never by any chance used the words morning or afternoon. Always P.M.
or A.M., log-book style.) "Smart work that. Man's always in a state of
hurry. He's a regular chucker-out, ain't he, sir? There's a few pubs I
know of in the East-end of London that would be all the better for
one of his sort around the bar." He chuckled at his joke. "A regular
chucker-out. Now he has fired out that Dutchman head over heels, I
suppose our turn's coming to-morrow morning."

We were all on deck at break of day (even the sick--poor devils--had
crawled out) ready to cast off in the twinkling of an eye. Nothing
came. Falk did not come. At last, when I began to think that probably
something had gone wrong in his engine-room, we perceived the tug going
by, full pelt, down the river, as if we hadn't existed. For a moment I
entertained the wild notion that he was going to turn round in the next
reach. Afterwards I watched his smoke appear above the plain, now here,
now there, according to the windings of the river. It disappeared. Then
without a word I went down to breakfast. I just simply went down to
breakfast.

Not one of us uttered a sound till the mate, after imbibing--by means
of suction out of a saucer--his second cup of tea, exclaimed: "Where the
devil is the man gone to?"

"Courting!" I shouted, with such a fiendish laugh that the old chap
didn't venture to open his lips any more.

I started to the office perfectly calm. Calm with excessive rage.
Evidently they knew all about it already, and they treated me to a
show of consternation. The manager, a soft-footed, immensely obese man,
breathing short, got up to meet me, while all round the room the young
clerks, bending over the papers on their desks, cast upward glances in
my direction. The fat man, without waiting for my complaint, wheezing
heavily and in a tone as if he himself were incredulous, conveyed to
me the news that Falk--Captain Falk--had declined--had absolutely
declined--to tow my ship--to have anything to do with my ship--this day
or any other day. Never!

I did my best to preserve a cool appearance, but, all the same, I must
have shown how much taken aback I was. We were talking in the middle
of the room. Suddenly behind my back some ass blew his nose with great
force, and at the same time another quill-driver jumped up and went out
on the landing hastily. It occurred to me I was cutting a foolish figure
there. I demanded angrily to see the principal in his private room.

The skin of Mr. Siegers' head showed dead white between the iron grey
streaks of hair lying plastered cross-wise from ear to ear over the top
of his skull in the manner of a bandage. His narrow sunken face was of
an uniform and permanent terra-cotta colour, like a piece of pottery.
He was sickly, thin, and short, with wrists like a boy of ten. But from
that debile body there issued a bullying voice, tremendously loud, harsh
and resonant, as if produced by some powerful mechanical contrivance
in the nature of a fog-horn. I do not know what he did with it in
the private life of his home, but in the larger sphere of business it
presented the advantage of overcoming arguments without the slightest
mental effort, by the mere volume of sound. We had had several
passages of arms. It took me all I knew to guard the interests of my
owners--whom, nota bene, I had never seen--while Siegers (who had
made their acquaintance some years before, during a business tour in
Australia) pretended to the knowledge of their innermost minds, and, in
the character of "our very good friends," threw them perpetually at my
head.

He looked at me with a jaundiced eye (there was no love lost between
us), and declared at once that it was strange, very strange. His
pronunciation of English was so extravagant that I can't even attempt to
reproduce it. For instance, he said "Fferie strantch." Combined with
the bellowing intonation it made the language of one's childhood sound
weirdly startling, and even if considered purely as a kind of unmeaning
noise it filled you with astonishment at first. "They had," he
continued, "been acquainted with Captain Falk for very many years, and
never had any reason...."

"That's why I come to you, of course," I interrupted. "I've the right
to know the meaning of this infernal nonsense." In the half light of the
room, which was greenish, because of the tree-tops screening the
window, I saw him writhe his meagre shoulders. It came into my head, as
disconnected ideas will come at all sorts of times into one's head, that
this, most likely, was the very room where, if the tale were true, Falk
had been lectured by Mr. Siegers, the father. Mr. Siegers' (the son's)
overwhelming voice, in brassy blasts, as though he had been trying to
articulate his words through a trombone, was expressing his great regret
at a conduct characterised by a very marked want of discretion... As I
lived I was being lectured too! His deafening gibberish was difficult to
follow, but it was _my_ conduct--mine!--that... Damn! I wasn't going to
stand this.

"What on earth are you driving at?" I asked in a passion. I put my hat
on my head (he never offered a seat to anybody), and as he seemed for
the moment struck dumb by my irreverence, I turned my back on him and
marched out. His vocal arrangements blared after me a few threats of
coming down on the ship for the demurrage of the lighters, and all the
other expenses consequent upon the delays arising from my frivolity.

Once outside in the sunshine my head swam. It was no longer a question
of mere delay. I perceived myself involved in hopeless and humiliating
absurdities that were leading me to something very like a disaster. "Let
us be calm," I muttered to myself, and ran into the shade of a
leprous wall. From that short side-street I could see the broad main
thoroughfare ruinous and gay, running away, away between stretches of
decaying masonry, bamboo fences, ranges of arcades of brick and plaster,
hovels of lath and mud, lofty temple gates of carved timber, huts of
rotten mats--an immensely wide thoroughfare, loosely packed as far as
the eye could reach with a barefooted and brown multitude paddling ankle
deep in the dust. For a moment I felt myself about to go out of my mind
with worry and desperation.

Some allowance must be made for the feelings of a young man new to
responsibility. I thought of my crew. Half of them were ill, and I
really began to think that some of them would end by dying on board if
I couldn't get them out to sea soon. Obviously I should have to take my
ship down the river, either working under canvas or dredging with the
anchor down; operations which, in common with many modern sailors,
I only knew theoretically. And I almost shrank from undertaking them
shorthanded and without local knowledge of the river bed, which is so
necessary for the confident handling of the ship. There were no pilots,
no beacons, no buoys of any sort; but there was a very devil of a
current for anybody to see, no end of shoal places, and at least two
obviously awkward turns of the channel between me and the sea. But how
dangerous these turns were I would not tell. I didn't even know what
my ship was capable of! I had never handled her in my life. A
misunderstanding between a man and his ship in a difficult river with no
room to make it up, is bound to end in trouble for the man. On the other
hand, it must be owned I had not much reason to count upon a general run
of good luck. And suppose I had the misfortune to pile her up high and
dry on some beastly shoal? That would have been the final undoing of
that voyage. It was plain that if Falk refused to tow me out he would
also refuse to pull me off. This meant--what? A day lost at the
very best; but more likely a whole fortnight of frizzling on some
pestilential mud-flat, of desperate work, of discharging cargo; more than
likely it meant borrowing money at an exorbitant rate of interest--from
the Siegers' gang too at that. They were a power in the port. And that
elderly seaman of mine, Gambril, had looked pretty ghastly when I
went forward to dose him with quinine that morning. _He_ would certainly
die--not to speak of two or three others that seemed nearly as bad,
and of the rest of them just ready to catch any tropical disease going.
Horror, ruin and everlasting remorse. And no help. None. I had fallen
amongst a lot of unfriendly lunatics!

At any rate, if I must take my ship down myself it was my duty to
procure if possible some local knowledge. But that was not easy. The
only person I could think of for that service was a certain Johnson,
formerly captain of a country ship, but now spliced to a country wife
and gone utterly to the bad. I had only heard of him in the vaguest way,
as living concealed in the thick of two hundred thousand natives, and
only emerging into the light of day for the purpose of hunting up some
brandy. I had a notion that if I could lay my hands on him I would sober
him on board my ship and use him for a pilot. Better than nothing. Once
a sailor always a sailor--and he had known the river for years. But in
our Consulate (where I arrived dripping after a sharp walk) they could
tell me nothing. The excellent young men on the staff, though willing to
help me, belonged to a sphere of the white colony for which that sort of
Johnson does not exist. Their suggestion was that I should hunt the
man up myself with the help of the Consulate's constable--an
ex-sergeant-major of a regiment of Hussars.

This man, whose usual duty apparently consisted in sitting behind a
little table in an outer room of Consular offices, when ordered to
assist me in my search for Johnson displayed lots of energy and a
marvellous amount of local knowledge of a sort. But he did not conceal
an immense and sceptical contempt for the whole business. We explored
together on that afternoon an infinity of infamous grog shops, gambling
dens, opium dens. We walked up narrow lanes where our gharry--a tiny
box of a thing on wheels, attached to a jibbing Burmah pony--could by
no means have passed. The constable seemed to be on terms of scornful
intimacy with Maltese, with Eurasians, with Chinamen, with Klings, and
with the sweepers attached to a temple, with whom he talked at the gate.
We interviewed also through a grating in a mud wall closing a blind
alley an immensely corpulent Italian, who, the ex-sergeant-major
remarked to me perfunctorily, had "killed another man last year."
Thereupon he addressed him as "Antonio" and "Old Buck," though that
bloated carcase, apparently more than half filling the sort of cell
wherein it sat, recalled rather a fat pig in a stye. Familiar and never
unbending, the sergeant chucked--absolutely chucked--under the chin
a horribly wrinkled and shrivelled old hag propped on a stick, who had
volunteered some sort of information: and with the same stolid face he
kept up an animated conversation with the groups of swathed brown women,
who sat smoking cheroots on the door-steps of a long range of clay
hovels. We got out of the gharry and clambered into dwellings airy like
packing crates, or descended into places sinister like cellars. We got
in, we drove on, we got out again for the sole purpose, as it seemed, of
looking behind a heap of rubble. The sun declined; my companion was curt
and sardonic in his answers, but it appears we were just missing Johnson
all along. At last our conveyance stopped once more with a jerk, and the
driver jumping down opened the door.

A black mudhole blocked the lane. A mound of garbage crowned with the
dead body of a dog arrested us not. An empty Australian beef tin bounded
cheerily before the toe of my boot. Suddenly we clambered through a gap
in a prickly fence....

It was a very clean native compound: and the big native woman, with bare
brown legs as thick as bedposts, pursuing on all fours a silver dollar
that came rolling out from somewhere, was Mrs. Johnson herself. "Your
man's at home," said the ex-sergeant, and stepped aside in complete
and marked indifference to anything that might follow. Johnson--at
home--stood with his back to a native house built on posts and with its
walls made of mats. In his left hand he held a banana. Out of the right
he dealt another dollar into space. The woman captured this one on the
wing, and there and then plumped down on the ground to look at us with
greater comfort.

My man was sallow of face, grizzled, unshaven, muddy on elbows and
back; where the seams of his serge coat yawned you could see his white
nakedness. The vestiges of a paper collar encircled his neck. He looked
at us with a grave, swaying surprise. "Where do you come from?" he
asked. My heart sank. How could I have been stupid enough to waste
energy and time for this?

But having already gone so far I approached a little nearer and declared
the purpose of my visit. He would have to come at once with me, sleep on
board my ship, and to-morrow, with the first of the ebb, he would give
me his assistance in getting my ship down to the sea, without steam. A
six-hundred-ton barque, drawing nine feet aft. I proposed to give
him eighteen dollars for his local knowledge; and all the time I was
speaking he kept on considering attentively the various aspects of the
banana, holding first one side up to his eye, then the other.

"You've forgotten to apologise," he said at last with extreme precision.
"Not being a gentleman yourself, you don't know apparently when you
intrude upon a gentleman. I am one. I wish you to understand that when I
am in funds I don't work, and now..."

I would have pronounced him perfectly sober hadn't he paused in great
concern to try and brush a hole off the knee of his trousers.

"I have money--and friends. Every gentleman has. Perhaps you would like
to know my friend? His name is Falk. You could borrow some money. Try to
remember. F-A-L-K, Falk." Abruptly his tone changed. "A noble heart," he
said muzzily.

"Has Falk been giving you some money?" I asked, appalled by the detailed
finish of the dark plot.

"Lent me, my good man, not given me. Lent," he corrected suavely.
"Met me taking the air last evening, and being as usual anxious to
oblige--Hadn't you better go to the devil out of my compound?"

And upon this, without other warning, he let fly with the banana which
missed my head, and took the constable just under the left eye. He
rushed at the miserable Johnson, stammering with fury. They fell....
But why dwell on the wretchedness, the breathlessness, the degradation,
the senselessness, the weariness, the ridicule and humiliation
and--and--the perspiration, of these moments? I dragged the ex-hussar
off. He was like a wild beast. It seems he had been greatly annoyed
at losing his free afternoon on my account. The garden of his bungalow
required his personal attention, and at the slight blow of the banana
the brute in him had broken loose. We left Johnson on his back, still
black in the face, but beginning to kick feebly. Meantime, the big woman
had remained sitting on the ground, apparently paralysed with extreme
terror.

For half an hour we jolted inside our rolling box, side by side, in
profound silence. The ex-sergeant was busy staunching the blood of a
long scratch on his cheek. "I hope you're satisfied," he said suddenly.
"That's what comes of all that tomfool business. If you hadn't
quarrelled with that tugboat skipper over some girl or other, all this
wouldn't have happened."

"You heard _that_ story?" I said.

"Of course I heard. And I shouldn't wonder if the Consul-General himself
doesn't come to hear of it. How am I to go before him to-morrow with
that thing on my cheek--I want to know. Its _you_ who ought to have got
this!"

After that, till the gharry stopped and he jumped out without
leave-taking, he swore to himself steadily, horribly; muttering great,
purposeful, trooper oaths, to which the worst a sailor can do is like
the prattle of a child. For my part I had just the strength to crawl
into Schomberg's coffee-room, where I wrote at a little table a note to
the mate instructing him to get everything ready for dropping down the
river next day. I couldn't face my ship. Well! she had a clever sort of
skipper and no mistake--poor thing! What a horrid mess! I took my head
between my hands. At times the obviousness of my innocence would reduce
me to despair. What had I done? If I had done something to bring about
the situation I should at least have learned not to do it again. But I
felt guiltless to the point of imbecility. The room was empty yet;
only Schomberg prowled round me goggle-eyed and with a sort of awed
respectful curiosity. No doubt he had set the story going himself; but
he was a good-hearted chap, and I am really persuaded he participated in
all my troubles. He did what he could for me. He ranged aside the heavy
match-stand, set a chair straight, pushed a spittoon slightly with
his foot--as you show small attentions to a friend under a great
sorrow--sighed, and at last, unable to hold his tongue:

"Well! I warned you, captain. That's what comes of running your head
against Mr. Falk. Man'll stick at nothing."

I sat without stirring, and after surveying me with a sort of
commiseration in his eyes he burst out in a hoarse whisper: "But for
a fine lump of a girl, she's a fine lump of a girl." He made a loud
smacking noise with his thick lips. "The finest lump of a girl that I
ever..." he was going on with great unction, but for some reason or
other broke off. I fancied myself throwing something at his head. "I
don't blame you, captain. Hang me if I do," he said with a patronising
air.

"Thank you," I said resignedly. It was no use fighting against this
false fate. I don't know even if I was sure myself where the truth of
the matter began. The conviction that it would end disastrously had been
driven into me by all the successive shocks my sense of security had
received. I began to ascribe an extraordinary potency to agents in
themselves powerless. It was as if Schomberg's baseless gossip had the
power to bring about the thing itself or the abstract enmity of Falk
could put my ship ashore.

I have already explained how fatal this last would have been. For my
further action, my youth, my inexperience, my very real concern for the
health of my crew must be my excuse. The action itself, when it came,
was purely impulsive. It was set in movement quite undiplomatically and
simply by Falk's appearance in the doorway.

The room was full by then and buzzing with voices. I had been looked
at with curiosity by every one, but how am I to describe the sensation
produced by the appearance of Falk himself blocking the doorway? The
tension of expectation could be measured by the profundity of the
silence that fell upon the very click of the billiard balls. As to
Schomberg, he looked extremely frightened; he hated mortally any sort
of row (fracas he called it) in his establishment. Fracas was bad
for business, he affirmed; but, in truth, this specimen of portly,
middle-aged manhood was of a timid disposition. I don't know what,
considering my presence in the place, they all hoped would come of it. A
sort of stag fight, perhaps. Or they may have supposed Falk had come in
only to annihilate me completely. As a matter of fact, Falk had come in
because Hermann had asked him to inquire after the precious white cotton
parasol which, in the worry and excitement of the previous day, he had
forgotten at the table where we had held our little discussion.

It was this that gave me my opportunity. I don't think I would have gone
to seek Falk out. No. I don't think so. There are limits. But there was
an opportunity and I seized it--I have already tried to explain why. Now
I will merely state that, in my opinion, to get his sickly crew into
the sea air and secure a quick despatch for his ship a skipper would be
justified in going to any length, short of absolute crime. He should
put his pride in his pocket; he may accept confidences; explain his
innocence as if it were a sin; he may take advantage of misconceptions,
of desires and of weaknesses; he ought to conceal his horror and other
emotions, and, if the fate of a human being, and that human being
a magnificent young girl, is strangely involved--why, he should
contemplate that fate (whatever it might seem to be) without turning a
hair. And all these things I have done; the explaining, the listening,
the pretending--even to the discretion--and nobody, not even Hermann's
niece, I believe, need throw stones at me now. Schomberg at all events
needn't, since from first to last, I am happy to say, there was not the
slightest "fracas."

Overcoming a nervous contraction of the windpipe, I had managed to
exclaim "Captain Falk!" His start of surprise was perfectly genuine, but
afterwards he neither smiled nor scowled. He simply waited. Then, when
I had said, "I must have a talk with you," and had pointed to a chair
at my table, he moved up to me, though he didn't sit down. Schomberg,
however, with a long tumbler in his hand, was making towards us
prudently, and I discovered then the only sign of weakness in Falk. He
had for Schomberg a repulsion resembling that sort of physical fear
some people experience at the sight of a toad. Perhaps to a man so
essentially and silently concentrated upon himself (though he could talk
well enough, as I was to find out presently) the other's irrepressible
loquacity, embracing every human being within range of the tongue, might
have appeared unnatural, disgusting, and monstrous. He suddenly gave
signs of restiveness--positively like a horse about to rear, and,
muttering hurriedly as if in great pain, "No. I can't stand that
fellow," seemed ready to bolt. This weakness of his gave me the
advantage at the very start. "Verandah," I suggested, as if rendering
him a service, and walked him out by the arm. We stumbled over a few
chairs; we had the feeling of open space before us, and felt the fresh
breath of the river--fresh, but tainted. The Chinese theatres across the
water made, in the sparsely twinkling masses of gloom an Eastern town
presents at night, blazing centres of light, and of a distant and
howling uproar. I felt him become suddenly tractable again like an
animal, like a good-tempered horse when the object that scares him is
removed. Yes. I felt in the darkness there how tractable he was, without
my conviction of his inflexibility--tenacity, rather, perhaps--being in
the least weakened. His very arm abandoning itself to my grasp was as
hard as marble--like a limb of iron. But I heard a tumultuous scuffling
of boot-soles within. The unspeakable idiots inside were crowding to the
windows, climbing over each other's backs behind the blinds, billiard
cues and all. Somebody broke a window pane, and with the sound of
falling glass, so suggestive of riot and devastation, Schomberg reeled
out after us in a state of funk which had prevented his parting with his
brandy and soda. He must have trembled like an aspen leaf. The piece of
ice in the long tumbler he held in his hand tinkled with an effect
of chattering teeth. "I beg you, gentlemen," he expostulated thickly.
"Come! Really, now, I must insist..."

How proud I am of my presence of mind! "Hallo," I said instantly in a
loud and naive tone, "somebody's breaking your windows, Schomberg. Would
you please tell one of your boys to bring out here a pack of cards and a
couple of lights? And two long drinks. Will you?"

To receive an order soothed him at once. It was business. "Certainly,"
he said in an immensely relieved tone. The night was rainy, with
wandering gusts of wind, and while we waited for the candles Falk said,
as if to justify his panic, "I don't interfere in anybody's business.
I don't give any occasion for talk. I am a respectable man. But this
fellow is always making out something wrong, and can never rest till he
gets somebody to believe him."

This was the first of my knowledge of Falk. This desire of
respectability, of being like everybody else, was the only recognition
he vouchsafed to the organisation of mankind. For the rest he might have
been the member of a herd, not of a society. Self-preservation was his
only concern. Not selfishness, but mere self-preservation. Selfishness
presupposes consciousness, choice, the presence of other men; but his
instinct acted as though he were the last of mankind nursing that law
like the only spark of a sacred fire. I don't mean to say that living
naked in a cavern would have satisfied him. Obviously he was
the creature of the conditions to which he was born. No doubt
self-preservation meant also the preservation of these conditions. But
essentially it meant something much more simple, natural, and powerful.
How shall I express it? It meant the preservation of the five senses
of his body--let us say--taking it in its narrowest as well as in its
widest meaning. I think you will admit before long the justice of this
judgment. However, as we stood there together in the dark verandah I had
