which are commonest in
the external creation; that in proportion to the richness of their
association, the resemblance to natural work, as a type and help, must
be more closely attempted, and more clearly seen; and that beyond a
certain point, and that a very low one, man cannot advance in the
invention of beauty, without directly imitating natural form. Thus, in
the Doric temple, the triglyph and cornice are unimitative; or imitative
only of artificial cuttings of wood. No one would call these members
beautiful. Their influence over us is in their severity and simplicity.
The fluting of the column, which I doubt not was the Greek symbol of the
bark of the tree, was imitative in its origin, and feebly resembled many
caniculated organic structures. Beauty is instantly felt in it, but of a
low order. The decoration proper was sought in the true forms of organic
life, and those chiefly human. Again: the Doric capital was unimitative;
but all the beauty it had was dependent on the precision of its ovolo, a
natural curve of the most frequent occurrence. The Ionic capital (to my
mind, as an architectural invention, exceedingly base) nevertheless
depended for all the beauty that it had on its adoption of a spiral
line, perhaps the commonest of all that characterise the inferior orders
of animal organism and habitation. Farther progress could not be made
without a direct imitation of the acanthus leaf.

Again: the Romanesque arch is beautiful as an abstract line. Its type is
always before us in that of the apparent vault of heaven, and horizon of
the earth. The cylindrical pillar is always beautiful, for God has so
moulded the stem of every tree that it is pleasant to the eyes. The
pointed arch is beautiful; it is the termination of every leaf that
shakes in summer wind, and its most fortunate associations are directly
borrowed from the trefoiled grass of the field, or from the stars of its
flowers. Further than this, man's invention could not reach without
frank imitation. His next step was to gather the flowers themselves, and
wreathe them in his capitals.

III. Now, I would insist especially on the fact, of which I doubt not
that further illustrations will occur to the mind of every reader, that
all most lovely forms and thoughts are directly taken from natural
objects; because I would fain be allowed to assume also the converse of
this, namely, that forms which are _not_ taken from natural objects
_must_ be ugly. I know this is a bold assumption; but as I have not
space to reason out the points wherein essential beauty of form
consists, that being far too serious a work to be undertaken in a bye
way, I have no other resource than to use this accidental mark or test
of beauty, of whose truth the considerations which I hope hereafter to
lay before the reader may assure him. I say an accidental mark, since
forms are not beautiful _because_ they are copied from nature; only it
is out of the power of man to conceive beauty without her aid. I believe
the reader will grant me this, even from the examples above advanced;
the degree of confidence with which it is granted must attach also to
his acceptance of the conclusions which will follow from it; but if it
be granted frankly, it will enable me to determine a matter of very
essential importance, namely, what _is_ or is _not_ ornament. For there
are many forms of so-called decoration in architecture, habitual, and
received, therefore, with approval, or at all events without any venture
at expression or dislike, which I have no hesitation in asserting to be
not ornament at all, but to be ugly things, the expense of which ought
in truth to be set down in the architect's contract, as "For
Monstrification." I believe that we regard these customary deformities
with a savage complacency, as an Indian does his flesh patterns and
paint (all nations being in certain degrees and senses savage). I
believe that I can prove them to be monstrous, and I hope hereafter to
do so conclusively; but, meantime, I can allege in defence of my
persuasion nothing but this fact of their being unnatural, to which the
reader must attach such weight as he thinks it deserves. There is,
however, a peculiar difficulty in using this proof; it requires the
writer to assume, very impertinently, that nothing is natural but what
he has seen or supposes to exist. I would not do this; for I suppose
there is no conceivable form or grouping of forms but in some part of
the universe an example of it may be found. But I think I am justified
in considering those forms to be _most_ natural which are most frequent;
or, rather, that on the shapes which in the every-day world are familiar
to the eyes of men, God has stamped those characters of beauty which He
has made it man's nature to love; while in certain exceptional forms He
has shown that the adoption of the others was not a matter of necessity,
but part of the adjusted harmony of creation. I believe that thus we may
reason from Frequency to Beauty and _vice versâ_; that knowing a thing
to be frequent, we may assume it to be beautiful; and assume that which
is most frequent to be most beautiful: I mean, of course, _visibly_
frequent; for the forms of things which are hidden in caverns of the
earth, or in the anatomy of animal frames, are evidently not intended by
their Maker to bear the habitual gaze of man. And, again, by frequency I
mean that limited and isolated frequency which is characteristic of all
perfection; not mere multitude: as a rose is a common flower, but yet
there are not so many roses on the tree as there are leaves. In this
respect Nature is sparing of her highest, and lavish of her less,
beauty; but I call the flower as frequent as the leaf, because, each in
its allotted quantity, where the one is, there will ordinarily be the
other.

IV. The first so-called ornament, then, which I would attack is that
Greek fret, now, I believe, usually known by the Italian name Guilloche,
which is exactly a case in point. It so happens that in crystals of
bismuth formed by the unagitated cooling of the melted metal, there
occurs a natural resemblance of it almost perfect. But crystals of
bismuth not only are of unusual occurrence in every-day life, but their
form is, as far as I know, unique among minerals; and not only unique,
but only attainable by an artificial process, the metal itself never
being found pure. I do not remember any other substance or arrangement
which presents a resemblance to this Greek ornament; and I think that I
may trust my remembrance as including most of the arrangements which
occur in the outward forms of common and familiar things. On this
ground, then, I allege that ornament to be ugly; or, in the literal
sense of the word, monstrous; different from anything which it is the
nature of man to admire: and I think an uncarved fillet or plinth
infinitely preferable to one covered with this vile concatenation of
straight lines: unless indeed it be employed as a foil to a true
ornament, which it may, perhaps, sometimes with advantage; or
excessively small, as it occurs on coins, the harshness of its
arrangement being less perceived.

V. Often in association with this horrible design we find, in Greek
works, one which is as beautiful as this is painful--that egg and dart
moulding, whose perfection in its place and way, has never been
surpassed. And why is this? Simply because the form of which it is
chiefly composed is one not only familiar to us in the soft housing of
the bird's nest, but happens to be that of nearly every pebble that
rolls and murmurs under the surf of the sea, on all its endless shore.
And with that a peculiar accuracy; for the mass which bears the light in
this moulding is _not_ in good Greek work, as in the frieze of the
Erechtheum, merely of the shape of an egg. It is _flattened_ on the
upper surface, with a delicacy and keen sense of variety in the curve
which it is impossible too highly to praise, attaining exactly that
flattened, imperfect oval, which, in nine cases out of ten, will be the
form of the pebble lifted at random from the rolled beach. Leave out
this flatness, and the moulding is vulgar instantly. It is singular also
that the insertion of this rounded form in the hollow recess has a
_painted_ type in the plumage of the Argus pheasant, the eyes of whose
feathers are so shaded as exactly to represent an oval form placed in a
hollow.

VI. It will evidently follow, upon our application of this test of
natural resemblance, that we shall at once conclude that all perfectly
beautiful forms must be composed of curves; since there is hardly any
common natural form in which it is possible to discover a straight line.
Nevertheless, Architecture, having necessarily to deal with straight
lines essential to its purposes in many instances and to the expression
of its power in others, must frequently be content with that measure of
beauty which is consistent with such primal forms; and we may presume
that utmost measure of beauty to have been attained when the
arrangements of such lines are consistent with the most frequent natural
groupings of them we can discover, although, to find right lines in
nature at all, we may be compelled to do violence to her finished work,
break through the sculptured and colored surfaces of her crags, and
examine the processes of their crystallisation.

VII. I have just convicted the Greek fret of ugliness, because it has no
precedent to allege for its arrangement except an artificial form of a
rare metal. Let us bring into court an ornament of Lombard architects,
Plate XII., fig. 7, as exclusively composed of right lines as the other,
only, observe, with the noble element of shadow added. This ornament,
taken from the front of the Cathedral of Pisa, is universal throughout
the Lombard churches of Pisa, Lucca, Pistoja, and Florence; and it will
be a grave stain upon them if it cannot be defended. Its first apology
for itself, made in a hurry, sounds marvellously like the Greek one, and
highly dubious. It says that its terminal contour is the very image of a
carefully prepared artificial crystal of common salt. Salt being,
however, a substance considerably more familiar to us than bismuth, the
chances are somewhat in favor of the accused Lombard ornament already.
But it has more to say for itself, and more to the purpose; namely, that
its main outline is one not only of natural crystallisation, but among
the very first and commonest of crystalline forms, being the primal
condition of the occurrence of the oxides of iron, copper, and tin, of
the sulphurets of iron and lead, of fluor spar, &c.; and that those
projecting forms in its surface represent the conditions of structure
which effect the change into another relative and equally common
crystalline form, the cube. This is quite enough. We may rest assured it
is as good a combination of such simple right lines as can be put
together, and gracefully fitted for every place in which such lines are
necessary.

VIII. The next ornament whose cause I would try is that of our Tudor
work, the portcullis. Reticulation is common enough in natural form, and
very beautiful; but it is either of the most delicate and gauzy texture,
or of variously sized meshes and undulating lines. There is no family
relation between portcullis and cobwebs or beetles' wings; something
like it, perhaps, may be found in some kinds of crocodile armor and on
the backs of the Northern divers, but always beautifully varied in size
of mesh. There is a dignity in the thing itself, if its size were
exhibited, and the shade given through its bars; but even these merits
are taken away in the Tudor diminution of it, set on a solid surface. It
has not a single syllable, I believe, to say in its defence. It is
another monster, absolutely and unmitigatedly frightful. All that
carving on Henry the Seventh's Chapel simply deforms the stones of it.

In the same clause with the portcullis, we may condemn all heraldic
decoration, so far as beauty is its object. Its pride and significance
have their proper place, fitly occurring in prominent parts of the
building, as over its gates; and allowably in places where its legendary
may be plainly read, as in painted windows, bosses of ceilings, &c. And
sometimes, of course, the forms which it presents may be beautiful, as
of animals, or simple symbols like the fleur-de-lis; but, for the most
part, heraldic similitudes and arrangements are so professedly and
pointedly unnatural, that it would be difficult to invent anything
uglier; and the use of them as a repeated decoration will utterly
destroy both the power and beauty of any building. Common sense and
courtesy also forbid their repetition. It is right to tell those who
enter your doors that you are such a one, and of such a rank; but to
tell it to them again and again, wherever they turn, becomes soon
impertinence, and at last folly. Let, therefore, the entire bearings
occur in few places, and these not considered as an ornament, but as an
inscription; and for frequent appliance, let any single and fair symbol
be chosen out of them. Thus we may multiply as much as we choose the
French fleur-de-lis, or the Florentine giglio bianco, or the English
rose; but we must not multiply a King's arms.

IX. It will also follow, from these considerations, that if any one part
of heraldic decoration be worse than another, it is the motto; since, of
all things unlike nature, the forms of letters are, perhaps, the most
so. Even graphic tellurium and felspar look, at their clearest, anything
but legible. All letters are, therefore, to be considered as frightful
things, and to be endured only upon occasion; that is to say, in places
where the sense of the inscription is of more importance than external
ornament. Inscriptions in churches, in rooms, and on pictures, are often
desirable, but they are not to be considered as architectural or
pictorial ornaments: they are, on the contrary, obstinate offences to
the eye, not to be suffered except when their intellectual office
introduces them. Place them, therefore, where they will be read, and
there only; and let them be plainly written, and not turned upside down,
nor wrong end first. It is an ill sacrifice to beauty to make that
illegible whose only merit is in its sense. Write it as you would speak
it, simply; and do not draw the eye to it when it would fain rest
elsewhere, nor recommend your sentence by anything but a little openness
of place and architectural silence about it. Write the Commandments on
the Church walls where they may be plainly seen, but do not put a dash
and a tail to every letter; and remember that you are an architect, not
a writing master.

X. Inscriptions appear sometimes to be introduced for the sake of the
scroll on which they are written; and in late and modern painted glass,
as well as in architecture, these scrolls are flourished and turned
hither and thither as if they were ornamental. Ribands occur frequently
in arabesques,--in some of a high order, too,--tying up flowers, or
flitting in and out among the fixed forms. Is there anything like
ribands in nature? It might be thought that grass and sea-weed afforded
apologetic types. They do not. There is a wide difference between their
structure and that of a riband. They have a skeleton, an anatomy, a
central rib, or fibre, or framework of some kind or another, which has a
beginning and an end, a root and head, and whose make and strength
effects every direction of their motion, and every line of their form.
The loosest weed that drifts and waves under the heaving of the sea, or
hangs heavily on the brown and slippery shore, has a marked strength,
structure, elasticity, gradation of substance; its extremities are more
finely fibred than its centre, its centre than its root; every fork of
its ramification is measured and proportioned; every wave of its languid
lines is love. It has its allotted size, and place, and function; it is
a specific creature. What is there like this in a riband? It has no
structure: it is a succession of cut threads all alike; it has no
skeleton, no make, no form, no size, no will of its own. You cut it and
crush it into what you will. It has no strength, no languor. It cannot
fall into a single graceful form. It cannot wave, in the true sense, but
only flutter: it cannot bend, in the true sense, but only turn and be
wrinkled. It is a vile thing; it spoils all that is near its wretched
film of an existence. Never use it. Let the flowers come loose if they
cannot keep together without being tied; leave the sentence unwritten if
you cannot write it on a tablet or book, or plain roll of paper. I know
what authority there is against me. I remember the scrolls of Perugino's
angels, and the ribands of Raphael's arabesques, and of Ghiberti's
glorious bronze flowers: no matter; they are every one of them vices and
uglinesses. Raphael usually felt this, and used an honest and rational
tablet, as in the Madonna di Fuligno. I do not say there is any type of
such tablets in nature, but all the difference lies in the fact that the
tablet is not considered as an ornament, and the riband, or flying
scroll, is. The tablet, as in Albert Durer's Adam and Eve, is introduced
for the sake of the writing, understood and allowed as an ugly but
necessary interruption. The scroll is extended as an ornamental form,
which it is not, nor ever can be.

XI. But it will be said that all this want of organisation and form
might be affirmed of drapery also, and that this latter is a noble
subject of sculpture. By no means. When was drapery a subject of
sculpture by itself, except in the form of a handkerchief on urns in the
seventeenth century and in some of the baser scenic Italian decorations?
Drapery, as such, is always ignoble; it becomes a subject of interest
only by the colors it bears, and the impressions which it receives from
some foreign form or force. All noble draperies, either in painting or
sculpture (color and texture being at present out of our consideration),
have, so far as they are anything more than necessities, one of two
great functions; they are the exponents of motion and of gravitation.
They are the most valuable means of expressing past as well as present
motion in the figure, and they are almost the only means of indicating
to the eye the force of gravity which resists such motion. The Greeks
used drapery in sculpture for the most part as an ugly necessity, but
availed themselves of it gladly in all representation of action,
exaggerating the arrangements of it which express lightness in the
material, and follow gesture in the person. The Christian sculptors,
caring little for the body, or disliking it, and depending exclusively
on the countenance, received drapery at first contentedly as a veil, but
soon perceived a capacity of expression in it which the Greek had not
seen or had despised. The principal element of this expression was the
entire removal of agitation from what was so pre-eminently capable of
being agitated. It fell from their human forms plumb down, sweeping the
ground heavily, and concealing the feet; while the Greek drapery was
often blown away from the thigh. The thick and coarse stuffs of the
monkish dresses, so absolutely opposed to the thin and gauzy web of
antique material, suggested simplicity of division as well as weight of
fall. There was no crushing nor subdividing them. And thus the drapery
gradually came to represent the spirit of repose as it before had of
motion, repose saintly and severe. The wind had no power upon the
garment, as the passion none upon the soul; and the motion of the figure
only bent into a softer line the stillness of the falling veil, followed
by it like a slow cloud by drooping rain: only in links of lighter
undulation it followed the dances of the angels.

Thus treated, drapery is indeed noble; but it is as an exponent of other
and higher things. As that of gravitation, it has especial majesty,
being literally the only means we have of fully representing this
mysterious natural force of earth (for falling water is less passive and
less defined in its lines). So, again, in sails it is beautiful because
it receives the forms of solid curved surface, and expresses the force
of another invisible element. But drapery trusted to its own merits, and
given for its own sake,--drapery like that of Carlo Dolci and the
Caraccis,--is always base.

XII. Closely connected with the abuse of scrolls and bands, is that of
garlands and festoons of flowers as an architectural decoration, for
unnatural arrangements are just as ugly as unnatural forms; and
architecture, in borrowing the objects of nature, is bound to place
them, as far as may be in her power, in such associations as may befit
and express their origin. She is not to imitate directly the natural
arrangement; she is not to carve irregular stems of ivy up her columns
to account for the leaves at the top, but she is nevertheless to place
her most exuberant vegetable ornament just where Nature would have
placed it, and to give some indication of that radical and connected
structure which Nature would have given it. Thus the Corinthian capital
is beautiful, because it expands under the abacus just as Nature would
have expanded it; and because it looks as if the leaves had one root,
though that root is unseen. And the flamboyant leaf mouldings are
beautiful, because they nestle and run up the hollows, and fill the
angles, and clasp the shafts which natural leaves would have delighted
to fill and to clasp. They are no mere cast of natural leaves; they are
counted, orderly, and architectural: but they are naturally, and
therefore beautifully, placed.

XIII. Now I do not mean to say that Nature never uses festoons: she
loves them, and uses them lavishly; and though she does so only in those
places of excessive luxuriance wherein it seems to me that architectural
types should seldom be sought, yet a falling tendril or pendent bough
might, if managed with freedom and grace, be well introduced into
luxuriant decoration (or if not, it is not their want of beauty, but of
architectural fitness, which incapacitates them for such uses). But what
resemblance to such example can we trace in a mass of all manner of
fruit and flowers, tied heavily into a long bunch, thickest in the
middle, and pinned up by both ends against a dead wall? For it is
strange that the wildest and most fanciful of the builders of truly
luxuriant architecture never ventured, so far as I know, even a pendent
tendril; while the severest masters of the revived Greek permitted this
extraordinary piece of luscious ugliness to be fastened in the middle of
their blank surfaces. So surely as this arrangement is adopted, the
whole value of the flower work is lost. Who among the crowds that gaze
upon the building ever pause to admire the flower work of St. Paul's?
It is as careful and as rich as it can be, yet it adds no delightfulness
to the edifice. It is no part of it. It is an ugly excrescence. We
always conceive the building without it, and should be happier if our
conception were not disturbed by its presence. It makes the rest of the
architecture look poverty-stricken, instead of sublime; and yet it is
never enjoyed itself. Had it been put, where it ought, into the
capitals, it would have been beheld with never-ceasing delight. I do not
mean that it could have been so in the present building, for such kind
of architecture has no business with rich ornament in any place; but
that if those groups of flowers had been put into natural places in an
edifice of another style, their value would have been felt as vividly as
now their uselessness. What applies to festoons is still more sternly
true of garlands. A garland is meant to be seen upon a head. There it is
beautiful, because we suppose it newly gathered and joyfully worn. But
it is not meant to be hung upon a wall. If you want a circular ornament,
put a flat circle of colored marble, as in the Casa Doria and other such
palaces at Venice; or put a star, or a medallion, or if you want a ring,
put a solid one, but do not carve the images of garlands, looking as if
they had been used in the last procession, and been hung up to dry, and
serve next time withered. Why not also carve pegs, and hats upon them?

XIV. One of the worst enemies of modern Gothic architecture, though
seemingly an unimportant feature, is an excrescence, as offensive by its
poverty as the garland by its profusion, the dripstone in the shape of
the handle of a chest of drawers, which is used over the square-headed
windows of what we call Elizabethan buildings. In the last Chapter, it
will be remembered that the square form was shown to be that of
pre-eminent Power, and to be properly adapted and limited to the
exhibition of space or surface. Hence, when the window is to be an
exponent of power, as for instance in those by M. Angelo in the lower
story of the Palazzo Ricardi at Florence, the square head is the most
noble form they can assume; but then either their space must be
unbroken, and their associated mouldings the most severe, or else the
square must be used as a finial outline, and is chiefly to be
associated with forms of tracery, in which the relative form of power,
the circle, is predominant, as in Venetian, and Florentine, and Pisan
Gothic. But if you break upon your terminal square, or if you cut its
lines off at the top and turn them outwards, you have lost its unity and
space. It is an including form no longer, but an added, isolated line,
and the ugliest possible. Look abroad into the landscape and see if you
can discover any one so bent and fragmentary as that of this strange
windlass-looking dripstone. You cannot. It is a monster. It unites every
element of ugliness, its line is harshly broken in itself, and
unconnected with every other; it has no harmony either with structure or
decoration, it has no architectural support, it looks glued to the wall,
and the only pleasant property it has, is the appearance of some
likelihood of its dropping off.

I might proceed, but the task is a weary one, and I think I have named
those false forms of decoration which are most dangerous in our modern
architecture as being legal and accepted. The barbarisms of individual
fancy are as countless as they are contemptible; they neither admit
attack nor are worth it; but these above named are countenanced, some by
the practice of antiquity, all by high authority: they have depressed
the proudest, and contaminated the purest schools, and are so
established in recent practice that I write rather for the barren
satisfaction of bearing witness against them, than with hope of inducing
any serious convictions to their prejudice.

XV. Thus far of what is _not_ ornament. What ornament is, will without
difficulty be determined by the application of the same test. It must
consist of such studious arrangements of form as are imitative or
suggestive of those which are commonest among natural existences, that
being of course the noblest ornament which represents the highest orders
of existence. Imitated flowers are nobler than imitated stones, imitated
animals, than flowers; imitated human form of all animal forms the
noblest. But all are combined in the richest ornamental work; and the
rock, the fountain, the flowing river with its pebbled bed, the sea, the
clouds of Heaven, the herb of the field, the fruit-tree bearing fruit,
the creeping thing, the bird, the beast, the man, and the angel, mingle
their fair forms on the bronze of Ghiberti.

Every thing being then ornamental that is imitative, I would ask the
reader's attention to a few general considerations, all that can here be
offered relating to so vast a subject; which, for convenience sake, may
be classed under the three heads of inquiry:--What is the right place
for architectural ornament? What is the peculiar treatment of ornament
which renders it architectural? and what is the right use of color as
associated with architectural imitative form?

XVI. What is the place of ornament? Consider first that the characters
of natural objects which the architect can represent are few and
abstract. The greater part of those delights by which Nature recommends
herself to man at all times, cannot be conveyed by him into his
imitative work. He cannot make his grass green and cool and good to rest
upon, which in nature is its chief use to man; nor can he make his
flowers tender and full of color and of scent, which in nature are their
chief powers of giving joy. Those qualities which alone he can secure
are certain severe characters of form, such as men only see in nature on
deliberate examination, and by the full and set appliance of sight and
thought: a man must lie down on the bank of grass on his breast and set
himself to watch and penetrate the intertwining of it, before he finds
that which is good to be gathered by the architect. So then while Nature
is at all times pleasant to us, and while the sight and sense of her
work may mingle happily with all our thoughts, and labors, and times of
existence, that image of her which the architect carries away represents
what we can only perceive in her by direct intellectual exertion, and
demands from us, wherever it appears, an intellectual exertion of a
similar kind in order to understand it and feel it. It is the written or
sealed impression of a thing sought out, it is the shaped result of
inquiry and bodily expression of thought.

XVII. Now let us consider for an instant what would be the effect of
continually repeating an expression of a beautiful thought to any other
of the senses at times when the mind could not address that sense to the
understanding of it. Suppose that in time of serious occupation, of
stern business, a companion should repeat in our ears continually some
favorite passage of poetry, over and over again all day long. We should
not only soon be utterly sick and weary of the sound of it, but that
sound would at the end of the day have so sunk into the habit of the ear
that the entire meaning of the passage would be dead to us, and it would
ever thenceforward require some effort to fix and recover it. The music
of it would not meanwhile have aided the business in hand, while its own
delightfulness would thenceforward be in a measure destroyed. It is the
same with every other form of definite thought. If you violently present
its expression to the senses, at times when the mind is otherwise
engaged, that expression will be ineffective at the time, and will have
its sharpness and clearness destroyed forever. Much more if you present
it to the mind at times when it is painfully affected or disturbed, or
if you associate the expression of pleasant thought with incongruous
circumstances, you will affect that expression thenceforward with a
painful color for ever.

XVIII. Apply this to expressions of thought received by the eye.
Remember that the eye is at your mercy more than the ear. "The eye it
cannot choose but see." Its nerve is not so easily numbed as that of the
ear, and it is often busied in tracing and watching forms when the ear
is at rest. Now if you present lovely forms to it when it cannot call
the mind to help it in its work, and among objects of vulgar use and
unhappy position, you will neither please the eye nor elevate the vulgar
object. But you will fill and weary the eye with the beautiful form, and
you will infect that form itself with the vulgarity of the thing to
which you have violently attached it. It will never be of much use to
you any more; you have killed or defiled it; its freshness and purity
are gone. You will have to pass it through the fire of much thought
before you will cleanse it, and warm it with much love before it will
revive.

XIX. Hence then a general law, of singular importance in the present
day, a law of simple common sense,--not to decorate things belonging to
purposes of active and occupied life. Wherever you can rest, there
decorate; where rest is forbidden, so is beauty. You must not mix
ornament with business, any more than you may mix play. Work first, and
then rest. Work first and then gaze, but do not use golden ploughshares,
nor bind ledgers in enamel. Do not thrash with sculptured flails: nor
put bas-reliefs on millstones. What! it will be asked, are we in the
habit of doing so? Even so; always and everywhere. The most familiar
position of Greek mouldings is in these days on shop fronts. There is
not a tradesman's sign nor shelf nor counter in all the streets of all
our cities, which has not upon it ornaments which were invented to adorn
temples and beautify kings' palaces. There is not the smallest advantage
in them where they are. Absolutely valueless--utterly without the power
of giving pleasure, they only satiate the eye, and vulgarise their own
forms. Many of these are in themselves thoroughly good copies of fine
things, which things themselves we shall never, in consequence, enjoy
any more. Many a pretty beading and graceful bracket there is in wood or
stucco above our grocers' and cheese-mongers' and hosiers' shops: how it
is that the tradesmen cannot understand that custom is to be had only by
selling good tea and cheese and cloth, and that people come to them for
their honesty, and their readiness, and their right wares, and not
because they have Greek cornices over their windows, or their names in
large gilt letters on their house fronts? how pleasurable it would be to
have the power of going through the streets of London, pulling down
those brackets and friezes and large names, restoring to the tradesmen
the capital they had spent in architecture, and putting them on honest
and equal terms, each with his name in black letters over his door, not
shouted down the street from the upper stories, and each with a plain
wooden shop casement, with small panes in it that people would not think
of breaking in order to be sent to prison! How much better for them
would it be--how much happier, how much wiser, to put their trust upon
their own truth and industry, and not on the idiocy of their customers.
It is curious, and it says little for our national probity on the one
hand, or prudence on the other, to see the whole system of our street
decoration based on the idea that people must be baited to a shop as
moths are to a candle.

XX. But it will be said that much of the best wooden decoration of the
middle ages was in shop fronts. No; it was in _house_ fronts, of which
the shop was a part, and received its natural and consistent portion of
the ornament. In those days men lived, and intended to live _by_ their
shops, and over them, all their days. They were contented with them and
happy in them: they were their palaces and castles. They gave them
therefore such decoration as made themselves happy in their own
habitation, and they gave it for their own sake. The upper stories were
always the richest, and the shop was decorated chiefly about the door,
which belonged to the house more than to it. And when our tradesmen
settle to their shops in the same way, and form no plans respecting
future villa architecture, let their whole houses be decorated, and
their shops too, but with a national and domestic decoration (I shall
speak more of this point in the sixth chapter). However, our cities are
for the most part too large to admit of contented dwelling in them
throughout life; and I do not say there is harm in our present system of
separating the shop from the dwelling-house; only where they are so
separated, let us remember that the only reason for shop decoration is
removed, and see that the decoration be removed also.

XXI. Another of the strange and evil tendencies of the present day is to
the decoration of the railroad station. Now, if there be any place in
the world in which people are deprived of that portion of temper and
discretion which are necessary to the contemplation of beauty, it is
there. It is the very temple of discomfort, and the only charity that
the builder can extend to us is to show us, plainly as may be, how
soonest to escape from it. The whole system of railroad travelling is
addressed to people who, being in a hurry, are therefore, for the time
being, miserable. No one would travel in that manner who could help
it--who had time to go leisurely over hills and between hedges, instead
of through tunnels and between banks: at least those who would, have no
sense of beauty so acute as that we need consult it at the station. The
railroad is in all its relations a matter of earnest business, to be got
through as soon as possible. It transmutes a man from a traveller into a
living parcel. For the time he has parted with the nobler
characteristics of his humanity for the sake of a planetary power of
locomotion. Do not ask him to admire anything. You might as well ask the
wind. Carry him safely, dismiss him soon: he will thank you for nothing
else. All attempts to please him in any other way are mere mockery, and
insults to the things by which you endeavor to do so. There never was
more flagrant nor impertinent folly than the smallest portion of
ornament in anything concerned with railroads or near them. Keep them
out of the way, take them through the ugliest country you can find,
confess them the miserable things they are, and spend nothing upon them
but for safety and speed. Give large salaries to efficient servants,
large prices to good manufacturers, large wages to able workmen; let the
iron be tough, and the brickwork solid, and the carriages strong. The
time is perhaps not distant when these first necessities may not be
easily met: and to increase expense in any other direction is madness.
Better bury gold in the embankments, than put it in ornaments on the
stations. Will a single traveller be willing to pay an increased fare on
the South Western, because the columns of the terminus are covered with
patterns from Nineveh? He will only care less for the Ninevite ivories
in the British Museum: or on the North Western, because there are old
English-looking spandrils to the roof of the station at Crewe? He will
only have less pleasure in their prototypes at Crewe House. Railroad
architecture has or would have a dignity of its own if it were only left
to its work. You would not put rings on the fingers of a smith at his
anvil.

XXII. It is not however only in these marked situations that the abuse
of which I speak takes place. There is hardly, at present, an
application of ornamental work, which is not in some sort liable to
blame of the same kind. We have a bad habit of trying to disguise
disagreeable necessities by some form of sudden decoration, which is, in
all other places, associated with such necessities. I will name only one
instance, that to which I have alluded before--the roses which conceal
the ventilators in the flat roofs of our chapels. Many of those roses
are of very beautiful design, borrowed from fine works: all their grace
and finish are invisible when they are so placed, but their general form
is afterwards associated with the ugly buildings in which they
constantly occur; and all the beautiful roses of the early French and
English Gothic, especially such elaborate ones as those of the triforium
of Coutances, are in consequence deprived of their pleasurable
influence: and this without our having accomplished the smallest good by
the use we have made of the dishonored form. Not a single person in the
congregation ever receives one ray of pleasure from those roof roses;
they are regarded with mere indifference, or lost in the general
impression of harsh emptiness.

XXIII. Must not beauty, then, it will be asked, be sought for in the
forms which we associate with our every-day life? Yes, if you do it
consistently, and in places where it can be calmly seen; but not if you
use the beautiful form only as a mask and covering of the proper
conditions and uses of things, nor if you thrust it into the places set
apart for toil. Put it in the drawing-room, not into the workshop; put
it upon domestic furniture, not upon tools of handicraft. All men have
sense of what is right in this manner, if they would only use and apply
that sense; every man knows where and how beauty gives him pleasure, if
he would only ask for it when it does so, and not allow it to be forced
upon him when he does not want it. Ask any one of the passengers over
London Bridge at this instant whether he cares about the forms of the
bronze leaves on its lamps, and he will tell you, No. Modify these forms
of leaves to a less scale, and put them on his milk-jug at breakfast,
and ask him whether he likes them, and he will tell you, Yes. People
have no need of teaching if they could only think and speak truth, and
ask for what they like and want, and for nothing else: nor can a right
disposition of beauty be ever arrived at except by this common sense,
and allowance for the circumstances of the time and place. It does not
follow, because bronze leafage is in bad taste on the lamps of London
Bridge, that it would be so on those of the Ponte della Trinita; nor,
because it would be a folly to decorate the house fronts of Gracechurch
Street, that it would be equally so to adorn those of some quiet
provincial town. The question of greatest external or internal
decoration depends entirely on the conditions of probable repose. It was
a wise feeling which made the streets of Venice so rich in external
ornament, for there is no couch of rest like the gondola. So, again,
there is no subject of street ornament so wisely chosen as the fountain,
where it is a fountain of use; for it is just there that perhaps the
happiest pause takes place in the labor of the day, when the pitcher is
rested on the edge of it, and the breath of the bearer is drawn deeply,
and the hair swept from the forehead, and the uprightness of the form
declined against the marble ledge, and the sound of the kind word or
light laugh mixes with the trickle of the falling water, heard shriller
and shriller as the pitcher fills. What pause is so sweet as that--so
full of the depth of ancient days, so softened with the calm of pastoral
solitude?

XXIV. II. Thus far, then, of the place for beauty. We were next to
inquire into the characters which fitted it peculiarly for architectural
appliance, and into the principles of choice and of arrangement which
best regulate the imitation of natural forms in which it consists. The
full answering of these questions would be a treatise on the art of
design: I intend only to say a few words respecting the two conditions
of that art which are essentially architectural,--Proportion and
Abstraction. Neither of these qualities is necessary, to the same
extent, in other fields of design. The sense of proportion is, by the
landscape painter, frequently sacrificed to character and accident; the
power of abstraction to that of complete realisation. The flowers of his
foreground must often be unmeasured in their quantity, loose in their
arrangement: what is calculated, either in quantity or disposition,
must be artfully concealed. That calculation is by the architect to be
prominently exhibited. So the abstraction of few characteristics out of
many is shown only in the painter's sketch; in his finished work it is
concealed or lost in completion. Architecture, on the contrary, delights
in Abstraction and fears to complete her forms. Proportion and
Abstraction, then, are the two especial marks of architectural design as
distinguished from all other. Sculpture must have them in inferior
degrees; leaning, on the one hand, to an architectural manner, when it
is usually greatest (becoming, indeed, a part of Architecture), and, on
the other, to a pictorial manner, when it is apt to lose its dignity,
and sink into mere ingenious carving.

XXV. Now, of Proportion so much has been written, that I believe the
only facts which are of practical use have been overwhelmed and kept out
of sight by vain accumulations of particular instances and estimates.
Proportions are as infinite (and that in all kinds of things, as
severally in colors, lines, shades, lights, and forms) as possible airs
in music: and it is just as rational an attempt to teach a young
architect how to proportion truly and well by calculating for him the
proportions of fine works, as it would be to teach him to compose
melodies by calculating the mathematical relations of the notes in
Beethoven's Adelaïde or Mozart's Requiem. The man who has eye and
intellect will invent beautiful proportions, and cannot help it; but he
can no more tell _us_ how to do it than Wordsworth could tell us how to
write a sonnet, or than Scott could have told us how to plan a romance.
But there are one or two general laws which can be told: they are of no
use, indeed, except as preventives of gross mistake, but they are so far
worth telling and remembering; and the more so because, in the
discussion of the subtle laws of proportion (which will never be either
numbered or known), architects are perpetually forgetting and
transgressing the very simplest of its necessities.

XXVI. Of which the first is, that wherever Proportion exists at all, one
member of the composition must be either larger than, or in some way
supreme over, the rest. There is no proportion between equal things.
They can have symmetry only, and symmetry without proportion is not
composition. It is necessary to perfect beauty, but it is the least
necessary of its elements, nor of course is there any difficulty in
obtaining it. Any succession of equal things is agreeable; but to
compose is to arrange unequal things, and the first thing to be done in
beginning a composition is to determine which is to be the principal
thing. I believe that all that has been written and taught about
proportion, put together, is not to the architect worth the single rule,
well enforced, "Have one large thing and several smaller things, or one
principal thing and several inferior things, and bind them well
together." Sometimes there may be a regular gradation, as between the
heights of stories in good designs for houses; sometimes a monarch with
a lowly train, as in the spire with its pinnacles: the varieties of
arrangement are infinite, but the law is universal--have one thing above
the rest, either by size, or office, or interest. Don't put the
pinnacles without the spire. What a host of ugly church towers have we
in England, with pinnacles at the corners, and none in the middle! How
many buildings like King's College Chapel at Cambridge, looking like
tables upside down, with their four legs in the air! What! it will be
said, have not beasts four legs? Yes, but legs of different shapes, and
with a head between them. So they have a pair of ears: and perhaps a
pair of horns: but not at both ends. Knock down a couple of pinnacles at
either end in King's College Chapel, and you will have a kind of
proportion instantly. So in a cathedral you may have one tower in the
centre, and two at the west end; or two at the west end only, though a
worse arrangement: but you must not have two at the west and two at the
east end, unless you have some central member to connect them; and even
then, buildings are generally bad which have large balancing features at
the extremities, and small connecting ones in the centre, because it is
not easy then to make the centre dominant. The bird or moth may indeed
have wide wings, because the size of the wing does not give supremacy to
the wing. The head and life are the mighty things, and the plumes,
however wide, are subordinate. In fine west fronts with a pediment and
two towers, the centre is always the principal mass, both in bulk and
interest (as having the main gateway), and the towers are subordinated
to it, as an animal's horns are to its head. The moment the towers rise
so high as to overpower the body and centre, and become themselves the
principal masses, they will destroy the proportion, unless they are made
unequal, and one of them the leading feature of the cathedral, as at
Antwerp and Strasburg. But the purer method is to keep them down in due
relation to the centre, and to throw up the pediment into a steep
connecting mass, drawing the eye to it by rich tracery. This is nobly
done in St. Wulfran of Abbeville, and attempted partly at Rouen, though
that west front is made up of so many unfinished and supervening designs
that it is impossible to guess the real intention of any one of its
builders.

  [Illustration: PLATE X.--(Page 122--Vol. V.)
  TRACERIES AND MOULDINGS FROM ROUEN AND SALISBURY.]

XXVII. This rule of supremacy applies to the smallest as well as to the
leading features: it is interestingly seen in the arrangement of all
good mouldings. I have given one, on the opposite page, from Rouen
cathedral; that of the tracery before distinguished as a type of the
noblest manner of Northern Gothic (Chap. II. § XXII.). It is a tracery
of three orders, of which the first is divided into a leaf moulding,
fig. 4, and _b_ in the section, and a plain roll, also seen in fig. 4,
_c_ in the section; these two divisions surround the entire window or
panelling, and are carried by two-face shafts of corresponding sections.
The second and third orders are plain rolls following the line of the
tracery; four divisions of moulding in all: of these four, the leaf
moulding is, as seen in the sections, much the largest; next to it the
outer roll; then, by an exquisite alternation, the innermost roll (_e_),
in order that it may not be lost in the recess and the intermediate
(_d_), the smallest. Each roll has its own shaft and capital; and the
two smaller, which in effect upon the eye, owing to the retirement of
the innermost, are nearly equal, have smaller capitals than the two
larger, lifted a little to bring them to the same level. The wall in the
trefoiled lights is curved, as from _e_ to _f_ in the section; but in
the quatrefoil it is flat, only thrown back to the full depth of the
recess below so as to get a sharp shadow instead of a soft one, the
mouldings falling back to it in nearly a vertical curve behind the roll
_e_. This could not, however, be managed with the simpler mouldings of
the smaller quatrefoil above, whose half section is given from _g_ to
g_2; but the architect was evidently fretted by the heavy look of its
circular foils as opposed to the light spring of the arches below: so he
threw its cusps obliquely clear from the wall, as seen in fig. 2,
attached to it where they meet the circle, but with their finials pushed
out from the natural level (_h_, in the section) to that of the first
order (g_2) and supported by stone props behind, as seen in the
profile fig. 2, which I got from the correspondent panel on the buttress
face (fig. 1 being on its side), and of which the lower cusps, being
broken away, show the remnant of one of their props projecting from the
wall. The oblique curve thus obtained in the profile is of singular
grace. Take it all in all, I have never met with a more exquisite piece
of varied, yet severe, proportioned and general arrangement (though all
the windows of the period are fine, and especially delightful in the
subordinate proportioning of the smaller capitals to the smaller
shafts). The only fault it has is the inevitable misarrangement of the
central shafts; for the enlargement of the inner roll, though beautiful
in the group of four divisions at the side, causes, in the triple
central shaft, the very awkwardness of heavy lateral members which has
just been in most instances condemned. In the windows of the choir, and
in most of the period, this difficulty is avoided by making the fourth
order a fillet which only follows the foliation, while the three
outermost are nearly in arithmetical progression of size, and the
central triple shaft has of course the largest roll in front. The
moulding of the Palazzo Foscari (Plate VIII., and Plate IV. fig. 8) is,
for so simple a group, the grandest in effect I have even seen: it is
composed of a large roll with two subordinates.

XXVIII. It is of course impossible to enter into details of instances
belonging to so intricate division of our subject, in the compass of a
general essay. I can but rapidly name the chief conditions of right.
Another of these is the connection of Symmetry with horizontal, and of
Proportion with vertical, division. Evidently there is in symmetry a
sense not merely of equality, but of balance: now a thing cannot be
balanced by another on the top of it, though it may by one at the side
of it. Hence, while it is not only allowable, but often necessary, to
divide buildings, or parts of them, horizontally into halves, thirds, or
other equal parts, all vertical divisions of this kind are utterly
wrong; worst into half, next worst in the regular numbers which more
betray the equality. I should have thought this almost the first
principle of proportion which a young architect was taught: and yet I
remember an important building, recently erected in England, in which
the columns are cut in half by the projecting architraves of the central
windows; and it is quite usual to see the spires of modern Gothic
churches divided by a band of ornament half way up. In all fine spires
there are two bands and three parts, as at Salisbury. The ornamented
portion of the tower is there cut in half, and allowably, because the
spire forms the third mass to which the other two are subordinate: two
stories are also equal in Giotto's campanile, but dominant over smaller
divisions below, and subordinated to the noble third above. Even this
arrangement is difficult to treat; and it is usually safer to increase
or diminish the height of the divisions regularly as they rise, as in
the Doge's Palace, whose three divisions are in a bold geometrical
progression: or, in towers, to get an alternate proportion between the
body, the belfry, and the crown, as in the campanile of St. Mark's. But,
at all events, get rid of equality; leave that to children and their
card houses: the laws of nature and the reason of man are alike against
it, in arts, as in politics. There is but one thoroughly ugly tower in
Italy that I know of, and that is so because it is divided into vertical
equal parts: the tower of Pisa.[12]

XXIX. One more principle of Proportion I have to name, equally simple,
equally neglected. Proportion is between three terms at _least_. Hence,
as the pinnacles are not enough without the spire, so neither the spire
without the pinnacles. All men feel this and usually express their
feeling by saying that the pinnacles conceal the junction of the spire
and tower. This is one reason; but a more influential one is, that the
pinnacles furnish the third term to the spire and tower. So that it is
not enough, in order to secure proportion, to divide a building
unequally; it must be divided into at least three parts; it may be into
more (and in details with advantage), but on a large scale I find three
is about the best number of parts in elevation, and five in horizontal
extent, with freedom of increase to five in the one case and seven in
the other; but not to more without confusion (in architecture, that is
to say; for in organic structure the numbers cannot be limited). I
purpose, in the course of works which are in preparation, to give
copious illustrations of this subject, but I will take at present only
one instance of vertical proportion, from the flower stem of the common
water plantain, _Alisma Plantago_. Fig. 5, Plate XII. is a reduced
profile of one side of a plant gathered at random; it is seen to have
five masts, of which, however, the uppermost is a mere shoot, and we can
consider only their relations up to the fourth. Their lengths are
measured on the line A B, which is the actual length of the lowest mass
_a b_, A C=_b c_, A D=_c d_, and A E=_d e_. If the reader will take the
trouble to measure these lengths and compare them, he will find that,
within half a line, the uppermost A E=5/7 of A D, A D=6/8 of A C, and A
C=7/9 of A B; a most subtle diminishing proportion. From each of the
joints spring three major and three minor branches, each between each;
but the major branches, at any joint, are placed over the minor branches
at the joint below, by the curious arrangement of the joint itself--the
stem is bluntly triangular; fig. 6 shows the section of any joint. The
outer darkened triangle is the section of the lower stem; the inner,
left light, of the upper stem; and the three main branches spring from
the ledges left by the recession. Thus the stems diminish in diameter
just as they diminish in height. The main branches (falsely placed in
the profile over each other to show their relations) have respectively
seven, six, five, four, and three arm-bones, like the masts of the stem;
these divisions being proportioned in the same subtle manner. From the
joints of these, it seems to be the _plan_ of the plant that three
major and three minor branches should again spring, bearing the flowers:
but, in these infinitely complicated members, vegetative nature admits
much variety; in the plant from which these measures were taken the full
complement appeared only at one of the secondary joints.

The leaf of this plant has five ribs on each side, as its flower
generally five masts, arranged with the most exquisite grace of curve;
but of lateral proportion I shall rather take illustrations from
architecture: the reader will find several in the accounts of the Duomo
at Pisa and St. Mark's at Venice, in Chap. V. §§ XIV.-XVI. I give these
arrangements merely as illustrations, not as precedents: all beautiful
proportions are unique, they are not general formulæ.

XXX. The other condition of architectural treatment which we proposed to
notice was the abstraction of imitated form. But there is a peculiar
difficulty in touching within these narrow limits on such a subject as
this, because the abstraction of which we find examples in existing art,
is partly involuntary; and it is a matter of much nicety to determine
where it begins to be purposed. In the progress of national as well as
of individual mind, the first attempts at imitation are always abstract
and incomplete. Greater completion marks the progress of art, absolute
completion usually its decline; whence absolute completion of imitative
form is often supposed to be in itself wrong. But it is not wrong
always, only dangerous. Let us endeavor briefly to ascertain wherein its
danger consists, and wherein its dignity.

XXXI. I have said that all art is abstract in its beginnings; that is to
say, it expresses only a small number of the qualities of the thing
represented. Curved and complex lines are represented by straight and
simple ones; interior markings of forms are few, and much is symbolical
and conventional. There is a resemblance between the work of a great
nation, in this phase, and the work of childhood and ignorance, which,
in the mind of a careless observer, might attach something like ridicule
to it. The form of a tree on the Ninevite sculptures is much like that
which, come twenty years ago, was familiar upon samplers; and the types
of the face and figure in early Italian art are susceptible of easy
caricature. On the signs which separate the infancy of magnificent
manhood from every other, I do not pause to insist (they consist
entirely in the choice of the symbol and of the features abstracted);
but I pass to the next stage of art, a condition of strength in which
the abstraction which was begun in incapability is continued in free
will. This is the case, however, in pure sculpture and painting, as well
as in architecture; and we have nothing to do but with that greater
severity of manner which fits either to be associated with the more
realist art. I believe it properly consists only in a due expression of
their subordination, an expression varying according to their place and
office. The question is first to be clearly determined whether the
architecture is a frame for the sculpture, or the sculpture an ornament
of the architecture. If the latter, then the first office of that
sculpture is not to represent the things it imitates, but to gather out
of them those arrangements of form which shall be pleasing to the eye in
their intended places. So soon as agreeable lines and points of shade
have been added to the mouldings which were meagre, or to the lights
which were unrelieved, the architectural work of the imitation is
accomplished; and how far it shall be wrought towards completeness or
not, will depend upon its place, and upon other various circumstances.
If, in its particular use or position, it is symmetrically arranged,
there is, of course, an instant indication of architectural subjection.
But symmetry is not abstraction. Leaves may be carved in the most
regular order, and yet be meanly imitative; or, on the other hand, they
may be thrown wild and loose, and yet be highly architectural in their
separate treatment. Nothing can be less symmetrical than the group of
leaves which join the two columns in Plate XIII.; yet, since nothing of
the leaf character is given but what is necessary for the bare
suggestion of its image and the attainment of the lines desired, their
treatment is highly abstract. It shows that the workman only wanted so
much of the leaf as he supposed good for his architecture, and would
allow no more; and how much is to be supposed good, depends, as I have
said, much more on place and circumstance than on general laws. I know
that this is not usually thought, and that many good architects would
insist on abstraction in all cases: the question is so wide and so
difficult that I express my opinion upon it most diffidently; but my own
feeling is, that a purely abstract manner, like that of our earliest
English work, does not afford room for the perfection of beautiful form,
and that its severity is wearisome after the eye has been long
accustomed to it. I have not done justice to the Salisbury dog-tooth
moulding, of which the effect is sketched in fig. 5, Plate X., but I
have done more justice to it nevertheless than to the beautiful French
one above it; and I do not think that any candid reader would deny that,
piquant and spirited as is that from Salisbury, the Rouen moulding is,
in every respect, nobler. It will be observed that its symmetry is more
complicated, the leafage being divided into double groups of two lobes
each, each lobe of different structure. With exquisite feeling, one of
these double groups is alternately omitted on the other side of the
moulding (not seen in the Plate, but occupying the cavetto of the
section), thus giving a playful lightness to the whole; and if the
reader will allow for a beauty in the flow of the curved outlines
(especially on the angle), of which he cannot in the least judge from my
rude drawing, he will not, I think, expect easily to find a nobler
instance of decoration adapted to the severest mouldings.

Now it will be observed, that there is in its treatment a high degree of
abstraction, though not so conventional as that of Salisbury: that is to
say, the leaves have little more than their flow and outline
represented; they are hardly undercut, but their edges are connected by
a gentle and most studied curve with the stone behind; they have no
serrations, no veinings, no rib or stalk on the angle, only an incision
gracefully made towards their extremities, indicative of the central rib
and depression. The whole style of the abstraction shows that the
architect could, if he had chosen, have carried the imitation much
farther, but stayed at this point of his own free will; and what he has
done is also so perfect in its kind, that I feel disposed to accept his
authority without question, so far as I can gather it from his works, on
the whole subject of abstraction.

XXXII. Happily his opinion is frankly expressed. This moulding is on the
lateral buttress, and on a level with the top of the north gate; it
cannot therefore be closely seen except from the wooden stairs of the
belfry; it is not intended to be so seen, but calculated for a distance
of, at least, forty to fifty feet from the eye. In the vault of the gate
itself, half as near again, there are three rows of mouldings, as I
think, by the same designer, at all events part of the same plan. One of
them is given in Plate I. fig. 2 _a_. It will be seen that the
abstraction is here infinitely less; the ivy leaves have stalks and
associated fruit, and a rib for each lobe, and are so far undercut as to
detach their forms from the stone; while in the vine-leaf moulding
above, of the same period, from the south gate, serration appears added
to other purely imitative characters. Finally, in the animals which form
the ornaments of the portion of the gate which is close to the eye,
abstraction nearly vanishes into perfect sculpture.

XXXIII. Nearness to the eye, however, is not the only circumstance which
influences architectural abstraction. These very animals are not merely
better cut because close to the eye; they are put close to the eye that
they may, without indiscretion, be better cut, on the noble principle,
first I think, clearly enunciated by Mr. Eastlake, that the closest
imitation shall be of the noblest object. Farther, since the wildness
and manner of growth of vegetation render a bona fide imitation of it
impossible in sculpture--since its members must be reduced in number,
ordered in direction, and cut away from their roots, even under the most
earnestly imitative treatment,--it becomes a point, as I think, of good
judgment, to proportion the completeness of execution of parts to the
formality of the whole; and since five or six leaves must stand for a
tree, to let also five or six touches stand for a leaf. But since the
animal generally admits of perfect outline--since its form is detached,
and may be fully represented, its sculpture may be more complete and
faithful in all its parts. And this principle will be actually found. I
believe, to guide the old workmen. If the animal form be in a gargoyle,
incomplete, and coining out of a block of stone, or if a head only, as
for a boss or other such partial use, its sculpture will be highly
abstract. But if it be an entire animal, as a lizard, or a bird, or a
squirrel, peeping among leafage, its sculpture will be much farther
carried, and I think, if small, near the eye, and worked in a fine
material, may rightly be carried to the utmost possible completion.
Surely we cannot wish a less finish bestowed on those which animate the
mouldings of the south door of the cathedral of Florence; nor desire
that the birds in the capitals of the Doge's palace should be stripped
of a single plume.

XXXIV. Under these limitations, then, I think that perfect sculpture may
be made a part of the severest architecture; but this perfection was
said in the outset to be dangerous. It is so in the highest degree; for
the moment the architect allows himself to dwell on the imitated
portions, there is a chance of his losing sight of the duty of his
ornament, of its business as a part of the composition, and sacrificing
its points of shade and effect to the delight of delicate carving. And
then he is lost. His architecture has become a mere framework for the
setting of delicate sculpture, which had better be all taken down and
put into cabinets. It is well, therefore, that the young architect
should be taught to think of imitative ornament as of the extreme of
grace in language; not to be regarded at first, not to be obtained at
the cost of purpose, meaning, force, or conciseness, yet, indeed, a
perfection--the least of all perfections, and yet the crowning one of
all--one which by itself, and regarded in itself, is an architectural
coxcombry, but is yet the sign of the most highly-trained mind and power
when it is associated with others. It is a safe manner, as I think, to
design all things at first in severe abstraction, and to be prepared, if
need were, to carry them out in that form; then to mark the parts where
high finish would be admissible, to complete these always with stern
reference to their general effect, and then connect them by a graduated
scale of abstraction with the rest. And there is one safeguard against
danger in this process on which I would finally insist. Never imitate
anything but natural forms, and those the noblest, in the completed
parts. The degradation of the cinque cento manner of decoration was
not owing to its naturalism, to its faithfulness of imitation, but to
its imitation of ugly, i.e. unnatural things. So long as it restrained
itself to sculpture of animals and flowers, it remained noble. The
balcony, on the opposite page, from a house in the Campo St. Benedetto
at Venice, shows one of the earliest occurrences of the cinque cento
arabesque, and a fragment of the pattern is given in Plate XII. fig. 8.
It is but the arresting upon the stone work of a stem or two of the
living flowers, which are rarely wanting in the window above (and which,
by the by, the French and Italian peasantry often trellis with exquisite
taste about their casements). This arabesque, relieved as it is in
darkness from the white stone by the stain of time, is surely both
beautiful and pure; and as long as the renaissance ornament remained in
such forms it may be beheld with undeserved admiration. But the moment
that unnatural objects were associated with these, and armor, and
musical instruments, and wild meaningless scrolls and curled shields,
and other such fancies, became principal in its subjects, its doom was
sealed, and with it that of the architecture of the world.

  [Illustration: PLATE XI.--(Page 131--Vol. V.)
  BALCONY IN THE CAMPO, ST. BENEDETTO, VENICE.]

XXXV. III. Our final inquiry was to be into the use of color as
associated with architectural ornament.

I do not feel able to speak with any confidence respecting the touching
of _sculpture_ with color. I would only note one point, that sculpture
is the representation of an idea, while architecture is itself a real
thing. The idea may, as I think, be left colorless, and colored by the
beholder's mind: but a reality ought to have reality in all its
attributes: its color should be as fixed as its form. I cannot,
therefore, consider architecture as in any wise perfect without color.
Farther, as I have above noticed, I think the colors of architecture
should be those of natural stones; partly because more durable, but also
because more perfect and graceful. For to conquer the harshness and
deadness of tones laid upon stone or on gesso, needs the management and
discretion of a true painter; and on this co-operation we must not
calculate in laying down rules for general practice. If Tintoret or
Giorgione are at hand, and ask us for a wall to paint, we will alter our
whole design for their sake, and become their servants; but we must, as
architects, expect the aid of the common workman only; and the laying of
color by a mechanical hand, and its toning under a vulgar eye, are far
more offensive than rudeness in cutting the stone. The latter is
imperfection only; the former deadness or discordance. At the best, such
color is so inferior to the lovely and mellow hues of the natural stone,
that it is wise to sacrifice some of the intricacy of design, if by so
doing we may employ the nobler material. And if, as we looked to Nature
for instruction respecting form, we look to her also to learn the
management of color, we shall, perhaps, find that this sacrifice of
intricacy is for other causes expedient.

XXXVI. First, then, I think that in making this reference we are to
consider our building as a kind of organized creature; in coloring which
we must look to the single and separately organized creatures of Nature,
not to her landscape combinations. Our building, if it is well composed,
is one thing, and is to be colored as Nature would color one thing--a
shell, a flower, or an animal; not as she colors groups of things.

And the first broad conclusion we shall deduce from observance of
natural color in such cases will be, that it never follows form, but is
arranged on an entirely separate system. What mysterious connection
there may be between the shape of the spots on an animal's skin and its
anatomical system, I do not know, nor even if such a connection has in
any wise been traced: but to the eye the systems are entirely separate,
and in many cases that of color is accidentally variable. The stripes of
a zebra do not follow the lines of its body or limbs, still less the
spots of a leopard. In the plumage of birds, each feather bears a part
of the pattern which is arbitrarily carried over the body, having indeed
certain graceful harmonies with the form, diminishing or enlarging in
directions which sometimes follow, but also not unfrequently oppose, the
directions of its muscular lines. Whatever harmonies there may be, are
distinctly like those of two separate musical parts, coinciding here and
there only--never discordant, but essentially different I hold this,
then, for the first great principle of architectural color. Let it be
visibly independent of form. Never paint a column with vertical lines,
but always cross it.[13] Never give separate mouldings separate colors
(I know this is heresy, but I never shrink from any conclusions, however
contrary to human authority, to which I am led by observance of natural
principles); and in sculptured ornaments I do not paint the leaves or
figures (I cannot help the Elgin frieze) of one color and their ground
of another, but vary both the ground and the figures with the same
harmony. Notice how Nature does it in a variegated flower; not one leaf
red and another white, but a point of red and a zone of white, or
whatever it may be, to each. In certain places you may run your two
systems closer, and here and there let them be parallel for a note or
two, but see that the colors and the forms coincide only as two orders
of mouldings do; the same for an instant, but each holding its own
course. So single members may sometimes have single colors: as a bird's
head is sometimes of one color and its shoulders another, you may make
your capital of one color and your shaft another; but in general the
best place for color is on broad surfaces, not on the points of interest
in form. An animal is mottled on its breast and back, rarely on its paws
or about its eyes; so put your variegation boldly on the flat wall and
broad shaft, but be shy of it in the capital and moulding; in all cases
it is a safe rule to simplify color when form is rich, and vice versâ;
and I think it would be well in general to carve all capitals and
graceful ornaments in white marble, and so leave them.

XXXVII. Independence then being first secured, what kind of limiting
outlines shall we adopt for the system of color itself?

I am quite sure that any person familiar with natural objects will never
be surprised at any appearance of care or finish in them. That is the
condition of the universe. But there is cause both for surprise and
inquiry whenever we see anything like carelessness or incompletion: that
is not a common condition; it must be one appointed for some singular
purpose. I believe that such surprise will be forcibly felt by any one
who, after studying carefully the lines of some variegated organic
form, will set himself to copy with similar diligence those of its
colors. The boundaries of the forms he will assuredly, whatever the
object, have found drawn with a delicacy and precision which no human
hand can follow. Those of its colors he will find in many cases, though
governed always by a certain rude symmetry, yet irregular, blotched,
imperfect, liable to all kinds of accidents and awkwardnesses. Look at
the tracery of the lines on a camp shell, and see how oddly and
awkwardly its tents are pitched. It is not indeed always so: there is
occasionally, as in the eye of the peacock's plume, an apparent
precision, but still a precision far inferior to that of the drawing of
the filaments which bear that lovely stain; and in the plurality of
cases a degree of looseness and variation, and, still more singularly,
of harshness and violence in arrangement, is admitted in color which
would be monstrous in form. Observe the difference in the precision of a
fish's scales and of the spots on them.

XXXVIII. Now, why it should be that color is best seen under these
circumstances I will not here endeavor to determine; nor whether the
lesson we are to learn from it be that it is God's will that all manner
of delights should never be combined in one thing. But the fact is
certain, that color is always by Him arranged in these simple or rude
forms, and as certain that, therefore, it must be best seen in them, and
that we shall never mend by refining its arrangements. Experience
teaches us the same thing. Infinite nonsense has been written about the
union of perfect color with perfect form. They never will, never can be
united. Color, to be perfect, _must_ have a soft outline or a simple
one: it cannot have a refined one; and you will never produce a good
painted window with good figure-drawing in it. You will lose perfection
of color as you give perfection of line. Try to put in order and form
the colors of a piece of opal.

XXXIX. I conclude, then, that all arrangements of color, for its own
sake, in graceful forms, are barbarous; and that, to paint a color
pattern with the lovely lines of a Greek leaf moulding, is an utterly
savage procedure. I cannot find anything in natural color like this: it
is not in the bond. I find it in all natural form--never in natural
color. If, then, our architectural color is to be beautiful as its form
was, by being imitative, we are limited to these conditions--to simple
masses of it, to zones, as in the rainbow and the zebra; cloudings and
flamings, as in marble shells and plumage, or spots of various shapes
and dimensions. All these conditions are susceptible of various degrees
of sharpness and delicacy, and of complication in arrangement. The zone
may become a delicate line, and arrange itself in chequers and zig-zags.
The flaming may be more or less defined, as on a tulip leaf, and may at
last be represented by a triangle of color, and arrange itself in stars
or other shapes; the spot may be also graduated into a stain, or defined
into a square or circle. The most exquisite harmonies may be composed of
these simple elements: some soft and full of flushed and melting spaces
of color; others piquant and sparkling, or deep and rich, formed of
close groups of the fiery fragments: perfect and lovely proportion may
be exhibited in the relation of their quantities, infinite invention in
their disposition: but, in all cases, their shape will be effective only
as it determines their quantity, and regulates their operation on each
other; points or edges of one being introduced between breadths of
others, and so on. Triangular and barred forms are therefore convenient,
or others the simplest possible; leaving the pleasure of the spectator
to be taken in the color, and in that only. Curved outlines, especially
if refined, deaden the color, and confuse the mind. Even in figure
painting the greatest colorists have either melted their outline away,
as often Correggio and Rubens; or purposely made their masses of
ungainly shape, as Titian; or placed their brightest hues in costume,
where they could get quaint patterns, as Veronese, and especially
Angelico, with whom, however, the absolute virtue of color is secondary
to grace of line. Hence, he never uses the blended hues of Correggio,
like those on the wing of the little Cupid, in the "Venus and Mercury,"
but always the severest type--the peacock plume. Any of these men would
have looked with infinite disgust upon the leafage and scrollwork which
form the ground of color in our modern painted windows, and yet all
whom I have named were much infected with the love of renaissance
designs. We must also allow for the freedom of the painter's subject,
and looseness of his associated lines; a pattern being severe in a
picture, which is over luxurious upon a building. I believe, therefore,
that it is impossible to be over quaint or angular in architectural
coloring; and thus many dispositions which I have had occasion to
reprobate in form, are, in color, the best that can be invented. I have
always, for instance, spoken with contempt of the Tudor style, for this
reason, that, having surrendered all pretence to spaciousness and
breadth,--having divided its surfaces by an infinite number of lines, it
yet sacrifices the only characters which can make lines beautiful;
sacrifices all the variety and grace which long atoned for the caprice
of the Flamboyant, and adopts, for its leading feature, an entanglement
of cross bars and verticals, showing about as much invention or skill of
design as the reticulation of the bricklayer's sieve. Yet this very
reticulation would in color be highly beautiful; and all the heraldry,
and other features which, in form, are monstrous, may be delightful as
themes of color (so long as there are no fluttering or over-twisted
lines in them); and this observe, because, when colored, they take the
place of a mere pattern, and the resemblance to nature, which could not
be found in their sculptured forms, is found in their piquant
variegation of other surfaces. There is a beautiful and bright bit of
wall painting behind the Duomo of Verona, composed of coats of arms,
whose bearings are balls of gold set in bars of green (altered blue?)
and white, with cardinal's hats in alternate squares. This is of course,
however, fit only for domestic work. The front of the Doge's palace at
Venice is the purest and most chaste model that I can name (but one) of
the fit application of color to public buildings. The sculpture and
mouldings are all white; but the wall surface is chequered with marble
blocks of pale rose, the chequers being in no wise harmonized, or fitted
to the forms of the windows; but looking as if the surface had been
completed first, and the windows cut out of it. In Plate XII. fig. 2 the
reader will see two of the patterns used in green and white, on the
columns of San Michele of Lucca, every column having a different design.
Both are beautiful, but the upper one certainly the best. Yet in
sculpture its lines would have been perfectly barbarous, and those even
of the lower not enough refined.

XL. Restraining ourselves, therefore, to the use of such simple
patterns, so far forth as our color is subordinate either to
architectural structure, or sculptural form, we have yet one more manner
of ornamentation to add to our general means of effect, monochrome
design, the intermediate condition between coloring and carving. The
relations of the entire system of architectural decoration may then be
thus expressed.

     1. Organic form dominant. True, independent sculpture, and
     alto-relievo; rich capitals, and mouldings; to be elaborate in
     completion of form, not abstract, and either to be left in pure
     white marble, or most cautiously touched with color in points and
     borders only, in a system not concurrent with their forms.

     2. Organic form sub-dominant. Basso-relievo or intaglio. To be more
     abstract in proportion to the reduction of depth; to be also more
     rigid and simple in contour; to be touched with color more boldly
     and in an increased degree, exactly in proportion to the reduced
     depth and fulness of form, but still in a system non-concurrent
     with their forms.

     3. Organic form abstracted to outline. Monochrome design, still
     farther reduced to simplicity of contour, and therefore admitting
     for the first time the color to be concurrent with its outlines;
     that is to say, as its name imports, the entire figure to be
     detached in one color from a ground of another.

     4. Organic forms entirely lost. Geometrical patterns or variable
     cloudings in the most vivid color.

On the opposite side of this scale, ascending from the color pattern, I
would place the various forms of painting which may be associated with
architecture: primarily, and as most fit for such purpose, the mosaic,
highly abstract in treatment, and introducing brilliant color in masses;
the Madonna of Torcello being, as I think, the noblest type of the
manner, and the Baptistery of Parma the richest: next, the purely
decorative fresco, like that of the Arena Chapel; finally, the fresco
becoming principal, as in the Vatican and Sistine. But I cannot, with
any safety, follow the principles of abstraction in this pictorial
ornament; since the noblest examples of it appear to me to owe their
architectural applicability to their archaic manner; and I think that
the abstraction and admirable simplicity which render them fit media of
the most splendid coloring, cannot be recovered by a voluntary
condescension. The Byzantines themselves would not, I think, if they
could have drawn the figure better, have used it for a color decoration;
and that use, as peculiar to a condition of childhood, however noble and
full of promise, cannot be included among those modes of adornment which
are now legitimate or even possible. There is a difficulty in the
management of the painted window for the same reason, which has not yet
been met, and we must conquer that first, before we can venture to
consider the wall as a painted window on a large scale. Pictorial
subject, without such abstraction, becomes necessarily principal, or, at
all events, ceases to be the architect's concern; its plan must be left
to the painter after the completion of the building, as in the works of
Veronese and Giorgione on the palaces of Venice.

XLI. Pure architectural decoration, then, may be considered as limited
to the four kinds above specified; of which each glides almost
imperceptibly into the other. Thus, the Elgin frieze is a monochrome in
a state of transition to sculpture, retaining, as I think, the half-cast
skin too long. Of pure monochrome, I have given an example in Plate VI.,
from the noble front of St. Michele of Lucca. It contains forty such
arches, all covered with equally elaborate ornaments, entirely drawn by
cutting out their ground to about the depth of an inch in the flat white
marble, and filling the spaces with pieces of green serpentine; a most
elaborate mode of sculpture, requiring excessive care and precision in
the fitting of the edges, and of course double work, the same line
needing to be cut both in the marble and serpentine. The excessive
simplicity of the forms will be at once perceived; the eyes of the
figures of animals, for instance, being indicated only by a round dot,
formed by a little inlet circle of serpentine, about half an inch over:
but, though simple, they admit often much grace of curvature, as in the
neck of the bird seen above the right hand pillar.[14] The pieces of
serpentine have fallen out in many places, giving the black shadows, as
seen under the horseman's arm and bird's neck, and in the semi-circular
line round the arch, once filled with some pattern. It would have
illustrated my point better to have restored the lost portions, but I
always draw a thing exactly as it is, hating restoration of any kind;
and I would especially direct the reader's attention to the completion
of the forms in the _sculptured_ ornament of the marble cornices, as
opposed to the abstraction of the monochrome figures, of the ball and
cross patterns between the arches, and of the triangular ornament round
the arch on the left.

XLII. I have an intense love for these monochrome figures, owing to
their wonderful life and spirit in all the works on which I found them;
nevertheless, I believe that the excessive degree of abstraction which
they imply necessitates our placing them in the rank of a progressive or
imperfect art, and that a perfect building should rather be composed of
the highest sculpture (organic form dominant and sub-dominant),
associated with pattern colors on the flat or broad surfaces. And we
find, in fact, that the cathedral of Pisa, which is a higher type than
that of Lucca, exactly follows this condition, the color being put in
geometrical patterns on its surfaces, and animal-forms and lovely
leafage used in the sculptured cornices and pillars. And I think that
the grace of the carved forms is best seen when it is thus boldly
opposed to severe traceries of color, while the color itself is, as we
have seen, always most piquant when it is put into sharp angular
arrangements. Thus the sculpture is approved and set off by the color,
and the color seen to the best advantage in its opposition both to the
whiteness and the grace of the carved marble.

XLIII. In the course of this and the preceding chapters, I have now
separately enumerated most of the conditions of Power and Beauty, which
in the outset I stated to be the grounds of the deepest impressions with
which architecture could affect the human mind; but I would ask
permission to recapitulate them in order to see if there be any building
which I may offer as an example of the unison, in such manner as is
possible, of them all. Glancing back, then, to the beginning of the
third chapter, and introducing in their place the conditions
incidentally determined in the two previous sections, we shall have the
following list of noble characters:

Considerable size, exhibited by simple terminal lines (Chap. III. § 6).
Projection towards the top (§ 7). Breadth of flat surface (§ 8). Square
compartments of that surface (§ 9). Varied and visible masonry (§ 11).
Vigorous depth of shadow (§ 13), exhibited especially by pierced
traceries (§ 18). Varied proportion in ascent (Chap. IV. § 28). Lateral
symmetry (§ 28). Sculpture most delicate at the base (Chap. I. § 12).
Enriched quantity of ornament at the top (§ 13). Sculpture abstract in
inferior ornaments and mouldings (Chap. IV. § 31), complete in animal
forms (§ 33). Both to be executed in white marble (§ 40). Vivid color
introduced in flat geometrical patterns (§ 39), and obtained by the use
of naturally colored stone (§ 35).

These characteristics occur more or less in different buildings, some in
one and some in another. But all together, and all in their highest
possible relative degrees, they exist, as far as I know, only in one
building in the world, the Campanile of Giotto at Florence. The drawing
of the tracery of its upper story, which heads this chapter, rude as it
is, will nevertheless give the reader some better conception of that
tower's magnificence than the thin outlines in which it is usually
portrayed. In its first appeal to the stranger's eye there is something
unpleasing; a mingling, as it seems to him, of over severity with over
minuteness. But let him give it time, as he should to all other
consummate art. I remember well how, when a boy, I used to despise that
Campanile, and think it meanly smooth and finished. But I have since
lived beside it many a day, and looked out upon it from my windows by
sunlight and moonlight, and I shall not soon forget how profound and
gloomy appeared to me the savageness of the Northern Gothic, when I
afterwards stood, for the first time, beneath the front of Salisbury.
The contrast is indeed strange, if it could be quickly felt, between the
rising of those grey walls out of their quiet swarded space, like dark
and barren rocks out of a green lake, with their rude, mouldering,
rough-grained shafts, and triple lights, without tracery or other
ornament than the martins' nests in the height of them, and that bright,
smooth, sunny surface of glowing jasper, those spiral shafts and fairy
traceries, so white, so faint, so crystalline, that their slight shapes
are hardly traced in darkness on the pallor of the Eastern sky, that
serene height of mountain alabaster, colored like a morning cloud, and
chased like a sea shell. And if this be, as I believe it, the model and
mirror of perfect architecture, is there not something to be learned by
looking back to the early life of him who raised it? I said that the
Power of human mind had its growth in the Wilderness; much more must the
love and the conception of that beauty, whose every line and hue we have
seen to be, at the best, a faded image of God's daily work, and an
arrested ray of some star of creation, be given chiefly in the places
which He has gladdened by planting there the fir tree and the pine. Not
within the walls of Florence, but among the far away fields of her
lilies, was the child trained who was to raise that headstone of Beauty
above the towers of watch and war. Remember all that he became; count
the sacred thoughts with which he filled the heart of Italy; ask those
who followed him what they learned at his feet; and when you have
numbered his labors, and received their testimony, if it seem to you
that God had verily poured out upon this His servant no common nor
restrained portion of His Spirit, and that he was indeed a king among
the children of men, remember also that the legend upon his crown was
that of David's:--"I took thee from the sheepcote, and from following
the sheep."




CHAPTER V.

THE LAMP OF LIFE.


I. Among the countless analogies by which the nature and relations of
the human soul are illustrated in the material creation, none are more
striking than the impressions inseparably connected with the active and
dormant states of matter. I have elsewhere endeavored to show, that no
inconsiderable part of the essential characters of Beauty depended on
the expression of vital energy in organic things, or on the subjection
to such energy, of things naturally passive and powerless. I need not
here repeat, of what was then advanced, more than the statement which I
believe will meet with general acceptance, that things in other respects
alike, as in their substance, or uses, or outward forms, are noble or
ignoble in proportion to the fulness of the life which either they
themselves enjoy, or of whose action they bear the evidence, as sea
sands are made beautiful by their bearing the seal of the motion of the
waters. And this is especially true of all objects which bear upon them
the impress of the highest order of creative life, that is to say, of
the mind of man: they become noble or ignoble in proportion to the
amount of the energy of that mind which has visibly been employed upon
them. But most peculiarly and imperatively does the rule hold with
respect to the creations of Architecture, which being properly capable
of no other life than this, and being not essentially composed of things
pleasant in themselves,--as music of sweet sounds, or painting of fair
colors, but of inert substance,--depend, for their dignity and
pleasurableness in the utmost degree, upon the vivid expression of the
intellectual life which has been concerned in their production.

II. Now in all other kind of energies except that of man's mind, there
is no question as to what is life, and what is not. Vital sensibility,
whether vegetable or animal, may, indeed, be reduced to so great
feebleness, as to render its existence a matter of question, but when it
is evident at all, it is evident as such: there is no mistaking any
imitation or pretence of it for the life itself; no mechanism nor
galvanism can take its place; nor is any resemblance of it so striking
as to involve even hesitation in the judgment; although many occur which
the human imagination takes pleasure in exalting, without for an instant
losing sight of the real nature of the dead things it animates; but
rejoicing rather in its own excessive life, which puts gesture into
clouds, and joy into waves, and voices into rocks.

III. But when we begin to be concerned with the energies of man, we find
ourselves instantly dealing with a double creature. Most part of his
being seems to have a fictitious counterpart, which it is at his peril
if he do not cast off and deny. Thus he has a true and false (otherwise
called a living and dead, or a feigned or unfeigned) faith. He has a
true and a false hope, a true and a false charity, and, finally, a true
and a false life. His true life is like that of lower organic beings,
the independent force by which he moulds and governs external things; it
is a force of assimilation which converts everything around him into
food, or into instruments; and which, however humbly or obediently it
may listen to or follow the guidance of superior intelligence, never
forfeits its own authority as a judging principle, as a will capable
either of obeying or rebelling. His false life is, indeed, but one of
the conditions of death or stupor, but it acts, even when it cannot be
said to animate, and is not always easily known from the true. It is
that life of custom and accident in which many of us pass much of our
time in the world; that life in which we do what we have not purposed,
and speak what we do not mean, and assent to what we do not understand;
that life which is overlaid by the weight of things external to it, and
is moulded by them, instead of assimilating them; that, which instead of
growing and blossoming under any wholesome dew, is crystallised over
with it, as with hoar frost, and becomes to the true life what an
arborescence is to a tree, a candied agglomeration of thoughts and
habits foreign to it, brittle, obstinate, and icy, which can neither
bend nor grow, but must be crushed and broken to bits, if it stand in
our way. All men are liable to be in some degree frost-bitten in this
sort; all are partly encumbered and crusted over with idle matter; only,
if they have real life in them, they are always breaking this bark away
in noble rents, until it becomes, like the black strips upon the birch
tree, only a witness of their own inward strength. But, with all the
efforts that the best men make, much of their being passes in a kind of
dream, in which they indeed move, and play their parts sufficiently, to
the eyes of their fellow-dreamers, but have no clear consciousness of
what is around them, or within them; blind to the one, insensible to the
other, [Greek: nôthroi]. I would not press the definition into its
darker application to the dull heart and heavy ear; I have to do with it
only as it refers to the too frequent condition of natural existence,
whether of nations or individuals, settling commonly upon them in
proportion to their age. The life of a nation is usually, like the flow
of a lava stream, first bright and fierce, then languid and covered, at
last advancing only by the tumbling over and over of its frozen blocks.
And that last condition is a sad one to look upon. All the steps are
marked most clearly in the arts, and in Architecture more than in any
other; for it, being especially dependent, as we have just said, on the
warmth of the true life, is also peculiarly sensible of the hemlock cold
of the false; and I do not know anything more oppressive, when the mind
is once awakened to its characteristics, than the aspect of a dead
architecture. The feebleness of childhood is full of promise and of
interest,--the struggle of imperfect knowledge full of energy and
continuity,--but to see impotence and rigidity settling upon the form of
the developed man; to see the types which once had the die of thought
struck fresh upon them, worn flat by over use; to see the shell of the
living creature in its adult form, when its colors are faded, and its
inhabitant perished,--this is a sight more humiliating, more melancholy,
than the vanishing of all knowledge, and the return to confessed and
helpless infancy.

Nay, it is to be wished that such return were always possible. There
would be hope if we could change palsy into puerility; but I know not
how far we can become children again, and renew our lost life. The
stirring which has taken place in our architectural aims and interests
within these few years, is thought by many to be full of promise: I
trust it is, but it has a sickly look to me. I cannot tell whether it be
indeed a springing of seed or a shaking among bones; and I do not think
the time will be lost which I ask the reader to spend in the inquiry,
how far all that we have hitherto ascertained or conjectured to be the
best in principle, may be formally practised without the spirit or the
vitality which alone could give it influence, value, or delightfulness.

IV. Now, in the first place--and this is rather an important point--it
is no sign of deadness in a present art that it borrows or imitates, but
only if it borrows without paying interest, or if it imitates without
choice. The art of a great nation, which is developed without any
acquaintance with nobler examples than its own early efforts furnish,
exhibits always the most consistent and comprehensible growth, and
perhaps is regarded usually as peculiarly venerable in its
self-origination. But there is something to my mind more majestic yet in
the life of an architecture like that of the Lombards, rude and
infantine in itself, and surrounded by fragments of a nobler art of
which it is quick in admiration and ready in imitation, and yet so
strong in its own new instincts that it re-constructs and re-arranges
every fragment that it copies or borrows into harmony with its own
thoughts,--a harmony at first disjointed and awkward, but completed in
the end, and fused into perfect organisation; all the borrowed elements
being subordinated to its own primal, unchanged life. I do not know any
sensation more exquisite than the discovering of the evidence of this
magnificent struggle into independent existence; the detection of the
borrowed thoughts, nay, the finding of the actual blocks and stones
carved by other hands and in other ages, wrought into the new walls,
with a new expression and purpose given to them, like the blocks of
unsubdued rocks (to go back to our former simile) which we find in the
heart of the lava current, great witnesses to the power which has fused
all but those calcined fragments into the mass of its homogeneous fire.

V. It will be asked, How is imitation to be rendered healthy and vital?
Unhappily, while it is easy to enumerate the signs of life, it is
impossible to define or to communicate life; and while every intelligent
writer on Art has insisted on the difference between the copying found
in an advancing or recedent period, none have been able to communicate,
in the slightest degree, the force of vitality to the copyist over whom
they might have influence. Yet it is at least interesting, if not
profitable, to note that two very distinguishing characters of vital
imitation are, its Frankness and its Audacity; its Frankness is
especially singular; there is never any effort to conceal the degree of
the sources of its borrowing. Raffaelle carries off a whole figure from
Masaccio, or borrows an entire composition from Perugino, with as much
tranquillity and simplicity of innocence as a young Spartan pickpocket;
and the architect of a Romanesque basilica gathered his columns and
capitals where he could find them, as an ant picks up sticks. There is
at least a presumption, when we find this frank acceptance, that there
is a sense within the mind of power capable of transforming and renewing
whatever it adopts; and too conscious, too exalted, to fear the
accusation of plagiarism,--too certain that it can prove, and has
proved, its independence, to be afraid of expressing its homage to what
it admires in the most open and indubitable way; and the necessary
consequence of this sense of power is the other sign I have named--the
Audacity of treatment when it finds treatment necessary, the
unhesitating and sweeping sacrifice of precedent where precedent becomes
inconvenient. For instance, in the characteristic forms of Italian
Romanesque, in which the hypaethral portion of the heathen temple was
replaced by the towering nave, and where, in consequence, the pediment
of the west front became divided into three portions, of which the
central one, like the apex of a ridge of sloping strata lifted by a
sudden fault, was broken away from and raised above the wings; there
remained at the extremities of the aisles two triangular fragments of
pediment, which could not now be filled by any of the modes of
decoration adapted for the unbroken space; and the difficulty became
greater when the central portion of the front was occupied by columnar
ranges, which could not, without painful abruptness, terminate short of
the extremities of the wings. I know not what expedient would have been
adopted by architects who had much respect for precedent, under such
circumstances, but it certainly would not have been that of the
Pisan,--to continue the range of columns into the pedimental space,
shortening them to its extremity until the shaft of the last column
vanished altogether, and there remained only its _capital_ resting in
the angle on its basic plinth. I raise no question at present whether
this arrangement be graceful or otherwise; I allege it only as an
instance of boldness almost without a parallel, casting aside every
received principle that stood in its way, and struggling through every
discordance and difficulty to the fulfilment of its own instincts.

VI. Frankness, however, is in itself no excuse for repetition, nor
audacity for innovation, when the one is indolent and the other unwise.
Nobler and surer signs of vitality must be sought,--signs independent
alike of the decorative or original character of the style, and constant
in every style that is determinedly progressive.

Of these, one of the most important I believe to be a certain neglect or
contempt of refinement in execution, or, at all events, a visible
subordination of execution to conception, commonly involuntary, but not
unfrequently intentional. This is a point, however, on which, while I
speak confidently, I must at the same time reservedly and carefully, as
there would otherwise be much chance of my being dangerously
misunderstood. It has been truly observed and well stated by Lord
Lindsay, that the best designers of Italy were also the most careful in
their workmanship; and that the stability and finish of their masonry,
mosaic, or other work whatsoever, were always perfect in proportion to
the apparent improbability of the great designers condescending to the
care of details among us so despised. Not only do I fully admit and
re-assert this most important fact, but I would insist upon perfect and
most delicate finish in its right place, as a characteristic of all the
highest schools of architecture, as much as it is those of painting.
But on the other hand, as perfect finish belongs to the perfected art, a
progressive finish belongs to progressive art; and I do not think that
any more fatal sign of a stupor or numbness settling upon that
undeveloped art could possibly be detected, than that it had been _taken
aback_ by its own execution, and that the workmanship had gone ahead of
the design; while, even in my admission of absolute finish in the right
place, as an attribute of the perfected school, I must reserve to myself
the right of answering in my own way the two very important questions,
what _is_ finish? and what _is_ its right place?

VII. But in illustrating either of these points, we must remember that
the correspondence of workmanship with thought is, in existent examples,
interfered with by the adoption of the designs of an advanced period by
the workmen of a rude one. All the beginnings of Christian architecture
are of this kind, and the necessary consequence is of course an increase
of the visible interval between the power of realisation and the beauty
of the idea. We have at first an imitation, almost savage in its
rudeness, of a classical design; as the art advances, the design is
modified by a mixture of Gothic grotesqueness, and the execution more
complete, until a harmony is established between the two, in which
balance they advance to new perfection. Now during the whole period in
which the ground is being recovered, there will be found in the living
architecture marks not to be mistaken, of intense impatience; a struggle
towards something unattained, which causes all minor points of handling
to be neglected; and a restless disdain of all qualities which appear
either to confess contentment or to require a time and care which might
be better spent. And, exactly as a good and earnest student of drawing
will not lose time in ruling lines or finishing backgrounds about
studies which, while they have answered his immediate purpose, he knows
to be imperfect and inferior to what he will do hereafter,--so the vigor
of a true school of early architecture, which is either working under
the influence of high example or which is itself in a state of rapid
development, is very curiously traceable, among other signs, in the
contempt of exact symmetry and measurement, which in dead architecture
are the most painful necessities.

  [Illustration: PLATE XII.--(Page 149--Vol. V.)
  FRAGMENTS FROM ABBEVILLE, LUCCA, VENICE, AND PISA.]

VIII. In Plate XII. fig. 1 I have given a most singular instance both of
rude execution and defied symmetry, in the little pillar and spandril
from a panel decoration under the pulpit of St. Mark's at Venice. The
imperfection (not merely simplicity, but actual rudeness and ugliness)
of the leaf ornament will strike the eye at once: this is general in
works of the time, but it is not so common to find a capital which has
been so carelessly cut; its imperfect volutes being pushed up one side
far higher than on the other, and contracted on that side, an additional
drill hole being put in to fill the space; besides this, the member _a_,
of the mouldings, is a roll where it follows the arch, and a flat fillet
at _a_; the one being slurred into the other at the angle _b_, and
finally stopped short altogether at the other side by the most
uncourteous and remorseless interference of the outer moulding: and in
spite of all this, the grace, proportion, and feeling of the whole
arrangement are so great, that, in its place, it leaves nothing to be
desired; all the science and symmetry in the world could not beat it. In
fig. 4 I have endeavored to give some idea of the execution of the
subordinate portions of a much higher work, the pulpit of St. Andrea at
Pistoja, by Nicolo Pisano. It is covered with figure sculptures,
executed with great care and delicacy; but when the sculptor came to the
simple arch mouldings, he did not choose to draw the eye to them by over
precision of work or over sharpness of shadow. The section adopted, _k_,
_m_, is peculiarly simple, and so slight and obtuse in its recessions as
never to produce a sharp line; and it is worked with what at first
appears slovenliness, but it is in fact sculptural _sketching_; exactly
correspondent to a painter's light execution of a background: the lines
appear and disappear again, are sometimes deep, sometimes shallow,
sometimes quite broken off; and the recession of the cusp joins that of
the external arch at _n_, in the most fearless defiance of all
mathematical laws of curvilinear contact.

IX. There is something very delightful in this bold expression of the
mind of the great master. I do not say that it is the "perfect work" of
patience, but I think that impatience is a glorious character in an
advancing school; and I love the Romanesque and early Gothic especially,
because they afford so much room for it; accidental carelessness of
measurement or of execution being mingled undistinguishably with the
purposed departures from symmetrical regularity, and the luxuriousness
of perpetually variable fancy, which are eminently characteristic of
both styles. How great, how frequent they are, and how brightly the
severity of architectural law is relieved by their grace and suddenness,
has not, I think, been enough observed; still less, the unequal
measurements of even important features professing to be absolutely
symmetrical. I am not so familiar with modern practice as to speak with
confidence respecting its ordinary precision; but I imagine that the
following measures of the western front of the cathedral of Pisa, would
be looked upon by present architects as very blundering approximations.
That front is divided into seven arched compartments, of which the
second, fourth or central, and sixth contain doors; the seven are in a
most subtle alternating proportion; the central being the largest, next
to it the second and sixth, then the first and seventh, lastly the third
and fifth. By this arrangement, of course, these three pairs should be
equal; and they are so to the eye, but I found their actual measures to
be the following, taken from pillar to pillar, in Italian braccia, palmi
(four inches each), and inches:--

                                        Braccia. Palmi. Inches. Total in
                                                                inches.
  1. Central door                            8      0     0    = 192
  2. Northern door   }                       6      3    1-1/2 = 157-1/2
  3. Southern door   }                       6      4     3    = 163
  4. Extreme northern space  }               5      5    3-1/2 = 143-1/2
  5. Extreme southern space  }               6      1    0-1/2 = 148-1/2
  6. Northern intervals between the doors }  5      2     1    = 129
  7. Southern intervals between the doors }  5      2    1-1/2 = 129-1/2

There is thus a difference, severally, between 2, 3 and 4, 5, of five
inches and a half in the one case, and five inches in the other.

X. This, however, may perhaps be partly attributable to some
accommodation of the accidental distortions which evidently took place
in the walls of the cathedral during their building, as much as in those
of the campanile. To my mind, those of the Duomo are far the most
wonderful of the two: I do not believe that a single pillar of its walls
is absolutely vertical: the pavement rises and falls to different
heights, or rather the plinth of the walls sinks into it continually to
different depths, the whole west front literally overhangs (I have not
plumbed it; but the inclination may be seen by the eye, by bringing it
into visual contact with the upright pilasters of the Campo Santo): and
a most extraordinary distortion in the masonry of the southern wall
shows that this inclination had begun when the first story was built.
The cornice above the first arcade of that wall touches the tops of
eleven out of its fifteen arches; but it suddenly leaves the tops of the
four westernmost; the arches nodding westward and sinking into the
ground, while the cornice rises (or seems to rise), leaving at any rate,
whether by the rise of the one or the fall of the other, an interval of
more than two feet between it and the top of the western arch, filled by
added courses of masonry. There is another very curious evidence of this
struggle of the architect with his yielding wall in the columns of the
main entrance. (These notices are perhaps somewhat irrelevant to our
immediate subject, but they appear to me highly interesting; and they,
at all events, prove one of the points on which I would insist,--how
much of imperfection and variety in things professing to be symmetrical
the eyes of those eager builders could endure: they looked to loveliness
in detail, to nobility in the whole, never to petty measurements.) Those
columns of the principal entrance are among the loveliest in Italy;
cylindrical, and decorated with a rich arabesque of sculptured foliage,
which at the base extends nearly all round them, up to the black
pilaster in which they are lightly engaged: but the shield of foliage,
bounded by a severe line, narrows to their tops, where it covers their
frontal segment only; thus giving, when laterally seen, a terminal line
sloping boldly outwards, which, as I think, was meant to conceal the
accidental leaning of the western walls, and, by its exaggerated
inclination in the same direction, to throw them by comparison into a
seeming vertical.

XI. There is another very curious instance of distortion above the
central door of the west front. All the intervals between the seven
arches are filled with black marble, each containing in its centre a
white parallelogram filled with animal mosaics, and the whole surmounted
by a broad white band, which, generally, does not touch the
parallelogram below. But the parallelogram on the north of the central
arch has been forced into an oblique position, and touches the white
band; and, as if the architect was determined to show that he did not
care whether it did or not, the white band suddenly gets thicker at that
place, and remains so over the two next arches. And these differences
are the more curious because the workmanship of them all is most
finished and masterly, and the distorted stones are fitted with as much
neatness as if they tallied to a hair's breadth. There is no look of
slurring or blundering about it; it is all coolly filled in, as if the
builder had no sense of anything being wrong or extraordinary: I only
wish we had a little of his impudence.

XII. Still, the reader will say that all these variations are probably
dependent more on the bad foundation than on the architect's feeling.
Not so the exquisite delicacies of change in the proportions and
dimensions of the apparently symmetrical arcades of the west front. It
will be remembered that I said the tower of Pisa was the only ugly tower
in Italy, because its tiers were equal, or nearly so, in height; a fault
this, so contrary to the spirit of the builders of the time, that it can
be considered only as an unlucky caprice. Perhaps the general aspect of
the west front of the cathedral may then have occurred to the reader's
mind, as seemingly another contradiction of the rule I had advanced. It
would not have been so, however, even had its four upper arcades been
actually equal; as they are subordinated to the great seven-arched lower
story, in the manner before noticed respecting the spire of Salisbury,
and as is actually the case in the Duomo of Lucca and Tower of Pistoja.
But the Pisan front is far more subtly proportioned. Not one of its four
arcades is of like height with another. The highest is the third,
counting upwards; and they diminish in nearly arithmetical proportion
alternately; in the order 3rd, 1st, 2nd, 4th. The inequalities in their
arches are not less remarkable: they at first strike the eye as all
equal; but there is a grace about them which equality never obtained: on
closer observation, it is perceived that in the first row of nineteen
arches, eighteen are equal, and the central one larger than the rest; in
the second arcade, the nine central arches stand over the nine below,
having, like them, the ninth central one largest. But on their flanks,
where is the slope of the shoulder-like pediment, the arches vanish, and
a wedge-shaped frieze takes their place, tapering outwards, in order to
allow the columns to be carried to the extremity of the pediment; and
here, where the heights of the shafts are so far shortened, they are set
thicker; five shafts, or rather four and a capital, above, to four of
the arcade below, giving twenty-one intervals instead of nineteen. In
the next or third arcade,--which, remember, is the highest,--eight
arches, all equal, are given in the space of the nine below, so that
there is now a central shaft instead of a central arch, and the span of
the arches is increased in proportion to their increased height.
Finally, in the uppermost arcade, which is the lowest of all, the
arches, the same in number as those below, are narrower than any of the
façade; the whole eight going very nearly above the six below them,
while the terminal arches of the lower arcade are surmounted by flanking
masses of decorated wall with projecting figures.

XIV. Now I call _that_ Living Architecture. There is sensation in every
inch of it, and an accommodation to every architectural necessity, with
a determined variation in arrangement, which is exactly like the related
proportions and provisions in the structure of organic form. I have not
space to examine the still lovelier proportioning of the external shafts
of the apse of this marvellous building. I prefer, lest the reader
should think it a peculiar example, to state the structure of another
church, the most graceful and grand piece of Romanesque work, as a
fragment, in north Italy, that of San Giovanni Evangelista at Pistoja.

The side of that church has three stories of arcade, diminishing in
height in bold geometrical proportion, while the arches, for the most
part, increase in number in arithmetical, _i.e._ two in the second
arcade, and three in the third, to one in the first. Lest, however, this
arrangement should be too formal, of the fourteen arches in the lowest
series, that which contains the door is made larger than the rest, and
is not in the middle, but the sixth from the West, leaving five on one
side and eight on the other. Farther: this lowest arcade is terminated
by broad flat pilasters, about half the width of its arches; but the
arcade above is continuous; only the two extreme arches at the west end
are made larger than all the rest, and instead of coming, as they
should, into the space of the lower extreme arch, take in both it and
its broad pilaster. Even this, however, was not out of order enough to
satisfy the architect's eye; for there were still two arches above to
each single one below: so at the east end, where there are more arches,
and the eye might be more easily cheated, what does he do but _narrow_
the two extreme _lower_ arches by half a braccio; while he at the same
time slightly enlarged the upper ones, so as to get only seventeen upper
to nine lower, instead of eighteen to nine. The eye is thus thoroughly
confused, and the whole building thrown into one mass, by the curious
variations in the adjustments of the superimposed shafts, not one of
which is either exactly in nor positively out of its place; and, to get
this managed the more cunningly, there is from an inch to an inch and a
half of gradual gain in the space of the four eastern arches, besides
the confessed half braccio. Their measures, counting from the east, I
found as follows:--

         Braccia. Palmi. Inches.

  1st       3        0      1
  2nd       3        0      2
  3rd       3        3      2
  4th       3        3      3-1/2

The upper arcade is managed on the same principle; it looks at first as
if there were three arches to each under pair; but there are, in
reality, only thirty-eight (or thirty-seven, I am not quite certain of
this number) to the twenty-seven below; and the columns get into all
manner of relative positions. Even then, the builder was not satisfied,
but must needs carry the irregularity into the spring of the arches, and
actually, while the general effect is of a symmetrical arcade, there is
not one of the arches the same in height as another; their tops undulate
all along the wall like waves along a harbor quay, some nearly touching
the string course above, and others falling from it as much as five or
six inches.

XIV. Let us next examine the plan of the west front of St. Mark's at
Venice, which, though in many respects imperfect, is in its proportions,
and as a piece of rich and fantastic color, as lovely a dream as ever
filled human imagination. It may, perhaps, however, interest the reader
to hear one opposite opinion upon this subject, and after what has been
urged in the preceding pages respecting proportion in general, more
especially respecting the wrongness of balanced cathedral towers and
other regular designs, together with my frequent references to the
Doge's palace, and campanile of St. Mark's, as models of perfection, and
my praise of the former especially as projecting above its second
arcade, the following extracts from the journal of Wood the architect,
written on his arrival at Venice, may have a pleasing freshness in them,
and may show that I have not been stating principles altogether trite or
accepted.

"The strange looking church, and the great ugly campanile, could not be
mistaken. The exterior of this church surprises you by its extreme
ugliness, more than by anything else."

"The Ducal Palace is even more ugly than anything I have previously
mentioned. Considered in detail, I can imagine no alteration to make it
tolerable; but if this lofty wall had been _set back behind_ the two
stories of little arches, it would have been a very noble production."

After more observations on "a certain justness of proportion," and on
the appearance of riches and power in the church, to which he ascribes a
pleasing effect, he goes on: "Some persons are of opinion that
irregularity is a necessary part of its excellence. I am decidedly of a
contrary opinion, and am convinced that a regular design of the same
sort would be far superior. Let an oblong of good architecture, but not
very showy, conduct to a fine cathedral, which should appear between
_two lofty towers_ and have _two obelisks_ in front, and on each side of
this cathedral let other squares partially open into the first, and one
of these extend down to a harbor or sea shore, and you would have a
scene which might challenge any thing in existence."

Why Mr. Wood was unable to enjoy the color of St. Mark's, or perceive
the majesty of the Ducal Palace, the reader will see after reading the
two following extracts regarding the Caracci and Michael Angelo.

"The pictures here (Bologna) are to my taste far preferable to those of
Venice, for if the Venetian school surpass in coloring, and, perhaps, in
composition, the Bolognese is decidedly superior in drawing and
expression, and the Caraccis _shine here like Gods_."

"What is it that is so much admired in this artist (M. Angelo)? Some
contend for a grandeur of composition in the lines and disposition of
the figures; this, I confess, I do not comprehend; yet, while I
acknowledge the beauty of certain forms and proportions in architecture,
I cannot consistently deny that similar merits may exist in painting,
though I am unfortunately unable to appreciate them."

I think these passages very valuable, as showing the effect of a
contracted knowledge and false taste in painting upon an architect's
understanding of his own art; and especially with what curious notions,
or lack of notions, about proportion, that art has been sometimes
practised. For Mr. Wood is by no means unintelligent in his observations
generally, and his criticisms on classical art are often most valuable.
But those who love Titian better than the Caracci, and who see something
to admire in Michael Angelo, will, perhaps, be willing to proceed with
me to a charitable examination of St. Mark's. For, although, the present
course of European events affords us some chance of seeing the changes
proposed by Mr. Wood carried into execution, we may still esteem
ourselves fortunate in having first known how it was left by the
builders of the eleventh century.

XV. The entire front is composed of an upper and lower series of arches,
enclosing spaces of wall decorated with mosaic, and supported on ranges
of shafts of which, in the lower series of arches, there is an upper
range superimposed on a lower. Thus we have five vertical divisions of
the façade; _i.e._ two tiers of shafts, and the arched wall they bear,
below; one tier of shafts, and the arched wall they bear, above. In
order, however, to bind the two main divisions together, the central
lower arch (the main entrance) rises above the level of the gallery and
balustrade which crown the lateral arches.

The proportioning of the columns and walls of the lower story is so
lovely and so varied, that it would need pages of description before it
could be fully understood; but it may be generally stated thus: The
height of the lower shafts, upper shafts, and wall, being severally
expressed by _a_, _b_, and _c_, then _a_:_c_::_c_:_b_ (_a_ being the
highest); and the diameter of shaft _b_ is generally to the diameter of
shaft _a_ as height _b_ is to height _a_, or something less, allowing
for the large plinth which diminishes the apparent height of the upper
shaft: and when this is their proportion of width, one shaft above is
put above one below, with sometimes another upper shaft interposed: but
in the extreme arches a single under shaft bears two upper, proportioned
as truly as the boughs of a tree; that is to say, the diameter of each
upper = 2/3 of lower. There being thus the three terms of proportion
gained in the lower story, the upper, while it is only divided into two
main members, in order that the whole height may not be divided into an
even number, has the third term added in its pinnacles. So far of the
vertical division. The lateral is still more subtle. There are seven
arches in the lower story; and, calling the central arch _a_, and
counting to the extremity, they diminish in the alternate order _a_,
_c_, _b_, _d_. The upper story has five arches, and two added pinnacles;
and these diminish in _regular_ order, the central being the largest,
and the outermost the least. Hence, while one proportion ascends,
another descends, like parts in music; and yet the pyramidal form is
secured for the whole, and, which was another great point of attention,
none of the shafts of the upper arches stand over those of the lower.

XVI. It might have been thought that, by this plan, enough variety had
been secured, but the builder was not satisfied even thus: for--and this
is the point bearing on the present part of our subject--always calling
the central arch _a_, and the lateral ones _b_ and _c_ in succession,
the northern _b_ and _c_ are considerably wider than the southern _b_
and _c_, but the southern _d_ is as much wider than the northern _d_,
and lower beneath its cornice besides; and, more than this, I hardly
believe that one of the effectively symmetrical members of the façade is
actually symmetrical with any other. I regret that I cannot state the
actual measures. I gave up the taking them upon the spot, owing to their
excessive complexity, and the embarrassment caused by the yielding and
subsidence of the arches.

Do not let it be supposed that I imagine the Byzantine workmen to have
had these various principles in their minds as they built. I believe
they built altogether from feeling, and that it was because they did so,
that there is this marvellous life, changefulness, and subtlety running
through their every arrangement; and that we reason upon the lovely
building as we should upon some fair growth of the trees of the earth,
that know not their own beauty.

XVII. Perhaps, however, a stranger instance than any I have yet given,
of the daring variation of pretended symmetry, is found in the front of
the Cathedral of Bayeux. It consists of five arches with steep
pediments, the outermost filled, the three central with doors; and they
appear, at first, to diminish in regular proportion from the principal
one in the centre. The two lateral doors are very curiously managed. The
tympana of their arches are filled with bas-reliefs, in four tiers; in
the lowest tier there is in each a little temple or gate containing the
principal figure (in that on the right, it is the gate of Hades with
Lucifer). This little temple is carried, like a capital, by an isolated
shaft which divides the whole arch at about 2/3 of its breadth, the
larger portion outmost; and in that larger portion is the inner entrance
door. This exact correspondence, in the treatment of both gates, might
lead us to expect a correspondence in dimension. Not at all. The small
inner northern entrance measures, in English feet and inches, 4 ft. 7
in. from jamb to jamb, and the southern five feet exactly. Five inches
in five feet is a considerable variation. The outer northern porch
measures, from face shaft to face shaft, 13 ft. 11 in., and the
southern, 14 ft. 6 in.; giving a difference of 7 in. on 14-1/2 ft. There
are also variations in the pediment decorations not less extraordinary.

XVIII. I imagine I have given instances enough, though I could multiply
them indefinitely, to prove that these variations are not mere blunders,
nor carelessnesses, but the result of a fixed scorn, if not dislike, of
accuracy in measurements; and, in most cases, I believe, of a determined
resolution to work out an effective symmetry by variations as subtle as
those of Nature. To what lengths this principle was sometimes carried,
we shall see by the very singular management of the towers of Abbeville.
I do not say it is right, still less that it is wrong, but it is a
wonderful proof of the fearlessness of a living architecture; for, say
what we will of it, that Flamboyant of France, however morbid, was as
vivid and intense in its animation as ever any phase of mortal mind; and
it would have lived till now, if it had not taken to telling lies. I
have before noticed the general difficulty of managing even lateral
division, when it is into two equal parts, unless there be some third
reconciling member. I shall give, hereafter, more examples of the modes
in which this reconciliation is effected in towers with double lights:
the Abbeville architect put his sword to the knot perhaps rather too
sharply. Vexed by the want of unity between his two windows he literally
laid their heads together, and so distorted their ogee curves, as to
leave only one of the trefoiled panels above, on the inner side, and
three on the outer side of each arch. The arrangement is given in Plate
XII. fig. 3. Associated with the various undulation of flamboyant curves
below, it is in the real tower hardly observed, while it binds it into
one mass in general effect. Granting it, however, to be ugly and wrong,
I like sins of the kind, for the sake of the courage it requires to
commit them. In plate II. (part of a small chapel attached to the West
front of the Cathedral of St. Lo), the reader will see an instance,
from the same architecture, of a violation of its own principles, for
the sake of a peculiar meaning. If there be any one feature which the
flamboyant architect loved to decorate richly, it was the niche--it was
what the capital is to the Corinthian order; yet in the case before us
there is an ugly beehive put in the place of the principal niche of the
arch. I am not sure if I am right in my interpretation of its meaning,
but I have little doubt that two figures below, now broken away, once
represented an Annunciation; and on another part of the same cathedral,
I find the descent of the Spirit, encompassed by rays of light,
represented very nearly in the form of the niche in question; which
appears, therefore, to be intended for a representation of this
effulgence, while at the same time it was made a canopy for the delicate
figures below. Whether this was its meaning or not, it is remarkable as
a daring departure from the common habits of the time.

XIX. Far more splendid is a license taken with the niche decoration
of the portal of St. Maclou at Rouen. The subject of the tympanum
bas-relief is the Last Judgment, and the sculpture of the inferno side
is carried out with a degree of power whose fearful grotesqueness I can
only describe as a mingling of the minds of Orcagna and Hogarth. The
demons are perhaps even more awful than Orcagna's; and, in some of the
expressions of debased humanity in its utmost despair, the English
painter is at least equalled. Not less wild is the imagination which
gives fury and fear even to the placing of the figures. An evil angel,
poised on the wing, drives the condemned troops from before the Judgment
seat; with his left hand he drags behind him a cloud, which is spreading
like a winding-sheet over them all; but they are urged by him so
furiously, that they are driven not merely to the extreme limit of that
scene, which the sculptor confined elsewhere within the tympanum, but
out of the tympanum and _into the niches_ of the arch; while the flames
that follow them, bent by the blast, as it seems, of the angel's wings,
rush into the niches also, and burst up _through their tracery_, the
three lowermost niches being represented as all on fire, while,
instead of their usual vaulted and ribbed ceiling, there is a demon in
the roof of each, with his wings folded over it, grinning down out of
the black shadow.

  [Illustration: PLATE XIII.--(Page 161--Vol. V.)
  PORTIONS OF AN ARCADE ON THE SOUTH SIDE OF THE CATHEDRAL OF FERRARA.]

XX. I have, however, given enough instances of vitality shown in mere
daring, whether wise, as surely in this last instance, or inexpedient;
but, as a single example of the Vitality of Assimilation, the faculty
which turns to its purposes all material that is submitted to it, I
would refer the reader to the extraordinary columns of the arcade on the
south side of the Cathedral of Ferrara. A single arch of it is given in
Plate XIII. on the right. Four such columns forming a group, there are
interposed two pairs of columns, as seen on the left of the same plate;
and then come another four arches. It is a long arcade of, I suppose,
not less than forty arches, perhaps of many more; and in the grace and
simplicity of its stilted Byzantine curves I hardly know its equal. Its
like, in fancy of column, I certainly do not know; there being hardly
two correspondent, and the architect having been ready, as it seems, to
adopt ideas and resemblances from any sources whatsoever. The vegetation
growing up the two columns is fine, though bizarre; the distorted
pillars beside it suggest images of less agreeable character; the
serpentine arrangements founded on the usual Byzantine double knot are
generally graceful; but I was puzzled to account for the excessively
ugly type of the pillar, fig. 3, one of a group of four. It so happened,
fortunately for me, that there had been a fair in Ferrara; and, when I
had finished my sketch of the pillar, I had to get out of the way of
some merchants of miscellaneous wares, who were removing their stall. It
had been shaded by an awning supported by poles, which, in order that
the covering might be raised or lowered according to the height of the
sun, were composed of two separate pieces, fitted to each other by a
_rack_, in which I beheld the prototype of my ugly pillar. It will not
be thought, after what I have above said of the inexpedience of
imitating anything but natural form, that I advance this architect's
practice as altogether exemplary; yet the humility is instructive, which
condescended to such sources for motives of thought, the boldness, which
could depart so far from all established types of form, and the life
and feeling, which out of an assemblage of such quaint and uncouth
materials, could produce an harmonious piece of ecclesiastical
architecture.

XXI. I have dwelt, however, perhaps, too long upon that form of vitality
which is known almost as much by its errors as by its atonements for
them. We must briefly note the operation of it, which is always right,
and always necessary, upon those lesser details, where it can neither be
superseded by precedents, nor repressed by proprieties.

I said, early in this essay, that hand-work might always be known from
machine-work; observing, however, at the same time, that it was possible
for men to turn themselves into machines, and to reduce their labor to
the machine level; but so long as men work _as_ men, putting their heart
into what they do, and doing their best, it matters not how bad workmen
they may be, there will be that in the handling which is above all
price: it will be plainly seen that some places have been delighted in
more than others--that there has been a pause, and a care about them;
and then there will come careless bits, and fast bits; and here the
chisel will have struck hard, and there lightly, and anon timidly; and
if the man's mind as well as his heart went with his work, all this will
be in the right places, and each part will set off the other; and the
effect of the whole, as compared with the same design cut by a machine
or a lifeless hand, will be like that of poetry well read and deeply
felt to that of the same verses jangled by rote. There are many to whom
the difference is imperceptible; but to those who love poetry it is
everything--they had rather not hear it at all, than hear it ill read;
and to those who love Architecture, the life and accent of the hand are
everything. They had rather not have ornament at all, than see it ill
cut--deadly cut, that is. I cannot too often repeat, it is not coarse
cutting, it is not blunt cutting, that is necessarily bad; but it is
cold cutting--the look of equal trouble everywhere--the smooth, diffused
tranquillity of heartless pains--the regularity of a plough in a level
field. The chill is more likely, indeed, to show itself in finished work
than in any other--men cool and tire as they complete: and if
completeness is thought to be vested in polish, and to be attainable by
help of sand paper, we may as well give the work to the engine-lathe at
once. But _right_ finish is simply the full rendering of the intended
impression; and _high_ finish is the rendering of a well intended and
vivid impression; and it is oftener got by rough than fine handling. I
am not sure whether it is frequently enough observed that sculpture is
not the mere cutting of the _form_ of anything in stone; it is the
cutting of the _effect_ of it. Very often the true form, in the marble,
would not be in the least like itself. The sculptor must paint with his
chisel: half his touches are not to realize, but to put power into the
form: they are touches of light and shadow; and raise a ridge, or sink a
hollow, not to represent an actual ridge or hollow, but to get a line of
light, or a spot of darkness. In a coarse way, this kind of execution is
very marked in old French woodwork; the irises of the eyes of its
chimeric monsters being cut boldly into holes, which, variously placed,
and always dark, give all kinds of strange and startling expressions,
averted and askance, to the fantastic countenances. Perhaps the highest
examples of this kind of sculpture-painting are the works of Mino da
Fiesole; their best effects being reached by strange angular, and
seemingly rude, touches of the chisel. The lips of one of the children
on the tombs in the church of the Badia, appear only half finished when
they are seen close; yet the expression is farther carried and more
ineffable, than in any piece of marble I have ever seen, especially
considering its delicacy, and the softness of the child-features. In a
sterner kind, that of the statues in the sacristy of St. Lorenzo equals
it, and there again by incompletion. I know no example of work in which
the forms are absolutely true and complete where such a result is
attained; in Greek sculptures is not even attempted.

XXII. It is evident that, for architectural appliances, such masculine
handling, likely as it must be to retain its effectiveness when higher
finish would be injured by time, must always be the most expedient; and
as it is impossible, even were it desirable that the highest finish
should be given to the quantity of work which covers a large building,
it will be understood how precious the intelligence must become, which
renders incompletion itself a means of additional expression; and how
great must be the difference, when the touches are rude and few, between
those of a careless and those of a regardful mind. It is not easy to
retain anything of their character in a copy; yet the reader will find
one or two illustrative points in the examples, given in Plate XIV.,
from the bas-reliefs of the north of Rouen Cathedral. There are three
square pedestals under the three main niches on each side of it, and one
in the centre; each of these being on two sides decorated with five
quatrefoiled panels. There are thus seventy quatrefoils in the lower
ornament of the gate alone, without counting those of the outer course
round it, and of the pedestals outside: each quatrefoil is filled with a
bas-relief, the whole reaching to something above a man's height. A
modern architect would, of course, have made all the five quatrefoils of
each pedestal-side equal: not so the Mediæval. The general form being
apparently a quatrefoil composed of semicircles on the sides of a
square, it will be found on examination that none of the arcs are
semicircles, and none of the basic figures squares. The latter are
rhomboids, having their acute or obtuse angles uppermost according to
their larger or smaller size; and the arcs upon their sides slide into
such places as they can get in the angles of the enclosing
parallelogram, leaving intervals, at each of the four angles, of various
shapes, which are filled each by an animal. The size of the whole panel
being thus varied, the two lowest of the five are tall, the next two
short, and the uppermost a little higher than the lowest; while in the
course of bas-reliefs which surrounds the gate, calling either of the
two lowest (which are equal), _a_, and either of the next two _b_, and
the fifth and sixth _c_ and _d_, then _d_ (the largest):
_c_::_c_:_a_::_a_:_b_. It is wonderful how much of the grace of the
whole depends on these variations.

XXIII. Each of the angles, it was said, is filled by an animal. There
are thus 70 x 4=280 animals, all different, in the mere fillings of the
intervals of the bas-reliefs. Three of these intervals, with their
beasts, actual size, the curves being traced upon the stone, I have
given in Plate XIV.

  [Illustration: PLATE XIV.--(Page 165--Vol. V.)
  SCULPTURE FROM THE CATHEDRAL OF ROUEN.]

I say nothing of their general design, or of the lines of the wings and
scales, which are perhaps, unless in those of the central dragon, not
much above the usual commonplaces of good ornamental work; but there is
an evidence in the features of thoughtfulness and fancy which is not
common, at least now-a-days. The upper creature on the left is biting
something, the form of which is hardly traceable in the defaced
stone--but biting he is; and the reader cannot but recognise in the
peculiarly reverted eye the expression which is never seen, as I think,
but in the eye of a dog gnawing something in jest, and preparing to
start away with it: the meaning of the glance, so far as it can be
marked by the mere incision of the chisel, will be felt by comparing it
with the eye of the couchant figure on the right, in its gloomy and
angry brooding. The plan of this head, and the nod of the cap over its
brow, are fine; but there is a little touch above the hand especially
well meant: the fellow is vexed and puzzled in his malice; and his hand
is pressed hard on his cheek bone, and the flesh of the cheek is
_wrinkled_ under the eye by the pressure. The whole, indeed, looks
wretchedly coarse, when it is seen on a scale in which it is naturally
compared with delicate figure etchings; but considering it as a mere
filling of an interstice on the outside of a cathedral gate, and as one
of more than three hundred (for in my estimate I did not include the
outer pedestals), it proves very noble vitality in the art of the time.

XXIV. I believe the right question to ask, respecting all ornament, is
simply this: Was it done with enjoyment--was the carver happy while he
was about it? It may be the hardest work possible, and the harder
because so much pleasure was taken in it; but it must have been happy
too, or it will not be living. How much of the stone mason's toil this
condition would exclude I hardly venture to consider, but the condition
is absolute. There is a Gothic church lately built near Rouen, vile
enough, indeed, in its general composition, but excessively rich in
detail; many of the details are designed with taste, and all evidently
by a man who has studied old work closely. But it is all as dead as
leaves in December; there is not one tender touch, not one warm stroke,
on the whole façade. The men who did it hated it, and were thankful when
it was done. And so long as they do so they are merely loading your
walls with shapes of clay: the garlands of everlastings in Père la
Chaise are more cheerful ornaments. You cannot get the feeling by paying
for it--money will not buy life. I am not sure even that you can get it
by watching or waiting for it. It is true that here and there a workman
may be found who has it in him, but he does not rest contented in the
inferior work--he struggles forward into an Academician; and from the
mass of available handicraftsmen the power is gone--how recoverable I
know not: this only I know, that all expense devoted to sculptural
ornament, in the present condition of that power, comes literally under
the head of Sacrifice for the sacrifice's sake, or worse. I believe the
only manner of rich ornament that is open to us is the geometrical
color-mosaic, and that much might result from our strenuously taking up
this mode of design. But, at all events, one thing we have in our
power--the doing without machine ornament and cast-iron work. All the
stamped metals, and artificial stones, and imitation woods and bronzes,
over the invention of which we hear daily exultation--all the short, and
cheap, and easy ways of doing that whose difficulty is its honor--are
just so many new obstacles in our already encumbered road. They will not
make one of us happier or wiser--they will extend neither the pride of
judgment nor the privilege of enjoyment. They will only make us
shallower in our understandings, colder in our hearts, and feebler in
our wits. And most justly. For we are not sent into this world to do any
thing into which we cannot put our hearts. We have certain work to do
for our bread, and that is to be done strenuously; other work to do for
our delight, and that is to be done heartily: neither is to be done by
halves or shifts, but with a will; and what is not worth this effort is
not to be done at all. Perhaps all that we have to do is meant for
nothing more than an exercise of the heart and of the will, and is
useless in itself; but, at all events, the little use it has may well be
spared if it is not worth putting our hands and our strength to. It
does not become our immortality to take an ease inconsistent with its
authority, nor to suffer any instruments with which it can dispense, to
come between it and the things it rules: and he who would form the
creations of his own mind by any other instrument than his own hand,
would, also, if he might, give grinding organs to Heaven's angels, to
make their music easier. There is dreaming enough, and earthiness
enough, and sensuality enough in human existence without our turning the
few glowing moments of it into mechanism; and since our life must at the
best be but a vapor that appears for a little time and then vanishes
away, let it at least appear as a cloud in the height of Heaven, not as
the thick darkness that broods over the blast of the Furnace, and
rolling of the Wheel.




CHAPTER VI.

THE LAMP OF MEMORY.


I. Among the hours of his life to which the writer looks back with
peculiar gratitude, as having been marked by more than ordinary fulness
of joy or clearness of teaching, is one passed, now some years ago, near
time of sunset, among the broken masses of pine forest which skirt the
course of the Ain, above the village of Champagnole, in the Jura. It is
a spot which has all the solemnity, with none of the savageness, of the
Alps; where there is a sense of a great power beginning to be manifested
in the earth, and of a deep and majestic concord in the rise of the long
low lines of piny hills; the first utterance of those mighty mountain
symphonies, soon to be more loudly lifted and wildly broken along the
battlements of the Alps. But their strength is as yet restrained; and
the far-reaching ridges of pastoral mountain succeed each other, like
the long and sighing swell which moves over quiet waters from some
far-off stormy sea. And there is a deep tenderness pervading that vast
monotony. The destructive forces and the stern expression of the central
ranges are alike withdrawn. No frost-ploughed, dust-encumbered paths of
ancient glacier fret the soft Jura pastures; no splintered heaps of
ruin break the fair ranks of her forests; no pale, defiled, or furious
rivers rend their rude and changeful ways among her rocks. Patiently,
eddy by eddy, the clear green streams wind along their well-known beds;
and under the dark quietness of the undisturbed pines, there spring up,
year by year, such company of joyful flowers as I know not the like of
among all the blessings of the earth. It was Spring time, too; and all
were coming forth in clusters crowded for very love; there was room
enough for all, but they crushed their leaves into all manner of strange
shapes only to be nearer each other. There was the wood anemone, star
after star, closing every now and then into nebulæ: and there was the
oxalis, troop by troop like virginal processions of the Mois de Marie,
the dark vertical clefts in the limestone choked up with them as with
heavy snow, and touched with ivy on the edges--ivy as light and lovely
as the vine; and ever and anon, a blue gush of violets, and cowslip
bells in sunny places; and in the more open ground, the vetch, and
comfrey, and mezereon, and the small sapphire buds of the Polygala
Alpina, and the wild strawberry, just a blossom or two, all showered
amidst the golden softness of deep, warm, amber-colored moss. I came out
presently on the edge of the ravine; the solemn murmur of its waters
rose suddenly from beneath, mixed with the singing of the thrushes among
the pine boughs; and, on the opposite side of the valley, walled all
along as it was by grey cliffs of limestone, there was a hawk sailing
slowly off their brow, touching them nearly with his wings, and with the
shadows of the pines flickering upon his plumage from above; but with a
fall of a hundred fathoms under his breast, and the curling pools of the
green river gliding and glittering dizzily beneath him, their foam
globes moving with him as he flew. It would be difficult to conceive a
scene less dependent upon any other interest than that of its own
secluded and serious beauty; but the writer well remembers the sudden
blankness and chill which were cast upon it when he endeavored, in order
more strictly to arrive at the sources of its impressiveness, to imagine
it, for a moment, a scene in some aboriginal forest of the New
Continent. The flowers in an instant lost their light, the river its
music[15]; the hills became oppressively desolate; a heaviness in the
boughs of the darkened forest showed how much of their former power had
been dependent upon a life which was not theirs, how much of the glory
of the imperishable, or continually renewed, creation is reflected from
things more precious in their memories than it, in its renewing. Those
ever springing flowers and ever flowing streams had been dyed by the
deep colors of human endurance, valor, and virtue; and the crests of the
sable hills that rose against the evening sky received a deeper worship,
because their far shadows fell eastward over the iron wall of Joux and
the four-square keep of Granson.

II. It is as the centralisation and protectress of this sacred
influence, that Architecture is to be regarded by us with the most
serious thought. We may live without her, and worship without her, but
we cannot remember without her. How cold is all history how lifeless all
imagery, compared to that which the living nation writes, and the
uncorrupted marble bears! how many pages of doubtful record might we not
often spare, for a few stones left one upon another! The ambition of the
old Babel builders was well directed for this world: there are but two
strong conquerors of the forgetfulness of men, Poetry and Architecture;
and the latter in some sort includes the former, and is mightier in its
reality; it is well to have, not only what men have thought and felt,
but what their hands have handled, and their strength wrought, and their
eyes beheld, all the days of their life. The age of Homer is surrounded
with darkness, his very personality with doubt. Not so that of Pericles:
and the day is coming when we shall confess, that we have learned more
of Greece out of the crumbled fragments of her sculpture than even from
her sweet singers or soldier historians. And if indeed there be any
profit in our knowledge of the past, or any joy in the thought of being
remembered hereafter, which can give strength to present exertion, or
patience to present endurance, there are two duties respecting national
architecture whose importance it is impossible to overrate; the first,
to render the architecture of the day historical; and, the second, to
preserve, as the most precious of inheritances, that of past ages.

III. It is in the first of these two directions that Memory may truly be
said to be the Sixth Lamp of Architecture; for it is in becoming
memorial or monumental that a true perfection is attained by civil and
domestic buildings; and this partly as they are, with such a view, built
in a more stable manner, and partly as their decorations are
consequently animated by a metaphorical or historical meaning.

As regards domestic buildings, there must always be a certain limitation
to views of this kind in the power, as well as in the hearts, of men;
still I cannot but think it an evil sign of a people when their houses
are built to last for one generation only. There is a sanctity in a good
man's house which cannot be renewed in every tenement that rises on its
ruins: and I believe that good men would generally feel this; and that
having spent their lives happily and honorably, they would be grieved at
the close of them to think that the place of their earthly abode, which
had seen, and seemed almost to sympathise in all their honor, their
gladness, or their suffering,--that this, with all the record it bare of
them, and all of material things that they had loved and ruled over, and
set the stamp of themselves upon--was to be swept away, as soon as there
was room made for them in the grave; that no respect was to be shown to
it, no affection felt for it, no good to be drawn from it by their
children; that though there was a monument in the church, there was no
warm monument in the heart and house to them; that all that they ever
treasured was despised, and the places that had sheltered and comforted
them were dragged down to the dust. I say that a good man would fear
this; and that, far more, a good son, a noble descendant, would fear
doing it to his father's house. I say that if men lived like men indeed,
their houses would be temples--temples which we should hardly dare to
injure, and in which it would make us holy to be permitted to live; and
there must be a strange dissolution of natural affection, a strange
unthankfulness for all that homes have given and parents taught, a
strange consciousness that we have been unfaithful to our fathers'
honor, or that our own lives are not such as would make our dwellings
sacred to our children, when each man would fain build to himself, and
build for the little revolution of his own life only. And I look upon
those pitiful concretions of lime and clay which spring up in mildewed
forwardness out of the kneaded fields about our capital--upon those
thin, tottering, foundationless shells of splintered wood and imitated
stone--upon those gloomy rows of formalised minuteness, alike without
difference and without fellowship, as solitary as similar--not merely
with the careless disgust of an offended eye, not merely with sorrow for
a desecrated landscape, but with a painful foreboding that the roots of
our national greatness must be deeply cankered when they are thus
loosely struck in their native ground; that those comfortless and
unhonored dwellings are the signs of a great and spreading spirit of
popular discontent; that they mark the time when every man's aim is to
be in some more elevated sphere than his natural one, and every man's
past life is his habitual scorn; when men build in the hope of leaving
the places they have built, and live in the hope of forgetting the years
that they have lived; when the comfort, the peace, the religion of home
have ceased to be felt; and the crowded tenements of a struggling and
restless population differ only from the tents of the Arab or the Gipsy
by their less healthy openness to the air of heaven, and less happy
choice of their spot of earth; by their sacrifice of liberty without the
gain of rest, and of stability without the luxury of change.

IV. This is no slight, no consequenceless evil: it is ominous,
infectious, and fecund of other fault and misfortune. When men do not
love their hearths, nor reverence their thresholds, it is a sign that
they have dishonored both, and that they have never acknowledged the
true universality of that Christian worship which was indeed to
supersede the idolatry, but not the piety, of the pagan. Our God is a
household God, as well as a heavenly one; He has an altar in every man's
dwelling; let men look to it when they rend it lightly and pour out its
ashes. It is not a question of mere ocular delight, it is no question of
intellectual pride, or of cultivated and critical fancy, how, and with
what aspect of durability and of completeness, the domestic buildings
of a nation shall be raised. It is one of those moral duties, not with
more impunity to be neglected because the perception of them depends on
a finely toned and balanced conscientiousness, to build our dwellings
with care, and patience, and fondness, and diligent completion, and with
a view to their duration at least for such a period as, in the ordinary
course of national revolutions, might be supposed likely to extend to
the entire alteration of the direction of local interests. This at the
least; but it would be better if, in every possible instance, men built
their own houses on a scale commensurate rather with their condition at
the commencement, than their attainments at the termination, of their
worldly career; and built them to stand as long as human work at its
strongest can be hoped to stand; recording to their children what they
have been, and from what, if so it had been permitted them, they had
risen. And when houses are thus built, we may have that true domestic
architecture, the beginning of all other, which does not disdain to
treat with respect and thoughtfulness the small habitation as well as
the large, and which invests with the dignity of contented manhood the
narrowness of worldly circumstance.

V. I look to this spirit of honorable, proud, peaceful self-possession,
this abiding wisdom of contented life, as probably one of the chief
sources of great intellectual power in all ages, and beyond dispute as
the very primal source of the great architecture of old Italy and
France. To this day, the interest of their fairest cities depends, not
on the isolated richness of palaces, but on the cherished and exquisite
decoration of even the smallest tenements of their proud periods. The
most elaborate piece of architecture in Venice is a small house at the
head of the Grand Canal, consisting of a ground floor with two stories
above, three windows in the first, and two in the second. Many of the
most exquisite buildings are on the narrower canals, and of no larger
dimensions. One of the most interesting pieces of fifteenth century
architecture in North Italy, is a small house in a back street, behind
the market-place of Vicenza; it bears date 1481, and the motto, _Il.
n'est. rose. sans. épine_; it has also only a ground floor and two
stories, with three windows in each, separated by rich flower-work, and
with balconies, supported, the central one by an eagle with open wings,
the lateral ones by winged griffins standing on cornucopiæ. The idea
that a house must be large in order to be well built, is altogether of
modern growth, and is parallel with the idea, that no picture can be
historical, except of a size admitting figures larger than life.

VI. I would have, then, our ordinary dwelling-houses built to last, and
built to be lovely; as rich and full of pleasantness as may be, within
and without; with what degree of likeness to each other in style and
manner, I will say presently, under another head; but, at all events,
with such differences as might suit and express each man's character and
occupation, and partly his history. This right over the house, I
conceive, belongs to its first builder, and is to be respected by his
children; and it would be well that blank stones should be left in
places, to be inscribed with a summary of his life and of its
experience, raising thus the habitation into a kind of monument, and
developing, into more systematic instructiveness, that good custom which
was of old universal, and which still remains among some of the Swiss
and Germans, of acknowledging the grace of God's permission to build and
possess a quiet resting-place, in such sweet words as may well close our
speaking of these things. I have taken them from the front of a cottage
lately built among the green pastures which descend from the village of
Grindelwald to the lower glacier:--

  "Mit herzlichem Vertrauen
  Hat Johannes Mooter und Maria Rubi
  Dieses Haus bauen lassen.
  Der liebe Gott woll uns bewahren
  Vor allem Unglück und Gefahren,
  Und es in Segen lassen stehn
  Auf der Reise durch diese Jammerzeit
  Nach dem himmlischen Paradiese,
  Wo alle Frommen wohnen,
  Da wird Gott sie belohnen
  Mit der Friedenskrone
      Zu alle Ewigkeit."

VII. In public buildings the historical purpose should be still more
definite. It is one of the advantages of Gothic architecture,--I use the
word Gothic in the most extended sense as broadly opposed to
classical,--that it admits of a richness of record altogether unlimited.
Its minute and multitudinous sculptural decorations afford means of
expressing, either symbolically or literally, all that need be known of
national feeling or achievement. More decoration will, indeed, be
usually required than can take so elevated a character; and much, even
in the most thoughtful periods, has been left to the freedom of fancy,
or suffered to consist of mere repetitions of some national bearing or
symbol. It is, however, generally unwise, even in mere surface ornament,
to surrender the power and privilege of variety which the spirit of
Gothic architecture admits; much more in important features--capitals of
columns or bosses, and string-courses, as of course in all confessed
bas-reliefs. Better the rudest work that tells a story or records a
fact, than the richest without meaning. There should not be a single
ornament put upon great civic buildings, without some intellectual
intention. Actual representation of history has in modern times been
checked by a difficulty, mean indeed, but steadfast: that of
unmanageable costume; nevertheless, by a sufficiently bold imaginative
treatment, and frank use of symbols, all such obstacles may be
vanquished; not perhaps in the degree necessary to produce sculpture in
itself satisfactory, but at all events so as to enable it to become a
grand and expressive element of architectural composition. Take, for
example, the management of the capitals of the ducal palace at Venice.
History, as such, was indeed entrusted to the painters of its interior,
but every capital of its arcades was filled with meaning. The large one,
the corner stone of the whole, next the entrance, was devoted to the
symbolisation of Abstract Justice; above it is a sculpture of the
Judgment of Solomon, remarkable for a beautiful subjection in its
treatment to its decorative purpose. The figures, if the subject had
been entirely composed of them, would have awkwardly interrupted the
line of the angle, and diminished its apparent strength; and therefore
in the midst of them, entirely without relation to them, and indeed
actually between the executioner and interceding mother, there rises the
ribbed trunk of a massy tree, which supports and continues the shaft of
the angle, and whose leaves above overshadow and enrich the whole. The
capital below bears among its leafage a throned figure of Justice,
Trajan doing justice to the widow, Aristotle "che die legge," and one or
two other subjects now unintelligible from decay. The capitals next in
order represent the virtues and vices in succession, as preservative or
destructive of national peace and power, concluding with Faith, with the
inscription "Fides optima in Deo est." A figure is seen on the opposite
side of the capital, worshipping the sun. After these, one or two
capitals are fancifully decorated with birds (Plate V.), and then come a
series representing, first the various fruits, then the national
costumes, and then the animals of the various countries subject to
Venetian rule.

VIII. Now, not to speak of any more important public building, let us
imagine our own India House adorned in this way, by historical or
symbolical sculpture: massively built in the first place; then chased
with bas-reliefs of our Indian battles, and fretted with carvings of
Oriental foliage, or inlaid with Oriental stones; and the more important
members of its decoration composed of groups of Indian life and
landscape, and prominently expressing the phantasms of Hindoo worship in
their subjection to the Cross. Would not one such work be better than a
thousand histories? If, however, we have not the invention necessary for
such efforts, or if, which is probably one of the most noble excuses we
can offer for our deficiency in such matters, we have less pleasure in
talking about ourselves, even in marble, than the Continental nations,
at least we have no excuse for any want of care in the points which
insure the building's endurance. And as this question is one of great
interest in its relations to the choice of various modes of decoration,
it will be necessary to enter into it at some length.

IX. The benevolent regards and purposes of men in masses seldom can be
supposed to extend beyond their own generation. They may look to
posterity as an audience, may hope for its attention, and labor for its
praise: they may trust to its recognition of unacknowledged merit, and
demand its justice for contemporary wrong. But all this is mere
selfishness, and does not involve the slightest regard to, or
consideration of, the interest of those by whose numbers we would fain
swell the circle of our flatterers, and by whose authority we would
gladly support our presently disputed claims. The idea of self-denial
for the sake of posterity, of practising present economy for the sake of
debtors yet unborn, of planting forests that our descendants may live
under their shade, or of raising cities for future nations to inhabit,
never, I suppose, efficiently takes place among publicly recognised
motives of exertion. Yet these are not the less our duties; nor is our
part fitly sustained upon the earth, unless the range of our intended
and deliberate usefulness include not only the companions, but the
successors, of our pilgrimage. God has lent us the earth for our life;
it is a great entail. It belongs as much to those who are to come after
us, and whose names are already written in the book of creation, as to
us; and we have no right, by anything that we do or neglect, to involve
them in unnecessary penalties, or deprive them of benefits which it was
in our power to bequeath. And this the more, because it is one of the
appointed conditions of the labor of men that, in proportion to the time
between the seed-sowing and the harvest, is the fulness of the fruit;
and that generally, therefore, the farther off we place our aim, and the
less we desire to be ourselves the witnesses of what we have labored
for, the more wide and rich will be the measure of our success. Men
cannot benefit those that are with them as they can benefit those who
come after them; and of all the pulpits from which human voice is ever
sent forth, there is none from which it reaches so far as from the
grave.

X. Nor is there, indeed, any present loss, in such respect, for
futurity. Every human action gains in honor, in grace, in all true
magnificence, by its regard to things that are to come. It is the far
sight, the quiet and confident patience, that, above all other
attributes, separate man from man, and near him to his Maker; and there
is no action nor art, whose majesty we may not measure by this test.
Therefore, when we build, let us think that we build for ever. Let it
not be for present delight, nor for present use alone; let it be such
work as our descendants will thank us for, and let us think, as we lay
stone on stone, that a time is to come when those stones will be held
sacred because our hands have touched them, and that men will say as
they look upon the labor and wrought substance of them, "See! this our
fathers did for us." For, indeed, the greatest glory of a building is
not in its stones, or in its gold. Its glory is in its Age, and in that
deep sense of voicefulness, of stern watching, of mysterious sympathy,
nay, even of approval or condemnation, which we feel in walls that have
long been washed by the passing waves of humanity. It is in their
lasting witness against men, in their quiet contrast with the
transitional character of all things, in the strength which, through the
lapse of seasons and times, and the decline and birth of dynasties, and
the changing of the face of the earth, and of the limits of the sea,
maintains its sculptured shapeliness for a time insuperable, connects
forgotten and following ages with each other, and half constitutes the
identity, as it concentrates the sympathy, of nations; it is in that
golden stain of time, that we are to look for the real light, and color,
and preciousness of architecture; and it is not until a building has
assumed this character, till it has been entrusted with the fame, and
hallowed by the deeds of men, till its walls have been witnesses of
suffering, and its pillars rise out of the shadows of death, that its
existence, more lasting as it is than that of the natural objects of the
world around it, can be gifted with even so much as these possess of
language and of life.

XI. For that period, then, we must build; not, indeed, refusing to
ourselves the delight of present completion, nor hesitating to follow
such portions of character as may depend upon delicacy of execution to
the highest perfection of which they are capable, even although we may
know that in the course of years such details must perish; but taking
care that for work of this kind we sacrifice no enduring quality, and
that the building shall not depend for its impressiveness upon anything
that is perishable. This would, indeed, be the law of good composition
under any circumstances, the arrangement of the larger masses being
always a matter of greater importance than the treatment of the smaller;
but in architecture there is much in that very treatment which is
skilful or otherwise in proportion to its just regard to the probable
effects of time: and (which is still more to be considered) there is a
beauty in those effects themselves, which nothing else can replace, and
which it is our wisdom to consult and to desire. For though, hitherto,
we have been speaking of the sentiment of age only, there is an actual
beauty in the marks of it, such and so great as to have become not
unfrequently the subject of especial choice among certain schools of
art, and to have impressed upon those schools the character usually and
loosely expressed by the term "picturesque." It is of some importance to
our present purpose to determine the true meaning of this expression, as
it is now generally used; for there is a principle to be developed from
that use which, while it has occultly been the ground of much that is
true and just in our judgment of art, has never been so far understood
as to become definitely serviceable. Probably no word in the language
(exclusive of theological expressions), has been the subject of so
frequent or so prolonged dispute; yet none remained more vague in their
acceptance, and it seems to me to be a matter of no small interest to
investigate the essence of that idea which all feel, and (to appearance)
with respect to similar things, and yet which every attempt to define
has, as I believe, ended either in mere enumeration of the effects and
objects to which the term has been attached, or else in attempts at
abstraction more palpably nugatory than any which have disgraced
metaphysical investigation on other subjects. A recent critic on Art,
for instance, has gravely advanced the theory that the essence of the
picturesque consists in the expression of "universal decay." It would be
curious to see the result of an attempt to illustrate this idea of the
picturesque, in a painting of dead flowers and decayed fruit, and
equally curious to trace the steps of any reasoning which, on such a
theory, should account for the picturesqueness of an ass colt as opposed
to a horse foal. But there is much excuse for even the most utter
failure in reasonings of this kind, since the subject is, indeed, one
of the most obscure of all that may legitimately be submitted to human
reason; and the idea is itself so varied in the minds of different men,
according to their subjects of study, that no definition can be expected
to embrace more than a certain number of its infinitely multiplied
forms.

XII. That peculiar character, however, which separates the picturesque
from the characters of subject belonging to the higher walks of art (and
this is all that is necessary for our present purpose to define), may be
shortly and decisively expressed. Picturesqueness, in this sense, is
_Parasitical Sublimity_. Of course all sublimity, as well as all beauty,
is, in the simple etymological sense, picturesque, that is to say, fit
to become the subject of a picture; and all sublimity is, even in the
peculiar sense which I am endeavoring to develope, picturesque, as
opposed to beauty; that is to say, there is more picturesqueness in the
subject of Michael Angelo than of Perugino, in proportion to the
prevalence of the sublime element over the beautiful. But that
character, of which the extreme pursuit is generally admitted to be
degrading to art, is _parasitical_ sublimity; _i.e._, a sublimity
dependent on the accidents, or on the least essential characters, of the
objects to which it belongs; and the picturesque is _developed
distinctively exactly in proportion to the distance from the centre of
thought of those points of character in which the sublimity is found_.
Two ideas, therefore, are essential to picturesqueness,--the first, that
of sublimity (for pure beauty is not picturesque at all, and becomes so
only as the sublime element mixes with it), and the second, the
subordinate or parasitical position of that sublimity. Of course,
therefore, whatever characters of line or shade or expression are
productive of sublimity, will become productive of picturesqueness; what
these characters are I shall endeavor hereafter to show at length; but,
among those which are generally acknowledged, I may name angular and
broken lines, vigorous oppositions of light and shadow, and grave, deep,
or boldly contrasted color; and all these are in a still higher degree
effective, when, by resemblance or association, they remind us of
objects on which a true and essential sublimity exists, as of rocks or
mountains, or stormy clouds or waves. Now if these characters, or any
others of a higher and more abstract sublimity, be found in the very
heart and substance of what we contemplate, as the sublimity of Michael
Angelo depends on the expression of mental character in his figures far
more than even on the noble lines of their arrangement, the art which
represents such characters cannot be properly called picturesque: but,
if they be found in the accidental or external qualities, the
distinctive picturesque will be the result.

XIII. Thus, in the treatment of the features of the human face by
Francia or Angelico, the shadows are employed only to make the contours
of the features thoroughly felt; and to those features themselves the
mind of the observer is exclusively directed (that is to say, to the
essential characters of the thing represented). All power and all
sublimity rest on these; the shadows are used only for the sake of the
features. On the contrary, by Rembrandt, Salvator, or Caravaggio, the
features are used _for the sake of the shadows_; and the attention is
directed, and the power of the painter addressed to characters of
accidental light and shade cast across or around those features. In the
case of Rembrandt there is often an essential sublimity in invention and
expression besides, and always a high degree of it in the light and
shade itself; but it is for the most part parasitical or engrafted
sublimity as regards the subject of the painting, and, just so far,
picturesque.

XIV. Again, in the management of the sculptures of the Parthenon, shadow
is frequently employed as a dark field on which the forms are drawn.
This is visibly the case in the metopes, and must have been nearly as
much so in the pediment. But the use of that shadow is entirely to show
the confines of the figures; and it is to _their lines_, and not to the
shapes of the shadows behind them, that the art and the eye are
addressed. The figures themselves are conceived as much as possible in
full light, aided by bright reflections; they are drawn exactly as, on
vases, white figures on a dark ground: and the sculptors have dispensed
with, or even struggled to avoid, all shadows which were not absolutely
necessary to the explaining of the form. On the contrary, in Gothic
sculpture, the shadow becomes itself a subject of thought. It is
considered as a dark color, to be arranged in certain agreeable masses;
the figures are very frequently made even subordinate to the placing of
its divisions: and their costume is enriched at the expense of the forms
underneath, in order to increase the complexity and variety of the
points of shade. There are thus, both in sculpture and painting, two, in
some sort, opposite schools, of which the one follows for its subject
the essential forms of things, and the other the accidental lights and
shades upon them. There are various degrees of their contrariety: middle
steps, as in the works of Correggio, and all degrees of nobility and of
degradation in the several manners: but the one is always recognised as
the pure, and the other as the picturesque school. Portions of
picturesque treatment will be found in Greek work, and of pure and
unpicturesque in Gothic; and in both there are countless instances, as
pre-eminently in the works of Michael Angelo, in which shadows become
valuable as media of expression, and therefore take rank among essential
characteristics. Into these multitudinous distinctions and exceptions I
cannot now enter, desiring only to prove the broad applicability of the
general definition.

XV. Again, the distinction will be found to exist, not only between
forms and shades as subjects of choice, but between essential and
inessential forms. One of the chief distinctions between the dramatic
and picturesque schools of sculpture is found in the treatment of the
hair. By the artists of the time of Pericles it was considered as an
excrescence,[16] indicated by few and rude lines, and subordinated in
every particular to the principality of the features and person. How
completely this was an artistical, not a national idea, it is
unnecessary to prove. We need but remember the employment of the
Lacedæmonians, reported by the Persian spy on the evening before the
battle of Thermopylæ, or glance at any Homeric description of ideal
form, to see how purely _sculpturesque_ was the law which reduced the
markings of the hair, lest, under the necessary disadvantages of
material, they should interfere with the distinctness of the personal
forms. On the contrary, in later sculpture, the hair receives almost the
principal care of the workman; and while the features and limbs are
clumsily and bluntly executed, the hair is curled and twisted, cut into
bold and shadowy projections, and arranged in masses elaborately
ornamental: there is true sublimity in the lines and the chiaroscuro of
these masses, but it is, as regards the creature represented,
parasitical, and therefore picturesque. In the same sense we may
understand the application of the term to modern animal painting,
distinguished as it has been by peculiar attention to the colors,
lustre, and texture of skin; nor is it in art alone that the definition
will hold. In animals themselves, when their sublimity depends upon
their muscular forms or motions, or necessary and principal attributes,
as perhaps more than all others in the horse, we do not call them
picturesque, but consider them as peculiarly fit to be associated with
pure historical subject. Exactly in proportion as their character of
sublimity passes into excrescences;--into mane and beard as in the lion,
into horns as in the stag, into shaggy hide as in the instance above
given of the ass colt, into variegation as in the zebra, or into
plumage,--they become picturesque, and are so in art exactly in
proportion to the prominence of these excrescential characters. It may
often be most expedient that they should be prominent; often there is in
them the highest degree of majesty, as in those of the leopard and boar;
and in the hands of men like Tintoret and Rubens, such attributes become
means of deepening the very highest and most ideal impressions. But the
picturesque direction of their thoughts is always distinctly
recognizable, as clinging to the surface, to the less essential
character, and as developing out of this a sublimity different from that
of the creature itself; a sublimity which is, in a sort, common to all
the objects of creation, and the same in its constituent elements,
whether it be sought in the clefts and folds of shaggy hair, or in the
chasms and rents of rocks, or in the hanging of thickets or hill sides,
or in the alternations of gaiety and gloom in the variegation of the
shell, the plume, or the cloud.

XVI. Now, to return to our immediate subject, it so happens that, in
architecture, the superinduced and accidental beauty is most commonly
inconsistent with the preservation of original character, and the
picturesque is therefore sought in ruin, and supposed to consist in
decay. Whereas, even when so sought, it consists in the mere sublimity
of the rents, or fractures, or stains, or vegetation, which assimilate
the architecture with the work of Nature, and bestow upon it those
circumstances of color and form which are universally beloved by the eye
of man. So far as this is done, to the extinction of the true characters
of the architecture, it is picturesque, and the artist who looks to the
stem of the ivy instead of the shaft of the pillar, is carrying out in
more daring freedom the debased sculptor's choice of the hair instead of
the countenance. But so far as it can be rendered consistent with the
inherent character, the picturesque or extraneous sublimity of
architecture has just this of nobler function in it than that of any
other object whatsoever, that it is an exponent of age, of that in
which, as has been said, the greatest glory of a building consists; and,
therefore, the external signs of this glory, having power and purpose
greater than any belonging to their mere sensible beauty, may be
considered as taking rank among pure and essential character; so
essential to my mind, that I think a building cannot be considered as in
its prime until four or five centuries have passed over it; and that the
entire choice and arrangement of its details should have reference to
their appearance after that period, so that none should be admitted
which would suffer material injury either by the weather-staining, or
the mechanical degradation which the lapse of such a period would
necessitate.

XVII. It is not my purpose to enter into any of the questions which the
application of this principle involves. They are of too great interest
and complexity to be even touched upon within my present limits, but
this is broadly to be noticed, that those styles of architecture which
are picturesque in the sense above explained with respect to sculpture,
that is to say, whose decoration depends on the arrangement of points
of shade rather than on purity of outline, do not suffer, but commonly
gain in richness of effect when their details are partly worn away;
hence such styles, pre-eminently that of French Gothic, should always be
adopted when the materials to be employed are liable to degradation, as
brick, sandstone, or soft limestone; and styles in any degree dependent
on purity of line, as the Italian Gothic, must be practised altogether
in hard and undecomposing materials, granite serpentine, or crystalline
marbles. There can be no doubt that the nature of the accessible
materials influenced the formation of both styles; and it should still
more authoritatively determine our choice of either.

XVIII. It does not belong to my present plan to consider at length the
second head of duty of which I have above spoken; the preservation of
the architecture we possess: but a few words may be forgiven, as
especially necessary in modern times. Neither by the public, nor by
those who have the care of public monuments, is the true meaning of the
word _restoration_ understood. It means the most total destruction which
a building can suffer: a destruction out of which no remnants can be
gathered; a destruction accompanied with false description of the thing
destroyed. Do not let us deceive ourselves in this important matter; it
is _impossible_, as impossible as to raise the dead, to restore anything
that has ever been great or beautiful in architecture. That which I have
above insisted upon as the life of the whole, that spirit which is given
only by the hand and eye of the workman, never can be recalled. Another
spirit may be given by another time, and it is then a new building; but
the spirit of the dead workman cannot be summoned up, and commanded to
direct other hands, and other thoughts. And as for direct and simple
copying, it is palpably impossible. What copying can there be of
surfaces that have been worn half an inch down? The whole finish of the
work was in the half inch that is gone; if you attempt to restore that
finish, you do it conjecturally; if you copy what is left, granting
fidelity to be possible (and what care, or watchfulness, or cost can
secure it?), how is the new work better than the old? There was yet in
the old _some_ life, some mysterious suggestion of what it had been,
and of what it had lost; some sweetness in the gentle lines which rain
and sun had wrought. There can be none in the brute hardness of the new
carving. Look at the animals which I have given in Plate 14, as an
instance of living work, and suppose the markings of the scales and hair
once worn away, or the wrinkles of the brows, and who shall ever restore
them? The first step to restoration (I have seen it, and that again and
again, seen it on the Baptistery of Pisa, seen it on the Casa d' Oro at
Venice, seen it on the Cathedral of Lisieux), is to dash the old work to
pieces; the second is usually to put up the cheapest and basest
imitation which can escape detection, but in all cases, however careful,
and however labored, an imitation still, a cold model of such parts as
_can_ be modelled, with conjectural supplements; and my experience has
as yet furnished me with only one instance, that of the Palais de
Justice at Rouen, in which even this, the utmost degree of fidelity
which is possible, has been attained or even attempted.

XIX. Do not let us talk then of restoration. The thing is a Lie from
beginning to end. You may make a model of a building as you may of a
corpse, and your model may have the shell of the old walls within it as
your cast might have the skeleton, with what advantage I neither see nor
care; but the old building is destroyed, and that more totally and
mercilessly than if it had sunk into a heap of dust, or melted into a
mass of clay: more has been gleaned out of desolated Nineveh than ever
will be out of re-built Milan. But, it is said, there may come a
necessity for restoration! Granted. Look the necessity full in the face,
and understand it on its own terms. It is a necessity for destruction.
Accept it as such, pull the building down, throw its stones into
neglected corners, make ballast of them, or mortar, if you will; but do
it honestly, and do not set up a Lie in their place. And look that
necessity in the face before it comes, and you may prevent it. The
principle of modern times (a principle which I believe, at least in
France, to be _systematically acted on by the masons_, in order to find
themselves work, as the abbey of St. Ouen was pulled down by the
magistrates of the town by way of giving work to some vagrants,) is to
neglect buildings first, and restore them afterwards. Take proper care
of your monuments, and you will not need to restore them. A few sheets
of lead put in time upon the roof, a few dead leaves and sticks swept in
time out of a water-course, will save both roof and walls from ruin.
Watch an old building with an anxious care; guard it as best you may,
and at _any_ cost from every influence of dilapidation. Count its stones
as you would jewels of a crown; set watches about it as if at the gates
of a besieged city; bind it together with iron where it loosens; stay it
with timber where it declines; do not care about the unsightliness of
the aid; better a crutch than a lost limb; and do this tenderly, and
reverently, and continually, and many a generation will still be born
and pass away beneath its shadow. Its evil day must come at last; but
let it come declaredly and openly, and let no dishonoring and false
substitute deprive it of the funeral offices of memory.

XX. Of more wanton or ignorant ravage it is vain to speak; my words will
not reach those who commit them, and yet, be it heard or not, I must not
leave the truth unstated, that it is again no question of expediency or
feeling whether we shall preserve the buildings of past times or not.
_We have no right whatever to touch them._ They are not ours. They
belong partly to those who built them, and partly to all the generations
of mankind who are to follow us. The dead have still their right in
them: that which they labored for, the praise of achievement or the
expression of religious feeling, or whatsoever else it might be which in
those buildings they intended to be permanent, we have no right to
obliterate. What we have ourselves built, we are at liberty to throw
down; but what other men gave their strength, and wealth, and life to
accomplish, their right over does not pass away with their death; still
less is the right to the use of what they have left vested in us only.
It belongs to all their successors. It may hereafter be a subject of
sorrow, or a cause of injury, to millions, that we have consulted our
present convenience by casting down such buildings as we choose to
dispense with. That sorrow, that loss we have no right to inflict. Did
the cathedral of Avranches belong to the mob who destroyed it, any more
than it did to us, who walk in sorrow to and fro over its foundation?
Neither does any building whatever belong to those mobs who do violence
to it. For a mob it is, and must be always; it matters not whether
enraged, or in deliberate folly; whether countless, or sitting in
committees; the people who destroy anything causelessly are a mob, and
Architecture is always destroyed causelessly. A fair building is
necessarily worth the ground it stands upon, and will be so until
central Africa and America shall have become as populous as Middlesex;
nor is any cause whatever valid as a ground for its destruction. If ever
valid, certainly not now when the place both of the past and future is
too much usurped in our minds by the restless and discontented present.
The very quietness of nature is gradually withdrawn from us; thousands
who once in their necessarily prolonged travel were subjected to an
influence, from the silent sky and slumbering fields, more effectual
than known or confessed, now bear with them even there the ceaseless
fever of their life; and along the iron veins that traverse the frame of
our country, beat and flow the fiery pulses of its exertions, hotter and
faster every hour. All vitality is concentrated through those throbbing
arteries into the central cities; the country is passed over like a
green sea by narrow bridges, and we are thrown back in continually
closer crowds upon the city gates. The only influence which can in any
wise _there_ take the place of that of the woods and fields, is the
power of ancient Architecture. Do not part with it for the sake of the
formal square, or of the fenced and planted walk, nor of the goodly
street nor opened quay. The pride of a city is not in these. Leave them
to the crowd; but remember that there will surely be some within the
circuit of the disquieted walls who would ask for some other spots than
these wherein to walk; for some other forms to meet their sight
familiarly: like him who sat so often where the sun struck from the
west, to watch the lines of the dome of Florence drawn on the deep sky,
or like those, his Hosts, who could bear daily to behold, from their
palace chambers, the places where their fathers lay at rest, at the
meeting of the dark streets of Verona.




CHAPTER VII.

THE LAMP OF OBEDIENCE.


I. It has been my endeavor to show in the preceding pages how every form
of noble architecture is in some sort the embodiment of the Polity,
Life, History, and Religious Faith of nations. Once or twice in doing
this, I have named a principle to which I would now assign a definite
place among those which direct that embodiment; the last place, not only
as that to which its own humility would incline, but rather as belonging
to it in the aspect of the crowning grace of all the rest; that
principle, I mean, to which Polity owes its stability, Life its
happiness, Faith its acceptance, Creation its continuance,--Obedience.

Nor is it the least among the sources of more serious satisfaction which
I have found in the pursuit of a subject that at first appeared to bear
but slightly on the grave interests of mankind, that the conditions of
material perfection which it leads me in conclusion to consider, furnish
a strange proof how false is the conception, how frantic the pursuit, of
that treacherous phantom which men call Liberty; most treacherous,
indeed, of all phantoms; for the feeblest ray of reason might surely
show us, that not only its attainment, but its being, was impossible.
There is no such thing in the universe. There can never be. The stars
have it not; the earth has it not; the sea has it not; and we men have
the mockery and semblance of it only for our heaviest punishment.

In one of the noblest poems[17] for its imagery and its music belonging
to the recent school of our literature, the writer has sought in the
aspect of inanimate nature the expression of that Liberty which, having
once loved, he had seen among men in its true dyes of darkness. But with
what strange fallacy of interpretation! since in one noble line of his
invocation he has contradicted the assumptions of the rest, and
acknowledged the presence of a subjection, surely not less severe
because eternal? How could he otherwise? since if there be any one
principle more widely than another confessed by every utterance, or more
sternly than another imprinted on every atom, of the visible creation,
that principle is not Liberty, but Law.

II. The enthusiast would reply that by Liberty he meant the Law of
Liberty. Then why use the single and misunderstood word? If by liberty
you mean chastisement of the passions, discipline of the intellect,
subjection of the will; if you mean the fear of inflicting, the shame of
committing a wrong; if you mean respect for all who are in authority,
and consideration for all who are in dependence; veneration for the
good, mercy to the evil, sympathy with the weak; if you mean
watchfulness over all thoughts, temperance in all pleasures, and
perseverance in all toils; if you mean, in a word, that Service which is
defined in the liturgy of the English church to be perfect Freedom, why
do you name this by the same word by which the luxurious mean license,
and the reckless mean change; by which the rogue means rapine, and the
fool equality, by which the proud mean anarchy, and the malignant mean
violence? Call it by any name rather than this, but its best and truest
is, Obedience. Obedience is, indeed, founded on a kind of freedom, else
its would become mere subjugation, but that freedom is only granted that
obedience may be more perfect; and thus, while a measure of license is
necessary to exhibit the individual energies of things, the fairness and
pleasantness and perfection of them all consist in their Restraint.
Compare a river that has burst its banks with one that is bound by them,
and the clouds that are scattered over the face of the whole heaven with
those that are marshalled into ranks and orders by its winds. So that
though restraint, utter and unrelaxing, can never be comely, this is not
because it is in itself an evil, but only because, when too great, it
overpowers the nature of the thing restrained, and so counteracts the
other laws of which that nature is itself composed. And the balance
wherein consists the fairness of creation is between the laws of life
and being in the things governed and the laws of general sway to which
they are subjected; and the suspension or infringement of either kind of
law, or, literally, disorder, is equivalent to, and synonymous with,
disease; while the increase of both honor and beauty is habitually on
the side of restraint (or the action of superior law) rather than of
character (or the action of inherent law). The noblest word in the
catalogue of social virtue is "Loyalty," and the sweetest which men have
learned in the pastures of the wilderness is "Fold."

III. Nor is this all; but we may observe, that exactly in proportion to
the majesty of things in the scale of being, is the completeness of
their obedience to the laws that are set over them. Gravitation is less
quietly, less instantly obeyed by a grain of dust than it is by the sun
and moon; and the ocean falls and flows under influences which the lake
and river do not recognize. So also in estimating the dignity of any
action or occupation of men, there is perhaps no better test than the
question "are its laws strait?" For their severity will probably be
commensurate with the greatness of the numbers whose labor it
concentrates or whose interest it concerns.

This severity must be singular, therefore, in the case of that art,
above all others, whose productions are the most vast and the most
common; which requires for its practice the co-operation of bodies of
men, and for its perfection the perseverance of successive generations.
And taking into account also what we have before so often observed of
Architecture, her continual influence over the emotions of daily life,
and her realism, as opposed to the two sister arts which are in
comparison but the picturing of stories and of dreams, we might
beforehand expect that we should find her healthy state and action
dependent on far more severe laws than theirs; that the license which
they extend to the workings of individual mind would be withdrawn by
her; and that, in assertion of the relations which she holds with all
that is universally important to man, she would set forth, by her own
majestic subjection, some likeness of that on which man's social
happiness and power depend. We might, therefore, without the light of
experience, conclude, that Architecture never could flourish except when
it was subjected to a national law as strict and as minutely
authoritative as the laws which regulate religion, policy, and social
relations; nay, even more authoritative than these, because both capable
of more enforcement, as over more passive matter; and needing more
enforcement, as the purest type not of one law nor of another, but of
the common authority of all. But in this matter experience speaks more
loudly than reason. If there be any one condition which, in watching the
progress of architecture, we see distinct and general; if, amidst the
counter evidence of success attending opposite accidents of character
and circumstance, any one conclusion may be constantly and indisputably
drawn, it is this; that the architecture of a nation is great only when
it is as universal and as established as its language; and when
provincial differences of style are nothing more than so many dialects.
Other necessities are matters of doubt: nations have been alike
successful in their architecture in times of poverty and of wealth; in
times of war and of peace; in times of barbarism and of refinement;
under governments the most liberal or the most arbitrary; but this one
condition has been constant, this one requirement clear in all places
and at all times, that the work shall be that of a school, that no
individual caprice shall dispense with, or materially vary, accepted
types and customary decorations; and that from the cottage to the
palace, and from the chapel to the basilica, and from the garden fence
to the fortress wall, every member and feature of the architecture of
the nation shall be as commonly current, as frankly accepted, as its
language or its coin.

IV. A day never passes without our hearing our English architects called
upon to be original, and to invent a new style: about as sensible and
necessary an exhortation as to ask of a man who has never had rags
enough on his back to keep out cold, to invent a new mode of cutting a
coat. Give him a whole coat first, and let him concern himself about the
fashion of it afterwards. We want no new style of architecture. Who
wants a new style of painting or sculpture? But we want some style. It
is of marvellously little importance, if we have a code of laws and they
be good laws, whether they be new or old, foreign or native, Roman or
Saxon, or Norman or English laws. But it is of considerable importance
that we should have a code of laws of one kind or another, and that code
accepted and enforced from one side of the island to another, and not
one law made ground of judgment at York and another in Exeter. And in
like manner it does not matter one marble splinter whether we have an
old or new architecture, but it matters everything whether we have an
architecture truly so called or not; that is, whether an architecture
whose laws might be taught at our schools from Cornwall to
Northumberland, as we teach English spelling and English grammar, or an
architecture which is to be invented fresh every time we build a
workhouse or a parish school. There seems to me to be a wonderful
misunderstanding among the majority of architects at the present day as
to the very nature and meaning of Originality, and of all wherein it
consists. Originality in expression does not depend on invention of new
words; nor originality in poetry on invention of new measures; nor, in
painting, on invention of new colors, or new modes of using them. The
chords of music, the harmonies of color, the general principles of the
arrangement of sculptural masses, have been determined long ago, and, in
all probability, cannot be added to any more than they can be altered.
Granting that they may be, such additions or alterations are much more
the work of time and of multitudes than of individual inventors. We may
have one Van Eyck, who will be known as the introducer of a new style
once in ten centuries, but he himself will trace his invention to some
accidental bye-play or pursuit; and the use of that invention will
depend altogether on the popular necessities or instincts of the period.
Originality depends on nothing of the kind. A man who has the gift, will
take up any style that is going, the style of his day, and will work in
that, and be great in that, and make everything that he does in it look
as fresh as if every thought of it had just come down from heaven. I do
not say that he will not take liberties with his materials, or with his
rules: I do not say that strange changes will not sometimes be wrought
by his efforts, or his fancies, in both. But those changes will be
instructive, natural, facile, though sometimes marvellous; they will
never be sought after as things necessary to his dignity or to his
independence; and those liberties will be like the liberties that a
great speaker takes with the language, not a defiance of its rules for
the sake of singularity; but inevitable, uncalculated, and brilliant
consequences of an effort to express what the language, without such
infraction, could not. There may be times when, as I have above
described, the life of an art is manifested in its changes, and in its
refusal of ancient limitations: so there are in the life of an insect;
and there is great interest in the state of both the art and the insect
at those periods when, by their natural progress and constitutional
power, such changes are about to be wrought. But as that would be both
an uncomfortable and foolish caterpillar which, instead of being
contented with a caterpillar's life and feeding on caterpillar's food,
was always striving to turn itself into a chrysalis; and as that would
be an unhappy chrysalis which should lie awake at night and roll
restlessly in its cocoon, in efforts to turn itself prematurely into a
moth; so will that art be unhappy and unprosperous which, instead of
supporting itself on the food, and contenting itself with the customs
which have been enough for the support and guidance of other arts before
it and like it, is struggling and fretting under the natural limitations
of its existence, and striving to become something other than it is. And
though it is the nobility of the highest creatures to look forward to,
and partly to understand the changes which are appointed for them,
preparing for them beforehand; and if, as is usual with _appointed_
changes, they be into a higher state, even desiring them, and rejoicing
in the hope of them, yet it is the strength of every creature, be it
changeful or not, to rest for the time being, contented with the
conditions of its existence, and striving only to bring about the
changes which it desires, by fulfilling to the uttermost the duties for
which its present state is appointed and continued.

V. Neither originality, therefore, nor change, good though both may be,
and this is commonly a most merciful and enthusiastic supposition with
respect to either, are ever to be sought in themselves, or can ever be
healthily obtained by any struggle or rebellion against common laws. We
want neither the one nor the other. The forms of architecture already
known are good enough for us, and for far better than any of us: and it
will be time enough to think of changing them for better when we can use
them as they are. But there are some things which we not only want, but
cannot do without; and which all the struggling and raving in the world,
nay more, which all the real talent and resolution in England, will
never enable us to do without: and these are Obedience, Unity,
Fellowship, and Order. And all our schools of design, and committees of
tastes; all our academies and lectures, and journalisms, and essays; all
the sacrifices which we are beginning to make, all the truth which there
is in our English nature, all the power of our English will, and the
life of our English intellect, will in this matter be as useless as
efforts and emotions in a dream, unless we are contented to submit
architecture and all art, like other things, to English law.

VI. I say architecture and all art; for I believe architecture must be
the beginning of arts, and that the others must follow her in their time
and order; and I think the prosperity of our schools of painting and
sculpture, in which no one will deny the life, though many the health,
depends upon that of our architecture. I think that all will languish
until that takes the lead, and (this I do not _think_, but I proclaim,
as confidently as I would assert the necessity, for the safety of
society, of an understood and strongly administered legal government)
our architecture _will_ languish, and that in the very dust, until the
first principle of common sense be manfully obeyed, and an universal
system of form and workmanship be everywhere adopted and enforced. It
may be said that this is impossible. It may be so--I fear it is so: I
have nothing to do with the possibility or impossibility of it; I simply
know and assert the necessity of it. If it be impossible, English art is
impossible. Give it up at once. You are wasting time, and money, and
energy upon it, and though you exhaust centuries and treasuries, and
break hearts for it, you will never raise it above the merest
dilettanteism. Think not of it. It is a dangerous vanity, a mere gulph
in which genius after genius will be swallowed up, and it will not
close. And so it will continue to be, unless the one bold and broad step
be taken at the beginning. We shall not manufacture art out of pottery
and printed stuffs; we shall not reason out art by our philosophy; we
shall not stumble upon art by our experiments, not create it by our
fancies: I do not say that we can even build it out of brick and stone;
but there is a chance for us in these, and there is none else; and that
chance rests on the bare possibility of obtaining the consent, both of
architects and of the public, to choose a style, and to use it
universally.

VII. How surely its principles ought at first to be limited, we may
easily determine by the consideration of the necessary modes of teaching
any other branch of general knowledge. When we begin to teach children
writing, we force them to absolute copyism, and require absolute
accuracy in the formation of the letters; as they obtain command of the
received modes of literal expression, we cannot prevent their falling
into such variations as are consistent with their feeling, their
circumstances, or their characters. So, when a boy is first taught to
write Latin, an authority is required of him for every expression he
uses; as he becomes master of the language he may take a license, and
feel his right to do so without any authority, and yet write better
Latin than when he borrowed every separate expression. In the same way
our architects would have to be taught to write the accepted style. We
must first determine what buildings are to be considered Augustan in
their authority; their modes of construction and laws of proportion are
to be studied with the most penetrating care; then the different forms
and uses of their decorations are to be classed and catalogued, as a
German grammarian classes the powers of prepositions; and under this
absolute, irrefragable authority, we are to begin to work; admitting not
so much as an alteration in the depth of a cavetto, or the breadth of a
fillet. Then, when our sight is once accustomed to the grammatical forms
and arrangements, and our thoughts familiar with the expression of them
all; when we can speak this dead language naturally, and apply it to
whatever ideas we have to render, that is to say, to every practical
purpose of life; then, and not till then, a license might be permitted;
and individual authority allowed to change or to add to the received
forms, always within certain limits; the decorations, especially, might
be made subjects of variable fancy, and enriched with ideas either
original or taken from other schools. And thus in process of time and by
a great national movement, it might come to pass, that a new style
should arise, as language itself changes; we might perhaps come to speak
Italian instead of Latin, or to speak modern instead of old English; but
this would be a matter of entire indifference, and a matter, besides,
which no determination or desire could either hasten or prevent. That
alone which it is in our power to obtain, and which it is our duty to
desire, is an unanimous style of some kind, and such comprehension and
practice of it as would enable us to adapt its features to the peculiar
character of every several building, large or small, domestic, civil, or
ecclesiastical. I have said that it was immaterial what style was
adopted, so far as regards the room for originality which its
developement would admit: it is not so, however, when we take into
consideration the far more important questions of the facility of
adaptation to general purposes, and of the sympathy with which this or
that style would be popularly regarded. The choice of Classical or
Gothic, again using the latter term in its broadest sense, may be
questionable when it regards some single and considerable public
building; but I cannot conceive it questionable, for an instant, when it
regards modern uses in general: I cannot conceive any architect insane
enough to project the vulgarization of Greek architecture. Neither can
it be rationally questionable whether we should adopt early or late,
original or derivative Gothic: if the latter were chosen, it must be
either some impotent and ugly degradation, like our own Tudor, or else a
style whose grammatical laws it would be nearly impossible to limit or
arrange, like the French Flamboyant. We are equally precluded from
adopting styles essentially infantine or barbarous, however Herculean
their infancy, or majestic their outlawry, such as our own Norman, or
the Lombard Romanesque. The choice would lie I think between four
styles:--1. The Pisan Romanesque; 2. The early Gothic of the Western
Italian Republics, advanced as far and as fast as our art would enable
us to the Gothic of Giotto; 3. The Venetian Gothic in its purest
developement; 4. The English earliest decorated. The most natural,
perhaps the safest choice, would be of the last, well fenced from chance
of again stiffening into the perpendicular; and perhaps enriched by some
mingling of decorative elements from the exquisite decorated Gothic of
France, of which, in such cases, it would be needful to accept some well
known examples, as the North door of Rouen and the church of St. Urbain
at Troyes, for final and limiting authorities on the side of decoration.

VIII. It is almost impossible for us to conceive, in our present state
of doubt and ignorance, the sudden dawn of intelligence and fancy, the
rapidly increasing sense of power and facility, and, in its _proper
sense_, of Freedom, which such wholesome restraint would instantly cause
throughout the whole circle of the arts. Freed from the agitation and
embarrassment of that liberty of choice which is the cause of half the
discomforts of the world; freed from the accompanying necessity of
studying all past, present, or even possible styles; and enabled, by
concentration of individual, and co-operation of multitudinous energy,
to penetrate into the uttermost secrets of the adopted style, the
architect would find his whole understanding enlarged, his practical
knowledge certain and ready to hand, and his imagination playful and
vigorous, as a child's would be within a walled garden, who would sit
down and shudder if he were left free in a fenceless plain. How many and
how bright would be the results in every direction of interest, not to
the arts merely, but to national happiness and virtue, it would be as
difficult to preconceive as it would seem extravagant to state: but the
first, perhaps the least, of them would be an increased sense of
fellowship among ourselves, a cementing of every patriotic bond of
union, a proud and happy recognition of our affection for and sympathy
with each other, and our willingness in all things to submit ourselves
to every law that would advance the interest of the community; a
barrier, also, the best conceivable, to the unhappy rivalry of the upper
and middle classes, in houses, furniture, and establishments; and even a
check to much of what is as vain as it is painful in the oppositions of
religious parties respecting matters of ritual. These, I say, would be
the first consequences. Economy increased tenfold, as it would be by the
simplicity of practice; domestic comforts uninterfered with by the
caprice and mistakes of architects ignorant of the capacities of the
styles they use, and all the symmetry and sightliness of our harmonized
streets and public buildings, are things of slighter account in the
catalogue of benefits. But it would be mere enthusiasm to endeavor to
trace them farther. I have suffered myself too long to indulge in the
speculative statement of requirements which perhaps we have more
immediate and more serious work than to supply, and of feelings which it
may be only contingently in our power to recover. I should be unjustly
thought unaware of the difficulty of what I have proposed, or of the
unimportance of the whole subject as compared with many which are
brought home to our interests and fixed upon our consideration by the
wild course of the present century. But of difficulty and of importance
it is for others to judge. I have limited myself to the simple statement
of what, if we desire to have architecture, we MUST primarily endeavor
to feel and do: but then it may not be desirable for us to have
architecture at all. There are many who feel it to be so; many who
sacrifice much to that end; and I am sorry to see their energies wasted
and their lives disquieted in vain. I have stated, therefore, the only
ways in which that end is attainable, without venturing even to express
an opinion as to its real desirableness. I have an opinion, and the zeal
with which I have spoken may sometimes have betrayed it, but I hold to
it with no confidence. I know too well the undue importance which the
study that every man follows must assume in his own eyes, to trust my
own impressions of the dignity of that of Architecture; and yet I think
I cannot be utterly mistaken in regarding it as at least useful in the
sense of a National employment. I am confirmed in this impression by
what I see passing among the states of Europe at this instant. All the
horror, distress, and tumult which oppress the foreign nations, are
traceable, among the other secondary causes through which God is working
out His will upon them, to the simple one of their not having enough to
do. I am not blind to the distress among their operatives; nor do I deny
the nearer and visibly active causes of the movement: the recklessness
of villany in the leaders of revolt, the absence of common moral
principle in the upper classes, and of common courage and honesty in the
heads of governments. But these causes themselves are ultimately
traceable to a deeper and simpler one: the recklessness of the
demagogue, the immorality of the middle class, and the effeminacy and
treachery of the noble, are traceable in all these nations to the
commonest and most fruitful cause of calamity in households--idleness.
We think too much in our benevolent efforts, more multiplied and more
vain day by day, of bettering men by giving them advice and instruction.
There are few who will take either: the chief thing they need is
occupation. I do not mean work in the sense of bread,--I mean work in
the sense of mental interest; for those who either are placed above the
necessity of labor for their bread, or who will not work although they
should. There is a vast quantity of idle energy among European nations
at this time, which ought to go into handicrafts; there are multitudes
of idle semi-gentlemen who ought to be shoemakers and carpenters; but
since they will not be these so long as they can help it, the business
of the philanthropist is to find them some other employment than
disturbing governments. It is of no use to tell them they are fools, and
that they will only make themselves miserable in the end as well as
others: if they have nothing else to do, they will do mischief; and the
man who will not work, and who has no means of intellectual pleasure, is
as sure to become an instrument of evil as if he had sold himself bodily
to Satan. I have myself seen enough of the daily life of the young
educated men of France and Italy, to account for, as it deserves, the
deepest national suffering and degradation; and though, for the most
part, our commerce and our natural habits of industry preserve us from
a similar paralysis, yet it would be wise to consider whether the forms
of employment which we chiefly adopt or promote, are as well calculated
as they might be to improve and elevate us.

We have just spent, for instance, a hundred and fifty millions, with
which we have paid men for digging ground from one place and depositing
it in another. We have formed a large class of men, the railway navvies,
especially reckless, unmanageable, and dangerous. We have maintained
besides (let us state the benefits as fairly as possible) a number of
iron founders in an unhealthy and painful employment; we have developed
(this is at least good) a very large amount of mechanical ingenuity; and
we have, in fine, attained the power of going fast from one place to
another. Meantime we have had no mental interest or concern ourselves in
the operations we have set on foot, but have been left to the usual
vanities and cares of our existence. Suppose, on the other hand, that we
had employed the same sums in building beautiful houses and churches. We
should have maintained the same number of men, not in driving
wheelbarrows, but in a distinctly technical, if not intellectual,
employment, and those who were more intelligent among them would have
been especially happy in that employment, as having room in it for the
developement of their fancy, and being directed by it to that
observation of beauty which, associated with the pursuit of natural
science, at present forms the enjoyment of many of the more intelligent
manufacturing operatives. Of mechanical ingenuity, there is, I imagine,
at least as much required to build a cathedral as to cut a tunnel or
contrive a locomotive: we should, therefore, have developed as much
science, while the artistical element of intellect would have been added
to the gain. Meantime we should ourselves have been made happier and
wiser by the interest we should have taken in the work with which we
were personally concerned; and when all was done, instead of the very
doubtful advantage of the power of going fast from place to place, we
should have had the certain advantage of increased pleasure in stopping
at home.

IX. There are many other less capacious, but more constant, channels of
expenditure, quite as disputable in their beneficial tendency; and we
are, perhaps, hardly enough in the habit of inquiring, with respect to
any particular form of luxury or any customary appliance of life,
whether the kind of employment it gives to the operative or the
dependant be as healthy and fitting an employment as we might otherwise
provide for him. It is not enough to find men absolute subsistence; we
should think of the manner of life which our demands necessitate; and
endeavor, as far as may be, to make all our needs such as may, in the
supply of them, raise, as well as feed, the poor. It is far better to
give work which is above the men, than to educate the men to be above
their work. It may be doubted, for instance, whether the habits of
luxury, which necessitate a large train of men servants, be a wholesome
form of expenditure; and more, whether the pursuits which have a
tendency to enlarge the class of the jockey and the groom be a
philanthropic form of mental occupation. So again, consider the large
number of men whose lives are employed by civilized nations in cutting
facets upon jewels. There is much dexterity of hand, patience, and
ingenuity thus bestowed, which are simply burned out in the blaze of the
tiara, without, so far as I see, bestowing any pleasure upon those who
wear or who behold, at all compensatory for the loss of life and mental
power which are involved in the employment of the workman. He would be
far more healthily and happily sustained by being set to carve stone;
certain qualities of his mind, for which there is no room in his present
occupation, would develope themselves in the nobler; and I believe that
most women would, in the end, prefer the pleasure of having built a
church, or contributed to the adornment of a cathedral, to the pride of
bearing a certain quantity of adamant on their foreheads.

X. I could pursue this subject willingly, but I have some strange
notions about it which it is perhaps wiser not loosely to set down. I
content myself with finally reasserting, what has been throughout the
burden of the preceding pages, that whatever rank, or whatever
importance, may be attributed or attached to their immediate subject,
there is at least some value in the analogies with which its pursuit has
presented us, and some instruction in the frequent reference of its
commonest necessities to the mighty laws, in the sense and scope of
which all men are Builders, whom every hour sees laying the stubble or
the stone.

I have paused, not once nor twice, as I wrote, and often have checked
the course of what might otherwise have been importunate persuasion, as
the thought has crossed me, how soon all Architecture may be vain,
except that which is not made with hands. There is something ominous in
the light which has enabled us to look back with disdain upon the ages
among whose lovely vestiges we have been wandering. I could smile when I
hear the hopeful exultation of many, at the new reach of worldly
science, and vigor of worldly effort; as if we were again at the
beginning of days. There is thunder on the horizon as well as dawn. The
sun was risen upon the earth when Lot entered into Zoar.




NOTES


NOTE I.

Page 21.

_"With the idolatrous Egyptian."_

The probability is indeed slight in comparison, but it _is_ a
probability nevertheless, and one which is daily on the increase. I
trust that I may not be thought to underrate the danger of such
sympathy, though I speak lightly of the chance of it. I have confidence
in the central religious body of the English and Scottish people, as
being not only untainted with Romanism, but immoveably adverse to it:
and, however strangely and swiftly the heresy of the Protestant and
victory of the Papist may seem to be extending among us, I feel assured
that there are barriers in the living faith of this nation which neither
can overpass. Yet this confidence is only in the ultimate faithfulness
of a few, not in the security of the nation from the sin and the
punishment of partial apostasy. Both have, indeed, in some sort, been
committed and suffered already; and, in expressing my belief of the
close connection of the distress and burden which the mass of the people
at present sustain, with the encouragement which, in various directions,
has been given to the Papist, do not let me be called superstitious or
irrational. No man was ever more inclined than I, both by natural
disposition and by many ties of early association, to a sympathy with
the principles and forms of the Romanist Church; and there is much in
its discipline which conscientiously, as well as sympathetically, I
could love and advocate. But, in confessing this strength of
affectionate prejudice, surely I vindicate more respect for my firmly
expressed belief, that the entire doctrine and system of that Church is
in the fullest sense anti-Christian; that its lying and idolatrous Power
is the darkest plague that ever held commission to hurt the Earth; that
all those yearnings for unity and fellowship, and common obedience,
which have been the root of our late heresies, are as false in their
grounds as fatal in their termination; that we never can have the
remotest fellowship with the utterers of that fearful Falsehood, and
live; that we have nothing to look to from them but treacherous
hostility; and that, exactly in proportion to the sternness of our
separation from them, will be not only the spiritual but the temporal
blessings granted by God to this country. How close has been the
correspondence hitherto between the degree of resistance to Romanism
marked in our national acts, and the honor with which those acts have
been crowned, has been sufficiently proved in a short essay by a writer
whose investigations into the influence of Religion upon the fate of
Nations have been singularly earnest and successful--a writer with whom
I faithfully and firmly believe that England will never be prosperous
again, and that the honor of her arms will be tarnished, and her
commerce blighted, and her national character degraded, until the
Romanist is expelled from the place which has impiously been conceded to
him among her legislators. "Whatever be the lot of those to whom error
is an inheritance, woe be to the man and the people to whom it is an
adoption. If England, free above all other nations, sustained amidst the
trials which have covered Europe, before her eyes, with burning and
slaughter, and enlightened by the fullest knowledge of divine truth,
shall refuse fidelity to the compact by which those matchless privileges
have been given, her condemnation will not linger. She has already made
one step full of danger. She has committed the capital error of
mistaking that for a purely political question which was a purely
religious one. Her foot already hangs over the edge of the precipice. It
must be retracted, or the empire is but a name. In the clouds and
darkness which seem to be deepening on all human policy--in the
gathering tumults of Europe, and the feverish discontents at home--it
may be even difficult to discern where the power yet lives to erect the
fallen majesty of the constitution once more. But there are mighty means
in sincerity; and if no miracle was ever wrought for the faithless and
despairing, the country that will help itself will never be left
destitute of the help of Heaven" (Historical Essays, by the Rev. Dr.
Croly, 1842). The first of these essays, "England the Fortress of
Christianity," I most earnestly recommend to the meditation of those who
doubt that a special punishment is inflicted by the Deity upon all
national crime, and perhaps, of all such crime most instantly upon the
betrayal on the part of England of the truth and faith with which she
has been entrusted.


NOTE II.

Page 25.

"_Not the gift, but the giving._"

Much attention has lately been directed to the subject of religious art,
and we are now in possession of all kinds of interpretations and
classifications of it, and of the leading facts of its history. But the
greatest question of all connected with it remains entirely unanswered,
What good did it do to real religion? There is no subject into which I
should so much rejoice to see a serious and conscientious inquiry
instituted as this; an inquiry neither undertaken in artistical
enthusiasm nor in monkish sympathy, but dogged, merciless and fearless.
I love the religious art of Italy as well as most men, but there is a
wide difference between loving it as a manifestation of individual
feeling, and looking to it as an instrument of popular benefit. I have
not knowledge enough to form even the shadow of an opinion on this
latter point, and I should be most grateful to any one who would put it
in my power to do so. There are, as it seems to me, three distinct
questions to be considered: the first, What has been the effect of
external splendor on the genuineness and earnestness of Christian
worship? the second, What the use of pictorial or sculptural
representation in the communication of Christian historical knowledge,
or excitement of affectionate imagination? the third, What the influence
of the practice of religious art on the life of the artist?

In answering these inquiries, we should have to consider separately
every collateral influence and circumstance; and, by a most subtle
analysis, to eliminate the real effect of art from the effects of the
abuses with which it was associated. This could be done only by a
Christian; not a man who would fall in love with a sweet color or sweet
expression, but who would look for true faith and consistent life as the
object of all. It never has been done yet, and the question remains a
subject of vain and endless contention between parties of opposite
prejudices and temperaments.


NOTE III.

Page 26.

_"To the concealment of what is really good or great."_

I have often been surprised at the supposition that Romanism, In its
present condition, could either patronise art or profit by it. The noble
painted windows of St. Maclou at Rouen, and many other churches in
France, are entirely blocked up behind the altars by the erection of
huge gilded wooden sunbeams, with interspersed cherubs.


NOTE IV.

Page 33.

_"With different pattern of traceries in each."_

I have certainly not examined the seven hundred and four traceries (four
to each niche) so as to be sure that none are alike; but they have the
aspect of continual variation, and even the roses of the pendants of the
small groined niche roofs are all of different patterns.


NOTE V.

Page 43.

"_Its flamboyant traceries of the last and most degraded forms._"

They are noticed by Mr. Whewell as forming the figure of the
fleur-de-lis, always a mark, when in tracery bars, of the most debased
flamboyant. It occurs in the central tower of Bayeux, very richly in the
buttresses of St. Gervais at Falaise, and in the small niches of some of
the domestic buildings at Rouen. Nor is it only the tower of St. Ouen
which is overrated. Its nave is a base imitation, in the flamboyant
period, of an early Gothic arrangement; the niches on its piers are
barbarisms; there is a huge square shaft run through the ceiling of the
aisles to support the nave piers, the ugliest excrescence I ever saw on
a Gothic building; the traceries of the nave are the most insipid and
faded flamboyant; those of the transept clerestory present a singularly
distorted condition of perpendicular; even the elaborate door of the
south transept is, for its fine period, extravagant and almost grotesque
in its foliation and pendants. There is nothing truly fine in the church
but the choir, the light triforium, and tall clerestory, the circle of
Eastern chapels, the details of sculpture, and the general lightness of
proportion; these merits being seen to the utmost advantage by the
freedom of the body of the church from all incumbrance.


NOTE VI.

Page 43.

Compare Iliad [Greek: S]. 1. 219 with Odyssey [Greek: Ô]. 1. 5-10.


NOTE VII.

Page 44.

"_Does not admit iron as a constructive material._"

Except in Chaucer's noble temple of Mars.

  "And dounward from an hill under a bent,
  Ther stood the temple of Mars, armipotent,
  Wrought all of burned stele, of which th' entree
  Was longe and streite, and gastly for to see.
  And thereout came a rage and swiche a vise,
  That it made all the gates for to rise.
  The northern light in at the dore shone,
  For window on the wall ne was ther none,
  Thurgh which men mighten any light discerne
  The dore was all of athamant eterne,
  Yclenched overthwart and ende long
  With yren tough, and for to make it strong,
  Every piler the temple to sustene
  Was tonne-gret, of yren bright and shene."
                                                 _The Knighte's Tale._

There is, by the bye, an exquisite piece of architectural color just
before:

  "And northward, in a turret on the wall
  _Of alabaster white, and red corall_,
  An oratorie riche for to see,
  In worship of Diane of Chastitee."


NOTE VIII.

Page 44.

_"The Builders of Salisbury."_

"This way of tying walls together with iron, instead of making them of
that substance and form, that they shall naturally poise themselves upon
their buttment, is against the rules of good architecture, not only
because iron is corruptible by rust, but because it is fallacious,
having unequal veins in the metal, some places of the same bar being
three times stronger than others, and yet all sound to appearance."
Survey of Salisbury Cathedral in 1668, by Sir C. Wren. For my own part,
I think it better work to bind a tower with iron, than to support a
false dome by a brick pyramid.


NOTE IX.

Page 60.

PLATE III.

In this plate, figures 4, 5, and 6, are glazed windows, but fig. 2 is
the open light of a belfry tower, and figures 1 and 3 are in triforia,
the latter also occurring filled, on the central tower of Coutances.


NOTE X.

Page 94.

_"Ornaments of the transept towers of Rouen."_

The reader cannot but observe agreeableness, as a mere arrangement of
shade, which especially belongs to the "sacred trefoil." I do not think
that the element of foliation has been enough insisted upon in its
intimate relations with the power of Gothic work. If I were asked what
was the most distinctive feature of its perfect style, I should say the
Trefoil. It is the very soul of it; and I think the loveliest Gothic is
always formed upon simple and bold tracings of it, taking place between
the blank lancet arch on the one hand, and the overcharged cinquefoiled
arch on the other.


NOTE XI.

Page 95.

"_And levelled cusps of stone._"

The plate represents one of the lateral windows of the third story of
the Palazzo Foscari. It was drawn from the opposite side of the Grand
Canal, and the lines of its traceries are therefore given as they appear
in somewhat distant effect. It shows only segments of the characteristic
quatrefoils of the central windows. I found by measurement their
construction exceedingly simple. Four circles are drawn in contact
within the large circle. Two tangential lines are then drawn to each
opposite pair, enclosing the four circles in a hollow cross. An inner
circle struck through the intersections of the circles by the tangents,
truncates the cusps.


NOTE XII.

Page 124.

"_Into vertical equal parts._"

Not absolutely so. There are variations partly accidental (or at least
compelled by the architect's effort to recover the vertical), between
the sides of the stories; and the upper and lower story are taller than
the rest. There is, however, an apparent equality between five out of
the eight tiers.


NOTE XIII.

Page 133.

"_Never paint a column with vertical lines._"

It should be observed, however, that any pattern which gives opponent
lines in its parts, may be arranged on lines parallel with the main
structure. Thus, rows of diamonds, like spots on a snake's back, or the
bones on a sturgeon, are exquisitely applied both to vertical and spiral
columns. The loveliest instances of such decoration that I know, are the
pillars of the cloister of St. John Lateran, lately illustrated by Mr.
Digby Wyatt, in his most valuable and faithful work on antique mosaic.


NOTE XIV.

Page 139.

On the cover of this volume the reader will find some figure outlines of
the same period and character, from the floor of San Miniato at
Florence. I have to thank its designer, Mr. W. Harry Rogers, for his
intelligent arrangement of them, and graceful adaptation of the
connecting arabesque. (Stamp on cloth cover of _London_ edition.)


NOTE XV.

Page 169.

"_The flowers lost their light, the river its music._"

Yet not all their light, nor all their music. Compare Modern Painters,
vol. ii. sec. 1. chap. iv. SECTION 8.


NOTE XVI.

Page 181.

"_By the artists of the time of Perides._"

This subordination was first remarked to me by a friend, whose profound
knowledge of Greek art will not, I trust, be reserved always for the
advantage of his friends only: Mr. C. Newton, of the British Museum.


NOTE XVII.

Page 188.

"_In one of the noblest poems._"

Coleridge's Ode to France:

  "Ye Clouds! that far above me float and pause,
    Whose pathless march no mortal may control!
    Ye Ocean-Waves! that wheresoe'er ye roll,
  Yield homage only to eternal laws!
  Ye Woods! that listen to the night-birds singing.
    Midway the smooth and perilous slope reclined,
  Save when your own imperious branches swinging,
    Have made a solemn music of the wind!
  Where, like a man beloved of God,
  Through glooms, which never woodman trod,
    How oft, pursuing fancies holy,
  My moonlight way o'er flowering weeds I wound,
    Inspired, beyond the guess of folly,
  By each rude shape and wild unconquerable sound!
  O ye loud Waves! and O ye Forests high!
    And O ye Clouds that far above me soared!
  Thou rising Sun! thou blue rejoicing Sky!
    Yea, everything that is and will be free!
    Bear witness for me, wheresoe'er ye be,
    With what deep worship I have still adored
      The spirit of divinest Liberty."

Noble verse, but erring thought: contrast George Herbert:--

  "Slight those who say amidst their sickly healths,
  Thou livest by rule. What doth not so but man?
  Houses are built by rule and Commonwealths.
  Entice the trusty sun, if that you can,
  From his ecliptic line; beckon the sky.
  Who lives by rule then, keeps good company.

  "Who keeps no guard upon himself is slack,
  And rots to nothing at the next great thaw;
  Man is a shop of rules: a well-truss'd pack
  Whose every parcel underwrites a law.
  Lose not thyself, nor give thy humors way;
  God gave them to thee under lock and key."







The Complete Works of John Ruskin

Volume IX

STONES OF VENICE

VOLUME III


[Illustration:
     THE BRIDGE OF SIGHS
     FROM A PHOTOGRAPH]


Library Edition

The Complete Works of John Ruskin

STONES OF VENICE

VOLUME III

Giotto
Lectures on Architecture
Harbours of England
A Joy Forever







National Library Association
New York             Chicago




THE
STONES OF VENICE

VOLUME III.

THE FALL




CONTENTS.


  THIRD, OR RENAISSANCE, PERIOD.

                          CHAPTER I.
                                                      PAGE
    Early Renaissance,                                   1

                         CHAPTER II.
    Roman Renaissance,                                  32

                         CHAPTER III.
    Grotesque Renaissance,                             112

                         CHAPTER IV.
    Conclusion,                                        166


  APPENDIX.

     1. Architect of the Ducal Palace,                 199
     2. Theology of Spenser,                           205
     3. Austrian Government in Italy,                  209
     4. Date of the Palaces of the Byzantine
          Renaissance,                                 211
     5. Renaissance Side of Ducal Palace,              212
     6. Character of the Doge Michele Morosini,        213
     7. Modern Education,                              214
     8. Early Venetian Marriages,                      222
     9. Character of the Venetian Aristocracy,         223
    10. Final Appendix,                                224


  INDICES.

     I. Personal Index,                                263
    II. Local Index,                                   268
   III. Topical Index,                                 271
    IV. Venetian Index,                                287




LIST OF PLATES.

                                                    Facing Page

 PLATE 1. Temperance and Intemperance in Ornament,            6
   "   2. Gothic Capitals,                                    8
   "   3. Noble and Ignoble Grotesque,                      125
   "   4. Mosaic of Olive Tree and Flowers,                 179
   "   5. Byzantine Bases,                                  225
   "   6. Byzantine Jambs,                                  229
   "   7. Gothic Jambs,                                     230
   "   8. Byzantine Archivolts,                             244
   "   9. Gothic Archivolts,                                245
   "  10. Cornices,                                         248
   "  11. Tracery Bars,                                     252
   "  12. Capitals of Fondaco de Turchi,                    304




THE

STONES OF VENICE.

THIRD, OR RENAISSANCE, PERIOD.




CHAPTER I.

EARLY RENAISSANCE.


§ I. I trust that the reader has been enabled, by the preceding
chapters, to form some conception of the magnificence of the streets of
Venice during the course of the thirteenth and fourteenth centuries. Yet
by all this magnificence she was not supremely distinguished above the
other cities of the middle ages. Her early edifices have been preserved
to our times by the circuit of her waves; while continual recurrences of
ruin have defaced the glory of her sister cities. But such fragments as
are still left in their lonely squares, and in the corners of their
streets, so far from being inferior to the buildings of Venice, are even
more rich, more finished, more admirable in invention, more exuberant in
beauty. And although, in the North of Europe, civilization was less
advanced, and the knowledge of the arts was more confined to the
ecclesiastical orders, so that, for domestic architecture, the period of
perfection must be there placed much later than in Italy, and considered
as extending to the middle of the fifteenth century; yet, as each city
reached a certain point in civilization, its streets became decorated
with the same magnificence, varied only in style according to the
materials at hand, and temper of the people. And I am not aware of any
town of wealth and importance in the middle ages, in which some proof
does not exist, that, at its period of greatest energy and prosperity,
its streets were inwrought with rich sculpture, and even (though in
this, as before noticed, Venice always stood supreme) glowing with color
and with gold. Now, therefore, let the reader,--forming for himself as
vivid and real a conception as he is able, either of a group of Venetian
palaces in the fourteenth century, or, if he likes better, of one of the
more fantastic but even richer street scenes of Rouen, Antwerp, Cologne,
or Nuremberg, and keeping this gorgeous image before him,--go out into
any thoroughfare, representative, in a general and characteristic way,
of the feeling for domestic architecture in modern times; let him, for
instance, if in London, walk once up and down Harley Street, or Baker
Street, or Gower Street; and then, looking upon this picture and on
this, set himself to consider (for this is to be the subject of our
following and final inquiry) what have been the causes which have
induced so vast a change in the European mind.

§ II. Renaissance architecture is the school which has conducted men's
inventive and constructive faculties from the Grand Canal to Gower
Street; from the marble shaft, and the lancet arch, and the wreathed
leafage, and the glowing and melting harmony of gold and azure, to the
square cavity in the brick wall. We have now to consider the causes and
the steps of this change; and, as we endeavored above to investigate the
nature of Gothic, here to investigate also the nature of Renaissance.

§ III. Although Renaissance architecture assumes very different forms
among different nations, it may be conveniently referred to three
heads:--Early Renaissance, consisting of the first corruptions
introduced into the Gothic schools: Central or Roman Renaissance, which
is the perfectly formed style: and Grotesque Renaissance, which is the
corruption of the Renaissance itself.

§ IV. Now, in order to do full justice to the adverse cause, we will
consider the abstract _nature_ of the school with reference only to its
best or central examples. The forms of building which must be classed
generally under the term _early_ Renaissance are, in many cases, only
the extravagances and corruptions of the languid Gothic, for whose
errors the classical principle is in no wise answerable. It was stated
in the second chapter of the "Seven Lamps," that, unless luxury had
enervated and subtlety falsified the Gothic forms, Roman traditions
could not have prevailed against them; and, although these enervated and
false conditions are almost instantly colored by the classical
influence, it would be utterly unfair to lay to the charge of that
influence the first debasement of the earlier schools, which had lost
the strength of their system before they could be struck by the plague.

§ V. The manner, however, of the debasement of all schools of art, so
far as it is natural, is in all ages the same; luxuriance of ornament,
refinement of execution, and idle subtleties of fancy, taking the place
of true thought and firm handling: and I do not intend to delay the
reader long by the Gothic sick-bed, for our task is not so much to watch
the wasting of fever in the features of the expiring king, as to trace
the character of that Hazael who dipped the cloth in water, and laid it
upon his face, Nevertheless, it is necessary to the completeness of our
view of the architecture of Venice, as well as to our understanding of
the manner in which the Central Renaissance obtained its universal
dominion, that we glance briefly at the principal forms into which
Venetian Gothic first declined. They are two in number: one the
corruption of the Gothic itself; the other a partial return to Byzantine
forms; for the Venetian mind having carried the Gothic to a point at
which it was dissatisfied, tried to retrace its steps, fell back first
upon Byzantine types, and through them passed to the first Roman. But in
thus retracing its steps, it does not recover its own lost energy. It
revisits the places through which it had passed in the morning light,
but it is now with wearied limbs, and under the gloomy shadows of
evening.

§ VI. It has just been said that the two principal causes of natural
decline in any school, are over-luxuriance and over-refinement. The
corrupt Gothic of Venice furnishes us with a curious instance of the
one, and the corrupt Byzantine of the other. We shall examine them in
succession.

Now, observe, first, I do not mean by _luxuriance_ of ornament,
_quantity_ of ornament. In the best Gothic in the world there is hardly
an inch of stone left unsculptured. But I mean that character of
extravagance in the ornament itself which shows that it was addressed to
jaded faculties; a violence and coarseness in curvature, a depth of
shadow, a lusciousness in arrangement of line, evidently arising out of
an incapability of feeling the true beauty of chaste form and restrained
power. I do not know any character of design which may be more easily
recognized at a glance than this over-lusciousness; and yet it seems to
me that at the present day there is nothing so little understood as the
essential difference between chasteness and extravagance, whether in
color, shade, or lines. We speak loosely and inaccurately of
"overcharged" ornament, with an obscure feeling that there is indeed
something in visible Form which is correspondent to Intemperance in
moral habits; but without any distinct detection of the character which
offends us, far less with any understanding of the most important lesson
which there can be no doubt was intended to be conveyed by the
universality of this ornamental law.

§ VII. In a word, then, the safeguard of highest beauty, in all visible
work, is exactly that which is also the safeguard of conduct in the
soul,--Temperance, in the broadest sense; the Temperance which we have
seen sitting on an equal throne with Justice amidst the Four Cardinal
Virtues, and, wanting which, there is not any other virtue which may not
lead us into desperate error. Now, observe: Temperance, in the nobler
sense, does not mean a subdued and imperfect energy; it does not mean a
stopping short in any good thing, as in Love or in Faith; but it means
the power which governs the most intense energy, and prevents its acting
in any way but as it ought. And with respect to things in which there
may be excess, it does not mean imperfect enjoyment of them; but the
regulation of their quantity, so that the enjoyment of them shall be
greatest. For instance, in the matter we have at present in hand,
temperance in color does not mean imperfect or dull enjoyment of color;
but it means that government of color which shall bring the utmost
possible enjoyment out of all hues. A bad colorist does not _love_
beautiful color better than the best colorist does, nor half so much.
But he indulges in it to excess; he uses it in large masses, and
unsubdued; and then it is a law of Nature, a law as universal as that of
gravitation, that he shall not be able to enjoy it so much as if he had
used it in less quantity. His eye is jaded and satiated, and the blue
and red have life in them no more. He tries to paint them bluer and
redder, in vain: all the blue has become grey, and gets greyer the more
he adds to it; all his crimson has become brown, and gets more sere and
autumnal the more he deepens it. But the great painter is sternly
temperate in his work; he loves the vivid color with all his heart; but
for a long time he does not allow himself anything like it, nothing but
sober browns and dull greys, and colors that have no conceivable beauty
in them; but these by his government become lovely: and after bringing
out of them all the life and power they possess, and enjoying them to
the uttermost,--cautiously, and as the crown of the work, and the
consummation of its music, he permits the momentary crimson and azure,
and the whole canvas is in a flame.

§ VIII. Again, in curvature, which is the cause of loveliness in all
form; the bad designer does not enjoy it more than the great designer,
but he indulges in it till his eye is satiated, and he cannot obtain
enough of it to touch his jaded feeling for grace. But the great and
temperate designer does not allow himself any violent curves; he works
much with lines in which the curvature, though always existing, is long
before it is perceived. He dwells on all these subdued curvatures to the
uttermost, and opposes them with still severer lines to bring them out
in fuller sweetness; and, at last, he allows himself a momentary curve
of energy, and all the work is, in an instant, full of life and grace.

The curves drawn in Plate VII. of the first volume, were chosen entirely
to show this character of dignity and restraint, as it appears in the
lines of nature, together with the perpetual changefulness of the
degrees of curvature in one and the same line; but although the purpose
of that plate was carefully explained in the chapter which it
illustrates, as well as in the passages of "Modern Painters" therein
referred to (vol. ii. pp. 43, 79), so little are we now in the habit of
considering the character of abstract lines, that it was thought by many
persons that this plate only illustrated Hogarth's reversed line of
beauty, even although the curve of the salvia leaf, which was the one
taken from that plate for future use, in architecture, was not a
reversed or serpentine curve at all. I shall now, however, I hope, be
able to show my meaning better.

§ IX. Fig. 1 in Plate I., opposite, is a piece of ornamentation from a
Norman-French manuscript of the thirteenth century, and fig. 2 from an
Italian one of the fifteenth. Observe in the first its stern moderation
in curvature; the gradually united lines _nearly straight_, though none
quite straight, used for its main limb, and contrasted with the bold but
simple offshoots of its leaves, and the noble spiral from which it
shoots, these in their turn opposed by the sharp trefoils and thorny
cusps. And see what a reserve of resource there is in the whole; how
easy it would have been to make the curves more palpable and the foliage
more rich, and how the noble hand has stayed itself, and refused to
grant one wave of motion more.

[Illustration: Plate I.
               TEMPERANCE AND INTEMPERANCE.
               IN CURVATURE.]

§ X. Then observe the other example, in which, while the same idea is
continually repeated, excitement and interest are sought for by means of
violent and continual curvatures wholly unrestrained, and rolling hither
and thither in confused wantonness. Compare the character of the
separate lines in these two examples carefully, and be assured that
wherever this redundant and luxurious curvature shows itself in
ornamentation, it is a sign of jaded energy and failing invention. Do
not confuse it with fulness or richness. Wealth is not necessarily
wantonness: a Gothic moulding may be buried half a foot deep in thorns
and leaves, and yet will be chaste in every line; and a late Renaissance
moulding may be utterly barren and poverty-stricken, and yet will show
the disposition to luxury in every line.

§ XI. Plate XX., in the second volume, though prepared for the special
illustration of the notices of capitals, becomes peculiarly interesting
when considered in relation to the points at present under
consideration. The four leaves in the upper row are Byzantine; the two
middle rows are transitional, all but fig. 11, which is of the formed
Gothic; fig. 12 is perfect Gothic of the finest time (Ducal Palace,
oldest part), fig. 13 is Gothic beginning to decline, fig. 14 is
Renaissance Gothic in complete corruption.

Now observe, first, the Gothic naturalism advancing gradually from the
Byzantine severity; how from the sharp, hard, formalized conventionality
of the upper series the leaves gradually expand into more free and
flexible animation, until in fig. 12 we have the perfect living leaf as
if fresh gathered out of the dew. And then, in the last two examples and
partly in fig. 11, observe how the forms which can advance no longer in
animation, advance, or rather decline, into luxury and effeminacy as the
strength of the school expires.

§ XII. In the second place, note that the Byzantine and Gothic schools,
however differing in degree of life, are both alike in _temperance_,
though the temperance of the Gothic is the nobler, because it consists
with entire animation. Observe how severe and subtle the curvatures are
in all the leaves from fig. 1 to fig. 12, except only in fig. 11; and
observe especially the firmness and strength obtained by the close
approximation to the straight line in the lateral ribs of the leaf, fig.
12. The longer the eye rests on these temperate curvatures the more it
will enjoy them, but it will assuredly in the end be wearied by the
morbid exaggeration of the last example.

[Illustration: Plate II.
               GOTHIC CAPITALS.]

§ XIII. Finally, observe--and this is very important--how one and the
same character in the work may be a sign of totally different states of
mind, and therefore in one case bad, and in the other good. The
examples, fig. 3. and fig. 12., are both equally pure in line; but one
is subdivided in the extreme, the other broad in the extreme, and both
are beautiful. The Byzantine mind delighted in the delicacy of
subdivision which nature shows in the fern-leaf or parsley-leaf; and so,
also, often the Gothic mind, much enjoying the oak, thorn, and thistle.
But the builder of the Ducal Palace used great breadth in his foliage,
in order to harmonize with the broad surface of his mighty wall, and
delighted in this breadth as nature delights in the sweeping freshness
of the dock-leaf or water-lily. Both breadth and subdivision are thus
noble, when they are contemplated or conceived by a mind in health; and
both become ignoble, when conceived by a mind jaded and satiated. The
subdivision in fig. 13 as compared with the type, fig. 12, which it was
intended to improve, is the sign, not of a mind which loved intricacy,
but of one which could not relish simplicity, which had not strength
enough to enjoy the broad masses of the earlier leaves, and cut them to
pieces idly, like a child tearing the book which, in its weariness, it
cannot read. And on the other hand, we shall continually find, in other
examples of work of the same period, an unwholesome breadth or
heaviness, which results from the mind having no longer any care for
refinement or precision, nor taking any delight in delicate forms, but
making all things blunted, cumbrous, and dead, losing at the same time
the sense of the elasticity and spring of natural curves. It is as if
the soul of man, itself severed from the root of its health, and about
to fall into corruption, lost the perception of life in all things
around it; and could no more distinguish the wave of the strong
branches, full of muscular strength and sanguine circulation, from the
lax bending of a broken cord, nor the sinuousness of the edge of the
leaf, crushed into deep folds by the expansion of its living growth,
from the wrinkled contraction of its decay.[1] Thus, in morals, there
is a care for trifles which proceeds from love and conscience, and is
most holy; and a care for trifles which comes of idleness and frivolity,
and is most base. And so, also, there is a gravity proceeding from
thought, which is most noble; and a gravity proceeding from dulness and
mere incapability of enjoyment, which is most base. Now, in the various
forms assumed by the later Gothic of Venice, there are one or two
features which, under other circumstances, would not have been signs of
decline; but, in the particular manner of their occurrence here,
indicate the fatal weariness of decay. Of all these features the most
distinctive are its crockets and finials.

§ XIV. There is not to be found a single crocket or finial upon any part
of the Ducal Palace built during the fourteenth century; and although
they occur on contemporary, and on some much earlier, buildings, they
either indicate detached examples of schools not properly Venetian, or
are signs of incipient decline.

The reason of this is, that the finial is properly the ornament of
gabled architecture; it is the compliance, in the minor features of the
building, with the spirit of its towers, ridged roof, and spires.
Venetian building is not gabled, but horizontal in its roots and general
masses; therefore the finial is a feature contradictory to its spirit,
and adopted only in that search for morbid excitement which is the
infallible indication of decline. When it occurs earlier, it is on
fragments of true gabled architecture, as, for instance, on the porch of
the Carmini.

In proportion to the unjustifiableness of its introduction was the
extravagance of the form it assumed; becoming, sometimes, a tuft at the
top of the ogee windows, half as high as the arch itself, and
consisting, in the richest examples, of a human figure, half emergent
out of a cup of leafage, as, for instance, in the small archway of the
Campo San Zaccaria: while the crockets, as being at the side of the
arch, and not so strictly connected with its balance and symmetry,
appear to consider themselves at greater liberty even than the finials,
and fling themselves, hither and thither, in the wildest contortions.
Fig. 4. in Plate I, is the outline of one, carved in stone, from the
later Gothic of St. Mark's; fig. 3. a crocket from the fine Veronese
Gothic; in order to enable the reader to discern the Renaissance
character better by comparison with the examples of curvature above
them, taken from the manuscripts. And not content with this exuberance
in the external ornaments of the arch, the finial interferes with its
traceries. The increased intricacy of these, as such, being a natural
process in the developement of Gothic, would have been no evil; but they
are corrupted by the enrichment of the finial at the point of the
cusp,--corrupted, that is to say, in Venice: for at Verona the finial,
in the form of a fleur-de-lis, appears long previously at the cusp
point, with exquisite effect; and in our own best Northern Gothic it is
often used beautifully in this place, as in the window from Salisbury,
Plate XII. (Vol. II.), fig. 2. But in Venice, such a treatment of it was
utterly contrary to the severe spirit of the ancient traceries; and the
adoption of a leafy finial at the extremity of the cusps in the door of
San Stefano, as opposed to the simple ball which terminates those of the
Ducal Palace, is an unmistakable indication of a tendency to decline.

In like manner, the enrichment and complication of the jamb mouldings,
which, in other schools, might and did take place in the healthiest
periods, are, at Venice, signs of decline, owing to the entire
inconsistency of such mouldings with the ancient love of the single
square jamb and archivolt. The process of enrichment in them is shown by
the successive examples given in Plate VII., below. They are numbered,
and explained in the Appendix.

§ XV. The date at which this corrupt form of Gothic first prevailed over
the early simplicity of the Venetian types can be determined in an
instant, on the steps of the choir of the Church of St. John and Paul.
On our left hand, as we enter, is the tomb of the Doge Marco Cornaro,
who died in 1367. It is rich and fully developed Gothic, with crockets
and finials, but not yet attaining any extravagant developement.
Opposite to it is that of the Doge Andrea Morosini, who died in 1382.
Its Gothic is voluptuous, and over-wrought; the crockets are bold and
florid, and the enormous finial represents a statue of St. Michael.
There is no excuse for the antiquaries who, having this tomb before
them, could have attributed the severe architecture of the Ducal Palace
to a later date; for every one of the Renaissance errors is here in
complete developement, though not so grossly as entirely to destroy the
loveliness of the Gothic forms. In the Porta della Carta, 1423, the vice
reaches its climax.

§ XVI. Against this degraded Gothic, then, came up the Renaissance
armies; and their first assault was in the requirement of universal
perfection. For the first time since the destruction of Rome, the world
had seen, in the work of the greatest artists of the fifteenth
century,--in the painting of Ghirlandajo, Masaccio, Francia, Perugino,
Pinturicchio, and Bellini; in the sculpture of Mino da Fiesole, of
Ghiberti, and Verrocchio,--a perfection of execution and fulness of
knowledge which cast all previous art into the shade, and which, being
in the work of those men united with all that was great in that of
former days, did indeed justify the utmost enthusiasm with which their
efforts were, or could be, regarded. But when this perfection had once
been exhibited in anything, it was required in everything; the world
could no longer be satisfied with less exquisite execution, or less
disciplined knowledge. The first thing that it demanded in all work was,
that it should be done in a consummate and learned way; and men
altogether forgot that it was possible to consummate what was
contemptible, and to know what was useless. Imperatively requiring
dexterity of touch, they gradually forgot to look for tenderness of
feeling; imperatively requiring accuracy of knowledge, they gradually
forgot to ask for originality of thought. The thought and the feeling
which they despised departed from them, and they were left to
felicitate themselves on their small science and their neat fingering.
This is the history of the first attack of the Renaissance upon the
Gothic schools, and of its rapid results, more fatal and immediate in
architecture than in any other art, because there the demand for
perfection was less reasonable, and less consistent with the
capabilities of the workman; being utterly opposed to that rudeness or
savageness on which, as we saw above, the nobility of the elder schools
in great part depends. But inasmuch as the innovations were founded on
some of the most beautiful examples of art, and headed by some of the
greatest men that the world ever saw, and as the Gothic with which they
interfered was corrupt and valueless, the first appearance of the
Renaissance feeling had the appearance of a healthy movement. A new
energy replaced whatever weariness or dulness had affected the Gothic
mind; an exquisite taste and refinement, aided by extended knowledge,
furnished the first models of the new school; and over the whole of
Italy a style arose, generally now known as cinque-cento, which in
sculpture and painting, as I just stated, produced the noblest masters
which the world ever saw, headed by Michael Angelo, Raphael, and
Leonardo; but which failed of doing the same in architecture, because,
as we have seen above, perfection is therein not possible, and failed
more totally than it would otherwise have done, because the classical
enthusiasm had destroyed the best types of architectural form.

§ XVII. For, observe here very carefully, the Renaissance principle, as
it consisted in a demand for universal perfection, is quite distinct
from the Renaissance principle as it consists in a demand for classical
and Roman _forms_ of perfection. And if I had space to follow out the
subject as I should desire, I would first endeavor to ascertain what
might have been the course of the art of Europe if no manuscripts of
classical authors had been recovered, and no remains of classical
architecture left, in the fifteenth century; so that the executive
perfection to which the efforts of all great men had tended for five
hundred years, and which now at last was reached, might have been
allowed to develope itself in its own natural and proper form, in
connexion with the architectural structure of earlier schools. This
refinement and perfection had indeed its own perils, and the history of
later Italy, as she sank into pleasure and thence into corruption, would
probably have been the same whether she had ever learned again to write
pure Latin or not. Still the inquiry into the probable cause of the
enervation which might naturally have followed the highest exertion of
her energies, is a totally distinct one from that into the particular
form given to this enervation by her classical learning; and it is
matter of considerable regret to me that I cannot treat these two
subjects separately: I must be content with marking them for separation
in the mind of the reader.

§ XVIII. The effect, then, of the sudden enthusiasm for classical
literature, which gained strength during every hour of the fifteenth
century, was, as far as respected architecture, to do away with the
entire system of Gothic science. The pointed arch, the shadowy vault,
the clustered shaft, the heaven-pointing spire, were all swept away; and
no structure was any longer permitted but that of the plain cross-beam
from pillar to pillar, over the round arch, with square or circular
shafts, and a low-gabled roof and pediment: two elements of noble form,
which had fortunately existed in Rome, were, however, for that reason,
still permitted; the cupola, and, internally, the waggon vault.

§ XIX. These changes in form were all of them unfortunate; and it is
almost impossible to do justice to the occasionally exquisite
ornamentation of the fifteenth century, on account of its being placed
upon edifices of the cold and meagre Roman outline. There is, as far as
I know, only one Gothic building in Europe, the Duomo of Florence, in
which, though the ornament be of a much earlier school, it is yet so
exquisitely finished as to enable us to imagine what might have been the
effect of the perfect workmanship of the Renaissance, coming out of the
hands of men like Verrocchio and Ghiberti, had it been employed on the
magnificent framework of Gothic structure. This is the question which,
as I shall note in the concluding chapter, we ought to set ourselves
practically to solve in modern times.

§ XX. The changes effected in form, however, were the least part of the
evil principles of the Renaissance. As I have just said, its main
mistake, in its early stages, was the unwholesome demand for
_perfection_, at any cost. I hope enough has been advanced, in the
chapter on the Nature of Gothic, to show the reader that perfection is
_not_ to be had from the general workman, but at the cost of
everything,--of his whole life, thought, and energy. And Renaissance
Europe thought this a small price to pay for manipulative perfection.
Men like Verrocchio and Ghiberti were not to be had every day, nor in
every place; and to require from the common workman execution or
knowledge like theirs, was to require him to become their copyist. Their
strength was great enough to enable them to join science with invention,
method with emotion, finish with fire; but, in them, the invention and
the fire were first, while Europe saw in them only the method and the
finish. This was new to the minds of men, and they pursued it to the
neglect of everything else. "This," they cried, "we must have in all our
work henceforward:" and they were obeyed. The lower workman secured
method and finish, and lost, in exchange for them, his soul.

§ XXI. Now, therefore, do not let me be misunderstood when I speak
generally of the evil spirit of the Renaissance. The reader may look
through all I have written, from first to last, and he will not find one
word but of the most profound reverence for those mighty men who could
wear the Renaissance armor of proof, and yet not feel it encumber their
living limbs,[2]--Leonardo and Michael Angelo, Ghirlandajo and Masaccio,
Titian and Tintoret. But I speak of the Renaissance as an evil time,
because, when it saw those men go burning forth into the battle, it
mistook their armor for their strength: and forthwith encumbered with
the painful panoply every stripling who ought to have gone forth only
with his own choice of three smooth stones out of the brook.

§ XXII. This, then, the reader must always keep in mind when he is
examining for himself any examples of cinque-cento work. When it has
been done by a truly great man, whose life and strength could not be
oppressed, and who turned to good account the whole science of his day,
nothing is more exquisite. I do not believe, for instance, that there is
a more glorious work of sculpture existing in the world than that
equestrian statue of Bartolomeo Colleone, by Verrocchio, of which, I
hope, before these pages are printed, there will be a cast in England.
But when the cinque-cento work has been done by those meaner men, who,
in the Gothic times, though in a rough way, would yet have found some
means of speaking out what was in their hearts, it is utterly
inanimate,--a base and helpless copy of more accomplished models; or, if
not this, a mere accumulation of technical skill, in gaining which the
workman had surrendered all other powers that were in him.

There is, therefore, of course, an infinite gradation in the art of the
period, from the Sistine Chapel down to modern upholstery; but, for the
most part, since in architecture the workman must be of an inferior
order, it will be found that this cinque-cento painting and higher
religious sculpture is noble, while the cinque-cento architecture, with
its subordinate sculpture, is universally bad; sometimes, however,
assuming forms, in which the consummate refinement almost atones for the
loss of force.

§ XXIII. This is especially the case with that second branch of the
Renaissance which, as above noticed, was engrafted at Venice on the
Byzantine types. So soon as the classical enthusiasm required the
banishment of Gothic forms, it was natural that the Venetian mind should
turn back with affection to the Byzantine models in which the round
arches and simple shafts, necessitated by recent law, were presented
under a form consecrated by the usage of their ancestors. And,
accordingly, the first distinct school of architecture[3] which arose
under the new dynasty, was one in which the method of inlaying marble,
and the general forms of shaft and arch, were adopted from the buildings
of the twelfth century, and applied with the utmost possible refinements
of modern skill. Both at Verona and Venice the resulting architecture is
exceedingly beautiful. At Verona it is, indeed, less Byzantine, but
possesses a character of richness and tenderness almost peculiar to that
city. At Venice it is more severe, but yet adorned with sculpture which,
for sharpness of touch and delicacy of minute form, cannot be rivalled,
and rendered especially brilliant and beautiful by the introduction of
those inlaid circles of colored marble, serpentine, and porphyry, by
which Phillippe de Commynes was so much struck on his first entrance
into the city. The two most refined buildings in this style in Venice
are, the small Church of the Miracoli, and the Scuola di San Marco
beside the Church of St. John and St. Paul. The noblest is the Rio
Façade of the Ducal Palace. The Casa Dario, and Casa Manzoni, on the
Grand Canal, are exquisite examples of the school, as applied to
domestic architecture; and, in the reach of the canal between the Casa
Foscari and the Rialto, there are several palaces, of which the Casa
Contarini (called "delle Figure") is the principal, belonging to the
same group, though somewhat later, and remarkable for the association of
the Byzantine principles of color with the severest lines of the Roman
pediment, gradually superseding the round arch. The precision of
chiselling and delicacy of proportion in the ornament and general lines
of these palaces cannot be too highly praised; and I believe that the
traveller in Venice, in general, gives them rather too little attention
than too much. But while I would ask him to stay his gondola beside each
of them long enough to examine their every line, I must also warn him to
observe, most carefully, the peculiar feebleness and want of soul in the
conception of their ornament, which mark them as belonging to a period
of decline; as well as the absurd mode of introduction of their pieces
of colored marble: these, instead of being simply and naturally inserted
in the masonry, are placed in small circular or oblong frames of
sculpture, like mirrors or pictures, and are represented as suspended by
ribands against the wall; a pair of wings being generally fastened on to
the circular tablets, as if to relieve the ribands and knots from their
weight, and the whole series tied under the chin of a little cherub at
the top, who is nailed against the façade like a hawk on a barn door.

But chiefly let him notice, in the Casa Contarini delle Figure, one most
strange incident, seeming to have been permitted, like the choice of the
subjects at the three angles of the Ducal Palace, in order to teach us,
by a single lesson, the true nature of the style in which it occurs. In
the intervals of the windows of the first story, certain shields and
torches are attached, in the form of trophies, to the stems of two trees
whose boughs have been cut off, and only one or two of their faded
leaves left, scarcely observable, but delicately sculptured here and
there, beneath the insertions of the severed boughs.

It is as if the workman had intended to leave us an image of the
expiring naturalism of the Gothic school. I had not seen this sculpture
when I wrote the passage referring to its period, in the first volume of
this work (Chap. XX. § XXXI.):--"Autumn came,--the leaves were
shed,--and the eye was directed to the extremities of the delicate
branches. _The Renaissance frosts came, and all perished!_"

§ XXIV. And the hues of this autumn of the early Renaissance are the
last which appear in architecture. The winter which succeeded was
colorless as it was cold; and although the Venetian painters struggled
long against its influence, the numbness of the architecture prevailed
over them at last, and the exteriors of all the latter palaces were
built only in barren stone. As at this point of our inquiry, therefore,
we must bid farewell to color, I have reserved for this place the
continuation of the history of chromatic decoration, from the Byzantine
period, when we left it in the fifth chapter of the second volume, down
to its final close.

§ XXV. It was above stated, that the principal difference in general
form and treatment between the Byzantine and Gothic palaces was the
contraction of the marble facing into the narrow spaces between the
windows, leaving large fields of brick wall perfectly bare. The reason
for this appears to have been, that the Gothic builders were no longer
satisfied with the faint and delicate hues of the veined marble; they
wished for some more forcible and piquant mode of decoration,
corresponding more completely with the gradually advancing splendor of
chivalric costume and heraldic device. What I have said above of the
simple habits of life of the thirteenth century, in no wise refers
either to costumes of state, or of military service; and any
illumination of the thirteenth and early fourteenth centuries (the great
period being, it seems to me, from 1250 to 1350), while it shows a
peculiar majesty and simplicity in the fall of the robes (often worn
over the chain armor), indicates, at the same time, an exquisite
brilliancy of color and power of design in the hems and borders, as well
as in the armorial bearings with which they are charged; and while, as
we have seen, a peculiar simplicity is found also in the _forms_ of the
architecture, corresponding to that of the folds of the robes, its
_colors_ were constantly increasing in brilliancy and decision,
corresponding to those of the quartering of the shield, and of the
embroidery of the mantle.

§ XXVI. Whether, indeed, derived from the quarterings of the knights'
shields, or from what other source, I know not; but there is one
magnificent attribute of the coloring of the late twelfth, the whole
thirteenth, and the early fourteenth century, which I do not find
definitely in any previous work, nor afterwards in general art, though
constantly, and necessarily, in that of great colorists, namely, the
union of one color with another by reciprocal interference: that is to
say, if a mass of red is to be set beside a mass of blue, a piece of the
red will be carried into the blue, and a piece of the blue carried into
the red; sometimes in nearly equal portions, as in a shield divided into
four quarters, of which the uppermost on one side will be of the same
color as the lowermost on the other; sometimes in smaller fragments,
but, in the periods above named, always definitely and grandly, though
in a thousand various ways. And I call it a magnificent principle, for
it is an eternal and universal one, not in art only,[4] but in human
life. It is the great principle of Brotherhood, not by equality, nor by
likeness, but by giving and receiving; the souls that are unlike, and
the nations that are unlike, and the natures that are unlike, being
bound into one noble whole by each receiving something from, and of, the
others' gifts and the others' glory. I have not space to follow out this
thought,--it is of infinite extent and application,--but I note it for
the reader's pursuit, because I have long believed, and the whole second
volume of "Modern Painters" was written to prove, that in whatever has
been made by the Deity externally delightful to the human sense of
beauty, there is some type of God's nature or of God's laws; nor are any
of His laws, in one sense, greater than the appointment that the most
lovely and perfect unity shall be obtained by the taking of one nature
into another. I trespass upon too high ground; and yet I cannot fully
show the reader the extent of this law, but by leading him thus far. And
it is just because it is so vast and so awful a law, that it has rule
over the smallest things; and there is not a vein of color on the
lightest leaf which the spring winds are at this moment unfolding in the
fields around us, but it is an illustration of an ordainment to which
the earth and its creatures owe their continuance, and their Redemption.

§ XXVII. It is perfectly inconceivable, until it has been made a subject
of special inquiry, how perpetually Nature employs this principle in the
distribution of her light and shade; how by the most extraordinary
adaptations, apparently accidental, but always in exactly the right
place, she contrives to bring darkness into light, and light into
darkness; and that so sharply and decisively, that at the very instant
when one object changes from light to dark, the thing relieved upon it
will change from dark to light, and yet so subtly that the eye will not
detect the transition till it looks for it. The secret of a great part
of the grandeur in all the noblest compositions is the doing of this
delicately in _degree_, and broadly in _mass_; in color it may be done
much more decisively than in light and shade, and, according to the
simplicity of the work, with greater frankness of confession, until, in
purely decorative art, as in the illumination, glass-painting, and
heraldry of the great periods, we find it reduced to segmental accuracy.
Its greatest masters, in high art, are Tintoret, Veronese, and Turner.

§ XXVIII. Together with this great principle of quartering is introduced
another, also of very high value as far as regards the delight of the
eye, though not of so profound meaning. As soon as color began to be
used in broad and opposed fields, it was perceived that the mass of it
destroyed its brilliancy, and it was _tempered_ by chequering it with
some other color or colors in smaller quantities, mingled with minute
portions of pure white. The two moral principles of which this is the
type, are those of Temperance and Purity; the one requiring the fulness
of the color to be subdued, and the other that it shall be subdued
without losing either its own purity or that of the colors with which it
is associated.

§ XXIX. Hence arose the universal and admirable system of the diapered
or chequered background of early ornamental art. They are completely
developed in the thirteenth century, and extend through the whole of
the fourteenth gradually yielding to landscape, and other pictorial
backgrounds, as the designers lost perception of the purpose of their
art, and of the value of color. The chromatic decoration of the Gothic
palaces of Venice was of course founded on these two great principles,
which prevailed constantly wherever the true chivalric and Gothic spirit
possessed any influence. The windows, with their intermediate spaces of
marble, were considered as the objects to be relieved, and variously
quartered with vigorous color. The whole space of the brick wall was
considered as a background; it was covered with stucco, and painted in
fresco, with diaper patterns.

§ XXX. What? the reader asks in some surprise,--Stucco! and in the great
Gothic period? Even so, but _not stucco to imitate stone_. Herein lies
all the difference; it is stucco confessed and understood, and laid on
the bricks precisely as gesso is laid on canvas, in order to form them
into a ground for receiving color from the human hand,--color which, if
well laid on, might render the brick wall more precious than if it had
been built of emeralds. Whenever we wish to paint, we may prepare our
paper as we choose; the value of the ground in no wise adds to the value
of the picture. A Tintoret on beaten gold would be of no more value than
a Tintoret on coarse canvas; the gold would merely be wasted. All that
we have to do is to make the ground as good and fit for the color as
possible, by whatever means.

§ XXXI. I am not sure if I am right in applying the term "stucco" to the
ground of fresco; but this is of no consequence; the reader will
understand that it was white, and that the whole wall of the palace was
considered as the page of a book to be illuminated: but he will
understand also that the sea winds are bad librarians; that, when once
the painted stucco began to fade or to fall, the unsightliness of the
defaced color would necessitate its immediate restoration; and that
therefore, of all the chromatic decoration of the Gothic palaces, there
is hardly a fragment left.

Happily, in the pictures of Gentile Bellini, the fresco coloring of the
Gothic palaces is recorded, as it still remained in his time; not with
rigid accuracy, but quite distinctly enough to enable us, by comparing
it with the existing colored designs in the manuscripts and glass of the
period, to ascertain precisely what it must have been.

§ XXXII. The walls were generally covered with chequers of very warm
color, a russet inclining to scarlet, more or less relieved with white,
black, and grey; as still seen in the only example which, having been
executed in marble, has been perfectly preserved, the front of the Ducal
Palace. This, however, owing to the nature of its materials, was a
peculiarly simple example; the ground is white, crossed with double bars
of pale red, and in the centre of each chequer there is a cross,
alternately black with a red centre and red with a black centre where
the arms cross. In painted work the grounds would be, of course, as
varied and complicated as those of manuscripts; but I only know of one
example left, on the Casa Sagredo, where, on some fragments of stucco, a
very early chequer background is traceable, composed of crimson
quatrefoils interlaced, with cherubim stretching their wings filling the
intervals. A small portion of this ground is seen beside the window
taken from the palace, Vol. II. Plate XIII. fig. 1.

§ XXXIII. It ought to be especially noticed, that, in all chequered
patterns employed in the colored designs of these noble periods, the
greatest care is taken to mark that they are _grounds_ of design rather
than designs themselves. Modern architects, in such minor imitations as
they are beginning to attempt, endeavor to dispose the parts in the
patterns so as to occupy certain symmetrical positions with respect to
the parts of the architecture. A Gothic builder never does this: he cuts
his ground into pieces of the shape he requires with utter
remorselessness, and places his windows or doors upon it with no regard
whatever to the lines in which they cut the pattern: and, in
illuminations of manuscripts, the chequer itself is constantly changed
in the most subtle and arbitrary way, wherever there is the least chance
of its regularity attracting the eye, and making it of importance. So
_intentional_ is this, that a diaper pattern is often set obliquely to
the vertical lines of the designs, for fear it should appear in any way
connected with them.

§ XXXIV. On these russet or crimson backgrounds the entire space of the
series of windows was relieved, for the most part, as a subdued white
field of alabaster; and on this delicate and veined white were set the
circular disks of purple and green. The arms of the family were of
course blazoned in their own proper colors, but I think generally on a
pure azure ground; the blue color is still left behind the shields in
the Casa Priuli and one or two more of the palaces which are unrestored,
and the blue ground was used also to relieve the sculptures of religious
subject. Finally, all the mouldings, capitals, cornices, cusps, and
traceries, were either entirely gilded or profusely touched with gold.

The whole front of a Gothic palace in Venice may, therefore, be simply
described as a field of subdued russet, quartered with broad sculptured
masses of white and gold; these latter being relieved by smaller inlaid
fragments of blue, purple, and deep green.

§ XXXV. Now, from the beginning of the fourteenth century, when painting
and architecture were thus united, two processes of change went on
simultaneously to the beginning of the seventeenth. The merely
decorative chequerings on the walls yielded gradually to more elaborate
paintings of figure-subject; first small and quaint, and then enlarging
into enormous pictures filled by figures generally colossal. As these
paintings became of greater merit and importance, the architecture with
which they were associated was less studied; and at last a style was
introduced in which the framework of the building was little more
interesting than that of a Manchester factory, but the whole space of
its walls was covered with the most precious fresco paintings. Such
edifices are of course no longer to be considered as forming an
architectural school; they were merely large preparations of artists'
panels; and Titian, Giorgione, and Veronese no more conferred merit on
the later architecture of Venice, as such, by painting on its façades,
than Landseer or Watts could confer merit on that of London by first
whitewashing and then painting its brick streets from one end to the
other.

§ XXXVI. Contemporarily with this change in the relative values of the
color decoration and the stone-work, one equally important was taking
place in the opposite direction, but of course in another group of
buildings. For in proportion as the architect felt himself thrust aside
or forgotten in one edifice, he endeavored to make himself principal in
another; and, in retaliation for the painter's entire usurpation of
certain fields of design, succeeded in excluding him totally from those
in which his own influence was predominant. Or, more accurately
speaking, the architects began to be too proud to receive assistance
from the colorists; and these latter sought for ground which the
architect had abandoned, for the unrestrained display of their own
skill. And thus, while one series of edifices is continually becoming
feebler in design and richer in superimposed paintings, another, that of
which we have so often spoken as the earliest or Byzantine Renaissance,
fragment by fragment rejects the pictorial decoration; supplies its
place first with marbles, and then, as the latter are felt by the
architect, daily increasing in arrogance and deepening in coldness, to
be too bright for his dignity, he casts even these aside one by one: and
when the last porphyry circle has vanished from the façade, we find two
palaces standing side by side, one built, so far as mere masonry goes,
with consummate care and skill, but without the slightest vestige of
color in any part of it; the other utterly without any claim to interest
in its architectural form, but covered from top to bottom with paintings
by Veronese. At this period, then, we bid farewell to color, leaving the
painters to their own peculiar field; and only regretting that they
waste their noblest work on walls, from which in a couple of centuries,
if not before, the greater part of their labor must be effaced. On the
other hand, the architecture whose decline we are tracing, has now
assumed an entirely new condition, that of the Central or True
Renaissance, whose nature we are to examine in the next chapter.

§ XXXVII. But before leaving these last palaces over which the Byzantine
influence extended itself, there is one more lesson to be learned from
them of much importance to us. Though in many respects debased in style,
they are consummate in workmanship, and unstained in honor; there is no
imperfection in them, and no dishonesty. That there is absolutely _no_
imperfection, is indeed, as we have seen above, a proof of their being
wanting in the highest qualities of architecture; but, as lessons in
masonry, they have their value, and may well be studied for the
excellence they display in methods of levelling stones, for the
precision of their inlaying, and other such qualities, which in them are
indeed too principal, yet very instructive in their particular way.

§ XXXVIII. For instance, in the inlaid design of the dove with the olive
branch, from the Casa Trevisan (Vol. I. Plate XX. p. 369), it is
impossible for anything to go beyond the precision with which the olive
leaves are cut out of the white marble; and, in some wreaths of laurel
below, the rippled edge of each leaf is as finely and easily drawn, as
if by a delicate pencil. No Florentine table is more exquisitely
finished than the façade of this entire palace; and as ideals of an
executive perfection, which, though we must not turn aside from our main
path to reach it, may yet with much advantage be kept in our sight and
memory, these palaces are most notable amidst the architecture of
Europe. The Rio Façade of the Ducal Palace, though very sparing in
color, is yet, as an example of finished masonry in a vast building, one
of the finest things, not only in Venice, but in the world. It differs
from other work of the Byzantine Renaissance, in being on a very large
scale; and it still retains one pure Gothic character, which adds not a
little to its nobleness, that of perpetual variety. There is hardly one
window of it, or one panel, that is like another; and this continual
change so increases its apparent size by confusing the eye, that, though
presenting no bold features, or striking masses of any kind, there are
few things in Italy more impressive than the vision of it overhead, as
the gondola glides from beneath the Bridge of Sighs. And lastly (unless
we are to blame these buildings for some pieces of very childish
perspective), they are magnificently honest, as well as perfect. I do
not remember even any gilding upon them; all is pure marble, and of the
finest kind.[5]

And therefore, in finally leaving the Ducal Palace,[6] let us take with
us one more lesson, the last which we shall receive from the Stones of
Venice, except in the form of a warning.

§ XXXIX. The school of architecture which we have just been examining
is, as we have seen above, redeemed from severe condemnation by its
careful and noble use of inlaid marbles as a means of color. From that
time forward, this art has been unknown, or despised; the frescoes of
the swift and daring Venetian painters long contended with the inlaid
marbles, outvying them with color, indeed more glorious than theirs, but
fugitive as the hues of woods in autumn; and, at last, as the art itself
of painting in this mighty manner failed from among men,[7] the modern
decorative system established itself, which united the meaninglessness
of the veined marble with the evanescence of the fresco, and completed
the harmony by falsehood.

§ XL. Since first, in the second chapter of the "Seven Lamps," I
endeavored to show the culpableness, as well as the baseness, of our
common modes of decoration by painted imitation of various woods or
marbles, the subject has been discussed in various architectural works,
and is evidently becoming one of daily increasing interest. When it is
considered how many persons there are whose means of livelihood consist
altogether in these spurious arts, and how difficult it is, even for the
most candid, to admit a conviction contrary both to their interests and
to their inveterate habits of practice and thought, it is rather a
matter of wonder, that the cause of Truth should have found even a few
maintainers, than that it should have encountered a host of adversaries.
It has, however, been defended repeatedly by architects themselves, and
so successfully, that I believe, so far as the desirableness of this or
that method of ornamentation is to be measured by the fact of its simple
honesty or dishonesty, there is little need to add anything to what has
been already urged upon the subject. But there are some points connected
with the practice of imitating marble, which I have been unable to touch
upon until now, and by the consideration of which we may be enabled to
see something of the _policy_ of honesty in this matter, without in the
least abandoning the higher ground of principle.

§ XLI. Consider, then, first, what marble seems to have been made for.
Over the greater part of the surface of the world, we find that a rock
has been providentially distributed, in a manner particularly pointing
it out as intended for the service of man. Not altogether a common rock,
it is yet rare enough to command a certain degree of interest and
attention wherever it is found; but not so rare as to preclude its use
for any purpose to which it is fitted. It is exactly of the consistence
which is best adapted for sculpture: that is to say, neither hard nor
brittle, nor flaky nor splintery, but uniform, and delicately, yet not
ignobly, soft,--exactly soft enough to allow the sculptor to work it
without force, and trace on it the finest lines of finished form; and
yet so hard as never to betray the touch or moulder away beneath the
steel; and so admirably crystallized, and of such permanent elements,
that no rains dissolve it, no time changes it, no atmosphere decomposes
it: once shaped, it is shaped for ever, unless subjected to actual
violence or attrition. This rock, then, is prepared by Nature for the
sculptor and architect, just as paper is prepared by the manufacturer
for the artist, with as great--nay, with greater--care, and more perfect
adaptation of the material to the requirements. And of this marble
paper, some is white and some colored; but more is colored than white,
because the white is evidently meant for sculpture, and the colored for
the covering of large surfaces.

§ XLII. Now, if we would take Nature at her word, and use this precious
paper which she has taken so much care to provide for us (it is a long
process, the making of that paper; the pulp of it needing the subtlest
possible solution, and the pressing of it--for it is all
hot-pressed--having to be done under the saw, or under something at
least as heavy); if, I say, we use it as Nature would have us, consider
what advantages would follow. The colors of marble are mingled for us
just as if on a prepared palette. They are of all shades and hues
(except bad ones), some being united and even, some broken, mixed, and
interrupted, in order to supply, as far as possible, the want of the
painter's power of breaking and mingling the color with the brush. But
there is more in the colors than this delicacy of adaptation. There is
history in them. By the manner in which they are arranged in every piece
of marble, they record the means by which that marble has been produced,
and the successive changes through which it has passed. And in all their
veins and zones, and flame-like stainings, or broken and disconnected
lines, they write various legends, never untrue, of the former political
state of the mountain kingdom to which they belonged, of its infirmities
and fortitudes, convulsions and consolidations, from the beginning of
time.

Now, if we were never in the habit of seeing anything but real marbles,
this language of theirs would soon begin to be understood; that is to
say, even the least observant of us would recognize such and such stones
as forming a peculiar class, and would begin to inquire where they came
from, and, at last, take some feeble interest in the main question, Why
they were only to be found in that or the other place, and how they
came to make a part of this mountain, and not of that? And in a little
while, it would not be possible to stand for a moment at a shop door,
leaning against the pillars of it, without remembering or questioning of
something well worth the memory or the inquiry, touching the hills of
Italy, or Greece, or Africa, or Spain; and we should be led on from
knowledge to knowledge, until even the unsculptured walls of our streets
became to us volumes as precious as those of our libraries.

§ XLIII. But the moment we admit imitation of marble, this source of
knowledge is destroyed. None of us can be at the pains to go through the
work of verification. If we knew that every colored stone we saw was
natural, certain questions, conclusions, interests, would force
themselves upon us without any effort of our own; but we have none of us
time to stop in the midst of our daily business, to touch and pore over,
and decide with painful minuteness of investigation, whether such and
such a pillar be stucco or stone. And the whole field of this knowledge,
which Nature intended us to possess when we were children, is hopelessly
shut out from us. Worse than shut out, for the mass of coarse imitations
confuses our knowledge acquired from other sources; and our memory of
the marbles we have perhaps once or twice carefully examined, is
disturbed and distorted by the inaccuracy of the imitations which are
brought before us continually.

§ XLIV. But it will be said, that it is too expensive to employ real
marbles in ordinary cases. It may be so: yet not always more expensive
than the fitting windows with enormous plate glass, and decorating them
with elaborate stucco mouldings and other useless sources of expenditure
in modern building; nay, not always in the end more expensive than the
frequent repainting of the dingy pillars, which a little water dashed
against them would refresh from day to day, if they were of true stone.
But, granting that it be so, in that very costliness, checking their
common use in certain localities, is part of the interest of marbles,
considered as history. Where they are not found, Nature has supplied
other materials,--clay for brick, or forest for timber,--in the working
of which she intends other characters of the human mind to be developed,
and by the proper use of which certain local advantages will assuredly
be attained, while the delightfulness and meaning of the precious
marbles will be felt more forcibly in the districts where they occur, or
on the occasions when they may be procured.

§ XLV. It can hardly be necessary to add, that, as the imitation of
marbles interferes with and checks the knowledge of geography and
geology, so the imitation of wood interferes with that of botany; and
that our acquaintance with the nature, uses, and manner of growth of the
timber trees of our own and of foreign countries, would probably, in the
majority of cases, become accurate and extensive, without any labor or
sacrifice of time, were not all inquiry checked, and all observation
betrayed, by the wretched labors of the "Grainer."

§ XLVI. But this is not all. As the practice of imitation retards
knowledge, so also it retards art.

There is not a meaner occupation for the human mind than the imitation
of the stains and striæ of marble and wood. When engaged in any easy and
simple mechanical occupation, there is still some liberty for the mind
to leave the literal work; and the clash of the loom or the activity of
the fingers will not always prevent the thoughts from some happy
expatiation in their own domains. But the grainer must think of what he
is doing; and veritable attention and care, and occasionally
considerable skill, are consumed in the doing of a more absolute nothing
than I can name in any other department of painful idleness. I know not
anything so humiliating as to see a human being, with arms and limbs
complete, and apparently a head, and assuredly a soul, yet into the
hands of which when you have put a brush and pallet, it cannot do
anything with them but imitate a piece of wood. It cannot color, it has
no ideas of color; it cannot draw, it has no ideas of form; it cannot
caricature, it has no ideas of humor. It is incapable of anything beyond
knots. All its achievement, the entire result of the daily application
of its imagination and immortality, is to be such a piece of texture as
the sun and dew are sucking up out of the muddy ground, and weaving
together, far more finely, in millions of millions of growing branches,
over every rood of waste woodland and shady hill.

§ XLVII. But what is to be done, the reader asks, with men who are
capable of nothing else than this? Nay, they may be capable of
everything else, for all we know, and what we are to do with them I will
try to say in the next chapter; but meanwhile one word more touching the
higher principles of action in this matter, from which we have descended
to those of expediency. I trust that some day the language of Types will
be more read and understood by us than it has been for centuries; and
when this language, a better one than either Greek or Latin, is again
recognized amongst us, we shall find, or remember, that as the other
visible elements of the universe--its air, its water, and its flame--set
forth, in their pure energies, the life-giving, purifying, and
sanctifying influences of the Deity upon His creatures, so the earth, in
its purity, sets forth His eternity and His TRUTH. I have dwelt above on
the historical language of stones; let us not forget this, which is
their theological language; and, as we would not wantonly pollute the
fresh waters when they issue forth in their clear glory from the rock,
nor stay the mountain winds into pestilential stagnancy, nor mock the
sunbeams with artificial and ineffective light; so let us not by our own
base and barren falsehoods, replace the crystalline strength and burning
color of the earth from which we were born, and to which we must return;
the earth which, like our own bodies, though dust in its degradation, is
full of splendor when God's hand gathers its atoms; and which was for
ever sanctified by Him, as the symbol no less of His love than of His
truth, when He bade the high priest bear the names of the Children of
Israel on the clear stones of the Breastplate of Judgment.


FOOTNOTES:

  [1] There is a curious instance of this in the modern imitations of
    the Gothic capitals of the Casa d' Oro, employed in its
    restorations. The old capitals look like clusters of leaves, the
    modern ones like kneaded masses of dough with holes in them.

  [2] Not that even these men were able to wear it altogether without
    harm, as we shall see in the next chapter.

  [3] Appendix 4, "Date of Palaces of Byzantine Renaissance."

  [4] In the various works which Mr. Prout has written on light and
    shade, no principle will be found insisted on more strongly than
    this carrying of the dark into the light, and _vice versa_. It is
    curious to find the untaught instinct of a merely picturesque artist
    in the nineteenth century, fixing itself so intensely on a principle
    which regulated the entire sacred composition of the thirteenth. I
    say "untaught" instinct, for Mr. Prout was, throughout his life, the
    discoverer of his own principles; fortunately so, considering what
    principles were taught in his time, but unfortunately in the
    abstract, for there were gifts in him, which, had there been any
    wholesome influences to cherish them, might have made him one of the
    greatest men of his age. He was great, under all adverse
    circumstances, but the mere wreck of what he might have been, if,
    after the rough training noticed in my pamphlet on Pre-Raphaelitism,
    as having fitted him for his great function in the world, he had met
    with a teacher who could have appreciated his powers, and directed
    them.

  [5] There may, however, be a kind of dishonesty even in the use of
    marble, if it is attempted to make the marble look like something
    else. See the final or Venetian Index under head "Scalzi."

  [6] Appendix 5, "Renaissance Side of Ducal Palace."

  [7] We have, as far as I _know_, at present among us, only one
    painter, G. F. Watts, who is capable of design in color on a large
    scale. He stands alone among our artists of the old school, in his
    perception of the value of breadth in distant masses, and in the
    vigor of invention by which such breadth must be sustained; and his
    power of expression and depth of thought are not less remarkable
    than his bold conception of color effect. Very probably some of the
    Pre-Raphaelites have the gift also; I am nearly certain that Rosetti
    has it, and I think also Millais; but the experiment has yet to be
    tried. I wish it could be made in Mr. Hope's church in Margaret
    Street.




CHAPTER II.

ROMAN RENAISSANCE.


§ I. Of all the buildings in Venice, later in date than the final
additions to the Ducal Palace, the noblest is, beyond all question, that
which, having been condemned by its proprietor, not many years ago, to
be pulled down and sold for the value of its materials, was rescued by
the Austrian government, and appropriated--the government officers
having no other use for it--to the business of the Post-Office; though
still known to the gondolier by its ancient name, the Casa Grimani. It
is composed of three stories of the Corinthian order, at once simple,
delicate, and sublime; but on so colossal a scale, that the
three-storied palaces on its right and left only reach to the cornice
which marks the level of its first floor. Yet it is not at first
perceived to be so vast; and it is only when some expedient is employed
to hide it from the eye, that by the sudden dwarfing of the whole reach
of the Grand Canal, which it commands, we become aware that it is to the
majesty of the Casa Grimani that the Rialto itself, and the whole group
of neighboring buildings, owe the greater part of their impressiveness.
Nor is the finish of its details less notable than the grandeur of their
scale. There is not an erring line, nor a mistaken proportion,
throughout its noble front; and the exceeding fineness of the chiselling
gives an appearance of lightness to the vast blocks of stone out of
whose perfect union that front is composed. The decoration is sparing,
but delicate: the first story only simpler than the rest, in that it has
pilasters instead of shafts, but all with Corinthian capitals, rich in
leafage, and fruited delicately; the rest of the walls flat and smooth,
and the mouldings sharp and shallow, so that the bold shafts look like
crystals of beryl running through a rock of quartz.

§ II. This palace is the principal type at Venice, and one of the best
in Europe, of the central architecture of the Renaissance schools; that
carefully studied and perfectly executed architecture to which those
schools owe their principal claims to our respect, and which became the
model of most of the important works subsequently produced by civilized
nations. I have called it the Roman Renaissance, because it is founded,
both in its principles of superimposition, and in the style of its
ornament, upon the architecture of classic Rome at its best period. The
revival of Latin literature both led to its adoption, and directed its
form; and the most important example of it which exists is the modern
Roman basilica of St. Peter's. It had, at its Renaissance or new birth,
no resemblance either to Greek, Gothic, or Byzantine forms, except in
retaining the use of the round arch, vault, and dome; in the treatment
of all details, it was exclusively Latin; the last links of connexion
with mediæval tradition having been broken by its builders in their
enthusiasm for classical art, and the forms of true Greek or Athenian
architecture being still unknown to them. The study of these noble Greek
forms has induced various modifications of the Renaissance in our own
times; but the conditions which are found most applicable to the uses of
modern life are still Roman, and the entire style may most fitly be
expressed by the term "Roman Renaissance."

§ III. It is this style, in its purity and fullest form,--represented by
such buildings as the Casa Grimani at Venice (built by San Micheli), the
Town Hall at Vicenza (by Palladio), St. Peter's at Rome (by Michael
Angelo), St. Paul's and Whitehall in London (by Wren and Inigo
Jones),--which is the true antagonist of the Gothic school. The
intermediate, or corrupt conditions of it, though multiplied over
Europe, are no longer admired by architects, or made the subjects of
their study; but the finished work of this central school is still, in
most cases, the model set before the student of the nineteenth century,
as opposed to those Gothic, Romanesque, or Byzantine forms which have
long been considered barbarous, and are so still by most of the leading
men of the day. That they are, on the contrary, most noble and
beautiful, and that the antagonistic Renaissance is, in the main,
unworthy and unadmirable, whatever perfection of a certain kind it may
possess, it was my principal purpose to show, when I first undertook the
labor of this work. It has been attempted already to put before the
reader the various elements which unite in the Nature of Gothic, and to
enable him thus to judge, not merely of the beauty of the forms which
that system has produced already, but of its future applicability to the
wants of mankind, and endless power over their hearts. I would now
endeavor, in like manner, to set before the reader the Nature of
Renaissance, and thus to enable him to compare the two styles under the
same light, and with the same enlarged view of their relations to the
intellect, and capacities for the service, of man.

§ IV. It will not be necessary for me to enter at length into any
examination of its external form. It uses, whether for its roofs of
aperture or roofs proper, the low gable or circular arch: but it differs
from Romanesque work in attaching great importance to the horizontal
lintel or architrave _above_ the arch; transferring the energy of the
principal shafts to the supporting of this horizontal beam, and thus
rendering the arch a subordinate, if not altogether a superfluous,
feature. The type of this arrangement has been given already at _c_,
Fig. XXXVI., p. 145, Vol. I.: and I might insist at length upon the
absurdity of a construction in which the shorter shaft, which has the
real weight of wall to carry, is split into two by the taller one, which
has nothing to carry at all,--that taller one being strengthened,
nevertheless, as if the whole weight of the building bore upon it; and
on the ungracefulness, never conquered in any Palladian work, of the two
half-capitals glued, as it were, against the slippery round sides of the
central shaft. But it is not the form of this architecture against which
I would plead. Its defects are shared by many of the noblest forms of
earlier building, and might have been entirely atoned for by excellence
of spirit. But it is the moral nature of it which is corrupt, and which
it must, therefore, be our principal business to examine and expose.

§ V. The moral, or immoral, elements which unite to form the spirit of
Central Renaissance architecture are, I believe, in the main,
two,--Pride and Infidelity; but the pride resolves itself into three
main branches,--Pride of Science, Pride of State, and Pride of System:
and thus we have four separate mental conditions which must be examined
successively.

§ VI. 1. PRIDE OF SCIENCE. It would have been more charitable, but more
confusing, to have added another element to our list, namely the _Love_
of Science; but the love is included in the pride, and is usually so
very subordinate an element that it does not deserve equality of
nomenclature. But, whether pursued in pride or in affection (how far by
either we shall see presently), the first notable characteristic of the
Renaissance central school is its introduction of accurate knowledge
into all its work, so far as it possesses such knowledge; and its
evident conviction, that such science is necessary to the excellence of
the work, and is the first thing to be expressed therein. So that all
the forms introduced, even in its minor ornament, are studied with the
utmost care; the anatomy of all animal structure is thoroughly
understood and elaborately expressed, and the whole of the execution
skilful and practised in the highest degree. Perspective, linear and
aerial, perfect drawing and accurate light and shade in painting, and
true anatomy in all representations of the human form, drawn or
sculptured, are the first requirements in all the work of this school.

§ VII. Now, first considering all this in the most charitable light, as
pursued from a real love of truth, and not from vanity, it would, of
course, have been all excellent and admirable, had it been regarded as
the aid of art, and not as its essence. But the grand mistake of the
Renaissance schools lay in supposing that science and art are the same
things, and that to advance in the one was necessarily to perfect the
other. Whereas they are, in reality, things not only different, but so
opposed, that to advance in the one is, in ninety-nine cases out of the
hundred, to retrograde in the other. This is the point to which I would
at present especially bespeak the reader's attention.

§ VIII. Science and art are commonly distinguished by the nature of
their actions; the one as knowing, the other as changing, producing, or
creating. But there is a still more important distinction in the nature
of the things they deal with. Science deals exclusively with things as
they are in themselves; and art exclusively with things as they affect
the human senses and human soul.[8] Her work is to portray the
appearance of things, and to deepen the natural impressions which they
produce upon living creatures. The work of science is to substitute
facts for appearances, and demonstrations for impressions. Both,
observe, are equally concerned with truth; the one with truth of aspect,
the other with truth of essence. Art does not represent things falsely,
but truly as they appear to mankind. Science studies the relations of
things to each other: but art studies only their relations to man; and
it requires of everything which is submitted to it imperatively this,
and only this,--what that thing is to the human eyes and human heart,
what it has to say to men, and what it can become to them: a field of
question just as much vaster than that of science, as the soul is larger
than the material creation.

§ IX. Take a single instance. Science informs us that the sun is
ninety-five millions of miles distant from, and 111 times broader than,
the earth; that we and all the planets revolve round it; and that it
revolves on its own axis in 25 days, 14 hours and 4 minutes. With all
this, art has nothing whatsoever to do. It has no care to know anything
of this kind. But the things which it does care to know, are these: that
in the heavens God hath set a tabernacle for the sun, "which is as a
bridegroom coming out of his chamber, and rejoiceth as a strong man to
run a race. His going forth is from the end of the heaven, and his
circuit unto the ends of it, and there is nothing hid from the heat
thereof."

§ X. This, then, being the kind of truth with which art is exclusively
concerned, how is such truth as this to be ascertained and accumulated?
Evidently, and only, by perception and feeling. Never either by
reasoning, or report. Nothing must come between Nature and the artist's
sight; nothing between God and the artist's soul. Neither calculation
nor hearsay,--be it the most subtle of calculations, or the wisest of
sayings,--may be allowed to come between the universe, and the witness
which art bears to its visible nature. The whole value of that witness
depends on its being _eye_-witness; the whole genuineness,
acceptableness, and dominion of it depend on the personal assurance of
the man who utters it. All its victory depends on the veracity of the
one preceding word, "Vidi."

The whole function of the artist in the world is to be a seeing and
feeling creature; to be an instrument of such tenderness and
sensitiveness, that no shadow, no hue, no line, no instantaneous and
evanescent expression of the visible things around him, nor any of the
emotions which they are capable of conveying to the spirit which has
been given him, shall either be left unrecorded, or fade from the book
of record. It is not his business either to think, to judge, to argue,
or to know. His place is neither in the closet, nor on the bench, nor at
the bar, nor in the library. They are for other men and other work. He
may think, in a by-way; reason, now and then, when he has nothing better
to do; know, such fragments of knowledge as he can gather without
stooping, or reach without pains; but none of these things are to be his
care. The work of his life is to be twofold only: to see, to feel.

§ XI. Nay, but, the reader perhaps pleads with me, one of the great uses
of knowledge is to open the eyes; to make things perceivable which,
never would have been seen, unless first they had been known.

Not so. This could only be said or believed by those who do not know
what the perceptive faculty of a great artist is, in comparison with
that of other men. There is no great painter, no great workman in any
art, but he sees more with the glance of a moment than he could learn by
the labor of a thousand hours. God has made every man fit for his work;
He has given to the man whom he means for a student, the reflective,
logical, sequential faculties; and to the man whom He means for an
artist, the perceptive, sensitive, retentive faculties. And neither of
these men, so far from being able to do the other's work, can even
comprehend the way in which it is done. The student has no understanding
of the vision, nor the painter of the process; but chiefly the student
has no idea of the colossal grasp of the true painter's vision and
sensibility.

The labor of the whole Geological Society, for the last fifty years, has
but now arrived at the ascertainment of those truths respecting mountain
form which Turner saw and expressed with a few strokes of a camel's hair
pencil fifty years ago, when he was a boy. The knowledge of all the laws
of the planetary system, and of all the curves of the motion of
projectiles, would never enable the man of science to draw a waterfall
or a wave; and all the members of Surgeons' Hall helping each other
could not at this moment see, or represent, the natural movement of a
human body in vigorous action, as a poor dyer's son did two hundred
years ago.[9]

§ XII. But surely, it is still insisted, granting this peculiar faculty
to the painter, he will still see more as he knows more, and the more
knowledge he obtains, therefore, the better. No; not even so. It is
indeed true, that, here and there, a piece of knowledge will enable the
eye to detect a truth which might otherwise have escaped it; as, for
instance, in watching a sunrise, the knowledge of the true nature of the
orb may lead the painter to feel more profoundly, and express more
fully, the distance between the bars of cloud that cross it, and the
sphere of flame that lifts itself slowly beyond them into the infinite
heaven. But, for one visible truth to which knowledge thus opens the
eyes, it seals them to a thousand: that is to say, if the knowledge
occur to the mind so as to occupy its powers of contemplation at the
moment when the sight work is to be done, the mind retires inward, fixes
itself upon the known fact, and forgets the passing visible ones; and a
_moment_ of such forgetfulness loses more to the painter than a day's
thought can gain. This is no new or strange assertion. Every person
accustomed to careful reflection of any kind, knows that its natural
operation is to close his eyes to the external world. While he is
thinking deeply, he neither sees nor feels, even though naturally he may
possess strong powers of sight and emotion. He who, having journeyed all
day beside the Leman Lake, asked of his companions, at evening, where it
was,[10] probably was not wanting in sensibility; but he was generally a
thinker, not a perceiver. And this instance is only an extreme one of
the effect which, in all cases, knowledge, becoming a subject of
reflection, produces upon the sensitive faculties. It must be but poor
and lifeless knowledge, if it has no tendency to force itself forward,
and become ground for reflection, in despite of the succession of
external objects. It will not obey their succession. The first that
comes gives it food enough for its day's work; it is its habit, its
duty, to cast the rest aside, and fasten upon that. The first thing that
a thinking and knowing man sees in the course of the day, he will not
easily quit. It is not his way to quit anything without getting to the
bottom of it, if possible. But the artist is bound to receive all things
on the broad, white, lucid field of his soul, not to grasp at one. For
instance, as the knowing and thinking man watches the sunrise, he sees
something in the color of a ray, or the change of a cloud, that is new
to him; and this he follows out forthwith into a labyrinth of optical
and pneumatical laws, perceiving no more clouds nor rays all the
morning. But the painter must catch all the rays, all the colors that
come, and see them all truly, all in their real relations and
succession; therefore, everything that occupies room in his mind he must
cast aside for the time, as completely as may be. The thoughtful man is
gone far away to seek; but the perceiving man must sit still, and open
his heart to receive. The thoughtful man is knitting and sharpening
himself into a two-edged sword, wherewith to pierce. The perceiving man
is stretching himself into a four-cornered sheet wherewith to catch. And
all the breadth to which he can expand himself, and all the white
emptiness into which he can blanch himself, will not be enough to
receive what God has to give him.

§ XIII. What, then, it will be indignantly asked, is an utterly ignorant
and unthinking man likely to make the best artist? No, not so neither.
Knowledge is good for him so long as he can keep it utterly, servilely,
subordinate to his own divine work, and trample it under his feet, and
out of his way, the moment it is likely to entangle him.

And in this respect, observe, there is an enormous difference between
knowledge and education. An artist need not be a _learned_ man, in all
probability it will be a disadvantage to him to become so; but he ought,
if possible, always to be an _educated_ man: that is, one who has
understanding of his own uses and duties in the world, and therefore of
the general nature of the things done and existing in the world; and who
has so trained himself, or been trained, as to turn to the best and most
courteous account whatever faculties or knowledge he has. The mind of an
educated man is greater than the knowledge it possesses; it is like the
vault of heaven, encompassing the earth which lives and flourishes
beneath it: but the mind of an educated and learned man is like a
caoutchouc band, with an everlasting spirit of contraction in it,
fastening together papers which it cannot open, and keeps others from
opening.

Half our artists are ruined for want of education, and by the possession
of knowledge; the best that I have known have been educated, and
illiterate. The ideal of an artist, however, is not that he should be
illiterate, but well read in the best books, and thoroughly high bred,
both in heart and in bearing. In a word, he should be fit for the best
society, _and should keep out of it_.[11]

§ XIV. There are, indeed, some kinds of knowledge with which an artist
ought to be thoroughly furnished; those, for instance, which enable him
to express himself; for this knowledge relieves instead of encumbering
his mind, and permits it to attend to its purposes instead of wearying
itself about means. The whole mystery of manipulation and manufacture
should be familiar to the painter from a child. He should know the
chemistry of all colors and materials whatsoever, and should prepare all
his colors himself, in a little laboratory of his own. Limiting his
chemistry to this one object, the amount of practical science necessary
for it, and such accidental discoveries as might fall in his way in the
course of his work, of better colors or better methods of preparing
them, would be an infinite refreshment to his mind; a minor subject of
interest to which it might turn when jaded with comfortless labor, or
exhausted with feverish invention, and yet which would never interfere
with its higher functions, when it chose to address itself to them. Even
a considerable amount of manual labor, sturdy color-grinding and
canvas-stretching, would be advantageous; though this kind of work ought
to be in great part done by pupils. For it is one of the conditions of
perfect knowledge in these matters, that every great master should have
a certain number of pupils, to whom he is to impart all the knowledge of
materials and means which he himself possesses, as soon as possible; so
that, at any rate, by the time they are fifteen years old, they may know
all that he knows himself in this kind; that is to say, all that the
world of artists know, and his own discoveries besides, and so never be
troubled about methods any more. Not that the knowledge even of his own
particular methods is to be of purpose confined to himself and his
pupils, but that necessarily it must be so in some degree; for only
those who see him at work daily can understand his small and
multitudinous ways of practice. These cannot verbally be explained to
everybody, nor is it needful that they should, only let them be
concealed from nobody who cares to see them; in which case, of course,
his attendant scholars will know them best. But all that can be made
public in matters of this kind should be so with all speed, every artist
throwing his discovery into the common stock, and the whole body of
artists taking such pains in this department of science as that there
shall be no unsettled questions about any known material or method: that
it shall be an entirely ascertained and indisputable matter which is the
best white, and which the best brown; which the strongest canvas, and
safest varnish; and which the shortest and most perfect way of doing
everything known up to that time: and if any one discovers a better, he
is to make it public forthwith. All of them taking care to embarrass
themselves with no theories or reasons for anything, but to work
empirically only: it not being in any wise their business to know
whether light moves in rays or in waves; or whether the blue rays of the
spectrum move slower or faster than the rest; but simply to know how
many minutes and seconds such and such a powder must be calcined, to
give the brightest blue.

§ XV. Now it is perhaps the most exquisite absurdity of the whole
Renaissance system, that while it has encumbered the artist with every
species of knowledge that is of no use to him, this one precious and
necessary knowledge it has utterly lost. There is not, I believe, at
this moment, a single question which could be put respecting pigments
and methods, on which the body of living artists would agree in their
answers. The lives of artists are passed in fruitless experiments;
fruitless, because undirected by experience and uncommunicated in their
results. Every man has methods of his own, which he knows to be
insufficient, and yet jealously conceals from his fellow-workmen: every
colorman has materials of his own, to which it is rare that the artist
can trust: and in the very front of the majestic advance of chemical
science, the empirical science of the artist has been annihilated, and
the days which should have led us to higher perfection are passed in
guessing at, or in mourning over, lost processes; while the so-called
Dark ages, possessing no more knowledge of chemistry than a village
herbalist does now, discovered, established, and put into daily practice
such methods of operation as have made their work, at this day, the
despair of all who look upon it.

§ XVI. And yet even this, to the painter, the safest of sciences, and in
some degree necessary, has its temptations, and capabilities of abuse.
For the simplest means are always enough for a great man; and when once
he has obtained a few ordinary colors, which he is sure will stand, and
a white surface that will not darken nor moulder, nor rend, he is master
of the world, and of his fellow-men. And, indeed, as if in these times
we were bent on furnishing examples of every species of opposite error,
while we have suffered the traditions to escape us of the simple methods
of doing simple things, which are enough for all the arts, and to all
the ages, we have set ourselves to discover fantastic modes of doing
fantastic things,--new mixtures and manipulations of metal, and
porcelain, and leather, and paper, and every conceivable condition of
false substance and cheap work, to our own infinitely multiplied
confusion,--blinding ourselves daily more and more to the great,
changeless, and inevitable truth, that there is but one goodness in art;
and that is one which the chemist cannot prepare, nor the merchant
cheapen, for it comes only of a rare human hand, and rare human soul.

§ XVII. Within its due limits, however, here is one branch of science
which the artist may pursue; and, within limits still more strict,
another also, namely, the science of the appearances of things as they
have been ascertained and registered by his fellow-men. For no day
passes but some visible fact is pointed out to us by others, which,
without their help, we should not have noticed; and the accumulation and
generalization of visible facts have formed, in the succession of ages,
the sciences of light and shade, and perspective, linear and aerial: so
that the artist is now at once put in possession of certain truths
respecting the appearances of things, which, so pointed out to him, any
man may in a few days understand and acknowledge; but which, without
aid, he could not probably discover in his lifetime. I say, probably
could not, because the time which the history of art shows us to have
been actually occupied in the discovery and systematization of such
truth, is no measure of the time _necessary_ for such discovery. The
lengthened period which elapsed between the earliest and the perfect
developement of the science of light (if I may so call it) was not
occupied in the actual effort to ascertain its laws, but in _acquiring
the disposition to make that effort_. It did not take five centuries to
find out the appearance of natural objects; but it took five centuries
to make people care about representing them. An artist of the twelfth
century did not desire to represent nature. His work was symbolical and
ornamental. So long as it was intelligible and lovely, he had no care to
make it like nature. As, for instance, when an old painter represented
the glory round a saint's head by a burnished plate of pure gold, he had
no intention of imitating an effect of light. He meant to tell the
spectator that the figure so decorated was a saint, and to produce
splendor of effect by the golden circle. It was no matter to him what
light was like. So soon as it entered into his intention to represent
the appearance of light, he was not long in discovering the natural
facts necessary for his purpose.

§ XVIII. But, this being fully allowed, it is still true that the
accumulation of facts now known respecting visible phenomena, is greater
than any man could hope to gather for himself, and that it is well for
him to be made acquainted with them; provided always, that he receive
them only at their true value, and do not suffer himself to be misled by
them. I say, at their true value; that is, an exceedingly small one. All
the information which men can receive from the accumulated experience of
others, is of no use but to enable them more quickly and accurately to
see for themselves. It will in no wise take the place of this personal
sight. Nothing can be done well in art, except by vision. Scientific
principles and experiences are helps to the eye, as a microscope is; and
they are of exactly as much use _without_ the eye. No science of
perspective, or of anything else, will enable us to draw the simplest
natural line accurately, unless we see it and feel it. Science is soon
at her wits' end. All the professors of perspective in Europe, could
not, by perspective, draw the line of curve of a sea beach; nay, could
not outline one pool of the quiet water left among the sand. The eye and
hand can do it, nothing else. All the rules of aerial perspective that
ever were written, will not tell me how sharply the pines on the
hill-top are drawn at this moment on the sky. I shall know if I see
them, and love them; not till then. I may study the laws of atmospheric
gradation for fourscore years and ten, and I shall not be able to draw
so much as a brick-kiln through its own smoke, unless I look at it; and
that in an entirely humble and unscientific manner, ready to see all
that the smoke, my master, is ready to show me, and expecting to see
nothing more.

§ XIX. So that all the knowledge a man has must be held cheap, and
neither trusted nor respected, the moment he comes face to face with
Nature. If it help him, well; if not, but, on the contrary, thrust
itself upon him in an impertinent and contradictory temper, and venture
to set itself in the slightest degree in opposition to, or comparison
with, his sight, let it be disgraced forthwith. And the slave is less
likely to take too much upon herself, if she has not been bought for a
high price. All the knowledge an artist needs, will, in these days, come
to him almost without his seeking; if he has far to look for it, he may
be sure he does not want it. Prout became Prout, without knowing a
single rule of perspective to the end of his days; and all the
perspective in the Encyclopædia will never produce us another Prout.

§ XX. And observe, also, knowledge is not only very often unnecessary,
but it is often _untrustworthy_. It is inaccurate, and betrays us where
the eye would have been true to us. Let us take the single instance of
the knowledge of aerial perspective, of which the moderns are so proud,
and see how it betrays us in various ways. First by the conceit of it,
which often prevents our enjoying work in which higher and better things
were thought of than effects of mist. The other day I showed a line
impression of Albert Durer's "St. Hubert" to a modern engraver, who had
never seen it nor any other of Albert Durer's works. He looked at it for
a minute contemptuously, then turned away: "Ah, I see that man did not
know much about aerial perspective!" All the glorious work and thought
of the mighty master, all the redundant landscape, the living
vegetation, the magnificent truth of line, were dead letters to him,
because he happened to have been taught one particular piece of
knowledge which Durer despised.

§ XXI. But not only in the conceit of it, but in the inaccuracy of it,
this science betrays us. Aerial perspective, as given by the modern
artist, is, in nine cases out of ten, a gross and ridiculous
exaggeration, as is demonstrable in a moment. The effect of air in
altering the hue and depth of color is of course great in the exact
proportion of the volume of air between the observer and the object. It
is not violent within the first few yards, and then diminished
gradually, but it is equal for each foot of interposing air. Now in a
clear day, and clear climate, such as that generally presupposed in a
work of fine color, objects are completely visible at a distance of ten
miles; visible in light and shade, with gradations between the two.
Take, then, the faintest possible hue of shadow, or of any color, and
the most violent and positive possible, and set them side by side. The
interval between them is greater than the real difference (for objects
may often be seen clearly much farther than ten miles, I have seen Mont
Blanc at 120) caused by the ten miles of intervening air between any
given hue of the nearest, and most distant, objects; but let us assume
it, in courtesy to the masters of aerial perspective, to be the real
difference. Then roughly estimating a mile at less than it really is,
also in courtesy to them, or at 5000 feet, we have this difference
between tints produced by 50,000 feet of air. Then, ten feet of air
will produce the 5000th part of this difference. Let the reader take the
two extreme tints, and carefully gradate the one into the other. Let him
divide this gradated shadow or color into 5000 successive parts; and the
difference in depth between one of these parts and the next is the exact
amount of aerial perspective between one object, and another, ten feet
behind it, on a clear day.

§ XXII. Now, in Millais' "Huguenot," the figures were standing about
three feet from the wall behind them; and the wise world of critics,
which could find no other fault with the picture, professed to have its
eyes hurt by the want of an aerial perspective, which, had it been
accurately given (as, indeed, I believe it was), would have amounted to
the 10/3-5000th, or less than the 15,000th part of the depth of any
given color. It would be interesting to see a picture painted by the
critics, upon this scientific principle. The aerial perspective usually
represented is entirely conventional and ridiculous; a mere struggle on
the part of the pretendedly well-informed, but really ignorant, artist,
to express distances by mist which he cannot by drawing.

It is curious that the critical world is just as much offended by the
true _presence_ of aerial perspective, over distances of fifty miles,
and with definite purpose of representing mist, in the works of Turner,
as by the true _absence_ of aerial perspective, over distances of three
feet, and in clear weather, in those of Millais.

§ XXIII. "Well but," still answers the reader, "this kind of error may
here and there be occasioned by too much respect for undigested
knowledge; but, on the whole, the gain is greater than the loss, and the
fact is, that a picture of the Renaissance period, or by a modern
master, does indeed represent nature more faithfully than one wrought in
the ignorance of old times." No, not one whit; for the most part less
faithfully. Indeed, the outside of nature is more truly drawn; the
material commonplace, which can be systematized, catalogued, and taught
to all pains-taking mankind,--forms of ribs and scapulæ,[12] of eyebrows
and lips, and curls of hair. Whatever can be measured and handled,
dissected and demonstrated,--in a word, whatever is of the body
only,--that the schools of knowledge do resolutely and courageously
possess themselves of, and portray. But whatever is immeasurable,
intangible, indivisible, and of the spirit, that the schools of
knowledge do as certainly lose, and blot out of their sight, that is to
say, all that is worth art's possessing or recording at all; for
whatever can be arrested, measured, and systematized, we can contemplate
as much as we will in nature herself. But what we want art to do for us
is to stay what is fleeting, and to enlighten what is incomprehensible,
to incorporate the things that have no measure, and immortalize the
things that have no duration. The dimly seen, momentary glance, the
flitting shadow of faint emotion, the imperfect lines of fading thought,
and all that by and through such things as these is recorded on the
features of man, and all that in man's person and actions, and in the
great natural world, is infinite and wonderful; having in it that spirit
and power which man may witness, but not weigh; conceive, but not
comprehend; love, but not limit; and imagine, but not define;--this, the
beginning and the end of the aim of all noble art, we have, in the
ancient art, by perception; and we have _not_, in the newer art, by
knowledge. Giotto gives it us, Orcagna gives it us. Angelico, Memmi,
Pisano, it matters not who,--all simple and unlearned men, in their
measure and manner,--give it us; and the learned men that followed them
give it us not, and we, in our supreme learning, own ourselves at this
day farther from it than ever.

§ XXIV. "Nay," but it is still answered, "this is because we have not
yet brought our knowledge into right use, but have been seeking to
accumulate it, rather than to apply it wisely to the ends of art. Let us
now do this, and we may achieve all that was done by that elder ignorant
art, and infinitely more." No, not so; for as soon as we try to put our
knowledge to good use, we shall find that we have much more than we can
use, and that what more we have is an encumbrance. All our errors in
this respect arise from a gross misconception as to the true nature of
knowledge itself. We talk of learned and ignorant men, as if there were
a certain quantity of knowledge, which to possess was to be learned, and
which not to possess was to be ignorant; instead of considering that
knowledge is infinite, and that the man most learned in human estimation
is just as far from knowing anything as he ought to know it, as the
unlettered peasant. Men are merely on a lower or higher stage of an
eminence, whose summit is God's throne, infinitely above all; and there
is just as much reason for the wisest as for the simplest man being
discontented with his position, as respects the real quantity of
knowledge he possesses. And, for both of them, the only true reasons for
contentment with the sum of knowledge they possess are these: that it is
the kind of knowledge they need for their duty and happiness in life;
that all they have is tested and certain, so far as it is in their
power; that all they have is well in order, and within reach when they
need it; that it has not cost too much time in the getting; that none of
it, once got, has been lost; and that there is not too much to be easily
taken care of.

§ XXV. Consider these requirements a little, and the evils that result
in our education and polity from neglecting them. Knowledge is mental
food, and is exactly to the spirit what food is to the body (except that
the spirit needs several sorts of food, of which knowledge is only one),
and it is liable to the same kind of misuses. It may be mixed and
disguised by art, till it becomes unwholesome; it may be refined,
sweetened, and made palatable, until it has lost all its power of
nourishment; and, even of its best kind, it may be eaten to surfeiting,
and minister to disease and death.

§ XXVI. Therefore, with respect to knowledge, we are to reason and act
exactly as with respect to food. We no more live to know, than we live
to eat. We live to contemplate, enjoy, act, adore; and we may know all
that is to be known in this world, and what Satan knows in the other,
without being able to do any of these. We are to ask, therefore, first,
is the knowledge we would have fit food for us, good and simple, not
artificial and decorated? and secondly, how much of it will enable us
best for our work; and will leave our hearts light, and our eyes clear?
For no more than that is to be eaten without the old Eve-sin.

§ XXVII. Observe, also, the difference between tasting knowledge, and
hoarding it. In this respect it is also like food; since, in some
measure, the knowledge of all men is laid up in granaries, for future
use; much of it is at any given moment dormant, not fed upon or enjoyed,
but in store. And by all it is to be remembered, that knowledge in this
form may be kept without air till it rots, or in such unthreshed
disorder that it is of no use; and that, however good or orderly, it is
still only in being tasted that it becomes of use; and that men may
easily starve in their own granaries, men of science, perhaps, most of
all, for they are likely to seek accumulation of their store, rather
than nourishment from it. Yet let it not be thought that I would
undervalue them. The good and great among them are like Joseph, to whom
all nations sought to buy corn; or like the sower going forth to sow
beside all waters, sending forth thither the feet of the ox and the ass:
only let us remember that this is not all men's work. We are not
intended to be all keepers of granaries, nor all to be measured by the
filling of a storehouse; but many, nay, most of us, are to receive day
by day our daily bread, and shall be as well nourished and as fit for
our labor, and often, also, fit for nobler and more divine labor, in
feeding from the barrel of meal that does not waste, and from the cruse
of oil that does not fail, than if our barns were filled with plenty,
and our presses bursting out with new wine.

§ XXVIII. It is for each man to find his own measure in this matter; in
great part, also, for others to find it for him, while he is yet a
youth. And the desperate evil of the whole Renaissance system is, that
all idea of measure is therein forgotten, that knowledge is thought the
one and the only good, and it is never inquired whether men are vivified
by it or paralyzed. Let us leave figures. The reader may not believe the
analogy I have been pressing so far; but let him consider the subject in
itself, let him examine the effect of knowledge in his own heart, and
see whether the trees of knowledge and of life are one now, any more
than in Paradise. He must feel that the real animating power of
knowledge is only in the moment of its being first received, when it
fills us with wonder and joy; a joy for which, observe, the previous
ignorance is just as necessary as the present knowledge. That man is
always happy who is in the presence of something which he cannot know to
the full, which he is always going on to know. This is the necessary
condition of a finite creature with divinely rooted and divinely
directed intelligence; this, therefore, its happy state,--but observe, a
state, not of triumph or joy in what it knows, but of joy rather in the
continual discovery of new ignorance, continual self-abasement,
continual astonishment. Once thoroughly our own, the knowledge ceases to
give us pleasure. It may be practically useful to us, it may be good for
others, or good for usury to obtain more; but, in itself, once let it be
thoroughly familiar, and it is dead. The wonder is gone from it, and all
the fine color which it had when first we drew it up out of the infinite
sea. And what does it matter how much or how little of it we have laid
aside, when our only enjoyment is still in the casting of that deep sea
line? What does it matter? Nay, in one respect, it matters much, and not
to our advantage. For one effect of knowledge is to deaden the force of
the imagination and the original energy of the whole man: under the
weight of his knowledge he cannot move so lightly as in the days of his
simplicity. The pack-horse is furnished for the journey, the war-horse
is armed for war; but the freedom of the field and the lightness of the
limb are lost for both. Knowledge is, at best, the pilgrim's burden or
the soldier's panoply, often a weariness to them both: and the
Renaissance knowledge is like the Renaissance armor of plate, binding
and cramping the human form; while all good knowledge is like the
crusader's chain mail, which throws itself into folds with the body, yet
it is rarely so forged as that the clasps and rivets do not gall us. All
men feel this, though they do not think of it, nor reason out its
consequences. They look back to the days of childhood as of greatest
happiness, because those were the days of greatest wonder, greatest
simplicity, and most vigorous imagination. And the whole difference
between a man of genius and other men, it has been said a thousand
times, and most truly, is that the first remains in great part a child,
seeing with the large eyes of children, in perpetual wonder, not
conscious of much knowledge,--conscious, rather, of infinite ignorance,
and yet infinite power; a fountain of eternal admiration, delight, and
creative force within him meeting the ocean of visible and governable
things around him.

That is what we have to make men, so far as we may. All are to be men of
genius in their degree,--rivulets or rivers, it does not matter, so that
the souls be clear and pure; not dead walls encompassing dead heaps of
things known and numbered, but running waters in the sweet wilderness of
things unnumbered and unknown, conscious only of the living banks, on
which they partly refresh and partly reflect the flowers, and so pass
on.

§ XXIX. Let each man answer for himself how far his knowledge has made
him this, or how far it is loaded upon him as the pyramid is upon the
tomb. Let him consider, also, how much of it has cost him labor and time
that might have been spent in healthy, happy action, beneficial to all
mankind; how many living souls may have been left uncomforted and
unhelped by him, while his own eyes were failing by the midnight lamp;
how many warm sympathies have died within him as he measured lines or
counted letters; how many draughts of ocean air, and steps on
mountain-turf, and openings of the highest heaven he has lost for his
knowledge; how much of that knowledge, so dearly bought, is now
forgotten or despised, leaving only the capacity of wonder less within
him, and, as it happens in a thousand instances, perhaps even also the
capacity of devotion. And let him,--if, after thus dealing with his own
heart, he can say that his knowledge has indeed been fruitful to
him,--yet consider how many there are who have been forced by the
inevitable laws of modern education into toil utterly repugnant to their
natures, and that in the extreme, until the whole strength of the young
soul was sapped away; and then pronounce with fearfulness how far, and
in how many senses, it may indeed be true that the wisdom of this world
is foolishness with God.

§ XXX. Now all this possibility of evil, observe, attaches to knowledge
pursued for the noblest ends, if it be pursued imprudently. I have
assumed, in speaking of its effect both on men generally and on the
artist especially, that it was sought in the true love of it, and with
all honesty and directness of purpose. But this is granting far too much
in its favor. Of knowledge in general, and without qualification, it is
said by the Apostle that "it puffeth up;" and the father of all modern
science, writing directly in its praise, yet asserts this danger even in
more absolute terms, calling it a "venomousness" in the very nature of
knowledge itself.

§ XXXI. There is, indeed, much difference in this respect between the
tendencies of different branches of knowledge; it being a sure rule that
exactly in proportion as they are inferior, nugatory, or limited in
scope, their power of feeding pride is greater. Thus philology, logic,
rhetoric, and the other sciences of the schools, being for the most part
ridiculous and trifling, have so pestilent an effect upon those who are
devoted to them, that their students cannot conceive of any higher
sciences than these, but fancy that all education ends in the knowledge
of words: but the true and great sciences, more especially natural
history, make men gentle and modest in proportion to the largeness of
their apprehension, and just perception of the infiniteness of the
things they can never know. And this, it seems to me, is the principal
lesson we are intended to be caught by the book of Job; for there God
has thrown open to us the heart of a man most just and holy, and
apparently perfect in all things possible to human nature except
humility. For this he is tried: and we are shown that no suffering, no
self-examination, however honest, however stern, no searching out of the
heart by its own bitterness, is enough to convince man of his
nothingness before God; but that the sight of God's creation will do it.
For, when the Deity himself has willed to end the temptation, and to
accomplish in Job that for which it was sent, He does not vouchsafe to
reason with him, still less does He overwhelm him with terror, or
confound him by laying open before his eyes the book of his iniquities.
He opens before him only the arch of the dayspring, and the fountains of
the deep; and amidst the covert of the reeds, and on the heaving waves,
He bids him watch the kings of the children of pride,--"Behold now
Behemoth, which I made with thee:" And the work is done.

§ XXXII. Thus, if, I repeat, there is any one lesson in the whole book
which stands forth more definitely than another, it is this of the holy
and humbling influence of natural science on the human heart. And yet,
even here, it is not the science, but the perception, to which the good
is owing; and the natural sciences may become as harmful as any others,
when they lose themselves in classification and catalogue-making. Still,
the principal danger is with the sciences of words and methods; and it
was exactly into those sciences that the whole energy of men during the
Renaissance period was thrown. They discovered suddenly that the world
for ten centuries had been living in an ungrammatical manner, and they
made it forthwith the end of human existence to be grammatical. And it
mattered thenceforth nothing what was said, or what was done, so only
that it was said with scholarship, and done with system. Falsehood in a
Ciceronian dialect had no opposers; truth in patois no listeners. A
Roman phrase was thought worth any number of Gothic facts. The sciences
ceased at once to be anything more than different kinds of
grammars,--grammar of language, grammar of logic, grammar of ethics,
grammar of art; and the tongue, wit, and invention of the human race
were supposed to have found their utmost and most divine mission in
syntax and syllogism, perspective and five orders.

Of such knowledge as this, nothing but pride could come; and, therefore,
I have called the first mental characteristic of the Renaissance
schools, the "pride" of science. If they had reached any science worth
the name, they might have loved it; but of the paltry knowledge they
possessed, they could only be proud. There was not anything in it
capable of being loved. Anatomy, indeed, then first made a subject of
accurate study, is a true science, but not so attractive as to enlist
the affections strongly on its side: and therefore, like its meaner
sisters, it became merely a ground for pride; and the one main purpose
of the Renaissance artists, in all their work, was to show how much they
knew.

§ XXXIII. There were, of course, noble exceptions; but chiefly belonging
to the earliest periods of the Renaissance, when its teaching had not
yet produced its full effect. Raphael, Leonardo, and Michael Angelo were
all trained in the old school; they all had masters who knew the true
ends of art, and had reached them; masters nearly as great as they were
themselves, but imbued with the old religious and earnest spirit, which
their disciples receiving from them, and drinking at the same time
deeply from all the fountains of knowledge opened in their day, became
the world's wonders. Then the dull wondering world believed that their
greatness rose out of their new knowledge, instead of out of that
ancient religious root, in which to abide was life, from which to be
severed was annihilation. And from that day to this, they have tried to
produce Michael Angelos and Leonardos by teaching the barren sciences,
and still have mourned and marvelled that no more Michael Angelos came;
not perceiving that those great Fathers were only able to receive such
nourishment because they were rooted on the rock of all ages, and that
our scientific teaching, nowadays, is nothing more nor less than the
assiduous watering of trees whose stems are cut through. Nay, I have
even granted too much in saying that those great men were able to
receive pure nourishment from the sciences; for my own conviction is,
and I know it to be shared by most of those who love Raphael
truly,--that he painted best when he knew least. Michael Angelo was
betrayed, again and again, into such vain and offensive exhibition of
his anatomical knowledge as, to this day, renders his higher powers
indiscernible by the greater part of men; and Leonardo fretted his life
away in engineering, so that there is hardly a picture left to bear his
name. But, with respect to all who followed, there can be no question
that the science they possessed was utterly harmful; serving merely to
draw away their hearts at once from the purposes of art and the power of
nature, and to make, out of the canvas and marble, nothing more than
materials for the exhibition of petty dexterity and useless knowledge.

§ XXXIV. It is sometimes amusing to watch the naïve and childish way in
which this vanity is shown. For instance, when perspective was first
invented, the world thought it a mighty discovery, and the greatest men
it had in it were as proud of knowing that retiring lines converge, as
if all the wisdom of Solomon had been compressed into a vanishing point.
And, accordingly, it became nearly impossible for any one to paint a
Nativity, but he must turn the stable and manger into a Corinthian
arcade, in order to show his knowledge of perspective; and half the best
architecture of the time, instead of being adorned with historical
sculpture, as of old, was set forth with bas-relief of minor corridors
and galleries, thrown into perspective.

Now that perspective can be taught to any schoolboy in a week, we can
smile at this vanity. But the fact is, that all pride in knowledge is
precisely as ridiculous, whatever its kind, or whatever its degree.
There is, indeed, nothing of which man has any right to be proud; but
the very last thing of which, with any show of reason, he can make his
boast is his knowledge, except only that infinitely small portion of it
which he has discovered for himself. For what is there to be more proud
of in receiving a piece of knowledge from another person, than in
receiving a piece of money? Beggars should not be proud, whatever kind
of alms they receive. Knowledge is like current coin. A man may have
some right to be proud of possessing it, if he has worked for the gold
of it, and assayed it, and stamped it, so that it may be received of
all men as true; or earned it fairly, being already assayed: but if he
has done none of these things, but only had it thrown in his face by a
passer-by, what cause has he to be proud? And though, in this mendicant
fashion, he had heaped together the wealth of Croesus, would pride any
more, for this, become him, as, in some sort, it becomes the man who has
labored for his fortune, however small? So, if a man tells me the sun is
larger than the earth, have I any cause for pride in knowing it? or, if
any multitude of men tell me any number of things, heaping all their
wealth of knowledge upon me, have I any reason to be proud under the
heap? And is not nearly all the knowledge of which we boast in these
days cast upon us in this dishonorable way; worked for by other men,
proved by them, and then forced upon us, even against our wills, and
beaten into us in our youth, before we have the wit even to know if it
be good or not? (Mark the distinction between knowledge and thought.)
Truly a noble possession to be proud of! Be assured, there is no part of
the furniture of a man's mind which he has a right to exult in, but that
which he has hewn and fashioned for himself. He who has built himself a
hut on a desert heath, and carved his bed, and table, and chair out of
the nearest forest, may have some right to take pride in the appliances
of his narrow chamber, as assuredly he will have joy in them. But the
man who has had a palace built, and adorned, and furnished for him, may,
indeed, have many advantages above the other, but he has no reason to be
proud of his upholsterer's skill; and it is ten to one if he has half
the joy in his couches of ivory that the other will have in his pallet
of pine.

§ XXXV. And observe how we feel this, in the kind of respect we pay to
such knowledge as we are indeed capable of estimating the value of. When
it is our own, and new to us, we cannot judge of it; but let it be
another's also, and long familiar to us, and see what value we set on
it. Consider how we regard a schoolboy, fresh from his term's labor. If
he begin to display his newly acquired small knowledge to us, and plume
himself thereupon, how soon do we silence him with contempt! But it is
not so if the schoolboy begins to feel or see anything. In the strivings
of his soul within him he is our equal; in his power of sight and
thought he stands separate from us, and may be a greater than we. We are
ready to hear him forthwith. "You saw that? you felt that? No matter for
your being a child; let us hear."

§ XXXVI. Consider that every generation of men stands in this relation
to its successors. It is as the schoolboy: the knowledge of which it is
proudest will be as the alphabet to those who follow. It had better make
no noise about its knowledge; a time will come when its utmost, in that
kind, will be food for scorn. Poor fools! was that all they knew? and
behold how proud they were! But what we see and feel will never be
mocked at. All men will be thankful to us for telling them that.
"Indeed!" they will say, "they felt that in their day? saw that? Would
God we may be like them, before we go to the home where sight and
thought are not!"

This unhappy and childish pride in knowledge, then, was the first
constituent element of the Renaissance mind, and it was enough, of
itself, to have cast it into swift decline: but it was aided by another
form of pride, which was above called the Pride of State; and which we
have next to examine.

§ XXXVII. II. PRIDE OF STATE. It was noticed in the second volume of
"Modern Painters," p. 122, that the principle which had most power in
retarding the modern school of portraiture was its constant expression
of individual vanity and pride. And the reader cannot fail to have
observed that one of the readiest and commonest ways in which the
painter ministers to this vanity, is by introducing the pedestal or
shaft of a column, or some fragment, however simple, of Renaissance
architecture, in the background of the portrait. And this is not merely
because such architecture is bolder or grander than, in general, that of
the apartments of a private house. No other architecture would produce
the same effect in the same degree. The richest Gothic, the most massive
Norman, would not produce the same sense of exaltation as the simple
and meagre lines of the Renaissance.

§ XXXVIII. And if we think over this matter a little, we shall soon feel
that in those meagre lines there is indeed an expression of aristocracy
in its worst characters; coldness, perfectness of training, incapability
of emotion, want of sympathy with the weakness of lower men, blank,
hopeless, haughty self-sufficiency. All these characters are written in
the Renaissance architecture as plainly as if they were graven on it in
words. For, observe, all other architectures have something in them that
common men can enjoy; some concession to the simplicities of humanity,
some daily bread for the hunger of the multitude. Quaint fancy, rich
ornament, bright color, something that shows a sympathy with men of
ordinary minds and hearts; and this wrought out, at least in the Gothic,
with a rudeness showing that the workman did not mind exposing his own
ignorance if he could please others. But the Renaissance is exactly the
contrary of all this. It is rigid, cold, inhuman; incapable of glowing,
of stooping, of conceding for an instant. Whatever excellence it has is
refined, high-trained, and deeply erudite; a kind which the architect
well knows no common mind can taste. He proclaims it to us aloud. "You
cannot feel my work unless you study Vitruvius. I will give you no gay
color, no pleasant sculpture, nothing to make you happy; for I am a
learned man. All the pleasure you can have in anything I do is in its
proud breeding, its rigid formalism, its perfect finish, its cold
tranquillity. I do not work for the vulgar, only for the men of the
academy and the court."

§ XXXIX. And the instinct of the world felt this in a moment. In the new
precision and accurate law of the classical forms, they perceived
something peculiarly adapted to the setting forth of state in an
appalling manner: Princes delighted in it, and courtiers. The Gothic was
good for God's worship, but this was good for man's worship. The Gothic
had fellowship with all hearts, and was universal, like nature: it could
frame a temple for the prayer of nations, or shrink into the poor man's
winding stair. But here was an architecture that would not shrink, that
had in it no submission, no mercy. The proud princes and lords rejoiced
in it. It was full of insult to the poor in its every line. It would not
be built of the materials at the poor man's hand; it would not roof
itself with thatch or shingle, and black oak beams; it would not wall
itself with rough stone or brick; it would not pierce itself with small
windows where they were needed; it would not niche itself, wherever
there was room for it, in the street corners. It would be of hewn stone;
it would have its windows and its doors, and its stairs and its pillars,
in lordly order, and of stately size; it would have its wings and its
corridors, and its halls and its gardens, as if all the earth were its
own. And the rugged cottages of the mountaineers, and the fantastic
streets of the laboring burgher were to be thrust out of its way, as of
a lower species.

§ XL. It is to be noted also, that it ministered as much to luxury as to
pride. Not to luxury of the eye, that is a holy luxury; Nature ministers
to that in her painted meadows, and sculptured forests, and gilded
heavens; the Gothic builder ministered to that in his twisted traceries,
and deep-wrought foliage, and burning casements. The dead Renaissance
drew back into its earthliness, out of all that was warm and heavenly;
back into its pride, out of all that was simple and kind; back into its
stateliness, out of all that was impulsive, reverent, and gay. But it
understood the luxury of the body; the terraced and scented and grottoed
garden, with its trickling fountains and slumbrous shades; the spacious
hall and lengthened corridor for the summer heat; the well-closed
windows, and perfect fittings and furniture, for defence against the
cold; and the soft picture, and frescoed wall and roof, covered with the
last lasciviousness of Paganism;--this is understood and possessed to
the full, and still possesses. This is the kind of domestic architecture
on which we pride ourselves, even to this day, as an infinite and
honorable advance from the rough habits of our ancestors; from the time
when the king's floor was strewn with rushes, and the tapestries swayed
before the searching wind in the baron's hall.

§ XLI. Let us hear two stories of those rougher times.

At the debate of King Edwin with his courtiers and priests, whether he
ought to receive the Gospel preached to him by Paulinus, one of his
nobles spoke as follows:

"The present life, O king! weighed with the time that is unknown, seems
to me like this. When you are sitting at a feast with your earls and
thanes in winter time, and the fire is lighted, and the hall is warmed,
and it rains and snows, and the storm is loud without, there comes a
sparrow, and flies through the house. It comes in at one door and goes
out at the other. While it is within, it is not touched by the winter's
storm; but it is but for the twinkling of an eye, for from winter it
comes and to winter it returns. So also this life of man endureth for a
little space; what goes before or what follows after, we know not.
Wherefore, if this new lore bring anything more certain, it is fit that
we should follow it."[13]

That could not have happened in a Renaissance building. The bird could
not have dashed in from the cold into the heat, and from the heat back
again into the storm. It would have had to come up a flight of marble
stairs, and through seven or eight antechambers; and so, if it had ever
made its way into the presence chamber, out again through loggias and
corridors innumerable. And the truth which the bird brought with it,
fresh from heaven, has, in like manner, to make its way to the
Renaissance mind through many antechambers, hardly, and as a despised
thing, if at all.

§ XLII. Hear another story of those early times.

The king of Jerusalem, Godfrey of Bouillon, at the siege of Asshur, or
Arsur, gave audience to some emirs from Samaria and Naplous. They found
him seated on the ground on a sack of straw. They expressing surprise,
Godfrey answered them: "May not the earth, out of which we came, and
which is to be our dwelling after death, serve us for a seat during
life?"

It is long since such a throne has been set in the reception chambers
of Christendom, or such an answer heard from the lips of a king.

Thus the Renaissance spirit became base both in its abstinence and its
indulgence. Base in its abstinence; curtailing the bright and playful
wealth of form and thought, which filled the architecture of the earlier
ages with sources of delight for their hardy spirit, pure, simple, and
yet rich as the fretwork of flowers and moss, watered by some strong and
stainless mountain stream: and base in its indulgence; as it granted to
the body what it withdrew from the heart, and exhausted, in smoothing
the pavement for the painless feet, and softening the pillow for the
sluggish brain, the powers of art which once had hewn rough ladders into
the clouds of heaven, and set up the stones by which they rested for
houses of God.

§ XLIII. And just in proportion as this courtly sensuality lowered the
real nobleness of the men whom birth or fortune raised above their
fellows, rose their estimate of their own dignity, together with the
insolence and unkindness of its expression, and the grossness of the
flattery with which it was fed. Pride is indeed the first and the last
among the sins of men, and there is no age of the world in which it has
not been unveiled in the power and prosperity of the wicked. But there
was never in any form of slavery, or of feudal supremacy, a
forgetfulness so total of the common majesty of the human soul, and of
the brotherly kindness due from man to man, as in the aristocratic
follies in the Renaissance. I have not space to follow out this most
interesting and extensive subject; but here is a single and very curious
example of the kind of flattery with which architectural teaching was
mingled when addressed to the men of rank of the day.

§ XLIV. In St. Mark's library there is a very curious Latin manuscript
of the twenty-five books of Averulinus, a Florentine architect, upon the
principles of his art. The book was written in or about 1460, and
translated into Latin, and richly illuminated for Corvinus, king of
Hungary, about 1483. I extract from the third book the following passage
on the nature of stones. "As there are three genera of men,--that is to
say, nobles, men of the middle classes, and rustics,--so it appears that
there are of stones. For the marbles and common stones of which we have
spoken above, set forth the rustics. The porphyries and alabasters, and
the other harder stones of mingled quality, represent the middle
classes, if we are to deal in comparisons: and by means of these the
ancients adorned their temples with incrustations and ornaments in a
magnificent manner. And after these come the chalcedonies and
sardonyxes, &c., which are so transparent that there can be seen no spot
in them.[14] Thus men endowed with nobility lead a life in which no spot
can be found."

Canute or Coeur de Lion (I name not Godfrey or St. Louis) would have
dashed their sceptres against the lips of a man who should have dared to
utter to them flattery such as this. But in the fifteenth century it was
rendered and accepted as a matter of course, and the tempers which
delighted in it necessarily took pleasure also in every vulgar or false
means, of taking worldly superiority. And among such false means
largeness of scale in the dwelling-house was of course one of the
easiest and most direct. All persons, however senseless or dull, could
appreciate size: it required some exertion of intelligence to enter into
the spirit of the quaint carving of the Gothic times, but none to
perceive that one heap of stones was higher than another.[15] And
therefore, while in the execution and manner of work the Renaissance
builders zealously vindicated for themselves the attribute of cold and
superior learning, they appealed for such approbation as they needed
from the multitude, to the lowest possible standard of taste; and while
the older workman lavished his labor on the minute niche and narrow
casement, on the doorways no higher than the head, and the contracted
angles of the turreted chamber, the Renaissance builder spared such cost
and toil in his detail, that he might spend it in bringing larger stones
from a distance; and restricted himself to rustication and five orders,
that he might load the ground with colossal piers, and raise an
ambitious barrenness of architecture, as inanimate as it was gigantic,
above the feasts and follies of the powerful or the rich. The Titanic
insanity extended itself also into ecclesiastical design: the principal
church in Italy was built with little idea of any other admirableness
than that which was to result from its being huge; and the religious
impressions of those who enter it are to this day supposed to be
dependent, in a great degree, on their discovering that they cannot span
the thumbs of the statues which sustain the vessels for holy water.

§ XLV. It is easy to understand how an architecture which thus appealed
not less to the lowest instincts of dulness than to the subtlest pride
of learning, rapidly found acceptance with a large body of mankind; and
how the spacious pomp of the new manner of design came to be eagerly
adopted by the luxurious aristocracies, not only of Venice, but of the
other countries of Christendom, now gradually gathering themselves into
that insolent and festering isolation, against which the cry of the poor
sounded hourly in more ominous unison, bursting at last into thunder
(mark where,--first among the planted walks and plashing fountains of
the palace wherein the Renaissance luxury attained its utmost height in
Europe, Versailles); that cry, mingling so much piteousness with its
wrath and indignation, "Our soul is filled with the scornful reproof of
the wealthy, and with the despitefulness of the proud."

§ XLVI. But of all the evidence bearing upon this subject presented by
the various arts of the fifteenth century, none is so interesting or so
conclusive as that deduced from its tombs. For, exactly in proportion as
the pride of life became more insolent, the fear of death became more
servile; and the difference in the manner in which the men of early and
later days adorned the sepulchre, confesses a still greater difference
in their manner of regarding death. To those he came as the comforter
and the friend, rest in his right hand, hope in his left; to these as
the humiliator, the spoiler, and the avenger. And, therefore, we find
the early tombs at once simple and lovely in adornment, severe and
solemn in their expression; confessing the power, and accepting the
peace, of death, openly and joyfully; and in all their symbols marking
that the hope of resurrection lay only in Christ's righteousness; signed
always with this simple utterance of the dead, "I will lay me down in
peace, and take my rest; for it is thou, Lord, only that makest me dwell
in safety." But the tombs of the later ages are a ghastly struggle of
mean pride and miserable terror: the one mustering the statues of the
Virtues about the tomb, disguising the sarcophagus with delicate
sculpture, polishing the false periods of the elaborate epitaph, and
filling with strained animation the features of the portrait statue; and
the other summoning underneath, out of the niche or from behind the
curtain, the frowning skull, or scythed skeleton, or some other more
terrible image of the enemy in whose defiance the whiteness of the
sepulchre had been set to shine above the whiteness of the ashes.

§ XLVII. This change in the feeling with which sepulchral monuments were
designed, from the eleventh to the eighteenth centuries, has been common
to the whole of Europe. But, as Venice is in other respects the centre
of the Renaissance system, so also she exhibits this change in the
manner of the sepulchral monument under circumstances peculiarly
calculated to teach us its true character. For the severe guard which,
in earlier times, she put upon every tendency to personal pomp and
ambition, renders the tombs of her ancient monarchs as remarkable for
modesty and simplicity as for their religious feeling; so that, in this
respect, they are separated by a considerable interval from the more
costly monuments erected at the same periods to the kings or nobles of
other European states. In later times, on the other hand, as the piety
of the Venetians diminished, their pride overleaped all limits, and the
tombs which in recent epochs, were erected for men who had lived only to
impoverish or disgrace the state, were as much more magnificent than
those contemporaneously erected for the nobles of Europe, as the
monuments for the great Doges had been humbler. When, in addition to
this, we reflect that the art of sculpture, considered as expressive of
emotion, was at a low ebb in Venice in the twelfth century, and that in
the seventeenth she took the lead in Italy in luxurious work, we shall
at once see the chain of examples through which the change of feeling is
expressed, must present more remarkable extremes here than it can in any
other city; extremes so startling that their impressiveness cannot be
diminished, while their intelligibility is greatly increased, by the
large number of intermediate types which have fortunately been
preserved.

It would, however, too much weary the general reader if, without
illustrations, I were to endeavor to lead him step by step through the
aisles of St. John and Paul; and I shall therefore confine myself to a
slight notice of those features in sepulchral architecture generally
which are especially illustrative of the matter at present in hand, and
point out the order in which, if possible, the traveller should visit
the tombs in Venice, so as to be most deeply impressed with the true
character of the lessons they convey.

§ XLVIII. I have not such an acquaintance with the modes of entombment
or memorial in the earliest ages of Christianity as would justify me in
making any general statement respecting them: but it seems to me that
the perfect type of a Christian tomb was not developed until toward the
thirteenth century, sooner or later according to the civilization of
each country; that perfect type consisting in the raised and perfectly
visible sarcophagus of stone, bearing upon it a recumbent figure, and
the whole covered by a canopy. Before that type was entirely developed,
and in the more ordinary tombs contemporary with it, we find the simple
sarcophagus, often with only a rough block of stone for its lid,
sometimes with a low-gabled lid like a cottage roof, derived from
Egyptian forms, and bearing, either on the sides or the lid, at least a
sculpture of the cross, and sometimes the name of the deceased, and date
of erection of the tomb. In more elaborate examples rich
figure-sculpture is gradually introduced; and in the perfect period the
sarcophagus, even when it does not bear any recumbent figure, has
generally a rich sculpture on its sides representing an angel presenting
the dead, in person and dress as he lived, to Christ or to the Madonna,
with lateral figures, sometimes of saints, sometimes--as in the tombs of
the Dukes of Burgundy at Dijon--of mourners; but in Venice almost always
representing the Annunciation, the angel being placed at one angle of
the sarcophagus, and the Madonna at the other. The canopy, in a very
simple foursquare form, or as an arch over a recess, is added above the
sarcophagus, long before the life-size recumbent figure appears resting
upon it. By the time that the sculptors had acquired skill enough to
give much expression to this figure, the canopy attains an exquisite
symmetry and richness; and, in the most elaborate examples, is
surmounted by a statue, generally small, representing the dead person in
the full strength and pride of life, while the recumbent figure shows
him as he lay in death. And, at this point, the perfect type of the
Gothic tomb is reached.

§ XLIX. Of the simple sarcophagus tomb there are many exquisite examples
both at Venice and Verona; the most interesting in Venice are those
which are set in the recesses of the rude brick front of the Church of
St. John and Paul, ornamented only, for the most part, with two crosses
set in circles, and the legend with the name of the dead, and an "Orate
pro anima" in another circle in the centre. And in this we may note one
great proof of superiority in Italian over English tombs; the latter
being often enriched with quatrefoils, small shafts, and arches, and
other ordinary architectural decorations, which destroy their
seriousness and solemnity, render them little more than ornamental, and
have no religious meaning whatever; while the Italian sarcophagi are
kept massive, smooth, and gloomy,--heavy-lidded dungeons of stone, like
rock-tombs,--but bearing on their surface, sculptured with tender and
narrow lines, the emblem of the cross, not presumptuously nor proudly,
but dimly graven upon their granite, like the hope which the human heart
holds, but hardly perceives in its heaviness.

§ L. Among the tombs in front of the Church of St. John and Paul there
is one which is peculiarly illustrative of the simplicity of these
earlier ages. It is on the left of the entrance, a massy sarcophagus
with low horns as of an altar, placed in a rude recess of the outside
wall, shattered and worn, and here and there entangled among wild grass
and weeds. Yet it is the tomb of two Doges, Jacopo and Lorenzo Tiepolo,
by one of whom nearly the whole ground was given for the erection of the
noble church in front of which his unprotected tomb is wasting away. The
sarcophagus bears an inscription in the centre, describing the acts of
the Doges, of which the letters show that it was added a considerable
period after the erection of the tomb: the original legend is still left
in other letters on its base, to this effect,

  "Lord James, died 1251. Lord Laurence, died 1288."

At the two corners of the sarcophagus are two angels bearing censers;
and on its lid two birds, with crosses like crests upon their heads. For
the sake of the traveller in Venice the reader will, I think, pardon me
the momentary irrelevancy of telling the meaning of these symbols.

§ LI. The foundation of the church of St. John and Paul was laid by the
Dominicans about 1234, under the immediate protection of the Senate and
the Doge Giacomo Tiepolo, accorded to them in consequence of a
miraculous vision appearing to the Doge; of which the following account
is given in popular tradition:

"In the year 1226, the Doge Giacomo Tiepolo dreamed a dream; and in his
dream he saw the little oratory of the Dominicans, and, behold, the
ground all around it (now occupied by the church) was covered with
roses of the color of vermilion, and the air was filled with their
fragrance. And in the midst of the roses, there were seen flying to and
fro a crowd of white doves, with golden crosses upon their heads. And
while the Doge looked, and wondered, behold, two angels descended from
heaven with golden censers, and passing through the oratory, and forth
among the flowers, they filled the place with the smoke of their
incense. Then the Doge heard suddenly a clear and loud voice which
proclaimed, 'This is the place that I have chosen for my preachers;' and
having heard it, straightway he awoke and went to the Senate, and
declared to them the vision. Then the Senate decreed that forty paces of
ground should be given to enlarge the monastery; and the Doge Tiepolo
himself made a still larger grant afterwards."

There is nothing miraculous in the occurrence of such a dream as this to
the devout Doge; and the fact, of which there is no doubt, that the
greater part of the land on which the church stands was given by him, is
partly a confirmation of the story. But, whether the sculptures on the
tomb were records of the vision, or the vision a monkish invention from
the sculptures on the tomb, the reader will not, I believe, look upon
its doves and crosses, or rudely carved angels, any more with disdain;
knowing how, in one way or another, they were connected with a point of
deep religious belief.

§ LII. Towards the beginning of the fourteenth century, in Venice, the
recumbent figure begins to appear on the sarcophagus, the first dated
example being also one of the most beautiful; the statue of the prophet
Simeon, sculptured upon the tomb which was to receive his relics in the
church dedicated to him under the name of San Simeone Grande. So soon as
the figure appears, the sarcophagus becomes much more richly sculptured,
but always with definite religious purpose. It is usually divided into
two panels, which are filled with small bas-reliefs of the acts or
martyrdom of the patron saints of the deceased: between them, in the
centre, Christ, or the Virgin and Child, are richly enthroned, under a
curtained canopy; and the two figures representing the Annunciation are
almost always at the angles; the promise of the Birth of Christ being
taken as at once the ground and the type of the promise of eternal life
to all men.

§ LIII. These figures are always in Venice most rudely chiselled; the
progress of figure sculpture being there comparatively tardy. At Verona,
where the great Pisan school had strong influence, the monumental
sculpture is immeasurably finer; and, so early as about the year
1335,[16] the consummate form of the Gothic tomb occurs in the monument
of Can Grande della Scala at Verona. It is set over the portal of the
chapel anciently belonging to the family. The sarcophagus is sculptured
with shallow bas-reliefs, representing (which is rare in the tombs with
which I am acquainted in Italy, unless they are those of saints) the
principal achievements of the warrior's life, especially the siege of
Vicenza and battle of Placenza; these sculptures, however, form little
more than a chased and roughened groundwork for the fully relieved
statues representing the Annunciation, projecting boldly from the front
of the sarcophagus. Above, the Lord of Verona is laid in his long robe
of civil dignity, wearing the simple bonnet, consisting merely of a
fillet bound round the brow, knotted and falling on the shoulder. He is
laid as asleep; his arms crossed upon his body, and his sword by his
side. Above him, a bold arched canopy is sustained by two projecting
shafts, and on the pinnacle of its roof is the statue of the knight on
his war-horse; his helmet, dragon-winged and crested with the dog's
head, tossed back behind his shoulders, and the broad and blazoned
drapery floating back from his horse's breast,--so truly drawn by the
old workman from the life, that it seems to wave in the wind, and the
knight's spear to shake, and his marble horse to be evermore quickening
its pace, and starting into heavier and hastier charge, as the silver
clouds float past behind it in the sky.

§ LIV. Now observe, in this tomb, as much concession is made to the
pride of man as may ever consist with honor, discretion, or dignity. I
do not enter into any question respecting the character of Can Grande,
though there can be little doubt that he was one of the best among the
nobles of his time; but that is not to our purpose. It is not the
question whether his wars were just, or his greatness honorably
achieved; but whether, supposing them to have been so, these facts are
well and gracefully told upon his tomb. And I believe there can be no
hesitation in the admission of its perfect feeling and truth. Though
beautiful, the tomb is so little conspicuous or intrusive, that it
serves only to decorate the portal of the little chapel, and is hardly
regarded by the traveller as he enters. When it is examined, the history
of the acts of the dead is found subdued into dim and minute ornament
upon his coffin; and the principal aim of the monument is to direct the
thoughts to his image as he lies in death, and to the expression of his
hope of resurrection; while, seen as by the memory far away, diminished
in the brightness of the sky, there is set the likeness of his armed
youth, stately, as it stood of old, in the front of battle, and meet to
be thus recorded for us, that we may now be able to remember the dignity
of the frame, of which those who once looked upon it hardly remembered
that it was dust.

§ LV. This, I repeat, is as much as may ever be granted, but this ought
always to be granted, to the honor and the affection of men. The tomb
which stands beside that of Can Grande, nearest it in the little field
of sleep, already shows the traces of erring ambition. It is the tomb of
Mastino the Second, in whose reign began the decline of his family. It
is altogether exquisite as a work of art; and the evidence of a less
wise or noble feeling in its design is found only in this, that the
image of a virtue, Fortitude, as belonging to the dead, is placed on the
extremity of the sarcophagus, opposite to the Crucifixion. But for this
slight circumstance, of which the significance will only be appreciated
as we examine the series of later monuments, the composition of this
monument of Can Mastino would have been as perfect as its decoration is
refined. It consists, like that of Can Grande, of the raised
sarcophagus, bearing the recumbent statue, protected by a noble
foursquare canopy, sculptured with ancient Scripture history. On one
side of the sarcophagus is Christ enthroned, with Can Mastino kneeling
before Him; on the other, Christ is represented in the mystical form,
half-rising from the tomb, meant, I believe, to be at once typical of
His passion and resurrection. The lateral panels are occupied by statues
of saints. At one extremity of the sarcophagus is the Crucifixion; at
the other, a noble statue of Fortitude, with a lion's skin thrown over
her shoulders, its head forming a shield upon her breast, her flowing
hair bound with a narrow fillet, and a three-edged sword in her
gauntleted right hand, drawn back sternly behind her thigh, while, in
her left, she bears high the shield of the Scalas.

§ LVI. Close to this monument is another, the stateliest and most
sumptuous of the three; it first arrests the eye of the stranger, and
long detains it,--a many-pinnacled pile surrounded by niches with
statues of the warrior saints.

It is beautiful, for it still belongs to the noble time, the latter part
of the fourteenth century; but its work is coarser than that of the
other, and its pride may well prepare us to learn that it was built for
himself, in his own lifetime, by the man whose statue crowns it, Can
Signorio della Scala. Now observe, for this is infinitely significant.
Can Mastino II. was feeble and wicked, and began the ruin of his house;
his sarcophagus is the first which bears upon it the image of a virtue,
but he lays claim only to Fortitude. Can Signorio was twice a
fratricide, the last time when he lay upon his death-bed: _his_ tomb
bears upon its gables the images of six virtues,--Faith, Hope, Charity,
Prudence, and (I believe) Justice and Fortitude.

§ LVII. Let us now return to Venice, where, in the second chapel
counting from right to left, at the west end of the Church of the Frari,
there is a very early fourteenth, or perhaps late thirteenth, century
tomb, another exquisite example of the perfect Gothic form. It is a
knight's; but there is no inscription upon it, and his name is unknown.
It consists of a sarcophagus, supported on bold brackets against the
chapel wall, bearing the recumbent figure, protected by a simple canopy
in the form of a pointed arch, pinnacled by the knight's crest; beneath
which the shadowy space is painted dark blue, and strewn with stars. The
statue itself is rudely carved; but its lines, as seen from the intended
distance, are both tender and masterly. The knight is laid in his mail,
only the hands and face being bare. The hauberk and helmet are of
chain-mail, the armor for the limbs of jointed steel; a tunic, fitting
close to the breast, and marking the noble swell of it by two narrow
embroidered lines, is worn over the mail; his dagger is at his right
side; his long cross-belted sword, not seen by the spectator from below,
at his left. His feet rest on a hound (the hound being his crest), which
looks up towards its master. In general, in tombs of this kind, the face
of the statue is slightly turned towards the spectator; in this
monument, on the contrary, it is turned away from him, towards the depth
of the arch: for there, just above the warrior's breast, is carved a
small image of St. Joseph bearing the infant Christ, who looks down upon
the resting figure; and to this image its countenance is turned. The
appearance of the entire tomb is as if the warrior had seen the vision
of Christ in his dying moments, and had fallen back peacefully upon his
pillow, with his eyes still turned to it, and his hands clasped in
prayer.

§ LVIII. On the opposite side of this chapel is another very lovely
tomb, to Duccio degli Alberti, a Florentine ambassador at Venice;
noticeable chiefly as being the first in Venice on which any images of
the Virtues appear. We shall return to it presently, but some account
must first be given of the more important among the other tombs in
Venice belonging to the perfect period. Of these, by far the most
interesting, though not the most elaborate, is that of the great Doge
Francesco Dandolo, whose ashes, it might have been thought, were
honorable enough to have been permitted to rest undisturbed in the
chapter-house of the Frari, where they were first laid. But, as if there
were not room enough, nor waste houses enough in the desolate city to
receive a few convent papers, the monks, wanting an "archivio," have
separated the tomb into three pieces: the canopy, a simple arch
sustained on brackets, still remains on the blank walls of the
desecrated chamber; the sarcophagus has been transported to a kind of
museum of antiquities, established in what was once the cloister of
Santa Maria della Salute; and the painting which filled the lunette
behind it is hung far out of sight, at one end of the sacristy of the
same church. The sarcophagus is completely charged with bas-reliefs: at
its two extremities are the types of St. Mark and St. John; in front, a
noble sculpture of the death of the Virgin; at the angles, angels
holding vases. The whole space is occupied by the sculpture; there are
no spiral shafts or panelled divisions; only a basic plinth below, and
crowning plinth above, the sculpture being raised from a deep concave
field between the two, but, in order to give piquancy and
picturesqueness to the mass of figures, two small trees are introduced
at the head and foot of the Madonna's couch, an oak and a stone pine.

§ LIX. It was said above,[17] in speaking of the frequent disputes of
the Venetians with the Pontifical power, which in their early days they
had so strenuously supported, that "the humiliation of Francesco Dandolo
blotted out the shame of Barbarossa." It is indeed well that the two
events should be remembered together. By the help of the Venetians,
Alexander III. was enabled, in the twelfth century, to put his foot upon
the neck of the emperor Barbarossa, quoting the words of the Psalm,
"Thou shalt tread upon the lion and the adder." A hundred and fifty
years later, the Venetian ambassador, Francesco Dandolo, unable to
obtain even an audience from the Pope, Clement V., to whom he had been
sent to pray for a removal of the sentence of excommunication pronounced
against the republic, concealed himself (according to the common
tradition) beneath the Pontiff's dining-table; and thence coming out as
he sat down to meat, embraced his feet, and obtained, by tearful
entreaties, the removal of the terrible sentence.

I say, "according to the common tradition;" for there are some doubts
cast upon the story by its supplement. Most of the Venetian historians
assert that Francesco Dandolo's surname of "Dog" was given him first on
this occasion, in insult, by the cardinals; and that the Venetians, in
remembrance of the grace which his humiliation had won for them, made it
a title of honor to him and to his race. It has, however, been
proved[18] that the surname was borne by the ancestors of Francesco
Dandolo long before; and the falsity of this seal of the legend renders
also its circumstances doubtful. But the main fact of grievous
humiliation having been undergone, admits of no dispute; the existence
of such a tradition at all is in itself a proof of its truth; it was not
one likely to be either invented or received without foundation: and it
will be well, therefore, that the reader should remember, in connection
with the treatment of Barbarossa at the door of the Church of St.
Mark's, that in the Vatican, one hundred and fifty years later, a
Venetian noble, a future Doge, submitted to a degradation, of which the
current report among his people was, that he had crept on his hands and
knees from beneath the Pontiff's table to his feet, and had been spurned
as a "dog" by the cardinals present.

§ LX. There are two principal conclusions to be drawn from this: the
obvious one respecting the insolence of the Papal dominion in the
thirteenth century; the second, that there were probably most deep piety
and humility in the character of the man who could submit to this
insolence for the sake of a benefit to his country. Probably no motive
would have been strong enough to obtain such a sacrifice from most men,
however unselfish; but it was, without doubt, made easier to Dandolo by
his profound reverence for the Pontifical office; a reverence which,
however _we_ may now esteem those who claimed it, could not but have
been felt by nearly all good and faithful men at the time of which we
are speaking. This is the main point which I wish the reader to remember
as we look at his tomb, this, and the result of it,--that, some years
afterwards, when he was seated on the throne which his piety had saved,
"there were sixty princes' ambassadors in Venice at the same time,
requesting the judgment of the Senate on matters of various concernment,
_so great was the fame of the uncorrupted justice of the Fathers_."[19]

Observe, there are no virtues on this tomb. Nothing but religious
history or symbols; the Death of the Virgin in front, and the types of
St. Mark and St. John at the extremities.

§ LXI. Of the tomb of the Doge Andrea Dandolo, in St. Mark's, I have
spoken before. It is one of the first in Venice which presents, in a
canopy, the Pisan idea of angels withdrawing curtains, as of a couch, to
look down upon the dead. The sarcophagus is richly decorated with
flower-work; the usual figures of the Annunciation are at the sides; an
enthroned Madonna in the centre; and two bas-reliefs, one of the
martyrdom of the Doge's patron saint, St. Andrew, occupy the
intermediate spaces. All these tombs have been richly colored; the hair
of the angels has here been gilded, their wings bedropped with silver,
and their garments covered with the most exquisite arabesques. This
tomb, and that of St. Isidore in another chapel of St. Mark's, which was
begun by this very Doge, Andrea Dandolo, and completed after his death
in 1354, are both nearly alike in their treatment, and are, on the
whole, the best existing examples of Venetian monumental sculpture.

§ LXII. Of much ruder workmanship, though still most precious, and
singularly interesting from its quaintness, is a sarcophagus in the
northernmost chapel, beside the choir of St. John and Paul, charged with
two bas-reliefs and many figures, but which bears no inscription. It
has, however, a shield with three dolphins on its brackets; and as at
the feet of the Madonna in its centre there is a small kneeling figure
of a Doge, we know it to be the tomb of the Doge Giovanni Dolfino, who
came to the throne in 1356.

He was chosen Doge while, as provveditore, he was in Treviso, defending
the city against the King of Hungary. The Venetians sent to the
besiegers, praying that their newly elected Doge might be permitted to
pass the Hungarian lines. Their request was refused, the Hungarians
exulting that they held the Doge of Venice prisoner in Treviso. But
Dolfino, with a body of two hundred horse, cut his way through their
lines by night, and reached Mestre (Malghera) in safety, where he was
met by the Senate. His bravery could not avert the misfortunes which
were accumulating on the republic. The Hungarian war was ignominiously
terminated by the surrender of Dalmatia: the Doge's heart was broken,
his eyesight failed him, and he died of the plague four years after he
had ascended the throne.

§ LXIII. It is perhaps on this account, perhaps in consequence of later
injuries, that the tomb has neither effigy nor inscription: that it has
been subjected to some violence is evident from the dentil which once
crowned its leaf-cornice being now broken away, showing the whole front.
But, fortunately, the sculpture of the sarcophagus itself is little
injured.

There are two saints, male and female, at its angles, each in a little
niche; a Christ, enthroned in the centre, the Doge and Dogaressa
kneeling at his feet; in the two intermediate panels, on one side the
Epiphany, on the other the Death of the Virgin; the whole supported, as
well as crowned, by an elaborate leaf-plinth. The figures under the
niches are rudely cut, and of little interest. Not so the central group.
Instead of a niche, the Christ is seated under a square tent, or
tabernacle, formed by curtains running on rods; the idea, of course, as
usual, borrowed from the Pisan one, but here ingeniously applied. The
curtains are opened in front, showing those at the back of the tent,
behind the seated figure; the perspective of the two retiring sides
being very tolerably suggested. Two angels, of half the size of the
seated figure, thrust back the near curtains, and look up reverently to
the Christ; while again, at their feet, about one third of _their_ size,
and half-sheltered, as it seems, by their garments, are the two kneeling
figures of the Doge and Dogaressa, though so small and carefully cut,
full of life. The Christ raising one hand as to bless, and holding a
book upright and open on the knees, does not look either towards them or
to the angels, but forward; and there is a very noticeable effort to
represent Divine abstraction in the countenance: the idea of the three
magnitudes of spiritual being,--the God, the Angel, and the Man,--is
also to be observed, aided as it is by the complete subjection of the
angelic power to the Divine; for the angels are in attitudes of the most
lowly watchfulness of the face of Christ, and appear unconscious of the
presence of the human beings who are nestled in the folds of their
garments.

§ LXIV. With this interesting but modest tomb of one of the kings of
Venice, it is desirable to compare that of one of her senators, of
exactly the same date, which is raised against the western wall of the
Frari, at the end of the north aisle. It bears the following remarkable
inscription:

 "ANNO MCCCLX. prima die Julii Sepultura . Domini . Simonii Dandolo .
   amador . de . Justisia . e . desiroso . de . acrese . el . ben .
   chomum."

The "Amador de Justitia" has perhaps some reference to Simon Dandolo's
having been one of the Giunta who condemned the Doge Faliero. The
sarcophagus is decorated merely by the Annunciation group, and an
enthroned Madonna with a curtain behind her throne, sustained by four
tiny angels, who look over it as they hold it up; but the workmanship of
the figures is more than usually beautiful.

§ LXV. Seven years later, a very noble monument was placed on the north
side of the choir of St. John and Paul, to the Doge Marco Cornaro,
chiefly, with respect to our present subject, noticeable for the absence
of religious imagery from the sarcophagus, which is decorated with
roses only; three very beautiful statues of the Madonna and two saints
are, however, set in the canopy above. Opposite this tomb, though about
fifteen years later in date, is the richest monument of the Gothic
period in Venice; that of the Doge Michele Morosini, who died in 1382.
It consists of a highly florid canopy,--an arch crowned by a gable, with
pinnacles at the flanks, boldly crocketed, and with a huge finial at the
top representing St. Michael,--a medallion of Christ set in the gable;
under the arch, a mosaic, representing the Madonna presenting the Doge
to Christ upon the cross; beneath, as usual, the sarcophagus, with a
most noble recumbent figure of the Doge, his face meagre and severe, and
sharp in its lines, but exquisite in the form of its small and princely
features. The sarcophagus is adorned with elaborate wrinkled leafage,
projecting in front of it into seven brackets, from which the statues
are broken away; but by which, for there can be no doubt that these last
statues represented the theological and cardinal Virtues, we must for a
moment pause.

§ LXVI. It was noticed above, that the tomb of the Florentine
ambassador, Duccio, was the first in Venice which presented images of
the Virtues. Its small lateral statues of Justice and Temperance are
exquisitely beautiful, and were, I have no doubt, executed by a
Florentine sculptor; the whole range of artistical power and religious
feeling being, in Florence, full half a century in advance of that of
Venice. But this is the first truly Venetian tomb which has the Virtues;
and it becomes of importance, therefore, to know what was the character
of Morosini.

The reader must recollect, that I dated the commencement of the fall of
Venice from the death of Carlo Zeno, considering that no state could be
held as in decline, which numbered such a man amongst its citizens.
Carlo Zeno was a candidate for the Ducal bonnet together with Michael
Morosini; and Morosini was chosen. It might be anticipated, therefore,
that there was something more than usually admirable or illustrious in
his character. Yet it is difficult to arrive at a just estimate of it,
as the reader will at once understand by comparing the following
statements:

   § LXVI. 1. "To him (Andrea Contarini) succeeded Morosini, at the age
   of seventy-four years; a most learned and prudent man, who also
   reformed several laws."--_Sansovino_, Vite de' Principi.

   2. "It was generally believed that, if his reign had been longer, he
   would have dignified the state by many noble laws and institutes; but
   by so much as his reign was full of hope, by as much was it short in
   duration, for he died when he had been at the head of the republic
   but four months."--_Sabellico_, lib. viii.

   3. "He was allowed but a short time to enjoy this high dignity, which
   he had so well deserved by his rare virtues, for God called him to
   Himself on the 15th of October."--_Muratori_, Annali de' Italia.

   4. "Two candidates presented themselves; one was Zeno, the other that
   Michael Morosini who, during the war, had tripled his fortune by his
   speculations. The suffrages of the electors fell upon him, and he was
   proclaimed Doge on the 10th of June."--_Daru_, Histoire de Venise,
   lib. x.

   5. "The choice of the electors was directed to Michele Morosini, a
   noble of illustrious birth, derived from a stock which, coeval with
   the republic itself, had produced the conqueror of Tyre, given a
   queen to Hungary, and more than one Doge to Venice. The brilliancy of
   this descent was tarnished in the present chief representative of the
   family by the most base and grovelling avarice; for at that moment,
   in the recent war, at which all other Venetians were devoting their
   whole fortunes to the service of the state, Morosini sought in the
   distresses of his country an opening for his own private enrichment,
   and employed his ducats, not in the assistance of the national wants,
   but in speculating upon houses which were brought to market at a
   price far beneath their real value, and which, upon the return of
   peace, insured the purchaser a fourfold profit. 'What matters the
   fall of Venice to me, so as I fall not together with her?' was his
   selfish and sordid reply to some one who expressed surprise at the
   transaction."--_Sketches of Venetian History_. Murray, 1831.

§ LXVIII. The writer of the unpretending little history from which the
last quotation is taken has not given his authority for this statement,
and I could not find it, but believed, from the general accuracy of the
book, that some authority might exist better than Daru's. Under these
circumstances, wishing if possible to ascertain the truth, and to clear
the character of this great Doge from the accusation, if it proved
groundless, I wrote to the Count Carlo Morosini, his descendant, and one
of the few remaining representatives of the ancient noblesse of Venice;
one, also, by whom his great ancestral name is revered, and in whom it
is exalted. His answer appears to me altogether conclusive as to the
utter fallacy of the reports of Daru and the English history. I have
placed his letter in the close of this volume (Appendix 6), in order
that the reader may himself be the judge upon this point; and I should
not have alluded to Daru's report, except for the purpose of
contradicting it, but that it still appears to me impossible that any
modern historian should have gratuitously invented the whole story, and
that, therefore, there must have been a trace in the documents which
Daru himself possessed, of some scandal of this kind raised by
Morosini's enemies, perhaps at the very time of the disputed election
with Carlo Zeno. The occurrence of the Virtues upon his tomb, for the
first time in Venetian monumental work, and so richly and conspicuously
placed, may partly have been in public contradiction of such a floating
rumor. But the face of the statue is a more explicit contradiction
still; it is resolute, thoughtful, serene, and full of beauty; and we
must, therefore, for once, allow the somewhat boastful introduction of
the Virtues to have been perfectly just: though the whole tomb is most
notable, as furnishing not only the exact intermediate condition in
style between the pure Gothic and its final Renaissance corruption, but,
at the same time, the exactly intermediate condition of _feeling_
between the pure calmness of early Christianity, and the boastful pomp
of the Renaissance faithlessness; for here we have still the religious
humility remaining in the mosaic of the canopy, which shows the Doge
kneeling before the cross, while yet this tendency to self-trust is
shown in the surrounding of the coffin by the Virtues.

§ LXIX. The next tomb by the side of which they appear is that of Jacopo
Cavalli, in the same chapel of St. John and Paul which contains the tomb
of the Doge Delfin. It is peculiarly rich in religious imagery, adorned
by boldly cut types of the four evangelists, and of two saints, while,
on projecting brackets in front of it, stood three statues of Faith,
Hope, and Charity, now lost, but drawn in Zanotto's work. It is all rich
in detail, and its sculptor has been proud of it, thus recording his
name below the epitaph:

  "QST OPERA DINTALGIO E FATTO IN PIERA,
   UNVENICIAN LAFE CHANOME POLO,
   NATO DI JACHOMEL CHATAIAPIERA."

   This work of sculpture is done in stone;
   A Venetian did it, named Paul,
   Son of Jachomel the stone-cutter.

Jacopo Cavalli died in 1384. He was a bold and active Veronese soldier,
did the state much service, was therefore ennobled by it, and became the
founder of the house of the Cavalli; but I find no especial reason for
the images of the Virtues, especially that of Charity, appearing at his
tomb, unless it be this: that at the siege of Feltre, in the war against
Leopold of Austria, he refused to assault the city, because the senate
would not grant his soldiers the pillage of the town. The feet of the
recumbent figure, which is in full armor, rest on a dog, and its head on
two lions; and these animals (neither of which form any part of the
knight's bearings) are said by Zanotto to be intended to symbolize his
bravery and fidelity. If, however, the lions are meant to set forth
courage, it is a pity they should have been represented as howling.

§ LXX. We must next pause for an instant beside the tomb of Michael
Steno, now in the northern aisle of St. John and Paul, having been
removed there from the destroyed church of the Servi: first, to note its
remarkable return to the early simplicity, the sarcophagus being
decorated only with two crosses in quatrefoils, though it is of the
fifteenth century, Steno dying in 1413; and, in the second place, to
observe the peculiarity of the epitaph, which eulogises Steno as having
been "amator justitie, pacis, et ubertatis," "a lover of justice, peace,
and plenty." In the epitaphs of this period, the virtues which are made
most account of in public men are those which were most useful to their
country. We have already seen one example in the epitaph on Simon
Dandolo; and similar expressions occur constantly in laudatory mentions
of their later Doges by the Venetian writers. Thus Sansovino of Marco
Cornaro, "Era savio huomo, eloquente, e amava molto la pace e l'
abbondanza della citta;" and of Tomaso Mocenigo, "Huomo oltre modo
desideroso della pace."

Of the tomb of this last-named Doge mention has before been made. Here,
as in Morosini's, the images of the Virtues have no ironical power,
although their great conspicuousness marks the increase of the boastful
feeling in the treatment of monuments. For the rest, this tomb is the
last in Venice which can be considered as belonging to the Gothic
period. Its mouldings are already rudely classical, and it has
meaningless figures in Roman armor at the angles; but its tabernacle
above is still Gothic, and the recumbent figure is very beautiful. It
was carved by two Florentine sculptors in 1423.

§ LXXI. Tomaso Mocenigo was succeeded by the renowned Doge, Francesco
Foscari, under whom, it will be remembered, the last additions were made
to the Gothic Ducal Palace; additions which, in form only, not in
spirit, corresponded to the older portions; since, during his reign, the
transition took place which permits us no longer to consider the
Venetian architecture as Gothic at all. He died in 1457, and his tomb is
the first important example of Renaissance art.

Not, however, a good characteristic example. It is remarkable chiefly as
introducing all the faults of the Renaissance at an early period, when
its merits, such as they are, were yet undeveloped. Its claim to be
rated as a classical composition is altogether destroyed by the remnants
of Gothic feeling which cling to it here and there in their last forms
of degradation; and of which, now that we find them thus corrupted, the
sooner we are rid the better. Thus the sarcophagus is supported by a
species of trefoil arches; the bases of the shafts have still their
spurs; and the whole tomb is covered by a pediment, with crockets and a
pinnacle. We shall find that the perfect Renaissance is at least pure in
its insipidity, and subtle in its vice; but this monument is remarkable
as showing the refuse of one style encumbering the embryo of another,
and all principles of life entangled either in the swaddling clothes or
the shroud.

§ LXXII. With respect to our present purpose, however, it is a monument
of enormous importance. We have to trace, be it remembered, the pride of
state in its gradual intrusion upon the sepulchre; and the consequent
and correlative vanishing of the expressions of religious feeling and
heavenly hope, together with the more and more arrogant setting forth of
the virtues of the dead. Now this tomb is the largest and most costly we
have yet seen; but its means of religious expression are limited to a
single statue of Christ, small and used merely as a pinnacle at the top.
The rest of the composition is as curious as it is vulgar. The conceit,
so often noticed as having been borrowed from the Pisan school, of
angels withdrawing the curtains of the couch to look down upon the dead,
was brought forward with increasing prominence by every succeeding
sculptor; but, as we draw nearer to the Renaissance period, we find that
the _angels_ become of less importance, and the _curtains_ of more. With
the Pisans, the curtains are introduced as a motive for the angels; with
the Renaissance sculptors, the angels are introduced merely as a motive
for the curtains, which become every day more huge and elaborate. In the
monument of Mocenigo, they have already expanded into a tent, with a
pole in the centre of it: and in that of Foscari, for the first time,
the _angels are absent altogether_; while the curtains are arranged in
the form of an enormous French tent-bed, and are sustained at the flanks
by two diminutive figures in Roman armor; substituted for the angels,
merely that the sculptor might _show his knowledge_ of classical
costume. And now observe how often a fault in feeling induces also a
fault in style. In the old tombs, the angels used to stand on or by the
side of the sarcophagus; but their places are here to be occupied by the
Virtues, and therefore, to sustain the diminutive Roman figures at the
necessary height, each has a whole Corinthian pillar to himself, a
pillar whose shaft is eleven feet high, and some three or four feet
round: and because this was not high enough, it is put on a pedestal
four feet and a half high; and has a spurred base besides of its own, a
tall capital, then a huge bracket above the capital, and then another
pedestal above the bracket, and on the top of all the diminutive figure
who has charge of the curtains.

§ LXXIII. Under the canopy, thus arranged, is placed the sarcophagus
with its recumbent figure. The statues of the Virgin and the saints have
disappeared from it. In their stead, its panels are filled with
half-length figures of Faith, Hope, and Charity; while Temperance and
Fortitude are at the Doge's feet, Justice and Prudence at his head,
figures now the size of life, yet nevertheless recognizable only by
their attributes: for, except that Hope raises her eyes, there is no
difference in the character or expression of any of their faces,--they
are nothing more than handsome Venetian women, in rather full and
courtly dresses, and tolerably well thrown into postures for effect from
below. Fortitude could not of course be placed in a graceful one without
some sacrifice of her character, but that was of no consequence in the
eyes of the sculptors of this period, so she leans back languidly, and
nearly overthrows her own column; while Temperance, and Justice opposite
to her, as neither the left hand of the one nor the right hand of the
other could be seen from below, have been _left with one hand each_.

§ LXXIV. Still these figures, coarse and feelingless as they are, have
been worked with care, because the principal effect of the tomb depends
on them. But the effigy of the Doge, of which nothing but the side is
visible, has been utterly neglected; and the ingenuity of the sculptor
is not so great, at the best, as that he can afford to be slovenly.
There is, indeed, nothing in the history of Foscari which would lead us
to expect anything particularly noble in his face; but I trust,
nevertheless, it has been misrepresented by this despicable carver; for
no words are strong enough to express the baseness of the portraiture. A
huge, gross, bony clown's face, with the peculiar sodden and sensual
cunning in it which is seen so often in the countenances of the worst
Romanist priest; a face part of iron and part of clay, with the
immobility of the one, and the foulness of the other, double chinned,
blunt-mouthed, bony-cheeked, with its brows drawn down into meagre lines
and wrinkles over the eyelids; the face of a man incapable either of joy
or sorrow, unless such as may be caused by the indulgence of passion, or
the mortification of pride. Even had he been such a one, a noble workman
would not have written it so legibly on his tomb; and I believe it to be
the image of the carver's own mind that is there hewn in the marble, not
that of the Doge Foscari. For the same mind is visible enough
throughout, the traces of it mingled with those of the evil taste of the
whole time and people. There is not anything so small but it is shown in
some portion of its treatment; for instance, in the placing of the
shields at the back of the great curtain. In earlier times, the shield,
as we have seen, was represented as merely suspended against the tomb by
a thong, or if sustained in any other manner, still its form was simple
and undisguised. Men in those days used their shields in war, and
therefore there was no need to add dignity to their form by external
ornament. That which, through day after day of mortal danger, had borne
back from them the waves of battle, could neither be degraded by
simplicity, nor exalted by decoration. By its rude leathern thong it
seemed to be fastened to their tombs, and the shield of the mighty was
not cast away, though capable of defending its master no more.

§ LXXV. It was otherwise in the fifteenth and sixteenth centuries. The
changed system of warfare was rapidly doing away with the practical
service of the shield; and the chiefs who directed the battle from a
distance, or who passed the greater part of their lives in the
council-chamber, soon came to regard the shield as nothing more than a
field for their armorial bearings. It then became a principal object of
their Pride of State to increase the conspicuousness of these marks of
family distinction by surrounding them with various and fantastic
ornament, generally scroll or flower work, which of course deprived the
shield of all appearance of being intended for a soldier's use. Thus the
shield of the Foscari is introduced in two ways. On the sarcophagus,
the bearings are three times repeated, enclosed in circular disks, which
are sustained each by a couple of naked infants. Above the canopy, two
shields of the usual form are set in the centre of circles filled by a
radiating ornament of shell flutings, which give them the effect of
ventilators; and their circumference is farther adorned by gilt rays,
undulating to represent a glory.

§ LXXVI. We now approach that period of the early Renaissance which was
noticed in the preceding chapter as being at first a very visible
improvement on the corrupted Gothic. The tombs executed during the
period of the Byzantine Renaissance exhibit, in the first place, a
consummate skill in handling the chisel, perfect science of drawing and
anatomy, high appreciation of good classical models, and a grace of
composition and delicacy of ornament derived, I believe, principally
from the great Florentine sculptors. But, together with this science,
they exhibit also, for a short time, some return to the early religious
feeling, forming a school of sculpture which corresponds to that of the
school of the Bellini in painting; and the only wonder is that there
should not have been more workmen in the fifteenth century doing in
marble what Perugino, Francia, and Bellini did on canvas. There are,
indeed, some few, as I have just said, in whom the good and pure temper
shows itself: but the sculptor was necessarily led sooner than the
painter to an exclusive study of classical models, utterly adverse to
the Christian imagination; and he was also deprived of the great
purifying and sacred element of color, besides having much more of
merely mechanical and therefore degrading labor to go through in the
realization of his thought. Hence I do not know any example in sculpture
at this period, at least in Venice, which has not conspicuous faults
(not faults of imperfection, as in early sculpture, but of purpose and
sentiment), staining such beauties as it may possess; and the whole
school soon falls away, and merges into vain pomp and meagre metaphor.

§ LXXVII. The most celebrated monument of this period is that to the
Doge Andrea Vendramin, in the Church of St. John and Paul, sculptured
about 1480, and before alluded to in the first chapter of the first
volume. It has attracted public admiration, partly by its costliness,
partly by the delicacy and precision of its chiselling; being otherwise
a very base and unworthy example of the school, and showing neither
invention nor feeling. It has the Virtues, as usual, dressed like
heathen goddesses, and totally devoid of expression, though graceful and
well studied merely as female figures. The rest of its sculpture is all
of the same kind; perfect in workmanship, and devoid of thought. Its
dragons are covered with marvellous scales, but have no terror nor sting
in them; its birds are perfect in plumage, but have no song in them; its
children lovely of limb, but have no childishness in them.

§ LXXVIII. Of far other workmanship are the tombs of Pietro and Giovanni
Mocenigo, in St. John and Paul, and of Pietro Bernardo in the Frari; in
all which the details are as full of exquisite fancy, as they are
perfect in execution; and in the two former, and several others of
similar feeling, the old religious symbols return; the Madonna is again
seen enthroned under the canopy, and the sarcophagus is decorated with
legends of the saints. But the fatal errors of sentiment are,
nevertheless, always traceable. In the first place, the sculptor is
always seen to be intent upon the exhibition of his skill, more than on
producing any effect on the spectator's mind; elaborate backgrounds of
landscape, with tricks of perspective, imitations of trees, clouds, and
water, and various other unnecessary adjuncts, merely to show how marble
could be subdued; together with useless under-cutting, and over-finish
in subordinate parts, continually exhibiting the same cold vanity and
unexcited precision of mechanism. In the second place, the figures have
all the peculiar tendency to posture-making, which, exhibiting itself
first painfully in Perugino, rapidly destroyed the veracity of
composition in all art. By posture-making I mean, in general, that
action of figures which results from the painter's considering, in the
first place, not how, under the circumstances, they would actually have
walked, or stood, or looked, but how they may most gracefully and
harmoniously walk or stand. In the hands of a great man, posture, like
everything else, becomes noble, even when over-studied, as with Michael
Angelo, who was, perhaps, more than any other, the cause of the
mischief; but, with inferior men, this habit of composing attitudes ends
necessarily in utter lifelessness and abortion. Giotto was, perhaps, of
all painters, the most free from the infection of the poison, always
conceiving an incident naturally, and drawing it unaffectedly; and the
absence of posture-making in the works of the Pre-Raphaelites, as
opposed to the Attitudinarianism of the modern school, has been both one
of their principal virtues, and of the principal causes of outcry
against them.

§ LXXIX. But the most significant change in the treatment of these
tombs, with respect to our immediate object, is in the form of the
sarcophagus. It was above noted, that, exactly in proportion to the
degree of the pride of life expressed in any monument, would be also the
fear of death; and therefore, as these tombs increase in splendor, in
size, and beauty of workmanship, we perceive a gradual desire to _take
away from the definite character of the sarcophagus_. In the earliest
times, as we have seen, it was a gloomy mass of stone; gradually it
became charged with religious sculpture; but never with the slightest
desire to disguise its form, until towards the middle of the fifteenth
century. It then becomes enriched with flower-work and hidden by the
Virtues; and, finally, losing its foursquare form, it is modelled on
graceful types of ancient vases, made as little like a coffin as
possible, and refined away in various elegancies, till it becomes, at
last, a mere pedestal or stage for the portrait statue. This statue, in
the meantime, has been gradually coming back to life, through a curious
series of transitions. The Vendramin monument is one of the last which
shows, or pretends to show, the recumbent figure laid in death. A few
years later, this idea became disagreeable to polite minds; and, lo! the
figures which before had been laid at rest upon the tomb pillow, raised
themselves on their elbows, and began to look round them. The soul of
the sixteenth century dared not contemplate its body in death.

§ LXXX. The reader cannot but remember many instances of this form of
monument, England being peculiarly rich in examples of them; although,
with her, tomb sculpture, after the fourteenth century, is altogether
imitative, and in no degree indicative of the temper of the people. It
was from Italy that the authority for the change was derived; and in
Italy only, therefore, that it is truly correspondent to the change in
the national mind. There are many monuments in Venice of this
semi-animate type, most of them carefully sculptured, and some very
admirable as portraits, and for the casting of the drapery, especially
those in the Church of San Salvador; but I shall only direct the reader
to one, that of Jacopo Pesaro, Bishop of Paphos, in the Church of the
Frari; notable not only as a very skilful piece of sculpture, but for
the epitaph, singularly characteristic of the period, and confirmatory
of all that I have alleged against it:

 "James Pesaro, Bishop of Paphos, who conquered the Turks in war,
   himself in peace, transported from a noble family among the Venetians
   to a nobler among the angels, laid here, expects the noblest crown,
   which the just Judge shall give to him in that day. He lived the
   years of Plato. He died 24th March, 1547."[20]

The mingled classicism and carnal pride of this epitaph surely need no
comment. The crown is expected as a right from the justice of the judge,
and the nobility of the Venetian family is only a little lower than that
of the angels. The quaint childishness of the "Vixit annos Platonicos"
is also very notable.

§ LXXXI. The statue, however, did not long remain in this partially
recumbent attitude. Even the expression of peace became painful to the
frivolous and thoughtless Italians, and they required the portraiture to
be rendered in a manner that should induce no memory of death. The
statue rose up, and presented itself in front of the tomb, like an actor
upon a stage, surrounded now not merely, or not at all, by the Virtues,
but by allegorical figures of Fame and Victory, by genii and muses, by
personifications of humbled kingdoms and adoring nations, and by every
circumstance of pomp, and symbol of adulation, that flattery could
suggest, or insolence could claim.

§ LXXXII. As of the intermediate monumental type, so also of this, the
last and most gross, there are unfortunately many examples in our own
country; but the most wonderful, by far, are still at Venice. I shall,
however, particularize only two; the first, that of the Doge John
Pesaro, in the Frari. It is to be observed that we have passed over a
considerable interval of time; we are now in the latter half of the
seventeenth century; the progress of corruption has in the meantime been
incessant, and sculpture has here lost its taste and learning as well as
its feeling. The monument is a huge accumulation of theatrical scenery
in marble: four colossal negro caryatides, grinning and horrible, with
faces of black marble and white eyes, sustain the first story of it;
above this, two monsters, long-necked, half dog and half dragon, sustain
an ornamental sarcophagus, on the top of which the full-length statue of
the Doge in robes of state stands forward with its arms expanded, like
an actor courting applause, under a huge canopy of metal, like the roof
of a bed, painted crimson and gold; on each side of him are sitting
figures of genii, and unintelligible personifications gesticulating in
Roman armor; below, between the negro caryatides, are two ghastly
figures in bronze, half corpse, half skeleton, carrying tablets on which
is written the eulogium: but in large letters graven in gold, the
following words are the first and last that strike the eye; the first
two phrases, one on each side, on tablets in the lower story, the last
under the portrait statue above:

  VIXIT ANNOS LXX.            DEVIXIT ANNO MDCLIX.
             "HIC REVIXIT ANNO MDCLXIX."

We have here, at last, the horrible images of death in violent contrast
with the defiant monument, which pretends to bring the resurrection
down to earth, "Hic revixit;" and it seems impossible for false taste
and base feeling to sink lower. Yet even this monument is surpassed by
one in St. John and Paul.

§ LXXXIII. But before we pass to this, the last with which I shall
burden the reader's attention, let us for a moment, and that we may feel
the contrast more forcibly, return to a tomb of the early times.

In a dark niche in the outer wall of the outer corridor of St.
Mark's--not even in the church, observe, but in the atrium or porch of
it, and on the north side of the church,--is a solid sarcophagus of
white marble, raised only about two feet from the ground on four stunted
square pillars. Its lid is a mere slab of stone; on its extremities are
sculptured two crosses; in front of it are two rows of rude figures, the
uppermost representing Christ with the Apostles: the lower row is of six
figures only, alternately male and female, holding up their hands in the
usual attitude of benediction; the sixth is smaller than the rest, and
the midmost of the other five has a glory round its head. I cannot tell
the meaning of these figures, but between them are suspended censers
attached to crosses; a most beautiful symbolic expression of Christ's
mediatorial function. The whole is surrounded by a rude wreath of vine
leaves, proceeding out of the foot of a cross.

On the bar of marble which separates the two rows of figures are
inscribed these words:

  "Here lies the Lord Marin Morosini, Duke."

It is the tomb of the Doge Marino Morosini, who reigned from 1249 to
1252.

§ LXXXIV. From before this rude and solemn sepulchre let us pass to the
southern aisle of the church of St. John and Paul; and there, towering
from the pavement to the vaulting of the church, behold a mass of
marble, sixty or seventy feet in height, of mingled yellow and white,
the yellow carved into the form of an enormous curtain, with ropes,
fringes, and tassels, sustained by cherubs; in front of which, in the
now usual stage attitudes, advance the statues of the Doge Bertuccio
Valier, his son the Doge Silvester Falier, and his son's wife,
Elizabeth. The statues of the Doges, though mean and Polonius-like, are
partly redeemed by the Ducal robes; but that of the Dogaressa is a
consummation of grossness, vanity, and ugliness,--the figure of a large
and wrinkled woman, with elaborate curls in stiff projection round her
face, covered from her shoulders to her feet with ruffs, furs, lace,
jewels, and embroidery. Beneath and around are scattered Virtues,
Victories, Fames, genii,--the entire company of the monumental stage
assembled, as before a drop scene,--executed by various sculptors, and
deserving attentive study as exhibiting every condition of false taste
and feeble conception. The Victory in the centre is peculiarly
interesting; the lion by which she is accompanied, springing on a
dragon, has been intended to look terrible, but the incapable sculptor
could not conceive any form of dreadfulness, could not even make the
lion look angry. It looks only lachrymose; and its lifted forepaws,
there being no spring nor motion in its body, give it the appearance of
a dog begging. The inscriptions under the two principal statues are as
follows:

      "Bertucius Valier, Duke,
   Great in wisdom and eloquence,
  Greater in his Hellespontic victory,
    Greatest in the Prince his son.
       Died in the year 1658."

         "Elisabeth Quirina,
       The wife of Silvester,
    Distinguished by Roman virtue,
         By Venetian piety,
       And by the Ducal crown,
            Died 1708."

The writers of this age were generally anxious to make the world aware
that they understood the degrees of comparison, and a large number of
epitaphs are principally constructed with this object (compare, in the
Latin, that of the Bishop of Paphos, given above): but the latter of
these epitaphs is also interesting from its mention, in an age now
altogether given up to the pursuit of worldly honor, of that "Venetian
piety" which once truly distinguished the city from all others; and of
which some form and shadow, remaining still, served to point an epitaph,
and to feed more cunningly and speciously the pride which could not be
satiated with the sumptuousness of the sepulchre.

§ LXXXV. Thus far, then, of the second element of the Renaissance spirit,
the Pride of State; nor need we go farther to learn the reason of the
fall of Venice. She was already likened in her thoughts, and was
therefore to be likened in her ruin, to the Virgin of Babylon. The Pride
of State and the Pride of Knowledge were no new passions: the sentence
against them had gone forth from everlasting. "Thou saidst, I shall be a
lady for ever; so that thou didst not lay these things to thine heart ...
_Thy wisdom and thy knowledge, it hath perverted thee_; and thou hast
said in thine heart, I am, and none else beside me. Therefore shall evil
come upon thee ...; thy merchants from thy youth, they shall wander every
one to his quarter; none shall save thee."[21]

§ LXXXVI. III. PRIDE OF SYSTEM. I might have illustrated these evil
principles from a thousand other sources, but I have not time to pursue
the subject farther, and must pass to the third element above named, the
Pride of System. It need not detain us so long as either of the others,
for it is at once more palpable and less dangerous. The manner in which
the pride of the fifteenth century corrupted the sources of knowledge,
and diminished the majesty, while it multiplied the trappings, of state,
is in general little observed; but the reader is probably already well
and sufficiently aware of the curious tendency to formulization and
system which, under the name of philosophy, encumbered the minds of the
Renaissance schoolmen. As it was above stated, grammar became the first
of sciences; and whatever subject had to be treated, the first aim of
the philosopher was to subject its principles to a code of laws, in the
observation of which the merit of the speaker, thinker, or worker, in
or on that subject, was thereafter to consist; so that the whole mind of
the world was occupied by the exclusive study of Restraints. The sound
of the forging of fetters was heard from sea to sea. The doctors of all
the arts and sciences set themselves daily to the invention of new
varieties of cages and manacles; they themselves wore, instead of gowns,
a chain mail, whose purpose was not so much to avert the weapon of the
adversary as to restrain the motions of the wearer; and all the acts,
thoughts, and workings of mankind,--poetry, painting, architecture, and
philosophy,--were reduced by them merely to so many different forms of
fetter-dance.

§ LXXXVII. Now, I am very sure that no reader who has given any
attention to the former portions of this work, or the tendency of what
else I have written, more especially the last chapter of the "Seven
Lamps," will suppose me to underrate the importance, or dispute the
authority, of law. It has been necessary for me to allege these again
and again, nor can they ever be too often or too energetically alleged,
against the vast masses of men who now disturb or retard the advance of
civilization; heady and high-minded, despisers of discipline, and
refusers of correction. But law, so far as it can be reduced to form and
system, and is not written upon the heart,--as it is, in a Divine
loyalty, upon the hearts of the great hierarchies who serve and wait
about the throne of the Eternal Lawgiver,--this lower and formally
expressible law has, I say, two objects. It is either for the definition
and restraint of sin, or the guidance of simplicity; it either explains,
forbids, and punishes wickedness, or it guides the movements and actions
both of lifeless things and of the more simple and untaught among
responsible agents. And so long, therefore, as sin and foolishness are
in the world, so long it will be necessary for men to submit themselves
painfully to this lower law, in proportion to their need of being
corrected, and to the degree of childishness or simplicity by which they
approach more nearly to the condition of the unthinking and inanimate
things which are governed by law altogether; yet yielding, in the manner
of their submission to it, a singular lesson to the pride of
man,--being obedient more perfectly in proportion to their
greatness.[22] But, so far as men become good and wise, and rise above
the state of children, so far they become emancipated from this written
law, and invested with the perfect freedom which consists in the fulness
and joyfulness of compliance with a higher and unwritten law; a law so
universal, so subtle, so glorious, that nothing but the heart can keep
it.

§ LXXXVIII. Now pride opposes itself to the observance of this Divine
law in two opposite ways: either by brute resistance, which is the way
of the rabble and its leaders, denying or defying law altogether; or by
formal compliance, which is the way of the Pharisee, exalting himself
while he pretends to obedience, and making void the infinite and
spiritual commandment by the finite and lettered commandment. And it is
easy to know which law we are obeying: for any law which we magnify and
keep through pride, is always the law of the letter; but that which we
love and keep through humility, is the law of the Spirit: And the letter
killeth, but the Spirit giveth life.

§ LXXXIX. In the appliance of this universal principle to what we have
at present in hand, it is to be noted, that all written or writable law
respecting the arts is for the childish and ignorant: that in the
beginning of teaching, it is possible to say that this or that must or
must not be done; and laws of color and shade may be taught, as laws of
harmony are to the young scholar in music. But the moment a man begins
to be anything deserving the name of an artist, all this teachable law
has become a matter of course with him; and if, thenceforth, he boast
himself anywise in the law, or pretend that he lives and works by it, it
is a sure sign that he is merely tithing cummin, and that there is no
true art nor religion in him. For the true artist has that inspiration
in him which is above all law, or rather, which is continually working
out such magnificent and perfect obedience to supreme law, as can in no
wise be rendered by line and rule. There are more laws perceived and
fulfilled in the single stroke of a great workman, than could be written
in a volume. His science is inexpressibly subtle, directly taught him by
his Maker, not in any wise communicable or imitable.[23] Neither can any
written or definitely observable laws enable us to do any great thing.
It is possible, by measuring and administering quantities of color, to
paint a room wall so that it shall not hurt the eye; but there are no
laws by observing which we can become Titians. It is possible so to
measure and administer syllables, as to construct harmonious verse; but
there are no laws by which we can write Iliads. Out of the poem or the
picture, once produced, men may elicit laws by the volume, and study
them with advantage, to the better understanding of the existing poem or
picture; but no more write or paint another, than by discovering laws of
vegetation they can make a tree to grow. And therefore, wheresoever we
find the system and formality of rules much dwelt upon, and spoken of as
anything else than a help for children, there we may be sure that noble
art is not even understood, far less reached. And thus it was with all
the common and public mind in the fifteenth and sixteenth centuries. The
greater men, indeed, broke through the thorn hedges; and, though much
time was lost by the learned among them in writing Latin verses and
anagrams, and arranging the framework of quaint sonnets and dexterous
syllogisms, still they tore their way through the sapless thicket by
force of intellect or of piety; for it was not possible that, either in
literature or in painting, rules could be received by any strong mind,
so as materially to interfere with its originality: and the crabbed
discipline and exact scholarship became an advantage to the men who
could pass through and despise them; so that in spite of the rules of
the drama we had Shakspeare, and in spite of the rules of art we had
Tintoret,--both of them, to this day, doing perpetual violence to the
vulgar scholarship and dim-eyed proprieties of the multitude.

§ XC. But in architecture it was not so; for that was the art of the
multitude, and was affected by all their errors; and the great men who
entered its field, like Michael Angelo, found expression for all the
best part of their minds in sculpture, and made the architecture merely
its shell. So the simpletons and sophists had their way with it: and the
reader can have no conception of the inanities and puerilities of the
writers, who, with the help of Vitruvius, re-established its "five
orders," determined the proportions of each, and gave the various
recipes for sublimity and beauty, which have been thenceforward followed
to this day, but which may, I believe, in this age of perfect machinery,
be followed out still farther. If, indeed, there are only five perfect
forms of columns and architraves, and there be a fixed proportion to
each, it is certainly possible, with a little ingenuity, so to regulate
a stonecutting machine, as that it shall furnish pillars and friezes to
the size ordered, of any of the five orders, on the most perfect Greek
models, in any quantity; an epitome, also, of Vitruvius, may be made so
simple, as to enable any bricklayer to set them up at their proper
distances, and we may dispense with our architects altogether.

§ XCI. But if this be not so, and there be any truth in the faint
persuasion which still lurks in men's minds that architecture _is_ an
art, and that it requires some gleam of intellect to practise it, then
let the whole system of the orders and their proportions be cast out and
trampled down as the most vain, barbarous, and paltry deception that was
ever stamped on human prejudice; and let us understand this plain truth,
common to all work of man, that, if it be good work, it is not a copy,
nor anything done by rule, but a freshly and divinely imagined thing.
Five orders! There is not a side chapel in any Gothic cathedral but it
has fifty orders, the worst of them better than the best of the Greek
ones, and all new; and a single inventive human soul could create a
thousand orders in an hour.[24] And this would have been discovered even
in the worst times, but that, as I said, the greatest men of the age
found expression for their invention in the other arts, and the best of
those who devoted themselves to architecture were in great part occupied
in adapting the construction of buildings to new necessities, such as
those developed by the invention of gunpowder (introducing a totally new
and most interesting science of fortification, which directed the
ingenuity of Sanmicheli and many others from its proper channel), and
found interest of a meaner kind in the difficulties of reconciling the
obsolete architectural laws they had consented to revive, and the forms
of Roman architecture which they agreed to copy, with the requirements
of the daily life of the sixteenth century.

§ XCII. These, then, were the three principal directions in which the
Renaissance pride manifested itself, and its impulses were rendered
still more fatal by the entrance of another element, inevitably
associated with pride. For, as it is written, "He that trusteth in his
own heart is a fool," so also it is written, "The fool hath said in his
heart, There is no God;" and the self-adulation which influenced not
less the learning of the age than its luxury, led gradually to the
forgetfulness of all things but self, and to an infidelity only the more
fatal because it still retained the form and language of faith.

§ XCIII. IV. INFIDELITY. In noticing the more prominent forms in which
this faithlessness manifested itself, it is necessary to distinguish
justly between that which was the consequence of respect for Paganism,
and that which followed from the corruption of Catholicism. For as the
Roman architecture is not to be made answerable for the primal
corruption of the Gothic, so neither is the Roman philosophy to be made
answerable for the primal corruption of Christianity. Year after year,
as the history of the life of Christ sank back into the depths of time,
and became obscured by the misty atmosphere of the history of the
world,--as intermediate actions and incidents multiplied in number, and
countless changes in men's modes of life, and tones of thought, rendered
it more difficult for them to imagine the facts of distant time,--it
became daily, almost hourly, a greater effort for the faithful heart to
apprehend the entire veracity and vitality of the story of its Redeemer;
and more easy for the thoughtless and remiss to deceive themselves as to
the true character of the belief they had been taught to profess. And
this must have been the case, had the pastors of the Church never failed
in their watchfulness, and the Church itself never erred in its practice
or doctrine. But when every year that removed the truths of the Gospel
into deeper distance, added to them also some false or foolish
tradition; when wilful distortion was added to natural obscurity, and
the dimness of memory was disguised by the fruitfulness of fiction;
when, moreover, the enormous temporal power granted to the clergy
attracted into their ranks multitudes of men who, but for such
temptation, would not have pretended to the Christian name, so that
grievous wolves entered in among them, not sparing the flock; and when,
by the machinations of such men, and the remissness of others, the form
and administrations of Church doctrine and discipline had become little
more than a means of aggrandizing the power of the priesthood, it was
impossible any longer for men of thoughtfulness or piety to remain in an
unquestioning serenity of faith. The Church had become so mingled with
the world that its witness could no longer be received; and the
professing members of it, who were placed in circumstances such as to
enable them to become aware of its corruptions, and whom their interest
or their simplicity did not bribe or beguile into silence, gradually
separated themselves into two vast multitudes of adverse energy, one
tending to Reformation, and the other to Infidelity.

§ XCIV. Of these, the last stood, as it were, apart, to watch the course
of the struggle between Romanism and Protestantism; a struggle which,
however necessary, was attended with infinite calamity to the Church.
For, in the first place, the Protestant movement was, in reality, not
_reformation_ but _reanimation_. It poured new life into the Church, but
it did not form or define her anew. In some sort it rather broke down
her hedges, so that all they who passed by might pluck off her grapes.
The reformers speedily found that the enemy was never far behind the
sower of good seed; that an evil spirit might enter the ranks of
reformation as well as those of resistance; and that though the deadly
blight might be checked amidst the wheat, there was no hope of ever
ridding the wheat itself from the tares. New temptations were invented
by Satan wherewith to oppose the revived strength of Christianity: as
the Romanist, confiding in his human teachers, had ceased to try whether
they were teachers sent from God, so the Protestant, confiding in the
teaching of the Spirit, believed every spirit, and did not try the
spirits whether they were of God. And a thousand enthusiasms and
heresies speedily obscured the faith and divided the force of the
Reformation.

§ XCV. But the main evils rose out of the antagonism of the two great
parties; primarily, in the mere fact of the existence of an antagonism.
To the eyes of the unbeliever the Church of Christ, for the first time
since its foundation, bore the aspect of a house divided against itself.
Not that many forms of schism had not before arisen in it; but either
they had been obscure and silent, hidden among the shadows of the Alps
and the marshes of the Rhine; or they had been outbreaks of visible and
unmistakable error, cast off by the Church, rootless, and speedily
withering away, while, with much that was erring and criminal, she still
retained within her the pillar and ground of the truth. But here was at
last a schism in which truth and authority were at issue. The body that
was cast off withered away no longer. It stretched out its boughs to the
sea and its branches to the river, and it was the ancient trunk that
gave signs of decrepitude. On one side stood the reanimated faith, in
its right hand the book open, and its left hand lifted up to heaven,
appealing for its proof to the Word of the Testimony and the power of
the Holy Ghost. On the other stood, or seemed to stand, all beloved
custom and believed tradition; all that for fifteen hundred years had
been closest to the hearts of men, or most precious for their help.
Long-trusted legend; long-reverenced power; long-practised discipline;
faiths that had ruled the destiny, and sealed the departure, of souls
that could not be told or numbered for multitude; prayers, that from the
lips of the fathers to those of the children had distilled like sweet
waterfalls, sounding through the silence of ages, breaking themselves
into heavenly dew to return upon the pastures of the wilderness; hopes,
that had set the face as a flint in the torture, and the sword as a
flame in the battle, that had pointed the purposes and ministered the
strength of life, brightened the last glances and shaped the last
syllables of death; charities, that had bound together the brotherhoods
of the mountain and the desert, and had woven chains of pitying or
aspiring communion between this world and the unfathomable beneath and
above; and, more than these, the spirits of all the innumerable,
undoubting, dead, beckoning to the one way by which they had been
content to follow the things that belonged unto their peace;--these all
stood on the other side: and the choice must have been a bitter one,
even at the best; but it was rendered tenfold more bitter by the
natural, but most sinful animosity of the two divisions of the Church
against each other.

§ XCVI. On one side this animosity was, of course, inevitable. The
Romanist party, though still including many Christian men, necessarily
included, also, all the worst of those who called themselves Christians.
In the fact of its refusing correction, it stood confessed as the Church
of the unholy; and, while it still counted among its adherents many of
the simple and believing,--men unacquainted with the corruption of the
body to which they belonged, or incapable of accepting any form of
doctrine but that which they had been taught from their youth,--it
gathered together with them whatever was carnal and sensual in
priesthood or in people, all the lovers of power in the one, and of ease
in the other. And the rage of these men was, of course, unlimited
against those who either disputed their authority, reprehended their
manner of life, or cast suspicion upon the popular methods of lulling
the conscience in the lifetime, or purchasing salvation on the
death-bed.

§ XCVII. Besides this, the reassertion and defence of various tenets
which before had been little more than floating errors in the popular
mind, but which, definitely attacked by Protestantism, it became
necessary to fasten down with a band of iron and brass, gave a form at
once more rigid, and less rational, to the whole body of Romanist
Divinity. Multitudes of minds which in other ages might have brought
honor and strength to the Church, preaching the more vital truths which
it still retained, were now occupied in pleading for arraigned
falsehoods, or magnifying disused frivolities; and it can hardly be
doubted by any candid observer, that the nascent or latent errors which
God pardoned in times of ignorance, became unpardonable when they were
formally defined and defended; that fallacies which were forgiven to the
enthusiasm of a multitude, were avenged upon the stubbornness of a
Council; that, above all, the great invention of the age, which rendered
God's word accessible to every man, left all sins against its light
incapable of excuse or expiation; and that from the moment when Rome set
herself in direct opposition to the Bible, the judgment was pronounced
upon her, which made her the scorn and the prey of her own children, and
cast her down from the throne where she had magnified herself against
heaven, so low, that at last the unimaginable scene of the Bethlehem
humiliation was mocked in the temples of Christianity. Judea had seen
her God laid in the manger of the beasts of burden; it was for
Christendom to stable the beasts of burden by the altar of her God.

§ XCVIII. Nor, on the other hand, was the opposition of Protestantism to
the Papacy less injurious to itself. That opposition was, for the most
part, intemperate, undistinguishing, and incautious. It could indeed
hardly be otherwise. Fresh bleeding from the sword of Rome, and still
trembling at her anathema, the reformed churches were little likely to
remember any of her benefits, or to regard any of her teaching. Forced
by the Romanist contumely into habits of irreverence, by the Romanist
fallacies into habits of disbelief, the self-trusting, rashly-reasoning
spirit gained ground among them daily. Sect branched out of sect,
presumption rose over presumption; the miracles of the early Church
were denied and its martyrs forgotten, though their power and palm were
claimed by the members of every persecuted sect; pride, malice, wrath,
love of change, masked themselves under the thirst for truth, and
mingled with the just resentment of deception, so that it became
impossible even for the best and truest men to know the plague of their
own hearts; while avarice and impiety openly transformed reformation
into robbery, and reproof into sacrilege. Ignorance could as easily lead
the foes of the Church, as lull her slumber; men who would once have
been the unquestioning recipients, were now the shameless inventors of
absurd or perilous superstitions; they who were of the temper that
walketh in darkness, gained little by having discovered their guides to
be blind; and the simplicity of the faith, ill understood and
contumaciously alleged, became an excuse for the rejection of the
highest arts and most tried wisdom of mankind: while the learned
infidel, standing aloof, drew his own conclusions, both from the rancor
of the antagonists, and from their errors; believed each in all that he
alleged against the other; and smiled with superior humanity, as he
watched the winds of the Alps drift the ashes of Jerome, and the dust of
England drink the blood of King Charles.

§ XCIX. Now all this evil was, of course, entirely independent of the
renewal of the study of Pagan writers. But that renewal found the faith
of Christendom already weakened and divided; and therefore it was itself
productive of an effect tenfold greater than could have been apprehended
from it at another time. It acted first, as before noticed, in leading
the attention of all men to words instead of things; for it was
discovered that the language of the middle ages had been corrupt, and
the primal object of every scholar became now to purify his style. To
this study of words, that of forms being added, both as of matters of
the first importance, half the intellect of the age was at once absorbed
in the base sciences of grammar, logic, and rhetoric; studies utterly
unworthy of the serious labor of men, and necessarily rendering those
employed upon them incapable of high thoughts or noble emotion. Of the
debasing tendency of philology, no proof is needed beyond once reading
a grammarian's notes on a great poet: logic is unnecessary for men who
can reason; and about as useful to those who cannot, as a machine for
forcing one foot in due succession before the other would be to a man
who could not walk: while the study of rhetoric is exclusively one for
men who desire to deceive or be deceived; he who has the truth at his
heart need never fear the want of persuasion on his tongue, or, if he
fear it, it is because the base rhetoric of dishonesty keeps the truth
from being heard.

§ C. The study of these sciences, therefore, naturally made men shallow
and dishonest in general; but it had a peculiarly fatal effect with
respect to religion, in the view which men took of the Bible. Christ's
teaching was discovered not to be rhetorical, St. Paul's preaching not
to be logical, and the Greek of the New Testament not to be grammatical.
The stern truth, the profound pathos, the impatient period, leaping from
point to point and leaving the intervals for the hearer to fill, the
comparatively Hebraized and unelaborate idiom, had little in them of
attraction for the students of phrase and syllogism; and the chief
knowledge of the age became one of the chief stumbling-blocks to its
religion.

§ CI. But it was not the grammarian and logician alone who was thus
retarded or perverted; in them there had been small loss. The men who
could truly appreciate the higher excellences of the classics were
carried away by a current of enthusiasm which withdrew them from every
other study. Christianity was still professed as a matter of form, but
neither the Bible nor the writings of the Fathers had time left for
their perusal, still less heart left for their acceptance. The human
mind is not capable of more than a certain amount of admiration or
reverence, and that which was given to Horace was withdrawn from David.
Religion is, of all subjects, that which will least endure a second
place in the heart or thoughts, and a languid and occasional study of it
was sure to lead to error or infidelity. On the other hand, what was
heartily admired and unceasingly contemplated was soon brought nigh to
being believed; and the systems of Pagan mythology began gradually to
assume the places in the human mind from which the unwatched
Christianity was wasting. Men did not indeed openly sacrifice to
Jupiter, or build silver shrines for Diana, but the ideas of Paganism
nevertheless became thoroughly vital and present with them at all times;
and it did not matter in the least, as far as respected the power of
true religion, whether the Pagan image was believed in or not, so long
as it entirely occupied the thoughts. The scholar of the sixteenth
century, if he saw the lightning shining from the east unto the west,
thought forthwith of Jupiter, not of the coming of the Son of Man; if he
saw the moon walking in brightness, he thought of Diana, not of the
throne which was to be established for ever as a faithful witness in
heaven; and though his heart was but secretly enticed, yet thus he
denied the God that is above.[25]

And, indeed, this double creed, of Christianity confessed and Paganism
beloved, was worse than Paganism itself, inasmuch as it refused
effective and practical belief altogether. It would have been better to
have worshipped Diana and Jupiter at once, than to have gone on through
the whole of life naming one God, imagining another, and dreading none.
Better, a thousandfold, to have been "a Pagan suckled in some creed
outworn," than to have stood by the great sea of Eternity and seen no
God walking on its waves, no heavenly world on its horizon.

§ CII. This fatal result of an enthusiasm for classical literature was
hastened and heightened by the misdirection of the powers of art. The
imagination of the age was actively set to realize these objects of
Pagan belief; and all the most exalted faculties of man, which, up to
that period, had been employed in the service of Faith, were now
transferred to the service of Fiction. The invention which had formerly
been both sanctified and strengthened by laboring under the command of
settled intention, and on the ground of assured belief, had now the
reins laid upon its neck by passion, and all ground of fact cut from
beneath its feet; and the imagination which formerly had helped men to
apprehend the truth, now tempted them to believe a falsehood. The
faculties themselves wasted away in their own treason; one by one they
fell in the potter's field; and the Raphael who seemed sent and inspired
from heaven that he might paint Apostles and Prophets, sank at once into
powerlessness at the feet of Apollo and the Muses.

§ CIII. But this was not all. The habit of using the greatest gifts of
imagination upon fictitious subjects, of course destroyed the honor and
value of the same imagination used in the cause of truth. Exactly in the
proportion in which Jupiters and Mercuries were embodied and believed,
in that proportion Virgins and Angels were disembodied and disbelieved.
The images summoned by art began gradually to assume one average value
in the spectator's mind; and incidents from the Iliad and from the
Exodus to come within the same degrees of credibility. And, farther,
while the powers of the imagination were becoming daily more and more
languid, because unsupported by faith, the manual skill and science of
the artist were continually on the increase. When these had reached a
certain point, they began to be the principal things considered in the
picture, and its story or scene to be thought of only as a theme for
their manifestation. Observe the difference. In old times, men used
their powers of painting to show the objects of faith; in later times,
they used the objects of faith that they might show their powers of
painting. The distinction is enormous, the difference incalculable as
irreconcilable. And thus, the more skilful the artist, the less his
subject was regarded; and the hearts of men hardened as their handling
softened, until they reached a point when sacred, profane, or sensual
subjects were employed, with absolute indifference, for the display of
color and execution; and gradually the mind of Europe congealed into
that state of utter apathy,--inconceivable, unless it had been
witnessed, and unpardonable, unless by us, who have been infected by
it,--which permits us to place the Madonna and the Aphrodite side by
side in our galleries, and to pass, with the same unmoved inquiry into
the manner of their handling, from a Bacchanal to a Nativity.

Now all this evil, observe, would have been merely the necessary and
natural operation of an enthusiasm for the classics, and of a delight in
the mere science of the artist, on the most virtuous mind. But this
operation took place upon minds enervated by luxury, and which were
tempted, at the very same period, to forgetfulness or denial of all
religious principle by their own basest instincts. The faith which had
been undermined by the genius of Pagans, was overthrown by the crimes of
Christians; and the ruin which was begun by scholarship, was completed
by sensuality. The characters of the heathen divinities were as suitable
to the manners of the time as their forms were agreeable to its taste;
and Paganism again became, in effect, the religion of Europe. That is to
say, the civilized world is at this moment, collectively, just as Pagan
as it was in the second century; a small body of believers being now, as
they were then, representative of the Church of Christ in the midst of
the faithless: but there is just this difference, and this very fatal
one, between the second and nineteenth centuries, that the Pagans are
nominally and fashionably Christians, and that there is every
conceivable variety and shade of belief between the two; so that not
only is it most difficult theoretically to mark the point where
hesitating trust and failing practice change into definite infidelity,
but it has become a point of politeness not to inquire too deeply into
our neighbor's religious opinions; and, so that no one be offended by
violent breach of external forms, to waive any close examination into
the tenets of faith. The fact is, we distrust each other and ourselves
so much, that we dare not press this matter; we know that if, on any
occasion of general intercourse, we turn to our next neighbor, and put
to him some searching or testing question, we shall, in nine cases out
of ten, discover him to be only a Christian in his own way, and as far
as he thinks proper, and that he doubts of many things which we
ourselves do not believe strongly enough to hear doubted without danger.
What is in reality cowardice and faithlessness, we call charity; and
consider it the part of benevolence sometimes to forgive men's evil
practice for the sake of their accurate faith, and sometimes to forgive
their confessed heresy for the sake of their admirable practice. And
under this shelter of charity, humility, and faintheartedness, the
world, unquestioned by others or by itself, mingles with and overwhelms
the small body of Christians, legislates for them, moralizes for them,
reasons for them; and, though itself of course greatly and beneficently
influenced by the association, and held much in check by its pretence to
Christianity, yet undermines, in nearly the same degree, the sincerity
and practical power of Christianity itself, until at last, in the very
institutions of which the administration may be considered as the
principal test of the genuineness of national religion, those devoted to
education, the Pagan system is completely triumphant; and the entire
body of the so-called Christian world has established a system of
instruction for its youth, wherein neither the history of Christ's
Church, nor the language of God's law, is considered a study of the
smallest importance; wherein, of all subjects of human inquiry, his own
religion is the one in which a youth's ignorance is most easily
forgiven;[26] and in which it is held a light matter that he should be
daily guilty of lying, or debauchery, or of blasphemy, so only that he
write Latin verses accurately, and with speed.

I believe that in few years more we shall wake from all these errors in
astonishment, as from evil dreams; having been preserved, in the midst
of their madness, by those hidden roots of active and earnest
Christianity which God's grace has bound in the English nation with iron
and brass. But in the Venetian, those roots themselves had withered;
and, from the palace of their ancient religion, their pride cast them
forth hopelessly to the pasture of the brute. From pride to infidelity,
from infidelity to the unscrupulous and insatiable pursuit of pleasure,
and from this to irremediable degradation, the transitions were swift,
like the falling of a star. The great palaces of the haughtiest nobles
of Venice were stayed, before they had risen far above their
foundations, by the blast of a penal poverty; and the wild grass, on the
unfinished fragments of their mighty shafts, waves at the tide-mark
where the power of the godless people first heard the "Hitherto shalt
thou come." And the regeneration in which they had so vainly
trusted,--the new birth and clear dawning, as they thought it, of all
art, all knowledge, and all hope,--became to them as that dawn which
Ezekiel saw on the hills of Israel: "Behold the day; behold, it is come.
The rod hath blossomed, pride hath budded, violence is risen up into a
rod of wickedness. None of them shall remain, nor of their multitude;
let not the buyer rejoice, nor the seller mourn, for wrath is upon all
the multitude thereof."


FOOTNOTES:

  [8] Or, more briefly, science has to do with facts, art with
    phenomena. To science, phenomena are of use only as they lead to
    facts; and to art facts are of use only as they lead to phenomena. I
    use the word "art" here with reference to the fine arts only, for
    the lower arts of mechanical production I should reserve the word
    "manufacture."

  [9] Tintoret.

  [10] St. Bernard.

  [11] Society always has a destructive influence upon an artist:
    first by its sympathy with his meanest powers; secondly, by its
    chilling want of understanding of his greatest; and, thirdly, by its
    vain occupation of his time and thoughts. Of course a painter of men
    must be _among_ men; but it ought to be as a watcher, not as a
    companion.

  [12] I intended in this place to have introduced some special
    consideration of the science of anatomy, which I believe to have
    been in great part the cause of the decline of modern art; but I
    have been anticipated by a writer better able to treat the subject.
    I have only glanced at his book; and there is something in the
    spirit of it which I do not like, and some parts of it are assuredly
    wrong; but, respecting anatomy, it seems to me to settle the
    question indisputably, more especially as being written by a master
    of the science. I quote two passages, and must refer the reader to
    the sequel.

    "_The scientific men of forty centuries_ have failed to describe so
    accurately, so beautifully, so artistically, as Homer did, the
    organic elements constituting the emblems of youth and beauty, and
    the waste and decay which these sustain by time and age. All these
    Homer understood better, and has described more truthfully than the
    scientific men of forty centuries....

    "Before I approach this question, permit me to make a few remarks on
    the pre-historic period of Greece; that era which seems to have
    produced nearly all the great men.

    "On looking attentively at the statues within my observation, I
    cannot find the slightest foundation for the assertion that their
    sculptors must have dissected the human frame and been well
    acquainted with the human anatomy. They, like Homer, had discovered
    Nature's secret, and bestowed their whole attention on the exterior.
    The exterior they read profoundly, and studied deeply--the _living
    exterior_ and the _dead_. Above all, they avoided displaying the
    dead and dissected interior, through the exterior. They had
    discovered that the interior presents hideous shapes, but not forms.
    Men during the philosophic era of Greece saw all this, each reading
    the antique to the best of his abilities. The man of genius
    rediscovered the canon of the ancient masters, and wrought on its
    principles. The greater number, as now, unequal to this step, merely
    imitated and copied those who preceded them."--_Great Artists and
    Great Anatomists_. By R. Knox, M.D. London, Van Voorst, 1852.

    Respecting the value of literary knowledge in general as regards
    art, the reader will also do well to meditate on the following
    sentences from Hallam's "Literature of Europe;" remembering at the
    same time what I have above said, that "the root of all great art in
    Europe is struck in the thirteenth century," and that the great time
    is from 1250 to 1350:

    "In Germany the tenth century, Leibnitz declares, was a golden age
    of learning compared with the thirteenth."

    "The writers of the thirteenth century display an incredible
    ignorance, not only of pure idiom, but of common grammatical rules."

    The fourteenth century was "not superior to the thirteenth in
    learning.... We may justly praise Richard of Bury for his zeal in
    collecting books. But his erudition appears crude, his style
    indifferent, and his thoughts superficial."

    I doubt the superficialness of the _thoughts_: at all events, this
    is not a character of the time, though it may be of the writer; for
    this would affect art more even than literature.

  [13] Churton's "Early English Church." London, 1840.

  [14] "Quibus nulla macula inest quæ non cernatur. Ita viri nobilitate
    præditi eam vitam peragant cui nulla nota possit inviri." The first
    sentence is literally, "in which there is no spot that may not be
    seen." But I imagine the writer meant it as I have put it in the
    text, else his comparison does not hold.

  [15] Observe, however, that the magnitude spoken of here and in the
    following passages, is the finished and polished magnitude sought
    for the sake of pomp: not the rough magnitude sought for the sake of
    sublimity: respecting which see the "Seven Lamps," chap. iii. § 5,
    6, and 8.

  [16] Can Grande died in 1329: we can hardly allow more than five
    years for the erection of his tomb.

  [17] Vol. I. Chap. I.

  [18] Sansovino, lib. xiii.

  [19] Tentori, vi. 142, i. 157.

  [20] "Jacobus Pisaurius Paphi Episcopus qui Turcos bello, se ipsum
    pace vincebat, ex nobili inter Venetas, ad nobiliorem inter Angelos
    familiam delatus, nobilissimam in illa die Coronam justo Judice
    reddente, hic situs expectat Vixit annos Platonicos. Obijt MDXLVII.
    IX. Kal. Aprilis."

  [21] Isaiah xlvii. 7, 10, 11, 15.

  [22] Compare "Seven Lamps," chap. vii. § 3.

  [23] See the farther remarks on Inspiration, in the fourth chapter.

  [24] That is to say, orders separated by such distinctions as the old
    Greek ones: considered with reference to the bearing power of the
    capital, all orders may be referred to two, as long ago stated; just
    as trees may be referred to the two great classes, monocotyledonous
    and dicotyledonous.

  [25] Job xxi: 26-28; Psalm lxxxix. 37.

  [26] I shall not forget the impression made upon me at Oxford, when,
    going up for my degree, and mentioning to one of the authorities
    that I had not had time enough to read the Epistles properly, I was
    told, that "the Epistles were separate sciences, and I need not
    trouble myself about them."

    The reader will find some farther notes on this subject in Appendix
    7, "Modern Education."




CHAPTER III.

GROTESQUE RENAISSANCE.


§ I. In the close of the last chapter it was noted that the phases of
transition in the moral temper of the falling Venetians, during their
fall, were from pride to infidelity, and from infidelity to the
unscrupulous _pursuit of pleasure_. During the last years of the
existence of the state, the minds both of the nobility and the people
seem to have been set simply upon the attainment of the means of
self-indulgence. There was not strength enough in them to be proud, nor
forethought enough to be ambitious. One by one the possessions of the
state were abandoned to its enemies; one by one the channels of its
trade were forsaken by its own languor, or occupied and closed against
it by its more energetic rivals; and the time, the resources, and the
thoughts of the nation were exclusively occupied in the invention of
such fantastic and costly pleasures as might best amuse their apathy,
lull their remorse, or disguise their ruin.

§ II. The architecture raised at Venice during this period is amongst
the worst and basest ever built by the hands of men, being especially
distinguished by a spirit of brutal mockery and insolent jest, which,
exhausting itself in deformed and monstrous sculpture, can sometimes be
hardly otherwise defined than as the perpetuation in stone of the
ribaldries of drunkenness. On such a period, and on such work, it is
painful to dwell, and I had not originally intended to do so; but I
found that the entire spirit of the Renaissance could not be
comprehended unless it was followed to its consummation; and that there
were many most interesting questions arising out of the study of this
particular spirit of jesting, with reference to which I have called it
the _Grotesque_ Renaissance. For it is not this period alone which is
distinguished by such a spirit. There is jest--perpetual, careless, and
not unfrequently obscene--in the most noble work of the Gothic periods;
and it becomes, therefore, of the greatest possible importance to
examine into the nature and essence of the Grotesque itself, and to
ascertain in what respect it is that the jesting of art in its highest
flight, differs from its jesting in its utmost degradation.

§ III. The place where we may best commence our inquiry is one renowned
in the history of Venice, the space of ground before the Church of Santa
Maria Formosa; a spot which, after the Rialto and St. Mark's Place,
ought to possess a peculiar interest in the mind of the traveller, in
consequence of its connexion with the most touching and true legend of
the Brides of Venice. That legend is related at length in every Venetian
history, and, finally, has been told by the poet Rogers, in a way which
renders it impossible for any one to tell it after him. I have only,
therefore, to remind the reader that the capture of the brides took
place in the cathedral church, St. Pietro di Castello; and that this of
Santa Maria Formosa is connected with the tale, only because it was
yearly visited with prayers by the Venetian maidens, on the anniversary
of their ancestors' deliverance. For that deliverance, their thanks were
to be rendered to the Virgin; and there was no church then dedicated to
the Virgin, in Venice, except this.[27]

Neither of the cathedral church, nor of this dedicated to St. Mary the
Beautiful, is one stone left upon another. But, from that which has been
raised on the site of the latter, we may receive a most important
lesson, introductory to our immediate subject, if first we glance back
to the traditional history of the church which has been destroyed.

§ IV. No more honorable epithet than "traditional" can be attached to
what is recorded concerning it, yet I should grieve to lose the legend
of its first erection. The Bishop of Uderzo, driven by the Lombards from
his Bishopric, as he was praying, beheld in a vision the Virgin Mother,
who ordered him to found a church in her honor, in the place where he
should see a white cloud rest. And when he went out, the white cloud
went before him; and on the place where it rested he built a church, and
it was called the Church of St. Mary the Beautiful, from the loveliness
of the form in which she had appeared in the vision.[28]

The first church stood only for about two centuries. It was rebuilt in
864, and enriched with various relics some fifty years later; relics
belonging principally to St. Nicodemus, and much lamented when they and
the church were together destroyed by fire in 1105.

It was then rebuilt in "magnifica forma," much resembling, according to
Corner, the architecture of the chancel of St. Mark;[29] but the
information which I find in various writers, as to the period at which
it was reduced to its present condition, is both sparing and
contradictory.

§ V. Thus, by Corner, we are told that this church, resembling St.
Mark's, "remained untouched for more than four centuries," until, in
1689, it was thrown down by an earthquake, and restored by the piety of
a rich merchant, Turrin Toroni, "in ornatissima forma;" and that, for
the greater beauty of the renewed church, it had added to it two façades
of marble. With this information that of the Padre dell' Oratoria
agrees, only he gives the date of the earlier rebuilding of the church
in 1175, and ascribes it to an architect of the name of Barbetta. But
Quadri, in his usually accurate little guide, tells us that this
Barbetta rebuilt the church in the fourteenth century; and that of the
two façades, so much admired by Corner, one is of the sixteenth century,
and its architect unknown; and the rest of the church is of the
seventeenth, "in the style of Sansovino."

§ VI. There is no occasion to examine, or endeavor to reconcile, these
conflicting accounts. All that is necessary for the reader to know is,
that every vestige of the church in which the ceremony took place was
destroyed _at least_ as early as 1689; and that the ceremony itself,
having been abolished in the close of the fourteenth century, is only to
be conceived as taking place in that more ancient church, resembling St.
Mark's, which, even according to Quadri, existed until that period. I
would, therefore, endeavor to fix the reader's mind, for a moment, on
the contrast between the former and latter aspect of this plot of
ground; the former, when it had its Byzantine church, and its yearly
procession of the Doge and the Brides; and the latter, when it has its
Renaissance church "in the style of Sansovino," and its yearly honoring
is done away.

§ VII. And, first, let us consider for a little the significance and
nobleness of that early custom of the Venetians, which brought about the
attack and the rescue of the year 943: that there should be but one
marriage day for the nobles of the whole nation,[30] so that all might
rejoice together; and that the sympathy might be full, not only of the
families who that year beheld the alliance of their children, and prayed
for them in one crowd, weeping before the altar, but of all the families
of the state, who saw, in the day which brought happiness to others, the
anniversary of their own. Imagine the strong bond of brotherhood thus
sanctified among them, and consider also the effect on the minds of the
youth of the state; the greater deliberation and openness necessarily
given to the contemplation of marriage, to which all the people were
solemnly to bear testimony; the more lofty and unselfish tone which it
would give to all their thoughts. It was the exact contrary of stolen
marriage. It was marriage to which God and man were taken for witnesses,
and every eye was invoked for its glance, and every tongue for its
prayers.[31]

§ VIII. Later historians have delighted themselves in dwelling on the
pageantry of the marriage day itself, but I do not find that they have
authority for the splendor of their descriptions. I cannot find a word
in the older Chronicles about the jewels or dress of the brides, and I
believe the ceremony to have been more quiet and homely than is usually
supposed. The only sentence which gives color to the usual accounts of
it is one of Sansovino's, in which he says that the magnificent dress of
the brides in his day was founded "on ancient custom."[32] However this
may have been, the circumstances of the rite were otherwise very simple.
Each maiden brought her dowry with her in a small "cassetta," or chest;
they went first to the cathedral, and waited for the youths, who having
come, they heard mass together, and the bishop preached to them and
blessed them: and so each bridegroom took his bride and her dowry and
bore her home.

§ IX. It seems that the alarm given by the attack of the pirates put an
end to the custom of fixing one day for all marriages: but the main
objects of the institution were still attained by the perfect publicity
given to the marriages of all the noble families; the bridegroom
standing in the Court of the Ducal Palace to receive congratulations on
his betrothal, and the whole body of the nobility attending the
nuptials, and rejoicing, "as at some personal good fortune; since, by
the constitution of the state, they are for ever incorporated together,
as if of one and the same family."[33] But the festival of the 2nd of
February, after the year 943, seems to have been observed only in memory
of the deliverance of the brides, and no longer set apart for public
nuptials.

§ X. There is much difficulty in reconciling the various accounts, or
distinguishing the inaccurate ones, of the manner of keeping this
memorable festival. I shall first give Sansovino's, which is the popular
one, and then note the points of importance in the counter-statements.
Sansovino says that the success of the pursuit of the pirates was owing
to the ready help and hard fighting of the men of the district of Sta.
Maria Formosa, for the most part trunkmakers; and that they, having been
presented after the victory to the Doge and the Senate, were told to ask
some favor for their reward. "The good men then said that they desired
the Prince, with his wife and the Signory, to visit every year the
church of their district, on the day of its feast. And the Prince asking
them, 'Suppose it should rain?' they answered, 'We will give you hats to
cover you; and if you are thirsty, we will give you to drink.' Whence is
it that the Vicar, in the name of the people, presents to the Doge, on
his visit, two flasks of malvoisie[34] and two oranges; and presents to
him two gilded hats, bearing the arms of the Pope, of the Prince, and of
the Vicar. And thus was instituted the Feast of the Maries, which was
called noble and famous because the people from all round came together
to behold it. And it was celebrated in this manner:...." The account
which follows is somewhat prolix; but its substance is, briefly, that
twelve maidens were elected, two for each division of the city; and that
it was decided by lot which contrade, or quarters of the town, should
provide them with dresses. This was done at enormous expense, one
contrada contending with another, and even the jewels of the treasury of
St. Mark being lent for the occasion to the "Maries," as the twelve
damsels were called. They, being thus dressed with gold, and silver, and
jewels, went in their galley to St. Mark's for the Doge, who joined them
with the Signory, and went first to San Pietro di Castello to hear mass
on St. Mark's day, the 31st of January, and to Santa Maria Formosa on
the 2nd of February, the intermediate day being spent in passing in
procession through the streets of the city; "and sometimes there arose
quarrels about the places they should pass through, for every one wanted
them to pass by his house."

§ XI. Nearly the same account is given by Corner, who, however, does not
say anything about the hats or the malvoisie. These, however, we find
again in the Matricola de' Casseleri, which, of course, sets the
services of the trunkmakers and the privileges obtained by them in the
most brilliant light. The quaintness of the old Venetian is hardly to be
rendered into English. "And you must know that the said trunkmakers were
the men who were the cause of such victory, and of taking the galley,
and of cutting all the Triestines to pieces, because, at that time, they
were valiant men and well in order. The which victory was on the 2nd
February, on the day of the Madonna of candles. And at the request and
entreaties of the said trunkmakers, it was decreed that the Doge, every
year, as long as Venice shall endure, should go on the eve of the said
feast to vespers in the said church, with the Signory. And be it noted,
that the vicar is obliged to give to the Doge two flasks of malvoisie,
with two oranges besides. And so it is observed, and will be observed
always." The reader must observe the continual confusion between St.
Mark's day the 31st of January, and Candlemas the 2nd of February. The
fact appears to be, that the marriage day in the old republic was St.
Mark's day, and the recovery of the brides was the same day at evening;
so that, as we are told by Sansovino, the commemorative festival began
on that day, but it was continued to the day of the Purification, that
especial thanks might be rendered to the Virgin; and, the visit to Sta.
Maria Formosa being the most important ceremony of the whole festival,
the old chroniclers, and even Sansovino, got confused, and asserted the
victory itself to have taken place on the day appointed for that
pilgrimage.

§ XII. I doubt not that the reader who is acquainted with the beautiful
lines of Rogers is as much grieved as I am at the interference of the
"casket-makers" with the achievement which the poet ascribes to the
bridegrooms alone; an interference quite as inopportune as that of old
Le Balafré with the victory of his nephew, in the unsatisfactory
conclusion of "Quentin Durward." I am afraid I cannot get the
casket-makers quite out of the way; but it may gratify some of my
readers to know that a chronicle of the year 1378, quoted by
Galliciolli, denies the agency of the people of Sta. Maria Formosa
altogether, in these terms: "Some say that the people of Sta. M. Formosa
were those who recovered the _spoil_ ("predra;" I may notice, in
passing, that most of the old chroniclers appear to consider the
recovery of the _caskets_ rather more a subject of congratulation than
that of the brides), and that, for their reward, they asked the Doge and
Signory to visit Sta. M. Formosa; but _this is false_. The going to Sta.
M. Formosa was because the thing had succeeded on that day, and because
this was then the only church in Venice in honor of the Virgin." But
here is again the mistake about the day itself; and besides if we get
rid altogether of the trunkmakers, how are we to account for the
ceremony of the oranges and hats, of which the accounts seem authentic?
If, however, the reader likes to substitute "carpenters" or
"house-builders" for casket-makers, he may do so with great reason (vide
Galliciolli, lib. ii. § 1758); but I fear that one or the other body of
tradesmen must be allowed to have had no small share in the honor of the
victory.

§ XIII. But whatever doubt attaches to the particular circumstances of
its origin, there is none respecting the splendor of the festival
itself, as it was celebrated for four centuries afterwards. We find that
each contrada spent from 800 to 1000 zecchins in the dress of the
"Maries" entrusted to it; but I cannot find among how many contrade the
twelve Maries were divided; it is also to be supposed that most of the
accounts given refer to the later periods of the celebration of the
festival. In the beginning of the eleventh century, the good Doge Pietro
Orseolo II. left in his will the third of his entire fortune "per la
Festa della Marie;" and, in the fourteenth century, so many people came
from the rest of Italy to see it, that special police regulations were
made for it, and the Council of Ten were twice summoned before it took
place.[35] The expense lavished upon it seems to have increased till the
year 1379, when all the resources of the republic were required for the
terrible war of Chiozza, and all festivity was for that time put an end
to. The issue of the war left the Venetians with neither the power nor
the disposition to restore the festival on its ancient scale, and they
seem to have been ashamed to exhibit it in reduced splendor. It was
entirely abolished.

§ XIV. As if to do away even with its memory, every feature of the
surrounding scene which was associated with that festival has been in
succeeding ages destroyed. With one solitary exception,[36] there is not
a house left in the whole Piazza of Santa Maria Formosa from whose
windows the festa of the Maries has ever been seen: of the church in
which they worshipped, not a stone is left, even the form of the ground
and direction of the neighboring canals are changed; and there is now
but one landmark to guide the steps of the traveller to the place where
the white cloud rested, and the shrine was built to St. Mary the
Beautiful. Yet the spot is still worth his pilgrimage, for he may
receive a lesson upon it, though a painful one. Let him first fill his
mind with the fair images of the ancient festival, and then seek that
landmark the tower of the modern church, built upon the place where the
daughters of Venice knelt yearly with her noblest lords; and let him
look at the head that is carved on the base of the tower,[37] still
dedicated to St. Mary the Beautiful.

§ XV. A head,--huge, inhuman, and monstrous,--leering in bestial
degradation, too foul to be either pictured or described, or to be
beheld for more than an instant: yet let it be endured for that instant;
for in that head is embodied the type of the evil spirit to which Venice
was abandoned in the fourth period of her decline; and it is well that
we should see and feel the full horror of it on this spot, and know what
pestilence it was that came and breathed upon her beauty, until it
melted away like the white cloud from the ancient fields of Santa Maria
Formosa.

§ XVI. This head is one of many hundreds which disgrace the latest
buildings of the city, all more or less agreeing in their expression of
sneering mockery, in most cases enhanced by thrusting out the tongue.
Most of them occur upon the bridges, which were among the very last
works undertaken by the republic, several, for instance, upon the Bridge
of Sighs; and they are evidences of a delight in the contemplation of
bestial vice, and the expression of low sarcasm, which is, I believe,
the most hopeless state into which the human mind can fall. This spirit
of idiotic mockery is, as I have said, the most striking characteristic
of the last period of the Renaissance, which, in consequence of the
character thus imparted to its sculpture, I have called grotesque; but
it must be our immediate task, and it will be a most interesting one, to
distinguish between this base grotesqueness, and that magnificent
condition of fantastic imagination, which was above noticed as one of
the chief elements of the Northern Gothic mind. Nor is this a question
of interesting speculation merely: for the distinction between the true
and false grotesque is one which the present tendencies of the English
mind have rendered it practically important to ascertain; and that in a
degree which, until he has made some progress in the consideration of
the subject, the reader will hardly anticipate.

§ XVII. But, first, I have to note one peculiarity in the late
architecture of Venice, which will materially assist us in understanding
the true nature of the spirit which is to be the subject of our inquiry;
and this peculiarity, singularly enough, is first exemplified in the
very façade of Santa Maria Formosa which is flanked by the grotesque
head to which our attention has just been directed. This façade, whose
architect is unknown, consists of a pediment, sustained on four
Corinthian pilasters, and is, I believe, the earliest in Venice which
appears _entirely destitute of every religious symbol, sculpture, or
inscription_; unless the Cardinal's hat upon the shield in the centre of
the impediment be considered a religious symbol. The entire façade is
nothing else than a monument to the Admiral Vincenzo Cappello. Two
tablets, one between each pair of flanking pillars, record his acts and
honors; and, on the corresponding spaces upon the base of the church,
are two circular trophies, composed of halberts, arrows, flags,
tridents, helmets, and lances: sculptures which are just as valueless in
a military as in an ecclesiastical point of view; for, being all copied
from the forms of Roman arms and armor, they cannot even be referred to
for information respecting the costume of the period. Over the door, as
the chief ornament of the façade, exactly in the spot which in the
"barbarous" St. Mark's is occupied by the figure of Christ, is the
statue of Vincenzo Cappello, in Roman armor. He died in 1542; and we
have, therefore, the latter part of the sixteenth century fixed as the
period when, in Venice, churches were first built to the glory of man,
instead of the glory of God.

§ XVIII. Throughout the whole of Scripture history, nothing is more
remarkable than the close connection of punishment with the sin of
vain-glory. Every other sin is occasionally permitted to remain, for
lengthened periods, without definite chastisement; but the forgetfulness
of God, and the claim of honor by man, as belonging to himself, are
visited at once, whether in Hezekiah, Nebuchadnezzar, or Herod, with the
most tremendous punishment. We have already seen, that the first reason
for the fall of Venice was the manifestation of such a spirit; and it is
most singular to observe the definiteness with which it is here
marked,--as if so appointed, that it might be impossible for future ages
to miss the lesson. For, in the long inscriptions[38] which record the
acts of Vincenzo Cappello, it might, at least, have been anticipated
that some expressions would occur indicative of remaining pretence to
religious feeling, or formal acknowledgement of Divine power. But there
are none whatever. The name of God does not once occur; that of St. Mark
is found only in the statement that Cappello was a procurator of the
church: there is no word touching either on the faith or hope of the
deceased; and the only sentence which alludes to supernatural powers at
all, alludes to them under the heathen name of _fates_, in its
explanation of what the Admiral Cappello _would_ have accomplished,
"nisi fata Christianis adversa vetuissent."

§ XIX. Having taken sufficient note of all the baseness of mind which
these facts indicate in the people, we shall not be surprised to find
immediate signs of dotage in the conception of their architecture. The
churches raised throughout this period are so grossly debased, that even
the Italian critics of the present day, who are partially awakened to
the true state of art in Italy, though blind, as yet, to its true cause,
exhaust their terms of reproach upon these last efforts of the
Renaissance builders. The two churches of San Moisè and Santa Maria
Zobenigo, which are among the most remarkable in Venice for their
manifestation of insolent atheism, are characterized by Lazari, the one
as "culmine d'ogni follia architettonica," the other as "orrido ammasso
di pietra d'Istria," with added expressions of contempt, as just as it
is unmitigated.

§ XX. Now both these churches, which I should like the reader to visit
in succession, if possible, after that of Sta. Maria Formosa, agree with
that church, and with each other, in being totally destitute of
religious symbols, and entirely dedicated to the honor of two Venetian
families. In San Moisè, a bust of Vincenzo Fini is set on a tall narrow
pyramid, above the central door, with this marvellous inscription:

  "OMNE FASTIGIVM
   VIRTVTE IMPLET
   VINCENTIVS FINI."

It is very difficult to translate this; for fastigium, besides its
general sense, has a particular one in architecture, and refers to the
part of the building occupied by the bust; but the main meaning of it is
that "Vincenzo Fini fills all height with his virtue." The inscription
goes on into farther praise, but this example is enough. Over the two
lateral doors are two other laudatory inscriptions of younger members of
the Fini family, the dates of death of the three heroes being 1660,
1685, and 1726, marking thus the period of consummate degradation.

[Illustration: Plate III.
               NOBLE AND IGNOBLE GROTESQUE.]

§ XXI. In like manner, the Church of Santa Maria Zobenigo is entirely
dedicated to the Barbaro family; the only religious symbols with which
it is invested being statues of angels blowing brazen trumpets, intended
to express the spreading of the fame of the Barbaro family in heaven. At
the top of the church is Venice crowned, between Justice and Temperance,
Justice holding a pair of grocer's scales, of iron, swinging in the
wind. There is a two-necked stone eagle (the Barbaro crest), with a
copper crown, in the centre of the pediment. A huge statue of a Barbaro
in armor, with a fantastic head-dress, over the central door; and four
Barbaros in niches, two on each side of it, strutting statues, in the
common stage postures of the period,--Jo. Maria Barbaro, sapiens
ordinum; Marinus Barbaro, Senator (reading a speech in a Ciceronian
attitude); Franc. Barbaro, legatus in classe (in armor, with high-heeled
boots, and looking resolutely fierce); and Carolus Barbaro, sapiens
ordinum: the decorations of the façade being completed by two trophies,
consisting of drums, trumpets, flags and cannon; and six plans,
sculptured in relief, of the towns of Zara, Candia, Padua, Rome, Corfu,
and Spalatro.

§ XXII. When the traveller has sufficiently considered the meaning of
this façade, he ought to visit the Church of St. Eustachio, remarkable
for the dramatic effect of the group of sculpture on its façade, and
then the Church of the Ospedaletto (see Index, under head Ospedaletto);
noticing, on his way, the heads on the foundations of the Palazzo Corner
della Regina, and the Palazzo Pesaro, and any other heads carved on the
modern bridges, closing with those on the Bridge of Sighs.

He will then have obtained a perfect idea of the style and feeling of
the Grotesque Renaissance. I cannot pollute this volume by any
illustration of its worst forms, but the head turned to the front, on
the right-hand in the opposite Plate, will give the general reader an
idea of its most graceful and refined developments. The figure set
beside it, on the left, is a piece of noble grotesque, from fourteenth
century Gothic; and it must be our present task to ascertain the nature
of the difference which exists between the two, by an accurate inquiry
into the true essence of the grotesque spirit itself.

§ XXIII. First, then, it seems to me that the grotesque is, in almost
all cases, composed of two elements, one ludicrous, the other fearful;
that, as one or other of these elements prevails, the grotesque falls
into two branches, sportive grotesque and terrible grotesque; but that
we cannot legitimately consider it under these two aspects, because
there are hardly any examples which do not in some degree combine both
elements; there are few grotesques so utterly playful as to be overcast
with no shade of fearfulness, and few so fearful as absolutely to
exclude all ideas of jest. But although we cannot separate the grotesque
itself into two branches, we may easily examine separately the two
conditions of mind which it seems to combine; and consider successively
what are the kinds of jest, and what the kinds of fearfulness, which may
be legitimately expressed in the various walks of art, and how their
expressions actually occur in the Gothic and Renaissance schools.

First, then, what are the conditions of playfulness which we may fitly
express in noble art, or which (for this is the same thing) are
consistent with nobleness in humanity? In other words, what is the
proper function of play, with respect not to youth merely, but to all
mankind?

§ XXIV. It is a much more serious question than may be at first
supposed; for a healthy manner of play is necessary in order to a
healthy manner of work: and because the choice of our recreation is, in
most cases, left to ourselves, while the nature of our work is generally
fixed by necessity or authority, it may be well doubted whether more
distressful consequences may not have resulted from mistaken choice in
play than from mistaken direction in labor.

§ XXV. Observe, however, that we are only concerned, here, with that
kind of play which causes laughter or implies recreation, not with that
which consists in the excitement of the energies whether of body or
mind. Muscular exertion is, indeed, in youth, one of the conditions of
recreation; "but neither the violent bodily labor which children of all
ages agree to call play," nor the grave excitement of the mental
faculties in games of skill or chance, are in anywise connected with the
state of feeling we have here to investigate, namely, that sportiveness
which man possesses in common with many inferior creatures, but to which
his higher faculties give nobler expression in the various
manifestations of wit, humor, and fancy.

With respect to the manner in which this instinct of playfulness is
indulged or repressed, mankind are broadly distinguishable into four
classes: the men who play wisely; who play necessarily; who play
inordinately; and who play not at all.

§ XXVI. First: Those who play wisely. It is evident that the idea of any
kind of play can only be associated with the idea of an imperfect,
childish, and fatigable nature. As far as men can raise that nature, so
that it shall no longer be interested by trifles or exhausted by toils,
they raise it above play; he whose heart is at once fixed upon heaven,
and open to the earth, so as to apprehend the importance of heavenly
doctrines, and the compass of human sorrow, will have little disposition
for jest; and exactly in proportion to the breadth and depth of his
character and intellect, will be, in general, the incapability of
surprise, or exuberant and sudden emotion, which must render play
impossible. It is, however, evidently not intended that many men should
even reach, far less pass their lives in, that solemn state of
thoughtfulness, which brings them into the nearest brotherhood with
their Divine Master; and the highest and healthiest state which is
competent to ordinary humanity appears to be that which, accepting the
necessity of recreation, and yielding to the impulses of natural delight
springing out of health and innocence, does, indeed, condescend often to
playfulness, but never without such deep love of God, of truth, and of
humanity, as shall make even its slightest words reverent, its idlest
fancies profitable, and its keenest satire indulgent. Wordsworth and
Plato furnish us with, perhaps, the finest and highest examples of this
playfulness: in the one case, unmixed with satire, the perfectly simple
effusion of that spirit--in

  "Which gives to all the self-same bent,
   Whose life is wise, and innocent;"

Plato, and, by the by, in a very wise book of our own times, not
unworthy of being named in such companionship, "Friends in Council,"
mingled with an exquisitely tender and loving satire.

§ XXVII. Secondly: The men who play necessarily. That highest species of
playfulness, which we have just been considering, is evidently the
condition of a mind, not only highly cultivated, but so habitually
trained to intellectual labor that it can bring a considerable force of
accurate thought into its moments even of recreation. This is not
possible, unless so much repose of mind and heart are enjoyed, even at
the periods of greatest exertion, that the rest required by the system
is diffused over the whole life. To the majority of mankind, such a
state is evidently unattainable. They must, perforce, pass a large part
of their lives in employments both irksome and toilsome, demanding an
expenditure of energy which exhausts the system, and yet consuming that
energy upon subjects incapable of interesting the nobler faculties. When
such employments are intermitted, those noble instincts, fancy,
imagination, and curiosity, are all hungry for the food which the labor
of the day has denied to them, while yet the weariness of the body, in a
great degree, forbids their application to any serious subject. They
therefore exert themselves without any determined purpose, and under no
vigorous restraint, but gather, as best they may, such various
nourishment, and put themselves to such fantastic exercise, as may
soonest indemnify them for their past imprisonment, and prepare them to
endure their recurrence. This sketching of the mental limbs as their
fetters fall away,--this leaping and dancing of the heart and intellect,
when they are restored to the fresh air of heaven, yet half paralyzed by
their captivity, and unable to turn themselves to any earnest
purpose,--I call necessary play. It is impossible to exaggerate its
importance, whether in polity, or in art.

§ XXVIII. Thirdly: The men who play inordinately. The most perfect state
of society which, consistently with due understanding of man's nature,
it may be permitted us to conceive, would be one in which the whole
human race were divided, more or less distinctly, into workers and
thinkers; that is to say, into the two classes, who only play wisely, or
play necessarily. But the number and the toil of the working class are
enormously increased, probably more than doubled, by the vices of the
men who neither play wisely nor necessarily, but are enabled by
circumstances, and permitted by their want of principle, to make
amusement the object of their existence. There is not any moment of the
lives of such men which is not injurious to others; both because they
leave the work undone which was appointed for them, and because they
necessarily think wrongly, whenever it becomes compulsory upon them to
think at all. The greater portion of the misery of this world arises
from the false opinions of men whose idleness has physically
incapacitated them from forming true ones. Every duty which we omit
obscures some truth which we should have known; and the guilt of a life
spent in the pursuit of pleasure is twofold, partly consisting in the
perversion of action, and partly in the dissemination of falsehood.

§ XXIX. There is, however, a less criminal, though hardly less dangerous
condition of mind; which, though not failing in its more urgent duties,
fails in the finer conscientiousness which regulates the degree, and
directs the choice, of amusement, at those times when amusement is
allowable. The most frequent error in this respect is the want of
reverence in approaching subjects of importance or sacredness, and of
caution in the expression of thoughts which may encourage like
irreverence in others: and these faults are apt to gain upon the mind
until it becomes habitually more sensible to what is ludicrous and
accidental, than to what is grave and essential, in any subject that is
brought before it; or even, at last, desires to perceive or to know
nothing but what may end in jest. Very generally minds of this
character are active and able; and many of them are so far
conscientious, that they believe their jesting forwards their work. But
it is difficult to calculate the harm they do, by destroying the
reverence which is our best guide into all truth; for weakness and evil
are easily visible, but greatness and goodness are often latent; and we
do infinite mischief by exposing weakness to eyes which cannot
comprehend greatness. This error, however, is more connected with abuses
of the satirical than of the playful instinct; and I shall have more to
say of it presently.

§ XXX. Lastly: The men who do not play at all: those who are so dull or
so morose as to be incapable of inventing or enjoying jest, and in whom
care, guilt, or pride represses all healthy exhilaration of the fancy;
or else men utterly oppressed with labor, and driven too hard by the
necessities of the world to be capable of any species of happy
relaxation.

§ XXXI. We have now to consider the way in which the presence or absence
of joyfulness, in these several classes, is expressed in art.

1. Wise play. The first and noblest class hardly ever speak through art,
except seriously; they feel its nobleness too profoundly, and value the
time necessary for its production too highly, to employ it in the
rendering of trivial thoughts. The playful fancy of a moment may
innocently be expressed by the passing word; but he can hardly have
learned the preciousness of life, who passes days in the elaboration of
a jest. And, as to what regards the delineation of human character, the
nature of all noble art is to epitomize and embrace so much at once,
that its subject can never be altogether ludicrous; it must possess all
the solemnities of the whole, not the brightness of the partial, truth.
For all truth that makes us smile is partial. The novelist amuses us by
his relation of a particular incident; but the painter cannot set any
one of his characters before us without giving some glimpse of its whole
career. That of which the historian informs us in successive pages, it
is the task of the painter to inform us of at once, writing upon the
countenance not merely the expression of the moment, but the history of
the life: and the history of a life can never be a jest.

Whatever part, therefore, of the sportive energy of these men of the
highest class would be expressed in verbal wit or humor finds small
utterance through their art, and will assuredly be confined, if it occur
there at all, to scattered and trivial incidents. But so far as their
minds can recreate themselves by the imagination of strange, yet not
laughable, forms, which, either in costume, in landscape, or in any
other accessaries, may be combined with those necessary for their more
earnest purposes, we find them delighting in such inventions; and a
species of grotesqueness thence arising in all their work, which is
indeed one of its most valuable characteristics, but which is so
intimately connected with the sublime or terrible form of the grotesque,
that it will be better to notice it under that head.

§ XXXII. 2. Necessary play. I have dwelt much in a former portion of
this work, on the justice and desirableness of employing the minds of
inferior workmen, and of the lower orders in general, in the production
of objects of art of one kind or another. So far as men of this class
are compelled to hard manual labor for their daily bread, so far forth
their artistical efforts must be rough and ignorant, and their
artistical perceptions comparatively dull. Now it is not possible, with
blunt perceptions and rude hands, to produce works which shall be
pleasing by their beauty; but it is perfectly possible to produce such
as shall be interesting by their character or amusing by their satire.
For one hard-working man who possesses the finer instincts which decide
on perfection of lines and harmonies of color, twenty possess dry humor
or quaint fancy; not because these faculties were originally given to
the human race, or to any section of it, in greater degree than the
sense of beauty, but because these are exercised in our daily
intercourse with each other, and developed by the interest which we take
in the affairs of life, while the others are not. And because,
therefore, a certain degree of success will probably attend the effort
to express this humor or fancy, while comparative failure will
assuredly result from an ignorant struggle to reach the forms of solemn
beauty, the working-man, who turns his attention partially to art, will
probably, and wisely, choose to do that which he can do best, and
indulge the pride of an effective satire rather than subject himself to
assured mortification in the pursuit of beauty; and this the more,
because we have seen that his application to art is to be playful and
recreative, and it is not in recreation that the conditions of
perfection can be fulfilled.

§ XXXIII. Now all the forms of art which result from the comparatively
recreative exertion of minds more or less blunted or encumbered by other
cares and toils, the art which we may call generally art of the wayside,
as opposed to that which is the business of men's lives, is, in the best
sense of the word, Grotesque. And it is noble or inferior, first,
according to the tone of the minds which have produced it, and in
proportion to their knowledge, wit, love of truth, and kindness;
secondly, according to the degree of strength they have been able to
give forth; but yet, however much we may find in it needing to be
forgiven, always delightful so long as it is the work of good and
ordinarily intelligent men. And its delightfulness ought mainly to
consist _in those very imperfections_ which mark it for work done in
times of rest. It is not its own merit so much as the enjoyment of him
who produced it, which is to be the source of the spectator's pleasure;
it is to the strength of his sympathy, not to the accuracy of his
criticism, that it makes appeal; and no man can indeed be a lover of
what is best in the higher walks of art, who has not feeling and charity
enough to rejoice with the rude sportiveness of hearts that have escaped
out of prison, and to be thankful for the flowers which men have laid
their burdens down to sow by the wayside.

§ XXXIV. And consider what a vast amount of human work this right
understanding of its meaning will make fruitful and admirable to us,
which otherwise we could only have passed by with contempt. There is
very little architecture in the world which is, in the full sense of the
words, good and noble. A few pieces of Italian Gothic and Romanesque, a
few scattered fragments of Gothic cathedrals, and perhaps two or three
of Greek temples, are all that we possess approaching to an ideal of
perfection. All the rest--Egyptian, Norman, Arabian, and most Gothic,
and, which is very noticeable, for the most part all the strongest and
mightiest--depend for their power on some developement of the grotesque
spirit; but much more the inferior domestic architecture of the middle
ages, and what similar conditions remain to this day in countries from
which the life of art has not yet been banished by its laws. The
fantastic gables, built up in scroll-work and steps, of the Flemish
street; the pinnacled roofs set with their small humorist double
windows, as if with so many ears and eyes, of Northern France; the
blackened timbers, crossed and carved into every conceivable waywardness
of imagination, of Normandy and old England; the rude hewing of the pine
timbers of the Swiss cottage; the projecting turrets and bracketed
oriels of the German street; these, and a thousand other forms, not in
themselves reaching any high degree of excellence, are yet admirable,
and most precious, as the fruits of a rejoicing energy in uncultivated
minds. It is easier to take away the energy, than to add the
cultivation; and the only effect of the better knowledge which civilized
nations now possess, has been, as we have seen in a former chapter, to
forbid their being happy, without enabling them to be great.

§ XXXV. It is very necessary, however, with respect to this provincial
or rustic architecture, that we should carefully distinguish its truly
grotesque from its picturesque elements. In the "Seven Lamps" I defined
the picturesque to be "parasitical sublimity," or sublimity belonging to
the external or accidental characters of a thing, not to the thing
itself. For instance, when a highland cottage roof is covered with
fragments of shale instead of slates, it becomes picturesque, because
the irregularity and rude fractures of the rocks, and their grey and
gloomy color, give to it something of the savageness, and much of the
general aspect, of the slope of a mountain side. But as a mere cottage
roof, it cannot be sublime, and whatever sublimity it derives from the
wildness or sternness which the mountains have given it in its covering,
is, so far forth, parasitical. The mountain itself would have been
grand, which is much more than picturesque; but the cottage cannot be
grand as such, and the parasitical grandeur which it may possess by
accidental qualities, is the character for which men have long agreed to
use the inaccurate word "Picturesque."

§ XXXVI. On the other hand, beauty cannot be parasitical. There is
nothing so small or so contemptible, but it may be beautiful in its own
right. The cottage may be beautiful, and the smallest moss that grows on
its roof, and the minutest fibre of that moss which the microscope can
raise into visible form, and all of them in their own right, not less
than the mountains and the sky; so that we use no peculiar term to
express their beauty, however diminutive, but only when the sublime
element enters, without sufficient worthiness in the nature of the thing
to which it is attached.

§ XXXVII. Now this picturesque element, which is always given, if by
nothing else, merely by ruggedness, adds usually very largely to the
pleasurableness of grotesque work, especially to that of its inferior
kinds; but it is not for this reason to be confounded with the
grotesqueness itself. The knots and rents of the timbers, the irregular
lying of the shingles on the roofs, the vigorous light and shadow, the
fractures and weather-stains of the old stones, which were so deeply
loved and so admirably rendered by our lost Prout, are the picturesque
elements of the architecture: the grotesque ones are those which are not
produced by the working of nature and of time, but exclusively by the
fancy of man; and, as also for the most part by his indolent and
uncultivated fancy, they are always, in some degree, wanting in
grandeur, unless the picturesque element be united with them.

§ XXXVIII. 3. Inordinate play. The reader will have some difficulty, I
fear, in keeping clearly in his mind the various divisions of our
subject; but, when he has once read the chapter through, he will see
their places and coherence. We have next to consider the expression
throughout of the minds of men who indulge themselves in unnecessary
play. It is evident that a large number of these men will be more
refined and more highly educated than those who only play necessarily;
the power of pleasure-seeking implies, in general, fortunate
circumstances of life. It is evident also that their play will not be so
hearty, so simple, or so joyful; and this deficiency of brightness will
affect it in proportion to its unnecessary and unlawful continuance,
until at last it becomes a restless and dissatisfied indulgence in
excitement, or a painful delving after exhausted springs of pleasure.

The art through which this temper is expressed will, in all probability,
be refined and sensual,--therefore, also, assuredly feeble; and because,
in the failure of the joyful energy of the mind, there will fail, also,
its perceptions and its sympathies, it will be entirely deficient in
expression of character, and acuteness of thought, but will be
peculiarly restless, manifesting its desire for excitement in idle
changes of subject and purpose. Incapable of true imagination, it will
seek to supply its place by exaggerations, incoherencies, and
monstrosities; and the form of the grotesque to which it gives rise will
be an incongruous chain of hackneyed graces, idly thrown
together,--prettinesses or sublimities, not of its own invention,
associated in forms which will be absurd without being fantastic, and
monstrous without being terrible. And because, in the continual pursuit
of pleasure, men lose both cheerfulness and charity, there will be small
hilarity, but much malice, in this grotesque; yet a weak malice,
incapable of expressing its own bitterness, not having grasp enough of
truth to become forcible, and exhausting itself in impotent or
disgusting caricature.

§ XXXIX. Of course, there are infinite ranks and kinds of this
grotesque, according to the natural power of the minds which originate
it, and to the degree in which they have lost themselves. Its highest
condition is that which first developed itself among the enervated
Romans, and which was brought to the highest perfection of which it was
capable, by Raphael, in the arabesques of the Vatican. It may be
generally described as an elaborate and luscious form of nonsense. Its
lower conditions are found in the common upholstery and decorations
which, over the whole of civilized Europe, have sprung from this
poisonous root; an artistical pottage, composed of nymphs, cupids, and
satyrs, with shreddings of heads and paws of meek wild beasts, and
nondescript vegetables. And the lowest of all are those which have not
even graceful models to recommend them, but arise out of the corruption
of the higher schools, mingled with clownish or bestial satire, as is
the case in the latter Renaissance of Venice, which we were above
examining. It is almost impossible to believe the depth to which the
human mind can be debased in following this species of grotesque. In a
recent Italian garden, the favorite ornaments frequently consist of
stucco images, representing, in dwarfish caricature, the most disgusting
types of manhood and womanhood which can be found amidst the dissipation
of the modern drawingroom; yet without either veracity or humor, and
dependent, for whatever interest they possess, upon simple grossness of
expression and absurdity of costume. Grossness, of one kind or another,
is, indeed, an unfailing characteristic of the style; either latent, as
in the refined sensuality of the more graceful arabesques, or, in the
worst examples, manifested in every species of obscene conception and
abominable detail. In the head, described in the opening of this
chapter, at Santa Maria Formosa, the _teeth_ are represented as
_decayed_.

§ XL. 4. The minds of the fourth class of men who do not play at all,
are little likely to find expression in any trivial form of art, except
in bitterness of mockery; and this character at once stamps the work in
which it appears, as belonging to the class of terrible, rather than of
playful, grotesque. We have, therefore, now to examine the state of mind
which gave rise to this second and more interesting branch of
imaginative work.

§ XLI. Two great and principal passions are evidently appointed by the
Deity to rule the life of man; namely, the love of God, and the fear of
sin, and of its companion--Death. How many motives we have for Love, how
much there is in the universe to kindle our admiration and to claim our
gratitude, there are, happily, multitudes among us who both feel and
teach. But it has not, I think, been sufficiently considered how
evident, throughout the system of creation, is the purpose of God that
we should often be affected by Fear; not the sudden, selfish, and
contemptible fear of immediate danger, but the fear which arises out of
the contemplation of great powers in destructive operation, and
generally from the perception of the presence of death. Nothing appears
to me more remarkable than the array of scenic magnificence by which the
imagination is appalled, in myriads of instances, when the actual danger
is comparatively small; so that the utmost possible impression of awe
shall be produced upon the minds of all, though direct suffering is
inflicted upon few. Consider, for instance, the moral effect of a single
thunder-storm. Perhaps two or three persons may be struck dead within
the space of a hundred square miles; and their deaths, unaccompanied by
the scenery of the storm, would produce little more than a momentary
sadness in the busy hearts of living men. But the preparation for the
Judgment by all that mighty gathering of clouds; by the questioning of
the forest leaves, in their terrified stillness, which way the winds
shall go forth; by the murmuring to each other, deep in the distance, of
the destroying angels before they draw forth their swords of fire; by
the march of the funeral darkness in the midst of the noon-day, and the
rattling of the dome of heaven beneath the chariot-wheels of death;--on
how many minds do not these produce an impression almost as great as the
actual witnessing of the fatal issue! and how strangely are the
expressions of the threatening elements fitted to the apprehension of
the human soul! The lurid color, the long, irregular, convulsive sound,
the ghastly shapes of flaming and heaving cloud, are all as true and
faithful in their appeal to our instinct of danger, as the moaning or
wailing of the human voice itself is to our instinct of pity. It is not
a reasonable calculating terror which they awake in us; it is no matter
that we count distance by seconds, and measure probability by averages.
That shadow of the thunder-cloud will still do its work upon our hearts,
and we shall watch its passing away as if we stood upon the
threshing-floor of Araunah.

§ XLII. And this is equally the case with respect to all the other
destructive phenomena of the universe. From the mightiest of them to the
gentlest, from the earthquake to the summer shower, it will be found
that they are attended by certain aspects of threatening, which strike
terror into the hearts of multitudes more numerous a thousandfold than
those who actually suffer from the ministries of judgment; and that,
besides the fearfulness of these immediately dangerous phenomena, there
is an occult and subtle horror belonging to many aspects of the creation
around us, calculated often to fill us with serious thought, even in our
times of quietness and peace. I understand not the most dangerous,
because most attractive form of modern infidelity, which, pretending to
exalt the beneficence of the Deity, degrades it into a reckless
infinitude of mercy, and blind obliteration of the work of sin; and
which does this chiefly by dwelling on the manifold appearances of God's
kindness on the face of creation. Such kindness is indeed everywhere and
always visible; but not alone. Wrath and threatening are invariably
mingled with the love; and in the utmost solitudes of nature, the
existence of Hell seems to me as legibly declared by a thousand
spiritual utterances, as that of Heaven. It is well for us to dwell with
thankfulness on the unfolding of the flower, and the falling of the dew,
and the sleep of the green fields in the sunshine; but the blasted
trunk, the barren rock, the moaning of the bleak winds, the roar of the
black, perilous, merciless whirlpools of the mountain streams, the
solemn solitudes of moors and seas, the continual fading of all beauty
into darkness, and of all strength into dust, have these no language for
us? We may seek to escape their teaching by reasonings touching the good
which is wrought out of all evil; but it is vain sophistry. The good
succeeds to the evil as day succeeds the night, but so also the evil to
the good. Gerizim and Ebal, birth and death, light and darkness, heaven
and hell, divide the existence of man, and his Futurity.[39]

§ XLIII. And because the thoughts of the choice we have to make between
these two, ought to rule us continually, not so much in our own actions
(for these should, for the most part, be governed by settled habit and
principle) as in our manner of regarding the lives of other men, and our
own responsibilities with respect to them; therefore, it seems to me
that the healthiest state into which the human mind can be brought is
that which is capable of the greatest love, and the greatest awe: and
this we are taught even in our times of rest; for when our minds are
rightly in tone, the merely pleasurable excitement which they seek with
most avidity is that which rises out of the contemplation of beauty or
of terribleness. We thirst for both, and, according to the height and
tone of our feeling, desire to see them in noble or inferior forms. Thus
there is a Divine beauty, and a terribleness or sublimity coequal with
it in rank, which are the subjects of the highest art; and there is an
inferior or ornamental beauty, and an inferior terribleness coequal with
it in rank, which are the subjects of grotesque art. And the state of
mind in which the terrible form of the grotesque is developed, is that
which in some irregular manner, dwells upon certain conditions of
terribleness, into the complete depth of which it does not enter for the
time.

§ XLIV. Now the things which are the proper subjects of human fear are
twofold; those which have the power of Death, and those which have the
nature of Sin. Of which there are many ranks, greater or less in power
and vice, from the evil angels themselves down to the serpent which is
their type, and which though of a low and contemptible class, appears
to unite the deathful and sinful natures in the most clearly visible and
intelligible form; for there is nothing else which we know, of so small
strength and occupying so unimportant a place in the economy of
creation, which yet is so mortal and so malignant. It is, then, on these
two classes of objects that the mind fixes for its excitement, in that
mood which gives rise to the terrible grotesque; and its subject will be
found always to unite some expression of vice and danger, but regarded
in a peculiar temper; sometimes (A) of predetermined or involuntary
apathy, sometimes (B) of mockery, sometimes (C) of diseased and
ungoverned imaginativeness.

§ XLV. For observe, the difficulty which, as I above stated, exists in
distinguishing the playful from the terrible grotesque arises out of
this cause; that the mind, under certain phases of excitement, _plays_
with _terror_, and summons images which, if it were in another temper,
would be awful, but of which, either in weariness or in irony, it
refrains for the time to acknowledge the true terribleness. And the mode
in which this refusal takes place distinguishes the noble from the
ignoble grotesque. For the master of the noble grotesque knows the depth
of all at which he seems to mock, and would feel it at another time, or
feels it in a certain undercurrent of thought even while he jests with
it; but the workman of the ignoble grotesque can feel and understand
nothing, and mocks at all things with the laughter of the idiot and the
cretin.

To work out this distinction completely is the chief difficulty in our
present inquiry; and, in order to do so, let us consider the above-named
three conditions of mind in succession, with relation to objects of
terror.

§ _XLVI_. (A). Involuntary or predetermined apathy. We saw above that
the grotesque was produced, chiefly in subordinate or ornamental art, by
rude, and in some degree uneducated men, and in their times of rest. At
such times, and in such subordinate work, it is impossible that they
should represent any solemn or terrible subject with a full and serious
entrance into its feeling. It is not in the languor of a leisure hour
that a man will set his whole soul to conceive the means of representing
some important truth, nor to the projecting angle of a timber bracket
that he would trust its representation, if conceived. And yet, in this
languor, and in this trivial work, he must find some expression of the
serious part of his soul, of what there is within him capable of awe, as
well as of love. The more noble the man is, the more impossible it will
be for him to confine his thoughts to mere loveliness, and that of a low
order. Were his powers and his time unlimited, so that, like Frà
Angelico, he could paint the Seraphim, in that order of beauty he could
find contentment, bringing down heaven to earth. But by the conditions
of his being, by his hard-worked life, by his feeble powers of
execution, by the meanness of his employment and the languor of his
heart, he is bound down to earth. It is the world's work that he is
doing, and world's work is not to be done without fear. And whatever
there is of deep and eternal consciousness within him, thrilling his
mind with the sense of the presence of sin and death around him, must be
expressed in that slight work, and feeble way, come of it what will. He
cannot forget it, among all that he sees of beautiful in nature; he may
not bury himself among the leaves of the violet on the rocks, and of the
lily in the glen, and twine out of them garlands of perpetual gladness.
He sees more in the earth than these,--misery and wrath, and
discordance, and danger, and all the work of the dragon and his angels;
this he sees with too deep feeling ever to forget. And though when he
returns to his idle work,--it may be to gild the letters upon the page,
or to carve the timbers of the chamber, or the stones of the
pinnacle,--he cannot give his strength of thought any more to the woe or
to the danger, there is a shadow of them still present with him: and as
the bright colors mingle beneath his touch, and the fair leaves and
flowers grow at his bidding, strange horrors and phantasms rise by their
side; grisly beasts and venomous serpents, and spectral fiends and
nameless inconsistencies of ghastly life, rising out of things most
beautiful, and fading back into them again, as the harm and the horror
of life do out of its happiness. He has seen these things; he wars with
them daily; he cannot but give them their part in his work, though in a
state of comparative apathy to them at the time. He is but carving and
gilding, and must not turn aside to weep; but he knows that hell is
burning on, for all that, and the smoke of it withers his oak-leaves.

§ XLVII. Now, the feelings which give rise to the false or ignoble
grotesque, are exactly the reverse of these. In the true grotesque, a
man of naturally strong feeling is accidentally or resolutely apathetic;
in the false grotesque, a man naturally apathetic is forcing himself
into temporary excitement. The horror which is expressed by the one,
comes upon him whether he will or not; that which is expressed by the
other, is sought out by him, and elaborated by his art. And therefore,
also, because the fear of the one is true, and of true things, however
fantastic its expression may be, there will be reality in it, and force.
It is not a manufactured terribleness, whose author, when he had
finished it, knew not if it would terrify any one else or not: but it is
a terribleness taken from the life; a spectre which the workman indeed
saw, and which, as it appalled him, will appal us also. But the other
workman never felt any Divine fear; he never shuddered when he heard the
cry from the burning towers of the earth,

  "Venga Medusa; sì lo farem di smalto."

He is stone already, and needs no gentle hand laid upon his eyes to save
him.

§ XLVIII. I do not mean what I say in this place to apply to the
creations of the imagination. It is not as the creating but as the
_seeing_ man, that we are here contemplating the master of the true
grotesque. It is because the dreadfulness of the universe around him
weighs upon his heart, that his work is wild; and therefore through the
whole of it we shall find the evidence of deep insight into nature. His
beasts and birds, however monstrous, will have profound relations with
the true. He may be an ignorant man, and little acquainted with the laws
of nature; he is certainly a busy man, and has not much time to watch
nature; but he never saw a serpent cross his path, nor a bird flit
across the sky, nor a lizard bask upon a stone, without learning so much
of the sublimity and inner nature of each as will not suffer him
thenceforth to conceive them coldly. He may not be able to carve plumes
or scales well; but his creatures will bite and fly, for all that. The
ignoble workman is the very reverse of this. He never felt, never looked
at nature; and if he endeavor to imitate the work of the other, all his
touches will be made at random, and all his extravagances will be
ineffective; he may knit brows, and twist lips, and lengthen beaks, and
sharpen teeth, but it will be all in vain. He may make his creatures
disgusting, but never fearful.

§ XLIX. There is, however, often another cause of difference than this.
The true grotesque being the expression of the _repose_ or play of a
_serious_ mind, there is a false grotesque opposed to it, which is the
result of the _full exertion_ of a _frivolous_ one. There is much
grotesque which is wrought out with exquisite care and pains, and as
much labor given to it as if it were of the noblest subject; so that the
workman is evidently no longer apathetic, and has no excuse for
unconnectedness of thought, or sudden unreasonable fear. If he awakens
horror now, it ought to be in some truly sublime form. His strength is
in his work; and he must not give way to sudden humor, and fits of
erratic fancy. If he does so, it must be because his mind is naturally
frivolous, or is for the time degraded into the deliberate pursuit of
frivolity. And herein lies the real distinction between the base
grotesque of Raphael and the Renaissance, above alluded to, and the true
Gothic grotesque. Those grotesques or arabesques of the Vatican, and
other such work, which have become the patterns of ornamentation in
modern times, are the fruit of great minds degraded to base objects. The
care, skill, and science, applied to the distribution of the leaves, and
the drawing of the figures, are intense, admirable, and accurate;
therefore, they ought to have produced a grand and serious work, not a
tissue of nonsense. If we can draw the human head perfectly, and are
masters of its expression and its beauty, we have no business to cut it
off, and hang it up by the hair at the end of a garland. If we can draw
the human body in the perfection of its grace and movement, we have no
business to take away its limbs, and terminate it with a bunch of
leaves. Or rather our doing so will imply that there is something wrong
with us; that, if we can consent to use our best powers for such base
and vain trifling, there must be something wanting in the powers
themselves; and that, however skilful we may be, or however learned, we
are wanting both in the earnestness which can apprehend a noble truth,
and in the thoughtfulness which can feel a noble fear. No Divine terror
will ever be found in the work of the man who wastes a colossal strength
in elaborating toys; for the first lesson which that terror is sent to
teach us, is the value of the human soul, and the shortness of mortal
time.

§ L. And are we never, then, it will be asked, to possess a refined or
perfect ornamentation? Must all decoration be the work of the ignorant
and the rude? Not so; but exactly in proportion as the ignorance and
rudeness diminish, must the ornamentation become rational, and the
grotesqueness disappear. The noblest lessons may be taught in
ornamentation, the most solemn truths compressed into it. The Book of
Genesis, in all the fulness of its incidents, in all the depth of its
meaning, is bound within the leaf-borders of the gates of Ghiberti. But
Raphael's arabesque is mere elaborate idleness. It has neither meaning
nor heart in it; it is an unnatural and monstrous abortion.

§ LI. Now, this passing of the grotesque into higher art, as the mind of
the workman becomes informed with better knowledge, and capable of more
earnest exertion, takes place in two ways. Either, as his power
increases, he devotes himself more and more to the beauty which he now
feels himself able to express, and so the grotesqueness expands, and
softens into the beautiful, as in the above-named instance of the gates
of Ghiberti; or else, if the mind of the workman be naturally inclined
to gloomy contemplation, the imperfection or apathy of his work rises
into nobler terribleness, until we reach the point of the grotesque of
Albert Durer, where, every now and then, the playfulness or apathy of
the painter passes into perfect sublime. Take the Adam and Eve, for
instance. When he gave Adam a bough to hold, with a parrot on it, and a
tablet hung to it, with "Albertus Durer Noricus faciebat, 1504,"
thereupon, his mind was not in Paradise. He was half in play, half
apathetic with respect to his subject, thinking how to do his work well,
as a wise master-graver, and how to receive his just reward of fame. But
he rose into the true sublime in the head of Adam, and in the profound
truthfulness of every creature that fills the forest. So again in that
magnificent coat of arms, with the lady and the satyr, as he cast the
fluttering drapery hither and thither around the helmet, and wove the
delicate crown upon the woman's forehead, he was in a kind of play; but
there is none in the dreadful skull upon the shield. And in the "Knight
and Death," and in the dragons of the illustrations to the Apocalypse,
there is neither play nor apathy; but their grotesque is of the ghastly
kind which best illustrates the nature of death and sin. And this leads
us to the consideration of the second state of mind out of which the
noble grotesque is developed; that is to say, the temper of mockery.

§ LII. (B). Mockery, or Satire. In the former part of this chapter, when
I spoke of the kinds of art which were produced in the recreation of the
lower orders, I only spoke of forms of ornament, not of the expression
of satire or humor. But it seems probable, that nothing is so refreshing
to the vulgar mind as some exercise of this faculty, more especially on
the failings of their superiors; and that, wherever the lower orders are
allowed to express themselves freely, we shall find humor, more or less
caustic, becoming a principal feature in their work. The classical and
Renaissance manufacturers of modern times having silenced the
independent language of the operative, his humor and satire pass away in
the word-wit which has of late become the especial study of the group of
authors headed by Charles Dickens; all this power was formerly thrown
into noble art, and became permanently expressed in the sculptures of
the cathedral. It was never thought that there was anything discordant
or improper in such a position: for the builders evidently felt very
deeply a truth of which, in modern times, we are less cognizant; that
folly and sin are, to a certain extent, synonymous, and that it would be
well for mankind in general, if all could be made to feel that
wickedness is as contemptible as it is hateful. So that the vices were
permitted to be represented under the most ridiculous forms, and all the
coarsest wit of the workman to be exhausted in completing the
degradation of the creatures supposed to be subjected to them.

§ LIII. Nor were even the supernatural powers of evil exempt from this
species of satire. For with whatever hatred or horror the evil angels
were regarded, it was one of the conditions of Christianity that they
should also be looked upon as vanquished; and this not merely in their
great combat with the King of Saints, but in daily and hourly combats
with the weakest of His servants. In proportion to the narrowness of the
powers of abstract conception in the workman, the nobleness of the idea
of spiritual nature diminished, and the traditions of the encounters of
men with fiends in daily temptations were imagined with less terrific
circumstances, until the agencies which in such warfare were almost
always represented as vanquished with disgrace, became, at last, as much
the objects of contempt as of terror.

The superstitions which represented the devil as assuming various
contemptible forms of disguises in order to accomplish his purposes
aided this gradual degradation of conception, and directed the study of
the workman to the most strange and ugly conditions of animal form,
until at last, even in the most serious subjects, the fiends are oftener
ludicrous than terrible. Nor, indeed, is this altogether avoidable, for
it is not possible to express intense wickedness without some condition
of degradation. Malice, subtlety, and pride, in their extreme, cannot be
written upon noble forms; and I am aware of no effort to represent the
Satanic mind in the angelic form, which has succeeded in painting.
Milton succeeds only because he separately describes the movements of
the mind, and therefore leaves himself at liberty to make the form
heroic; but that form is never distinct enough to be painted. Dante, who
will not leave even external forms obscure, degrades them before he can
feel them to be demoniacal; so also John Bunyan: both of them, I think,
having firmer faith than Milton's in their own creations, and deeper
insight into the nature of sin. Milton makes his fiends too noble, and
misses the foulness, inconstancy, and fury of wickedness. His Satan
possesses some virtues, not the less virtues for being applied to evil
purpose. Courage, resolution, patience, deliberation in council, this
latter being eminently a wise and holy character, as opposed to the
"Insania" of excessive sin: and all this, if not a shallow and false, is
a smooth and artistical, conception. On the other hand, I have always
felt that there was a peculiar grandeur in the indescribable,
ungovernable fury of Dante's fiends, ever shortening its own powers, and
disappointing its own purposes; the deaf, blind, speechless, unspeakable
rage, fierce as the lightning, but erring from its mark or turning
senselessly against itself, and still further debased by foulness of
form and action. Something is indeed to be allowed for the rude feelings
of the time, but I believe all such men as Dante are sent into the world
at the time when they can do their work best; and that, it being
appointed for him to give to mankind the most vigorous realization
possible both of Hell and Heaven, he was born both in the country and at
the time which furnished the most stern opposition of Horror and Beauty,
and permitted it to be written in the clearest terms. And, therefore,
though there are passages in the "Inferno" which it would be impossible
for any poet now to write, I look upon it as all the more perfect for
them. For there can be no question but that one characteristic of
excessive vice is indecency, a general baseness in its thoughts and acts
concerning the body,[40] and that the full portraiture of it cannot be
given without marking, and that in the strongest lines, this tendency to
corporeal degradation; which, in the time of Dante, could be done
frankly, but cannot now. And, therefore, I think the twenty-first and
twenty-second books of the "Inferno" the most perfect portraitures of
fiendish nature which we possess; and at the same time, in their
mingling of the extreme of horror (for it seems to me that the silent
swiftness of the first demon, "con l'ali aperte e sovra i pie leggiero,"
cannot be surpassed in dreadfulness) with ludicrous actions and images,
they present the most perfect instances with which I am acquainted of
the terrible grotesque. But the whole of the "Inferno" is full of this
grotesque, as well as the "Faërie Queen;" and these two poems, together
with the works of Albert Durer, will enable the reader to study it in
its noblest forms, without reference to Gothic cathedrals.

§ LIV. Now, just as there are base and noble conditions of the apathetic
grotesque, so also are there of this satirical grotesque. The condition
which might be mistaken for it is that above described as resulting from
the malice of men given to pleasure, and in which the grossness and
foulness are in the workman as much as in his subject, so that he
chooses to represent vice and disease rather than virtue and beauty,
having his chief delight in contemplating them; though he still mocks at
them with such dull wit as may be in him, because, as Young has said
most truly,

  "'Tis not in folly not to scorn a fool."

§ LV. Now it is easy to distinguish this grotesque from its noble
counterpart, by merely observing whether any forms of beauty or dignity
are mingled with it or not; for, of course, the noble grotesque is only
employed by its master for good purposes, and to contrast with beauty:
but the base workman cannot conceive anything but what is base; and
there will be no loveliness in any part of his work, or, at the best, a
loveliness measured by line and rule, and dependent on legal shapes of
feature. But, without resorting to this test, and merely by examining
the ugly grotesque itself, it will be found that, if it belongs to the
base school, there will be, first, no Horror in it; secondly, no Nature
in it; and, thirdly, no Mercy in it.

§ LVI. I say, first, no Horror. For the base soul has no fear of sin,
and no hatred of it: and, however it may strive to make its work
terrible, there will be no genuineness in the fear; the utmost it can do
will be to make its work disgusting.

Secondly, there will be no Nature in it. It appears to be one of the
ends proposed by Providence in the appointment of the forms of the brute
creation, that the various vices to which mankind are liable should be
severally expressed in them so distinctly and clearly as that men could
not but understand the lesson; while yet these conditions of vice might,
in the inferior animal, be observed without the disgust and hatred which
the same vices would excite, if seen in men, and might be associated
with features of interest which would otherwise attract and reward
contemplation. Thus, ferocity, cunning, sloth, discontent, gluttony,
uncleanness, and cruelty are seen, each in its extreme, in various
animals; and are so vigorously expressed, that when men desire to
indicate the same vices in connexion with human forms, they can do it no
better than by borrowing here and there the features of animals. And
when the workman is thus led to the contemplation of the animal kingdom,
finding therein the expressions of vice which he needs, associated with
power, and nobleness, and freedom from disease, if his mind be of right
tone he becomes interested in this new study; and all noble grotesque
is, therefore, full of the most admirable rendering of animal character.
But the ignoble workman is capable of no interest of this kind; and,
being too dull to appreciate, and too idle to execute, the subtle and
wonderful lines on which the expression of the lower animal depends, he
contents himself with vulgar exaggeration, and leaves his work as false
as it is monstrous, a mass of blunt malice and obscene ignorance.

§ LVII. Lastly, there will be no Mercy in it. Wherever the satire of the
noble grotesque fixes upon human nature, it does so with much sorrow
mingled amidst its indignation: in its highest forms there is an
infinite tenderness, like that of the fool in Lear; and even in its more
heedless or bitter sarcasm, it never loses sight altogether of the
better nature of what it attacks, nor refuses to acknowledge its
redeeming or pardonable features. But the ignoble grotesque has no pity:
it rejoices in iniquity, and exists only to slander.

§ LVIII. I have not space to follow out the various forms of transition
which exist between the two extremes of great and base in the satirical
grotesque. The reader must always remember, that, although there is an
infinite distance between the best and worst, in this kind the interval
is filled by endless conditions more or less inclining to the evil or
the good; impurity and malice stealing gradually into the nobler forms,
and invention and wit elevating the lower, according to the countless
minglings of the elements of the human soul.

§ LIX. (C). Ungovernableness of the imagination. The reader is always to
keep in mind that if the objects of horror, in which the terrible
grotesque finds its materials, were contemplated in their true light,
and with the entire energy of the soul, they would cease to be
grotesque, and become altogether sublime; and that therefore it is some
shortening of the power, or the will, of contemplation, and some
consequent distortion of the terrible image in which the grotesqueness
consists. Now this distortion takes place, it was above asserted, in
three ways: either through apathy, satire, or ungovernableness of
imagination. It is this last cause of the grotesque which we have
finally to consider; namely, the error and wildness of the mental
impressions, caused by fear operating upon strong powers of imagination,
or by the failure of the human faculties in the endeavor to grasp the
highest truths.

§ LX. The grotesque which comes to all men in a disturbed dream is the
most intelligible example of this kind, but also the most ignoble; the
imagination, in this instance, being entirely deprived of all aid from
reason, and incapable of self-government. I believe, however, that the
noblest forms of imaginative power are also in some sort ungovernable,
and have in them something of the character of dreams; so that the
vision, of whatever kind, comes uncalled, and will not submit itself to
the seer, but conquers him, and forces him to speak as a prophet,
having no power over his words or thoughts.[41] Only, if the whole man
be trained perfectly, and his mind calm, consistent and powerful, the
vision which comes to him is seen as in a perfect mirror, serenely, and
in consistence with the rational powers; but if the mind be imperfect
and ill trained, the vision is seen as in a broken mirror, with strange
distortions and discrepancies, all the passions of the heart breathing
upon it in cross ripples, till hardly a trace of it remains unbroken. So
that, strictly speaking, the imagination is never governed; it is always
the ruling and Divine power: and the rest of the man is to it only as an
instrument which it sounds, or a tablet on which it writes; clearly and
sublimely if the wax be smooth and the strings true, grotesquely and
wildly if they are stained and broken. And thus the "Iliad," the
"Inferno," the "Pilgrim's Progress," the "Faërie Queen," are all of them
true dreams; only the sleep of the men to whom they came was the deep,
living sleep which God sends, with a sacredness in it, as of death, the
revealer of secrets.

§ LXI. Now, observe in this matter, carefully, the difference between a
dim mirror and a distorted one; and do not blame me for pressing the
analogy too far, for it will enable me to explain my meaning every way
more clearly. Most men's minds are dim mirrors, in which all truth is
seen, as St. Paul tells us, darkly: this is the fault most common and
most fatal; dulness of the heart and mistiness of sight, increasing to
utter hardness and blindness; Satan breathing upon the glass, so that if
we do not sweep the mist laboriously away, it will take no image. But,
even so far as we are able to do this, we have still the distortion to
fear, yet not to the same extent, for we can in some sort allow for the
distortion of an image, if only we can see it clearly. And the fallen
human soul, at its best, must be as a diminishing glass, and that a
broken one, to the mighty truths of the universe round it; and the wider
the scope of its glance, and the vaster the truths into which it obtains
an insight, the more fantastic their distortion is likely to be, as the
winds and vapors trouble the field of the telescope most when it reaches
farthest.

§ LXII. Now, so far as the truth is seen by the imagination[42] in its
wholeness and quietness, the vision is sublime; but so far as it is
narrowed and broken by the inconsistencies of the human capacity, it
becomes grotesque; and it would seem to be rare that any very exalted
truth should be impressed on the imagination without some grotesqueness
in its aspect, proportioned to the degree of _diminution of breadth_ in
the grasp which is given of it. Nearly all the dreams recorded in the
Bible,--Jacob's, Joseph's, Pharaoh's, Nebuchadnezzar's,--are grotesques;
and nearly the whole of the accessary scenery in the books of Ezekiel
and the Apocalypse. Thus, Jacob's dream revealed to him the ministry of
angels; but because this ministry could not be seen or understood by him
in its fulness, it was narrowed to him into a ladder between heaven and
earth, which was a grotesque. Joseph's two dreams were evidently
intended to be signs of the steadfastness of the Divine purpose towards
him, by possessing the clearness of special prophecy; yet were couched
in such imagery, as not to inform him prematurely of his destiny, and
only to be understood after their fulfilment. The sun, and moon, and
stars were at the period, and are indeed throughout the Bible, the
symbols of high authority. It was not revealed to Joseph that he should
be lord over all Egypt; but the representation of his family by symbols
of the most magnificent dominion, and yet as subject to him, must have
been afterwards felt by him as a distinctly prophetic indication of his
own supreme power. It was not revealed to him that the occasion of his
brethren's special humiliation before him should be their coming to buy
corn; but when the event took place, must he not have felt that there
was prophetic purpose in the form of the sheaves of wheat which first
imaged forth their subjection to him? And these two images of the sun
doing obeisance, and the sheaves bowing down,--narrowed and imperfect
intimations of great truth which yet could not be otherwise
conveyed,--are both grotesque. The kine of Pharaoh eating each other,
the gold and clay of Nebuchadnezzar's image, the four beasts full of
eyes, and other imagery of Ezekiel and the Apocalypse, are grotesques of
the same kind, on which I need not further insist.

§ LXIII. Such forms, however, ought perhaps to have been arranged under
a separate head, as Symbolical Grotesque; but the element of awe enters
into them so strongly, as to justify, for all our present purposes,
their being classed with the other varieties of terrible grotesque. For
even if the symbolic vision itself be not terrible, the sense of what
may be veiled behind it becomes all the more awful in proportion to the
insignificance or strangeness of the sign itself; and, I believe, this
thrill of mingled doubt, fear, and curiosity lies at the very root of
the delight which mankind take in symbolism. It was not an accidental
necessity for the conveyance of truth by pictures instead of words,
which led to its universal adoption wherever art was on the advance; but
the Divine fear which necessarily follows on the understanding that a
thing is other and greater than it seems; and which, it appears
probable, has been rendered peculiarly attractive to the human heart,
because God would have us understand that this is true not of invented
symbols merely, but of all things amidst which we live; that there is a
deeper meaning within them than eye hath seen, or ear hath heard; and
that the whole visible creation is a mere perishable symbol of things
eternal and true. It cannot but have been sometimes a subject of wonder
with thoughtful men, how fondly, age after age, the Church has cherished
the belief that the four living creatures which surrounded the
Apocalyptic throne were symbols of the four Evangelists, and rejoiced
to use those forms in its picture-teaching; that a calf, a lion, an
eagle, and a beast with a man's face, should in all ages have been
preferred by the Christian world, as expressive of Evangelistic power
and inspiration, to the majesty of human forms; and that quaint
grotesques, awkward and often ludicrous caricatures even of the animals
represented, should have been regarded by all men, not only with
contentment, but with awe, and have superseded all endeavors to
represent the characters and persons of the Evangelistic writers
themselves (except in a few instances, confined principally to works
undertaken without a definite religious purpose);--this, I say, might
appear more than strange to us, were it not that we ourselves share the
awe, and are still satisfied with the symbol, and that justly. For,
whether we are conscious of it or not, there is in our hearts, as we
gaze upon the brutal forms that have so holy a signification, an
acknowledgment that it was not Matthew, nor Mark, nor Luke, nor John, in
whom the Gospel of Christ was unsealed: but that the invisible things of
Him from the beginning of the creation are clearly seen, being
understood by the things that are made; that the whole world, and all
that is therein, be it low or high, great or small, is a continual
Gospel; and that as the heathen, in their alienation from God, changed
His glory into an image made like unto corruptible man, and to birds,
and four-footed boasts, the Christian, in his approach to God, is to
undo this work, and to change the corruptible things into the image of
His glory; believing that there is nothing so base in creation, but that
our faith may give it wings which shall raise us into companionship with
heaven; and that, on the other hand, there is nothing so great or so
goodly in creation, but that it is a mean symbol of the Gospel of
Christ, and of the things He has prepared for them that love Him.

§ LXIV. And it is easy to understand, if we follow out this thought,
how, when once the symbolic language was familiarized to the mind, and
its solemnity felt in all its fulness, there was no likelihood of
offence being taken at any repulsive or feeble characters in execution
or conception. There was no form so mean, no incident so commonplace,
but, if regarded in this light, it might become sublime; the more
vigorous the fancy and the more faithful the enthusiasm, the greater
would be the likelihood of their delighting in the contemplation of
symbols whose mystery was enhanced by apparent insignificance, or in
which the sanctity and majesty of meaning were contrasted with the
utmost uncouthness of external form: nor with uncouthness merely, but
even with every appearance of malignity or baseness; the beholder not
being revolted even by this, but comprehending that, as the seeming evil
in the framework of creation did not invalidate its Divine authorship,
so neither did the evil or imperfection in the symbol invalidate its
Divine message. And thus, sometimes, the designer at last became wanton
in his appeal to the piety of his interpreter, and recklessly poured out
the impurity and the savageness of his own heart, for the mere pleasure
of seeing them overlaid with the fine gold of the sanctuary, by the
religion of their beholder.

§ LXV. It is not, however, in every symbolical subject that the fearful
grotesque becomes embodied to the full. The element of distortion which
affects the intellect when dealing with subjects above its proper
capacity, is as nothing compared with that which it sustains from the
direct impressions of terror. It is the trembling of the human soul in
the presence of death which most of all disturbs the images on the
intellectual mirror, and invests them with the fitfulness and
ghastliness of dreams. And from the contemplation of death, and of the
pangs which follow his footsteps, arise in men's hearts the troop of
strange and irresistible superstitions which, more or less melancholy or
majestic according to the dignity of the mind they impress, are yet
never without a certain grotesqueness, following on the paralysis of the
reason and over-excitement of the fancy. I do not mean to deny the
actual existence of spiritual manifestations; I have never weighed the
evidence upon the subject; but with these, if such exist, we are not
here concerned. The grotesque which we are examining arises out of that
condition of mind which appears to follow naturally upon the
contemplation of death, and in which the fancy is brought into morbid
action by terror, accompanied by the belief in spiritual presence, and
in the possibility of spiritual apparition. Hence are developed its most
sublime, because its least voluntary, creations, aided by the
fearfulness of the phenomena of nature which are in any wise the
ministers of death, and primarily directed by the peculiar ghastliness
of expression in the skeleton, itself a species of terrible grotesque in
its relation to the perfect human frame.

§ LXVI. Thus, first born from the dusty and dreadful whiteness of the
charnel house, but softened in their forms by the holiest of human
affections, went forth the troop of wild and wonderful images, seen
through tears, that had the mastery over our Northern hearts for so many
ages. The powers of sudden destruction lurking in the woods and waters,
in the rocks and clouds;--kelpie and gnome, Lurlei and Hartz spirits;
the wraith and foreboding phantom; the spectra of second sight; the
various conceptions of avenging or tormented ghost, haunting the
perpetrator of crime, or expiating its commission; and the half
fictitious and contemplative, half visionary and believed images of the
presence of death itself, doing its daily work in the chambers of
sickness and sin, and waiting for its hour in the fortalices of strength
and the high places of pleasure;--these, partly degrading us by the
instinctive and paralyzing terror with which they are attended, and
partly ennobling us by leading our thoughts to dwell in the eternal
world, fill the last and the most important circle in that great kingdom
of dark and distorted power, of which we all must be in some sort the
subjects until mortality shall be swallowed up of life; until the waters
of the last fordless river cease to roll their untransparent volume
between us and the light of heaven, and neither death stand between us
and our brethren, nor symbols between us and our God.

§ LXVII. We have now, I believe, obtained a view approaching to
completeness of the various branches of human feeling which are
concerned in the developement of this peculiar form of art. It remains
for us only to note, as briefly as possible, what facts in the actual
history of the grotesque bear upon our immediate subject.

From what we have seen to be its nature, we must, I think, be led to one
most important conclusion; that wherever the human mind is healthy and
vigorous in all its proportions, great in imagination and emotion no
less than in intellect, and not overborne by an undue or hardened
preëminence of the mere reasoning faculties, there the grotesque will
exist in full energy. And, accordingly, I believe that there is no test
of greatness in periods, nations, or men, more sure than the
developement, among them or in them, of a noble grotesque, and no test
of comparative smallness or limitation, of one kind or another, more
sure than the absence of grotesque invention, or incapability of
understanding it. I think that the central man of all the world, as
representing in perfect balance the imaginative, moral, and intellectual
faculties, all at their highest, is Dante; and in him the grotesque
reaches at once the most distinct and the most noble developement to
which it was ever brought in the human mind. The two other greatest men
whom Italy has produced, Michael Angelo and Tintoret, show the same
element in no less original strength, but oppressed in the one by his
science, and in both by the spirit of the age in which they lived;
never, however, absent even in Michael Angelo, but stealing forth
continually in a strange and spectral way, lurking in folds of raiment
and knots of wild hair, and mountainous confusions of craggy limb and
cloudy drapery; and, in Tintoret, ruling the entire conceptions of his
greatest works to such a degree that they are an enigma or an offence,
even to this day, to all the petty disciples of a formal criticism. Of
the grotesque in our own Shakspeare I need hardly speak, nor of its
intolerableness to his French critics; nor of that of Æschylus and
Homer, as opposed to the lower Greek writers; and so I believe it will
be found, at all periods, in all minds of the first order.

§ LXVIII. As an index of the greatness of nations, it is a less certain
test, or, rather, we are not so well agreed on the meaning of the term
"greatness" respecting them. A nation may produce a great effect, and
take up a high place in the world's history, by the temporary enthusiasm
or fury of its multitudes, without being truly great; or, on the other
hand, the discipline of morality and common sense may extend its
physical power or exalt its well-being, while yet its creative and
imaginative powers are continually diminishing. And again: a people may
take so definite a lead over all the rest of the world in one direction,
as to obtain a respect which is not justly due to them if judged on
universal grounds. Thus the Greeks perfected the sculpture of the human
body; threw their literature into a disciplined form, which has given it
a peculiar power over certain conditions of modern mind; and were the
most carefully educated race that the world has seen; but a few years
hence, I believe, we shall no longer think them a greater people than
either the Egyptians or Assyrians.

§ LXIX. If, then, ridding ourselves as far as possible of prejudices
owing merely to the school-teaching which remains from the system of the
Renaissance, we set ourselves to discover in what races the human soul,
taken all in all, reached its highest magnificence, we shall find, I
believe, two great families of men, one of the East and South, the other
of the West and North: the one including the Egyptians, Jews, Arabians,
Assyrians, and Persians; the other, I know not whence derived, but
seeming to flow forth from Scandinavia, and filling the whole of Europe
with its Norman and Gothic energy. And in both these families, wherever
they are seen in their utmost nobleness, there the grotesque is
developed in its utmost energy; and I hardly know whether most to admire
the winged bulls of Nineveh, or the winged dragons of Verona.

§ LXX. The reader who has not before turned his attention to this
subject may, however, at first have some difficulty in distinguishing
between the noble grotesque of these great nations, and the barbarous
grotesque of mere savages, as seen in the work of the Hindoo and other
Indian nations; or, more grossly still, in that of the complete savage
of the Pacific islands; or if, as is to be hoped, he instinctively
feels the difference, he may yet find difficulty in determining wherein
that difference consists. But he will discover, on consideration, that
the noble grotesque _involves the true appreciation of beauty_, though
the mind may wilfully turn to other images or the hand resolutely stop
short of the perfection which it must fail, if it endeavored, to reach;
while the grotesque of the Sandwich islander involves no perception or
imagination of anything above itself. He will find that in the exact
proportion in which the grotesque results from an incapability of
perceiving beauty, it becomes savage or barbarous; and that there are
many stages of progress to be found in it even in its best times, much
truly savage grotesque occurring in the fine Gothic periods, mingled
with the other forms of the ignoble grotesque resulting from vicious
inclinations or base sportiveness. Nothing is more mysterious in the
history of the human mind, than the manner in which gross and ludicrous
images are mingled with the most solemn subjects in the work of the
middle ages, whether of sculpture or illumination; and although, in
great part, such incongruities are to be accounted for on the various
principles which I have above endeavored to define, in many instances
they are clearly the result of vice and sensuality. The general
greatness of seriousness of an age does not effect the restoration of
human nature; and it would be strange, if, in the midst of the art even
of the best periods, when that art was entrusted to myriads of workmen,
we found no manifestations of impiety, folly, or impurity.

§ LXXI. It needs only to be added that in the noble grotesque, as it is
partly the result of a morbid state of the imaginative power, that power
itself will be always seen in a high degree; and that therefore our
power of judging of the rank of a grotesque work will depend on the
degree in which we are in general sensible of the presence of invention.
The reader may partly test this power in himself by referring to the
Plate given in the opening of this chapter, in which, on the left, is a
piece of noble and inventive grotesque, a head of the lion-symbol of St.
Mark, from the Veronese Gothic; the other is a head introduced as a
boss on the foundation of the Palazzo Corner della Regina at Venice,
utterly devoid of invention, made merely monstrous by exaggerations of
the eyeballs and cheeks, and generally characteristic of that late
Renaissance grotesque of Venice, with which we are at present more
immediately concerned.[43]

§ LXXII. The developement of that grotesque took place under different
laws from those which regulate it in any other European city. For, great
as we have seen the Byzantine mind show itself to be in other
directions, it was marked as that of a declining nation by the absence
of the grotesque element; and, owing to its influence, the early
Venetian Gothic remained inferior to all other schools in this
particular character. Nothing can well be more wonderful than its
instant failure in any attempt at the representation of ludicrous or
fearful images, more especially when it is compared with the magnificent
grotesque of the neighboring city of Verona, in which the Lombard
influence had full sway. Nor was it until the last links of connexion
with Constantinople had been dissolved, that the strength of the
Venetian mind could manifest itself in this direction. But it had then a
new enemy to encounter. The Renaissance laws altogether checked its
imagination in architecture; and it could only obtain permission to
express itself by starting forth in the work of the Venetian painters,
filling them with monkeys and dwarfs, even amidst the most serious
subjects, and leading Veronese and Tintoret to the most unexpected and
wild fantasies of form and color.

§ LXXIII. We may be deeply thankful for this peculiar reserve of the
Gothic grotesque character to the last days of Venice. All over the rest
of Europe it had been strongest in the days of imperfect art;
magnificently powerful throughout the whole of the thirteenth century,
tamed gradually in the fourteenth and fifteenth, and expiring in the
sixteenth amidst anatomy and laws of art. But at Venice, it had not been
received when it was elsewhere in triumph, and it fled to the lagoons
for shelter when elsewhere it was oppressed. And it was arrayed by the
Venetian painters in robes of state, and advanced by them to such honor
as it had never received in its days of widest dominion; while, in
return, it bestowed upon their pictures that fulness, piquancy, decision
of parts, and mosaic-like intermingling of fancies, alternately
brilliant and sublime, which were exactly what was most needed for the
developement of their unapproachable color-power.

§ LXXIV. Yet, observe, it by no means follows that because the grotesque
does not appear in the art of a nation, the sense of it does not exist
in the national mind. Except in the form of caricature, it is hardly
traceable in the English work of the present day; but the minds of our
workmen are full of it, if we would only allow them to give it shape.
They express it daily in gesture and gibe, but are not allowed to do so
where it would be useful. In like manner, though the Byzantine influence
repressed it in the early Venetian architecture, it was always present
in the Venetian mind, and showed itself in various forms of national
custom and festival; _acted_ grotesques, full of wit, feeling, and
good-humor. The ceremony of the hat and the orange, described in the
beginning of this chapter, is one instance out of multitudes. Another,
more rude, and exceedingly characteristic, was that instituted in the
twelfth century in memorial of the submission of Woldaric, the patriarch
of Aquileia, who, having taken up arms against the patriarch of Grado,
and being defeated and taken prisoner by the Venetians, was sentenced,
not to death, but to send every year on "Fat Thursday" sixty-two large
loaves, twelve fat pigs, and a bull, to the Doge; the bull being
understood to represent the patriarch, and the twelve pigs his clergy:
and the ceremonies of the day consisting in the decapitation of these
representatives, and a distribution of their joints among the senators;
together with a symbolic record of the attack upon Aquileia, by the
erection of a wooden castle in the rooms of the Ducal Palace, which the
_Doge and the Senate_ attacked and demolished with clubs. As long as the
Doge and the Senate were truly kingly and noble, they were content to
let this ceremony be continued; but when they became proud and selfish,
and were destroying both themselves and the state by their luxury, they
found it inconsistent with their dignity, and it was abolished, as far
as the Senate was concerned, in 1549.[44]

§ LXXV. By these and other similar manifestations, the grotesque spirit
is traceable through all the strength of the Venetian people. But again:
it is necessary that we should carefully distinguish between it and the
spirit of mere levity. I said, in the fifth chapter, that the Venetians
were distinctively a serious people, serious, that is to say, in the
sense in which the English are a more serious people than the French;
though the habitual intercourse of our lower classes in London has a
tone of humor in it which I believe is untraceable in that of the
Parisian populace. It is one thing to indulge in playful rest, and
another to be devoted to the pursuit of pleasure: and gaiety of heart
during the reaction after hard labor, and quickened by satisfaction in
the accomplished duty or perfected result, is altogether compatible
with, nay, even in some sort arises naturally out of, a deep internal
seriousness of disposition; this latter being exactly the condition of
mind which, as we have seen, leads to the richest developements of the
playful grotesque; while, on the contrary, the continual pursuit of
pleasure deprives the soul of all alacrity and elasticity, and leaves it
incapable of happy jesting, capable only of that which is bitter, base,
and foolish. Thus, throughout the whole of the early career of the
Venetians, though there is much jesting, there is no levity; on the
contrary there is an intense earnestness both in their pursuit of
commercial and political successes, and in their devotion to
religion,[45] which led gradually to the formation of that highly
wrought mingling of immovable resolution with secret thoughtfulness,
which so strangely, sometimes so darkly, distinguishes the Venetian
character at the time of their highest power, when the seriousness was
left, but the conscientiousness destroyed. And if there be any one sign
by which the Venetian countenance, as it is recorded for us, to the very
life, by a school of portraiture which has never been equalled (chiefly
because no portraiture ever had subjects so noble),--I say, if there be
one thing more notable than another in the Venetian features, it is this
deep pensiveness and solemnity. In other districts of Italy, the dignity
of the heads which occur in the most celebrated compositions is clearly
owing to the feeling of the painter. He has visibly raised or idealized
his models, and appears always to be veiling the faults or failings of
the human nature around him, so that the best of his work is that which
has most perfectly taken the color of his own mind; and the least
impressive, if not the least valuable, that which appears to have been
unaffected and unmodified portraiture. But at Venice, all is exactly the
reverse of this. The tone of mind in the painter appears often in some
degree frivolous or sensual; delighting in costume, in domestic and
grotesque incident, and in studies of the naked form. But the moment he
gives himself definitely to portraiture, all is noble and grave; the
more literally true his work, the more majestic; and the same artist who
will produce little beyond what is commonplace in painting a Madonna or
an apostle, will rise into unapproachable sublimity when his subject is
a member of the Forty, or a Master of the Mint.

Such, then, were the general tone and progress of the Venetian mind, up
to the close of the seventeenth century. First, serious, religious, and
sincere; then, though serious still, comparatively deprived of
conscientiousness, and apt to decline into stern and subtle policy: in
the first case, the spirit of the noble grotesque not showing itself in
art at all, but only in speech and action; in the second case,
developing itself in painting, through accessories and vivacities of
composition, while perfect dignity was always preserved in portraiture.
A third phase rapidly developed itself.

§ LXXVI. Once more, and for the last time, let me refer the reader to
the important epoch of the death of the Doge Tomaso Mocenigo in 1423,
long ago indicated as the commencement of the decline of the Venetian
power. That commencement is marked, not merely by the words of the dying
Prince, but by a great and clearly legible sign. It is recorded, that on
the accession of his successor, Foscari, to the throne, "SI FESTEGGIO
DALLA CITTA UNO ANNO INTERO:" "The city kept festival for a whole year."
Venice had in her childhood sown, in tears, the harvest she was to reap
in rejoicing. She now sowed in laughter the seeds of death.

Thenceforward, year after year, the nation drank with deeper thirst from
the fountains of forbidden pleasure, and dug for springs, hitherto
unknown, in the dark places of the earth. In the ingenuity of
indulgence, in the varieties of vanity, Venice surpassed the cities of
Christendom, as of old she surpassed them in fortitude and devotion; and
as once the powers of Europe stood before her judgment-seat, to receive
the decisions of her justice, so now the youth of Europe assembled in
the halls of her luxury, to learn from her the arts of delight.

It is as needless, as it is painful, to trace the steps of her final
ruin. That ancient curse was upon her, the curse of the cities of the
plain, "Pride, fulness of bread, and abundance of idleness." By the
inner burning of her own passions, as fatal as the fiery reign of
Gomorrah, she was consumed from her place among the nations; and her
ashes are choking the channels of the dead salt sea.


FOOTNOTES:

  [27] Mutinelli, Annali Urbani, lib. i. p. 24; and the Chronicle of
    1738, quoted by Galliciolli: "attrovandosi allora la giesia de Sta.
    Maria Formosa sola giesia del nome della gloriosa Vergine Maria."

  [28] Or from the brightness of the cloud, according to the Padre who
    arranged the "Memorie delle Chiese di Venezia," vol. iii. p. 7.
    Compare Corner, p. 42. This first church was built in 639.

  [29] Perhaps both Corner and the Padre founded their diluted
    information on the short sentence of Sansovino: "Finalmente, l'anno
    1075, fu ridotta a perfezione da Paolo Barbetta, sul modello del
    corpo di mezzo della chiesa di S. Marco." Sansovino, however, gives
    842, instead of 864, as the date of the first rebuilding.

  [30] Or at least for its principal families. Vide Appendix 8, "Early
    Venetian Marriages."

  [31] "Nazionale quasi la ceremonia, perciocche per essa nuovi
    difensori ad acquistar andava la patria, sostegni nuovi le leggi, la
    Liberta."--_Mutinelli._

  [32] "Vestita, _per antico uso_, di bianco, e con chiome sparse giù
    per le spalle, conteste con fila d'oro." "Dressed according to
    ancient usage in white, and with her hair thrown down upon her
    shoulders, interwoven with threads of gold." This was when she was
    first brought out of her chamber to be seen by the guests invited to
    the espousals. "And when the form of the espousal has been gone
    through, she is led, to the sound of pipes and trumpets, and other
    musical instruments, round the room, _dancing serenely all the time,
    and bowing herself before the guests_ (ballando placidamente, e
    facendo inchini ai convitati); and so she returns to her chamber:
    and when other guests have arrived, she again comes forth, and makes
    the circuit of the chamber. And this is repeated for an hour or
    somewhat more; and then, accompanied by many ladies who wait for
    her, she enters a gondola without its felze (canopy), and, seated on
    a somewhat raised seat covered with carpets, with a great number of
    gondolas following her, she goes to visit the monasteries and
    convents, wheresoever she has any relations."

  [33] Sansovino.

  [34] English, "Malmsey." The reader will find a most amusing account
    of the negotiations between the English and Venetians, touching the
    supply of London with this wine, in Mr. Brown's translation of the
    Giustiniani papers. See Appendix IX.

  [35] "XV. diebus et octo diebus ante festum Mariarum omni
    anno."--_Galliciolli._ The same precautions were taken before the
    feast of the Ascension.

  [36] Casa Vittura.

  [37] The keystone of the arch on its western side, facing the canal.

  [38] The inscriptions are as follows:

    To the left of the reader.

      "VINCENTIUS CAPELLUS MARITIMARUM
       RERUM PERITISSIMUS ET ANTIQUORUM
       LAUDIBUS PAR, TRIREMIUM ONERARIA
       RUM PRÆFECTUS, AB HENRICO VII. BRI
       TANNIÆ REGE INSIGNE DONATUS CLAS
       SIS LEGATUS V. IMP. DESIG. TER CLAS
       SEM DEDUXIT, COLLAPSAM NAVALEM DIS
       CIPLINAM RESTITUIT, AD ZACXINTHUM
       AURIÆ CÆSARIS LEGATO PRISCAM
       VENETAM VIRTUTEM OSTENDIT."

    To the right of the reader.

      "IN AMBRACIO SINU BARBARUSSUM OTTHO
       MANICÆ CLASSIS DUCEM INCLUSIT
       POSTRIDIE AD INTERNITIONEM DELETU
       RUS NISI FATA CHRISTIANIS ADVERSA
       VETUISSENT. IN RYZONICO SINU CASTRO NOVO
       EXPUGNATO DIVI MARCI PROCUR
       UNIVERSO REIP CONSENSU CREATUS
       IN PATRIA MORITUR TOTIUS CIVITATIS
       MOERORE, ANNO ÆTATIS LXXIV. MDCXLII. XIV. KAL SEPT."

  [39] The Love of God is, however, always shown by the predominance,
    or greater sum, of good, in the end; but never by the annihilation
    of evil. The modern doubts of eternal punishment are not so much the
    consequence of benevolence as of feeble powers of reasoning. Every
    one admits that God brings finite good out of finite evil. Why not,
    therefore, infinite good out of infinite evil?

  [40] Let the reader examine, with special reference to this subject,
    the general character of the language of Iago.

  [41] This opposition of art to inspiration is long and gracefully
    dwelt upon by Plato, in his "Phædrus," using, in the course of his
    argument, almost the words of St Paul: [Greek: kallion marturousin
    oi palaioi manian sôphrosynês tên ek Theou tês par anthrôpôn
    gignomenês]: "It is the testimony of the ancients, that _the madness
    which is of God is a nobler thing than the wisdom which is of men_;"
    and again, "He who sets himself to any work with which the Muses
    have to do," (i. e. to any of the fine arts,) "without madness,
    thinking that by art alone he can do his work sufficiently, will be
    found vain and incapable, and the work of temperance and rationalism
    will be thrust aside and obscured by that of inspiration." The
    passages to the same effect, relating especially to poetry, are
    innumerable in nearly all ancient writers; but in this of Plato, the
    entire compass of the fine arts is intended to be embraced.

    No one acquainted with other parts of my writings will suppose me to
    be an advocate of idle trust in the imagination. But it is in these
    days just as necessary to allege the supremacy of genius as the
    necessity of labor; for there never was, perhaps, a period in which
    the peculiar gift of the painter was so little discerned, in which
    so many and so vain efforts have been made to replace it by study
    and toil. This has been peculiarly the case with the German school,
    and there are few exhibitions of human error more pitiable than the
    manner in which the inferior members of it, men originally and for
    ever destitute of the painting faculty, force themselves into an
    unnatural, encumbered, learned fructification of tasteless fruit,
    and pass laborious lives in setting obscurely and weakly upon canvas
    the philosophy, if such it be, which ten minutes' work of a strong
    man would have put into healthy practice, or plain words. I know not
    anything more melancholy than the sight of the huge German cartoon,
    with its objective side, and subjective side; and mythological
    division, and symbolical division, and human and Divine division;
    its allegorical sense, and literal sense; and ideal point of view,
    and intellectual point of view; its heroism of well-made armor and
    knitted brows; its heroinism of graceful attitude and braided hair;
    its inwoven web of sentiment, and piety, and philosophy, and
    anatomy, and history, all profound: and twenty innocent dashes of
    the hand of one God-made painter, poor old Bassan or Bonifazio, were
    worth it all, and worth it ten thousand times over.

    Not that the sentiment or the philosophy is base in itself. They
    will make a good man, but they will not make a good painter,--no,
    nor the millionth part of a painter. They would have been good in
    the work and words of daily life; but they are good for nothing in
    the cartoon, if they are there alone. And the worst result of the
    system is the intense conceit into which it cultivates a weak mind.
    Nothing is so hopeless, so intolerable, as the pride of a foolish
    man who has passed through a process of thinking, so as actually to
    have found something out. He believes there is nothing else to be
    found out in the universe. Whereas the truly great man, on whom the
    Revelations rain till they bear him to the earth with their weight,
    lays his head in the dust, and speaks thence--often in broken
    syllables. Vanity is indeed a very equally divided inheritance among
    mankind; but I think that among the first persons, no emphasis is
    altogether so strong as that on the German _Ich_. I was once
    introduced to a German philosopher-painter before Tintoret's
    "Massacre of the Innocents." He looked at it superciliously, and
    said it "wanted to be restored." He had been himself several years
    employed in painting a "Faust" in a red jerkin and blue fire; which
    made Tintoret appear somewhat dull to him.

  [42] I have before stated ("Modern Painters" vol. ii.) that the
    first function of the imagination is the apprehension of ultimate
    truth.

  [43] Note especially, in connexion with what was advanced in Vol. II.
    respecting our English neatness of execution, how the base workman
    has cut the lines of the architecture neatly and precisely round the
    abominable head: but the noble workman has used his chisel like a
    painter's pencil, and sketched the glory with a few irregular lines,
    anything rather than circular; and struck out the whole head in the
    same frank and fearless way, leaving the sharp edges of the stone as
    they first broke, and flinging back the crest of hair from the
    forehead with half a dozen hammer-strokes, while the poor wretch who
    did the other was half a day in smoothing its vapid and vermicular
    curls.

  [44] The decree is quoted by Mutinelli, lib. i. p. 46.

  [45] See Appendix 9.




CHAPTER IV.

CONCLUSION.


§ I. I fear this chapter will be a rambling one, for it must be a kind
of supplement to the preceding pages, and a general recapitulation of
the things I have too imperfectly and feebly said.

The grotesques of the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries, the nature
of which we examined in the last chapter, close the career of the
architecture of Europe. They were the last evidences of any feeling
consistent with itself, and capable of directing the efforts of the
builder to the formation of anything worthy the name of a style or
school. From that time to this, no resuscitation of energy has taken
place, nor does any for the present appear possible. How long this
impossibility may last, and in what direction with regard to art in
general, as well as to our lifeless architecture, our immediate efforts
may most profitably be directed, are the questions I would endeavor
briefly to consider in the present chapter.

§ II. That modern science, with all its additions to the comforts of
life, and to the fields of rational contemplation, has placed the
existing races of mankind on a higher platform than any that preceded
them, none can doubt for an instant; and I believe the position in which
we find ourselves is somewhat analogous to that of thoughtful and
laborious youth succeeding a restless and heedless infancy. Not long
ago, it was said to me by one of the masters of modern science: "When
men invented the locomotive, the child was learning to go; when they
invented the telegraph, it was learning to speak." He looked forward to
the manhood of mankind, as assuredly the nobler in proportion to the
slowness of its developement. What might not be expected from the prime
and middle strength of the order of existence whose infancy had lasted
six thousand years? And, indeed, I think this the truest, as well as the
most cheering, view that we can take of the world's history. Little
progress has been made as yet. Base war, lying policy, thoughtless
cruelty, senseless improvidence,--all things which, in nations, are
analogous to the petulance, cunning, impatience, and carelessness of
infancy,--have been, up to this hour, as characteristic of mankind as
they were in the earliest periods; so that we must either be driven to
doubt of human progress at all, or look upon it as in its very earliest
stage. Whether the opportunity is to be permitted us to redeem the hours
that we have lost; whether He, in whose sight a thousand years are as
one day, has appointed us to be tried by the continued possession of the
strange powers with which He has lately endowed us; or whether the
periods of childhood and of probation are to cease together, and the
youth of mankind is to be one which shall prevail over death, and bloom
for ever in the midst of a new heaven and a new earth, are questions
with which we have no concern. It is indeed right that we should look
for, and hasten, so far as in us lies, the coming of the Day of God; but
not that we should check any human efforts by anticipations of its
approach. We shall hasten it best by endeavoring to work out the tasks
that are appointed for us here; and, therefore, reasoning as if the
world were to continue under its existing dispensation, and the powers
which have just been granted to us were to be continued through myriads
of future ages.

§ III. It seems to me, then, that the whole human race, so far as their
own reason can be trusted, may at present be regarded as just emergent
from childhood; and beginning for the first time to feel their strength,
to stretch their limbs, and explore the creation around them. If we
consider that, till within the last fifty years, the nature of the
ground we tread on, of the air we breathe, and of the light by which we
see, were not so much as conjecturally conceived by us; that the
duration of the globe, and the races of animal life by which it was
inhabited, are just beginning to be apprehended; and that the scope of
the magnificent science which has revealed them, is as yet so little
received by the public mind, that presumption and ignorance are still
permitted to raise their voices against it unrebuked; that perfect
veracity in the representation of general nature by art has never been
attempted until the present day, and has in the present day been
resisted with all the energy of the popular voice;[46] that the simplest
problems of social science are yet so little understood, as that
doctrines of liberty and equality can be openly preached, and so
successfully as to affect the whole body of the civilized world with
apparently incurable disease; that the first principles of commerce were
acknowledged by the English Parliament only a few months ago, in its
free trade measures, and are still so little understood by the million,
that no nation dares to abolish its custom-houses;[47] that the simplest
principles of policy are still not so much as stated, far less received,
and that civilized nations persist in the belief that the subtlety and
dishonesty which they know to be ruinous in dealings between man and
man, are serviceable in dealings between multitude and multitude;
finally, that the scope of the Christian religion, which we have been
taught for two thousand years, is still so little conceived by us, that
we suppose the laws of charity and of self-sacrifice bear upon
individuals in all their social relations, and yet do not bear upon
nations in any of their political relations;--when, I say, we thus
review the depth of simplicity in which the human race are still
plunged with respect to all that it most profoundly concerns them to
know, and which might, by them, with most ease have been ascertained, we
can hardly determine how far back on the narrow path of human progress
we ought to place the generation to which we belong, how far the
swaddling clothes are unwound from us, and childish things beginning to
be put away.

On the other hand, a power of obtaining veracity in the representation
of material and tangible things, which, within certain limits and
conditions, is unimpeachable, has now been placed in the hands of all
men,[48] almost without labor. The foundation of every natural science
is now at last firmly laid, not a day passing without some addition of
buttress and pinnacle to their already magnificent fabric. Social
theorems, if fiercely agitated, are therefore the more likely to be at
last determined, so that they never can be matters of question more.
Human life has been in some sense prolonged by the increased powers of
locomotion, and an almost limitless power of converse. Finally, there is
hardly any serious mind in Europe but is occupied, more or less, in the
investigation of the questions which have so long paralyzed the strength
of religious feeling, and shortened the dominion of religious faith. And
we may therefore at least look upon ourselves as so far in a definite
state of progress, as to justify our caution in guarding against the
dangers incident to every period of change, and especially to that from
childhood into youth.

§ IV. Those dangers appear, in the main, to be twofold; consisting
partly in the pride of vain knowledge, partly in the pursuit of vain
pleasure. A few points are still to be noticed with respect to each of
these heads.

Enough, it might be thought, had been said already, touching the pride
of knowledge; but I have not yet applied the principles, at which we
arrived in the third chapter, to the practical questions of modern art.
And I think those principles, together with what were deduced from the
consideration of the nature of Gothic in the second volume, so necessary
and vital, not only with respect to the progress of art, but even to the
happiness of society, that I will rather run the risk of tediousness
than of deficiency, in their illustration and enforcement.

In examining the nature of Gothic, we concluded that one of the chief
elements of power in that, and in _all good_ architecture, was the
acceptance of uncultivated and rude energy in the workman. In examining
the nature of Renaissance, we concluded that its chief element of
weakness was that pride of knowledge which not only prevented all
rudeness in expression, but gradually quenched all energy which could
only be rudely expressed; nor only so, but, for the motive and matter of
the work itself, preferred science to emotion, and experience to
perception.

§ V. The modern mind differs from the Renaissance mind in that its
learning is more substantial and extended, and its temper more humble;
but its errors, with respect to the cultivation of art, are precisely
the same,--nay, as far as regards execution, even more aggravated. We
require, at present, from our general workmen, more perfect finish than
was demanded in the most skilful Renaissance periods, except in their
very finest productions; and our leading principles in teaching, and in
the patronage which necessarily gives tone to teaching, are, that the
goodness of work consists primarily in firmness of handling and accuracy
of science, that is to say, in hand-work and head-work; whereas
heart-work, which is the _one_ work we want, is not only independent of
both, but often, in great degree, inconsistent with either.

§ VI. Here, therefore, let me finally and firmly enunciate the great
principle to which all that has hitherto been stated is
subservient:--that art is valuable or otherwise, only as it expresses
the personality, activity, and living perception of a good and great
human soul; that it may express and contain this with little help from
execution, and less from science; and that if it have not this, if it
show not the vigor, perception, and invention of a mighty human spirit,
it is worthless. Worthless, I mean, as _art_; it may be precious in some
other way, but, as art, it is nugatory. Once let this be well understood
among us, and magnificent consequences will soon follow. Let me repeat
it in other terms, so that I may not be misunderstood. All art is great,
and good, and true, only so far as it is distinctively the work of
_manhood_ in its entire and highest sense; that is to say, not the work
of limbs and fingers, but of the soul, aided, according to her
necessities, by the inferior powers; and therefore distinguished in
essence from all products of those inferior powers unhelped by the soul.
For as a photograph is not a work of art, though it requires certain
delicate manipulations of paper and acid, and subtle calculations of
time, in order to bring out a good result; so, neither would a drawing
_like_ a photograph, made directly from nature, be a work of art,
although it would imply many delicate manipulations of the pencil and
subtle calculations of effects of color and shade. It is no more art[49]
to manipulate a camel's hair pencil, than to manipulate a china tray and
a glass vial. It is no more art to lay on color delicately, than to lay
on acid delicately. It is no more art to use the cornea and retina for
the reception of an image, than to use a lens and a piece of silvered
paper. But the moment that inner part of the man, or rather that entire
and only being of the man, of which cornea and retina, fingers and
hands, pencils and colors, are all the mere servants and
instruments;[50] that manhood which has light in itself, though the
eyeball be sightless, and can gain in strength when the hand and the
foot are hewn off and cast into the fire; the moment this part of the
man stands forth with its solemn "Behold, it is I," then the work
becomes art indeed, perfect in honor, priceless in value, boundless in
power.

§ VII. Yet observe, I do not mean to speak of the body and soul as
separable. The man is made up of both: they are to be raised and
glorified together, and all art is an expression of the one, by and
through the other. All that I would insist upon is, the necessity of the
whole man being in his work; the body _must_ be in it. Hands and habits
must be in it, whether we will or not; but the nobler part of the man
may often not be in it. And that nobler part acts principally in love,
reverence, and admiration, together with those conditions of thought
which arise out of them. For we usually fall into much error by
considering the intellectual powers as having dignity in themselves, and
separable from the heart; whereas the truth is, that the intellect
becomes noble and ignoble according to the food we give it, and the kind
of subjects with which it is conversant. It is not the reasoning power
which, of itself, is noble, but the reasoning power occupied with its
proper objects. Half of the mistakes of metaphysicians have arisen from
their not observing this; namely, that the intellect, going through the
same processes, is yet mean or noble according to the matter it deals
with, and wastes itself away in mere rotatory motion, if it be set to
grind straws and dust. If we reason only respecting words, or lines, or
any trifling and finite things, the reason becomes a contemptible
faculty; but reason employed on holy and infinite things, becomes
herself holy and infinite. So that, by work of the soul, I mean the
reader always to understand the work of the entire immortal creature,
proceeding from a quick, perceptive, and eager heart, perfected by the
intellect, and finally dealt with by the hands, under the direct
guidance of these higher powers.

§ VIII. And now observe, the first important consequence of our fully
understanding this preëminence of the soul, will be the due
understanding of that subordination of knowledge respecting which so
much has already been said. For it must be felt at once, that the
increase of knowledge, merely as such, does not make the soul larger or
smaller; that, in the sight of God, all the knowledge man can gain is as
nothing: but that the soul, for which the great scheme of redemption was
laid, be it ignorant or be it wise, is all in all; and in the activity,
strength, health, and well-being of this soul, lies the main difference,
in His sight, between one man and another. And that which is all in all
in God's estimate is also, be assured, all in all in man's labor; and to
have the heart open, and the eyes clear, and the emotions and thoughts
warm and quick, and not the knowing of this or the other fact, is the
state needed for all mighty doing in this world. And therefore finally,
for this, the weightiest of all reasons, let us take no pride in our
knowledge. We may, in a certain sense, be proud of being immortal; we
may be proud of being God's children; we may be proud of loving,
thinking, seeing, and of all that we are by no human teaching: but not
of what we have been taught by rote; not of the ballast and freight of
the ship of the spirit, but only of its pilotage, without which all the
freight will only sink it faster, and strew the sea more richly with
its ruin. There is not at this moment a youth of twenty, having received
what we moderns ridiculously call education, but he knows more of
everything, except the soul, than Plato or St. Paul did; but he is not
for that reason a greater man, or fitter for his work, or more fit to be
heard by others, than Plato or St. Paul. There is not at this moment a
junior student in our schools of painting, who does not know fifty times
as much about the art as Giotto did; but he is not for that reason
greater than Giotto; no, nor his work better, nor fitter for our
beholding. Let him go on to know all that the human intellect can
discover and contain in the term of a long life, and he will not be one
inch, one line, nearer to Giotto's feet. But let him leave his academy
benches, and, innocently, as one knowing nothing, go out into the
highways and hedges, and there rejoice with them that rejoice, and weep
with them that weep; and in the next world, among the companies of the
great and good, Giotto will give his hand to him, and lead him into
their white circle, and say, "This is our brother."

§ IX. And the second important consequence of our feeling the soul's
preëminence will be our understanding the soul's language, however
broken, or low, or feeble, or obscure in its words; and chiefly that
great symbolic language of past ages, which has now so long been
unspoken. It is strange that the same cold and formal spirit which the
Renaissance teaching has raised amongst us, should be equally dead to
the languages of imitation and of symbolism; and should at once disdain
the faithful rendering of real nature by the modern school of the
Pre-Raphaelites, and the symbolic rendering of imagined nature in the
work of the thirteenth century. But so it is; and we find the same body
of modern artists rejecting Pre-Raphaelitism because it is not ideal!
and thirteenth century work, because it is not real!--their own practice
being at once false and un-ideal, and therefore equally opposed to both.

§ X. It is therefore, at this juncture, of much importance to mark for
the reader the exact relation of healthy symbolism and of healthy
imitation; and, in order to do so, let us return to one of our Venetian
examples of symbolic art, to the central cupola of St. Mark's. On that
cupola, as has been already stated, there is a mosaic representing the
Apostles on the Mount of Olives, with an olive-tree separating each from
the other; and we shall easily arrive at our purpose, by comparing the
means which would have been adopted by a modern artist bred in the
Renaissance schools,--that is to say, under the influence of Claude and
Poussin, and of the common teaching of the present day,--with those
adopted by the Byzantine mosaicist to express the nature of these trees.

§ XI. The reader is doubtless aware that the olive is one of the most
characteristic and beautiful features of all Southern scenery. On the
slopes of the northern Apennines, olives are the usual forest timber;
the whole of the Val d'Arno is wooded with them, every one of its
gardens is filled with them, and they grow in orchard-like ranks out of
its fields of maize, or corn, or vine; so that it is physically
impossible, in most parts of the neighborhood of Florence, Pistoja,
Lucca, or Pisa, to choose any site of landscape which shall not owe its
leading character to the foliage of these trees. What the elm and oak
are to England, the olive is to Italy; nay, more than this, its presence
is so constant, that, in the case of at least four fifths of the
drawings made by any artist in North Italy, he must have been somewhat
impeded by branches of olive coming between him and the landscape. Its
classical associations double its importance in Greece; and in the Holy
Land the remembrances connected with it are of course more touching than
can ever belong to any other tree of the field. Now, for many years
back, at least one third out of all the landscapes painted by English
artists have been chosen from Italian scenery; sketches in Greece and in
the Holy Land have become as common as sketches on Hampstead Heath; our
galleries also are full of sacred subjects, in which, if any background
be introduced at all, the foliage of the olive ought to have been a
prominent feature.

And here I challenge the untravelled English reader to tell me what an
olive-tree is like?

§ XII. I know he cannot answer my challenge. He has no more idea of an
olive-tree than if olives grew only in the fixed stars. Let him meditate
a little on this one fact, and consider its strangeness, and what a
wilful and constant closing of the eyes to the most important truths it
indicates on the part of the modern artist. Observe, a want of
perception, not of science. I do not want painters to tell me any
scientific facts about olive-trees. But it had been well for them to
have felt and seen the olive-tree; to have loved it for Christ's sake,
partly also for the helmed Wisdom's sake which was to the heathen in
some sort as that nobler Wisdom which stood at God's right hand, when He
founded the earth and established the heavens. To have loved it, even to
the hoary dimness of its delicate foliage, subdued and faint of hue, as
if the ashes of the Gethsemane agony had been cast upon it for ever; and
to have traced, line by line, the gnarled writhing of its intricate
branches, and the pointed fretwork of its light and narrow leaves,
inlaid on the blue field of the sky, and the small rosy-white stars of
its spring blossoming, and the beads of sable fruit scattered by autumn
along its topmost boughs--the right, in Israel, of the stranger, the
fatherless, and the widow,--and, more than all, the softness of the
mantle, silver grey, and tender like the down on a bird's breast, with
which, far away, it veils the undulation of the mountains;--these it had
been well for them to have seen and drawn, whatever they had left
unstudied in the gallery.

§ XIII. And if the reader would know the reason why this has not been
done (it is one instance only out of the myriads which might be given of
sightlessness in modern art), and will ask the artists themselves, he
will be informed of another of the marvellous contradictions and
inconsistencies in the base Renaissance art; for it will be answered
him, that it is not right, nor according to law, to draw trees so that
one should be known from another, but that trees ought to be generalized
into a universal idea of a tree: that is to say, that the very school
which carries its science in the representation of man down to the
dissection of the most minute muscle, refuses so much science to the
drawing of a tree as shall distinguish one species from another; and
also, while it attends to logic, and rhetoric, and perspective, and
atmosphere, and every other circumstance which is trivial, verbal,
external, or accidental, in what it either says or sees, it will _not_
attend to what is essential and substantial,--being intensely
solicitous, for instance, if it draws two trees, one behind the other,
that the farthest off shall be as much smaller as mathematics show that
it should be, but totally unsolicitous to show, what to the spectator is
a far more important matter, whether it is an apple or an orange tree.

§ XIV. This, however, is not to our immediate purpose. Let it be granted
that an idea of an olive-tree is indeed to be given us in a special
manner; how, and by what language, this idea is to be conveyed, are
questions on which we shall find the world of artists again divided; and
it was this division which I wished especially to illustrate by
reference to the mosaics of St. Mark's.

Now the main characteristics of an olive-tree are these. It has sharp
and slender leaves of a greyish green, nearly grey on the under surface,
and resembling, but somewhat smaller than, those of our common willow.
Its fruit, when ripe, is black and lustrous; but of course so small,
that, unless in great quantity, it is not conspicuous upon the tree. Its
trunk and branches are peculiarly fantastic in their twisting, showing
their fibres at every turn; and the trunk is often hollow, and even rent
into many divisions like separate stems, but the extremities are
exquisitely graceful, especially in the setting on of the leaves; and
the notable and characteristic effect of the tree in the distance is of
a rounded and soft mass or ball of downy foliage.

§ XV. Supposing a modern artist to address himself to the rendering of
this tree with his best skill: he will probably draw accurately the
twisting of the branches, but yet this will hardly distinguish the tree
from an oak: he will also render the color and intricacy of the foliage,
but this will only confuse the idea of an oak with that of a willow. The
fruit, and the peculiar grace of the leaves at the extremities, and the
fibrous structure of the stems, will all be too minute to be rendered
consistently with his artistical feeling of breadth, or with the amount
of labor which he considers it dexterous and legitimate to bestow upon
the work: but, above all, the rounded and monotonous form of the head of
the tree will be at variance with his ideas of "composition;" he will
assuredly disguise or break it, and the main points of the olive-tree
will all at last remain untold.

§ XVI. Now observe, the old Byzantine mosaicist begins his work at
enormous disadvantage. It is to be some one hundred and fifty feet above
the eye, in a dark cupola; executed not with free touches of the pencil,
but with square pieces of glass; not by his own hand, but by various
workmen under his superintendence; finally, not with a principal purpose
of drawing olive-trees, but mainly as a decoration of the cupola. There
is to be an olive-tree beside each apostle, and their stems are to be
the chief lines which divide the dome. He therefore at once gives up the
irregular twisting of the boughs hither and thither, but he will not
give up their fibres. Other trees have irregular and fantastic branches,
but the knitted cordage of fibres is the olive's own. Again, were he to
draw the leaves of their natural size, they would be so small that their
forms would be invisible in the darkness; and were he to draw them so
large as that their shape might be seen, they would look like laurel
instead of olive. So he arranges them in small clusters of five each,
nearly of the shape which the Byzantines give to the petals of the lily,
but elongated so as to give the idea of leafage upon a spray; and these
clusters,--his object always, be it remembered, being _decoration_ not
less than _representation_,--he arranges symmetrically on each side of
his branches, laying the whole on a dark ground most truly suggestive of
the heavy rounded mass of the tree, which, in its turn, is relieved
against the gold of the cupola. Lastly, comes the question respecting
the fruit. The whole power and honor of the olive is in its fruit; and,
unless that be represented, nothing is represented. But if the berries
were colored black or green, they would be totally invisible; if of
any other color, utterly unnatural, and violence would be done to the
whole conception. There is but one conceivable means of showing them,
namely to represent them as golden. For the idea of golden fruit of
various kinds was already familiar to the mind, as in the apples of the
Hesperides, without any violence to the distinctive conception of the
fruit itself.[51] So the mosaicist introduced small round golden berries
into the dark ground between each leaf, and his work was done.

[Illustration: Plate IV.
               Mosaics of Olive-tree and Flowers.]

§ XVII. On the opposite plate, the uppermost figure on the left is a
tolerably faithful representation of the general effect of one of these
decorative olive-trees; the figure on the right is the head of the tree
alone, showing the leaf clusters, berries, and _interlacing_ of the
boughs as they leave the stem. Each bough is connected with a separate
line of fibre in the trunk, and the junctions of the arms and stem are
indicated, down to the very root of the tree, with a truth in structure
which may well put to shame the tree anatomy of modern times.

§ XVIII. The white branching figures upon the serpentine band below are
two of the clusters of flowers which form the foreground of a mosaic in
the atrium. I have printed the whole plate in blue, because that color
approaches more nearly than black to the distant effect of the mosaics,
of which the darker portions are generally composed of blue, in greater
quantity than any other color. But the waved background in this
instance, is of various shades of blue and green alternately, with one
narrow black band to give it force; the whole being intended to
represent the distant effect and color of deep grass, and the wavy line
to _express its bending motion_, just as the same symbol is used to
represent the waves of water. Then the two white clusters are
representative of the distinctly visible herbage close to the
spectator, having buds and flowers of two kinds, springing in one case
out of the midst of twisted grass, and in the other out of their own
proper leaves; the clusters being kept each so distinctly symmetrical,
as to form, when set side by side, an ornamental border of perfect
architectural severity; and yet each cluster different from the next,
and every flower, and bud, and knot of grass, varied in form and
thought. The way the mosaic tesseræ are arranged, so as to give the
writhing of the grass blades round the stalks of the flowers, is
exceedingly fine.

The tree circles below are examples of still more severely conventional
forms, adopted, on principle, when the decoration is to be in white and
gold, instead of color; these ornaments being cut in white marble on the
outside of the church, and the ground laid in with gold, though
necessarily here represented, like the rest of the plate, in blue. And
it is exceedingly interesting to see how the noble workman, the moment
he is restricted to more conventional materials, retires into more
conventional forms, and reduces his various leafage into symmetry, now
nearly perfect; yet observe, in the central figure, where the symbolic
meaning of the vegetation beside the cross required it to be more
distinctly indicated, he has given it life and growth by throwing it
into unequal curves on the opposite sides.

§ XIX. I believe the reader will now see, that in these mosaics, which
the careless traveller is in the habit of passing by with contempt,
there is a depth of feeling and of meaning greater than in most of the
best sketches from nature of modern times; and, without entering into
any question whether these conventional representations are as good as,
under the required limitations, it was possible to render them, they are
at all events good enough completely to illustrate that mode of
symbolical expression which appeals altogether to thought, and in no
wise trusts to realization. And little as, in the present state of our
schools, such an assertion is likely to be believed, the fact is that
this kind of expression is the _only one allowable in noble art_.

§ XX. I pray the reader to have patience with me for a few moments. I do
not mean that no art is noble but Byzantine mosaic; but no art is noble
which in any wise depends upon direct imitation for its effect upon the
mind. This was asserted in the opening chapters of "Modern Painters,"
but not upon the highest grounds; the results at which we have now
arrived in our investigation of early art, will enable me to place it on
a loftier and firmer foundation.

§ XXI. We have just seen that all great art is the work of the whole
living creature, body and soul, and chiefly of the soul. But it is not
only _the work_ of the whole creature, it likewise _addresses_ the whole
creature. That in which the perfect being speaks, must also have the
perfect being to listen. I am not to spend my utmost spirit, and give
all my strength and life to my work, while you, spectator or hearer,
will give me only the attention of half your soul. You must be all mine,
as I am all yours; it is the only condition on which we can meet each
other. All your faculties, all that is in you of greatest and best, must
be awake in you, or I have no reward. The painter is not to cast the
entire treasure of his human nature into his labor, merely to please a
part of the beholder: not merely to delight his senses, not merely to
amuse his fancy, not merely to beguile him into emotion, not merely to
lead him into thought, but to do _all_ this. Senses, fancy, feeling,
reason, the whole of the beholding spirit, must be stilled in attention
or stirred with delight; else the laboring spirit has not done its work
well. For observe, it is not merely its _right_ to be thus met, face to
face, heart to heart; but it is its _duty_ to evoke its answering of the
other soul; its trumpet call must be so clear, that though the challenge
may by dulness or indolence be unanswered, there shall be no error as to
the meaning of the appeal; there must be a summons in the work, which it
shall be our own fault if we do not obey. We require this of it, we
beseech this of it. Most men do not know what is in them, till they
receive this summons from their fellows: their hearts die within them,
sleep settles upon them, the lethargy of the world's miasmata; there is
nothing for which they are so thankful as for that cry, "Awake, thou
that sleepest." And this cry must be most loudly uttered to their
noblest faculties; first of all to the imagination, for that is the most
tender, and the soonest struck into numbness by the poisoned air; so
that one of the main functions of art in its service to man, is to
arouse the imagination from its palsy, like the angel troubling the
Bethesda pool; and the art which does not do this is false to its duty,
and degraded in its nature. It is not enough that it be well imagined,
it must task the beholder also to imagine well; and this so
imperatively, that if he does not choose to rouse himself to meet the
work, he shall not taste it, nor enjoy it in any wise. Once that he is
well awake, the guidance which the artist gives him should be full and
authoritative: the beholder's imagination must not be suffered to take
its own way, or wander hither and thither; but neither must it be left
at rest; and the right point of realization, for any given work of art,
is that which will enable the spectator to complete it for himself, in
the exact way the artist would have him, but not that which will save
him the trouble of effecting the completion. So soon as the idea is
entirely conveyed, the artist's labor should cease; and every touch
which he adds beyond the point when, with the help of the beholder's
imagination, the story ought to have been told, is a degradation to his
work. So that the art is wrong, which either realizes its subject
completely, or fails in giving such definite aid as shall enable it to
be realized by the beholding imagination.

§ XXII. It follows, therefore, that the quantity of finish or detail
which may rightly be bestowed upon any work, depends on the number and
kind of ideas which the artist wishes to convey, much more than on the
amount of realization necessary to enable the imagination to grasp them.
It is true that the differences of judgment formed by one or another
observer are in great degree dependent on their unequal imaginative
powers, as well as their unequal efforts in following the artist's
intention; and it constantly happens that the drawing which appears
clear to the painter in whose mind the thought is formed, is slightly
inadequate to suggest it to the spectator. These causes of false
judgment, or imperfect achievement, must always exist, but they are of
no importance. For, in nearly every mind, the imaginative power, however
unable to act independently, is so easily helped and so brightly
animated by the most obscure suggestion, that there is no form of
artistical language which will not readily be seized by it, if once it
set itself intelligently to the task; and even without such effort there
are few hieroglyphics of which, once understanding that it is to take
them as hieroglyphics, it cannot make itself a pleasant picture.

§ XXIII. Thus, in the case of all sketches, etchings, unfinished
engravings, &c., no one ever supposes them to be imitations. Black
outlines on white paper cannot produce a deceptive resemblance of
anything; and the mind, understanding at once that it is to depend on
its own powers for great part of its pleasure, sets itself so actively
to the task that it can completely enjoy the rudest outline in which
meaning exists. Now, when it is once in this temper, the artist is
infinitely to be blamed who insults it by putting anything into his work
which is not suggestive: having summoned the imaginative power, he must
turn it to account and keep it employed, or it will run against him in
indignation. Whatever he does merely to realize and substantiate an idea
is impertinent; he is like a dull story-teller, dwelling on points which
the hearer anticipates or disregards. The imagination will say to him:
"I knew all that before; I don't want to be told that. Go on; or be
silent, and let me go on in my own way. I can tell the story better than
you."

Observe, then, whenever finish is given for the sake of realization, it
is wrong; whenever it is given for the sake of adding ideas it is right.
All true finish consists in the addition of ideas, that is to say, in
giving the imagination more food; for once well awaked, it is ravenous
for food: but the painter who finishes in order to substantiate takes
the food out of its mouth, and it will turn and rend him.

§ XXIV. Let us go back, for instance, to our olive grove,--or, lest the
reader should be tired of olives, let it be an oak copse,--and consider
the difference between the substantiating and the imaginative methods of
finish in such a subject. A few strokes of the pencil, or dashes of
color, will be enough to enable the imagination to conceive a tree; and
in those dashes of color Sir Joshua Reynolds would have rested, and
would have suffered the imagination to paint what more it liked for
itself, and grow oaks, or olives, or apples, out of the few dashes of
color at its leisure. On the other hand, Hobbima, one of the worst of
the realists, smites the imagination on the mouth, and bids it be
silent, while he sets to work to paint his oak of the right green, and
fill up its foliage laboriously with jagged touches, and furrow the bark
all over its branches, so as, if possible, to deceive us into supposing
that we are looking at a real oak; which, indeed, we had much better do
at once, without giving any one the trouble to deceive us in the matter.

§ XXV. Now, the truly great artist neither leaves the imagination to
itself, like Sir Joshua, nor insults it by realization, like Hobbima,
but finds it continual employment of the happiest kind. Having summoned
it by his vigorous first touches, he says to it: "Here is a tree for
you, and it is to be an oak. Now I know that you can make it green and
intricate for yourself, but that is not enough: an oak is not only green
and intricate, but its leaves have most beautiful and fantastic forms
which I am very sure you are not quite able to complete without help; so
I will draw a cluster or two perfectly for you, and then you can go on
and do all the other clusters. So far so good: but the leaves are not
enough; the oak is to be full of acorns, and you may not be quite able
to imagine the way they grow, nor the pretty contrast of their glossy
almond-shaped nuts with the chasing of their cups; so I will draw a
bunch or two of acorns for you, and you can fill up the oak with others
like them. Good: but that is not enough; it is to be a bright day in
summer, and all the outside leaves are to be glittering in the sunshine
as if their edges were of gold: I cannot paint this, but you can; so I
will really gild some of the edges nearest you,[52] and you can turn
the gold into sunshine, and cover the tree with it. Well done: but still
this is not enough; the tree is so full foliaged and so old that the
wood birds come in crowds to build there; they are singing, two or three
under the shadow of every bough. I cannot show you them all; but here is
a large one on the outside spray, and you can fancy the others inside."

§ XXVI. In this way the calls upon the imagination are multiplied as a
great painter finishes; and from these larger incidents he may proceed
into the most minute particulars, and lead the companion imagination to
the veins in the leaves and the mosses on the trunk, and the shadows of
the dead leaves upon the grass, but always multiplying thoughts, or
subjects of thought, never working for the sake of realization; the
amount of realization actually reached depending on his space, his
materials, and the nature of the thoughts he wishes to suggest. In the
sculpture of an oak-tree, introduced above an Adoration of the Magi on
the tomb of the Doge Marco Dolfino (fourteenth century), the sculptor
has been content with a few leaves, a single acorn, and a bird; while,
on the other hand, Millais' willow-tree with the robin, in the
background of his "Ophelia," or the foreground of Hunt's "Two Gentlemen
of Verona," carries the appeal to the imagination into particulars so
multiplied and minute, that the work nearly reaches realization. But it
does not matter how near realization the work may approach in its
fulness, or how far off it may remain in its slightness, so long as
realization is not the end proposed, but the informing one spirit of the
thoughts of another. And in this greatness and simplicity of purpose all
noble art is alike, however slight its means, or however perfect, from
the rudest mosaics of St. Mark's to the most tender finishing of the
"Huguenot" or the "Ophelia."

§ XXVII. Only observe, in this matter, that a greater degree of
realization is often allowed, for the sake of color, than would be right
without it. For there is not any distinction between the artists of the
inferior and the nobler schools more definite than this; that the first
_color for the sake of realization_, and the second _realize for the
sake of color_. I hope that, in the fifth chapter, enough has been said
to show the nobility of color, though it is a subject on which I would
fain enlarge whenever I approach it: for there is none that needs more
to be insisted upon, chiefly on account of the opposition of the persons
who have no eye for color, and who, being therefore unable to understand
that it is just as divine and distinct in its power as music (only
infinitely more varied in its harmonies), talk of it as if it were
inferior and servile with respect to the other powers of art;[53]
whereas it is so far from being this, that wherever it enters it must
take the mastery, and, whatever else is sacrificed for its sake, _it_,
at least, must be right. This is partly the case even with music: it is
at our choice, whether we will accompany a poem with music, or not; but,
if we do, the music _must_ be right, and neither discordant nor
inexpressive. The goodness and sweetness of the poem cannot save it, if
the music be harsh or false; but, if the music be right, the poem may be
insipid or inharmonious, and still saved by the notes to which it is
wedded. But this is far more true of color. If that be wrong, all is
wrong. No amount of expression or invention can redeem an ill-colored
picture; while, on the other hand, if the color be right, there is
nothing it will not raise or redeem; and, therefore, wherever color
enters at all, anything _may_ be sacrificed to it, and, rather than it
should be false or feeble, everything _must_ be sacrificed to it: so
that, when an artist touches color, it is the same thing as when a poet
takes up a musical instrument; he implies, in so doing, that he is a
master, up to a certain point, of that instrument, and can produce sweet
sound from it, and is able to fit the course and measure of his words to
its tones, which, if he be not able to do, he had better not have
touched it. In like manner, to add color to a drawing is to undertake
for the perfection of a visible music, which, if it be false, will
utterly and assuredly mar the whole work; if true, proportionately
elevate it, according to its power and sweetness. But, in no case ought
the color to be added in order to increase the realization. The drawing
or engraving is all that the imagination needs. To "paint" the subject
merely to make it more real, is only to insult the imaginative power and
to vulgarize the whole. Hence the common, though little understood
feeling, among men of ordinary cultivation, that an inferior sketch is
always better than a bad painting; although, in the latter, there may
verily be more skill than in the former. For the painter who has
presumed to touch color without perfectly understanding it, not for the
color's sake, nor because he loves it, but for the sake of completion
merely, has committed two sins against us; he has dulled the imagination
by not trusting it far enough, and then, in this languid state, he
oppresses it with base and false color; for all color that is not
lovely, is discordant; there is no mediate condition. So, therefore,
when it is permitted to enter at all, it must be with the
predetermination that, cost what it will, the color shall be right and
lovely: and I only wish that, in general, it were better understood that
a _painter's_ business is _to paint_, primarily; and that all
expression, and grouping, and conceiving, and what else goes to
constitute design, _are of less importance than color, in a colored
work_. And so they were always considered in the noble periods; and
sometimes all resemblance to nature whatever (as in painted windows,
illuminated manuscripts, and such other work) is sacrificed to the
brilliancy of color; sometimes distinctness of form to its richness, as
by Titian, Turner, and Reynolds; and, which is the point on which we are
at present insisting, sometimes, in the pursuit of its utmost
refinements on the surfaces of objects, an amount of realization becomes
consistent with noble art, which would otherwise be altogether
inadmissible, that is to say, which no great mind could otherwise have
either produced or enjoyed. The extreme finish given by the
Pre-Raphaelites is rendered noble chiefly by their love of color.

§ XXVIII. So then, whatever may be the means, or whatever the more
immediate end of any kind of art, all of it that is good agrees in this,
that it is the expression of one soul talking to another, and is
precious according to the greatness of the soul that utters it. And
consider what mighty consequences follow from our acceptance of this
truth! what a key we have herein given us for the interpretation of the
art of all time! For, as long as we held art to consist in any high
manual skill, or successful imitation of natural objects, or any
scientific and legalized manner of performance whatever, it was
necessary for us to limit our admiration to narrow periods and to few
men. According to our own knowledge and sympathies, the period chosen
might be different, and our rest might be in Greek statues, or Dutch
landscapes, or Italian Madonnas; but, whatever our choice, we were
therein captive, barred from all reverence but of our favorite masters,
and habitually using the language of contempt towards the whole of the
human race to whom it had not pleased Heaven to reveal the arcana of the
particular craftsmanship we admired, and who, it might be, had lived
their term of seventy years upon the earth, and fitted themselves
therein for the eternal world, without any clear understanding,
sometimes even with an insolent disregard, of the laws of perspective
and chiaroscuro.

But let us once comprehend the holier nature of the art of man, and
begin to look for the meaning of the spirit, however syllabled, and the
scene is changed; and we are changed also. Those small and dexterous
creatures whom once we worshipped, those fur-capped divinities with
sceptres of camel's hair, peering and poring in their one-windowed
chambers over the minute preciousness of the labored canvas; how are
they swept away and crushed into unnoticeable darkness! And in their
stead, as the walls of the dismal rooms that enclosed them, and us, are
struck by the four winds of Heaven, and rent away, and as the world
opens to our sight, lo! far back into all the depths of time, and forth
from all the fields that have been sown with human life, how the harvest
of the dragon's teeth is springing! how the companies of the gods are
ascending out of the earth! The dark stones that have so long been the
sepulchres of the thoughts of nations, and the forgotten ruins wherein
their faith lay charnelled, give up the dead that were in them; and
beneath the Egyptian ranks of sultry and silent rock, and amidst the dim
golden lights of the Byzantine dome, and out of the confused and cold
shadows of the Northern cloister, behold, the multitudinous souls come
forth with singing, gazing on us with the soft eyes of newly
comprehended sympathy, and stretching their white arms to us across the
grave, in the solemn gladness of everlasting brotherhood.

§ XXIX. The other danger to which, it was above said, we were primarily
exposed under our present circumstances of life, is the pursuit of vain
pleasure, that is to say, false pleasure; delight, which is not indeed
delight; as knowledge vainly accumulated, is not indeed knowledge. And
this we are exposed to chiefly in the fact of our ceasing to be
children. For the child does not seek false pleasure; its pleasures are
true, simple, and instinctive: but the youth is apt to abandon his early
and true delight for vanities,--seeking to be like men, and sacrificing
his natural and pure enjoyments to his pride. In like manner, it seems
to me that modern civilization sacrifices much pure and true pleasure to
various forms of ostentation from which it can receive no fruit.
Consider, for a moment, what kind of pleasures are open to human nature,
undiseased. Passing by the consideration of the pleasures of the higher
affections, which lie at the root of everything, and considering the
definite and practical pleasures of daily life, there is, first, the
pleasure of doing good; the greatest of all, only apt to be despised
from not being often enough tasted: and then, I know not in what order
to put them, nor does it matter,--the pleasure of gaining knowledge; the
pleasure of the excitement of imagination and emotion (or poetry and
passion); and, lastly, the gratification of the senses, first of the
eye, then of the ear, and then of the others in their order.

§ XXX. All these we are apt to make subservient to the desire of praise;
nor unwisely, when the praise sought is God's and the conscience's: but
if the sacrifice is made for man's admiration, and knowledge is only
sought for praise, passion repressed or affected for praise, and the
arts practised for praise, we are feeding on the bitterest apples of
Sodom, suffering always ten mortifications for one delight. And it seems
to me, that in the modern civilized world we make such sacrifice doubly:
first, by laboring for merely ambitious purposes; and secondly, which is
the main point in question, by being ashamed of simple pleasures, more
especially of the pleasure in sweet color and form, a pleasure evidently
so necessary to man's perfectness and virtue, that the beauty of color
and form has been given lavishly throughout the whole of creation, so
that it may become the food of all, and with such intricacy and subtlety
that it may deeply employ the thoughts of all. If we refuse to accept
the natural delight which the Deity has thus provided for us, we must
either become ascetics, or we must seek for some base and guilty
pleasures to replace those of Paradise, which we have denied ourselves.

Some years ago, in passing through some of the cells of the Grand
Chartreuse, noticing that the window of each apartment looked across the
little garden of its inhabitant to the wall of the cell opposite, and
commanded no other view, I asked the monk beside me, why the window was
not rather made on the side of the cell whence it would open to the
solemn fields of the Alpine valley. "We do not come here," he replied,
"to look at the mountains."

§ XXXI. The same answer is given, practically, by the men of this
century, to every such question; only the walls with which they enclose
themselves are those of pride, not of prayer. But in the middle ages it
was otherwise. Not, indeed, in landscape itself, but in the art which
can take the place of it, in the noble color and form with which they
illumined, and into which they wrought, every object around them that
was in any wise subjected to their power, they obeyed the laws of their
inner nature, and found its proper food. The splendor and fantasy even
of dress, which in these days we pretend to despise, or in which, if we
even indulge, it is only for the sake of vanity, and therefore to our
infinite harm, were in those early days studied for love of their true
beauty and honorableness, and became one of the main helps to dignity of
character, and courtesy of bearing. Look back to what we have been told
of the dress of the early Venetians, that it was so invented "that in
clothing themselves with it, they might clothe themselves also with
modesty and honor;"[54] consider what nobleness of expression there is
in the dress of any of the portrait figures of the great times, nay,
what perfect beauty, and more than beauty, there is in the folding of
the robe round the imagined form even of the saint or of the angel; and
then consider whether the grace of vesture be indeed a thing to be
despised. We cannot despise it if we would; and in all our highest
poetry and happiest thought we cling to the magnificence which in daily
life we disregard. The essence of modern romance is simply the return of
the heart and fancy to the things in which they naturally take pleasure;
and half the influence of the best romances, of Ivanhoe, or Marmion, or
the Crusaders, or the Lady of the Lake, is completely dependent upon the
accessaries of armor and costume. Nay, more than this, deprive the Iliad
itself of its costume, and consider how much of its power would be lost.
And that delight and reverence which we feel in, and by means of, the
mere imagination of these accessaries, the middle ages had in the vision
of them; the nobleness of dress exercising, as I have said, a perpetual
influence upon character, tending in a thousand ways to increase
dignity and self-respect, and together with grace of gesture, to induce
serenity of thought.

§ XXXII. I do not mean merely in its magnificence; the most splendid
time was not the best time. It was still in the thirteenth
century,--when, as we have seen, simplicity and gorgeousness were justly
mingled, and the "leathern girdle and clasp of bone" were worn, as well
as the embroidered mantle,--that the manner of dress seems to have been
noblest. The chain mail of the knight, flowing and falling over his form
in lapping waves of gloomy strength, was worn under full robes of one
color in the ground, his crest quartered on them, and their borders
enriched with subtle illumination. The women wore first a dress close to
the form in like manner, and then long and flowing robes, veiling them
up to the neck, and delicately embroidered around the hem, the sleeves,
and the girdle. The use of plate armor gradually introduced more
fantastic types; the nobleness of the form was lost beneath the steel;
the gradually increasing luxury and vanity of the age strove for
continual excitement in more quaint and extravagant devices; and in the
fifteenth century, dress reached its point of utmost splendor and fancy,
being in many cases still exquisitely graceful, but now, in its morbid
magnificence, devoid of all wholesome influence on manners. From this
point, like architecture, it was rapidly degraded; and sank through the
buff coat, and lace collar, and jack-boot, to the bag-wig, tailed coat,
and high-heeled shoes; and so to what it is now.

§ XXXIII. Precisely analogous to this destruction of beauty in dress,
has been that of beauty in architecture; its color, and grace, and
fancy, being gradually sacrificed to the base forms of the Renaissance,
exactly as the splendor of chivalry has faded into the paltriness of
fashion. And observe the form in which the necessary reaction has taken
place; necessary, for it was not possible that one of the strongest
instincts of the human race could be deprived altogether of its natural
food. Exactly in the degree that the architect withdrew from his
buildings the sources of delight which in early days they had so richly
possessed, demanding, in accordance with the new principles of taste,
the banishment of all happy color and healthy invention, in that degree
the minds of men began to turn to landscape as their only resource. The
picturesque school of art rose up to address those capacities of
enjoyment for which, in sculpture, architecture, or the higher walks of
painting, there was employment no more; and the shadows of Rembrandt,
and savageness of Salvator, arrested the admiration which was no longer
permitted to be rendered to the gloom or the grotesqueness of the Gothic
aisle. And thus the English school of landscape, culminating in Turner,
is in reality nothing else than a healthy effort to fill the void which
the destruction of Gothic architecture has left.

§ XXXIV. But the void cannot thus be completely filled; no, nor filled
in any considerable degree. The art of landscape-painting will never
become thoroughly interesting or sufficing to the minds of men engaged
in active life, or concerned principally with practical subjects. The
sentiment and imagination necessary to enter fully into the romantic
forms of art are chiefly the characteristics of youth; so that nearly
all men as they advance in years, and some even from their childhood
upwards, must be appealed to, if at all, by a direct and substantial
art, brought before their daily observation and connected with their
daily interests. No form of art answers these conditions so well as
architecture, which, as it can receive help from every character of mind
in the workman, can address every character of mind in the spectator;
forcing itself into notice even in his most languid moments, and
possessing this chief and peculiar advantage, that it is the property of
all men. Pictures and statues may be jealously withdrawn by their
possessors from the public gaze, and to a certain degree their safety
requires them to be so withdrawn; but the outsides of our houses belong
not so much to us as to the passer-by, and whatever cost and pains we
bestow upon them, though too often arising out of ostentation, have at
least the effect of benevolence.

§ XXXV. If, then, considering these things, any of my readers should
determine, according to their means, to set themselves to the revival
of a healthy school of architecture in England, and wish to know in few
words how this may be done, the answer is clear and simple. First, let
us cast out utterly whatever is connected with the Greek, Roman, or
Renaissance architecture, in principle or in form. We have seen above,
that the whole mass of the architecture, founded on Greek and Roman
models, which we have been in the habit of building for the last three
centuries, is utterly devoid of all life, virtue, honorableness, or
power of doing good. It is base, unnatural, unfruitful, unenjoyable, and
impious. Pagan in its origin, proud and unholy in its revival, paralyzed
in its old age, yet making prey in its dotage of all the good and living
things that were springing around it in their youth, as the dying and
desperate king, who had long fenced himself so strongly with the towers
of it, is said to have filled his failing veins with the blood of
children;[55] an architecture invented, as it seems, to make plagiarists
of its architects, slaves of its workmen, and Sybarites of its
inhabitants; an architecture in which intellect is idle, invention
impossible, but in which all luxury is gratified, and all insolence
fortified;--the first thing we have to do is to cast it out, and shake
the dust of it from our feet for ever. Whatever has any connexion with
the five orders, or with any one of the orders,--whatever is Doric, or
Ionic, or Tuscan, or Corinthian, or Composite, or in any way Grecized or
Romanized; whatever betrays the smallest respect for Vitruvian laws, or
conformity with Palladian work,--that we are to endure no more. To
cleanse ourselves of these "cast clouts and rotten rags" is the first
thing to be done in the court of our prison.

§ XXXVI. Then, to turn our prison into a palace is an easy thing. We
have seen above, that exactly in the degree in which Greek and Roman
architecture is lifeless, unprofitable, and unchristian, in that same
degree our own ancient Gothic is animated, serviceable, and faithful. We
have seen that it is flexible to all duty, enduring to all time,
instructive to all hearts, honorable and holy in all offices. It is
capable alike of all lowliness and all dignity, fit alike for cottage
porch or castle gateway; in domestic service familiar, in religious,
sublime; simple, and playful, so that childhood may read it, yet clothed
with a power that can awe the mightiest, and exalt the loftiest of human
spirits: an architecture that kindles every faculty in its workman, and
addresses every emotion in its beholder; which, with every stone that is
laid on its solemn walls, raises some human heart a step nearer heaven,
and which from its birth has been incorporated with the existence, and
in all its form is symbolical of the faith, of Christianity. In this
architecture let us henceforward build, alike the church, the palace,
and the cottage; but chiefly let us use it for our civil and domestic
buildings. These once ennobled, our ecclesiastical work will be exalted
together with them: but churches are not the proper scenes for
experiments in untried architecture, nor for exhibitions of unaccustomed
beauty. It is certain that we must often fail before we can again build
a natural and noble Gothic: let not our temples be the scenes of our
failures. It is certain that we must offend many deep-rooted prejudices,
before ancient Christian architecture[56] can be again received by all
of us: let not religion be the first source of such offence. We shall
meet with difficulties in applying Gothic architecture to churches,
which would in no wise affect the designs of civil buildings, for the
most beautiful forms of Gothic chapels are not those which are best
fitted for Protestant worship. As it was noticed in the second volume,
when speaking of the Cathedral of Torcello it seems not unlikely, that
as we study either the science of sound, or the practice of the early
Christians, we may see reason to place the pulpit generally at the
extremity of the apse or chancel; an arrangement entirely destructive of
the beauty of a Gothic church, as seen in existing examples, and
requiring modifications of its design in other parts with which we
should be unwise at present to embarrass ourselves; besides, that the
effort to introduce the style exclusively for ecclesiastical purposes,
excites against it the strong prejudices of many persons who might
otherwise be easily enlisted among its most ardent advocates. I am quite
sure, for instance, that if such noble architecture as has been employed
for the interior of the church just built in Margaret Street[57] had
been seen in a civil building, it would have decided the question with
many men at once; whereas, at present, it will be looked upon with fear
and suspicion, as the expression of the ecclesiastical principles of a
particular party. But, whether thus regarded or not, this church
assuredly decides one question conclusively, that of our present
capability of Gothic design. It is the first piece of architecture I
have seen, built in modern days, which is free from all signs of
timidity or incapacity. In general proportion of parts, in refinement
and piquancy of mouldings, above all, in force, vitality, and grace of
floral ornament, worked in a broad and masculine manner, it challenges
fearless comparison with the noblest work of any time. Having done this,
we may do anything; there need be no limits to our hope or our
confidence; and I believe it to be possible for us, not only to equal,
but far to surpass, in some respects, any Gothic yet seen in Northern
countries. In the introduction of figure-sculpture, we must, indeed, for
the present, remain utterly inferior, for we have no figures to study
from. No architectural sculpture was ever good for anything which did
not represent the dress and persons of the people living at the time;
and our modern dress will _not_ form decorations for spandrils and
niches. But in floral sculpture we may go far beyond what has yet been
done, as well as in refinement of inlaid work and general execution.
For, although the glory of Gothic architecture is to receive the rudest
work, it refuses not the best; and, when once we have been content to
admit the handling of the simplest workman, we shall soon be rewarded by
finding many of our simple workmen become cunning ones: and, with the
help of modern wealth and science, we may do things like Giotto's
campanile, instead of like our own rude cathedrals; but better than
Giotto's campanile, insomuch as we may adopt the pure and perfect forms
of the Northern Gothic, and work them out with the Italian refinement.
It is hardly possible at present to imagine what may be the splendor of
buildings designed in the forms of English and French thirteenth century
_surface_ Gothic, and wrought out with the refinement of Italian art in
the details, and with a deliberate resolution, since we cannot have
figure sculpture, to display in them the beauty of every flower and herb
of the English fields, each by each; doing as much for every tree that
roots itself in our rocks, and every blossom that drinks our summer
rains, as our ancestors did for the oak, the ivy, and the rose. Let this
be the object of our ambition, and let us begin to approach it, not
ambitiously, but in all humility, accepting help from the feeblest
hands; and the London of the nineteenth century may yet become as Venice
without her despotism, and as Florence without her dispeace.


FOOTNOTES:

  [46] In the works of Turner and the Pre-Raphaelites.

  [47] Observe, I speak of these various principles as self-evident,
    only under the present circumstances of the world, not as if they
    had always been so; and I call them now self-evident, not merely
    because they seem so to myself, but because they are felt to be so
    likewise by all the men in whom I place most trust. But granting
    that they are not so, then their very disputability proves the state
    of infancy above alleged, as characteristic of the world. For I do
    not suppose that any Christian reader will doubt the first great
    truth, that whatever facts or laws are important to mankind, God has
    made ascertainable by mankind; and that as the decision of all these
    questions is of vital importance to the race, that decision must
    have been long ago arrived at, unless they were still in a state of
    childhood.

  [48] I intended to have given a sketch in this place (above referred
    to) of the probable results of the daguerreotype and calotype within
    the next few years, in modifying the application of the engraver's
    art, but I have not had time to complete the experiments necessary
    to enable me to speak with certainty. Of one thing, however, I have
    little doubt, that an infinite service will soon be done to a large
    body of our engravers; namely, the making them draughtsmen (in black
    and white) on paper instead of steel.

  [49] I mean art in its highest sense. All that men do ingeniously is
    art, in one sense. In fact, we want a definition of the word "art"
    much more accurate than any in our minds at present. For, strictly
    speaking, there is no such thing as "fine" or "high" art. All _art_
    is a low and common thing, and what we indeed respect is not art at
    all, but _instinct_ or _inspiration_ expressed by the help of art.

  [50] "_Socrates_. This, then, was what I asked you; whether that
    which puts anything else to service, and the thing which is put to
    service by it, are always two different things?

    _Alcibiades._ I think so.

    _Socrates._ What shall we then say of the leather-cutter? Does he
    cut his leather with his instruments only, or with his hands also?

    _Alcibiades._ With his hands also.

    _Socrates._ Does he not use his eyes as well as his hands?

    _Alcibiades._ Yes.

    _Socrates._ And we agreed that the thing which uses and the thing
    which is used, were different things?

    _Alcibiades._ Yes.

    _Socrates._ Then the leather-cutter is not the same thing as his
    eyes or hands?

    _Alcibiades._ So it appears.

    _Socrates._ Does not, then, man make use of his whole body?

    _Alcibiades._ Assuredly.

    _Socrates._ Then the man is not the same thing as his body?

    _Alcibiades._ It seems so.

    _Socrates._ What, then, _is_ the man?

    _Alcibiades._ I know not."

    _Plato_, Alcibiades I.

  [51] Thus the grapes pressed by Excesse are partly golden (Spenser,
    book ii. cant. 12.):

            "Which did themselves amongst the leaves enfold,
             As lurking from the view of covetous guest,
             That the weake boughes, with so rich load opprest
             Did bow adowne as overburdened."

  [52] The reader must not suppose that the use of gold, in this manner,
    is confined to early art. Tintoret, the greatest master of pictorial
    effect that ever existed, has gilded the ribs of the fig-leaves in
    his "Resurrection," in the Scuola di San Rocco.

  [53] Nothing is more wonderful to me than to hear the pleasure of the
    eye, in color, spoken of with disdain as "sensual," while people
    exalt that of the ear in music. Do they really suppose the eye is a
    less noble bodily organ than the ear,--that the organ by which
    nearly all our knowledge of the external universe is communicated to
    us, and through which we learn the wonder and the love, can be less
    exalted in its own peculiar delight than the ear, which is only for
    the communication of the ideas which owe to the eye their very
    existence? I do not mean to depreciate music: let it be loved and
    reverenced as is just; only let the delight of the eye be reverenced
    more. The great power of music over the multitude is owing, not to
    its being less but _more_ sensual than color; it is so distinctly
    and so richly sensual, that it can be idly enjoyed; it is exactly at
    the point where the lower and higher pleasures of the senses and
    imagination are balanced; so that pure and great minds love it for
    its invention and emotion, and lower minds for its sensual power.

  [54] Vol. II. Appendix 7.

  [55] Louis the Eleventh. "In the month of March, 1481, Louis was
    seized with a fit of apoplexy at _St. Bénoit-du-lac-mort_, near
    Chinon. He remained speechless and bereft of reason three days; and
    then but very imperfectly restored, he languished in a miserable
    state.... To cure him," says a contemporary historian, "wonderful
    and terrible medicines were compounded. It was reported among the
    people that his physicians opened the veins of little children, and
    made him drink their blood, to correct the poorness of his
    own."--_Bussey's History of France._ London, 1850.

  [56] Observe, I call Gothic "Christian" architecture, not
    "ecclesiastical." There is a wide difference. I believe it is the
    only architecture which Christian men should build, but not at all
    an architecture necessarily connected with the services of their
    church.

  [57] Mr. Hope's Church, in Margaret Street, Portland Place. I do not
    altogether like the arrangements of color in the brickwork; but
    these will hardly attract the eye, where so much has been already
    done with precious and beautiful marble, and is yet to be done in
    fresco. Much will depend, however, upon the coloring of this latter
    portion. I wish that either Holman Hunt or Millais could be
    prevailed upon to do at least some of these smaller frescoes.




APPENDIX.


1. ARCHITECT OF THE DUCAL PALACE.

Popular tradition and a large number of the chroniclers ascribe the
building of the Ducal Palace to that Filippo Calendario who suffered
death for his share in the conspiracy of Faliero. He was certainly one
of the leading architects of the time, and had for several years the
superintendence of the works of the Palace; but it appears, from the
documents collected by the Abbé Cadorin, that the first designer of the
Palace, the man to whom we owe the adaptation of the Frari traceries to
civil architecture, was Pietro Baseggio, who is spoken of expressly as
"formerly the Chief Master of our New Palace,"[58] in the decree of
1361, quoted by Cadorin, and who, at his death, left Calendario his
executor. Other documents collected by Zanotto, in his work on "Venezia
e le sue Lagune," show that Calendario was for a long time at sea, under
the commands of the Signory, returning to Venice only three or four
years before his death; and that therefore the entire management of the
works of the Palace, in the most important period, must have been
entrusted to Baseggio.

It is quite impossible, however, in the present state of the Palace, to
distinguish one architect's work from another in the older parts; and I
have not in the text embarrassed the reader by any attempt at close
definition of epochs before the great junction of the Piazzetta Façade
with the older palace in the fifteenth century. Here, however, it is
necessary that I should briefly state the observations I was able to
make on the relative dates of the earlier portions.

In the description of the Fig-tree angle, given in the eighth chapter of
Vol. II., I said that it seemed to me somewhat earlier than that of the
Vine, and the reader might be surprised at the apparent opposition of
this statement to my supposition that the Palace was built gradually
round from the Rio Façade to the Piazzetta. But in the two great open
arcades there is no succession of work traceable; from the Vine angle to
the junction with the fifteenth century work, above and below, all seems
nearly of the same date, the only question being of the accidental
precedence of workmanship of one capital or another; and I think, from
its style, that the Fig-tree angle must have been first completed. But
in the upper stories of the Palace there are enormous differences of
style. On the Rio Façade, in the upper story, are several series of
massive windows of the third order, corresponding exactly in mouldings
and manner of workmanship to those of the chapter-house of the Frari,
and consequently carrying us back to a very early date in the fourteenth
century: several of the capitals of these windows, and two richly
sculptured string-courses in the wall below, are of Byzantine
workmanship, and in all probability fragments of the Ziani Palace. The
traceried windows on the Rio Façade, and the two eastern windows on the
Sea Façade, are all of the finest early fourteenth century work,
masculine and noble in their capitals and bases to the highest degree,
and evidently contemporary with the very earliest portions of the lower
arcades. But the moment we come to the windows of the Great Council
Chamber the style is debased. The mouldings are the same, but they are
coarsely worked, and the heads set amidst the leafage of the capitals
quite valueless and vile.

I have not the least doubt that these window-jambs and traceries were
restored after the great fire;[59] and various other restorations have
taken place since, beginning with the removal of the traceries from all
the windows except the northern one of the Sala del Scrutinio, behind
the Porta della Carta, where they are still left. I made out four
periods of restoration among these windows, each baser than the
preceding. It is not worth troubling the reader about them, but the
traveller who is interested in the subject may compare two of them in
the same window; the one nearer the sea of the two belonging to the
little room at the top of the Palace on the Piazzetta Façade, between
the Sala del Gran Consiglio and that of the Scrutinio. The seaward jamb
of that window is of the first, and the opposite jamb of the second,
period of these restorations. These are all the points of separation in
date which I could discover by internal evidence. But much more might be
made out by any Venetian antiquary whose time permitted him thoroughly
to examine any existing documents which allude to or describe the parts
of the Palace spoken of in the important decrees of 1340, 1342, and
1344; for the first of these decrees speaks of certain "columns looking
towards the Canal"[60] or sea, as then existing, and I presume these
columns to have been part of the Ziani Palace, corresponding to the part
of that palace on the Piazzetta where were the "red columns" between
which Calendario was executed; and a great deal more might be determined
by any one who would thoroughly unravel the obscure language of those
decrees.

Meantime, in order to complete the evidence respecting the main dates
stated in the text, I have collected here such notices of the building
of the Ducal Palace as appeared to me of most importance in the various
chronicles I examined. I could not give them all in the text, as they
repeat each other, and would have been tedious; but they will be
interesting to the antiquary, and it is to be especially noted in all of
them how the Palazzo _Vecchio_ is invariably distinguished, either
directly or by implication, from the Palazzo Nuovo. I shall first
translate the piece of the Zancarol Chronicle given by Cadorin, which
has chiefly misled the Venetian antiquaries. I wish I could put the rich
old Italian into old English, but must be content to lose its raciness,
as it is necessary that the reader should be fully acquainted with its
facts.

"It was decreed that none should dare to propose to the Signory of
Venice to ruin the _old_ palace and rebuild it new and more richly, and
there was a penalty of one thousand ducats against any one who should
break it. Then the Doge, wishing to set forward the public good, said to
the Signory, ... that they ought to rebuild the façades of the _old_
palace, and that it ought to be restored, to do honor to the nation: and
so soon as he had done speaking, the Avogadori demanded the penalty from
the Doge, for having disobeyed the law; and the Doge with ready mind
paid it, remaining in his opinion that the said fabric ought to be
built. And so, in the year 1422, on the 20th day of September, it was
passed in the Council of the Pregadi that the said new palace should be
begun, and the expense should be borne by the Signori del Sal; and so,
on the 24th day of March, 1424, it was begun to throw down the _old_
palace, and to build it anew."--_Cadorin_, p. 129.

The day of the month, and the council in which the decree was passed,
are erroneously given by this Chronicle. Cadorin has printed the words
of the decree itself, which passed in the Great Council on the 27th
September: and these words are, fortunately, much to our present
purpose. For as more than one façade is spoken of in the above extract,
the Marchese Selvatico was induced to believe that both the front to the
sea and that to the Piazzetta had been destroyed; whereas, the "façades"
spoken of are evidently those of the Ziani Palace. For the words of the
decree (which are much more trustworthy than those of the Chronicle,
even if there were any inconsistency between them) run thus: "Palatium
nostrum fabricetur et fiat in forma decora et convenienti, quod
respondeat _solemnissimo principio palatii nostri novi_." Thus the new
council chamber and façade to the sea are called the "most venerable
beginning of our _New_ Palace;" and the rest was ordered to be designed
in accordance with these, as was actually the case as far as the Porta
della Carta. But the Renaissance architects who thenceforward proceeded
with the fabric, broke through the design, and built everything else
according to their own humors.

The question may be considered as set at rest by these words of the
decree, even without any internal or any farther documentary evidence.
But rather for the sake of impressing the facts thoroughly on the
reader's mind, than of any additional proof, I shall quote a few more of
the best accredited Chronicles.

The passage given by Bettio, from the Sivos Chronicle, is a very
important parallel with that from the Zancarol above:

"Essendo molto vecchio, e quasi rovinoso el Palazzo sopra la piazza, fo
deliberato di far quella parte tutta da novo, et continuarla com' è
quella della Sala grande, et cosi il Lunedi 27 Marzo 1424 fu dato
principio a ruinare detto Palazzo vecchio dalla parte, ch' è verso
panateria cioè della Giustizia, ch' è nelli occhi di sopra le colonne
fino alla Chiesa et fo fatto anco la porta grande, com' è al presente,
con la sala che si addimanda la Libraria."[61]

We have here all the facts told us in so many words: the "old palace" is
definitely stated to have been "on the piazza," and it is to be rebuilt
"like the part of the great saloon." The very point from which the newer
buildings commenced is told us; but here the chronicler has carried his
attempt at accuracy too far. The point of junction is, as stated above,
at the third pillar beyond the medallion of Venice; and I am much at a
loss to understand what could have been the disposition of these three
pillars where they joined the Ziani Palace, and how they were connected
with the arcade of the inner cortile. But with these difficulties, as
they do not bear on the immediate question, it is of no use to trouble
the reader.

The next passage I shall give is from a Chronicle in the Marcian
Library, bearing title, "Supposta di Zancaruol;" but in which I could
not find the passage given by Cadorin from, I believe, a manuscript of
this Chronicle at Vienna. There occurs instead of it the following thus
headed:--

"Come _la parte nova_ del Palazzo fuo hedificata _novamente_.

"El Palazzo novo de Venesia quella parte che xe verso la Chiesia de S.
Marcho fuo prexo chel se fesse del 1422 e fosse pagado la spexa per li
officiali del sal. E fuo fatto per sovrastante G. Nicolo Barberigo cum
provision de ducati X doro al mexe e fuo fabricado e fatto nobelissimo.
Come fin ancho di el sta e fuo grande honor a la Signoria de Venesia e a
la sua Citta."

This entry, which itself bears no date, but comes between others dated
22nd July and 27th December, is interesting, because it shows the first
transition of the idea of _newness_, from the Grand Council Chamber to
the part built under Foscari. For when Mocenigo's wishes had been
fulfilled, and the old palace of Ziani had been destroyed, and another
built in its stead, the Great Council Chamber, which was "the new
palace" compared with Ziani's, became "the old palace" compared with
Foscari's; and thus we have, in the body of the above extract, the whole
building called "the new palace of Venice;" but in the heading of it, we
have "the new _part_ of the palace" applied to the part built by
Foscari, in contradistinction to the Council Chamber.

The next entry I give is important, because the writing of the MS. in
which it occurs, No. 53 in the Correr Museum, shows it to be probably
not later than the end of the fifteenth century:

"El palazo nuovo de Venixia zoe quella parte che se sora la piazza verso
la giesia di Miss. San Marcho del 1422 fo principiado, el qual fo fato e
finito molto belo, chome al presente se vede nobilissimo, et a la
fabricha de quello fo deputado Miss. Nicolo Barberigo, soprastante con
ducati dieci doro al mexe."

We have here the part built by Foscari distinctly called the Palazzo
Nuovo, as opposed to the Great Council Chamber, which had now completely
taken the position of the Palazzo Vecchio, and is actually so called by
Sansovino. In the copy of the Chronicle of Paolo Morosini, and in the
MSS. numbered respectively 57, 59, 74, and 76 in the Correr Museum, the
passage above given from No. 53 is variously repeated with slight
modifications and curtailments; the entry in the Morosini Chronicle
being headed, "Come fu principiato il palazo che guarda sopra la piaza
grande di S. Marco," and proceeding in the words, "El Palazo Nuovo di
Venetia, cioè quella parte che e sopra la piaza," &c., the writers being
cautious, in all these instances, to _limit their statement_ to the part
facing the Piazza, that no reader might suppose the Council Chamber to
have been built or begun at the same time; though, as long as to the end
of the sixteenth century, we find the Council Chamber still included in
the expression "Palazzo Nuovo." Thus, in the MS. No. 75 in the Correr
Museum, which is about that date, we have "Del 1422, a di 20 Settembre
fu preso nel consegio grando de dover _compir_ el Palazo Novo, e dovesen
fare la spessa li officialli del Sal (61. M. 2. B.)." And, so long as
this is the case, the "Palazzo Vecchio" always means the Ziani Palace.
Thus, in the next page of this same MS. we have "a di 27 Marzo (1424 by
context) fo principia a butar zosso, el _Palazzo Vecchio_ per refarlo da
novo, e poi se he" (and so it is done); and in the MS. No. 81, "Del
1424, fo gittado zoso el _Palazzo Vecchio_ per refarlo de nuovo, a di 27
Marzo." But in the time of Sansovino the Ziani Palace was quite
forgotten; the Council Chamber was then the _old_ palace, and Foscari's
part was the new. His account of the "Palazzo Publico" will now be
perfectly intelligible; but, as the work itself is easily accessible, I
shall not burden the reader with any farther extracts, only noticing
that the chequering of the façade with red and white marbles, which he
ascribes to Foscari, may or may not be of so late a date, as there is
nothing in the style of the work which can be produced as evidence.


2. THEOLOGY OF SPENSER.

The following analysis of the first books of the "Faërie Queen," may be
interesting to readers who have been in the habit of reading the noble
poem too hastily to connect its parts completely together; and may
perhaps induce them to more careful study of the rest of the poem.

The Redcrosse Knight is Holiness,--the "Pietas" of St. Mark's, the
"Devotio" of Orcagna,--meaning, I think, in general, Reverence and Godly
Fear.

This Virtue, in the opening of the book, has Truth (or Una) at its side,
but presently enters the Wandering Wood, and encounters the serpent
Error; that is to say, Error in her universal form, the first enemy of
Reverence and Holiness; and more especially Error as founded on
learning; for when Holiness strangles her,

  "Her vomit _full of bookes and papers was_,
   With loathly frogs and toades, which eyes did lacke."

Having vanquished this first open and palpable form of Error, as
Reverence and Religion must always vanquish it, the Knight encounters
Hypocrisy, or Archimagus; Holiness cannot detect Hypocrisy, but
believes him, and goes home with him; whereupon Hypocrisy succeeds in
separating Holiness from Truth; and the Knight (Holiness) and Lady
(Truth) go forth separately from the house of Archimagus.

Now observe: the moment Godly Fear, or Holiness, is separated from
Truth, he meets Infidelity, or the Knight Sans Foy; Infidelity having
Falsehood, or Duesa, riding behind him. The instant the Redcrosse Knight
is aware of the attack of Infidelity, he

  "Gan fairly couch his speare, and towards ride."

He vanquishes and slays Infidelity; but is deceived by his companion,
Falsehood, and takes her for his lady: thus showing the condition of
Religion, when, after being attacked by Doubt, and remaining victorious,
it is nevertheless seduced, by any form of Falsehood, to pay reverence
where it ought not. This, then, is the first fortune of Godly Fear
separated from Truth. The poet then returns to Truth, separated from
Godly Fear. She is immediately attended by a lion, or Violence, which
makes her dreaded wherever she comes; and when she enters the mart of
Superstition, this Lion tears Kirkrapine in pieces: showing how Truth,
separated from Godliness, does indeed put an end to the abuses of
Superstition, but does so violently and desperately. She then meets
again with Hypocrisy, whom she mistakes for her own lord, or Godly Fear,
and travels a little way under his guardianship (Hypocrisy thus not
unfrequently appearing to defend the Truth), until they are both met by
Lawlessness, or the Knight Sans Loy, whom Hypocrisy cannot resist.
Lawlessness overthrows Hypocrisy, and seizes upon Truth, first slaying
her lion attendant: showing that the first aim of licence is to destroy
the force and authority of Truth. Sans Loy then takes Truth captive, and
bears her away. Now this Lawlessness is the "unrighteousness," or
"adikia," of St. Paul; and his bearing Truth away captive, is a type of
those "who hold the truth in unrighteousness,"--that is to say,
generally, of men who, knowing what is true, make the truth give way to
their own purposes, or use it only to forward them, as is the case with
so many of the popular leaders of the present day. Una is then delivered
from Sans Loy by the satyrs, to show that Nature, in the end, must work
out the deliverance of the truth, although, where it has been captive to
Lawlessness, that deliverance can only be obtained through Savageness,
and a return to barbarism. Una is then taken from among the satyrs by
Satyrane, the son of a satyr and a "lady myld, fair Thyamis," (typifying
the early steps of renewed civilization, and its rough and hardy
character "nousled up in life and manners wilde,") who, meeting again
with Sans Loy, enters instantly into rough and prolonged combat with
him: showing how the early organization of a hardy nation must be
wrought out through much discouragement from Lawlessness. This contest
the poet leaving for the time undecided, returns to trace the adventures
of the Redcrosse Knight, or Godly Fear, who, having vanquished
Infidelity, presently is led by Falsehood to the house of Pride: thus
showing how religion, separated from truth, is first tempted by doubts
of God, and then by the pride of life. The description of this house of
Pride is one of the most elaborate and noble pieces in the poem; and
here we begin to get at the proposed system of Virtues and Vices. For
Pride, as queen, has six other vices yoked in her chariot; namely,
first, Idleness, then Gluttony, Lust, Avarice, Envy, and Anger, all
driven on by "Sathan, with a smarting whip in hand." From these lower
vices and their company, Godly Fear, though lodging in the house of
Pride, holds aloof; but he is challenged, and has a hard battle to fight
with Sans Joy, the brother of Sans Foy: showing, that though he has
conquered Infidelity, and does not give himself up to the allurements of
Pride, he is yet exposed, so long as he dwells in her house, to distress
of mind and loss of his accustomed rejoicing before God. He, however,
having partly conquered Despondency, or Sans Joy, Falsehood goes down to
Hades, in order to obtain drugs to maintain the power or life of
Despondency; but, meantime, the Knight leaves the house of Pride:
Falsehood pursues and overtakes him, and finds him by a fountain side,
of which the waters are

                           "Dull and slow,
  And all that drinke thereof do faint and feeble grow."

Of which the meaning is, that Godly Fear, after passing through the
house of Pride, is exposed to drowsiness and feebleness of watch; as,
after Peter's boast, came Peter's sleeping, from weakness of the flesh,
and then, last of all, Peter's fall. And so it follows: for the
Redcrosse Knight, being overcome with faintness by drinking of the
fountain, is thereupon attacked by the giant Orgoglio, overcome and
thrown by him into a dungeon. This Orgoglio is Orgueil, or Carnal Pride;
not the pride of life, spiritual and subtle, but the common and vulgar
pride in the power of this world: and his throwing the Redcrosse Knight
into a dungeon, is a type of the captivity of true religion under the
temporal power of corrupt churches, more especially of the Church of
Rome; and of its gradually wasting away in unknown places, while carnal
pride has the preëminence over all things. That Spenser means,
especially, the pride of the Papacy, is shown by the 16th stanza of the
book; for there the giant Orgoglio is said to have taken Duessa, or
Falsehood, for his "deare," and to have set upon her head a triple
crown, and endowed her with royal majesty, and made her to ride upon a
seven-headed beast.

In the meantime, the dwarf, the attendant of the Redcrosse Knight, takes
his arms, and finding Una tells her of the captivity of her lord. Una,
in the midst of her mourning, meets Prince Arthur, in whom, as Spenser
himself tells us, is set forth generally Magnificence; but who, as is
shown by the choice of the hero's name, is more especially the
magnificence, or literally, "great doing" of the kingdom of England.
This power of England, going forth with Truth, attacks Orgoglio, or the
Pride of Papacy, slays him; strips Duessa, or Falsehood, naked; and
liberates the Redcrosse Knight. The magnificent and well-known
description of Despair follows, by whom the Redcrosse Knight is hard
bested, on account of his past errors and captivity, and is only saved
by Truth, who, perceiving him to be still feeble, brings him to the
house of Coelia, called, in the argument of the canto, Holiness, but
properly, Heavenly Grace, the mother of the Virtues. Her "three
daughters, well up-brought," are Faith, Hope, and Charity. Her porter is
Humility; because Humility opens the door of Heavenly Grace. Zeal and
Reverence are her chamberlains, introducing the new comers to her
presence; her groom, or servant, is Obedience; and her physician,
Patience. Under the commands of Charity, the matron Mercy rules over
her hospital, under whose care the Knight is healed of his sickness; and
it is to be especially noticed how much importance Spenser, though never
ceasing to chastise all hypocrisies and mere observances of form,
attaches to true and faithful _penance_ in effecting this cure. Having
his strength restored to him, the Knight is trusted to the guidance of
Mercy, who, leading him forth by a narrow and thorny way, first
instructs him in the seven works of Mercy, and then leads him to the
hill of Heavenly Contemplation; whence, having a sight of the New
Jerusalem, as Christian of the Delectable Mountains, he goes forth to
the final victory over Satan, the old serpent, with which the book
closes.


3. AUSTRIAN GOVERNMENT IN ITALY.

I cannot close these volumes without expressing my astonishment and
regret at the facility with which the English allow themselves to be
misled by any representations, however openly groundless or ridiculous,
proceeding from the Italian Liberal party, respecting the present
administration of the Austrian Government. I do not choose here to enter
into any political discussion, or express any political opinion; but it
is due to justice to state the simple facts which came under my notice
during my residence in Italy. I was living at Venice through two entire
winters, and in the habit of familiar association both with Italians and
Austrians, my own antiquarian vocations rendering such association
possible without exciting the distrust of either party. During this
whole period, I never once was able to ascertain, from any liberal
Italian, that he had a single _definite_ ground of complaint against the
Government. There was much general grumbling and vague discontent; but I
never was able to bring one of them to the point, or to discover what it
was that they wanted, or in what way they felt themselves injured; nor
did I ever myself witness an instance of oppression on the part of the
Government, though several of much kindness and consideration. The
indignation of those of my own countrymen and countrywomen whom I
happened to see during their sojourn in Venice was always vivid, but by
no means large in its grounds. English ladies on their first arrival
invariably began the conversation with the same remark: "What a
dreadful thing it was to be ground under the iron heel of despotism!"
Upon closer inquiries it always appeared that being "ground under the
heel of despotism" was a poetical expression for being asked for one's
passport at San Juliano, and required to fetch it from San Lorenzo, full
a mile and a quarter distant. In like manner, travellers, after two or
three days' residence in the city, used to return with pitiful
lamentations over "the misery of the Italian people." Upon inquiring
what instances they had met with of this misery, it invariably turned
out that their gondoliers, after being paid three times their proper
fare, had asked for something to drink, and had attributed the fact of
their being thirsty to the Austrian Government. The misery of the
Italians consists in having three festa days a week, and doing in their
days of exertion about one fourth as much work as an English laborer.

There is, indeed, much true distress occasioned by the measures which
the Government is sometimes compelled to take in order to repress
sedition; but the blame of this lies with those whose occupation is the
excitement of sedition. So also there is much grievous harm done to
works of art by the occupation of the country by so large an army; but
for the mode in which that army is quartered, the Italian municipalities
are answerable, not the Austrians. Whenever I was shocked by finding, as
above-mentioned at Milan, a cloister, or a palace, occupied by soldiery,
I always discovered, on investigation, that the place had been given by
the municipality; and that, beyond requiring that lodging for a certain
number of men should be found in such and such a quarter of the town,
the Austrians had nothing to do with the matter. This does not, however,
make the mischief less: and it is strange, if we think of it, to see
Italy, with all her precious works of art, made a continual
battle-field; as if no other place for settling their disputes could be
found by the European powers, than where every random shot may destroy
what a king's ransom cannot restore.[62] It is exactly as if the
tumults in Paris could he settled no otherwise than by fighting them out
in the Gallery of the Louvre.


4. DATE OF THE PALACES OF THE BYZANTINE RENAISSANCE.

In the sixth article of the Appendix to the first volume, the question
of the date of the Casa Dario and Casa Trevisan was deferred until I
could obtain from my friend Mr. Rawdon Brown, to whom the former palace
once belonged, some more distinct data respecting this subject than I
possessed myself.

Speaking first of the Casa Dario, he says: "Fontana dates it from about
the year 1450, and considers it the earliest specimen of the
architecture founded by Pietro Lombardo, and followed by his sons,
Tullio and Antonio. In a Sanuto autograph miscellany, purchased by me
long ago, and which I gave to St. Mark's Library, are two letters from
Giovanni Dario, dated 10th and 11th July, 1485, in the neighborhood of
Adrianople; where the Turkish camp found itself, and Bajazet II.
received presents from the Soldan of Egypt, from the Schah of the Indies
(query Grand Mogul), and from the King of Hungary: of these matters,
Dario's letters give many curious details. Then, in the _printed_
Malipiero Annals, page 136 (which err, I think, by a year), the
Secretary Dario's negotiations at the Porte are alluded to; and in date
of 1484 he is stated to have returned to Venice, having quarrelled with
the Venetian bailiff at Constantinople: the annalist adds, that
'Giovanni Dario was a native of Candia, and that the Republic was so
well satisfied with him for having concluded peace with Bajazet, that he
received, as a gift from his country, an estate at Noventa, in the
Paduan territory, worth 1500 ducats, and 600 ducats in cash for the
dower of one of his daughters.' These largesses probably enabled him to
build his house about the year 1486, and are doubtless hinted at in the
inscription, which I restored A.D. 1837; _it had no date_, and ran thus,
URBIS . GENIO . JOANNES . DARIVS. In the Venetian history of Paolo
Morosini, page 594, it is also mentioned, that Giovanni Dario was,
moreover, the Secretary who concluded the peace between Mahomet, the
conqueror of Constantinople, and Venice, A.D. 1478; but, unless he build
his house by proxy, that date has nothing to do with it; and in my mind,
the fact of the present, and the inscription, warrant one's dating it
1486, and not 1450.

"The Trevisan-Cappello House, in Canonica, was once the property (A.D.
1578) of a Venetian dame, fond of cray-fish, according to a letter of
hers in the archives, whereby she thanks one of her lovers for some
which he had sent her from Treviso to Florence, of which she was then
Grand Duchess. Her name has perhaps found its way into the English
annuals. Did you ever hear of Bianca Cappello? She bought that house of
the Trevisana family, by whom Selva (in Cicognara) and Fontana
(following Selva) say it was ordered of the Lombardi, at the
commencement of the sixteenth century: but the inscription on its
façade, thus,

  SOLI  | |  HONOR. ET
  DEO   | |  GLORIA.

reminding one both of the Dario House, and of the words NON NOBIS DOMINE
inscribed on the façade of the Loredano Vendramin Palace at S. Marcuola
(now the property of the Duchess of Berri), of which Selva found proof
in the Vendramin Archives that it was commenced by Sante Lombardo, A.D.
1481, is in favor of its being classed among the works of the fifteenth
century."


5. RENAISSANCE SIDE OF DUCAL PALACE.

In passing along the Rio del Palazzo the traveller ought especially to
observe the base of the Renaissance building, formed by alternately
depressed and raised pyramids, the depressed portions being _casts_ of
the projecting ones, which are truncated on the summits. The work cannot
be called rustication, for it is cut as sharply and delicately as a
piece of ivory, but it thoroughly answers the end which rustication
proposes, and misses: it gives the base of the building a look of
crystalline hardness, actually resembling, and that very closely, the
appearance presented by the fracture of a piece of cap quartz; while yet
the light and shade of its alternate recesses and projections are so
varied as to produce the utmost possible degree of delight to the eye,
attainable by a geometrical pattern so simple. Yet, with all this high
merit, it is not a base which could be brought into general use. Its
brilliancy and piquancy are here set off with exquisite skill by its
opposition to mouldings, in the upper part of the building, of an almost
effeminate delicacy, and its complexity is rendered delightful by its
contrast with the ruder bases of the other buildings of the city; but it
would look meagre if it were employed to sustain bolder masses above,
and would become wearisome if the eye were once thoroughly familiarized
with it by repetition.


6. CHARACTER OF THE DOGE MICHELE MOROSINI.

The following extracts from the letter of Count Charles Morosini, above
mentioned, appear to set the question at rest.

"It is our unhappy destiny that, during the glory of the Venetian
republic, no one took the care to leave us a faithful and conscientious
history: but I hardly know whether this misfortune should be laid to the
charge of the historians themselves, or of those commentators who have
destroyed their trustworthiness by new accounts of things, invented by
themselves. As for the poor Morosini, we may perhaps save his honor by
assembling a conclave of our historians, in order to receive their
united sentence; for, in this case, he would have the absolute majority
on his side, nearly all the authors bearing testimony to his love for
his country and to the magnanimity of his heart. I must tell you that
the history of Daru is not looked upon with esteem by well-informed men;
and it is said that he seems to have no other object in view than to
obscure the glory of all actions. I know not on what authority the
English writer depends; but he has, perhaps, merely copied the statement
of Daru.... I have consulted an ancient and authentic MS. belonging to
the Venieri family, a MS. well known, and certainly better worthy of
confidence than Daru's history, and it says nothing of M. Morosini but
that he was elected Doge to the delight and joy of all men. Neither do
the Savina or Dolfin Chronicles say a word of the shameful speculation;
and our best informed men say that the reproach cast by some historians
against the Doge perhaps arose from a mistaken interpretation of the
words pronounced by him, and reported by Marin Sanuto, that 'the
speculation would sooner or later have been advantageous to the
country.' But this single consideration is enough to induce us to form a
favorable conclusion respecting the honor of this man, namely, that he
was not elected Doge until after he had been entrusted with many
honorable embassies to the Genoese and Carrarese, as well as to the King
of Hungary and Amadeus of Savoy; and if in these embassies he had not
shown himself a true lover of his country, the republic not only would
not again have entrusted him with offices so honorable, but would never
have rewarded him with the dignity of Doge, therein to succeed such a
man as Andrea Contarini; and the war of Chioggia, during which it is
said that he tripled his fortune by speculations, took place during the
reign of Contarini, 1379, 1380, while Morosini was absent on foreign
embassies."


7. MODERN EDUCATION.

The following fragmentary notes on this subject have been set down at
different times. I have been accidentally prevented from arranging them
properly for publication, but there are one or two truths in them which
it is better to express insufficiently than not at all.

       *       *       *       *       *

By a large body of the people of England and of Europe a man is called
educated if he can write Latin verses and construe a Greek chorus. By
some few more enlightened persons it is confessed that the construction
of hexameters is not in itself an important end of human existence; but
they say, that the general discipline which a course of classical
reading gives to the intellectual powers, is the final object of our
scholastical institutions.

But it seems to me, there is no small error even in this last and more
philosophical theory. I believe, that what it is most honorable to know,
it is also most profitable to learn; and that the science which it is
the highest power to possess, it is also the best exercise to acquire.

And if this be so, the question as to what should be the materiel of
education, becomes singularly simplified. It might be matter of dispute
what processes have the greatest effect in developing the intellect; but
it can hardly be disputed what facts it is most advisable that a man
entering into life should accurately know.

I believe, in brief, that he ought to know three things:

  First.   Where he is.
  Secondly.   Where he is going.
  Thirdly.   What he had best do, under those circumstances.

First. Where he is.--That is to say, what sort of a world he has got
into; how large it is; what kind of creatures live in it, and how; what
it is made of, and what may be made of it.

Secondly. Where he is going.--That is to say, what chances or reports
there are of any other world besides this; what seems to be the nature
of that other world; and whether, for information respecting it, he had
better consult the Bible, Koran, or Council of Trent.

Thirdly. What he had best do under those circumstances.--That is to say,
what kind of faculties he possesses; what are the present state and
wants of mankind; what is his place in society; and what are the
readiest means in his power of attaining happiness and diffusing it. The
man who knows these things, and who has had his will so subdued in the
learning them, that he is ready to do what he knows he ought, I should
call educated; and the man who knows them not,--uneducated, though he
could talk all the tongues of Babel.

Our present European system of so-called education ignores, or despises,
not one, nor the other, but all the three, of these great branches of
human knowledge.

First: It despises Natural History.--Until within the last year or two,
the instruction in the physical sciences given at Oxford consisted of a
course of twelve or fourteen lectures on the Elements of Mechanics or
Pneumatics, and permission to ride out to Shotover with the Professor of
Geology. I do not know the specialties of the system pursued in the
academies of the Continent; but their practical result is, that unless a
man's natural instincts urge him to the pursuit of the physical sciences
too strongly to be resisted, he enters into life utterly ignorant of
them. I cannot, within my present limits, even so much as count the
various directions in which this ignorance does evil. But the main
mischief of it is, that it leaves the greater number of men without the
natural food which God intended for their intellects. For one man who is
fitted for the study of words, fifty are fitted for the study of things,
and were intended to have a perpetual, simple, and religious delight in
watching the processes, or admiring the creatures, of the natural
universe. Deprived of this source of pleasure, nothing is left to them
but ambition or dissipation; and the vices of the upper classes of
Europe are, I believe, chiefly to be attributed to this single cause.

Secondly: It despises Religion.--I do not say it despises "Theology,"
that is to say, _Talk_ about God. But it despises "Religion;" that is to
say, the "binding" or training to God's service. There is much talk and
much teaching in all our academies, of which the effect is not to bind,
but to loosen, the elements of religious faith. Of the ten or twelve
young men who, at Oxford, were my especial friends, who sat with me
under the same lectures on Divinity, or were punished with me for
missing lecture by being sent to evening prayers,[63] four are now
zealous Romanists,--a large average out of twelve; and while thus our
own universities profess to teach Protestantism, and do not, the
universities on the Continent profess to teach Romanism, and do
not,--sending forth only rebels and infidels. During long residence on
the Continent, I do not remember meeting with above two or three young
men, who either believed in revelation, or had the grace to hesitate in
the assertion of their infidelity.

Whence, it seems to me, we may gather one of two things; either that
there is nothing in any European form of religion so reasonable or
ascertained, as that it can be taught securely to our youth, or fastened
in their minds by any rivets of proof which they shall not be able to
loosen the moment they begin to think; or else, that no means are taken
to train them in such demonstrable creeds.

It seems to me the duty of a rational nation to ascertain (and to be at
some pains in the matter) which of these suppositions is true; and, if
indeed no proof can be given of any supernatural fact, or Divine
doctrine, stronger than a youth just out of his teens can overthrow in
the first stirrings of serious thought, to confess this boldly; to get
rid of the expense of an Establishment, and the hypocrisy of a Liturgy;
to exhibit its cathedrals as curious memorials of a by-gone
superstition, and, abandoning all thoughts of the next world, to set
itself to make the best it can of this.

But if, on the other hand, there _does_ exist any evidence by which the
probability of certain religious facts may be shown, as clearly, even,
as the probabilities of things not absolutely ascertained in
astronomical or geological science, let this evidence be set before all
our youth so distinctly, and the facts for which it appears inculcated
upon them so steadily, that although it may be possible for the evil
conduct of after life to efface, or for its earnest and protracted
meditation to modify, the impressions of early years, it may not be
possible for our young men, the instant they emerge from their
academies, to scatter themselves like a flock of wild fowl risen out of
a marsh, and drift away on every irregular wind of heresy and apostasy.

Lastly: Our system of European education despises Politics.--That is to
say, the science of the relations and duties of men to each other. One
would imagine, indeed, by a glance at the state of the world, that there
was no such science. And, indeed, it is one still in its infancy.

It implies, in its full sense, the knowledge of the operations of the
virtues and vices of men upon themselves and society; the understanding
of the ranks and offices of their intellectual and bodily powers in
their various adaptations to art, science, and industry; the
understanding of the proper offices of art, science, and labor
themselves, as well as of the foundations of jurisprudence, and broad
principles of commerce; all this being coupled with practical knowledge
of the present state and wants of mankind.

What, it will be said, and is all this to be taught to schoolboys? No;
but the first elements of it, all that are necessary to be known by an
individual in order to his acting wisely in any station of life, might
be taught, not only to every schoolboy, but to every peasant. The
impossibility of equality among men; the good which arises from their
inequality; the compensating circumstances in different states and
fortunes; the honorableness of every man who is worthily filling his
appointed place in society, however humble; the proper relations of poor
and rich, governor and governed; the nature of wealth, and mode of its
circulation; the difference between productive and unproductive labor;
the relation of the products of the mind and hand; the true value of
works of the higher arts, and the possible amount of their production;
the meaning of "Civilization," its advantages and dangers; the meaning
of the term "Refinement;" the possibilities of possessing refinement in
a low station, and of losing it in a high one; and, above all, the
significance of almost every act of a man's daily life, in its ultimate
operation upon himself and others;--all this might be, and ought to be,
taught to every boy in the kingdom, so completely, that it should be
just as impossible to introduce an absurd or licentious doctrine among
our adult population, as a new version of the multiplication table. Nor
am I altogether without hope that some day it may enter into the heads
of the tutors of our schools to try whether it is not as easy to make an
Eton boy's mind as sensitive to falseness in policy, as his ear is at
present to falseness in prosody.

I know that this is much to hope. That English ministers of religion
should ever come to desire rather to make a youth acquainted with the
powers of nature and of God, than with the powers of Greek particles;
that they should ever think it more useful to show him how the great
universe rolls upon its course in heaven, than how the syllables are
fitted in a tragic metre; that they should hold it more advisable for
him to be fixed in the principles of religion than in those of syntax;
or, finally, that they should ever come to apprehend that a youth likely
to go straight out of college into parliament, might not unadvisably
know as much of the Peninsular as of the Peloponnesian War, and be as
well acquainted with the state of Modern Italy as of old Etruria;--all
this however unreasonably, I _do_ hope, and mean to work for. For though
I have not yet abandoned all expectation of a better world than this, I
believe this in which we live is not so good as it might be. I know
there are many people who suppose French revolutions, Italian
insurrections, Caffre wars, and such other scenic effects of modern
policy, to be among the normal conditions of humanity. I know there are
many who think the atmosphere of rapine, rebellion, and misery which
wraps the lower orders of Europe more closely every day, is as natural a
phenomenon as a hot summer. But God forbid! There are ills which flesh
is heir to, and troubles to which man is born; but the troubles which he
is born to are as sparks which fly _upward_, not as flames burning to
the nethermost Hell. The Poor we must have with us always, and sorrow is
inseparable from any hour of life; but we may make their poverty such as
shall inherit the earth, and the sorrow, such as shall be hallowed by
the hand of the Comforter, with everlasting comfort. We _can_, if we
will but shake off this lethargy and dreaming that is upon us, and take
the pains to think and act like men, we can, I say, make kingdoms to be
like well-governed households, in which, indeed, while no care or
kindness can prevent occasional heart-burnings, nor any foresight or
piety anticipate all the vicissitudes of fortune, or avert every stroke
of calamity, yet the unity of their affection and fellowship remains
unbroken, and their distress is neither embittered by division,
prolonged by imprudence, nor darkened by dishonor.

       *       *       *       *       *

The great leading error of modern times is the mistaking erudition for
education. I call it the leading error, for I believe that, with little
difficulty, nearly every other might be shown to have root in it; and,
most assuredly, the worst that are fallen into on the subject of art.

Education then, briefly, is the leading human souls to what is best, and
making what is best out of them; and these two objects are always
attainable together, and by the same means; the training which makes men
happiest in themselves, also makes them most serviceable to others. True
education, then, has respect, first to the ends which are proposable to
the man, or attainable by him; and, secondly, to the material of which
the man is made. So far as it is able, it chooses the end according to
the material: but it cannot always choose the end, for the position of
many persons in life is fixed by necessity; still less can it choose
the material; and, therefore, all it can do, is to fit the one to the
other as wisely as may be.

But the first point to be understood, is that the material is as various
as the ends; that not only one man is unlike another, but _every_ man is
essentially different from _every_ other, so that no training, no
forming, nor informing, will ever make two persons alike in thought or
in power. Among all men, whether of the upper or lower orders, the
differences are eternal and irreconcilable, between one individual and
another, born under absolutely the same circumstances. One man is made
of agate, another of oak; one of slate, another of clay. The education
of the first is polishing; of the second, seasoning; of the third,
rending; of the fourth, moulding. It is of no use to season the agate;
it is vain to try to polish the slate; but both are fitted, by the
qualities they possess, for services in which they may be honored.

Now the cry for the education of the lower classes, which is heard every
day more widely and loudly, is a wise and a sacred cry, provided it be
extended into one for the education of _all_ classes, with definite
respect to the work each man has to do, and the substance of which he is
made. But it is a foolish and vain cry, if it be understood, as in the
plurality of cases it is meant to be, for the expression of mere craving
after knowledge, irrespective of the simple purposes of the life that
now is, and blessings of that which is to come.

One great fallacy into which men are apt to fall when they are reasoning
on this subject is: that light, as such, is always good; and darkness,
as such, always evil. Far from it. Light untempered would be
annihilation. It is good to them that sit in darkness and in the shadow
of death; but, to those that faint in the wilderness, so also is the
shadow of the great rock in a weary land. If the sunshine is good, so
also the cloud of the latter rain. Light is only beautiful, only
available for life, when it is tempered with shadow; pure light is
fearful, and unendurable by humanity. And it is not less ridiculous to
say that the light, as such, is good in itself, than to say that the
darkness is good in itself. Both are rendered safe, healthy, and useful
by the other; the night by the day, the day by the night; and we could
just as easily live without the dawn as without the sunset, so long as
we are human. Of the celestial city we are told there shall be "no night
there," and then we shall know even as also we are known: but the night
and the mystery have both their service here; and our business is not to
strive to turn the night into day, but to be sure that we are as they
that watch for the morning.

Therefore, in the education either of lower or upper classes, it matters
not the least how much or how little they know, provided they know just
what will fit them to do their work, and to be happy in it. What the sum
or the nature of their knowledge ought to be at a given time or in a
given case, is a totally different question: the main thing to be
understood is, that a man is not educated, in any sense whatsoever,
because he can read Latin, or write English, or can behave well in a
drawingroom; but that he is only educated if he is happy, busy,
beneficent, and effective in the world; that millions of peasants are
therefore at this moment better educated than most of those who call
themselves gentlemen; and that the means taken to "educate" the lower
classes in any other sense may very often be productive of a precisely
opposite result.

Observe: I do not say, nor do I believe, that the lower classes ought
not to be better educated, in millions of ways, than they are. I believe
_every man in a Christian kingdom ought to be equally well educated_.
But I would have it education to purpose; stern, practical,
irresistible, in moral habits, in bodily strength and beauty, in all
faculties of mind capable of being developed under the circumstances of
the individual, and especially in the technical knowledge of his own
business; but yet, infinitely various in its effort, directed to make
one youth humble, and another confident; to tranquillize this mind, to
put some spark of ambition into that; now to urge, and now to restrain:
and in the doing of all this, considering knowledge as one only out of
myriads of means in its hands, or myriads of gifts at its disposal; and
giving it or withholding it as a good husbandman waters his garden,
giving the full shower only to the thirsty plants, and at times when
they are thirsty, whereas at present we pour it upon the heads of our
youth as the snow falls on the Alps, on one and another alike, till they
can bear no more, and then take honor to ourselves because here and
there a river descends from their crests into the valleys, not
observing that we have made the loaded hills themselves barren for ever.

Finally: I hold it for indisputable, that the first duty of a state is
to see that every child born therein shall be well housed, clothed, fed,
and educated, till it attain years of discretion. But in order to the
effecting this, the government must have an authority over the people of
which we now do not so much as dream; and I cannot in this place pursue
the subject farther.


8. EARLY VENETIAN MARRIAGES.

Galliciolli, lib. ii. § 1757, insinuates a doubt of the general custom,
saying "it would be more reasonable to suppose that only twelve maidens
were married in public on St. Mark's day;" and Sandi also speaks of
twelve only. All evidence, however, is clearly in favor of the popular
tradition; the most curious fact connected with the subject being the
mention, by Herodotus, of the mode of marriage practised among the
Illyrian "Veneti" of his time, who presented their maidens for marriage
on one day in each year; and, with the price paid for those who were
beautiful, gave dowries to those who had no personal attractions.

It is very curious to find the traces of this custom existing, though in
a softened form, in Christian times. Still, I admit that there is little
confidence to be placed in the mere concurrence of the Venetian
Chroniclers, who, for the most part, copied from each other: but the
best and most complete account I have read, is that quoted by
Galliciolli from the "Matricola de' Casseleri," written in 1449; and, in
that account, the words are quite unmistakable. "It was anciently the
custom of Venice, that _all the brides_ (novizze) of Venice, when they
married, should be married by the bishop, in the Church of S. Pietro di
Castello, on St. Mark's day, which is the 31st of January." Rogers quotes
Navagiero to the same effect; and Sansovino is more explicit still. "It
was the custom to contract marriages openly; and when the deliberations
were completed, the damsels assembled themselves in St. Pietro di
Castello, for the feast of St. Mark, in February."


9. CHARACTER OF THE VENETIAN ARISTOCRACY.

The following noble answer of a Venetian ambassador, Giustiniani, on the
occasion of an insult offered him at the court of Henry the Eighth, is
as illustrative of the dignity which there yet remained in the character
and thoughts of the Venetian noble, as descriptive, in few words, of the
early faith and deeds of his nation. He writes thus to the Doge, from
London, on the 15th of April, 1516:

"By my last, in date of the 30th ult., I informed you that the
countenances of some of these lords evinced neither friendship nor
goodwill, and that much language had been used to me of a nature
bordering not merely on arrogance, but even on outrage; and not having
specified this in the foregoing letters, I think fit now to mention it
in detail. Finding myself at the court, and talking familiarly about
other matters, two lay lords, great personages in this kingdom, inquired
of me 'whence it came that your Excellency was of such slippery faith,
now favoring one party and then the other?' Although these words ought
to have irritated me, I answered them with all discretion, 'that you did
keep, and ever had kept your faith; the maintenance of which has placed
you in great trouble, and subjected you to wars of longer duration than
you would otherwise have experienced; descending to particulars in
justification of your Sublimity.' Whereupon one of them replied, '_Isti
Veneti sunt piscatores._'[64] Marvellous was the command I then had over
myself in not giving vent to expressions which might have proved
injurious to your Signory; and with extreme moderation I rejoined, 'that
had he been at Venice, and seen our Senate, and the Venetian nobility,
he perhaps would not speak thus; and moreover, were he well read in our
history, both concerning the origin of our city and the grandeur of your
Excellency's feats, neither the one nor the other would seem to him
those of fishermen; yet,' said I, 'did fishermen found the Christian
faith, and we have been those fishermen who defended it against the
forces of the Infidel, our fishing-boats being galleys and ships, our
hooks the treasure of St. Mark, and our bait the life-blood of our
citizens, who died for the Christian faith.'"

I take this most interesting passage from a volume of despatches
addressed from London to the Signory of Venice, by the ambassador
Giustiniani, during the years 1516-1519; despatches not only full of
matters of historical interest, but of the most delightful every-day
description of all that went on at the English court. They were
translated by Mr. Brown from the original letters, and will, I believe,
soon be published, and I hope also, read and enjoyed: for I cannot close
these volumes without expressing a conviction, which has long been
forcing itself upon my mind, that _restored_ history is of little more
value than restored painting or architecture; that the only history
worth reading is that written at the time of which it treats, the
history of what was done and seen, heard out of the mouths of the men
who did and saw. One fresh draught of such history is worth more than a
thousand volumes of abstracts, and reasonings, and suppositions, and
theories; and I believe that, as we get wiser, we shall take little
trouble about the history of nations who have left no distinct records
of themselves, but spend our time only in the examination of the
faithful documents which, in any period of the world, have been left,
either in the form of art or literature, portraying the scenes, or
recording the events, which in those days were actually passing before
the eyes of men.


10. FINAL APPENDIX.

The statements respecting the dates of Venetian buildings made
throughout the preceding pages, are founded, as above stated, on careful
and personal examination of all the mouldings, or other features
available as evidence, of every palace of importance in the city. Three
parts, at least, of the time occupied in the completion of the work have
been necessarily devoted to the collection of these evidences, of which
it would be quite useless to lay the mass before the reader; but of
which the leading points must be succinctly stated, in order to show the
nature of my authority for any of the conclusions expressed in the text.

I have therefore collected in the plates which illustrate this article
of the Appendix, for the examination of any reader who may be interested
by them, as many examples of the evidence-bearing details as are
sufficient for the proof required, especially including all the
exceptional forms; so that the reader may rest assured that if I had
been able to lay before him all the evidence in my possession, it would
have been still more conclusive than the portion now submitted to him.

[Illustration: Plate V.
               BYZANTINE BASES.]

We must examine in succession the Bases, Doorways and Jambs, Capitals,
Archivolts, Cornices, and Tracery Bars, of Venetian architecture.


  _I. Bases._

The principal points we have to notice are the similarity and simplicity
of the Byzantine bases in general, and the distinction between those of
Torcello and Murano, and of St. Mark's, as tending to prove the early
dates attributed in the text to the island churches. I have sufficiently
illustrated the forms of the Gothic bases in Plates X., XI., and XIII.
of the first volume, so that I here note chiefly the Byzantine or
Romanesque ones, adding two Gothic forms for the sake of comparison.

The most characteristic examples, then, are collected in Plate V.
opposite; namely:

            1, 2, 3, 4. In the upper gallery of apse of Murano.
            5. Lower shafts of apse. Murano.
            6. Casa Falier.
            7. Small shafts of panels. Casa Farsetti.
            8. Great shafts and plinth. Casa Farsetti.
            9. Great lower shafts. Fondaco de' Turchi.
           10. Ducal Palace, upper arcade.
 PLATE V.  11. General late Gothic form.
 Vol. III. 12. Tomb of Dogaressa Vital Michele, in St. Mark's atrium.
           13. Upper arcade of Madonnetta House.
           14. Rio-Foscari House.
           15. Upper arcade. Terraced House.
           16, 17, 18. Nave. Torcello.
           19, 20. Transepts. St. Mark's.
           21. Nave. St. Mark's.
           22. External pillars of northern portico. St. Mark's.
           23, 24. Clustered pillars of northern portico. St. Mark's.
           25, 26. Clustered pillars of southern portico. St. Mark's.

Now, observe, first, the enormous difference in style between the bases
1 to 5, and the rest in the upper row, that is to say, between the bases
of Murano and the twelfth and thirteenth century bases of Venice; and,
secondly, the difference between the bases 16 to 20 and the rest in the
lower row, that is to say, between the bases of Torcello (with those of
St. Mark's which belong to the nave, and which may therefore be supposed
to be part of the earlier church), and the later ones of the St. Mark's
Façade.

Secondly: Note the fellowship between 5 and 6, one of the evidences of
the early date of the Casa Falier.

Thirdly: Observe the slurring of the upper roll into the cavetto, in 13,
14, and 15, and the consequent relationship established between three
most important buildings, the Rio-Foscari House, Terraced House, and
Madonnetta House.

Fourthly: Byzantine bases, if they have an incision between the upper
roll and cavetto, are very apt to approach the form of fig. 23, in which
the upper roll is cut out of the flat block, and the ledge beneath it is
sloping. Compare Nos. 7, 8, 9, 21, 22, 23, 24, 25, 26. On the other
hand, the later Gothic base, 11, has always its upper roll well
developed, and, generally, the fillet between it and the cavetto
vertical. The sloping fillet is indeed found down to late periods; and
the vertical fillet, as in No. 12, in Byzantine ones; but still, when a
base has such a sloping fillet and peculiarly graceful sweeping cavetto,
as those of No. 10, looking as if they would run into one line with each
other, it is strong presumptive evidence of its belonging to an early,
rather than a late period.

The base 12 is the boldest example I could find of the exceptional form
in early times; but observe, in this, that the upper roll is larger than
the lower. This is _never_ the case in late Gothic, where the proportion
is always as in fig. 11. Observe that in Nos. 8 and 9 the upper rolls
are at least as large as the lower, an important evidence of the dates
of the Casa Farsetti and Fondaco de' Turchi.

Lastly: Note the peculiarly steep profile of No. 22, with reference to
what is said of this base in Vol. II. Appendix 9.


  _II. Doorways and Jambs._

The entrances to St. Mark's consist, as above mentioned, of great
circular or ogee porches; underneath which the real open entrances, in
which the valves of the bronze doors play, are square headed.

[Illustration: Fig. I.]

The mouldings of the jambs of these doors are highly curious, and the
most characteristic are therefore represented in one view. The outsides
of the jambs are lowest.

  _a_. Northern lateral door.
  _b_. First northern door of the façade.
  _c_. Second door of the façade.
  _d_. Fourth door of the façade.
  _e_. Central door of the façade.

I wish the reader especially to note the arbitrary character of the
curves and incisions; all evidently being drawn by hand, none being
segments of circles, none like another, none influenced by any visible
law. I do not give these mouldings as beautiful; they are, for the most
part, very poor in effect, but they are singularly characteristic of the
free work of the time.

The kind of door to which these mouldings belong, is shown, with the
other groups of doors, in Plate XIV. Vol. II. fig. 6 _a_. Then 6 _b_, 6
_c_, 6 _d_ represent the groups of doors in which the Byzantine
influence remained energetic, admitting slowly the forms of the pointed
Gothic; 7 _a_, with the gable above, is the intermediate group between
the Byzantine and Gothic schools; 7 _b_, 7 _c_, 7 _d_, 7 _e_ are the
advanced guards of the Gothic and Lombardic invasions, representative of
a large number of thirteenth century arcades and doors. Observe that 6
_d_ is shown to be of a late school by its finial, and 6 _e_ of the
latest school by its finial, complete ogee arch (instead of round or
pointed), and abandonment of the lintel.

These examples, with the exception of 6 _a_, which is a general form,
are all actually existing doors; namely:

  6 _b._ In the Fondamenta Venier, near St. Maria della Salute.
  6 _c._ In the Calle delle Botteri, between the Rialto and San Cassan.
  6 _d._ Main door of San Gregorio.
  6 _e._ Door of a palace in Rio San Paternian.
  7 _a._ Door of a small courtyard near house of Marco Polo.
  7 _b._ Arcade in narrow canal, at the side of Casa Barbaro.
  7 _c._ At the turn of the canal, close to the Ponte dell' Angelo.
  7 _d._ In Rio San Paternian (a ruinous house).
  7 _e._ At the turn of the canal on which the Sotto Portico della Stua
           opens, near San Zaccaria.

If the reader will take a magnifying glass to the figure 6 _d_, he will
see that its square ornaments, of which, in the real door, each contains
a rose, diminish to the apex of the arch; a very interesting and
characteristic circumstance, showing the subtle feeling of the Gothic
builders. They must needs diminish the ornamentation, in order to
sympathize with the delicacy of the point of the arch. The magnifying
glass will also show the Bondumieri shield in No. 7 _d_, and the Leze
shield in No. 7 _e_, both introduced on the keystones in the grand early
manner. The mouldings of these various doors will be noticed under the
head Archivolt.

[Illustration: Plate VI.
               BYZANTINE JAMBS.]

Now, throughout the city we find a number of doors resembling the square
doors of St. Mark, and occurring with rare exceptions either in
buildings of the Byzantine period, or imbedded in restored houses;
never, in a single instance, forming a connected portion of any late
building; and they therefore furnish a most important piece of evidence,
wherever they are part of the original structure of a _Gothic_ building,
that such building is one of the advanced guards of the Gothic school,
and belongs to its earliest period.

On Plate VI., opposite, are assembled all the important examples I could
find in Venice of these mouldings. The reader will see at a glance their
peculiar character, and unmistakable likeness to each other. The
following are the references:

            1. Door in Calle Mocenigo.
            2. Angle of tomb of Dogaressa Vital Michele.
            3. Door in Sotto Portico, St. Apollonia (near Ponte di
                  Canonica).
            4. Door in Calle della Verona (another like it is close by).
            5. Angle of tomb of Doge Marino Morosini.
            6, 7. Door in Calle Mocenigo.
            8. Door in Campo S. Margherita.
 Plate VI.  9. Door at Traghetto San Samuele, on south side of Grand
 Vol. III.       Canal.
           10. Door at Ponte St. Toma.
           11. Great door of Church of Servi.
           12. In Calle della Chiesa, Campo San Filippo e Giacomo.
           13. Door of house in Calle di Rimedio (Vol. II.).
           14. Door in Fondaco de' Turchi.
           15. Door in Fondamenta Malcanton, near Campo S. Margherita.
           16. Door in south side of Canna Reggio.
           17, 18. Doors in Sotto Portico dei Squellini.

The principal points to be noted in these mouldings are their curious
differences of level, as marked by the dotted lines, more especially in
14, 15, 16, and the systematic projection of the outer or lower
mouldings in 16, 17, 18. Then, as points of evidence, observe that 1 is
the jamb and 6 the archivolt (7 the angle on a larger scale) of the
brick door given in my folio work from Ramo di rimpetto Mocenigo, one of
the evidences of the early date of that door; 8 is the jamb of the door
in Campo Santa Margherita (also given in my folio work), fixing the
early date of that also; 10 is from a Gothic door opening off the Ponte
St. Toma; and 11 is also from a Gothic building. All the rest are from
Byzantine work, or from ruins. The angle of the tomb of Marino Morosini
(5) is given for comparison only.

The doors with the mouldings 17, 18, are from the two ends of a small
dark passage, called the Sotto Portico dei Squellini, opening near Ponte
Cappello, on the Rio-Marin: 14 is the outside one, arranged as usual,
and at _a_, in the rough stone, are places for the staples of the door
valve; 15, at the other end of the passage, opening into the little
Corte dei Squellini, is set with the part _a_ outwards, it also having
places for hinges; but it is curious that the rich moulding should be
set in towards the dark passage, though natural that the doors should
both open one way.

[Illustration: Plate VII.
               GOTHIC JAMBS.]

The next Plate, VII., will show the principal characters of the Gothic
jambs, and the total difference between them and the Byzantine ones. Two
more Byzantine forms, 1 and 2, are given here for the sake of
comparison; then 3, 4, and 5 are the common profiles of simple jambs of
doors in the Gothic period; 6 is one of the jambs of the Frari windows,
continuous into the archivolt, and meeting the traceries, where the line
is set upon it at the extremity of its main slope; 7 and 8 are jambs of
the Ducal Palace windows, in which the great semicircle is the half
shaft which sustains the traceries, and the rest of the profile is
continuous in the archivolt; 17, 18, and 19 are the principal piers of
the Ducal Palace; and 20, from St. Fermo of Verona, is put with them in
order to show the step of transition from the Byzantine form 2 to the
Gothic chamfer, which is hardly represented at Venice. The other
profiles on the plate are all late Gothic, given to show the gradual
increase of complexity without any gain of power. The open lines in 12,
14, 16, etc., are the parts of the profile cut into flowers or cable
mouldings; and so much incised as to show the constant outline of the
cavetto or curve beneath them. The following are the references:

             1. Door in house of Marco Polo.
             2. Old door in a restored church of St. Cassan.
             3, 4, 5. Common jambs of Gothic doors.
             6. Frari windows.
             7, 8. Ducal Palace windows.
             9. Casa Priuli, great entrance.
            10. San Stefano, great door.
 PLATE VII. 11. San Gregorio, door opening to the water.
 Vol. III.  12. Lateral door, Frari.
            13. Door of Campo San Zaccaria.
            14. Madonna dell'Orto.
            15. San Gregorio, door in the façade.
            16. Great lateral door, Frari.
            17. Pilaster at Vine angle, Ducal Palace.
            18. Pier, inner cortile, Ducal Palace.
            19. Pier, under the medallion of Venice, on the Piazetta
                  façade of the Ducal Palace.


  _III. Capitals._

I shall here notice the various facts I have omitted in the text of the
work.

First, with respect to the Byzantine Capitals represented in Plate VII.
Vol. II., I omitted to notice that figs. 6 and 7 represent two sides of
the same capital at Murano (though one is necessarily drawn on a smaller
scale than the other). Fig. 7 is the side turned to the light, and fig.
6 to the shade, the inner part, which is quite concealed, not being
touched at all.

We have here a conclusive proof that these capitals were cut for their
place in the apse; therefore I have always considered them as tests of
Venetian workmanship, and, on the strength of that proof, have
occasionally spoken of capitals as of true Venetian work, which M.
Lazari supposes to be of the Lower Empire. No. 11, from St. Mark's, was
not above noticed. The way in which the cross is gradually left in
deeper relief as the sides slope inwards and away from it, is highly
picturesque and curious.

No. 9 has been reduced from a larger drawing, and some of the life and
character of the curves lost in consequence. It is chiefly given to show
the irregular and fearless freedom of the Byzantine designers, no two
parts of the foliage being correspondent; in the original it is of white
marble, the ground being colored blue.

Plate X. Vol. II. represents the four principal orders of Venetian
capitals in their greatest simplicity, and the profiles of the most
interesting examples of each. The figures 1 and 4 are the two great
concave and convex groups, and 2 and 3 the transitional. Above each type
of form I have put also an example of the group of flowers which
represent it in nature: fig. 1 has a lily; fig. 2 a variety of the
Tulipa sylvestris; figs. 3 and 4 forms of the magnolia. I prepared this
plate in the early spring, when I could not get any other examples,[65]
or I would rather have had two different species for figs. 3 and 4; but
the half-open magnolia will answer the purpose, showing the beauty of
the triple curvature in the sides.

I do not say that the forms of the capitals are actually taken from
flowers, though assuredly so in some instances, and partially so in the
decoration of nearly all. But they were designed by men of pure and
natural feeling for beauty, who therefore instinctively adopted the
forms represented, which are afterwards proved to be beautiful by their
frequent occurrence in common flowers.

The convex forms, 3 and 4, are put lowest in the plate only because they
are heaviest; they are the earliest in date, and have already been
enough examined.

I have added a plate to this volume (Plate XII.), which should have
appeared in illustration of the fifth chapter of Vol. II., but was not
finished in time. It represents the central capital and two of the
lateral ones of the Fondaco de' Turchi, the central one drawn very
large, in order to show the excessive simplicity of its chiselling,
together with the care and sharpness of it, each leaf being expressed by
a series of sharp furrows and ridges. Some slight errors in the large
tracings from which the engraving was made have, however, occasioned a
loss of spring in the curves, and the little fig. 4 of Plate X. Vol. II.
gives a truer idea of the distant effect of the capital.

The profiles given in Plate X. Vol. II. are the following:

       1. _a._ Main capitals, upper arcade, Madonnetta House.
          _b._ Main capitals, upper arcade, Casa Falier.
          _c._ Lateral capitals, upper arcade, Fondaco de' Turchi.
          _d._ Small pillars of St. Mark's Pulpit.
          _e._ Casa Farsetti.
          _f._ Inner capitals of arcade of Ducal Palace.
          _g._ Plinth of the house[66] at Apostoli.
          _h._ Main capitals of house at Apostoli.
          _i._ Main capitals, upper arcade, Fondaco de' Turchi.
       2. _a._ Lower arcade, Fondaco de' Turchi.
          _b, c._ Lower pillars, house at Apostoli.
          _d._ San Simeon Grande.
 PLATE X. _e._ Restored house on Grand Canal. Three of the old arches left.
 vol. II. _f._ Upper arcade, Ducal Palace.
          _g._ Windows of third order, central shaft, Ducal Palace.
          _h._ Windows of third order, lateral shaft, Ducal Palace.
          _i._ Ducal Palace, main shafts.
          _k._ Piazzetta shafts.
       3. _a._ St. Mark's Nave.
          _b, c._ Lily capitals, St. Mark's.
       4. _a._ Fondaco de' Turchi, central shaft, upper arcade.
          _b._ Murano, upper arcade.
          _c._ Murano, lower arcade.
          _d._ Tomb of St. Isidore.
          _e._ General late Gothic profile.

The last two sections are convex in effect, though not in reality; the
bulging lines being carved into bold flower-work.

The capitals belonging to the groups 1 and 2, in the Byzantine times,
have already been illustrated in Plate VIII. Vol. II.; we have yet to
trace their succession in the Gothic times. This is done in Plate II. of
this volume, which we will now examine carefully. The following are the
capitals represented in that plate:

           1. Small shafts of St. Mark's Pulpit.
           2. From the transitional house in the Calle di Rimedio (conf.
                Vol. II.).
           3. General simplest form of the middle Gothic capital.
           4. Nave of San Giacomo de Lorio.
           5. Casa Falier.
           6. Early Gothic house in Campo Sta. M^a. Mater Domini.
 PLATE II. 7. House at the Apostoli.
 Vol. III. 8. Piazzetta shafts.
           9. Ducal Palace, upper arcade.
          10. Palace of Marco Querini.
          11. Fondaco de' Turchi.
          12. Gothic palaces in Campo San Polo.
          13. Windows of fourth order, Plate XVI. Vol. II.
          14. Nave of Church of San Stefano.
          15. Late Gothic Palace at the Miracoli.

The two lateral columns form a consecutive series: the central column is
a group of exceptional character, running parallel with both. We will
take the lateral ones first. 1. Capital of pulpit of St. Mark's
(representative of the simplest concave forms of the Byzantine period).
Look back to Plate VIII. Vol. II., and observe that while all the forms
in that plate are contemporaneous, we are now going to follow a series
_consecutive_ in time, which begins from fig. 1, either in that plate or
in this; that is to say, with the simplest possible condition to be
found at the time; and which proceeds to develope itself into gradually
increasing richness, while the _already rich_ capitals of the old school
die at its side. In the forms 14 and 15 (Plate VIII.) the Byzantine
school expired; but from the Byzantine simple capital (1, Plate II.
above) which was coexistent with them, sprang another hardy race of
capitals, whose succession we have now to trace.

The form 1, Plate II. is evidently the simplest conceivable condition of
the truncated capital, long ago represented generally in Vol. I., being
only rounded a little on its side to fit it to the shaft. The next step
was to place a leaf beneath each of the truncations (fig. 4, Plate II.,
San Giacomo de Lorio), the end of the leaf curling over at the top in a
somewhat formal spiral, partly connected with the traditional volute of
the Corinthian capital. The sides are then enriched by the addition of
some ornament, as a shield (fig. 7) or rose (fig. 10), and we have the
formed capital of the early Gothic. Fig. 10, being from the palace of
Marco Querini, is certainly not later than the middle of the thirteenth
century (see Vol. II.), and fig. 7, is, I believe, of the same date; it
is one of the bearing capitals of the lower story of the palace at the
Apostoli, and is remarkably fine in the treatment of its angle leaves,
which are not deeply under-cut, but show their magnificent sweeping
under surface all the way down, not as a leaf surface, but treated like
the gorget of a helmet, with a curved line across it like that where the
gorget meets the mail. I never saw anything finer in simple design. Fig.
10 is given chiefly as a certification of date, and to show the
treatment of the capitals of this school on a small scale. Observe the
more expansive head in proportion to the diameter of the shaft, the
leaves being drawn from the angles, as if gathered in the hand, till
their edges meet; and compare the rule given in Vol. I. Chap. IX. § XIV.
The capitals of the remarkable house, of which a portion is represented
in Fig. XXXI. Vol. II., are most curious and pure examples of this
condition; with experimental trefoils, roses, and leaves introduced
between their volutes. When compared with those of the Querini Palace,
they form one of the most important evidences of the date of the
building.

Fig. 13. One of the bearing capitals, already drawn on a small scale in
the windows represented in Plate XVI. Vol. II.

Now, observe. The capital of the form of fig. 10 appeared sufficient to
the Venetians for all ordinary purposes; and they used it in common
windows to the latest Gothic periods, but yet with certain differences
which at once show the lateness of the work. In the first place, the
rose, which at first was flat and quatrefoiled, becomes, after some
experiments, a round ball dividing into three leaves, closely resembling
our English ball flower, and probably derived from it; and, in other
cases, forming a bold projecting bud in various degrees of contraction
or expansion. In the second place, the extremities of the angle leaves
are wrought into rich flowing lobes, and bent back so as to lap against
their own breasts; showing lateness of date in exact proportion to the
looseness of curvature. Fig. 3 represents the general aspect of these
later capitals, which may be conveniently called the rose capitals of
Venice; two are seen on service, in Plate VIII. Vol. I., showing
comparatively early date by the experimental form of the six-foiled
rose. But for elaborate edifices this form was not sufficiently rich;
and there was felt to be something awkward in the junction of the leaves
at the bottom. Therefore, four other shorter leaves were added at the
sides, as in fig. 13, Plate II., and as generally represented in Plate
X. Vol. II. fig. 1. This was a good and noble step, taken very early in
the thirteenth century; and all the best Venetian capitals were
thenceforth of this form. Those which followed, and rested in the common
rose type, were languid and unfortunate: I do not know a single good
example of them after the first half of the thirteenth century.

But the form reached in fig. 13 was quickly felt to be of great value
and power. One would have thought it might have been taken straight from
the Corinthian type; but it is clearly the work of men who were making
experiments for themselves. For instance, in the central capital of Fig.
XXXI. Vol. II., there is a trial condition of it, with the intermediate
leaf set behind those at the angles (the reader had better take a
magnifying glass to this woodcut; it will show the character of the
capitals better). Two other experimental forms occur in the Casa Cicogna
(Vol. II.), and supply one of the evidences which fix the date of that
palace. But the form soon was determined as in fig. 13, and then means
were sought of recommending it by farther decoration.

The leaves which are used in fig. 13, it will be observed, have lost
the Corinthian volute, and are now pure and plain leaves, such as were
used in the Lombardic Gothic of the early thirteenth century all over
Italy. Now in a round-arched gateway at Verona, certainly not later than
1300; the pointed leaves of this pure form are used in one portion of
the mouldings, and in another are enriched by having their surfaces
carved each into a beautiful ribbed and pointed leaf. The capital, fig.
6, Plate II., is nothing more than fig. 13 so enriched; and the two
conditions are quite contemporary, fig. 13 being from a beautiful series
of fourth order windows in Campo Sta. M^a. Mater Domini, already drawn
in my folio work.

Fig. 13 is representative of the richest conditions of Gothic capital
which existed at the close of the thirteenth century. The builder of the
Ducal Palace amplified them into the form of fig. 9, but varying the
leafage in disposition and division of lobes in every capital; and the
workmen trained under him executed many noble capitals for the Gothic
palaces of the early fourteenth century, of which fig. 12, from a palace
in the Campo St. Polo, is one of the most beautiful examples. In figs. 9
and 12 the reader sees the Venetian Gothic capital in its noblest
developement. The next step was to such forms as fig. 15, which is
generally characteristic of the late fourteenth and early fifteenth
century Gothic, and of which I hope the reader will at once perceive the
exaggeration and corruption.

This capital is from a palace near the Miracoli, and it is remarkable
for the delicate, though corrupt, ornament on its abacus, which is
precisely the same as that on the pillars of the screen of St. Mark's.
That screen is a monument of very great value, for it shows the entire
corruption of the Gothic power, and the style of the later palaces
accurately and completely defined in all its parts, and is dated 1380;
thus at once furnishing us with a limiting date, which throws all the
noble work of the early Ducal Palace, and all that is like it in Venice,
thoroughly back into the middle of the fourteenth century at the latest.

Fig. 2 is the simplest condition of the capital universally employed in
the windows of the second order, noticed above, Vol. II., as belonging
to a style of great importance in the transitional architecture of
Venice. Observe, that in all the capitals given in the lateral columns
in Plate II., the points of the leaves _turn over_. But in this central
group they lie _flat_ against the angle of the capital, and form a
peculiarly light and lovely succession of forms, occurring only in their
purity in the windows of the second order, and in some important
monuments connected with them.

In fig. 2 the leaf at the angle is cut, exactly in the manner of an
Egyptian bas-relief, _into_ the stone, with a raised edge round it, and
a raised rib up the centre; and this mode of execution, seen also in
figs. 4 and 7, is one of the collateral evidences of early date. But in
figs. 5 and 8, where more elaborate effect was required, the leaf is
thrown out boldly with an even edge from the surface of the capital, and
enriched on its own surface: and as the treatment of fig. 2 corresponds
with that of fig. 4, so that of fig. 5 corresponds with that of fig. 6;
2 and 5 having the upright leaf, 4 and 6 the bending leaves; but all
contemporary.

Fig. 5 is the central capital of the windows of Casa Falier, drawn in
Plate XV. Vol. II.; and one of the leaves set on its angles is drawn
larger at fig. 7, Plate XX. Vol. II. It has no rib, but a sharp raised
ridge down its centre; and its lobes, of which the reader will observe
the curious form,--round in the middle one, truncated in the sides,--are
wrought with a precision and care which I have hardly ever seen
equalled: but of this more presently.

The next figure (8, Plate II.) is the most important capital of the
whole transitional period, that employed on the two columns of the
Piazzetta. These pillars are said to have been _raised_ in the close of
the twelfth century, but I cannot find even the most meagre account of
their bases, capitals, or, which seems to me most wonderful, of that
noble winged lion, one of the grandest things produced by mediæval art,
which all men admire, and none can draw. I have never yet seen a
faithful representation of his firm, fierce, and fiery strength. I
believe that both he and the capital which bears him are late thirteenth
century work. I have not been up to the lion, and cannot answer for it;
but if it be not thirteenth century work, it is as good; and respecting
the capitals, there can be small question. They are of exactly the date
of the oldest tombs, bearing crosses, outside of St. John and Paul; and
are associated with all the other work of the transitional period, from
1250 to 1300 (the bases of these pillars, representing the trades of
Venice, ought, by the by, to have been mentioned as among the best early
efforts of Venetian grotesque); and, besides, their abaci are formed by
four reduplications of the dentilled mouldings of St. Mark's, which
never occur after the year 1300.

Nothing can be more beautiful or original than the adaptation of these
broad bearing abaci; but as they have nothing to do with the capital
itself, and could not easily be brought into the space, they are omitted
in Plate II., where fig. 8 shows the bell of the capital only. Its
profile is curiously subtle,--apparently concave everywhere, but in
reality concave (all the way down) only on the angles, and slightly
convex at the sides (the profile through the side being 2 _k_, Plate X.
Vol. II.); in this subtlety of curvature, as well as in the simple
cross, showing the influence of early times.

The leaf on the angle, of which more presently, is fig. 5, Plate XX.
Vol. II.

Connected with this school of transitional capitals we find a form in
the later Gothic, such as fig. 14, from the Church of San Stefano; but
which appears in part derived from an old and rich Byzantine type, of
which fig. 11, from the Fondaco de' Turchi, is a characteristic example.

I must now take the reader one step farther, and ask him to examine,
finally, the treatment of the leaves, down to the cutting of their most
minute lobes, in the series of capitals of which we have hitherto only
sketched the general forms.

In all capitals with nodding leaves, such as 6 and 9 in Plate II., the
real form of the leaf is not to be seen, except in perspective; but, in
order to render the comparison more easy, I have in Plate XX. Vol. II.
opened all the leaves out, as if they were to be dried in a herbarium,
only leaving the furrows and sinuosities of surface, but laying the
outside contour nearly flat upon the page, except for a particular
reason in figs. 2, 10, 11, and 15.

I shall first, as usual, give the references, and then note the points
of interest.

           1, 2, 3. Fondaco de' Turchi, upper arcade.
           4. Greek pillars brought from St. Jean d'Acre.
           5. Piazzetta shafts.
           6. Madonnetta House.
 PLATE XX. 7. Casa Falier.
  Vol. II. 8. Palace near St. Eustachio.
           9. Tombs, outside of St. John and Paul.
          10. Tomb of Giovanni Soranzo.
          11. Tomb of Andrea Dandolo.
          12, 13, 14. Ducal Palace.

N.B. The upper row, 1 to 4, is Byzantine, the next transitional, the
last two Gothic.

Fig. 1. The leaf of the capital No. 6, Plate VIII. Vol. II. Each lobe of
the leaf has a sharp furrow up to its point, from its root.

Fig. 2. The leaf of the capital on the right hand, at the top of Plate
XII. in this volume. The lobes worked in the same manner, with deep
black drill holes between their points.

Fig. 3. One of the leaves of fig. 14, Plate VIII. Vol. II. fully
unfolded. The lobes worked in the same manner, but left shallow, so as
not to destroy the breadth of light; the central line being drawn by
drill holes, and the interstices between lobes cut black and deep.

Fig. 4. Leaf with flower; pure Byzantine work, showing whence the
treatment of all the other leaves has been derived.

Fig. 6. For the sake of symmetry, this is put in the centre: it is the
earliest of the three in this row; taken from the Madonnetta House,
where the capitals have leaves both at their sides and angles. The tall
angle leaf, with its two lateral ones, is given in the plate; and there
is a remarkable distinction in the mode of workmanship of these leaves,
which, though found in a palace of the Byzantine period, is indicative
of a tendency to transition; namely, that the sharp furrow is now drawn
_only to the central lobe_ of each division of the leaf, and the rest of
the surface of the leaf is left nearly flat, a slight concavity only
marking the division of the extremities. At the base of these leaves
they are perfectly flat, only cut by the sharp and narrow furrow, as an
elevated table-land is by ravines.

Fig. 5. A more advanced condition; the fold at the recess, between each
division of the leaf, carefully expressed, and the concave or depressed
portions of the extremities marked more deeply, as well as the central
furrow, and a rib added in the centre.

Fig. 7. A contemporary, but more finished form; the sharp furrows
becoming softer, and the whole leaf more flexible.

Fig. 8. An exquisite form of the same period, but showing still more
advanced naturalism, from a very early group of third order windows,
near the Church of St. Eustachio on the Grand Canal.

Fig. 9. Of the same time, from a small capital of an angle shaft of the
sarcophagi at the _side_ of St. John and Paul, in the little square
which is adorned by the Colleone statue. This leaf is very quaint and
pretty in giving its midmost lateral divisions only two lobes each,
instead of the usual three or four.

Fig. 10. Leaf employed in the cornice of the tomb of the Doge Giovanni
Soranzo, who died in 1312. It nods over, and has three ribs on its upper
surface; thus giving us the completed ideal form of the leaf, but its
execution is still very archaic and severe.

Now the next example, fig. 11, is from the tomb of the Doge Andrea
Dandolo, and therefore executed between 1354 and 1360; and this leaf
shows the Gothic naturalism and refinement of curvature fully developed.
In this forty years' interval, then, the principal advance of Gothic
sculpture is to be placed.

I had prepared a complete series of examples, showing this advance, and
the various ways in which the separations of the ribs, a most
characteristic feature, are more and more delicately and scientifically
treated, from the beginning to the middle of the fourteenth century, but
I feared that no general reader would care to follow me into these
minutiæ, and have cancelled this portion of the work, at least for the
present, the main point being, that the reader should feel the full
extent of the change, which he can hardly fail to do in looking from
fig. 10 to figs. 11 and 12. I believe that fig. 12 is the earlier of the
two; and it is assuredly the finer, having all the elasticity and
simplicity of the earliest forms, with perfect flexibility added. In
fig. 11 there is a perilous element beginning to develope itself into
one feature, namely, the extremities of the leaves, which, instead of
merely nodding over, now curl completely round into a kind of ball. This
occurs early, and in the finest Gothic work, especially in cornices and
other running mouldings: but it is a fatal symptom, a beginning of the
intemperance of the later Gothic, and it was followed out with singular
avidity; the ball of coiled leafage increasing in size and complexity,
and at last becoming the principal feature of the work; the light
striking on its vigorous projection, as in fig. 14. Nearly all the
Renaissance Gothic of Venice depends upon these balls for effect, a late
capital being generally composed merely of an upper and lower range of
leaves terminating in this manner.

It is very singular and notable how, in this loss of _temperance_, there
is loss of _life_. For truly healthy and living leaves do not bind
themselves into knots at the extremities. They bend, and wave, and nod,
but never curl. It is in disease, or in death, by blight, or frost, or
poison only, that leaves in general assume this ingathered form. It is
the flame of autumn that has shrivelled them, or the web of the
caterpillar that has bound them: and thus the last forms of the Venetian
leafage set forth the fate of Venetian pride; and, in their utmost
luxuriance and abandonment, perish as if eaten of worms.

And now, by glancing back to Plate X. Vol. II, the reader will see in a
moment the kind of evidence which is found of the date of capitals in
their profiles merely. Observe: we have seen that the treatment of the
leaves in the Madonnetta House seemed "indicative of a tendency to
transition." Note their profile, 1_a_, and its close correspondence with
1 _h_, which is actually of a transitional capital from the upper arcade
of second order windows in the Apostoli Palace; yet both shown to be
very close to the Byzantine period, if not belonging to it, by their
fellowship with the profile _i_, from the Fondaco de' Turchi. Then note
the close correspondence of all the other profiles in that line, which
belong to the concave capitals or plinths of the Byzantine palaces, and
note their composition, the abacus being, in idea, merely an echo or
reduplication of the capital itself; as seen in perfect simplicity in
the profile _f_, which is a roll under a _tall_ concave curve forming
the bell of the capital, with a roll and _short_ concave curve for its
abacus. This peculiar abacus is an unfailing test of early date; and our
finding this simple profile used for the Ducal Palace (_f_), is strongly
confirmatory of all our former conclusions.

Then the next row, 2, are the Byzantine and early Gothic semi-convex
curves, in their pure forms, having no roll below; but often with a roll
added, as at _f_, and in certain early Gothic conditions curiously fused
into it, with a cavetto between, as _b_, _c_, _d_. But the more archaic
form is as at _f_ and _k_; and as these two profiles are from the Ducal
Palace and Piazzetta shafts, they join again with the rest of the
evidence of their early date. The profiles _i_ and _k_ are both most
beautiful; _i_ is that of the great capitals of the Ducal Palace, and
the small profiles between it and _k_ are the varieties used on the
fillet at its base. The profile _i_ should have had leaves springing
from it, as 1 _h_ has, only more boldly, but there was no room for them.

The reader cannot fail to discern at a glance the fellowship of the
whole series of profiles, 2 _a_ to _k_, nor can he but with equal ease
observe a marked difference in 4 _d_ and 4 _e_ from any others in the
plate; the bulging outlines of leafage being indicative of the luxuriant
and flowing masses, no longer expressible with a simple line, but to be
considered only as confined within it, of the later Gothic. Now _d_ is a
dated profile from the tomb of St. Isidore, 1355, which by its dog-tooth
abacus and heavy leafage distinguishes itself from all the other
profiles, and therefore throws them back into the first half of the
century. But, observe, it still retains the noble swelling root. This
character soon after vanishes; and, in 1380, the profile _e_, at once
heavy, feeble, and ungraceful, with a meagre and valueless abacus hardly
discernible, is characteristic of all the capitals of Venice.

Note, finally, this contraction of the abacus. Compare 4 _c_, which is
the earliest form in the plate, from Murano, with 4 _e_, which is the
latest. The other profiles show the gradual process of change; only
observe, in 3_a_ the abacus is not drawn; it is so bold that it would
not come into the plate without reducing the bell curve to too small a
scale.

So much for the evidence derivable from the capitals; we have next to
examine that of the archivolts or arch mouldings.

[Illustration: Plate VIII.
               BYZANTINE ARCHIVOLTS.]


  _IV. Archivolts._

In Plate VIII., opposite, are arranged in one view all the conditions of
Byzantine archivolt employed in Venice, on a large scale. It will be
seen in an instant that there can be no mistaking the manner of their
masonry. The soffit of the arch is the horizontal line at the bottom of
all these profiles, and each of them (except 13, 14) is composed of two
slabs of marble, one for the soffit, another for the face of the arch;
the one on the soffit is worked on the edge into a roll (fig. 10) or
dentil (fig. 9), and the one on the face is bordered on the other side
by another piece let edgeways into the wall, and also worked into a roll
or dentil: in the richer archivolts a cornice is added to this roll, as
in figs. 1 and 4, or takes its place, as in figs. 1, 3, 5, and 6; and in
such richer examples the facestone, and often the soffit, are
sculptured, the sculpture being cut into their surfaces, as indicated in
fig. 11. The concavities cut in the facestones of 1, 2, 4, 5, 6 are all
indicative of sculpture in effect like that of Fig. XXVI. Vol. II., of
which archivolt fig. 5, here, is the actual profile. The following are
the references to the whole:

             1. Rio-Foscari House.
             2. Terraced House, entrance door.
             3. Small Porticos of St. Mark's, external arches.
             4. Arch on the canal at Ponte St. Toma.
             5. Arch of Corte del Remer.
             6. Great outermost archivolt of central door, St. Mark's.
 PLATE VIII. 7. Inner archivolt of southern porch, St. Mark's Façade.
  Vol. III.  8. Inner archivolt of central entrance, St. Mark's.
             9. Fondaco de' Turchi, main arcade.
            10. Byzantine restored house on Grand Canal, lower arcade.
            11. Terraced House, upper arcade.
            12. Inner archivolt of northern porch of façade, St. Mark's.
            13 and 14. Transitional forms.

[Illustration: Plate IX.
               GOTHIC ARCHIVOLTS.]

There is little to be noted respecting these forms, except that, in fig.
1, the two lower rolls, with the angular projections between, represent
the fall of the mouldings of two proximate arches on the abacus of the
bearing shaft; their two cornices meeting each other, and being
gradually narrowed into the little angular intermediate piece, their
sculptures being slurred into the contracted space, a curious proof of
the earliness of the work. The real archivolt moulding is the same as
fig. 4 _c c_, including only the midmost of the three rolls in fig. 1.

It will be noticed that 2, 5, 6, and 8 are sculptured on the soffits as
well as the faces; 9 is the common profile of arches decorated only with
colored marble, the facestone being colored, the soffit white. The
effect of such a moulding is seen in the small windows at the right hand
of Fig. XXVI. Vol. II.

The reader will now see that there is but little difficulty in
identifying Byzantine work, the archivolt mouldings being so similar
among themselves, and so unlike any others. We have next to examine the
Gothic forms.

Figs. 13 and 14 in Plate VIII. represent the first brick mouldings of
the transitional period, occurring in such instances as Fig. XXIII. or
Fig. XXXIII. Vol. II. (the soffit stone of the Byzantine mouldings being
taken away), and this profile, translated into solid stone, forms the
almost universal moulding of the windows of the second order. These two
brick mouldings are repeated, for the sake of comparison, at the top of
Plate IX. opposite; and the upper range of mouldings which they
commence, in that plate, are the brick mouldings of Venice in the early
Gothic period. All the forms below are in stone; and the moulding 2,
translated into stone, forms the universal archivolt of the early
pointed arches of Venice, and windows of second and third orders. The
moulding 1 is much rarer, and used for the most part in doors only.

The reader will see at once the resemblance of character in the various
flat brick mouldings, 3 to 11. They belong to such arches as 1 and 2 in
Plate XVII. Vol. II.; or 6 _b_, 6 _c_, in Plate XIV. Vol. II., 7 and 8
being actually the mouldings of those two doors; the whole group being
perfectly defined, and separate from all the other Gothic work in
Venice, and clearly the result of an effort to imitate, in brickwork,
the effect of the flat sculptured archivolts of the Byzantine times.
(See Vol. II. Chap. VII. § XXXVII.)

Then comes the group 14 to 18 in stone, derived from the mouldings 1 and
2; first by truncation, 14; then by beading the truncated angle, 15, 16.
The occurrence of the profile 16 in the three beautiful windows
represented in the uppermost figure of Plate XVIII. Vol. I. renders that
group of peculiar interest, and is strong evidence of its antiquity.
Then a cavetto is added, 17; first shallow and then deeper, 18, which is
the common archivolt moulding of the central Gothic door and window:
but, in the windows of the early fourth order, this moulding is
complicated by various additions of dog-tooth mouldings under the
dentil, as in 20; or the _gabled_ dentil (see fig. 20, Plate IX. Vol.
I), as fig. 21; or both, as figs 23, 24. All these varieties expire in
the advanced period, and the established moulding for windows is 29. The
intermediate group, 25 to 28, I found only in the high windows of the
third order in the Ducal Palace, or in the Chapter-house of the Frari,
or in the arcades of the Ducal Palace; the great outside lower arcade of
the Ducal Palace has the profile 31, the left-hand side being the
innermost.

Now observe, all these archivolts, without exception, assume that the
spectator looks from the outside only: none are complete on both sides;
they are essentially _window_ mouldings, and have no resemblance to
those of our perfect Gothic arches prepared for traceries. If they were
all completely drawn in the plate, they should be as fig. 25, having a
great depth of wall behind the mouldings, but it was useless to
represent this in every case. The Ducal Palace begins to show mouldings
on both sides, 28, 31; and 35 is a _complete_ arch moulding from the
apse of the Frari. That moulding, though so perfectly developed, is
earlier than the Ducal Palace, and with other features of the building,
indicates the completeness of the Gothic system, which made the
architect of the Ducal Palace found his work principally upon that
church.

The other examples in this plate show the various modes of combination
employed in richer archivolts. The triple change of slope in 38 is very
curious. The references are as follows:

            1. Transitional to the second order.
            2. Common second order.
            3. Brick, at Corte del Forno, Round arch.
            4. Door at San Giovanni Grisostomo.
            5. Door at Sotto Portico della Stua.
            6. Door in Campo St. Luca, of rich brickwork.
            7. Round door at Fondamenta Venier.
            8. Pointed door. Fig. 6_c_, Plate XIV. Vol. II.
            9. Great pointed arch, Salizzada San Lio.
           10. Round door near Fondaco de' Turchi.
           11. Door with Lion, at Ponte della Corona.
           12. San Gregorio, Façade.
           13. St. John and Paul, Nave.
           14. Rare early fourth order, at San Cassan.
           15. General early Gothic archivolt.
           16. Same, from door in Rio San G. Grisostomo.
           17. Casa Vittura.
           18. Casa Sagredo, Unique thirds. Vol. II.
           19. Murano Palace, Unique fourths.[67]
 PLATE IX. 20. Pointed door of Four-Evangelist House.[68]
 Vol. III. 21. Keystone door in Campo St. M. Formosa.
           22. Rare fourths, at St. Pantaleon.
           23. Rare fourths, Casa Papadopoli.
           24. Rare fourths, Chess house.[69]
           25. Thirds of Frari Cloister.
           26. Great pointed arch of Frari Cloister.
           27. Unique thirds, Ducal Palace.
           28. Inner Cortile, pointed arches, Ducal Palace.
           29. Common fourth and fifth order Archivolt.
           30. Unique thirds, Ducal Palace.
           31. Ducal Palace, lower arcade.
           32. Casa Priuli, arches in the inner court.
           33. Circle above the central window, Ducal Palace.
           34. Murano apse.
           35. Acute-pointed arch, Frari.
           36. Door of Accademia delle belle Arti.
           37. Door in Calle Tiossi, near Four-Evangelist House.
           38. Door in Campo San Polo.
           39. Door of palace at Ponte Marcello.
           40. Door of a palace close to the Church of the Miracoli.


  _V. Cornices._

Plate X. represents, in one view, the cornices or string-courses of
Venice, and the abaci of its capitals, early and late; these two
features being inseparably connected, as explained in Vol. I.

The evidence given by these mouldings is exceedingly clear. The two
upper lines in the Plate, 1-11, 12-24, are all plinths from Byzantine
buildings. The reader will at once observe their unmistakable
resemblances. The row 41 to 50 are contemporary abaci of capitals; 52,
53, 54, 56, are examples of late Gothic abaci; and observe, especially,
these are all rounded at the _top_ of the cavetto, but the Byzantine
abaci are rounded, if at all, at the _bottom_ of the cavetto (see 7, 8,
9, 10, 20, 28, 46). Consider what a valuable test of date this is, in
any disputable building.

Again, compare 28, 29, one from St. Mark's, the other from the Ducal
Palace, and observe the close resemblance, giving farther evidence of
early date in the palace.

25 and 50 are drawn to the same scale. The former is the wall-cornice,
the latter the abacus of the great shafts, in the Casa Loredan; the one
passing into the other, as seen in Fig. XXVIII. Vol. I. It is curious to
watch the change in proportion, while the moulding, all but the lower
roll, remains the same.

[Illustration: Plate X.
               CORNICES AND ABACI.]

The following are the references:

            1. Common plinth of St. Mark's.
            2. Plinth above lily capitals, St. Mark's.
            3, 4. Plinths in early surface Gothic.
            5. Plinth of door in Campo St. Luca.
            6. Plinth of treasury door, St. Mark's.
            7. Archivolts of nave, St. Mark's.
            8. Archivolts of treasury door, St. Mark's.
            9. Moulding of circular window in St. John and Paul.
           10. Chief decorated narrow plinth, St. Mark's.
           11. Plinth of door, Campo St. Margherita.
           12. Plinth of tomb of Doge Vital Falier.
           13. Lower plinth, Fondaco de' Turchi, and Terraced House.
           14. Running plinth of Corte del Remer.
           15. Highest plinth at top of Fondaco de' Turchi.
           16. Common Byzantine plinth.
           17. Running plinth of Casa Falier.
           18. Plinth of arch at Ponte St. Toma.
           19, 20, 21. Plinths of tomb of Doge Vital Falier.
           22. Plinth of window in Calle del Pistor.
           23. Plinth of tomb of Dogaressa Vital Michele.
           24. Archivolt in the Frari.
           25. Running plinth, Casa Loredan.
           26. Running plinth, under pointed arch, in Salizzada San Lio.
           27. Running plinth, Casa Erizzo.
 PLATE X.  28. Circles in portico of St. Mark's.
 Vol. III. 29. Ducal Palace cornice, lower arcade.
           30. Ducal Palace cornice, upper arcade.
           31. Central Gothic plinth.
           32. Late Gothic plinth.
           33. Late Gothic plinth, Casa degli Ambasciatori.
           34. Late Gothic plinth, Palace near the Jesuiti.
           35, 36. Central balcony cornice.
           37. Plinth of St. Mark's balustrade.
           38. Cornice of the Frari, in brick, cabled.
           39. Central balcony plinth.
           40. Uppermost cornice, Ducal Palace.
           41. Abacus of lily capitals, St. Mark's.
           42. Abacus, Fondaco de' Turchi.
           43. Abacus, large capital of Terraced House.
           44. Abacus, Fondaco de' Turchi.
           45. Abacus, Ducal Palace, upper arcade.
           46. Abacus, Corte del Remer.
           47. Abacus, small pillars, St. Mark's pulpit.
           48. Abacus, Murano and Torcello.
           49. Abacus, Casa Farsetti.
           50. Abacus, Casa Loredan, lower story.
           51. Abacus, capitals of Frari.
           52. Abacus, Casa Cavalli (plain).
           53. Abacus, Casa Priuli (flowered).
           54. Abacus, Casa Foscari (plain).
           55. Abacus, Casa Priuli (flowered).
           56. Abacus, Plate II. fig. 15.
           57. Abacus, St. John and Paul.
           58. Abacus, St. Stefano.

It is only farther to be noted, that these mouldings are used in various
proportions, for all kinds of purposes: sometimes for true cornices;
sometimes for window-sills; sometimes, 3 and 4 (in the Gothic time)
especially, for dripstones of gables: 11 and such others form little
plinths or abaci at the spring of arches, such as those shown at _a_,
Fig. XXIII. Vol. II. Finally, a large number of superb Byzantine
cornices occur, of the form shown at the top of the arch in Plate V.
Vol. II., having a profile like 16 or 19 here; with nodding leaves of
acanthus thrown out from it, being, in fact, merely one range of the
leaves of a Byzantine capital unwrapped, and formed into a continuous
line. I had prepared a large mass of materials for the illustration of
these cornices, and the Gothic ones connected with them; but found the
subject would take up another volume, and was forced, for the present,
to abandon it. The lower series of profiles, 7 to 12 in Plate XV. Vol.
I, shows how the leaf-ornament is laid on the simple early cornices.


  _VI. Traceries._

We have only one subject more to examine, the character of the early and
late Tracery Bars.

The reader may perhaps have been surprised at the small attention given
to traceries in the course of the preceding volumes: but the reason is,
that there are no _complicated_ traceries at Venice belonging to the
good Gothic time, with the single exception of those of the Casa
Cicogna; and the magnificent arcades of the Ducal Palace Gothic are so
simple as to require little explanation.

There are, however, two curious circumstances in the later traceries;
the first, that they are universally considered by the builder (as the
old Byzantines considered sculptured surfaces of stone) as material out
of which a certain portion is _to be cut_, to fill his window. A fine
Northern Gothic tracery is a complete and systematic arrangement of
arches and foliation, _adjusted_ to the form of the window; but a
Venetian tracery is a piece of a larger composition, cut to the shape of
the window. In the Porta della Carta, in the Church of the Madonna
dell'Orto, in the Casa Bernardo on the Grand Canal, in the old Church of
the Misericordia, and wherever else there are rich traceries in Venice,
it will always be found that a certain arrangement of quatrefoils and
other figures has been planned as if it were to extend indefinitely into
miles of arcade; and out of this colossal piece of marble lace, a piece
in the shape of a window is cut, mercilessly and fearlessly: whatever
fragments and odd shapes of interstice, remnants of this or that figure
of the divided foliation, may occur at the edge of the window, it
matters not; all are cut across, and shut in by the great outer
archivolt.

It is very curious to find the Venetians treating what in other
countries became of so great individual importance, merely as a kind of
diaper ground, like that of their chequered colors on the walls. There
is great grandeur in the idea, though the system of their traceries was
spoilt by it: but they always treated their buildings as masses of color
rather than of line; and the great traceries of the Ducal Palace itself
are not spared any more than those of the minor palaces. They are cut
off at the flanks in the middle of the quatrefoils, and the terminal
mouldings take up part of the breadth of the poor half of a quatrefoil
at the extremity.

One other circumstance is notable also. In good Northern Gothic the
tracery bars are of a constant profile, the same on both sides; and if
the plan of the tracery leaves any interstices so small that there is
not room for the full profile of the tracery bar all round them, those
interstices are entirely closed, the tracery bars being supposed to have
met each other. But in Venice, if an interstice becomes anywhere
inconveniently small, the tracery bar is sacrificed; cut away, or in
some way altered in profile, in order to afford more room for the light,
especially in the early traceries, so that one side of a tracery bar is
often quite different from the other. For instance, in the bars 1 and 2,
Plate XI., from the Frari and St. John and Paul, the uppermost side is
towards a great opening, and there was room for the bevel or slope to
the cusp; but in the other side the opening was too small, and the bar
falls vertically to the cusp. In 5 the uppermost side is to the narrow
aperture, and the lower to the small one; and in fig. 9, from the Casa
Cicogna, the uppermost side is to the apertures of the tracery, the
lowermost to the arches beneath, the great roll following the design of
the tracery; while 13 and 14 are left without the roll at the base of
their cavettos on the uppermost sides, which are turned to narrow
apertures. The earliness of the Casa Cicogna tracery is seen in a moment
by its being moulded on the face only. It is in fact nothing more than a
series of quatrefoiled apertures in the solid wall of the house, with
mouldings on their faces, and magnificent arches of pure pointed fifth
order sustaining them below.

[Illustration: Plate XI.
               TRACERY BARS.]

The following are the references to the figures in the plate:

            1. Frari.
            2. Apse, St. John and Paul.
            3. Frari.
            4. Ducal Palace, inner court, upper window.
            5. Madonna dell'Orto.
            6. St. John and Paul.
            7. Casa Bernardo.
            8. Casa Contarini Fasan.
            9. Casa Cicogna.
           10. 11. Frari.
           12. Murano Palace (see note, p. 265).
 PLATE XI. 13. Misericordia.
 Vol. III. 14. Palace of the younger Foscari.[70]
           15. Casa d'Oro; great single windows.
           16. Hotel Danieli.
           17. Ducal Palace.
           18. Casa Erizzo, on Grand Canal.
           19. Main story, Casa Cavalli.
           20. Younger Foscari.
           21. Ducal Palace, traceried windows.
           22. Porta della Carta.
           23. Casa d'Oro.
           24. Casa d'Oro, upper story.
           25. Casa Facanon.
           26. Casa Cavalli, near Post-Office.

It will be seen at a glance that, except in the very early fillet
traceries of the Frari and St. John and Paul, Venetian work consists of
roll traceries of one general pattern. It will be seen also, that 10 and
11 from the Frari, furnish the first examples of the form afterwards
completely developed in 17, the tracery bar of the Ducal Palace; but
that this bar differs from them in greater strength and squareness, and
in adding a recess between its smaller roll and the cusp. Observe, that
this is done for strength chiefly; as, in the contemporary tracery (21)
of the upper windows, no such additional thickness is used.

Figure 17 is slightly inaccurate. The little curved recesses behind the
smaller roll are not equal on each side; that next the cusp is smallest,
being about 5/8 of an inch, while that next the cavetto is about 7/8; to
such an extent of subtlety did the old builders carry their love of
change.

The return of the cavetto in 21, 23, and 26, is comparatively rare, and
is generally a sign of later date.

[Illustration: Fig. II.]

[Illustration: Fig. III.]

The reader must observe that the great sturdiness of the form of the
bars, 5, 9, 17, 24, 25, is a consequence of the peculiar office of
Venetian traceries in supporting the mass of the building above, already
noticed in Vol. II.; and indeed the forms of the Venetian Gothic are,
in many other ways, influenced by the difficulty of obtaining stability
on sandy foundations. One thing is especially noticeable in all their
arrangements of traceries; namely, the endeavor to obtain equal and
horizontal pressure along the whole breadth of the building, not the
divided and local pressures of Northern Gothic. This object is
considerably aided by the structure of the balconies, which are of great
service in knitting the shafts together, forming complete tie-beams of
marble, as well as a kind of rivets, at their bases. For instance, at
_b_, Fig. II., is represented the masonry of the base of the upper
arcade of the Ducal Palace, showing the root of one of its main shafts,
with the binding balconies. The solid stones which form the foundation
are much broader than the balcony shafts, so that the socketed
arrangement is not seen: it is shown as it would appear in a
longitudinal section. The balconies are not let into the circular
shafts, but fitted to their circular curves, so as to grasp them, and
riveted with metal; and the bars of stone which form the tops of the
balconies are of great strength and depth, the small trefoiled arches
being cut out of them as in Fig. III., so as hardly to diminish their
binding power. In the lighter independent balconies they are often cut
deeper; but in all cases the bar of stone is nearly independent of the
small shafts placed beneath it, and would stand firm though these were
removed, as at _a_, Fig. II., supported either by the main shafts of
the traceries, or by its own small pilasters with semi-shafts at their
sides, of the plan _d_, Fig. II., in a continuous balcony, and _e_ at
the angle of one.

There is one more very curious circumstance illustrative of the Venetian
desire to obtain horizontal pressure. In all the Gothic staircases with
which I am acquainted, out of Venice, in which vertical shafts are used
to support an inclined line, those shafts are connected by arches rising
each above the other, with a little bracket above the capitals, on the
side where it is necessary to raise the arch; or else, though less
gracefully, with a longer curve to the lowest side of the arch.

But the Venetians seem to have had a morbid horror of arches which were
not _on a level_. They could not endure the appearance of the roof of
one arch bearing against the side of another; and rather than introduce
the idea of obliquity into bearing curves, they abandoned the arch
principle altogether; so that even in their richest Gothic staircases,
where trefoiled arches, exquisitely decorated, are used on the landings,
they ran the shafts on the sloping stair simply into the bar of stone
above them, and used the excessively ugly and valueless arrangement of
Fig. II., rather than sacrifice the sacred horizontality of their arch
system.

[Illustration: Fig. IV.]

It will be noted, in Plate XI., that the form and character of the
tracery bars themselves are independent of the position or projection of
the cusps on their flat sides. In this respect, also, Venetian traceries
are peculiar, the example 22 of the Porta della Carta being the only one
in the plate which is subordinated according to the Northern system. In
every other case the form of the aperture is determined, either by a
flat and solid cusp as in 6, or by a pierced cusp as in 4. The effect of
the pierced cusp is seen in the uppermost figure, Plate XVIII. Vol. II.;
and its derivation from the solid cusp will be understood, at once, from
the woodcut Fig. IV., which represents a series of the flanking stones
of any arch of the fifth order, such as _f_ in Plate III. Vol. I.

[Illustration: Fig. V.]

The first on the left shows the condition of cusp in a perfectly simple
and early Gothic arch, 2 and 3 are those of common arches of the fifth
order, 4 is the condition in more studied examples of the Gothic
advanced guard, and 5 connects them all with the system of traceries.
Introducing the common archivolt mouldings on the projecting edge of 2
and 3, we obtain the bold and deep fifth order window, used down to the
close of the fourteenth century or even later, and always grand in its
depth of cusp, and consequently of shadow; but the narrow cusp 4 occurs
also in very early work, and is piquant when set beneath a bold flat
archivolt, as in Fig. V., from the Corte del Forno at Santa Marina. The
pierced cusp gives a peculiar lightness and brilliancy to the window,
but is not so sublime. In the richer buildings the surface of the flat
and solid cusp is decorated with a shallow trefoil (see Plate VIII. Vol.
I.), or, when the cusp is small, with a triangular incision only, as
seen in figs. 7 and 8, Plate XI. The recesses on the sides of the other
cusps indicate their single or double lines of foliation. The cusp of
the Ducal Palace has a fillet only round its edge, and a ball of red
marble on its truncated point, and is perfect in its grand simplicity;
but in general the cusps of Venice are far inferior to those of Verona
and of the other cities of Italy, chiefly because there was always some
confusion in the mind of the designer between true cusps and the mere
bending inwards of the arch of the fourth order. The two series, 4 _a_
to 4 _e_, and 5 _a_ to 5 _e_, in Plate XIV. Vol. II., are arranged so as
to show this connexion, as well as the varieties of curvature in the
trefoiled arches of the fourth and fifth orders, which, though
apparently slight on so small a scale, are of enormous importance in
distant effect; a house in which the joints of the cusps project as much
as in 5 _c_, being quite piquant and grotesque when compared with one in
which the cusps are subdued to the form 5 _b_. 4 _d_ and 4 _e_ are
Veronese forms, wonderfully effective and spirited; the latter occurs at
Verona only, but the former at Venice also. 5 _d_ occurs in Venice, but
is very rare; and 5 _e_ I found only once, on the narrow canal close to
the entrance door of the Hotel Danieli. It was partly walled up, but I
obtained leave to take down the brickwork and lay open one side of the
arch, which may still be seen.

       *       *       *       *       *

The above particulars are enough to enable the reader to judge of the
distinctness of evidence which the details of Venetian architecture bear
to its dates. Farther explanation of the plates would be vainly tedious:
but the architect who uses these volumes in Venice will find them of
value, in enabling him instantly to class the mouldings which may
interest him; and for this reason I have given a larger number of
examples than would otherwise have been sufficient for my purpose.


FOOTNOTES:

  [58] "Olim _magistri_ prothi palatii nostri novi."--_Cadorin_, p. 127.

  [59] A print, dated 1585, barbarously inaccurate, as all prints were
    at that time, but still in some respects to be depended upon,
    represents all the windows on the façade full of traceries; and the
    circles above, between them, occupied by quatrefoils.

  [60] "Lata tanto, quantum est ambulum existens super columnis versus
    canale respicientibus."

  [61] Bettio, p. 28.

  [62] In the bombardment of Venice in 1848, hardly a single palace
    escaped without three or four balls through its roof: three came
    into the Scuola di San Rocco, tearing their way through the pictures
    of Tintoret, of which the ragged fragments were still hanging from
    the ceiling in 1851; and the shells had reached to within a hundred
    yards of St. Mark's Church itself, at the time of the capitulation.

  [63] A _Mohammedan_ youth is punished, I believe, for such
    misdemeanors, by being _kept away_ from prayers.

  [64] "Those Venetians are fishermen."

  [65] I am afraid that the kind friend, Lady Trevelyan, who helped me
    to finish this plate, will not like to be thanked here; but I cannot
    let her send into Devonshire for magnolias, and draw them for me,
    _without_ thanking her.

  [66] That is, the house in the parish of the Apostoli, on the Grand
    Canal, noticed in Vol. II.; and see also the Venetian Index, under
    head "Apostoli."

  [67] Close to the bridge over the main channel through Murano is a
    massive foursquare Gothic palace, containing some curious traceries,
    and many _unique_ transitional forms of window, among which these
    windows of the fourth order occur, with a roll within their dentil
    band.

  [68] Thus, for the sake of convenience, we may generally call the
    palace with the emblems of the Evangelists on its spandrils, Vol.
    II.

  [69] The house with chequers like a chess-board on its spandrils,
    given in my folio work.

  [70] The palace next the Casa Foscari, on the Grand Canal, sometimes
    said to have belonged to the son of the Doge.




INDICES.

   I. PERSONAL INDEX.  |  III. TOPICAL INDEX.
  II. LOCAL INDEX.     |   IV. VENETIAN INDEX.

The first of the following Indices contains the names of persons; the
second those of places (not in Venice) alluded to in the body of the
work. The third Index consists of references to the subjects touched
upon. In the fourth, called the Venetian Index, I have named every
building of importance in the city of Venice itself, or near it;
supplying, for the convenience of the traveller, short notices of those
to which I had no occasion to allude in the text of the work; and making
the whole as complete a guide as I could, with such added directions as
I should have given to any private friend visiting the city. As,
however, in many cases, the opinions I have expressed differ widely from
those usually received; and, in other instances, subjects which may be
of much interest to the traveller have not come within the scope of my
inquiry; the reader had better take Lazari's small Guide in his hand
also, as he will find in it both the information I have been unable to
furnish, and the expression of most of the received opinions upon any
subject of art.

Various inconsistencies will be noticed in the manner of indicating the
buildings, some being named in Italian, some in English, and some half
in one, and half in the other. But these inconsistencies are permitted
in order to save trouble, and make the Index more practically useful.
For instance, I believe the traveller will generally look for "Mark,"
rather than for "Marco," when he wishes to find the reference to St.
Mark's Church; but I think he will look for Rocco, rather than for Roch,
when he is seeking for the account of the Scuola di San Rocco. So also I
have altered the character in which the titles of the plates are
printed, from the black letter in the first volume, to the plain Roman
in the second and third; finding experimentally that the former
character was not easily legible, and conceiving that the book would be
none the worse for this practical illustration of its own principles, in
a daring sacrifice of symmetry to convenience.

These alphabetical Indices will, however, be of little use, unless
another, and a very different kind of Index, be arranged in the mind of
the reader; an Index explanatory of the principal purposes and contents
of the various parts of this essay. It is difficult to analyze the
nature of the reluctance with which either a writer or painter takes it
upon him to explain the meaning of his own work, even in cases where,
without such explanation, it must in a measure remain always disputable:
but I am persuaded that this reluctance is, in most instances, carried
too far; and that, wherever there really is a serious purpose in a book
or a picture, the author does wrong who, either in modesty or vanity
(both feelings have their share in producing the dislike of personal
interpretation), trusts entirely to the patience and intelligence of the
readers or spectators to penetrate into their significance. At all
events, I will, as far as possible, spare such trouble with respect to
these volumes, by stating here, finally and clearly, both what they
intend and what they contain; and this the rather because I have lately
noticed, with some surprise, certain reviewers announcing as a
discovery, what I thought had lain palpably on the surface of the book,
namely, that "if Mr. Ruskin be right, all the architects, and all the
architectural teaching of the last three hundred years, must have been
wrong." That is indeed precisely the fact; and the very thing I meant to
say, which indeed I thought I had said over and over again. I believe
the architects of the last three centuries to have been wrong; wrong
without exception; wrong totally, and from the foundation. This is
exactly the point I have been endeavoring to prove, from the beginning
of this work to the end of it. But as it seems not yet to have been
stated clearly enough, I will here try to put my entire theorem into an
unmistakable form.

The various nations who attained eminence in the arts before the time of
Christ, each of them, produced forms of architecture which in their
various degrees of merit were almost exactly indicative of the degrees
of intellectual and moral energy of the nations which originated them;
and each reached its greatest perfection at the time when the true
energy and prosperity of the people who had invented it were at their
culminating point. Many of these various styles of architecture were
good, considered in relation to the times and races which gave birth to
them; but none were absolutely good or perfect, or fitted for the
practice of all future time.

The advent of Christianity for the first time rendered possible the full
development of the soul of man, and therefore the full development of
the arts of man.

Christianity gave birth to a new architecture, not only immeasurably
superior to all that had preceded it, but demonstrably the best
architecture that _can_ exist; perfect in construction and decoration,
and fit for the practice of all time.

This architecture, commonly called "Gothic," though in conception
perfect, like the theory of a Christian character, never reached an
actual perfection, having been retarded and corrupted by various adverse
influences; but it reached its highest perfection, hitherto manifested,
about the close of the thirteenth century, being then indicative of a
peculiar energy in the Christian mind of Europe.

In the course of the fifteenth century, owing to various causes which I
have endeavored to trace in the preceding pages, the Christianity of
Europe was undermined; and a Pagan architecture was introduced, in
imitation of that of the Greeks and Romans.

The architecture of the Greeks and Romans themselves was not good, but
it was natural; and, as I said before, good in some respects, and for a
particular time.

But the imitative architecture introduced first in the fifteenth
century, and practised ever since, was neither good nor natural. It was
good in no respect, and for no time. All the architects who have built
in that style have built what was worthless; and therefore the greater
part of the architecture which has been built for the last three hundred
years, and which we are now building, is worthless. We must give up this
style totally, despise it and forget it, and build henceforward only in
that perfect and Christian style hitherto called Gothic, which is
everlastingly the best.

This is the theorem of these volumes.

In support of this theorem, the first volume contains, in its first
chapter, a sketch of the actual history of Christian architecture, up to
the period of the Reformation; and, in the subsequent chapters, an
analysis of the entire system of the laws of architectural construction
and decoration, deducing from those laws positive conclusions as to the
best forms and manners of building for all time.

The second volume contains, in its first five chapters, an account of
one of the most important and least known forms of Christian
architecture, as exhibited in Venice, together with an analysis of its
nature in the fourth chapter; and, which is a peculiarly important part
of this section, an account of the power of color over the human mind.

The sixth chapter of the second volume contains an analysis of the
nature of Gothic architecture, properly so called, and shows that in its
external form it complies precisely with the abstract laws of structure
and beauty, investigated in the first volume. The seventh and eighth
chapters of the second volume illustrate the nature of Gothic
architecture by various Venetian examples. The third volume
investigates, in its first chapter, the causes and manner of the
corruption of Gothic architecture; in its second chapter, defines the
nature of the Pagan architecture which superseded it; in the third
chapter, shows the connexion of that Pagan architecture with the various
characters of mind which brought about the destruction of the Venetian
nation; and, in the fourth chapter, points out the dangerous tendencies
in the modern mind which the practice of such an architecture indicates.

Such is the intention of the preceding pages, which I hope will no more
be doubted or mistaken. As far as regards the manner of its fulfilment,
though I hope, in the course of other inquiries, to add much to the
elucidation of the points in dispute, I cannot feel it necessary to
apologize for the imperfect handling of a subject which the labor of a
long life, had I been able to bestow it, must still have left
imperfectly treated.




I.

PERSONAL INDEX.


    A

  Alberti, Duccio degli, his tomb, iii. 74, 80.
  Alexander III., his defence by Venetians, i. 7.
  Ambrose, St., his verbal subtleties, ii. 320.
  Angelico, Frà, artistical power of, i. 400; his influence on
    Protestants, ii. 105; his coloring, ii. 145.
  Aristotle, his evil influence on the modern mind, ii. 319.
  Averulinus, his book on architecture, iii. 63.


    B

  Barbaro, monuments of the family, iii. 125.
  Barbarossa, Emperor, i. 7, 9.
  Baseggio, Pietro, iii. 199.
  Bellini, John, i. 11; his kindness to Albert Durer, i. 383; general
    power of, see Venetian Index, under head "Giovanni Grisostomo;"
    Gentile, his brother, iii. 21.
  Berti, Bellincion, ii. 263.
  Browning, Elizabeth B., her poetry, ii. 206.
  Bunsen, Chevalier, his work on Romanesque Churches, ii. 381.
  Bunyan, John, his portraiture of constancy, ii. 333; of patience, ii.
    334; of vanity, ii. 346; of sin, iii. 147.


    C

  Calendario, Filippo, iii. 199.
  Canaletto, i. 24; and see Venetian Index under head "Carità."
  Canova, i. 217; and see Venetian Index under head "Frari."
  Cappello, Vincenzo, his tomb, iii. 122.
  Caracci, school of the, i. 24.
  Cary, his translation of Dante, ii. 264.
  Cavalli, Jacopo, his tomb, iii. 82.
  Cicero, influence of his philosophy, ii. 317, 318.
  Claude Lorraine, i. 24.
  Comnenus, Manuel, ii. 263.
  Cornaro, Marco, his tomb, iii. 79.
  Correggio, ii. 192.
  Crabbe, naturalism in his poetry, ii. 195.


    D

  Dandolo, Andrea, tomb of, ii. 70; Francesco, tomb of, iii. 74;
    character of, iii. 76; Simon, tomb of, iii. 79.
  Dante, his central position, ii. 340, iii. 158; his system of virtue,
    ii. 323; his portraiture of sin, iii. 147.
  Daru, his character as a historian, iii. 213.
  Dolci, Carlo, ii. 105.
  Dolfino, Giovanni, tomb of, iii. 78.
  Durer, Albert, his rank as a landscape painter, i. 383; his power in
    grotesque, iii. 145.


    E

  Edwin, King, his conversion, iii. 62.


    F

  Faliero, Bertuccio, his tomb, iii. 94; Marino, his house, ii. 254;
    Vitale, miracle in his time, ii. 61.
  Fergusson, James, his system of beauty, i. 388.
  Foscari, Francesco, his reign, i. 4, iii. 165; his tomb, iii. 84; his
    countenance, iii. 86.


    G

  Garbett, answer to Mr., i. 403.
  Ghiberti, his sculpture, i. 217.
  Giotto, his system of the virtues, ii. 323, 329, 341; his rank as a
    painter, ii. 188, iii. 172.
  Giulio Romano, i. 23.
  Giustiniani, Marco, his tomb, i. 315; Sebastian, ambassador to
    England, iii. 224.
  Godfrey of Bouillon, his piety, iii. 62.
  Gozzoli, Benozzo, ii. 195.
  Gradenigo, Pietro, ii. 290.
  Grande, Can, della Scala, his tomb, i. 268 (the cornice _g_ in Plate
    XVI. is taken from it), iii. 71.
  Guariento, his Paradise, ii. 296.
  Guercino, ii. 105.


    H

  Hamilton, Colonel, his paper on the Serapeum, ii. 220.
  Hobbima, iii. 184.
  Hunt, William, his painting of peasant boys, ii. 192; of still life,
    ii. 394.
  Hunt, William Holman, relation of his works to modern and ancient
    art, iii. 185.


    K

  Knight, Gally, his work on Architecture, i. 378.


    L

  Leonardo da Vinci, ii. 171.
  Louis XI., iii. 194.


    M

  Martin, John, ii. 104.
  Mastino, Can, della Scala, his tomb, ii. 224, iii. 72.
  Maynard, Miss, her poems, ii. 397.
  Michael Angelo, ii. 134, 188, iii. 56, 90, 99, 158.
  Millais, John E., relation of his works to older art, iii. 185;
    aerial perspective in his "Huguenot," iii. 47.
  Milton, how inferior to Dante, iii. 147.
  Mocenigo, Tomaso, his character, i. 4; his speech on rebuilding the
    Ducal Palace, ii. 299; his tomb, i. 26, iii. 84.
  Morosini, Carlo, Count, note on Daru's History by, iii. 213.
  Morosini, Marino, his tomb, iii. 93.
  Morosini, Michael, his character, iii. 213;
     his tomb, iii. 80.
  Murillo, his sensualism, ii. 192.


    N

  Napoleon, his genius in civil administration, i. 399.
  Niccolo Pisano, i. 215.


    O

  Orcagna, his system of the virtues, ii. 329.
  Orseolo, Pietro (Doge), iii. 120.
  Otho the Great, his vow at Murano, ii. 32.


    P

  Palladio, i. 24, 146; and see Venetian Index, under head "Giorgio
    Maggiore."
  Participazio, Angelo, founds the Ducal Palace, ii. 287.
  Pesaro, Giovanni, tomb of, iii. 92; Jacopo, tomb of, iii. 91.
  Philippe de Commynes, i. 12.
  Plato, influence of his philosophy, ii. 317, 338; his playfulness,
    iii. 127.
  Poussin, Nicolo and Gaspar, i. 23.
  Procaccini, Camillo, ii. 188.
  Prout, Samuel, his style, i. 250, iii. 19, 134.
  Pugin, Welby, his rank as an architect, i. 385.


    Q

  Querini, Marco, his palace, ii. 255.


    R

  Raffaelle, ii. 188, iii. 56, 108, 136.
  Reynolds, Sir J., his painting at New College, ii. 323; his general
    manner, iii. 184.
  Rogers, Samuel, his works, ii. 195, iii. 113.
  Rubens, intellectual rank of, i. 400;
     coarseness of, ii. 145.


    S

  Salvator Rosa, i. 24, ii. 105, 145, 188.
  Scaligeri, tombs of, at Verona; see "Grande," "Mastino," "Signorio;"
    palace of, ii. 257.
  Scott, Sir W., his feelings of romance, iii. 191.
  Shakspeare, his "Seven Ages," whence derived, ii. 361.
  Sharpe, Edmund, his works, i. 342, 408.
  Signorio, Can, della Scala, his tomb, character, i. 268, iii. 73.
  Simplicius, St., ii. 356.
  Spenser, value of his philosophy, ii. 327, 341; his personifications
    of the months, ii. 272; his system of the virtues, ii. 326; scheme of
    the first book of the Faërie Queen, iii. 205.
  Steno, Michael, ii. 306; his tomb, ii. 296.
  Stothard (the painter), his works, ii. 187, 195.
  Symmachus, St., ii. 357.


    T

  Teniers, David, ii. 188.
  Tiepolo, Jacopo and Lorenzo, their tombs, iii. 69; Bajamonte, ii.
    255.
  Tintoret, i. 12; his genius and function, ii. 149; his Paradise, ii.
    304, 372; his rank among the men of Italy, iii. 158.
  Titian, i. 12; his function and fall, ii. 149, 187.
  Turner, his rank as a landscape painter, i. 382, ii. 187.


    U

  Uguccione, Benedetto, destroys Giotto's façade at Florence, i. 197.


    V

  Vendramin, Andrea (Doge), his tomb, i. 27, iii. 88.
  Verocchio, Andrea, iii. 11, 13.
  Veronese, Paul, artistical rank of, i. 400; his designs of
    balustrades, ii. 247; and see in Venetian Index, "Ducal Palace,"
    "Pisani," "Sebastian," "Redentore," "Accademia."


    W

  West, Benjamin, ii. 104.
  Wordsworth, his observation of nature, i. 247 (note).


    Z

  Zeno, Carlo, i. 4, iii. 80.
  Ziani, Sebastian (Doge), builds Ducal Palace, ii. 289.




II.

LOCAL INDEX.


    A

  Abbeville, door of church at, ii. 225; parapet at, ii. 245.
  Alexandria, Church at, i. 381.
  Alhambra, ornamentation of, i. 429.
  Alps, how formed for distant effect, i. 247; how seen from Venice,
    ii. 2, 28.
  Amiens, pillars of Cathedral at, i. 102.
  Arqua, hills of, how seen from Venice, ii. 2.
  Assisi, Giotto's paintings at, ii. 323.


    B

  Beauvais, piers of Cathedral at, i. 93; grandeur of its buttress
    structure, i. 170.
  Bergamo, Duomo at, i. 275.
  Bologna, Palazzo Pepoli at, i. 275.
  Bourges, Cathedral at, i. 43, 102, 228, 271, 299; ii. 92, 186; house
    of Jacques Coeur at, i. 346.


    C

  Chamouni, glacier forms at, i. 222.
  Como, Broletto of, i. 141, 339.


    D

  Dijon, pillars in Church of Notre Dame at, i. 102; tombs of Dukes of
    Burgundy, iii. 68.


    E

  Edinburgh, college at, i. 207.


    F

  Falaise (St. Gervaise at), piers of, i. 103.
  Florence, Cathedral of, i. 197, iii. 13.


    G

  Gloucester, Cathedral of, i. 192.


    L

  Lombardy, geology of, ii. 5.
  London, Church in Margaret Street, Portland Place, iii. 196; Temple
    Church, i. 412; capitals in Belgrave and Grosvenor Squares, i. 330;
    Bank of England, base of, i. 283; wall of, typical of accounts, i.
    295; statue in King William Street, i. 210; shops in Oxford Street,
    i. 202; Arthur Club-house, i. 295; Athenæum Club-house, i. 157, 283;
    Duke of York's Pillar, i. 283; Treasury, i. 205; Whitehall, i. 205;
    Westminster, fall of houses at, ii. 268; Monument, i. 82, 283; Nelson
    Pillar, i. 216; Wellington Statue, i. 257.
  Lucca, Cathedral of, ii. 275; San Michele at, i. 375.
  Lyons, porch of cathedral at, i. 379.


    M

  Matterhorn (Mont Cervin), structure of, i. 58; lines of, applied to
    architecture, i. 308, 310, 332.
  Mestre, scene in street of, i. 355.
  Milan, St. Ambrogio, piers of, i. 102; capital of, i. 324; St.
    Eustachio, tomb of St. Peter Martyr, i. 218.
  Moulins, brickwork at, i. 296.
  Murano, general aspect of, ii. 29; Duomo of, ii. 32; balustrades of,
    ii. 247; inscriptions at, ii. 384.


    N

  Nineveh, style of its decorations, i. 234, 239; iii. 159.


    O

  Orange (South France), arch at, i. 250.
  Orleans, Cathedral of, i. 95.


    P

  Padua, Arena chapel at, ii. 324; St. Antonio at, i. 135; St. Sofia
    at, i. 327; Eremitani, Church of, at, i. 135.
  Paris, Hotel des Invalides, i. 214; Arc de l'Etoile, i. 291; Colonne
    Vendome, i. 212.
  Pavia, St. Michele at, piers of, i. 102, 337; ornaments of, i. 376.
  Pisa, Baptistery of, ii. 275.
  Pistoja, San Pietro at, i. 295.


    R

  Ravenna, situation of, ii. 6.
  Rouen, Cathedral, piers of, i. 103, 153; pinnacles of, ii. 213; St.
    Maclou at, sculptures of, ii. 197.


    S

  Salisbury Cathedral, piers of, i. 102; windows at, ii. 224.
  Sens, Cathedral of, i. 135.
  Switzerland, cottage architecture of, i. 156, 203, iii. 133.


    V

  Verona, San Fermo at, i. 136, ii. 259; Sta. Anastasia at, i. 142;
    Duomo of, i. 373; St. Zeno at, i. 373; balconies at, ii. 247;
    archivolt at, i. 335; tombs at, see in Personal Index, "Grande,"
    "Mastino," "Signorio."
  Vevay, architecture of, i. 136.
  Vienne (South France), Cathedral of, i. 274.


    W

  Warwick, Guy's tower at, i. 168.
  Wenlock (Shropshire), Abbey of, i. 270.
  Winchester, Cathedral of, i. 192.


    Y

  York, Minster of, i. 205, 313.




III.

TOPICAL INDEX.


    A

  Abacus, defined, i. 107; law of its proportion, i. 111-115; its
    connection with cornices, i. 116; its various profiles, i. 319-323;
    iii. 243-248.
  Acanthus, leaf of, its use in architecture, i. 233; how treated at
    Torcello, ii. 15.
  Alabaster, use of, in incrustation, ii. 86.
  Anachronism, necessity of, in the best art, ii. 198.
  Anatomy, a disadvantageous study for artists, iii. 47.
  Angels, use of their images in Venetian heraldry, ii. 278; statues
    of, on the Ducal Palace, ii. 311.
  Anger, how symbolically represented, ii. 344.
  Angles, decoration of, i. 260; ii. 305; of Gothic Palaces, ii. 238;
    of Ducal Palace, ii. 307.
  Animal character in northern and southern climates, ii. 156; in
    grotesque art, iii. 149.
  Apertures, analysis of their structure, i. 50; general forms of, i.
    174.
  Apse, forms of, in southern and northern churches compared, i. 170.
  Arabesques of Raffaelle, their baseness, iii. 136.
  Arabian architecture, i. 18, 234, 235, 429; ii. 135.
  Arches, general structure of, i. 122; moral characters of, i. 126;
    lancet, round, and depressed, i. 129; four-centred, i. 130; ogee, i.
    131; non-concentric, i. 133, 341; masonry of, i. 133, ii. 218; load
    of, i. 144; are not derived from vegetation, ii. 201.
  Architects, modern, their unfortunate position, i. 404, 407.
  Architecture, general view of its divisions, i. 47-51; how to judge
    of it, ii. 173; adaptation of, to requirements of human mind, iii.
    192; richness of early domestic, ii. 100, iii. 2; manner of its
    debasement in general, iii. 3.
  Archivolts, decoration of, i. 334; general families of, i. 335; of
    Murano, ii. 49; of St. Mark's, ii. 95; in London, ii. 97; Byzantine,
    ii. 138; profiles of, iii. 244.
  Arts, relative dignity of, i. 395; how represented in Venetian
    sculpture, ii. 355; what relation exists between them and their
    materials, ii. 394; art divided into the art of facts, of design, and
    of both, ii. 183; into purist, naturalist, and sensualist, ii. 187;
    art opposed to inspiration, iii. 151; defined, iii. 170;
    distinguished from science, iii. 35; how to enjoy that of the
    ancients, iii. 188.
  Aspiration, not the primal motive of Gothic work, i. 151.
  Astrology, judicial, representation of its doctrines in Venetian
    sculpture, ii. 352.
  Austrian government in Italy, iii. 209.
  Avarice, how represented figuratively, ii. 344.


    B

  Backgrounds, diapered, iii. 20.
  Balconies, of Venice, ii. 243; general treatment of, iii. 254; of
    iron, ii. 247.
  Ballflower, its use in ornamentation, i. 279.
  Balustrades. See "Balconies."
  Bases, general account of, iii. 225; of walls, i. 55; of piers, i.
    73; of shafts, i. 84; decoration of, i. 281; faults of Gothic
    profiles of, i. 285; spurs of, i. 286; beauty of, in St. Mark's, i.
    290; Lombardie, i. 292; ought not to be richly decorated, i. 292;
    general effect of, ii. 387.
  Battlements, i. 162; abuse of, in ornamentation, i. 219.
  Beauty and ornament, relation of the terms, i. 404.
  Bellstones of capitals defined, i. 108.
  Birds, use of in ornamentation, i. 234, ii. 140.
  Bishops, their ancient authority, ii. 25.
  Body, its relation to the soul, i. 41, 395.
  Brackets, division of, i. 161; ridiculous forms of, i. 161.
  Breadth in Byzantine design, ii. 133.
  Brickwork, ornamental, i. 296; in general, ii. 241, 260, 261.
  Brides of Venice, legend of the, iii. 113, 116.
  Buttresses, general structure of, i. 166; flying, i. 192; supposed
    sanctity of, i. 173.
  Bull, symbolical use of, in representing rivers, i. 418, 421, 424.
  Byzantine style, analysis of, ii. 75; ecclesiastical fitness of, ii.
    97; centralization in, ii. 236; palaces built in, ii. 118; sculptures
    in, ii. 137, 140.


    C

  Candlemas, ancient symbols of, ii. 272.
  Capitals, general structure of, i. 105; bells of, i. 107; just
    proportions of, i. 114; various families of, i. 13, 65, 324, ii. 129,
    iii. 231; are necessary to shafts in good architecture, i. 119;
    Byzantine, ii. 131, iii. 231; Lily, of St. Mark's, ii. 137; of
    Solomon's temple, ii. 137.
  Care, how symbolized, ii. 348. See "Sorrow."
  Caryatides, i. 302.
  Castles, English, entrances of, i. 177.
  Cathedrals, English, effect of, ii. 63.
  Ceilings, old Venetian, ii. 280.
  Centralization in design, ii. 237.
  Chalet of Switzerland, its character, i. 203.
  Chamfer defined, i. 263; varieties of, i. 262, 429.
  Changefulness, an element of Gothic, ii. 172.
  Charity, how symbolized, ii. 327, 339.
  Chartreuse, Grande, morbid life in, iii. 190.
  Chastity, how symbolized, ii. 328.
  Cheerfulness, how symbolized, ii. 326, 348; virtue of, ii. 326.
  Cherries, cultivation of, at Venice, ii. 361.
  Christianity, how mingled with worldliness, iii. 109; how imperfectly
    understood, iii. 168; influence of, in liberating workmen, ii. 159,
    i. 243; influence of, on forms, i. 99.
  Churches, wooden, of the North, i. 381; considered as ships, ii. 25;
    decoration of, how far allowable, ii. 102.
  Civilization, progress of, iii. 168; twofold danger of, iii. 169.
  Classical literature, its effect on the modern mind, iii. 12.
  Climate, its influence on architecture, i. 151, ii. 155, 203.
  Color, its importance in early work, ii. 38, 40, 78, 91; its
    spirituality, ii. 145, 396; its relation to music, iii. 186;
    quartering of, iii. 20; how excusing realization, iii. 186.
  Commerce, how regarded by Venetians, i. 6.
  Composition, definition of the term, ii. 182.
  Constancy, how symbolized, ii. 333.
  Construction, architectural, how admirable, i. 36.
  Convenience, how consulted by Gothic architecture, ii. 179.
  Cornices, general divisions of, i. 63, iii. 248; of walls, i. 60; of
    roofs, i. 149; ornamentation of, i. 305; curvatures of, i. 310;
    military, i. 160; Greek, i. 157.
  Courses in walls, i. 60.
  Crockets, their use in ornamentation, i. 346; their abuse at Venice,
    iii. 109.
  Crosses, Byzantine, ii. 139.
  Crusaders, character of the, ii. 263.
  Crystals, architectural appliance of, i. 225.
  Cupid, representation of, in early and later art, ii. 342.
  Curvature, on what its beauty depends, i. 222, iii. 5.
  Cusps, definition of, i. 135; groups of, i. 138; relation of, to
    vegetation, ii. 219; general treatment of, iii. 255; earliest
    occurrence of, ii. 220.


    D

  Daguerreotype, probable results of, iii. 169.
  Darkness, a character of early churches, ii. 18; not an abstract
    evil, iii. 220.
  Death, fear of, in Renaissance times, iii. 65, 90, 92; how anciently
    regarded, iii. 139, 156.
  Decoration, true nature of, i. 405; how to judge of, i. 44, 45. See
    "Ornament."
  Demons, nature of, how illustrated by Milton and Dante, iii. 147.
  Dentil, Venetian, defined, i. 273, 275.
  Design, definition of the term, ii. 183; its relations to naturalism,
    ii. 184.
  Despair, how symbolized, ii. 334.
  Diaper patterns in brick, i. 296; in color, iii. 21, 22.
  Discord, how symbolized, ii. 333.
  Discs, decoration by means of, i. 240, 416; ii. 147, 264.
  Division of labor, evils of, ii. 165.
  Doge of Venice, his power, i. 3, 360.
  Dogtooth moulding defined, i. 269.
  Dolphins, moral disposition of, i. 230; use of, in symbolic
    representation of sea, i. 422, 423.
  Domestic architecture, richness of, in middle ages, ii. 99.
  Doors, general structure of, i. 174, 176; smallness of in English
    cathedrals, i. 176; ancient Venetian, ii. 277, iii. 227.
  Doric architecture, i. 157, 301, 307; Christian Doric, i. 308, 315.
  Dragon, conquered by St. Donatus, ii. 33; use of, in ornamentation,
    ii. 219.
  Dreams, how resembled by the highest arts, iii. 153; prophetic, in
    relation to the Grotesque, iii. 156.
  Dress, its use in ornamentation, i. 212; early Venetian, ii. 383;
    dignity of, iii. 191; changes in modern dress, iii. 192.
  Duties of buildings, i. 47.


    E

  Earthquake of 1511, ii. 242.
  Eastern races, their power over color, ii. 147.
  Eaves, construction of, i. 156.
  Ecclesiastical architecture in Venice, i. 20; no architecture
    exclusively ecclesiastical, ii. 99.
  Edge decoration, i. 268.
  Education, University, i. 391; iii. 110; evils of, with respect to
    architectural workmen, ii. 107; how to be successfully undertaken,
    ii. 165, 214; modern education in general, how mistaken, iii. 110,
    234; system of, in Plato, ii. 318; of Persian kings, ii. 318; not to
    be mistaken for erudition, iii. 219; ought to be universal, iii. 220.
  Egg and arrow mouldings, i. 314.
  Egyptian architecture, i. 99, 239; ii. 203.
  Elgin marbles, ii. 171.
  Encrusted architecture, i. 271, 272; general analysis of, ii. 76.
  Energy of Northern Gothic, i. 371; ii. 16, 204.
  English (early) capitals, faults of, i. 100, 411; English mind, its
    mistaken demands of perfection, ii. 160.
  Envy, how set forth, ii. 346.
  Evangelists, types of, how explicable, iii. 155.


    F

  Faërie Queen, Spenser's, value of, theologically, ii. 328.
  Faith, influence of on art, ii. 104, 105; Titian's picture of, i. 11;
    how symbolized, ii. 337.
  Falsehood, how symbolized, ii. 349.
  Fatalism, how expressed in Eastern architecture, ii. 205.
  Fear, effect of, on human life, iii. 137; on Grotesque art, iii. 142.
  Feudalism, healthy effects of, i. 184.
  Fig-tree, sculpture of, on Ducal Palace, ii. 307.
  Fillet, use of, in ornamentation, i. 267.
  Finials, their use in ornamentation, i. 346; a sign of decline in
    Venetian architecture, iii. 109.
  Finish in workmanship, when to be required, ii. 165; dangers of, iii.
    170, ii. 162.
  Fir, spruce, influence of, on architecture, i. 152.
  Fire, forms of, in ornamentation, i. 228.
  Fish, use of, in ornamentation, i. 229.
  Flamboyant Gothic, i. 278, ii. 225.
  Flattery, common in Renaissance times, iii. 64.
  Flowers, representation of, how desirable, i. 340; how represented in
    mosaic, iii. 179.
  Fluting of columns, a mistake, i. 301.
  Foils, definition of, ii. 221.
  Foliage, how carved in declining periods, iii. 8, 17. See "Vegetation."
  Foliation defined, ii. 219; essential to Gothic architecture, ii. 222.
  Folly, how symbolized, ii. 325, 348.
  Form of Gothic, defined, ii. 209.
  Fortitude, how symbolized, ii. 337.
  Fountains, symbolic representations of, i. 427.
  French architecture, compared with Italian, ii. 226.
  Frivolity, how exhibited in Grotesque art, iii. 143.
  Fruit, its use in ornamentation, i. 232.


    G

  Gable, general structure of, i. 124; essential to Gothic, ii. 210, 217.
  Gardens, Italian, iii. 136.
  Generalization, abuses of, iii. 176.
  Geology of Lombardy, ii. 5.
  Glass, its capacities in architecture, i. 409; manufacture of, ii.
    166; true principles of working in, ii. 168, 395.
  Gluttony, how symbolized, ii. 343.
  Goldsmiths' work, a high form of art, ii. 166.
  Gondola, management of, ii. 375.
  Gothic architecture, analysis of, ii. 151; not derived from vegetable
    structure, i. 121; convenience of, ii. 178; divisions of, ii. 215;
    surface and linear, ii. 226; Italian and French, ii. 226; flamboyant,
    i. 278, ii. 225; perpendicular, i. 192, ii. 223, 227; early English,
    i. 109; how to judge of it, ii. 228; how fitted for domestic
    purposes, ii. 269, iii. 195; how first corrupted, iii. 3; how to be
    at present built, iii. 196; early Venetian, ii. 248; ecclesiastical
    Venetian, i. 21; central Venetian, ii. 231; how adorned by color in
    Venice, iii. 23.
  Government of Venice, i. 2, ii. 366.
  Grammar, results of too great study of it, iii. 55, 106.
  Greek architecture, general character of, i. 240, ii. 215, iii. 159.
  Grief. See "Sorrow."
  Griffins, Lombardic, i. 292, 387.
  Grotesque, analysis of, iii. 132; in changes of form, i. 317; in
    Venetian painting, iii. 162; symbolical, iii. 155; its character in
    Renaissance work, iii. 113, 121, 136, 143.
  Gutters of roofs, i. 151.


    H

  Heathenism, typified in ornament, i. 317. See "Paganism."
  Heaven and Hell, proofs of their existence in natural phenomena, iii.
    138.
  History, how to be written and read, iii. 224.
  Hobbima, iii. 184.
  Honesty, how symbolized, ii. 349.
  Hope, how symbolized, ii. 341.
  Horseshoe arches, i. 129, ii. 249, 250.
  Humanity, spiritual nature of, i. 41; divisions of, with respect to
    art, i. 394.
  Humility, how symbolized, ii. 339.


    I

  Idleness, how symbolized, ii. 345.
  Idolatry, proper sense of the term, ii. 388; is no encourager of art,
    ii. 110. See "Popery."
  Imagination, its relation to art, iii. 182.
  Imitation of precious stones, &c., how reprehensible, iii. 26, 30.
  Imposts, continuous, i. 120.
  Infidelity, how symbolized, ii. 335; an element of the Renaissance
    spirit, iii. 100.
  Injustice, how symbolized, ii. 349.
  Inlaid ornamentation, i. 369; perfection of, in early Renaissance,
    iii. 26.
  Inscriptions at Murano, ii. 47, 54; use of, in early times, ii. 111.
  Insects, use of, in ornamentation, i. 230.
  Inspiration, how opposed to art, iii. 151, 171.
  Instinct, its dignity, iii. 171.
  Intellect, how variable in dignity, iii. 173.
  Involution, delightfulness of, in ornament, ii. 136.
  Iron, its use in architecture, i. 184, 410.
  Italians, modern character of, iii. 209.
  Italy, how ravaged by recent war, iii. 209.


    J

  Jambs, Gothic, iii. 137.
  Jesting, evils of, iii. 129.
  Jesuits, their restricted power in Venice, i. 366.
  Jewels, their cutting, a bad employment, ii. 166.
  Judgments, instinctive, i. 399.
  Job, book of, its purpose, iii. 53.


    K

  Keystones, how mismanaged in Renaissance work. See Venetian Index,
    under head "Libreria."
  Knowledge, its evil consequences, iii. 40; how to be received, iii.
    50, &c. See "Education."


    L

  Labor, manual, ornamental value of, i. 407; evils of its division,
    ii. 165; is not a degradation, ii. 168.
  Labyrinth, in Venetian streets, its clue, ii. 254.
  Lagoons, Venetian, nature of, ii. 7, 8.
  Landscape, lower schools of, i. 24; Venetian, ii. 149; modern love
    of, ii. 175, iii. 123.
  Laws of right in architecture, i. 32; laws in general, how
    permissibly violated, i. 255, ii. 210; their position with respect to
    art, iii. 96; and to religion, iii. 205.
  Leaves, use of, in ornamentation, i. 232 (see "Vegetation");
    proportion of, ii. 128.
  Liberality, how symbolized, ii. 333.
  Life in Byzantine architecture, ii. 133.
  Lilies, beautiful proportions of, ii. 128; used for parapet
    ornaments, ii. 242; lily capitals, ii. 137.
  Limitation of ornament, i. 254.
  Lines, abstract use of, in ornament, i. 221.
  Lintel, its structure, i. 124, 126.
  Lion, on piazzetta shafts, iii. 238.
  Load, of arches, i. 133.
  Logic, a contemptible science, iii. 105.
  Lombardic architecture, i. 17.
  Lotus leaf, its use in architecture, i. 233.
  Love, its power over human life, iii. 137.
  Lusts, their power over human nature, how symbolized by Spenser, ii.
    328.
  Luxury, how symbolized, ii. 342; how traceable in ornament, iii. 4;
    of Renaissance schools, iii. 61.


    M

  Madonna, Byzantine representations of, ii. 53.
  Magnitude, vulgar admiration of, iii. 64.
  Malmsey, use of, in Feast of the Maries, iii. 117.
  Marble, its uses, iii. 27.
  Maries, Feast of the, iii. 117.
  Mariolatry, ancient and modern, ii. 55.
  Marriages of Venetians, iii. 116.
  Masonry, Mont-Cenisian, i. 132; of walls, i. 61; of arches, i. 133.
  Materials, invention of new, how injurious to art, iii. 42.
  Misery, how symbolized, ii. 347.
  Modesty, how symbolized, ii. 335.
  Monotony, its place in art, ii. 176.
  Months, personifications of, in ancient art, ii. 272.
  Moroseness, its guilt, iii. 130.
  Mosaics at Torcello, ii. 18, 19; at St. Mark's, ii. 70, 112; early
    character of, ii. 110, iii. 175, 178.
  Music, its relation to color, iii. 186.
  Mythology of Venetian painters, ii. 150; ancient, how injurious to
    the Christian mind, iii. 107.


    N

  Natural history, how necessary a study, iii. 54.
  Naturalism, general analysis of it with respect to art, ii. 181, 190;
    its advance in Gothic art, iii. 6; not to be found in the encrusted
    style, ii. 89; its presence in the noble Grotesque, iii. 144.
  Nature (in the sense of material universe) not improvable by art, i.
    350; its relation to architecture, i. 351.
  Niches, use of, in Northern Gothic, i. 278; in Venetian, ii. 240; in
    French and Veronese, ii. 227.
  Norman hatchet-work, i. 297; zigzag, i. 339.
  Novelty, its necessity to the human mind, ii. 176.


    O

  Oak-tree, how represented in symbolical art, iii. 185.
  Obedience, how symbolized, ii. 334.
  Oligarchical government, its effect on the Venetians, i. 5.
  Olive-tree, neglect of, by artists, iii. 175; general expression of,
    iii. 176, 177; representations of, in mosaic, iii. 178.
  Order, uses and disadvantages of, ii. 172.
  Orders, Doric and Corinthian, i. 13; ridiculous divisions of, i. 157,
    370; ii. 173, 249; iii. 99.
  Ornament, material of, i. 211; the best, expresses man's delight in
    God's work, i. 220; not in his own, i. 211; general treatment of, i.
    236; is necessarily imperfect, i. 237, 240; divided into servile,
    subordinate, and insubordinate, i. 242, ii. 158; distant effect of,
    i. 248; arborescent, i. 252; restrained within limits, i. 255; cannot
    be overcharged if good, i. 406.
  Oxford, system of education at, i. 391.


    P

  Paganism, revival of its power in modern times, iii. 105, 107, 122.
  Painters, their power of perception, iii. 37; influence of society
    on, iii. 41; what they should know, iii. 41; what is their business,
    iii. 187.
  Palace, the Crystal, merits of, i. 409.
  Palaces, Byzantine, ii. 118, 391; Gothic, ii. 231.
  Papacy. See "Popery."
  Parapets, i. 162, ii. 240.
  Parthenon, curves of, ii. 127.
  Patience, how symbolized, ii. 334.
  Pavements, ii. 52.
  Peacocks, sculpture of, i. 240.
  Pedestals of shafts, i. 82; and see Venetian Index under head
    "Giorgio Maggiore."
  Perception opposed to knowledge, iii. 37.
  Perfection, inordinate desire of, destructive of art, i. 237; ii.
    133, 158, 169.
  Perpendicular style, i. 190, 253; ii. 223, 227.
  Personification, evils of, ii. 322.
  Perspective, aerial, ridiculous exaggerations of, iii. 45; ancient
    pride in, iii. 57; absence of, in many great works, see in Venetian
    Index the notice of Tintoret's picture of the Pool of Bethesda, under
    head "Rocco."
  Phariseeism and Liberalism, how opposed, iii. 97.
  Philology, a base science, iii. 54.
  Piazzetta at Venice, plan of, ii. 283; shafts of, ii. 233.
  Pictures, judgment of, how formed, ii. 371; neglect of, in Venice,
    ii. 372; how far an aid to religion, ii. 104, 110.
  Picturesque, definition of term, iii. 134.
  Piers, general structure of, i. 71, 98, 118.
  Pilgrim's Progress. See "Bunyan."
  Pine of Italy, its effect on architecture, i. 152; of Alps, effect in
    distance, i. 245. See "Fir."
  Pinnacles are of little practical service, i. 170; their effect on
    common roofs, i. 347.
  Play, its relation to Grotesque art, iii. 126.
  Pleasure, its kinds and true uses, iii. 189.
  Popery, how degraded in contest with Protestantism, i. 34, iii. 103;
    its influence on art, i. 23, 34, 35, 384, 432, ii. 51; typified in
    ornament, i. 316; power of Pope in Venice, i. 362; arts used in
    support of Popery, ii. 74.
  Porches, i. 195.
  Portraiture, power of, in Venice, iii. 164.
  Posture-making in Renaissance art, iii. 90.
  Prayers, ancient and modern, difference between, ii. 315, 390.
  Pre-Raphaelitism, iii. 90; present position of, iii. 168, 174, 188.
  Pride, how symbolized, ii. 343, iii. 207; of knowledge, iii. 35; of
    state, iii. 59; of system, iii. 95.
  Priests, restricted power of, in Venice, i. 366.
  Proportions, subtlety of, in early work, ii. 38, 121, 127.
  Protestantism, its influence on art, i. 23; typified in ornament, i.
    316; influence of, on prosperity of nations, i. 368; expenditure in
    favor of, i. 434; is incapable of judging of art, ii. 105; how
    expressed in art, ii. 205; its errors in opposing Romanism, iii, 102,
    103, 104; its shame of religious confession, ii. 278.
  Prudence, how symbolized, ii. 340.
  Pulpits, proper structure of, ii. 22, 380.
  Purism in art, its nature and definition, ii. 189.
  Purity, how symbolized, iii. 20.


    Q

  Quadrupeds, use of in ornamentation, i. 234.
  Quantity of ornament, its regulation, i. 23.


    R

  Rationalism, its influence on art, i. 23.
  Realization, how far allowable in noble art, iii. 182, 186.
  Recesses, decoration of, i. 278.
  Recumbent statues, iii. 72.
  Redundance, an element of Gothic, ii. 206.
  Religion, its influence on Venetian policy, i. 6; how far aided by
    pictorial art, ii. 104, 109; contempt of, in Renaissance times, iii.
    122.
  Renaissance architecture, nature of, iii. 33; early, iii. 1;
    Byzantine, iii. 15; Roman, iii. 32; Grotesque, iii. 112;
    inconsistencies of, iii. 42, etc.
  Reptiles, how used in ornamentation, i. 230.
  Resistance, line of, in arches, i. 126.
  Restraint, ornamental, value of, i. 255.
  Reverence, how ennobling to humanity, ii. 163.
  Rhetoric, a base study, iii. 106.
  Rigidity, an element of Gothic, ii. 203.
  Rivers, symbolical representation of, i. 419, 420.
  Rocks, use of, in ornamentation, i. 224; organization of, i. 246;
    curvatures of, i. 58, 224.
  Roll-mouldings, decoration of, i. 276.
  Romance, modern errors of, ii. 4; how connected with dress, iii. 192.
  Romanesque style, i. 15, 19, 145; ii. 215. See "Byzantine," and
    "Renaissance."
  Romanism. See "Popery."
  Roofs, analysis of, i. 46, 148; ii. 212, 216; domed, i. 149; Swiss,
    i. 149, 345; steepness of, conducive to Gothic character, i. 151, ii.
    209; decoration of, i. 343.
  Rustication, is ugly and foolish, i. 65; natural objects of which it
    produces a resemblance, i. 296.


    S

  Salvia, its leaf applied to architecture, i. 287, 306.
  Sarcophagi, Renaissance treatment of, iii. 90; ancient, iii. 69, 93.
  Satellitic shafts, i. 95.
  Satire in Grotesque art, iii. 126, 145.
  Savageness, the first element of Gothic, ii. 155; in Grotesque art,
    iii. 159.
  Science opposed to art, iii. 36.
  Sculpture, proper treatment of, i. 216, &c.
  Sea, symbolical representations of, i. 352, 421; natural waves of, i.
    351.
  Sensualism in art, its nature and definition, ii. 189; how redeemed
    by color, ii. 145.
  Serapeum at Memphis, cusps of, ii. 220.
  Sermons, proper manner of regarding them, ii. 22; mode of their
    delivery in Scotch church, ii. 381.
  Serrar del Consiglio, ii. 291.
  Shafts, analysis of, i. 84; vaulting shafts, i. 145; ornamentation
    of, i. 300; twisted, by what laws regulated, i. 303; strength of, i.
    402; laws by which they are regulated in encrusted style, ii. 82.
  Shields, use of, on tombs, ii. 224, iii. 87.
  Shipping, use of, in ornamentation, i. 215.
  Shops in Venice, ii. 65.
  Sight, how opposed to thought, iii. 39.
  Simplicity of life in thirteenth century, ii. 263.
  Sin, how symbolized in Grotesque art, iii. 141.
  Slavery of Greeks and Egyptians, ii. 158; of English workmen, ii.
    162, 163.
  Society, unhealthy state of, in modern times, ii. 163.
  Sorrow, how sinful, ii. 325; how symbolized, ii. 347.
  Soul, its development in art, iii. 173, 188; its connection with the
    body, i. 41, 395.
  Spandrils, structure of, i. 146; decoration of, i. 297.
  Spirals, architectural value of, i. 222, ii. 16.
  Spurs of bases, i. 79.
  Staircases, i. 208; of Gothic palaces, ii. 280.
  Stucco, when admissible, iii. 21.
  Subordination of ornament, i. 240.
  Superimposition of buildings, i. 200; ii. 386.
  Surface-Gothic, explanation of term, ii. 225, 227.
  Symbolism, i. 417; how opposed to personification, ii. 322.
  System, pride of, how hurtful, iii. 95, 99.


    T

  Temperance, how symbolized, ii. 338; temperance in color and
    curvature, iii. 420.
  Theology, opposed to religion, iii. 216; of Spencer, iii. 205.
  Thirteenth century, its high position with respect to art, ii. 263.
  Thought, opposed to sight, iii. 39.
  Tombs at Verona, i. 142, 412; at Venice, ii. 69; early Christian,
    iii. 67; Gothic, iii. 71; Renaissance treatment of, iii. 84.
  Towers, proper character of, i. 204; of St. Mark's, i 207.
  Traceries, structure of, i. 184, 185; flamboyant, i. 189; stump, i.
    189; English perpendicular, i 190, ii. 222; general character of, ii.
    220; strength of, in Venetian Gothic, ii. 234, iii. 253; general
    forms of tracery bars, iii. 250.
  Treason, how detested by Dante, ii. 327.
  Trees, use of, in ornamentation, i. 231.
  Trefoil, use of, in ornamentation, ii. 42.
  Triangles, used for ornaments at Murano, ii. 43.
  Tribune at Torcello, ii. 24.
  Triglyphs, ugliness of, i, 43.
  Trunkmakers, their share in recovery of Brides of Venice, iii. 117, 118.
  Truth, relation of, to religion, in Spenser's "Faërie Queen," iii,
    205; typified by stones, iii. 31.
  Tympanum, decoration of, i. 299.


    U

  Unity of Venetian nobility, i. 10.


    V

  Vain glory, speedy punishment of, iii. 122.
  Vanity, how symbolized, ii. 346.
  Variety in ornamental design, importance of, ii. 43, 133, 142, 172.
  Vegetation, use of, in ornamentation, i. 232; peculiar meaning of, in
    Gothic, ii. 199; how connected with cusps, ii. 219.
  Veil (wall veil), construction of, i. 58; decoration of, i. 294.
  Vine, Lombardic sculpture of, i. 375; at Torcello, ii. 15; use of, in
    ornamentation, ii. 141; in symbolism, ii. 143; sculpture of, on Ducal
    Palace, ii. 308.
  Virtues, how symbolized in sepulchral monuments, iii. 82, 86; systems
    of, in Pagan and Christian philosophy, ii. 312; cardinal, ii. 317,
    318, 320; of architecture, i. 36, 44.
  Voussoirs defined, i. 125; contest between them and architraves, i.
    336.


    W

  Walls, general analysis of their structure, i. 48; bases of, i. 52,
    53; cornices of, i. 63; rustication of, i. 61, 338; decoration of, i.
    294; courses in, i. 61, 295.
  Water, its use in ornamentation, i. 226; ancient representations of,
    i. 417.
  Weaving, importance of associations connected with, ii. 136.
  Wells, old Venetian, ii. 279.
  Windows, general forms of, i. 179; Arabian, i. 180, ii. 135;
    square-headed, ii. 211, 269; development of, in Venice, ii. 235;
    orders of, in Venice, ii. 248; advisable form of, in modern
    buildings, ii. 269.
  Winds, how symbolized at Venice, ii. 367.
  Wooden architecture, i. 381.
  Womanhood, virtues of, as given by Spenser, ii. 326.


    Z

  Zigzag, Norman, i. 339.




IV.

VENETIAN INDEX.


I have endeavored to make the following index as useful as possible to
the traveller, by indicating only the objects which are really worth his
study. A traveller's interest, stimulated as it is into strange vigor by
the freshness of every impression, and deepened by the sacredness of the
charm of association which long familiarity with any scene too fatally
wears away,[71] is too precious a thing to be heedlessly wasted; and as
it is physically impossible to see and to understand more than a certain
quantity of art in a given time, the attention bestowed on second-rate
works, in such a city as Venice, is not merely lost, but actually
harmful,--deadening the interest and confusing the memory with respect
to those which it is a duty to enjoy, and a disgrace to forget. The
reader need not fear being misled by any omissions; for I have
conscientiously pointed out every characteristic example, even of the
styles which I dislike, and have referred to Lazari in all instances in
which my own information failed: but if he is in any wise willing to
trust me, I should recommend him to devote his principal attention, if
he is fond of paintings, to the works of Tintoret, Paul Veronese, and
John Bellini; not of course neglecting Titian, yet remembering that
Titian can be well and thoroughly studied in almost any great European
gallery, while Tintoret and Bellini can be judged of _only_ in Venice,
and Paul Veronese, though gloriously represented by the two great
pictures in the Louvre, and many others throughout Europe, is yet not to
be fully estimated until he is seen at play among the fantastic chequers
of the Venetian ceilings.

I have supplied somewhat copious notices of the pictures of Tintoret,
because they are much injured, difficult to read, and entirely neglected
by other writers on art. I cannot express the astonishment and
indignation I felt on finding, in Kugler's handbook, a paltry cenacolo,
painted probably in a couple of hours for a couple of zecchins, for the
monks of St. Trovaso, quoted as characteristic of this master; just as
foolish readers quote separate stanzas of Peter Bell or the Idiot Boy,
as characteristic of Wordsworth. Finally, the reader is requested to
observe, that the dates assigned to the various buildings named in the
following index, are almost without exception conjectural; that is to
say, founded exclusively on the internal evidence of which a portion has
been given in the Final Appendix. It is likely, therefore, that here and
there, in particular instances, further inquiry may prove me to have
been deceived; but such occasional errors are not of the smallest
importance with respect to the general conclusions of the preceding
pages, which will be found to rest on too broad a basis to be disturbed.


    A

 ACCADEMIA DELLE BELLE ARTI. Notice above the door the two bas-reliefs
   of St. Leonard and St. Christopher, chiefly remarkable for their rude
   cutting at so late a date as 1377; but the niches under which they
   stand are unusual in their bent gables, and in little crosses within
   circles which fill their cusps. The traveller is generally too much
   struck by Titian's great picture of the "Assumption," to be able to
   pay proper attention to the other works in this gallery. Let him,
   however, ask himself candidly, how much of his admiration is
   dependent merely upon the picture being larger than any other in the
   room, and having bright masses of red and blue in it: let him be
   assured that the picture is in reality not one whit the better for
   being either large, or gaudy in color; and he will then be better
   disposed to give the pains necessary to discover the merit of the more
   profound and solemn works of Bellini and Tintoret. One of the most
   wonderful works in the whole gallery is Tintoret's "Death of Abel," on
   the left of the "Assumption;" the "Adam and Eve," on the right of it,
   is hardly inferior; and both are more characteristic examples of the
   master, and in many respects better pictures, than the much vaunted
   "Miracle of St. Mark." All the works of Bellini in this room are of
   great beauty and interest. In the great room, that which contains
   Titian's "Presentation of the Virgin," the traveller should examine
   carefully all the pictures by Vittor Carpaccio and Gentile Bellini,
   which represent scenes in ancient Venice; they are full of interesting
   architecture and costume. Marco Basaiti's "Agony in the Garden" is a
   lovely example of the religious school. The Tintorets in this room are
   all second rate, but most of the Veronese are good, and the large ones
   are magnificent.

 ALIGA. See GIORGIO.

 ALVISE, CHURCH OF ST. I have never been in this church, but Lazari
   dates its interior, with decision, as of the year 1388, and it may be
   worth a glance, if the traveller has time.

 ANDREA, CHURCH OF ST. Well worth visiting for the sake of the
   peculiarly sweet and melancholy effect of its little grass-grown
   campo, opening to the lagoon and the Alps. The sculpture over the
   door, "St. Peter walking on the Water," is a quaint piece of
   Renaissance work. Note the distant rocky landscape, and the oar of the
   existing gondola floating by St. Andrew's boat. The church is of the
   later Gothic period, much defaced, but still picturesque. The lateral
   windows are bluntly trefoiled, and good of their time.

 ANGELI, CHURCH DELGLI, at Murano. The sculpture of the "Annunciation"
   over the entrance-gate is graceful. In exploring Murano, it is worth
   while to row up the great canal thus far for the sake of the opening
   to the lagoon.

 ANTONINO, CHURCH OF ST. Of no importance.

 APOLLINARE, CHURCH OF ST. Of no importance.

 APOSTOLI, CHURCH OF THE. The exterior is nothing. There is said to be
   a picture by Veronese in the interior, "The Fall of the Manna." I have
   not seen it; but, if it be of importance, the traveller should compare
   it carefully with Tintoret's, in the Scuola di San Rocco, and San
   Giorgio Maggiore.

 APOSTOLI, PALACE AT, II. 253, on the Grand Canal, near the Rialto,
   opposite the fruit-market. A most important transitional palace. Its
   sculpture in the first story is peculiarly rich and curious; I think
   Venetian, in imitation of Byzantine. The sea story and first floor are
   of the first half of the thirteenth century, the rest modern. Observe
   that only one wing of the sea story is left, the other half having
   been modernized. The traveller should land to look at the capital
   drawn in Plate II. of Vol. III. fig. 7.

 ARSENAL. Its gateway is a curiously picturesque example of Renaissance
   workmanship, admirably sharp and expressive in its ornamental
   sculpture; it is in many parts like some of the best Byzantine work.
   The Greek lions in front of it appear to me to deserve more praise
   than they have received; though they are awkwardly balanced between
   conventional and imitative representation, having neither the severity
   proper to the one, nor the veracity necessary for the other.


    B

 BADOER, PALAZZO, in the Campo San Giovanni in Bragola. A magnificent
   example of the fourteenth century Gothic, circa 1310-1320, anterior to
   the Ducal Palace, and showing beautiful ranges of the fifth order
   window, with fragments of the original balconies, and the usual
   lateral window larger than any of the rest. In the centre of its
   arcade on the first floor is the inlaid ornament drawn in Plate VIII.
   Vol. I. The fresco painting on the walls is of later date; and I
   believe the heads which form the finials have been inserted afterwards
   also, the original windows having been pure fifth order.

   The building is now a ruin, inhabited by the lowest orders; the first
   floor, when I was last in Venice, by a laundress.

 BAFFO, PALAZZO, in the Campo St. Maurizio. The commonest late
   Renaissance. A few olive leaves and vestiges of two figures still
   remain upon it, of the frescoes by Paul Veronese, with which it was
   once adorned.

 BALBI, PALAZZO, in Volta di Canal. Of no importance.

 BARBARIGO, PALAZZO, on the Grand Canal, next the Casa Pisani. Late
   Renaissance; noticeable only as a house in which some of the best
   pictures of Titian were allowed to be ruined by damp, and out of which
   they were then sold to the Emperor of Russia.

 BARBARO, PALAZZO, on the Grand Canal, next the Palazzo Cavalli. These
   two buildings form the principal objects in the foreground of the view
   which almost every artist seizes on his first traverse of the Grand
   Canal, the Church of the Salute forming a most graceful distance.
   Neither is, however, of much value, except in general effect; but the
   Barbaro is the best, and the pointed arcade in its side wall, seen
   from the narrow canal between it and the Cavalli, is good Gothic, of
   the earliest fourteenth century type.

 BARNABA, CHURCH OF ST. Of no importance.

 BARTOLOMEO, CHURCH OF ST. I did not go to look at the works of
   Sebastian del Piombo which it contains, fully crediting M. Lazari's
   statement, that they have been "Barbaramente sfigurati da mani
   imperite, che pretendevano ristaurarli." Otherwise the church is of no
   importance.

 BASSO, CHURCH OF ST. Of no importance.

 BATTAGIA, PALAZZO, on the Grand Canal. Of no importance.

 BECCHERIE. See QUERINI.

 BEMBO, PALAZZO, on the Grand Canal, next the Casa Manin. A noble
   Gothic pile, circa 1350-1380, which, before it was painted by the
   modern Venetians with the two most valuable colors of Tintoret, Bianco
   e Nero, by being whitewashed above, and turned into a coal warehouse
   below, must have been among the most noble in effect on the whole
   Grand Canal. It still forms a beautiful group with the Rialto, some
   large shipping being generally anchored at its quay. Its sea story and
   entresol are of earlier date, I believe, than the rest; the doors of
   the former are Byzantine (see above, Final Appendix, under head
   "Jambs"); and above the entresol is a beautiful Byzantine cornice,
   built into the wall, and harmonizing well with the Gothic work.

 BEMBO, PALAZZO, in the Calle Magno, at the Campo de' due Pozzi, close
   to the Arsenal. Noticed by Lazari and Selvatico as having a very
   interesting staircase. It is early Gothic, circa 1330, but not a whit
   more interesting than many others of similar date and design. See
   "Contarini Porta de Ferro," "Morosini," "Sanudo," and "Minelli."

 BENEDETTO, CAMPO OF ST. Do not fail to see the superb, though
   partially ruinous, Gothic palace fronting this little square. It is
   very late Gothic, just passing into Renaissance; unique in Venice, in
   masculine character, united with the delicacy of the incipient style.
   Observe especially the brackets of the balconies, the flower-work on
   the cornices, and the arabesques on the angles of the balconies
   themselves.

 BENEDETTO, CHURCH OF ST. Of no importance.

 BERNARDO, PALAZZO, on the Grand Canal. A very noble pile of early
   fifteenth century Gothic, founded on the Ducal Palace. The traceries
   in its lateral windows are both rich and unusual.

 BERNARDO, PALAZZO, at St. Polo. A glorious palace, on a narrow canal,
   in a part of Venice now inhabited by the lower orders only. It is
   rather late Central Gothic, circa 1380-1400, but of the finest kind,
   and superb in its effect of color when seen from the side. A capital
   in the interior court is much praised by Selvatico and Lazari, because
   its "foglie d'acanto" (anything by the by, _but_ acanthus), "quasi
   agitate de vento si attorcigliano d'intorno alla campana, _concetto
   non indegno della bell'epoca greca_!" Does this mean "epoca
   Bisantina?" The capital is simply a translation into Gothic sculpture
   of the Byzantine ones of St. Mark's and the Fondaco de' Turchi (see
   Plate VIII. Vol. I. fig. 14), and is far inferior to either. But,
   taken as a whole, I think that, after the Ducal Palace, this is the
   noblest in effect of all in Venice.

 BRENTA, Banks of the, I. 354. Villas on the, I. 354.

 BUSINELLO, CASA, II. 391.

 BYZANTINE PALACES generally, II. 118.


    C

 CAMERLENGHI, PALACE OF THE, beside the Rialto. A graceful work of the
   early Renaissance (1525) passing into Roman Renaissance. Its details
   are inferior to most of the work of the school. The "Camerlenghi,"
   properly "Camerlenghi di Comune," were the three officers or ministers
   who had care of the administration of public expenses.

 CANCELLARIA, II. 293.

 CANCIANO, CHURCH OF ST. Of no importance.

 CAPPELLO, PALAZZO, at St. Aponal. Of no interest. Some say that Bianca
   Cappello fled from it; but the tradition seems to fluctuate between
   the various houses belonging to her family.

 CARITÀ, CHURCH OF THE. Once an interesting Gothic church of the
   fourteenth century, lately defaced, and applied to some of the usual
   important purposes of the modern Italians. The effect of its ancient
   façade may partly be guessed at from the pictures of Canaletto, but
   only guessed at; Canaletto being less to be trusted for renderings of
   details, than the rudest and most ignorant painter of the thirteenth
   century.

 CARMINI, CHURCH OF THE. A most interesting church of late thirteenth
   century work, but much altered and defaced. Its nave, in which the
   early shafts and capitals of the pure truncate form are unaltered, is
   very fine in effect; its lateral porch is quaint and beautiful,
   decorated with Byzantine circular sculptures (of which the central one
   is given in Vol. II. Plate XI. fig. 5), and supported on two shafts
   whose capitals are the most archaic examples of the pure Rose form
   that I know in Venice.

   There is a glorious Tintoret over the first altar on the right in
   entering; the "Circumcision of Christ." I do not know an aged head
   either more beautiful or more picturesque than that of the high
   priest. The cloister is full of notable tombs, nearly all dated; one,
   of the fifteenth century, to the left on entering, is interesting from
   the color still left on the leaves and flowers of its sculptured
   roses.

 CASSANO, CHURCH OF ST. This church must on no account be missed, as it
   contains three Tintorets, of which one, the "Crucifixion," is among
   the finest in Europe. There is nothing worth notice in the building
   itself, except the jamb of an ancient door (left in the Renaissance
   buildings, facing the canal), which has been given among the examples
   of Byzantine jambs; and the traveller may, therefore, devote his
   entire attention to the three pictures in the chancel.

   1. _The Crucifixion._ (On the left of the high altar.) It is
   refreshing to find a picture taken care of, and in a bright though not
   a good light, so that such parts of it as are seen at all are seen
   well. It is also in a better state than most pictures in galleries,
   and most remarkable for its new and strange treatment of the subject.
   It seems to have been painted more for the artist's own delight, than
   with any labored attempt at composition; the horizon is so low that
   the spectator must fancy himself lying at full length on the grass, or
   rather among the brambles and luxuriant weeds, of which the foreground
   is entirely composed. Among these, the seamless robe of Christ has
   fallen at the foot of the cross; the rambling briars and wild grasses
   thrown here and there over its folds of rich, but pale, crimson.
   Behind them, and seen through them, the heads of a troop of Roman
   soldiers are raised against the sky; and, above them, their spears and
   halberds form a thin forest against the horizontal clouds. The three
   crosses are put on the extreme right of the picture, and its centre is
   occupied by the executioners, one of whom, standing on a ladder,
   receives from the other at once the sponge and the tablet with the
   letters INRI. The Madonna and St. John are on the extreme left,
   superbly painted, like all the rest, but quite subordinate. In fact,
   the whole mind of the painter seems to have been set upon making the
   principals accessary, and the accessaries principal. We look first at
   the grass, and then at the scarlet robe; and then at the clump of
   distant spears, and then at the sky, and last of all at the cross. As
   a piece of color, the picture is notable for its extreme modesty.
   There is not a single very full or bright tint in any part, and yet
   the color is delighted in throughout; not the slightest touch of it
   but is delicious. It is worth notice also, and especially, because
   this picture being in a fresh state we are sure of one fact, that,
   like nearly all other great colorists, Tintoret was afraid of light
   greens in his vegetation. He often uses dark blue greens in his
   shadowed trees, but here where the grass is in full light, it is all
   painted with various hues of sober brown, more especially where it
   crosses the crimson robe. The handling of the whole is in his noblest
   manner; and I consider the picture generally quite beyond all price.
   It was cleaned, I believe, some years ago, but not injured, or at
   least as little injured as it is possible for a picture to be which
   has undergone any cleaning process whatsoever.

   2. _The Resurrection._ (Over the high altar.) The lower part of this
   picture is entirely concealed by a miniature temple, about five feet
   high, on the top of the altar; certainly an insult little expected by
   Tintoret, as, by getting on steps, and looking over the said temple,
   one may see that the lower figures of the picture are the most
   labored. It is strange that the painter never seemed able to conceive
   this subject with any power, and in the present work he is
   marvellously hampered by various types and conventionalities. It is
   not a painting of the Resurrection, but of Roman Catholic saints,
   _thinking_ about the Resurrection. On one side of the tomb is a bishop
   in full robes, on the other a female saint, I know not who; beneath
   it, an angel playing on an organ, and a cherub blowing it; and other
   cherubs flying about the sky, with flowers; the whole conception being
   a mass of Renaissance absurdities. It is, moreover, heavily painted,
   over-done, and over-finished; and the forms of the cherubs utterly
   heavy and vulgar. I cannot help fancying the picture has been restored
   in some way or another, but there is still great power in parts of it.
   If it be a really untouched Tintoret, it is a highly curious example
   of failure from over-labor on a subject into which his mind was not
   thrown: the color is hot and harsh, and felt to be so more painfully,
   from its opposition to the grand coolness and chastity of the
   "Crucifixion." The face of the angel playing the organ is highly
   elaborated; so, also, the flying cherubs.

   3. _The Descent into Hades._ (On the right-hand side of the high
   altar.) Much injured and little to be regretted. I never was more
   puzzled by any picture, the painting being throughout careless, and in
   some places utterly bad, and yet not like modern work; the principal
   figure, however, of Eve, has either been redone, or is scholar's work
   altogether, as, I suspect, most of the rest of the picture. It looks
   as if Tintoret had sketched it when he was ill, left it to a bad
   scholar to work on with, and then finished it in a hurry; but he has
   assuredly had something to do with it; it is not likely that anybody
   else would have refused all aid from the usual spectral company with
   which common painters fill the scene. Bronzino, for instance, covers
   his canvas with every form of monster that his sluggish imagination
   could coin. Tintoret admits only a somewhat haggard Adam, a graceful
   Eve, two or three Venetians in court dress, seen amongst the smoke,
   and a Satan represented as a handsome youth, recognizable only by the
   claws on his feet. The picture is dark and spoiled, but I am pretty
   sure there are no demons or spectres in it. This is quite in
   accordance with the master's caprice, but it considerably diminishes
   the interest of a work in other ways unsatisfactory. There may once
   have been something impressive in the shooting in of the rays at the
   top of the cavern, as well as in the strange grass that grows in the
   bottom, whose infernal character is indicated by its all being knotted
   together; but so little of these parts can be seen, that it is not
   worth spending time on a work certainly unworthy of the master, and in
   great part probably never seen by him.

 CATTARINA, CHURCH OF ST., said to contain a _chef-d'oeuvre_ of Paul
   Veronese, the "Marriage of St. Catherine." I have not seen it.

 CAVALLI, PALAZZO, opposite the Academy of Arts. An imposing pile, on
   the Grand Canal, of Renaissance Gothic, but of little merit in the
   details; and the effect of its traceries has been of late destroyed by
   the fittings of modern external blinds. Its balconies are good, of the
   later Gothic type. See "BARBARO."

 CAVALLI, PALAZZO, next the Casa Grimani (or Post-Office), but on the
   other side of the narrow canal. Good Gothic, founded on the Ducal
   Palace, circa 1380. The capitals of the first story are remarkably
   rich in the deep fillets at the necks. The crests, heads of
   sea-horses, inserted between the windows, appear to be later, but are
   very fine of their kind.

 CICOGNA, PALAZZO, at San Sebastiano, II. 265.

 CLEMENTE, CHURCH OF ST. On an island to the south of Venice, from
   which the view of the city is peculiarly beautiful. See "SCALZI."

 CONTARINI PORTA DI FERRO, PALAZZO, near the Church of St. John and
   Paul, so called from the beautiful ironwork on a door, which was some
   time ago taken down by the proprietor and sold. Mr. Rawdon Brown
   rescued some of the ornaments from the hands of the blacksmith, who
   had bought them for old iron. The head of the door is a very
   interesting stone arch of the early thirteenth century, already drawn
   in my folio work. In the interior court is a beautiful remnant of
   staircase, with a piece of balcony at the top, circa 1350, and one of
   the most richly and carefully wrought in Venice. The palace, judging
   by these remnants (all that are now left of it, except a single
   traceried window of the same date at the turn of the stair), must once
   have been among the most magnificent in Venice.

 CONTARINI (DELLE FIGURE), PALAZZO, on the Grand Canal, III. 17.

 CONTARINI DAI SCRIGNI, PALAZZO, on the Grand Canal. A Gothic building,
   founded on the Ducal Palace. Two Renaissance statues in niches at the
   sides give it its name.

 CONTARINI FASAN, PALAZZO, on the Grand Canal, II. 244. The richest
   work of the fifteenth century domestic Gothic in Venice, but notable
   more for richness than excellence of design. In one respect, however,
   it deserves to be regarded with attention, as showing how much beauty
   and dignity may be bestowed on a very small and unimportant
   dwelling-house by Gothic sculpture. Foolish criticisms upon it have
   appeared in English accounts of foreign buildings, objecting to it on
   the ground of its being "ill-proportioned;" the simple fact being,
   that there was no room in this part of the canal for a wider house,
   and that its builder made its rooms as comfortable as he could, and
   its windows and balconies of a convenient size for those who were to
   see through them, and stand on them, and left the "proportions"
   outside to take care of themselves; which, indeed, they have very
   sufficiently done; for though the house thus honestly confesses its
   diminutiveness, it is nevertheless one of the principal ornaments of
   the very noblest reach of the Grand Canal, and would be nearly as
   great a loss, if it were destroyed, as the Church of La Salute itself.

 CONTARINI, PALAZZO, at St. Luca. Of no importance.

 CORNER DELLA CA' GRANDE, PALAZZO, on the Grand Canal. One of the worst
   and coldest buildings of the central Renaissance, It is on a grand
   scale, and is a conspicuous object, rising over the roofs of the
   neighboring houses in the various aspects of the entrance of the Grand
   Canal, and in the general view of Venice from San Clemente.

 CORNER DELLA REGINA, PALAZZO. A late Renaissance building of no merit
   or interest.

 CORNER MOCENIGO, PALAZZO, at St. Polo. Of no interest.

 CORNER SPINELLI, PALAZZO, on the Grand Canal. A graceful and
   interesting example of the early Renaissance, remarkable for its
   pretty circular balconies.

 CORNER, RACCOLTA. I must refer the reader to M. Lazari's Guide for an
   account of this collection, which, however, ought only to be visited
   if the traveller is not pressed for time.


    D

 DANDOLO, PALAZZO, on the Grand Canal. Between the Casa Loredan and
   Casa Bembo is a range of modern buildings, some of which occupy, I
   believe, the site of the palace once inhabited by the Doge Henry
   Dandolo. Fragments of early architecture of the Byzantine school may
   still be traced in many places among their foundations, and two doors
   in the foundation of the Casa Bembo itself belong to the same group.
   There is only one existing palace, however, of any value, on this
   spot, a very small but rich Gothic one of about 1300, with two groups
   of fourth order windows in its second and third stories, and some
   Byzantine circular mouldings built into it above. This is still
   reported to have belonged to the family of Dandolo, and ought to be
   carefully preserved, as it is one of the most interesting and ancient
   Gothic palaces which yet remain.

 DANIELI, ALBERGO. See Nani.

 DA PONTE, PALAZZO. Of no interest.

 DARIO, PALAZZO, I. 370; III. 211.

 DOGANA DI MARE, at the separation of the Grand Canal from the Giudecca.
   A barbarous building of the time of the Grotesque Renaissance (1676),
   rendered interesting only by its position. The statue of Fortune,
   forming the weathercock, standing on the world, is alike
   characteristic of the conceits of the time, and of the hopes and
   principles of the last days of Venice.

 DONATO, CHURCH OF ST., at Murano, II. 31.

 DONA', PALAZZO, on the Grand Canal. I believe the palace described under
   this name as of the twelfth century, by M. Lazari, is that which I
   have called the Braided House, II. 132, 392.

 D'ORO CASA. A noble pile of very quaint Gothic, once superb in general
   effect, but now destroyed by restorations. I saw the beautiful slabs
   of red marble, which formed the bases of its balconies, and were
   carved into noble spiral mouldings of strange sections, half a foot
   deep, dashed to pieces when I was last in Venice; its glorious
   interior staircase, by far the most interesting Gothic monument of the
   kind in Venice, had been carried away, piece by piece, and sold for
   waste marble, two years before. Of what remains, the most beautiful
   portions are, or were, when I last saw them, the capitals of the
   windows in the upper story, most glorious sculpture of the fourteenth
   century. The fantastic window traceries are, I think, later; but the
   rest of the architecture of this palace is anomalous, and I cannot
   venture to give any decided opinion respecting it. Parts of its
   mouldings are quite Byzantine in character, but look somewhat like
   imitations.

 DUCAL PALACE, I. 29; history of, II. 282, etc.; III. 199; plan and
   section of, II. 282, 283; description of, II. 304, etc.; series of its
   capitals, II. 332, etc.; spandrils of, I. 299, 415; shafts of, I. 413;
   traceries of, derived from those of the Frari, II. 234; angles of, II.
   239; main balcony of, II. 245; base of, III. 212; Rio Façade of, III.
   25; paintings in, II. 372. The multitude of works by various masters,
   which cover the walls of this palace is so great, that the traveller
   is in general merely wearied and confused by them. He had better
   refuse all attention except to the following works:

   1. _Paradise_, by Tintoret; at the extremity of the Great Council
   chamber. I found it impossible to count the number of figures in this
   picture, of which the grouping is so intricate, that at the upper part
   it is not easy to distinguish one figure from another; but I counted
   150 important figures in one half of it alone; so that, as there are
   nearly as many in subordinate position, the total number cannot be
   under 500. I believe this is, on the whole, Tintoret's
   _chef-d'oeuvre_; though it is so vast that no one takes the trouble
   to read it, and therefore less wonderful pictures are preferred to it.
   I have not myself been able to study except a few fragments of it, all
   executed in his finest manner; but it may assist a hurried observer to
   point out to him that the whole composition is divided into concentric
   zones, represented one above another like the stories of a cupola,
   round the figures of Christ and the Madonna, at the central and
   highest point: both these figures are exceedingly dignified and
   beautiful. Between each zone or belt of the nearer figures, the white
   distances of heaven are seen filled with floating spirits. The picture
   is, on the whole, wonderfully preserved, and the most precious thing
   that Venice possesses. She will not possess it long; for the Venetian
   academicians, finding it exceedingly unlike their own works, declare
   it to want harmony, and are going to retouch it to their own ideas of
   perfection.

   2. _Siege of Zara_; the first picture on the right on entering the
   Sala del Scrutinio. It is a mere battle piece, in which the figures,
   like the arrows, are put in by the score. There are high merits in the
   thing, and so much invention that it is possible Tintoret may have
   made the sketch for it; but, if executed by him at all, he has done it
   merely in the temper in which a sign-painter meets the wishes of an
   ambitious landlord. He seems to have been ordered to represent all the
   events of the battle at once; and to have felt that, provided he gave
   men, arrows, and ships enough, his employers would be perfectly
   satisfied. The picture is a vast one, some thirty feet by fifteen.

   Various other pictures will be pointed out by the custode, in these
   two rooms, as worthy of attention, but they are only historically, not
   artistically, interesting. The works of Paul Veronese on the ceiling
   have been repainted; and the rest of the pictures on the walls are by
   second-rate men. The traveller must, once for all, be warned against
   mistaking the works of Domenico Robusti (Domenico Tintoretto), a very
   miserable painter, for those of his illustrious father, Jacopo.

   3. _The Doge Grimani kneeling before Faith_, by Titian; in the Sala
   delle quattro Porte. To be observed with care, as one of the most
   striking examples of Titian's want of feeling and coarseness of
   conception. (See above, Vol. I. p. 12.) As a work of mere art, it is,
   however, of great value. The traveller who has been accustomed to
   deride Turner's indistinctness of touch, ought to examine carefully
   the mode of painting the Venice in the distance at the bottom of this
   picture.

   4. _Frescoes on the Roof of the Sala delle quattro Porte_, by
   Tintoret. Once magnificent beyond description, now mere wrecks (the
   plaster crumbling away in large flakes), but yet deserving of the most
   earnest study.

   5. _Christ taken down from the Cross_, by Tintoret; at the upper end
   of the Sala dei Pregadi. One of the most interesting mythic pictures
   of Venice, two doges being represented beside the body of Christ, and
   a most noble painting; executed, however, for distant effect, and seen
   best from the end of the room.

   6. _Venice, Queen of the Sea_, by Tintoret. Central compartment of the
   ceiling, in the Sala dei Pregadi. Notable for the sweep of its vast
   green surges, and for the daring character of its entire conception,
   though it is wild and careless, and in many respects unworthy of the
   master. Note the way in which he has used the fantastic forms of the
   sea weeds, with respect to what was above stated (III. 158), as to his
   love of the grotesque.

   7. _The Doge Loredano in Prayer to the Virgin_, by Tintoret; in the
   same room. Sickly and pale in color, yet a grand work; to be studied,
   however, more for the sake of seeing what a great man does "to order,"
   when he is wearied of what is required from him, than for its own
   merit.

   8. _St. George and the Princess._ There are, besides the "Paradise,"
   only six pictures in the Ducal Palace, as far as I know, which
   Tintoret painted carefully, and those are all exceedingly fine: the
   most finished of these are in the Anti-Collegio; but those that are
   most majestic and characteristic of the master are two oblong ones,
   made to fill the panels of the walls in the Anti-Chiesetta; these two,
   each, I suppose, about eight feet by six, are in his most quiet and
   noble manner. There is excessively little color in them, their
   prevalent tone being a greyish brown opposed with grey, black, and a
   very warm russet. They are thinly painted, perfect in tone, and quite
   untouched. The first of them is "St. George and the Dragon," the
   subject being treated in a new and curious way. The principal figure
   is the princess, who sits astride on the dragon's neck, holding him by
   a bridle of silken riband; St. George stands above and behind her,
   holding his hands over her head as if to bless her, or to keep the
   dragon quiet by heavenly power; and a monk stands by on the right,
   looking gravely on. There is no expression or life in the dragon,
   though the white flashes in its eye are very ghastly: but the whole
   thing is entirely typical; and the princess is not so much represented
   riding on the dragon, as supposed to be placed by St. George in an
   attitude of perfect victory over her chief enemy. She has a full rich
   dress of dull red, but her figure is somewhat ungraceful. St. George
   is in grey armor and grey drapery, and has a beautiful face; his
   figure entirely dark against the distant sky. There is a study for
   this picture in the Manfrini Palace.

   9. _St. Andrew and St. Jerome._ This, the companion picture, has even
   less color than its opposite. It is nearly all brown and grey; the
   fig-leaves and olive-leaves brown, the faces brown, the dresses brown,
   and St. Andrew holding a great brown cross. There is nothing that can
   be called color, except the grey of the sky, which approaches in some
   places a little to blue, and a single piece of dirty brick-red in St.
   Jerome's dress; and yet Tintoret's greatness hardly ever shows more
   than in the management of such sober tints. I would rather have these
   two small brown pictures, and two others in the Academy perfectly
   brown also in their general tone--the "Cain and Abel" and the "Adam
   and Eve,"--than all the other small pictures in Venice put together,
   which he painted in bright colors, for altar pieces; but I never saw
   two pictures which so nearly approached grisailles as these, and yet
   were delicious pieces of color. I do not know if I am right in calling
   one of the saints St. Andrew. He stands holding a great upright wooden
   cross against the sky. St. Jerome reclines at his feet, against a
   rock, over which some glorious fig leaves and olive branches are
   shooting; every line of them studied with the most exquisite care, and
   yet cast with perfect freedom.

   10. _Bacchus and Ariadne._ The most beautiful of the four careful
   pictures by Tintoret, which occupy the angles of the Anti-Collegio.
   Once one of the noblest pictures in the world, but now miserably
   faded, the sun being allowed to fall on it all day long. The design of
   the forms of the leafage round the head of the Bacchus, and the
   floating grace of the female figure above, will, however, always give
   interest to this picture, unless it be repainted.

   The other three Tintorets in this room are careful and fine, but far
   inferior to the "Bacchus;" and the "Vulcan and the Cyclops" is a
   singularly meagre and vulgar study of common models.

   11. _Europa_, by Paul Veronese: in the same room. One of the very few
   pictures which both possess and deserve a high reputation.

   12. _Venice enthroned_, by Paul Veronese; on the roof of the same
   room. One of the grandest pieces of frank color in the Ducal Palace.

   13. _Venice, and the Doge Sebastian Venier_; at the upper end of the
   Sala del Collegio. An unrivalled Paul Veronese, far finer even than
   the "Europa."

   14. _Marriage of St. Catherine_, by Tintoret; in the same room. An
   inferior picture, but the figure of St. Catherine is quite exquisite.
   Note how her veil falls over her form, showing the sky through it, as
   an alpine cascade falls over a marble rock.

   There are three other Tintorets on the walls of this room, but all
   inferior, though full of power. Note especially the painting of the
   lion's wings, and of the colored carpet, in the one nearest the
   throne, the Doge Alvise Mocenigo adoring the Redeemer.

   The roof is entirely by Paul Veronese, and the traveller who really
   loves painting, ought to get leave to come to this room whenever he
   chooses; and should pass the sunny summer mornings there again and
   again, wandering now and then into the Anti-Collegio and Sala dei
   Pregadi, and coming back to rest under the wings of the couched lion
   at the feet of the "Mocenigo." He will no otherwise enter so deeply
   into the heart of Venice.


    E

 EMO, PALAZZO, on the Grand Canal. Of no interest.

 ERIZZO, PALAZZO, near the Arsenal, II. 262.

 ERIZZO, PALAZZO, on the Grand Canal, nearly opposite the Fondaco
   de'Turchi. A Gothic palace, with a single range of windows founded on
   the Ducal traceries, and bold capitals. It has been above referred to
   in the notice of tracery bars.

 EUFEMIA, CHURCH OF ST. A small and defaced, but very curious, early
   Gothic church on the Giudecca. Not worth visiting, unless the
   traveller is seriously interested in architecture.

 EUROPA, ALBERGO, ALL'. Once a Giustiniani Palace. Good Gothic, circa
   1400, but much altered.

 EVANGELISTI, CASA DEGLI, II. 265.

 [Illustration: Plate XII.
                CAPITALS OF FONDACO DE' TURCHI.]


    F

 FACANON, PALAZZO (ALLA FAVA). A fair example of the fifteenth century
   Gothic, founded on Ducal Palace.

 FALIER, PALAZZO, at the Apostoli. Above, II. 253.

 FANTINO, CHURCH OF ST. Said to contain a John Bellini, otherwise of no
   importance.

 FARSETTI, PALAZZO, on the Grand Canal, II. 124, 393.

 FAVA, CHURCH OF ST. Of no importance.

 FELICE, CHURCH OF ST. Said to contain a Tintoret, which, if untouched,
   I should conjecture, from Lazari's statement of its subject, St.
   Demetrius armed, with one of the Ghisi family in prayer, must be very
   fine. Otherwise the church is of no importance.

 FERRO, PALAZZO, on the Grand Canal. Fifteenth century Gothic, very
   hard and bad.

 FLANGINI, PALAZZO, on the Grand Canal. Of no importance.

 FONDACO DE' TURCHI, I. 328; II. 120, 121, 236. The opposite plate,
   representing three of its capitals, has been several times referred
   to.

 FONDACO DE' TEDESCHI. A huge and ugly building near the Rialto,
   rendered, however, peculiarly interesting by remnants of the frescoes
   by Giorgione with which it was once covered. See Vol. II. 80, and III.
   23.

 FORMOSA, CHURCH OF SANTA MARIA, III. 113, 122,

 FOSCA, CHURCH OF ST. Notable for its exceedingly picturesque
   campanile, of late Gothic, but uninjured by restorations, and
   peculiarly Venetian in being crowned by the cupola instead of the
   pyramid, which would have been employed at the same period in any
   other Italian city.

 FOSCARI, PALAZZO, on the Grand Canal. The noblest example in Venice of
   the fifteenth century Gothic, founded on the Ducal Palace, but lately
   restored and spoiled, all but the stone-work of the main windows. The
   restoration was necessary, however: for, when I was in Venice in 1845,
   this palace was a foul ruin; its great hall a mass of mud, used as a
   back receptacle of a stone-mason's yard; and its rooms whitewashed,
   and scribbled over with indecent caricatures. It has since been
   partially strengthened and put in order; but as the Venetian
   municipality have now given it to the Austrians to be used as
   barracks, it will probably soon be reduced to its former condition.
   The lower palaces at the side of this building are said by some to
   have belonged to the younger Foscari. See "GIUSTINIANI."

 FRANCESCO DELLA VIGNA, CHURCH OF ST. Base Renaissance, but must be
   visited in order to see the John Bellini in the Cappella Santa. The
   late sculpture, in the Cappella Giustiniani, appears from Lazari's
   statement to be deserving of careful study. This church is said also
   to contain two pictures by Paul Veronese.

 FRARI, CHURCH OF THE. Founded in 1250, and continued at various
   subsequent periods. The apse and adjoining chapels are the earliest
   portions, and their traceries have been above noticed (II. 234) as the
   origin of those of the Ducal Palace. The best view of the apse, which
   is a very noble example of Italian Gothic, is from the door of the
   Scuola di San Rocco. The doors of the church are all later than any
   other portion of it, very elaborate Renaissance Gothic. The interior
   is good Gothic, but not interesting, except in its monuments. Of
   these, the following are noticed in the text of this volume:

   That of Duccio degli Alberti, at pages 74, 80; of the unknown Knight,
   opposite that of Duccio, III. 74; of Francesco Foscari, III. 84; of
   Giovanni Pesaro, 91; of Jacopo Pesaro, 92.

   Besides these tombs, the traveller ought to notice carefully that of
   Pietro Bernardo, a first-rate example of Renaissance work; nothing can
   be more detestable or mindless in general design, or more beautiful in
   execution. Examine especially the griffins, fixed in admiration of
   bouquets, at the bottom. The fruit and flowers which arrest the
   attention of the griffins may well arrest the traveller's also;
   nothing can be finer of their kind. The tomb of Canova, _by_ Canova,
   cannot be missed; consummate in science, intolerable in affectation,
   ridiculous in conception, null and void to the uttermost in invention
   and feeling. The equestrian statue of Paolo Savelli is spirited; the
   monument of the Beato Pacifico, a curious example of Renaissance
   Gothic with wild crockets (all in terra cotta). There are several good
   Vivarini's in the church, but its chief pictorial treasure is the John
   Bellini in the sacristy, the most finished and delicate example of the
   master in Venice.


    G

 GEREMIA, CHURCH OF ST. Of no importance.

 GESUATI, CHURCH OF THE. Of no importance.

 GIACOMO DE LORIO, CHURCH OF ST., a most interesting church, of the early
   thirteenth century, but grievously restored. Its capitals have been
   already noticed as characteristic of the earliest Gothic; and it is
   said to contain four works of Paul Veronese, but I have not examined
   them. The pulpit is admired by the Italians, but is utterly worthless.
   The verdantique pillar, in the south transept, is a very noble example
   of the "Jewel Shaft." See the note at p. 83, Vol. II.

 GIACOMO DI RIALTO, CHURCH OF ST. A picturesque little church, on the
   Piazza di Rialto. It has been grievously restored, but the pillars and
   capitals of its nave are certainly of the eleventh century; those of
   its portico are of good central Gothic; and it will surely not be left
   unvisited, on this ground, if on no other, that it stands on the site,
   and still retains the name, of the first church ever built on that
   Rialto which formed the nucleus of future Venice, and became
   afterwards the mart of her merchants.

 GIOBBE, CHURCH OF ST., near the Cana Reggio. Its principal entrance is
   a very fine example of early Renaissance sculpture. Note in it,
   especially, its beautiful use of the flower of the convolvulus. There
   are said to be still more beautiful examples of the same period, in
   the interior. The cloister, though much defaced, is of the Gothic
   period, and worth a glance.

 GIORGIO DE' GRECI, CHURCH OF ST. The Greek Church. It contains no
   valuable objects of art, but its service is worth attending by those
   who have never seen the Greek ritual.

 GIORGIO DE' SCHIAVONI, CHURCH OF ST. Said to contain a very precious
   series of paintings by Victor Carpaccio. Otherwise of no interest.

 GIORGIO IN ALIGA (St. George in the seaweed), Church of St. Unimportant
   in itself, but the most beautiful view of Venice at sunset is from a
   point at about two thirds of the distance from the city to the island.

 GIORGIO MAGGIORE, CHURCH OF ST. A building which owes its interesting
   effect chiefly to its isolated position, being seen over a great space
   of lagoon. The traveller should especially notice in its façade the
   manner in which the central Renaissance architects (of whose style
   this church is a renowned example) endeavored to fit the laws they had
   established to the requirements of their age. Churches were required
   with aisles and clerestories, that is to say, with a high central nave
   and lower wings; and the question was, how to face this form with
   pillars of one proportion. The noble Romanesque architects built story
   above story, as at Pisa and Lucca; but the base Palladian architects
   dared not do this. They must needs retain some image of the Greek
   temple; but the Greek temple was all of one height, a low gable roof
   being borne on ranges of equal pillars. So the Palladian builders
   raised first a Greek temple with pilasters for shafts; and, _through
   the middle of its roof, or horizontal beam_, that is to say, of the
   cornice which externally represented this beam, they lifted another
   temple on pedestals, adding these barbarous appendages to the shafts,
   which otherwise would not have been high enough; fragments of the
   divided cornice or tie-beam being left between the shafts, and the
   great door of the church thrust in between the pedestals. It is
   impossible to conceive a design more gross, more barbarous, more
   childish in conception, more servile in plagiarism, more insipid in
   result, more contemptible under every point of rational regard.

   Observe, also, that when Palladio had got his pediment at the top of
   the church, he did not know what to do with it; he had no idea of
   decorating it except by a round hole in the middle. (The traveller
   should compare, both in construction and decoration, the Church of the
   Redentore with this of San Giorgio.) Now, a dark penetration is often
   a most precious assistance to a building dependent upon color for its
   effect; for a cavity is the only means in the architect's power of
   obtaining certain and vigorous shadow; and for this purpose, a
   circular penetration, surrounded by a deep russet marble moulding, is
   beautifully used in the centre of the white field on the side of the
   portico of St. Mark's. But Palladio had given up color, and pierced
   his pediment with a circular cavity, merely because he had not wit
   enough to fill it with sculpture. The interior of the church is like a
   large assembly room, and would have been undeserving of a moment's
   attention, but that it contains some most precious pictures, namely:

   1. _Gathering the Manna._ (On the left hand of the high altar.) One of
   Tintoret's most remarkable landscapes. A brook flowing through a
   mountainous country, studded with thickets and palm trees; the
   congregation have been long in the Wilderness, and are employed in
   various manufactures much more than in gathering the manna. One group
   is forging, another grinding manna in a mill, another making shoes,
   one woman making a piece of dress, some washing; the main purpose of
   Tintoret being evidently to indicate the _continuity_ of the supply of
   heavenly food. Another painter would have made the congregation
   hurrying to gather it, and wondering at it; Tintoret at once makes us
   remember that they have been fed with it "by the space of forty
   years." It is a large picture, full of interest and power, but
   scattered in effect, and not striking except from its elaborate
   landscape.

   2. _The Last Supper._ (Opposite the former.) These two pictures have
   been painted for their places, the subjects being illustrative of the
   sacrifice of the mass. This latter is remarkable for its entire
   homeliness in the general treatment of the subject; the entertainment
   being represented like any large supper in a second-rate Italian inn,
   the figures being all comparatively uninteresting; but we are reminded
   that the subject is a sacred one, not only by the strong light shining
   from the head of Christ, but because the smoke of the lamp which hangs
   over the table turns, as it rises, into a multitude of angels, all
   painted in grey, the color of the smoke; and so writhed and twisted
   together that the eye hardly at first distinguishes them from the
   vapor out of which they are formed, ghosts of countenances and filmy
   wings filling up the intervals between the completed heads. The idea
   is highly characteristic of the master. The picture has been
   grievously injured, but still shows miracles of skill in the
   expression of candle-light mixed with twilight; variously reflected
   rays, and half tones of the dimly lighted chamber, mingled with the
   beams of the lantern and those from the head of Christ, flashing along
   the metal and glass upon the table, and under it along the floor, and
   dying away into the recesses of the room.

   3. _Martyrdom of various Saints._ (Altar piece of the third altar in
   the South aisle.) A moderately sized picture, and now a very
   disagreeable one, owing to the violent red into which the color that
   formed the glory of the angel at the top is changed. It has been
   hastily painted, and only shows the artist's power in the energy of
   the figure of an executioner drawing a bow, and in the magnificent
   ease with which the other figures are thrown together in all manner of
   wild groups and defiances of probability. Stones and arrows are flying
   about in the air at random.

   4. _Coronation of the Virgin._ (Fourth altar in the same aisle.)
   Painted more for the sake of the portraits at the bottom, than of the
   Virgin at the top. A good picture, but somewhat tame for Tintoret, and
   much injured. The principal figure, in black, is still, however, very
   fine.

   5. _Resurrection of Christ._ (At the end of the north aisle, in the
   chapel beside the choir.) Another picture painted chiefly for the sake
   of the included portraits, and remarkably cold in general conception;
   its color has, however, been gay and delicate, lilac, yellow, and blue
   being largely used in it. The flag which our Saviour bears in his
   hand, has been once as bright as the sail of a Venetian fishing-boat,
   but the colors are now all chilled, and the picture is rather crude
   than brilliant; a mere wreck of what it was, and all covered with
   droppings of wax at the bottom.

   6. _Martyrdom of St. Stephen._ (Altar piece in the north transept.)
   The Saint is in a rich prelate's dress, looking as if he had just been
   saying mass, kneeling in the foreground, and perfectly serene. The
   stones are flying about him like hail, and the ground is covered with
   them as thickly as if it were a river bed. But in the midst of them,
   at the saint's right hand, there is a book lying, crushed but open,
   two or three stones which have torn one of its leaves lying upon it.
   The freedom and ease with which the leaf is crumpled is just as
   characteristic of the master as any of the grander features; no one
   but Tintoret could have so crushed a leaf; but the idea is still more
   characteristic of him, for the book is evidently meant for the Mosaic
   History which Stephen had just been expounding, and its being crushed
   by the stones shows how the blind rage of the Jews was violating their
   own law in the murder of Stephen. In the upper part of the picture are
   three figures,--Christ, the Father, and St. Michael. Christ of course
   at the right hand of the Father, as Stephen saw him standing; but
   there is little dignity in this part of the conception. In the middle
   of the picture, which is also the middle distance, are three or four
   men throwing stones, with Tintoret's usual vigor of gesture, and
   behind them an immense and confused crowd; so that, at first, we
   wonder where St. Paul is; but presently we observe that, in the front
   of this crowd, and _almost exactly in the centre of the picture_,
   there is a figure seated on the ground, very noble and quiet, and with
   some loose garments thrown across its knees. It is dressed in vigorous
   black and red. The figure of the Father in the sky above is dressed in
   black and red also, and these two figures are the centres of color to
   the whole design. It is almost impossible to praise too highly the
   refinement of conception which withdrew the unconverted St. Paul into
   the distance, so as entirely to separate him from the immediate
   interest of the scene, and yet marked the dignity to which he was
   afterward to be raised, by investing him with the colors which
   occurred nowhere else in the picture except in the dress which veils
   the form of the Godhead. It is also to be noted as an interesting
   example of the value which the painter put upon color only; another
   composer would have thought it necessary to exalt the future apostle
   by some peculiar dignity of action or expression. The posture of the
   figure is indeed grand, but inconspicuous; Tintoret does not depend
   upon it, and thinks that the figure is quite ennobled enough by being
   made a key-note of color.

   It is also worth observing how boldly imaginative is the treatment
   which covers the ground with piles of stones, and yet leaves the
   martyr apparently unwounded. Another painter would have covered him
   with blood, and elaborated the expression of pain upon his
   countenance. Tintoret leaves us under no doubt as to what manner of
   death he is dying; he makes the air hurtle with the stones, but he
   does not choose to make his picture disgusting, or even painful. The
   face of the martyr is serene, and exulting; and we leave the picture,
   remembering only how "he fell asleep."

 GIOVANELLI, PALAZZO, at the Ponte di Noale. A fine example of
   fifteenth century Gothic, founded on the Ducal Palace.

 GIOVANNI E PAOLO, CHURCH OF ST.[72] Foundation of, III. 69. An
   impressive church, though none of its Gothic is comparable with that
   of the North, or with that of Verona. The Western door is interesting
   as one of the last conditions of Gothic design passing into
   Renaissance, very rich and beautiful of its kind, especially the
   wreath of fruit and flowers which forms its principal molding. The
   statue of Bartolomeo Colleone, in the little square beside the church,
   is certainly one of the noblest works in Italy. I have never seen
   anything approaching it in animation, in vigor of portraiture, or
   nobleness of line. The reader will need Lazari's Guide in making the
   circuit of the church, which is full of interesting monuments: but I
   wish especially to direct his attention to two pictures, besides the
   celebrated Peter Martyr: namely,

   1. _The Crucifixion_, by Tintoret; on the wall of the left-hand aisle,
   just before turning into the transept. A picture fifteen feet long by
   eleven or twelve high. I do not believe that either the "Miracle of
   St. Mark," or the great "Crucifixion" in the Scuola di San Rocco, cost
   Tintoret more pains than this comparatively small work, which is now
   utterly neglected, covered with filth and cobwebs, and fearfully
   injured. As a piece of color, and light and shade, it is altogether
   marvellous. Of all the fifty figures which the picture contains, there
   is not one which in any way injures or contends with another; nay,
   there is not a single fold of garment or touch of the pencil which
   could be spared; every virtue of Tintoret, as a painter, is there in
   its highest degree,--color at once the most intense and the most
   delicate, the utmost decision in the arrangement of masses of light,
   and yet half tones and modulations of endless variety; and all
   executed with a magnificence of handling which no words are energetic
   enough to describe. I have hardly ever seen a picture in which there
   was so much decision, and so little impetuosity, and in which so
   little was conceded to haste, to accident, or to weakness. It is too
   infinite a work to be describable; but among its minor passages of
   extreme beauty, should especially be noticed the manner in which the
   accumulated forms of the human body, which fill the picture from end
   to end, are prevented from being felt heavy, by the grace and
   elasticity of two or three sprays of leafage which spring from a
   broken root in the foreground, and rise conspicuous in shadow against
   an interstice filled by the pale blue, grey, and golden light in which
   the distant crowd is invested, the office of this foliage being, in an
   artistical point of view, correspondent to that of the trees set by
   the sculptors of the Ducal Palace on its angles. But they have a far
   more important meaning in the picture than any artistical one. If the
   spectator will look carefully at the root which I have called broken,
   he will find that in reality, it is not broken, but cut; the other
   branches of the young tree having _lately been cut away_. When we
   remember that one of the principal incidents in great San Rocco
   Crucifixion is the ass feeding on withered palm leaves, we shall be at
   no loss to understand the great painter's purpose in lifting the
   branch of this mutilated olive against the dim light of the distant
   sky; while, close beside it, St. Joseph of Arimathea drags along the
   dust a white garment--observe, the principal light of the
   picture,--stained with the blood of that King before whom, five days
   before, his crucifiers had strewn their own garments in the way.

   2. _Our Lady with the Camerlenghi._ (In the centre chapel of the three
   on the right of the choir.) A remarkable instance of the theoretical
   manner of representing Scriptural facts, which, at this time, as noted
   in the second chapter of this volume, was undermining the belief of
   the facts themselves. Three Venetian chamberlains desired to have
   their portraits painted, and at the same time to express their
   devotion to the Madonna; to that end they are painted kneeling before
   her, and in order to account for their all three being together, and
   to give a thread or clue to the story of the picture, they are
   represented as the Three Magi; but lest the spectator should think it
   strange that the Magi should be in the dress of Venetian chamberlains,
   the scene is marked as a mere ideality, by surrounding the person of
   the Virgin with saints who lived five hundred years after her. She has
   for attendants St. Theodore, St. Sebastian, and St. Carlo (query St.
   Joseph). One hardly knows whether most to regret the spirit which was
   losing sight of the verities of religious history in imaginative
   abstractions, or to praise the modesty and piety which desired rather
   to be represented as kneeling before the Virgin than in the discharge
   or among the insignia of important offices of state.

   As an "Adoration of the Magi," the picture is, of course, sufficiently
   absurd: the St. Sebastian leans back in the corner to be out of the
   way; the three Magi kneel, without the slightest appearance of
   emotion, to a Madonna seated in a Venetian loggia of the fifteenth
   century, and three Venetian servants behind bear their offerings in a
   very homely sack, tied up at the mouth. As a piece of portraiture and
   artistical composition, the work is altogether perfect, perhaps the
   best piece of Tintoret's portrait-painting in existence. It is very
   carefully and steadily wrought, and arranged with consummate skill on
   a difficult plan. The canvas is a long oblong, I think about eighteen
   or twenty feet long, by about seven high; one might almost fancy the
   painter had been puzzled to bring the piece into use, the figures
   being all thrown into positions which a little diminish their height.
   The nearest chamberlain is kneeling, the two behind him bowing
   themselves slightly, the attendants behind bowing lower, the Madonna
   sitting, the St. Theodore sitting still lower on the steps at her
   feet, and the St. Sebastian leaning back, so that all the lines of the
   picture incline more or less from right to left as they ascend. This
   slope, which gives unity to the detached groups, is carefully
   exhibited by what a mathematician would call coordinates,--the upright
   pillars of the loggia and the horizontal clouds of the beautiful sky.
   The color is very quiet, but rich and deep, the local tones being
   brought out with intense force, and the cast shadows subdued, the
   manner being much more that of Titian than of Tintoret. The sky
   appears full of light, though it is as dark as the flesh of the faces;
   and the forms of its floating clouds, as well as of the hills over
   which they rise, are drawn with a deep remembrance of reality. There
   are hundreds of pictures of Tintoret's more amazing than this, but I
   hardly know one that I more love.

   The reader ought especially to study the sculpture round the altar of
   the Capella del Rosario, as an example of the abuse of the sculptor's
   art; every accessory being labored out with as much ingenuity and
   intense effort to turn sculpture into painting, the grass, trees, and
   landscape being as far realized as possible, and in alto-relievo.
   These bas-reliefs are by various artists, and therefore exhibit the
   folly of the age, not the error of an individual.

   The following alphabetical list of the tombs in this church which are
   alluded to as described in the text, with references to the pages
   where they are mentioned, will save some trouble:

     Cavalli, Jacopo, III. 82.    |  Mocenigo, Pietro, III. 89.
     Cornaro, Marco, III. 11.     |  Mocenigo, Tomaso, I. 8, 26, III. 84.
     Dolfin, Giovanni, III. 78.   |  Morosini, Michele, III. 80.
     Giustiniani, Marco, I. 315.  |  Steno, Michele, III. 83.
     Mocenigo, Giovanni, III. 89. |  Vendramin, Andrea, I. 27, III. 88.

 GIOVANNI GRISOSTOMO, CHURCH OF ST. One of the most important in
   Venice. It is early Renaissance, containing some good sculpture, but
   chiefly notable as containing a noble Sebastian del Piombo, and a John
   Bellini, which a few years hence, unless it be "restored," will be
   esteemed one of the most precious pictures in Italy, and among the
   most perfect in the world. John Bellini is the only artist who appears
   to me to have united, in equal and magnificent measures, justness of
   drawing, nobleness of coloring, and perfect manliness of treatment,
   with the purest religious feeling. He did, as far as it is possible to
   do it, instinctively and unaffectedly, what the Caracci only pretended
   to do. Titian colors better, but has not his piety. Leonardo draws
   better, but has not his color. Angelico is more heavenly, but has not
   his manliness, far less his powers of art.

 GIOVANNI ELEMOSINARIO, CHURCH OF ST. Said to contain a Titian and a
   Bonifazio. Of no other interest.

 GIOVANNI IN BRAGOLA, CHURCH OF ST. A Gothic church of the fourteenth
   century, small, but interesting, and said to contain some precious
   works by Cima da Conegliano, and one by John Bellini.

 GIOVANNI NOVO, CHURCH OF ST. Of no importance.

 GIOVANNI, S., SCUOLA DI. A fine example of the Byzantine Renaissance,
   mixed with remnants of good late Gothic. The little exterior cortile
   is sweet in feeling, and Lazari praises highly the work of the
   interior staircase.

 GIUDECCA. The crescent-shaped island (or series of islands), which
   forms the most northern extremity of the city of Venice, though
   separated by a broad channel from the main city. Commonly said to
   derive its name from the number of Jews who lived upon it; but Lazari
   derives it from the word "Judicato," in Venetian dialect "Zudegà," it
   having been in old time "adjudged" as a kind of prison territory to
   the more dangerous and turbulent citizens. It is now inhabited only by
   the poor, and covered by desolate groups of miserable dwellings,
   divided by stagnant canals.

   Its two principal churches, the Redentore and St. Eufemia, are named
   in their alphabetical order.

 GIULIANO, CHURCH OF ST. Of no importance.

 GIUSEPPE DI CASTELLO, CHURCH OF ST. Said to contain a Paul Veronese:
   otherwise of no importance.

 GIUSTINA, CHURCH OF ST. Of no importance.

 GIUSTINIANI PALAZZO, on the Grand Canal, now Albergo all' Europa. Good
   late fourteenth century Gothic, but much altered.

 GIUSTINIANI, PALAZZO, next the Casa Foscari, on the Grand Canal.
   Lazari, I know not on what authority, says that this palace was built
   by the Giustiniani family before 1428. It is one of those founded
   directly on the Ducal Palace, together with the Casa Foscari at its
   side: and there could have been no doubt of their date on this ground;
   but it would be interesting, after what we have seen of the progress
   of the Ducal Palace, to ascertain the exact year of the erection of
   any of these imitations.

   This palace contains some unusually rich detached windows, full of
   tracery, of which the profiles are given in the Appendix, under the
   title of the Palace of the Younger Foscari, it being popularly
   reported to have belonged to the son of the Doge.

 GIUSTINIAN LOLIN, PALAZZO, on the Grand Canal. Of no importance.

 GRASSI PALAZZO, on the Grand Canal, now Albergo all' Imperator d'
   Austria. Of no importance.

 GREGORIO, CHURCH OF ST., on the Grand Canal. An important church of
   the fourteenth century, now desecrated, but still interesting. Its
   apse is on the little canal crossing from the Grand Canal to the
   Giudecca, beside the Church of the Salute, and is very characteristic
   of the rude ecclesiastical Gothic contemporary with the Ducal Palace.
   The entrance to its cloisters, from the Grand Canal, is somewhat
   later; a noble square door, with two windows on each side of it, the
   grandest examples in Venice of the late window of the fourth order.

   The cloister, to which this door gives entrance, is exactly
   contemporary with the finest work of the Ducal Palace, circa 1350. It
   is the loveliest cortile I know in Venice; its capitals consummate in
   design and execution; and the low wall on which they stand showing
   remnants of sculpture unique, as far as I know, in such application.

 GRIMANI, PALAZZO, on the Grand Canal, III. 32.

   There are several other palaces in Venice belonging to this family,
   but none of any architectural interest.


    J

 JESUITI, CHURCH OF THE. The basest Renaissance; but worth a visit in
   order to examine the imitations of curtains in white marble inlaid
   with green.

   It contains a Tintoret, "The Assumption," which I have not examined;
   and a Titian, "The Martyrdom of St. Lawrence," originally, it seems to
   me, of little value, and now, having been restored, of none.


    L

 LABIA PALAZZO, on the Canna Reggio. Of no importance.

 LAZZARO DE' MENDICANTI, CHURCH OF ST. Of no importance.

 LIBRERIA VECCHIA. A graceful building of the central Renaissance,
   designed by Sansovino, 1536, and much admired by all architects of the
   school. It was continued by Scamozzi, down the whole side of St.
   Mark's Place, adding another story above it, which modern critics
   blame as destroying the "eurithmia;" never considering that had the
   two low stories of the Library been continued along the entire length
   of the Piazza, they would have looked so low that the entire dignity
   of the square would have been lost. As it is, the Library is left in
   its originally good proportions, and the larger mass of the Procuratie
   Nuove forms a more majestic, though less graceful, side for the great
   square.

   But the real faults of the building are not in its number of stories,
   but in the design of the parts. It is one of the grossest examples of
   the base Renaissance habit of turning _keystones_ into _brackets_,
   throwing them out in bold projection (not less than a foot and a half)
   beyond the mouldings of the arch; a practice utterly barbarous,
   inasmuch as it evidently tends to dislocate the entire arch, if any
   real weight were laid on the extremity of the keystone; and it is also
   a very characteristic example of the vulgar and painful mode of
   filling spandrils by naked figures in alto-relievo, leaning against
   the arch on each side, and appearing as if they were continually in
   danger of slipping off. Many of these figures have, however, some
   merit in themselves; and the whole building is graceful and effective
   of its kind. The continuation of the Procuratie Nuove, at the western
   extremity of St. Mark's Place (together with various apartments in the
   great line of the Procuratie Nuove) forms the "Royal Palace," the
   residence of the Emperor when at Venice. This building is entirely
   modern, built in 1810, in imitation of the Procuratie Nuove, and on
   the site of Sansovino's Church of San Geminiano.

   In this range of buildings, including the Royal Palace, the Procuratie
   Nuove, the old Library, and the "Zecca" which is connected with them
   (the latter being an ugly building of very modern date, not worth
   notice architecturally), there are many most valuable pictures, among
   which I would especially direct attention, first to those in the
   Zecca, namely, a beautiful and strange Madonna, by Benedetto Diana;
   two noble Bonifazios; and two groups, by Tintoret, of the Provveditori
   della Zecca, by no means to be missed, whatever may be sacrificed to
   see them, on account of the quietness and veracity of their unaffected
   portraiture, and the absolute freedom from all vanity either in the
   painter or in his subjects.

   Next, in the "Antisala" of the old Library, observe the "Sapienza" of
   Titian, in the centre of the ceiling; a most interesting work in the
   light brilliancy of its color, and the resemblance to Paul Veronese.
   Then, in the great hall of the old Library, examine the two large
   Tintorets, "St. Mark saving a Saracen from Drowning," and the
   "Stealing of his Body from Constantinople," both rude, but great (note
   in the latter the dashing of the rain on the pavement, and running of
   the water about the feet of the figures): then in the narrow spaces
   between the windows, there are some magnificent single figures by
   Tintoret, among the finest things of the kind in Italy, or in Europe.
   Finally, in the gallery of pictures in the Palazzo Reale, among other
   good works of various kinds, are two of the most interesting
   Bonifazios in Venice, the "Children of Israel in their journeyings,"
   in one of which, if I recollect right, the quails are coming in flight
   across a sunset sky, forming one of the earliest instances I know of a
   thoroughly natural and Turneresque effect being felt and rendered by
   the old masters. The picture struck me chiefly from this circumstance;
   but, the note-book in which I had described it and its companion
   having been lost on my way home, I cannot now give a more special
   account of them, except that they are long, full of crowded figures,
   and peculiarly light in color and handling as compared with
   Bonifazio's work in general.

 LIO, CHURCH OF ST. Of no importance, but said to contain a spoiled
   Titian.

 LIO, SALIZZADA DI ST., windows in, II. 252, 257.

 LOREDAN, PALAZZO, on the Grand Canal, near the Rialto, II. 123, 393.
   Another palace of this name, on the Campo St. Stefano, is of no
   importance.

 LORENZO, CHURCH OF ST. Of no importance.

 LUCA, CHURCH OF ST. Its campanile is of very interesting and quaint
   early Gothic, and it is said to contain a Paul Veronese, "St Luke and
   the Virgin." In the little Campiello St. Luca, close by, is a very
   precious Gothic door, rich in brickwork, of the thirteenth century;
   and in the foundations of the houses on the same side of the square,
   but at the other end of it, are traceable some shafts and arches
   closely resembling the work of the Cathedral of Murano, and evidently
   having once belonged to some most interesting building.

 LUCIA, CHURCH OF ST. Of no importance.


    M

 MADDALENA, CHURCH OF STA. MARIA. Of no importance.

 MALIPIERO, PALAZZO, on the Campo St. M. Formosa, facing the canal at its
   extremity. A very beautiful example of the Byzantine Renaissance. Note
   the management of color in its inlaid balconies.

 MANFRINI, PALAZZO. The architecture is of no interest; and as it is in
   contemplation to allow the collection of pictures to be sold, I shall
   take no note of them. But even if they should remain, there are few of
   the churches in Venice where the traveller had not better spend his
   time than in this gallery; as, with the exception of Titian's
   "Entombment," one or two Giorgiones, and the little John Bellini (St.
   Jerome), the pictures are all of a kind which may be seen elsewhere.

 MANGILI VALMARANA, PALAZZO, on the Grand Canal. Of no importance.

 MANIN, PALAZZO, on the Grand Canal. Of no importance.

 MANZONI, PALAZZO, on the Grand Canal, near the Church of the Carità. A
   perfect and very rich example of Byzantine Renaissance: its warm
   yellow marbles are magnificent.

 MARCILIAN, CHURCH OF ST. Said to contain a Titian, "Tobit and the
   Angel:" otherwise of no importance.

 MARIA, CHURCHES OF STA. See FORMOSA, MATER DOMINI, MIRACOLI, ORTO,
   SALUTE, and ZOBENIGO.

 MARCO, SCUOLA DI SAN, III. 16.

 MARK, CHURCH OF ST., history of, II. 57; approach to, II. 71; general
   teaching of, II. 112, 116; measures of façade of, II. 126; balustrades
   of, II. 244, 247; cornices of, I. 311; horseshoe arches of, II. 249;
   entrances of, II. 271, III. 245; shafts of, II. 384; base in
   baptistery of, I. 290; mosaics in atrium of, II. 112; mosaics in
   cupola of, II. 114, III. 192; lily capitals of, II. 137; Plates
   illustrative of (Vol. II.), VI. VII. figs. 9, 10, 11, VIII. figs. 8,
   9, 12, 13, 15, IX. XI. fig. 1, and Plate III. Vol. III.

 MARK, SQUARE OF ST. (Piazza di San Marco), anciently a garden, II. 58;
   general effect of, II. 66, 116; plan of, II. 282.

 MARTINO, CHURCH OF ST. Of no importance.

 MATER DOMINI, CHURCH OF ST. MARIA. It contains two important pictures:
   one over the second altar on the right, "St. Christina," by Vincenzo
   Catena, a very lovely example of the Venetian religious school; and,
   over the north transept door, the "Finding of the Cross," by Tintoret,
   a carefully painted and attractive picture, but by no means a good
   specimen of the master, as far as regards power of conception. He does
   not seem to have entered into his subject. There is no wonder, no
   rapture, no entire devotion in any of the figures. They are only
   interested and pleased in a mild way; and the kneeling woman who hands
   the nails to a man stooping forward to receive them on the right hand,
   does so with the air of a person saying, "You had better take care of
   them; they may be wanted another time." This general coldness in
   expression is much increased by the presence of several figures on the
   right and left, introduced for the sake of portraiture merely; and
   the reality, as well as the feeling, of the scene is destroyed by our
   seeing one of the youngest and weakest of the women with a huge cross
   lying across her knees, the whole weight of it resting upon her. As
   might have been expected, where the conception is so languid, the
   execution is little delighted in; it is throughout steady and
   powerful, but in no place affectionate, and in no place impetuous. If
   Tintoret had always painted in this way, he would have sunk into a
   mere mechanist. It is, however, a genuine and tolerably well preserved
   specimen, and its female figures are exceedingly graceful; that of St.
   Helena very queenly, though by no means agreeable in feature. Among
   the male portraits on the left there is one different from the usual
   types which occur either in Venetian paintings or Venetian populace;
   it is carefully painted, and more like a Scotch Presbyterian minister,
   than a Greek. The background is chiefly composed of architecture,
   white, remarkably uninteresting in color, and still more so in form.
   This is to be noticed as one of the unfortunate results of the
   Renaissance teaching at this period. Had Tintoret backed his Empress
   Helena with Byzantine architecture, the picture might have been one of
   the most gorgeous he ever painted.

 MATER DOMINI, CAMPO DI STA. MARIA, II. 261. A most interesting little
   piazza, surrounded by early Gothic houses, once of singular beauty;
   the arcade at its extremity, of fourth order windows, drawn in my
   folio work, is one of the earliest and loveliest of its kind in
   Venice; and in the houses at the side is a group of second order
   windows with their intermediate crosses, all complete, and well worth
   careful examination.

 MICHELE IN ISOLA, CHURCH OF ST. On the island between Venice and
   Murano. The little Cappella Emiliana at the side of it has been much
   admired, but it would be difficult to find a building more feelingless
   or ridiculous. It is more like a German summer-house, or angle turret,
   than a chapel, and may be briefly described as a bee-hive set on a low
   hexagonal tower, with dashes of stone-work about its windows like the
   flourishes of an idle penman.

   The cloister of this church is pretty; and the attached cemetery is
   worth entering, for the sake of feeling the strangeness of the quiet
   sleeping ground in the midst of the sea.

 MICHIEL DALLE COLONNE, PALAZZO. Of no importance.

 MINELLI, PALAZZO. In the Corte del Maltese, at St. Paternian. It has a
   spiral external staircase, very picturesque, but of the fifteenth
   century and without merit.

 MIRACOLI, CHURCH OF STA. MARIA DEI. The most interesting and finished
   example in Venice of the Byzantine Renaissance, and one of the most
   important in Italy of the cinque-cento style. All its sculptures
   should be examined with great care, as the best possible examples of a
   bad style. Observe, for instance, that in spite of the beautiful work
   on the square pillars which support the gallery at the west end, they
   have no more architectural effect than two wooden posts. The same kind
   of failure in boldness of purpose exists throughout; and the building
   is, in fact, rather a small museum of unmeaning, though refined
   sculpture, than a piece of architecture.

   Its grotesques are admirable examples of the base Raphaelesque design
   examined above, III. 136. Note especially the children's heads tied up
   by the hair, in the lateral sculptures at the top of the altar steps.
   A rude workman, who could hardly have carved the head at all, might
   have allowed this or any other mode of expressing discontent with his
   own doings; but the man who could carve a child's head so perfectly
   must have been wanting in all human feeling, to cut it off, and tie it
   by the hair to a vine leaf. Observe, in the Ducal Palace, though far
   ruder in skill, the heads always _emerge_ from the leaves, they are
   never _tied_ to them.

 MISERICORDIA, CHURCH OF. The church itself is nothing, and contains
   nothing worth the traveller's time; but the Albergo de' Confratelli
   della Misericordia at its side is a very interesting and beautiful
   relic of the Gothic Renaissance. Lazari says, "del secolo xiv.;" but I
   believe it to be later. Its traceries are very curious and rich, and
   the sculpture of its capitals very fine for the late time. Close to
   it, on the right-hand side of the canal which is crossed by the wooden
   bridge, is one of the richest Gothic doors in Venice, remarkable for
   the appearance of antiquity in the general design and stiffness of its
   figures, though it bears its date 1505. Its extravagant crockets are
   almost the only features which, but for this written date, would at
   first have confessed its lateness; but, on examination, the figures
   will be found as bad and spiritless as they are apparently archaic,
   and completely exhibiting the Renaissance palsy of imagination.

   The general effect is, however, excellent, the whole arrangement
   having been borrowed from earlier work.

   The action of the statue of the Madonna, who extends her robe to
   shelter a group of diminutive figures, representative of the Society
   for whose house the sculpture was executed, may be also seen in most
   of the later Venetian figures of the Virgin which occupy similar
   situations. The image of Christ is placed in a medallion on her
   breast, thus fully, though conventionally, expressing the idea of
   self-support which is so often partially indicated by the great
   religious painters in their representations of the infant Jesus.

 MOISÈ, CHURCH OF ST., III. 124. Notable as one of the basest examples
   of the basest school of the Renaissance. It contains one important
   picture, namely "Christ washing the Disciples' Feet," by Tintoret; on
   the left side of the chapel, north of the choir. This picture has been
   originally dark, is now much faded--in parts, I believe, altogether
   destroyed--and is hung in the worst light of a chapel, where, on a
   sunny day at noon, one could not easily read without a candle. I
   cannot, therefore, give much information respecting it; but it is
   certainly one of the least successful of the painter's works, and both
   careless and unsatisfactory in its composition as well as its color.
   One circumstance is noticeable, as in a considerable degree detracting
   from the interest of most of Tintoret's representations of our Saviour
   with his disciples. He never loses sight of the fact that all were
   poor, and the latter ignorant; and while he never paints a senator, or
   a saint once thoroughly canonized, except as a gentleman, he is very
   careful to paint the Apostles, in their living intercourse with the
   Saviour, in such a manner that the spectator may see in an instant, as
   the Pharisee did of old, that they were unlearned and ignorant men;
   and, whenever we find them in a room, it is always such a one as would
   be inhabited by the lower classes. There seems some violation of this
   practice in the dais, or flight of steps, at the top of which the
   Saviour is placed in the present picture; but we are quickly reminded
   that the guests' chamber or upper room ready prepared was not likely
   to have been in a palace, by the humble furniture upon the floor,
   consisting of a tub with a copper saucepan in it, a coffee-pot, and a
   pair of bellows, curiously associated with a symbolic cup with a
   wafer, which, however, is in an injured part of the canvas, and may
   have been added by the priests. I am totally unable to state what the
   background of the picture is or has been; and the only point farther
   to be noted about it is the solemnity, which, in spite of the familiar
   and homely circumstances above noticed, the painter has given to the
   scene, by placing the Saviour, in the act of washing the feet of
   Peter, at the top of a circle of steps, on which the other Apostles
   kneel in adoration and astonishment.

 MORO, PALAZZO. See OTHELLO.

 MOROSINI, PALAZZO, near the Ponte dell' Ospedaletto, at San Giovannie
   Paolo. Outside it is not interesting, though the gateway shows remains
   of brickwork of the thirteenth century. Its interior court is
   singularly beautiful; the staircase of early fourteenth century Gothic
   has originally been superb, and the window in the angle above is the
   most perfect that I know in Venice of the kind; the lightly sculptured
   coronet is exquisitely introduced at the top of its spiral shaft.

   This palace still belongs to the Morosini family, to whose present
   representative, the Count Carlo Morosini, the reader is indebted for
   the note on the character of his ancestors, above, III. 213.

 MOROSINI, PALAZZO, at St. Stefano. Of no importance.


    N

 NANI-MOCENIGO, PALAZZO. (Now Hotel Danieli.) A glorious example of the
   central Gothic, nearly contemporary with the finest part of the Ducal
   Palace. Though less impressive in effect than the Casa Foscari or Casa
   Bernardo, it is of purer architecture than either: and quite unique in
   the delicacy of the form of the cusps in the central group of windows,
   which are shaped like broad scimitars, the upper foil of the windows
   being very small. If the traveller will compare these windows with
   the neighboring traceries of the Ducal Palace, he will easily perceive
   the peculiarity.

 NICOLO DEL LIDO, CHURCH OF ST. Of no importance.

 NOME DI GESU, CHURCH OF THE. Of no importance.


    O

 ORFANI, CHURCH OF THE. Of no importance.

 ORTO, CHURCH OF STA. MARIA, DELL'. An interesting example of Renaissance
   Gothic, the traceries of the windows being very rich and quaint.

   It contains four most important Tintorets: "The Last Judgment," "The
   Worship of the Golden Calf," "The Presentation of the Virgin," and
   "Martyrdom of St. Agnes." The first two are among his largest and
   mightiest works, but grievously injured by damp and neglect; and
   unless the traveller is accustomed to decipher the thoughts in a
   picture patiently, he need not hope to derive any pleasure from them.
   But no pictures will better reward a resolute study. The following
   account of the "Last Judgment," given in the second volume of "Modern
   Painters," will be useful in enabling the traveller to enter into the
   meaning of the picture, but its real power is only to be felt by
   patient examination of it.

   "By Tintoret only has this unimaginable event (the Last Judgment) been
   grappled with in its Verity; not typically nor symbolically, but as
   they may see it who shall not sleep, but be changed. Only one
   traditional circumstance he has received, with Dante and Michael
   Angelo, the Boat of the Condemned; but the impetuosity of his mind
   bursts out even in the adoption of this image; he has not stopped at
   the scowling ferryman of the one, nor at the sweeping blow and demon
   dragging of the other, but, seized Hylas like by the limbs, and
   tearing up the earth in his agony, the victim is dashed into his
   destruction; nor is it the sluggish Lethe, nor the fiery lake, that
   bears the cursed vessel, but the oceans of the earth and the waters of
   the firmament gathered into one white, ghastly cataract; the river of
   the wrath of God, roaring down into the gulf where the world has
   melted with its fervent heat, choked with the ruins of nations, and
   the limbs of its corpses tossed out of its whirling, like
   water-wheels. Bat-like, out of the holes and caverns and shadows of
   the earth, the bones gather, and the clay heaps heave, rattling and
   adhering into half-kneaded anatomies, that crawl, and startle, and
   struggle up among the putrid weeds, with the clay clinging to their
   clotted hair, and their heavy eyes sealed by the earth darkness yet,
   like his of old who went his way unseeing to the Siloam Pool; shaking
   off one by one the dreams of the prison-house, hardly hearing the
   clangor of the trumpets of the armies of God, blinded yet more, as
   they awake, by the white light of the new Heaven, until the great
   vortex of the four winds bears up their bodies to the judgment seat;
   the Firmament is all full of them, a very dust of human souls, that
   drifts, and floats, and falls into the interminable, inevitable light;
   the bright clouds are darkened with them as with thick snow, currents
   of atom life in the arteries of heaven, now soaring up slowly, and
   higher and higher still, till the eye and the thought can follow no
   farther, borne up, wingless, by their inward faith and by the angel
   powers invisible, now hurled in countless drifts of horror before the
   breath of their condemnation."

   Note in the opposite picture the way the clouds are wrapped about in
   the distant Sinai.

   The figure of the little Madonna in the "Presentation" should be
   compared with Titian's in his picture of the same subject in the
   Academy. I prefer Tintoret's infinitely: and note how much finer is
   the feeling with which Tintoret has relieved the glory round her head
   against the pure sky, than that which influenced Titian in encumbering
   his distance with architecture.

   The "Martyrdom of St. Agnes" _was_ a lovely picture. It has been
   "restored" since I saw it.

 OSPEDALETTO, CHURCH OF THE. The most monstrous example of the
   Grotesque Renaissance which there is in Venice; the sculptures on its
   façade representing masses of diseased figures and swollen fruit.

   It is almost worth devoting an hour to the successive examination of
   five buildings, as illustrative of the last degradation of the
   Renaissance. San Moisè is the most clumsy, Santa Maria Zobenigo the
   most impious, St. Eustachio the most ridiculous, the Ospedaletto the
   most monstrous, and the head at Santa Maria Formosa the most foul.

 OTHELLO, HOUSE OF, at the Carmini. The researches of Mr. Brown into
   the origin of the play of "Othello" have, I think, determined that
   Shakspeare wrote on definite historical grounds; and that Othello may
   be in many points identified with Christopher Moro, the lieutenant of
   the republic at Cyprus, in 1508. See "Ragguagli su Maria Sanuto," i.
   252.

   His palace was standing till very lately, a Gothic building of the
   fourteenth century, of which Mr. Brown possesses a drawing. It is now
   destroyed, and a modern square-windowed house built on its site. A
   statue, said to be a portrait of Moro, but a most paltry work, is set
   in a niche in the modern wall.


    P

 PANTALEONE, CHURCH OF ST. Said to contain a Paul Veronese; otherwise of
   no importance.

 PATERNIAN, CHURCH OF ST. Its little leaning tower forms an interesting
   object as the traveller sees it from the narrow canal which passes
   beneath the Porte San Paternian. The two arched lights of the belfry
   appear of very early workmanship, probably of the beginning of the
   thirteenth century.

 PESARO PALAZZO, on the Grand Canal. The most powerful and impressive
   in effect of all the palaces of the Grotesque Renaissance. The heads
   upon its foundation are very characteristic of the period, but there
   is more genius in them than usual. Some of the mingled expressions of
   faces and grinning casques are very clever.

 PIAZZETTA, pillars of, see Final Appendix under head "Capital." The
   two magnificent blocks of marble brought from St. Jean d'Acre, which
   form one of the principal ornaments of the Piazzetta, are Greek
   sculpture of the sixth century, and will be described in my folio
   work.

 PIETA, CHURCH OF THE. Of no importance.

 PIETRO, CHURCH OF ST., at Murano. Its pictures, once valuable, are now
   hardly worth examination, having been spoiled by neglect.

 PIETRO, DI CASTELLO, CHURCH OF ST., I. 7, 361. It is said to contain
   a Paul Veronese, and I suppose the so-called "Chair of St. Peter" must
   be worth examining.

 PISANI, PALAZZO, on the Grand Canal. The latest Venetian Gothic, just
   passing into Renaissance. The capitals of the first floor windows are,
   however, singularly spirited and graceful, very daringly under-cut,
   and worth careful examination. The Paul Veronese, once the glory of
   this palace, is, I believe, not likely to remain in Venice. The other
   picture in the same room, the "Death of Darius," is of no value.

 PISANI, PALAZZO, at St. Stefano. Late Renaissance, and of no merit,
   but grand in its colossal proportions, especially when seen from the
   narrow canal at its side, which terminated by the apse of the Church
   of San Stefano, is one of the most picturesque and impressive little
   pieces of water scenery in Venice.

 POLO, CHURCH OF ST. Of no importance, except as an example of the
   advantages accruing from restoration. M. Lazari says of it, "Before
   this church was modernized, its principal chapel was adorned with
   Mosaics, and possessed a pala of silver gilt, of Byzantine
   workmanship, which is now lost."

 POLO, SQUARE OF ST. (Campo San Polo.) A large and important square,
   rendered interesting chiefly by three palaces on the side of it
   opposite the church, of central Gothic (1360), and fine of their time,
   though small. One of their capitals has been given in Plate II. of
   this volume, fig. 12. They are remarkable as being decorated with
   sculptures of the Gothic time, in imitation of Byzantine ones; the
   period being marked by the dog-tooth and cable being used instead of
   the dentil round the circles.

 POLO, PALAZZO, at San G. Grisostomo (the house of Marco Polo), II. 139.
   Its interior court is full of interest, showing fragments of the old
   building in every direction, cornices, windows, and doors, of almost
   every period, mingled among modern rebuilding and restoration of all
   degrees of dignity.

 PORTA DELLA CARTA, II. 302.

 PRIULI, PALAZZO. A most important and beautiful early Gothic Palace,
   at San Severo; the main entrance is from the Fundamento San Severo,
   but the principal façade is on the other side, towards the canal. The
   entrance has been grievously defaced, having had winged lions filling
   the spandrils of its pointed arch, of which only feeble traces are now
   left, the façade has very early fourth order windows in the lower
   story, and above, the beautiful range of fifth order windows drawn at
   the bottom of Plate XVIII. Vol. II., where the heads of the fourth
   order range are also seen (note their inequality, the larger one at
   the flank). This Palace has two most interesting traceried angle
   windows also, which, however, I believe are later than those on the
   façade; and finally, a rich and bold interior staircase.

   PROCURATIE NUOVE, see "LIBRERIA" VECCHIA: A graceful series buildings,
   of late fifteenth century design, forming the northern side of St.
   Mark's Place, but of no particular interest.


    Q

 QUERINI, PALAZZO, now the Beccherie, II. 255, III. 234.


    R

 RAFFAELLE, CHIESA DELL'ANGELO. Said to contain a Bonifazio, otherwise of
   no importance.

 REDENTORE, CHURCH OF THE, II. 378. It contains three interesting John
   Bellinis, and also, in the sacristy, a most beautiful Paul Veronese.

 REMER, CORTE DEL, house in. II. 251.

 REZZONICO, PALAZZO, on the Grand Canal. Of the Grotesque Renaissance
   time, but less extravagant than usual.

 RIALTO, BRIDGE OF THE. The best building raised in the time of the
   Grotesque Renaissance; very noble in its simplicity, in its
   proportions, and in its masonry. Note especially the grand way in
   which the oblique archstones rest on the butments of the bridge, safe,
   palpably both to the sense and eye: note also the sculpture of the
   Annunciation on the southern side of it; how beautifully arranged, so
   as to give more lightness and a grace to the arch--_the dove, flying
   towards the Madonna, forming the keystone_,--and thus the whole action
   of the figures being parallel to the curve of the arch, while all the
   masonry is at right angles to it. Note, finally, one circumstance
   which gives peculiar firmness to the figure of the angel, and
   associates itself with the general expression of strength in the
   whole building; namely that the sole of the advanced foot is set
   perfectly level, as if placed on the ground, instead of being thrown
   back behind like a heron's, as in most modern figures of this kind.

   The sculptures themselves are not good; but these pieces of feeling in
   them are very admirable. The two figures on the other side, St. Mark
   and St. Theodore, are inferior, though all by the same sculptor,
   Girolamo Campagna.

   The bridge was built by Antonio da Ponte, in 1588. It was anciently of
   wood, with a drawbridge in the centre, a representation of which may
   be seen in one of Carpaccio's pictures at the Accademia delle Belle
   Arti: and the traveller should observe that the interesting effect,
   both of this and the Bridge of Sighs, depends in great part on their
   both being _more_ than bridges; the one a covered passage, the other a
   row of shops, sustained on an arch. No such effect can be produced
   merely by the masonry of the roadway itself.

 RIO DEL PALAZZO, II. 282.

 ROCCO, CAMPIELLO DI SAN, windows in, II. 258.

 ROCCO, CHURCH OF ST. Notable only for the most interesting pictures by
   Tintoret which it contains, namely:

   1. _San Rocco before the Pope._ (On the left of the door as we enter.)
   A delightful picture in his best manner, but not much labored; and,
   like several other pictures in this church, it seems to me to have
   been executed at some period of the painter's life when he was either
   in ill health, or else had got into a mechanical way of painting, from
   having made too little reference to nature for a long time. There is
   something stiff and forced in the white draperies on both sides, and a
   general character about the whole which I can feel better than I can
   describe; but which, if I had been the painter's physician, would have
   immediately caused me to order him to shut up his painting-room, and
   take a voyage to the Levant, and back again. The figure of the Pope
   is, however, extremely beautiful, and is not unworthy, in its jewelled
   magnificence, here dark against the sky, of comparison with the figure
   of the high priest in the "Presentation," in the Scuola di San Rocco.

   2. _Annunciation._ (On the other side of the door, on entering.) A
   most disagreeable and dead picture, having all the faults of the age,
   and none of the merits of the painter. It must be a matter of future
   investigation to me, what could cause the fall of his mind from a
   conception so great and so fiery as that of the "Annunciation" in the
   Scuola di San Rocco, to this miserable reprint of an idea worn out
   centuries before. One of the most inconceivable things in it,
   considered as the work of Tintoret, is that where the angel's robe
   drifts away behind his limb, one cannot tell by the character of the
   outline, or by the tones of the color, whether the cloud comes in
   before the robe, or whether the robe cuts upon the cloud. The Virgin
   is uglier than that of the Scuola, and not half so real; and the
   draperies are crumpled in the most commonplace and ignoble folds. It
   is a picture well worth study, as an example of the extent to which
   the greatest mind may be betrayed by the abuse of its powers, and the
   neglect of its proper food in the study of nature.

   3. _Pool of Bethesda._ (On the right side of the church, in its
   centre, the lowest of the two pictures which occupy the wall.) A noble
   work, but eminently disagreeable, as must be all pictures of this
   subject; and with the same character in it of undefinable want, which
   I have noticed in the two preceding works. The main figure in it is
   the cripple, who has taken up his bed; but the whole effect of this
   action is lost by his not turning to Christ, but flinging it on his
   shoulder like a triumphant porter with a huge load; and the corrupt
   Renaissance architecture, among which the figures are crowded, is both
   ugly in itself, and much too small for them. It is worth noticing, for
   the benefit of persons who find fault with the perspective of the
   Pre-Raphaelites, that the perspective of the brackets beneath these
   pillars is utterly absurd; and that, in fine, the presence or absence
   of perspective has nothing to do with the merits of a great picture:
   not that the perspective of the Pre-Raphaelites _is_ false in any case
   that I have examined, the objection being just as untenable as it is
   ridiculous.

   4. _San Rocco in the Desert._ (Above the last-named picture.) A single
   recumbent figure in a not very interesting landscape, deserving less
   attention than a picture of St. Martin just opposite to it,--a noble
   and knightly figure on horseback by Pordenone, to which I cannot pay a
   greater compliment than by saying that I was a considerable time in
   doubt whether or not it was another Tintoret.

   5. _San Rocco in the Hospital._ (On the right-hand side of the altar.)
   There are four vast pictures by Tintoret in the dark choir of this
   church, not only important by their size (each being some twenty-five
   feet long by ten feet high), but also elaborate compositions; and
   remarkable, one for its extraordinary landscape, and the other as the
   most studied picture in which the painter has introduced horses in
   violent action. In order to show what waste of human mind there is in
   these dark churches of Venice, it is worth recording that, as I was
   examining these pictures, there came in a party of eighteen German
   tourists, not hurried, nor jesting among themselves as large parties
   often do, but patiently submitting to their cicerone, and evidently
   desirous of doing their duty as intelligent travellers. They sat down
   for a long time on the benches of the nave, looked a little at the
   "Pool of Bethesda," walked up into the choir and there heard a lecture
   of considerable length from their _valet-de-place_ upon some subject
   connected with the altar itself, which, being in German, I did not
   understand; they then turned and went slowly out of the church, not
   one of the whole eighteen ever giving a single glance to any of the
   four Tintorets, and only one of them, as far as I saw, even raising
   his eyes to the walls on which they hung, and immediately withdrawing
   them, with a jaded and _nonchalant_ expression easily interpretable
   into "Nothing but old black pictures." The two Tintorets above
   noticed, at the end of the church, were passed also without a glance;
   and this neglect is not because the pictures have nothing in them
   capable of arresting the popular mind, but simply because they are
   totally in the dark, or confused among easier and more prominent
   objects of attention. This picture, which I have called "St. Rocco in
   the Hospital," shows him, I suppose, in his general ministrations at
   such places, and is one of the usual representations of a disgusting
   subject from which neither Orcagna nor Tintoret seems ever to have
   shrunk. It is a very noble picture, carefully composed and highly
   wrought; but to me gives no pleasure, first, on account of its
   subject, secondly, on account of its dull brown tone all over,--it
   being impossible, or nearly so, in such a scene, and at all events
   inconsistent with its feeling, to introduce vivid color of any kind.
   So it is a brown study of diseased limbs in a close room.

   6. _Cattle Piece._ (Above the picture last described.) I can give no
   other name to this picture, whose subject I can neither guess nor
   discover, the picture being in the dark, and the guide-books leaving
   me in the same position. All I can make out of it is, that there is a
   noble landscape with cattle and figures. It seems to me the best
   landscape of Tintoret's in Venice, except the "Flight into Egypt;" and
   is even still more interesting from its savage character, the
   principal trees being pines, something like Titian's in his "St.
   Francis receiving the Stigmata," and chestnuts on the slopes and in
   the hollows of the hills; the animals also seem first-rate. But it is
   too high, too much faded, and too much in the dark to be made out. It
   seems never to have been rich in color, rather cool and grey, and very
   full of light.

   7. _Finding of Body of San Rocco._ (On the left-hand side of the
   altar.) An elaborate, but somewhat confused picture, with a flying
   angel in a blue drapery; but it seemed to me altogether uninteresting,
   or perhaps requiring more study than I was able to give it.

   8. _San Rocco in Campo d' Armata._ So this picture is called by the
   sacristan. I could see no San Rocco in it; nothing but a wild group of
   horses and warriors in the most magnificent confusion of fall and
   flight ever painted by man. They seem all dashed different ways as if
   by a whirlwind; and a whirlwind there must be, or a thunderbolt,
   behind them, for a huge tree is torn up and hurled into the air beyond
   the central figure, as if it were a shivered lance. Two of the horses
   meet in the midst, as if in a tournament; but in madness of fear, not
   in hostility; on the horse to the right is a standard-bearer, who
   stoops as from some foe behind him, with the lance laid across his
   saddle-bow, level, and the flag stretched out behind him as he flies,
   like the sail of a ship drifting from its mast; the central horseman,
   who meets the shock, of storm, or enemy, whatever it be, is hurled
   backwards from his seat, like a stone from a sling; and this figure
   with the shattered tree trunk behind it, is the most noble part of the
   picture. There is another grand horse on the right, however, also in
   full action. Two gigantic figures on foot, on the left, meant to be
   nearer than the others, would, it seems to me, have injured the
   picture, had they been clearly visible; but time has reduced them to
   perfect subordination.


 ROCCO, SCUOLA DI SAN, bases of, I. 291, 431; soffit ornaments of, I.
   337. An interesting building of the early Renaissance (1517), passing
   into Roman Renaissance. The wreaths of leafage about its shafts are
   wonderfully delicate and fine, though misplaced.

   As regards the pictures which it contains, it is one of the three most
   precious buildings in Italy; buildings, I mean, consistently decorated
   with a series of paintings at the time of their erection, and still
   exhibiting that series in its original order. I suppose there can be
   little question, but that the three most important edifices of this
   kind in Italy are the Sistine Chapel, the Campo Santo of Pisa, and the
   Scuola di San Rocco at Venice: the first is painted by Michael Angelo;
   the second by Orcagna, Benozzo Gozzoli, Pietro Laurati, and several
   other men whose works are as rare as they are precious; and the third
   by Tintoret.

   Whatever the traveller may miss in Venice, he should therefore give
   unembarrassed attention and unbroken time to the Scuola di San Rocco;
   and I shall, accordingly, number the pictures, and note in them, one
   by one, what seemed to me most worthy of observation.

   There are sixty-two in all, but eight of these are merely of children
   or children's heads, and two of unimportant figures. The number of
   valuable pictures is fifty-two; arranged on the walls and ceilings of
   three rooms, so badly lighted, in consequence of the admirable
   arrangements of the Renaissance architect, that it is only in the
   early morning that some of the pictures can be seen at all, nor can
   they ever be seen but imperfectly. They were all painted, however, for
   their places in the dark, and, as compared with Tintoret's other
   works, are therefore, for the most part, nothing more than vast
   sketches, made to produce, under a certain degree of shadow, the
   effect of finished pictures. Their treatment is thus to be considered
   as a kind of scene-painting; differing from ordinary scene-painting
   only in this, that the effect aimed at is not _that of a natural
   scene_ but _a perfect picture_. They differ in this respect from all
   other existing works; for there is not, as far as I know, any other
   instance in which a great master has consented to work for a room
   plunged into almost total obscurity. It is probable that none but
   Tintoret would have undertaken the task, and most fortunate that he
   was forced to it. For in this magnificent scene-painting we have, of
   course, more wonderful examples, both of his handling, and knowledge
   of effect, than could ever have been exhibited in finished pictures;
   while the necessity of doing much with few strokes keeps his mind so
   completely on the stretch throughout the work (while yet the velocity
   of production prevented his being wearied), that no other series of
   his works exhibits powers so exalted. On the other hand, owing to the
   velocity and coarseness of the painting, it is more liable to injury
   through drought or damp; and, as the walls have been for years
   continually running down with rain, and what little sun gets into the
   place contrives to fall all day right on one or other of the pictures,
   they are nothing but wrecks of what they were; and the ruins of
   paintings originally coarse are not likely ever to be attractive to
   the public mind. Twenty or thirty years ago they were taken down to be
   retouched; but the man to whom the task was committed providentially
   died, and only one of them was spoiled. I have found traces of his
   work upon another, but not to an extent very seriously destructive.
   The rest of the sixty-two, or, at any rate, all that are in the upper
   room, appear entirely intact.

   Although, as compared with his other works, they are all very scenic
   in execution, there are great differences in their degrees of finish;
   and, curiously enough, some on the ceilings and others in the darkest
   places in the lower room are very nearly finished pictures, while the
   "Agony in the Garden," which is in one of the best lights in the upper
   room, appears to have been painted in a couple of hours with a broom
   for a brush.

   For the traveller's greater convenience, I shall give a rude plan of
   the arrangement, and list of the subjects, of each group of pictures
   before examining them in detail.

   First Group. On the walls of the room on the ground floor.

   [Illustration:

      1. Annunciation.                5. The Magdalen.
      2. Adoration of Magi.           6. St. Mary of Egypt.
      3. Flight into Egypt.           7. Circumcision.
      4. Massacre of Innocents.       8. Assumption of Virgin.

      At the turn of the stairs leading to the upper room:
      9. Visitation.]

   1. _The Annunciation._ This, which first strikes the eye, is a very
   just representative of the whole group, the execution being carried to
   the utmost limits of boldness consistent with completion. It is a
   well-known picture, and need not therefore be specially described, but
   one or two points in it require notice. The face of the Virgin is very
   disagreeable to the spectator from below, giving the idea of a woman
   about thirty, who had never been handsome. If the face is untouched,
   it is the only instance I have ever seen of Tintoret's failing in an
   intended effect, for, when seen near, the face is comely and youthful,
   and expresses only surprise, instead of the pain and fear of which it
   bears the aspect in the distance. I could not get near enough to see
   whether it had been retouched. It looks like Tintoret's work, though
   rather hard; but, as there are unquestionable marks in the retouching
   of this picture, it is possible that some slight restoration of lines
   supposed to be faded, entirely alter the distant expression of the
   face. One of the evident pieces of repainting is the scarlet of the
   Madonna's lap, which is heavy and lifeless. A far more injurious one
   is the strip of sky seen through the doorway by which the angel
   enters, which has originally been of the deep golden color of the
   distance on the left, and which the blundering restorer has daubed
   over with whitish blue, so that it looks like a bit of the wall;
   luckily he has not touched the outlines of the angel's black wings, on
   which the whole expression of the picture depends. This angel and the
   group of small cherubs above form a great swinging chain, of which the
   dove representing the Holy Spirit forms the bend. The angels in their
   flight seem to be attached to this as the train of fire is to a
   rocket; all of them appearing to have swooped down with the swiftness
   of a falling star.

   2. _Adoration of the Magi._ The most finished picture in the Scuola,
   except the "Crucifixion," and perhaps the most delightful of the
   whole. It unites every source of pleasure that a picture can possess:
   the highest elevation of principal subject, mixed with the lowest
   detail of picturesque incident; the dignity of the highest ranks of
   men, opposed to the simplicity of the lowest; the quietness and
   serenity of an incident in cottage life, contrasted with the
   turbulence of troops of horsemen and the spiritual power of angels.
   The placing of the two doves as principal points of light in the front
   of the picture, in order to remind the spectator of the poverty of the
   mother whose child is receiving the offerings and adoration of three
   monarchs, is one of Tintoret's master touches; the whole scene,
   indeed, is conceived in his happiest manner. Nothing can be at once
   more humble or more dignified than the bearing of the kings; and there
   is a sweet reality given to the whole incident by the Madonna's
   stooping forward and lifting her hand in admiration of the vase of
   gold which has been set before the Christ, though she does so with
   such gentleness and quietness that her dignity is not in the least
   injured by the simplicity of the action. As if to illustrate the means
   by which the Wise men were brought from the East, the whole picture is
   nothing but a large star, of which Christ is the centre; all the
   figures, even the timbers of the roof, radiate from the small bright
   figure on which the countenances of the flying angels are bent, the
   star itself, gleaming through the timbers above, being quite
   subordinate. The composition would almost be too artificial were it
   not broken by the luminous distance where the troop of horsemen are
   waiting for the kings. These, with a dog running at full speed, at
   once interrupt the symmetry of the lines, and form a point of relief
   from the over concentration of all the rest of the action.

   3. _Flight into Egypt._ One of the principal figures here is the
   donkey. I have never seen any of the nobler animals--lion, or leopard,
   or horse, or dragon--made so sublime as this quiet head of the
   domestic ass, chiefly owing to the grand motion in the nostril and
   writhing in the ears. The space of the picture is chiefly occupied by
   lovely landscape, and the Madonna and St. Joseph are pacing their way
   along a shady path upon the banks of a river at the side of the
   picture. I had not any conception, until I got near, how much pains
   had been taken with the Virgin's head; its expression is as sweet and
   as intense as that of any of Raffaelle's, its reality far greater. The
   painter seems to have intended that everything should be subordinate
   to the beauty of this single head; and the work is a wonderful proof
   of the way in which a vast field of canvas may be made conducive to
   the interest of a single figure. This is partly accomplished by
   slightness of painting, so that on close examination, while there is
   everything to astonish in the masterly handling and purpose, there is
   not much perfect or very delightful painting; in fact, the two figures
   are treated like the living figures in a scene at the theatre, and
   finished to perfection, while the landscape is painted as hastily as
   the scenes, and with the same kind of opaque size color. It has,
   however, suffered as much as any of the series, and it is hardly fair
   to judge of its tones and colors in its present state.

   4. _Massacre of the Innocents._ The following account of this picture,
   given in "Modern Painters," may be useful to the traveller, and is
   therefore here repeated. "I have before alluded to the painfulness of
   Raffaelle's treatment of the Massacre of the Innocents. Fuseli affirms
   of it, that, 'in dramatic gradation he disclosed all the mother
   through every image of pity and terror.' If this be so, I think the
   philosophical spirit has prevailed over the imaginative. The
   imagination never errs; it sees all that is, and all the relations
   and bearings of it; but it would not have confused the mortal frenzy
   of maternal terror, with various development of maternal character.
   Fear, rage, and agony, at their utmost pitch, sweep away all
   character: humanity itself would be lost in maternity, the woman would
   become the mere personification of animal fury or fear. For this
   reason all the ordinary representations of this subject are, I think,
   false and cold: the artist has not heard the shrieks, nor mingled with
   the fugitives; he has sat down in his study to convulse features
   methodically, and philosophize over insanity. Not so Tintoret.
   Knowing, or feeling, that the expression of the human face was, in
   such circumstances, not to be rendered, and that the effort could only
   end in an ugly falsehood, he denies himself all aid from the features,
   he feels that if he is to place himself or us in the midst of that
   maddened multitude, there can be no time allowed for watching
   expression. Still less does he depend on details of murder or
   ghastliness of death; there is no blood, no stabbing or cutting, but
   there is an awful substitute for these in the chiaroscuro. The scene
   is the outer vestibule of a palace, the slippery marble floor is
   fearfully barred across by sanguine shadows, so that our eyes seem to
   become bloodshot and strained with strange horror and deadly vision; a
   lake of life before them, like the burning seen of the doomed Moabite
   on the water that came by the way of Edom: a huge flight of stairs,
   without parapet, descends on the left; down this rush a crowd of women
   mixed with the murderers; the child in the arms of one has been seized
   by the limbs, _she hurls herself over the edge, and falls head
   downmost, dragging the child out of the grasp by her weight_;--she
   will be dashed dead in a second:--close to us is the great struggle; a
   heap of the mothers, entangled in one mortal writhe with each other
   and the swords; one of the murderers dashed down and crushed beneath
   them, the sword of another caught by the blade and dragged at by a
   woman's naked hand; the youngest and fairest of the women, her child
   just torn away from a death grasp, and clasped to her breast with the
   grip of a steel vice, falls backwards, helpless over the heap, right
   on the sword points; all knit together and hurled down in one
   hopeless, frenzied, furious abandonment of body and soul in the
   effort to save. Far back, at the bottom of the stairs, there is
   something in the shadow like a heap of clothes. It is a woman, sitting
   quiet,--quite quiet,--still as any stone; she looks down steadfastly
   on her dead child, laid along on the floor before her, and her hand is
   pressed softly upon her brow."

   I have nothing to add to the above description of this picture, except
   that I believe there may have been some change in the color of the
   shadow that crosses the pavement. The chequers of the pavements are,
   in the light, golden white and pale grey; in the shadow, red and dark
   grey, the white in the sunshine becoming red in the shadow. I formerly
   supposed that this was meant to give greater horror to the scene, and
   it is very like Tintoret if it be so; but there is a strangeness and
   discordance in it which makes me suspect the colors may have changed.

   5. _The Magdalen._ This and the picture opposite to it, "St. Mary of
   Egypt," have been painted to fill up narrow spaces between the windows
   which were not large enough to receive compositions, and yet in which
   single figures would have looked awkwardly thrust into the corner.
   Tintoret has made these spaces as large as possible by filling them
   with landscapes, which are rendered interesting by the introduction of
   single figures of very small size. He has not, however, considered his
   task, of making a small piece of wainscot look like a large one, worth
   the stretch of his powers, and has painted these two landscapes just
   as carelessly and as fast as an upholsterer's journeyman finishing a
   room at a railroad hotel. The color is for the most part opaque, and
   dashed or scrawled on in the manner of a scene-painter; and as during
   the whole morning the sun shines upon the one picture, and during the
   afternoon upon the other, hues, which were originally thin and
   imperfect, are now dried in many places into mere dirt upon the
   canvas. With all these drawbacks the pictures are of very high
   interest, for although, as I said, hastily and carelessly, they are
   not languidly painted; on the contrary, he has been in his hottest and
   grandest temper; and in this first one ("Magdalen") the laurel tree,
   with its leaves driven hither and thither among flakes of fiery cloud,
   has been probably one of the greatest achievements that his hand
   performed in landscape: its roots are entangled in underwood; of which
   every leaf seems to be articulated, yet all is as wild as if it had
   grown there instead of having been painted; there has been a mountain
   distance, too, and a sky of stormy light, of which I infinitely regret
   the loss, for though its masses of light are still discernible, its
   variety of hue is all sunk into a withered brown. There is a curious
   piece of execution in the striking of the light upon a brook which
   runs under the roots of the laurel in the foreground: these roots are
   traced in shadow against the bright surface of the water; another
   painter would have drawn the light first, and drawn the dark roots
   over it. Tintoret has laid in a brown ground which he has left for the
   roots, and painted the water through their interstices with a few
   mighty rolls of his brush laden with white.

   6. _St. Mary of Egypt._ This picture differs but little in the plan,
   from the one opposite, except that St. Mary has her back towards us,
   and the Magdalen her face, and that the tree on the other side of the
   brook is a palm instead of a laurel. The brook (Jordan?) is, however,
   here much more important; and the water painting is exceedingly fine.
   Of all painters that I know, in old times, Tintoret is the fondest of
   running water; there was a sort of sympathy between it and his own
   impetuous spirit. The rest of the landscape is not of much interest,
   except so far as it is pleasant to see trunks of trees drawn by single
   strokes of the brush.

   7. _The Circumcision of Christ._ The custode has some story about this
   picture having been painted in imitation of Paul Veronese. I much
   doubt if Tintoret ever imitated any body; but this picture is the
   expression of his perception of what Veronese delighted in, the
   nobility that there may be in mere golden tissue and colored drapery.
   It is, in fact, a picture of the moral power of gold and color; and
   the chief use of the attendant priest is to support upon his shoulders
   the crimson robe, with its square tablets of black and gold; and yet
   nothing is withdrawn from the interest or dignity of the scene.
   Tintoret has taken immense pains with the head of the high-priest. I
   know not any existing old man's head so exquisitely tender, or so
   noble in its lines. He receives the Infant Christ in his arms
   kneeling, and looking down upon the Child with infinite veneration and
   love; and the flashing of golden rays from its head is made the centre
   of light, and all interest. The whole picture is like a golden charger
   to receive the Child; the priest's dress is held up behind him, that
   it may occupy larger space; the tables and floor are covered with
   chequer-work; the shadows of the temple are filled with brazen lamps;
   and above all are hung masses of curtains, whose crimson folds are
   strewn over with golden flakes. Next to the "Adoration of the Magi"
   this picture is the most laboriously finished of the Scuola di San
   Rocco, and it is unquestionably the highest existing type of the
   sublimity which may be thrown into the treatment of accessaries of
   dress and decoration.

   8. _Assumption of the Virgin._ On the tablet or panel of stone which
   forms the side of the tomb out of which the Madonna rises, is this
   inscription, in large letters, REST. ANTONIUS FLORIAN, 1834. Exactly
   in proportion to a man's idiocy, is always the size of the letters in
   which he writes his name on the picture that he spoils. The old
   mosaicists in St. Mark's have not, in a single instance, as far as I
   know, signed their names; but the spectator who wishes to know who
   destroyed the effect of the nave, may see his name inscribed, twice
   over, in letters half a foot high, BARTOLOMEO BOZZA. I have never seen
   Tintoret's name signed, except in the great "Crucifixion;" but this
   Antony Florian, I have no doubt, repainted the whole side of the tomb
   that he might put his name on it. The picture is, of course, ruined
   wherever he touched it; that is to say, half over; the circle of
   cherubs in the sky is still pure; and the design of the great painter
   is palpable enough yet in the grand flight of the horizontal angel, on
   whom the Madonna half leans as she ascends. It has been a noble
   picture, and is a grievous loss; but, happily, there are so many pure
   ones, that we need not spend time in gleaning treasures out of the
   ruins of this.

   9. _Visitation._ A small picture, painted in his very best manner;
   exquisite in its simplicity, unrivalled in vigor, well preserved, and,
   as a piece of painting, certainly one of the most precious in Venice.
   Of course it does not show any of his high inventive powers; nor can a
   picture of four middle-sized figures be made a proper subject of
   comparison with large canvases containing forty or fifty; but it is,
   for this very reason, painted with such perfect ease, and yet with no
   slackness either of affection or power, that there is no picture that
   I covet so much. It is, besides, altogether free from the Renaissance
   taint of dramatic effect. The gestures are as simple and natural as
   Giotto's, only expressed by grander lines, such as none but Tintoret
   ever reached. The draperies are dark, relieved against a light sky,
   the horizon being excessively low, and the outlines of the drapery so
   severe, that the intervals between the figures look like ravines
   between great rocks, and have all the sublimity of an Alpine valley at
   twilight. This precious picture is hung about thirty feet above the
   eye, but by looking at it in a strong light, it is discoverable that
   the Saint Elizabeth is dressed in green and crimson, the Virgin in the
   peculiar red which all great colorists delight in--a sort of glowing
   brick-color or brownish scarlet, opposed to rich golden brownish
   black; and both have white kerchiefs, or drapery, thrown over their
   shoulders. Zacharias leans on his staff behind them in a black dress
   with white sleeves. The stroke of brilliant white light, which
   outlines the knee of Saint Elizabeth, is a curious instance of the
   habit of the painter to relieve his dark forms by a sort of halo of
   more vivid light, which, until lately, one would have been apt to
   suppose a somewhat artificial and unjustifiable means of effect. The
   daguerreotype has shown, what the naked eye never could, that the
   instinct of the great painter was true, and that there is actually
   such a sudden and sharp line of light round the edges of dark objects
   relieved by luminous space.

   Opposite this picture is a most precious Titian, the "Annunciation,"
   full of grace and beauty. I think the Madonna one of the sweetest
   figures he ever painted. But if the traveller has entered at all into
   the spirit of Tintoret, he will immediately feel the comparative
   feebleness and conventionality of the Titian. Note especially the mean
   and petty folds of the angel's drapery, and compare them with the
   draperies of the opposite picture. The larger pictures at the sides of
   the stairs by Zanchi and Negri, are utterly worthless.

   [Illustration: Second Group. On the walls of the upper room.

      10. Adoration of Shepherds.     17. Resurrection of Lazarus.
      11. Baptism.                    18. Ascension.
      12. Resurrection.               19. Pool of Bethesda.
      13. Agony in Garden.            20. Temptation.
      14. Last Supper.                21. St. Rocco.
      15. Altar Piece: St. Rocco.     22. St. Sebastian.
      16. Miracle of Loaves.]

   10. _The Adoration of the Shepherds._ This picture commences the
   series of the upper room, which, as already noticed, is painted with
   far less care than that of the lower. It is one of the painter's
   inconceivable caprices that the only canvases that are in good light
   should be covered in this hasty manner, while those in the dungeon
   below, and on the ceiling above, are all highly labored. It is,
   however, just possible that the covering of these walls may have been
   an after-thought, when he had got tired of his work. They are also,
   for the most part, illustrative of a principle of which I am more and
   more convinced every day, that historical and figure pieces ought not
   to be made vehicles for effects of light. The light which is fit for a
   historical picture is that tempered semi-sunshine of which, in
   general, the works of Titian are the best examples, and of which the
   picture we have just passed, "The Visitation," is a perfect example
   from the hand of one greater than Titian; so also the three
   "Crucifixions" of San Rocco, San Cassano, and St. John and Paul; the
   "Adoration of the Magi" here; and, in general, the finest works of
   the master; but Tintoret was not a man to work in any formal or
   systematic manner; and, exactly like Turner, we find him recording
   every effect which Nature herself displays. Still he seems to regard
   the pictures which deviate from the great general principle of
   colorists rather as "tours de force" than as sources of pleasure; and
   I do not think there is any instance of his having worked out one of
   these tricky pictures with thorough affection, except only in the case
   of the "Marriage of Cana." By tricky pictures, I mean those which
   display light entering in different directions, and attract the eye to
   the effects rather than to the figure which displays them. Of this
   treatment, we have already had a marvellous instance in the
   candle-light picture of the "Last Supper" in San Giorgio Maggiore.
   This "Adoration of the Shepherds" has probably been nearly as
   wonderful when first painted: the Madonna is seated on a kind of
   hammock floor made of rope netting, covered with straw; it divides the
   picture into two stories, of which the uppermost contains the Virgin,
   with two women who are adoring Christ, and shows light entering from
   above through the loose timbers of the roof of the stable, as well as
   through the bars of a square window; the lower division shows this
   light falling behind the netting upon the stable floor, occupied by a
   cock and a cow, and against this light are relieved the figures of the
   shepherds, for the most part in demi-tint, but with flakes of more
   vigorous sunshine falling here and there upon them from above. The
   optical illusion has originally been as perfect as one of Hunt's best
   interiors; but it is most curious that no part of the work seems to
   have been taken any pleasure in by the painter; it is all by his hand,
   but it looks as if he had been bent only on getting over the ground.
   It is literally a piece of scene-painting, and is exactly what we
   might fancy Tintoret to have done, had he been forced to paint scenes
   at a small theatre at a shilling a day. I cannot think that the whole
   canvas, though fourteen feet high and ten wide, or thereabouts, could
   have taken him more than a couple of days to finish: and it is very
   noticeable that exactly in proportion to the brilliant effects of
   light is the coarseness of the execution, for the figures of the
   Madonna and of the women above, which are not in any strong effect,
   are painted with some care, while the shepherds and the cow are alike
   slovenly; and the latter, which is in full sunshine, is recognizable
   for a cow more by its size and that of its horns, than by any care
   given to its form. It is interesting to contrast this slovenly and
   mean sketch with the ass's head in the "Flight into Egypt," on which
   the painter exerted his full power; as an effect of light, however,
   the work is, of course, most interesting. One point in the treatment
   is especially noticeable: there is a peacock in the rack beyond the
   cow; and under other circumstances, one cannot doubt that Tintoret
   would have liked a peacock in full color, and would have painted it
   green and blue with great satisfaction. It is sacrificed to the light,
   however, and is painted in warm grey, with a dim eye or two in the
   tail: this process is exactly analogous to Turner's taking the colors
   out of the flags of his ships in the "Gosport." Another striking point
   is the litter with which the whole picture is filled in order more to
   confuse the eye: there is straw sticking from the roof, straw all over
   the hammock floor, and straw struggling hither and thither all over
   the floor itself; and, to add to the confusion, the glory around the
   head of the infant, instead of being united and serene, is broken into
   little bits, and is like a glory of chopped straw. But the most
   curious thing, after all, is the want of delight in any of the
   principal figures, and the comparative meanness and commonplaceness of
   even the folds of the drapery. It seems as if Tintoret had determined
   to make the shepherds as uninteresting as possible; but one does not
   see why their very clothes should be ill painted, and their
   disposition unpicturesque. I believe, however, though it never struck
   me until I had examined this picture, that this is one of the
   painter's fixed principles: he does not, with German sentimentality,
   make shepherds and peasants graceful or sublime, but he purposely
   vulgarizes them, not by making their actions or their faces boorish or
   disagreeable, but rather by painting them ill, and composing their
   draperies tamely. As far as I recollect at present, the principle is
   universal with him; exactly in proportion to the dignity of character
   is the beauty of the painting. He will not put out his strength upon
   any man belonging to the lower classes; and, in order to know what the
   painter is, one must see him at work on a king, a senator, or a
   saint. The curious connexion of this with the aristocratic tendencies
   of the Venetian nation, when we remember that Tintoret was the
   greatest man whom that nation produced, may become very interesting,
   if followed out. I forgot to note that, though the peacock is painted
   with great regardlessness of color, there is a feature in it which no
   common painter would have observed,--the peculiar flatness of the
   back, and undulation of the shoulders: the bird's body is all there,
   though its feathers are a good deal neglected; and the same thing is
   noticeable in a cock who is pecking among the straw near the
   spectator, though in other respects a shabby cock enough. The fact is,
   I believe, he had made his shepherds so commonplace that he dare not
   paint his animals well, otherwise one would have looked at nothing in
   the picture but the peacock, cock, and cow. I cannot tell what the
   shepherds are offering; they look like milk bowls, but they are
   awkwardly held up, with such twistings of body as would have certainly
   spilt the milk. A woman in front has a basket of eggs; but this I
   imagine to be merely to keep up the rustic character of the scene, and
   not part of the shepherd's offerings.

   11. _Baptism._ There is more of the true picture quality in this work
   than in the former one, but still very little appearance of enjoyment
   or care. The color is for the most part grey and uninteresting, and
   the figures are thin and meagre in form, and slightly painted; so much
   so, that of the nineteen figures in the distance, about a dozen are
   hardly worth calling figures, and the rest are so sketched and
   flourished in that one can hardly tell which is which. There is one
   point about it very interesting to a landscape painter: the river is
   seen far into the distance, with a piece of copse bordering it; the
   sky beyond is dark, but the water nevertheless receives a brilliant
   reflection from some unseen rent in the clouds, so brilliant, that
   when I was first at Venice, not being accustomed to Tintoret's slight
   execution, or to see pictures so much injured, I took this piece of
   water for a piece of sky. The effect as Tintoret has arranged it, is
   indeed somewhat unnatural, but it is valuable as showing his
   recognition of a principle unknown to half the historical painters of
   the present day,--that the reflection seen in the water is totally
   different from the object seen above it, and that it is very possible
   to have a bright light in reflection where there appears nothing but
   darkness to be reflected. The clouds in the sky itself are round,
   heavy, and lightless, and in a great degree spoil what would otherwise
   be a fine landscape distance. Behind the rocks on the right, a single
   head is seen, with a collar on the shoulders: it seems to be intended
   for a portrait of some person connected with the picture.

   12. _Resurrection._ Another of the "effect of light" pictures, and not
   a very striking one, the best part of it being the two distant figures
   of the Maries seen in the dawn of the morning. The conception of the
   Resurrection itself is characteristic of the worst points of Tintoret.
   His impetuosity is here in the wrong place; Christ bursts out of the
   rock like a thunderbolt, and the angels themselves seem likely to be
   crushed under the rent stones of the tomb. Had the figure of Christ
   been sublime, this conception might have been accepted; but, on the
   contrary, it is weak, mean, and painful; and the whole picture is
   languidly or roughly painted, except only the fig-tree at the top of
   the rock, which, by a curious caprice, is not only drawn in the
   painter's best manner, but has golden ribs to all its leaves, making
   it look like one of the beautiful crossed or chequered patterns, of
   which he is so fond in his dresses; the leaves themselves being a dark
   olive brown.

   13. _The Agony in the Garden._ I cannot at present understand the
   order of these subjects; but they may have been misplaced. This, of
   all the San Rocco pictures, is the most hastily painted, but it is
   not, like those we have been passing, _clodly_ painted; it seems to
   have been executed altogether with a hearth-broom, and in a few hours.
   It is another of the "effects," and a very curious one; the Angel who
   bears the cup to Christ is surrounded by a red halo; yet the light
   which falls upon the shoulders of the sleeping disciples, and upon the
   leaves of the olive-trees, is cool and silvery, while the troop coming
   up to seize Christ are seen by torch-light. Judas, who is the second
   figure, points to Christ, but turns his head away as he does so, as
   unable to look at him. This is a noble touch; the foliage is also
   exceedingly fine, though what kind of olive-tree bears such leaves I
   know not, each of them being about the size of a man's hand. If there
   be any which bear such foliage, their olives must be the size of
   cocoa-nuts. This, however, is true only of the underwood, which is,
   perhaps, not meant for olive. There are some taller trees at the top
   of the picture, whose leaves are of a more natural size. On closely
   examining the figures of the troops on the left, I find that the
   distant ones are concealed, all but the limbs, by a sort of arch of
   dark color, which is now so injured, that I cannot tell whether it was
   foliage or ground: I suppose it to have been a mass of close foliage,
   through which the troop is breaking its way; Judas rather showing them
   the path, than actually pointing to Christ, as it is written, "Judas,
   who betrayed him, knew the place." St. Peter, as the most zealous of
   the three disciples, the only one who was to endeavor to defend his
   Master, is represented as awakening and turning his head toward the
   troop, while James and John are buried in profound slumber, laid in
   magnificent languor among the leaves. The picture is singularly
   impressive, when seen far enough off, as an image of thick forest
   gloom amidst the rich and tender foliage of the South; the leaves,
   however, tossing as in disturbed night air, and the flickering of the
   torches, and of the branches, contrasted with the steady flame which
   from the Angel's presence is spread over the robes of the disciples.
   The strangest feature in the whole is that the Christ also is
   represented as sleeping. The angel seems to appear to him in a dream.

   14. _The Last Supper._ A most unsatisfactory picture; I think about
   the worst I know of Tintoret's, where there is no appearance of
   retouching. He always makes the disciples in this scene too vulgar;
   they are here not only vulgar, but diminutive, and Christ is at the
   end of the table, the smallest figure of them all. The principal
   figures are two mendicants sitting on steps in front; a kind of
   supporters, but I suppose intended to be waiting for the fragments; a
   dog, in still more earnest expectation, is watching the movements of
   the disciples, who are talking together, Judas having just gone out.
   Christ is represented as giving what one at first supposes is the sop
   to Judas, but as the disciple who received it has a glory, and there
   are only eleven at table, it is evidently the Sacramental bread. The
   room in which they are assembled is a sort of large kitchen, and the
   host is seen employed at a dresser in the background. This picture has
   not only been originally poor, but is one of those exposed all day to
   the sun, and is dried into mere dusty canvas: where there was once
   blue, there is now nothing.

   15. _Saint Rocco in Glory._ One of the worst order of Tintorets, with
   apparent smoothness and finish, yet languidly painted, as if in
   illness or fatigue; very dark and heavy in tone also; its figures, for
   the most part, of an awkward middle size, about five feet high, and
   very uninteresting. St. Rocco ascends to heaven, looking down upon a
   crowd of poor and sick persons who are blessing and adoring him. One
   of these, kneeling at the bottom, is very nearly a repetition, though
   a careless and indolent one, of that of St. Stephen, in St. Giorgio
   Maggiore, and of the central figure in the "Paradise" of the Ducal
   Palace. It is a kind of lay figure, of which he seems to have been
   fond; its clasped hands are here shockingly painted--I should think
   unfinished. It forms the only important light at the bottom, relieved
   on a dark ground; at the top of the picture, the figure of St. Rocco
   is seen in shadow against the light of the sky, and all the rest is in
   confused shadow. The commonplaceness of this composition is curiously
   connected with the languor of thought and touch throughout the work.

   16. _Miracle of the Loaves._ Hardly anything but a fine piece of
   landscape is here left; it is more exposed to the sun than any other
   picture in the room, and its draperies having been, in great part,
   painted in blue, are now mere patches of the color of starch; the
   scene is also very imperfectly conceived. The twenty-one figures,
   including Christ and his Disciples, very ill represent a crowd of
   seven thousand; still less is the marvel of the miracle expressed by
   perfect ease and rest of the reclining figures in the foreground, who
   do not so much as look surprised; considered merely as reclining
   figures, and as pieces of effect in half light, they have once been
   fine. The landscape, which represents the slope of a woody hill, has a
   very grand and far-away look. Behind it is a great space of streaky
   sky, almost prismatic in color, rosy and golden clouds covering up its
   blue, and some fine vigorous trees thrown against it; painted in about
   ten minutes each, however, by curly touches of the brush, and looking
   rather more like seaweed than foliage.

   17. _Resurrection of Lazarus._ Very strangely, and not impressively
   conceived. Christ is half reclining, half sitting, at the bottom of
   the picture, while Lazarus is disencumbered of his grave-clothes at
   the top of it; the scene being the side of a rocky hill, and the mouth
   of the tomb probably once visible in the shadow on the left; but all
   that is now discernible is a man having his limbs unbound, as if
   Christ were merely ordering a prisoner to be loosed. There appears
   neither awe nor agitation, nor even much astonishment, in any of the
   figures of the group; but the picture is more vigorous than any of the
   three last mentioned, and the upper part of it is quite worthy of the
   master, especially its noble fig-tree and laurel, which he has
   painted, in one of his usual fits of caprice, as carefully as that in
   the "Resurrection of Christ," opposite. Perhaps he has some meaning in
   this; he may have been thinking of the verse, "Behold the fig-tree,
   and all the trees; when they now shoot forth," &c. In the present
   instance, the leaves are dark only, and have no golden veins. The
   uppermost figures also come dark against the sky, and would form a
   precipitous mass, like a piece of the rock itself, but that they are
   broken in upon by one of the limbs of Lazarus, bandaged and in full
   light, which, to my feeling, sadly injures the picture, both as a
   disagreeable object, and a light in the wrong place. The grass and
   weeds are, throughout, carefully painted, but the lower figures are of
   little interest, and the face of the Christ a grievous failure.

   18. _The Ascension._ I have always admired this picture, though it is
   very slight and thin in execution, and cold in color; but it is
   remarkable for its thorough effect of open air, and for the sense of
   motion and clashing in the wings of the Angels which sustain the
   Christ: they owe this effect a good deal to the manner in which they
   are set, edge on; all seem like sword-blades cutting the air. It is
   the most curious in conception of all the pictures in the Scuola, for
   it represents, beneath the Ascension, a kind of epitome of what took
   place before the Ascension. In the distance are two Apostles walking,
   meant, I suppose, for the two going to Emmaus; nearer are a group
   round a table, to remind us of Christ appearing to them as they sat at
   meat; and in the foreground is a single reclining figure of, I
   suppose, St. Peter, because we are told that "he was seen of Cephas,
   then of the twelve:" but this interpretation is doubtful; for why
   should not the vision by the Lake of Tiberias be expressed also? And
   the strange thing of all is the scene, for Christ ascended from the
   Mount of Olives; but the Disciples are walking, and the table is set,
   in a little marshy and grassy valley, like some of the bits near
   Maison Neuve on the Jura, with a brook running through it, so
   capitally expressed, that I believe it is this which makes me so fond
   of the picture. The reflections are as scientific in the diminution,
   in the image, of large masses of bank above, as any of Turner's, and
   the marshy and reedy ground looks as if one would sink into it; but
   what all this has to do with the Ascension I cannot see. The figure of
   Christ is not undignified, but by no means either interesting or
   sublime.

   19. _Pool of Bethesda._ I have no doubt the principal figures have
   been repainted; but as the colors are faded, and the subject
   disgusting, I have not paid this picture sufficient attention to say
   how far the injury extends; nor need any one spend time upon it,
   unless after having first examined all the other Tintorets in Venice.
   All the great Italian painters appear insensible to the feeling of
   disgust at disease; but this study of the population of an hospital is
   without any points of contrast, and I wish Tintoret had not
   condescended to paint it. This and the six preceding paintings have
   all been uninteresting,--I believe chiefly owing to the observance in
   them of Sir Joshua's rule for the heroic, "that drapery is to be mere
   drapery, and not silk, nor satin, nor brocade." However wise such a
   rule may be when applied to works of the purest religious art, it is
   anything but wise as respects works of color. Tintoret is never quite
   himself unless he has fur or velvet, or rich stuff of one sort or the
   other, or jewels, or armor, or something that he can put play of color
   into, among his figures, and not dead folds of linsey-woolsey; and I
   believe that even the best pictures of Raffaelle and Angelico are not
   a little helped by their hems of robes, jewelled crowns, priests'
   copes, and so on; and the pictures that have nothing of this kind in
   them, as for instance the "Transfiguration," are to my mind not a
   little dull.

   20. _Temptation._ This picture singularly illustrates what has just
   been observed; it owes great part of its effect to the lustre of the
   jewels in the armlet of the evil angel, and to the beautiful colors of
   his wings. These are slight accessaries apparently, but they enhance
   the value of all the rest, and they have evidently been enjoyed by the
   painter. The armlet is seen by reflected light, its stones shining by
   inward lustre; this occult fire being the only hint given of the real
   character of the Tempter, who is otherways represented in the form of
   a beautiful angel, though the face is sensual: we can hardly tell how
   far it was intended to be therefore expressive of evil; for Tintoret's
   good angels have not always the purest features; but there is a
   peculiar subtlety in this telling of the story by so slight a
   circumstance as the glare of the jewels in the darkness. It is curious
   to compare this imagination with that of the mosaics in St. Mark's, in
   which Satan is a black monster, with horns, and head, and tail,
   complete. The whole of the picture is powerfully and carefully
   painted, though very broadly; it is a strong effect of light, and
   therefore, as usual, subdued in color. The painting of the stones in
   the foreground I have always thought, and still think, the best piece
   of rock drawing before Turner, and the most amazing instance of
   Tintoret's perceptiveness afforded by any of his pictures.

   21. _St. Rocco._ Three figures occupy the spandrils of the window
   above this and the following picture, painted merely in light and
   shade, two larger than life, one rather smaller. I believe these to be
   by Tintoret; but as they are quite in the dark, so that the execution
   cannot be seen, and very good designs of the kind have been furnished
   by other masters, I cannot answer for them. The figure of St. Rocco,
   as well as its companion, St. Sebastian, is colored; they occupy the
   narrow intervals between the windows, and are of course invisible
   under ordinary circumstances. By a great deal of straining of the
   eyes, and sheltering them with the hand from the light, some little
   idea of the design may be obtained. The "St. Rocco" is a fine figure,
   though rather coarse, but, at all events, worth as much light as would
   enable us to see it.

   22. _St. Sebastian._ This, the companion figure, is one of the finest
   things in the whole room, and assuredly the most majestic Saint
   Sebastian in existence; as far as mere humanity can be majestic, for
   there is no effort at any expression of angelic or saintly
   resignation; the effort is simply to realize the fact of the
   martyrdom, and it seems to me that this is done to an extent not even
   attempted by any other painter. I never saw a man die a violent death,
   and therefore cannot say whether this figure be true or not, but it
   gives the grandest and most intense impression of truth. The figure is
   dead, and well it may be, for there is one arrow through the forehead
   and another through the heart; but the eyes are open, though glazed,
   and the body is rigid in the position in which it last stood, the left
   arm raised and the left limb advanced, something in the attitude of a
   soldier sustaining an attack under his shield, while the dead eyes are
   still turned in the direction from which the arrows came: but the most
   characteristic feature is the way these arrows are fixed. In the
   common martyrdoms of St. Sebastian they are stuck into him here and
   there like pins, as if they had been shot from a great distance and
   had come faltering down, entering the flesh but a little way, and
   rather bleeding the saint to death than mortally wounding him; but
   Tintoret had no such ideas about archery. He must have seen bows drawn
   in battle, like that of Jehu when he smote Jehoram between the
   harness: all the arrows in the saint's body lie straight in the same
   direction, broad-feathered and strong-shafted, and sent apparently
   with the force of thunderbolts; every one of them has gone through him
   like a lance, two through the limbs, one through the arm, one through
   the heart, and the last has crashed through the forehead, nailing the
   head to the tree behind as if it had been dashed in by a
   sledge-hammer. The face, in spite of its ghastliness, is beautiful,
   and has been serene; and the light which enters first and glistens on
   the plumes of the arrows, dies softly away upon the curling hair, and
   mixes with the glory upon the forehead. There is not a more remarkable
   picture in Venice, and yet I do not suppose that one in a thousand of
   the travellers who pass through the Scuola so much as perceives there
   is a picture in the place which it occupies.

   [Illustration: Third Group. On the roof of the upper room.

      23. Moses striking the Rock.       29. Elijah.
      24. Plague of Serpents.            30. Jonah.
      25. Fall of Manna.                 31. Joshua.
      26. Jacob's Dream.                 32. Sacrifice of Isaac.
      27. Ezekiel's Vision.              33. Elijah at the Brook.
      28. Fall of Man.                   34. Paschal Feast.
                 35. Elisha feeding the People.]

   23. _Moses striking the Rock._ We now come to the series of pictures
   upon which the painter concentrated the strength he had reserved for
   the upper room; and in some sort wisely, for, though it is not
   pleasant to examine pictures on a ceiling, they are at least
   distinctly visible without straining the eyes against the light. They
   are carefully conceived and thoroughly well painted in proportion to
   their distance from the eye. This carefulness of thought is apparent
   at a glance: the "Moses striking the Rock" embraces the whole of the
   seventeenth chapter of Exodus, and even something more, for it is not
   from that chapter, but from parallel passages that we gather the facts
   of the impatience of Moses and the wrath of God at the waters of
   Meribah; both which facts are shown by the leaping of the stream out
   of the rock half-a-dozen ways at once, forming a great arch over the
   head of Moses, and by the partial veiling of the countenance of the
   Supreme Being. This latter is the most painful part of the whole
   picture, at least as it is seen from below; and I believe that in some
   repairs of the roof this head must have been destroyed and repainted.
   It is one of Tintoret's usual fine thoughts that the lower part of the
   figure is veiled, not merely by clouds, but in a kind of watery
   sphere, showing the Deity coming to the Israelites at that particular
   moment as the Lord of the Rivers and of the Fountain of the Waters.
   The whole figure, as well as that of Moses and the greater number of
   those in the foreground, is at once dark and warm, black and red being
   the prevailing colors, while the distance is bright gold touched with
   blue, and seems to open into the picture like a break of blue sky
   after rain. How exquisite is this expression, by mere color, of the
   main force of the fact represented! that is to say, joy and
   refreshment after sorrow and scorching heat. But, when we examine of
   what this distance consists, we shall find still more cause for
   admiration. The blue in it is not the blue of sky, it is obtained by
   blue stripes upon white tents glowing in the sunshine; and in front of
   these tents is seen that great battle with Amalek of which the account
   is given in the remainder of the chapter, and for which the Israelites
   received strength in the streams which ran out of the rock in Horeb.
   Considered merely as a picture, the opposition of cool light to warm
   shadow is one of the most remarkable pieces of color in the Scuola,
   and the great mass of foliage which waves over the rocks on the left
   appears to have been elaborated with his highest power and his most
   sublime invention. But this noble passage is much injured, and now
   hardly visible.

   24. _Plague of Serpents._ The figures in the distance are remarkably
   important in this picture, Moses himself being among them; in fact,
   the whole scene is filled chiefly with middle-sized figures, in order
   to increase the impression of space. It is interesting to observe the
   difference in the treatment of this subject by the three great
   painters, Michael Angelo, Rubens, and Tintoret. The first two, equal
   to the latter in energy, had less love of liberty: they were fond of
   binding their compositions into knots, Tintoret of scattering his far
   and wide: they all alike preserve the unity of composition, but the
   unity in the first two is obtained by binding, and that of the last by
   springing from one source; and, together with this feeling, comes his
   love of space, which makes him less regard the rounding and form of
   objects themselves, than their relations of light and shade and
   distance. Therefore Rubens and Michael Angelo made the fiery serpents
   huge boa constrictors, and knotted the sufferers together with them.
   Tintoret does not like to be so bound; so he makes the serpents little
   flying and fluttering monsters like lampreys with wings; and the
   children of Israel, instead of being thrown into convulsed and
   writhing groups, are scattered, fainting in the fields, far away in
   the distance. As usual, Tintoret's conception, while thoroughly
   characteristic of himself, is also truer to the words of Scripture. We
   are told that "the Lord sent fiery serpents among the people, and they
   _bit_ the people;" we are not told that they crushed the people to
   death. And while thus the truest, it is also the most terrific
   conception. M. Angelo's would be terrific if one could believe in it:
   but our instinct tells us that boa constrictors do not come in armies;
   and we look upon the picture with as little emotion as upon the handle
   of a vase, or any other form worked out of serpents, where there is no
   probability of serpents actually occurring. But there is a probability
   in Tintoret's conception. We feel that it is not impossible that there
   should come up a swarm of these small winged reptiles: and their
   horror is not diminished by their smallness: not that they have any of
   the grotesque terribleness of German invention; they might have been
   made infinitely uglier with small pains, but it is their
   _veritableness_ which makes them awful. They have triangular heads
   with sharp beaks or muzzle; and short, rather thick bodies, with bony
   processes down the back like those of sturgeons; and small wings
   spotted with orange and black; and round glaring eyes, not very large,
   but very ghastly, with an intense delight in biting expressed in them.
   (It is observable, that the Venetian painter has got his main idea of
   them from the sea-horses and small reptiles of the Lagoons.) These
   monsters are fluttering and writhing about everywhere, fixing on
   whatever they come near with their sharp venomous heads; and they are
   coiling about on the ground, and all the shadows and thickets are full
   of them, so that there is no escape anywhere: and, in order to give
   the idea of greater extent to the plague, Tintoret has not been
   content with one horizon; I have before mentioned the excessive
   strangeness of this composition, in having a cavern open in the right
   of the foreground, through which is seen another sky and another
   horizon. At the top of the picture, the Divine Being is seen borne by
   angels, apparently passing over the congregation in wrath, involved in
   masses of dark clouds; while, behind, an Angel of mercy is descending
   toward Moses, surrounded by a globe of white light. This globe is
   hardly seen from below; it is not a common glory, but a transparent
   sphere, like a bubble, which not only envelopes the angel, but crosses
   the figure of Moses, throwing the upper part of it into a subdued pale
   color, as if it were crossed by a sunbeam. Tintoret is the only
   painter who plays these tricks with transparent light, the only man
   who seems to have perceived the effects of sunbeams, mists, and
   clouds, in the far away atmosphere; and to have used what he saw on
   towers, clouds, or mountains, to enhance the sublimity of his figures.
   The whole upper part of this picture is magnificent, less with respect
   to individual figures, than for the drift of its clouds, and
   originality and complication of its light and shade; it is something
   like Raffaelle's "Vision of Ezekiel," but far finer. It is difficult
   to understand how any painter, who could represent floating clouds so
   nobly as he has done here, could ever paint the odd, round, pillowy
   masses which so often occur in his more carelessly designed sacred
   subjects. The lower figures are not so interesting, and the whole is
   painted with a view to effect from below, and gains little by close
   examination.

   25. _Fall of Manna._ In none of these three large compositions has the
   painter made the slightest effort at expression in the human
   countenance; everything is done by gesture, and the faces of the
   people who are drinking from the rock, dying from the serpent-bites,
   and eating the manna, are all alike as calm as if nothing was
   happening; in addition to this, as they are painted for distant
   effect, the heads are unsatisfactory and coarse when seen near, and
   perhaps in this last picture the more so, and yet the story is
   exquisitely told. We have seen in the Church of San Giorgio Maggiore
   another example of his treatment of it, where, however, the gathering
   of manna is a subordinate employment, but here it is principal. Now,
   observe, we are told of the manna, that it was found in the morning;
   that then there lay round about the camp a small round thing like the
   hoar-frost, and that "when the sun waxed hot it melted." Tintoret has
   endeavored, therefore, first of all, to give the idea of coolness; the
   congregation are reposing in a soft green meadow, surrounded by blue
   hills, and there are rich trees above them, to the branches of one of
   which is attached a great grey drapery to catch the manna as it comes
   down. In any other picture such a mass of drapery would assuredly have
   had some vivid color, but here it is grey; the fields are cool frosty
   green, the mountains cold blue, and, to complete the expression and
   meaning of all this, there is a most important point to be noted in
   the form of the Deity, seen above, through an opening in the clouds.
   There are at least ten or twelve other pictures in which the form of
   the Supreme Being occurs, to be found in the Scuola di San Rocco
   alone; and in every one of these instances it is richly colored, the
   garments being generally red and blue, but in this picture of the
   manna the figure is _snow white_. Thus the painter endeavors to show
   the Deity as the giver of bread, just as in the "Striking of the Rock"
   we saw that he represented Him as the Lord of the rivers, the
   fountains, and the waters. There is one other very sweet incident at
   the bottom of the picture; four or five sheep, instead of pasturing,
   turn their heads aside to catch the manna as it comes down, or seem to
   be licking it off each other's fleeces. The tree above, to which the
   drapery is tied, is the most delicate and delightful piece of leafage
   in all the Scuola; it has a large sharp leaf, something like that of a
   willow, but five times the size.

   26. _Jacob's Dream._ A picture which has good effect from below, but
   gains little when seen near. It is an embarrassing one for any
   painter, because angels always look awkward going up and down stairs;
   one does not see the use of their wings. Tintoret has thrown them into
   buoyant and various attitudes, but has evidently not treated the
   subject with delight; and it is seen to all the more disadvantage
   because just above the painting of the "Ascension," in which the full
   fresh power of the painter is developed. One would think this latter
   picture had been done just after a walk among hills, for it is full of
   the most delicate effects of transparent cloud, more or less veiling
   the faces and forms of the angels, and covering with white light the
   silvery sprays of the palms, while the clouds in the "Jacob's Dream"
   are the ordinary rotundities of the studio.

   27. _Ezekiel's Vision._ I suspect this has been repainted, it is so
   heavy and dead in color; a fault, however, observable in many of the
   small pictures on the ceiling, and perhaps the natural result of the
   fatigue of such a mind as Tintoret's. A painter who threw such intense
   energy into some of his works can hardly but have been languid in
   others in a degree never experienced by the more tranquil minds of
   less powerful workmen; and when this languor overtook him whilst he
   was at work on pictures where a certain space had to be covered by
   mere force of arm, this heaviness of color could hardly but have been
   the consequence: it shows itself chiefly in reds and other hot hues,
   many of the pictures in the Ducal Palace also displaying it in a
   painful degree. This "Ezekiel's Vision" is, however, in some measure
   worthy of the master, in the wild and horrible energy with which the
   skeletons are leaping up about the prophet; but it might have been
   less horrible and more sublime, no attempt being made to represent the
   space of the Valley of Dry Bones, and the whole canvas being occupied
   only by eight figures, of which five are half skeletons. It it is
   strange that, in such a subject, the prevailing hues should be red and
   brown.

   28. _Fall of Man._ The two canvases last named are the most
   considerable in size upon the roof, after the centre pieces. We now
   come to the smaller subjects which surround the "Striking the Rock;"
   of these this "Fall of Man" is the best, and I should think it very
   fine anywhere but in the Scuola di San Rocco; there is a grand light
   on the body of Eve, and the vegetation is remarkably rich, but the
   faces are coarse, and the composition uninteresting. I could not get
   near enough to see what the grey object is upon which Eve appears to
   be sitting, nor could I see any serpent. It is made prominent in the
   picture of the Academy of this same subject, so that I suppose it is
   hidden in the darkness, together with much detail which it would be
   necessary to discover in order to judge the work justly.

   29. _Elijah (?)._ A prophet holding down his face, which is covered
   with his hand. God is talking with him, apparently in rebuke. The
   clothes on his breast are rent, and the action of the figures might
   suggest the idea of the scene between the Deity and Elijah at Horeb:
   but there is no suggestion of the past magnificent scenery,--of the
   wind, the earthquake, or the fire; so that the conjecture is good for
   very little. The painting is of small interest; the faces are vulgar,
   and the draperies have too much vapid historical dignity to be
   delightful.

   30. _Jonah._ The whale here occupies fully one-half of the canvas;
   being correspondent in value with a landscape background. His mouth is
   as large as a cavern, and yet, unless the mass of red color in the
   foreground be a piece of drapery, his tongue is too large for it. He
   seems to have lifted Jonah out upon it, and not yet drawn it back, so
   that it forms a kind of crimson cushion for him to kneel upon in his
   submission to the Deity. The head to which this vast tongue belongs is
   sketched in somewhat loosely, and there is little remarkable about it
   except its size, nor much in the figures, though the submissiveness of
   Jonah is well given. The great thought of Michael Angelo renders one
   little charitable to any less imaginative treatment of this subject.

   31. _Joshua (?)._ This is a most interesting picture, and it is a
   shame that its subject is not made out, for it is not a common one.
   The figure has a sword in its hand, and looks up to a sky full of
   fire, out of which the form of the Deity is stooping, represented as
   white and colorless. On the other side of the picture there is seen
   among the clouds a pillar apparently falling, and there is a crowd at
   the feet of the principal figure, carrying spears. Unless this be
   Joshua at the fall of Jericho, I cannot tell what it means; it is
   painted with great vigor, and worthy of a better place.

   32. _Sacrifice of Isaac._ In conception, it is one of the least worthy
   of the master in the whole room, the three figures being thrown into
   violent attitudes, as inexpressive as they are strained and
   artificial. It appears to have been vigorously painted, but vulgarly;
   that is to say, the light is concentrated upon the white beard and
   upturned countenance of Abraham, as it would have been in one of the
   dramatic effects of the French school, the result being that the head
   is very bright and very conspicuous, and perhaps, in some of the late
   operations upon the roof, recently washed and touched. In consequence,
   every one who comes into the room, is first invited to observe the
   "bella testa di Abramo." The only thing characteristic of Tintoret is
   the way in which the pieces of ragged wood are tossed hither and
   thither in the pile upon which Isaac is bound, although this
   scattering of the wood is inconsistent with the Scriptural account of
   Abraham's deliberate procedure, for we are told of him that "he set
   the wood in order." But Tintoret had probably not noticed this, and
   thought the tossing of the timber into the disordered heap more like
   the act of the father in his agony.

   33. _Elijah at the Brook Cherith (?)._ I cannot tell if I have rightly
   interpreted the meaning of this picture, which merely represents a
   noble figure couched upon the ground, and an angel appearing to him;
   but I think that between the dark tree on the left, and the recumbent
   figure, there is some appearance of a running stream, at all events
   there is of a mountainous and stony place. The longer I study this
   master, the more I feel the strange likeness between him and Turner,
   in our never knowing what subject it is that will stir him to
   exertion. We have lately had him treating Jacob's Dream, Ezekiel's
   Vision, Abraham's Sacrifice, and Jonah's Prayer, (all of them subjects
   on which the greatest painters have delighted to expend their
   strength,) with coldness, carelessness, and evident absence of
   delight; and here, on a sudden, in a subject so indistinct that one
   cannot be sure of its meaning, and embracing only two figures, a man
   and an angel, forth he starts in his full strength. I believe he must
   somewhere or another, the day before, have seen a kingfisher; for this
   picture seems entirely painted for the sake of the glorious downy
   wings of the angel,--white clouded with blue, as the bird's head and
   wings are with green,--the softest and most elaborate in plumage that
   I have seen in any of his works: but observe also the general
   sublimity obtained by the mountainous lines of the drapery of the
   recumbent figure, dependent for its dignity upon these forms alone, as
   the face is more than half hidden, and what is seen of it
   expressionless.

   34. _The Paschal Feast._ I name this picture by the title given in the
   guide-books; it represents merely five persons watching the increase
   of a small fire lighted on a table or altar in the midst of them. It
   is only because they have all staves in their hands that one may
   conjecture this fire to be that kindled to consume the Paschal
   offering. The effect is of course a fire light; and, like all mere
   fire lights that I have ever seen, totally devoid of interest.

   35. _Elisha feeding the People._ I again guess at the subject: the
   picture only represents a figure casting down a number of loaves
   before a multitude; but, as Elisha has not elsewhere occurred, I
   suppose that these must be the barley loaves brought from
   Baalshalisha. In conception and manner of painting, this picture and
   the last, together with the others above-mentioned, in comparison with
   the "Elijah at Cherith," may be generally described as "dregs of
   Tintoret:" they are tired, dead, dragged out upon the canvas
   apparently in the heavy-hearted state which a man falls into when he
   is both jaded with toil and sick of the work he is employed upon. They
   are not hastily painted; on the contrary, finished with considerably
   more care than several of the works upon the walls; but those, as, for
   instance, the "Agony in the Garden," are hurried sketches with the
   man's whole heart in them, while these pictures are exhausted
   fulfilments of an appointed task. Whether they were really amongst the
   last painted, or whether the painter had fallen ill at some
   intermediate time, I cannot say; but we shall find him again in his
   utmost strength in the room which we last enter.

   [Illustration: Fourth Group. Inner room on the upper floor.

                              On the Roof.

      36 to 39. Children's Heads.          41 to 44. Children.
      40. St. Rocco in Heaven.             45 to 56. Allegorical Figures.

                             On the Walls.

      57. Figure in Niche.                 60. Ecce Homo.
      58. Figure in Niche.                 61. Christ bearing his Cross.
      59. Christ before Pilate.            62. CRUCIFIXION.]

   36 to 39. _Four Children's Heads_, which it is much to be regretted
   should be thus lost in filling small vacuities of the ceiling.

   40. _St. Rocco in Heaven._ The central picture of the roof, in the
   inner room. From the well-known anecdote respecting the production of
   this picture, whether in all its details true or not, we may at least
   gather that having been painted in competition with Paul Veronese and
   other powerful painters of the day, it was probably Tintoret's
   endeavor to make it as popular and showy as possible. It is quite
   different from his common works; bright in all its tints and tones;
   the faces carefully drawn, and of an agreeable type; the outlines
   firm, and the shadows few; the whole resembling Correggio more than
   any Venetian painter. It is, however, an example of the danger, even
   to the greatest artist, of leaving his own style; for it lacks all the
   great virtues of Tintoret, without obtaining the lusciousness of
   Correggio. One thing, at all events, is remarkable in it,--that,
   though painted while the competitors were making their sketches, it
   shows no sign of haste or inattention.

   41 to 44. _Figures of Children_, merely decorative.

   45 to 56. _Allegorical Figures on the Roof._ If these were not in the
   same room with the "Crucifixion," they would attract more public
   attention than any works in the Scuola, as there are here no black
   shadows, nor extravagances of invention, but very beautiful figures
   richly and delicately colored, a good deal resembling some of the best
   works of Andrea del Sarto. There is nothing in them, however,
   requiring detailed examination. The two figures between the windows
   are very slovenly, if they are his at all; and there are bits of
   marbling and fruit filling the cornices, which may or may not be his:
   if they are, they are tired work, and of small importance.

   59. _Christ before Pilate._ A most interesting picture, but, which is
   unusual, best seen on a dark day, when the white figure of Christ
   alone draws the eye, looking almost like a spirit; the painting of the
   rest of the picture being both somewhat thin and imperfect. There is a
   certain meagreness about all the minor figures, less grandeur and
   largeness in the limbs and draperies, and less solidity, it seems,
   even in the color, although its arrangements are richer than in many
   of the compositions above described. I hardly know whether it is owing
   to this thinness of color, or on purpose, that the horizontal clouds
   shine through the crimson flag in the distance; though I should think
   the latter, for the effect is most beautiful. The passionate action of
   the Scribe in lifting his hand to dip the pen into the ink-horn is,
   however, affected and overstrained, and the Pilate is very mean;
   perhaps intentionally, that no reverence might be withdrawn from the
   person of Christ. In work of the thirteenth and fourteenth centuries,
   the figures of Pilate and Herod are always intentionally made
   contemptible.

   _Ecce Homo._ As usual, Tintoret's own peculiar view of the subject.
   Christ is laid fainting on the ground, with a soldier standing on one
   side of him; while Pilate, on the other, withdraws the robe from the
   scourged and wounded body, and points it out to the Jews. Both this
   and the picture last mentioned resemble Titian more than Tintoret in
   the style of their treatment.

   61. _Christ bearing his Cross._ Tintoret is here recognizable again in
   undiminished strength. He has represented the troops and attendants
   climbing Calvary by a winding path, of which two turns are seen, the
   figures on the uppermost ledge, and Christ in the centre of them,
   being relieved against the sky; but, instead of the usual simple
   expedient of the bright horizon to relieve the dark masses, there is
   here introduced, on the left, the head of a white horse, which blends
   itself with the sky in one broad mass of light. The power of the
   picture is chiefly in effect, the figure of Christ being too far off
   to be very interesting, and only the malefactors being seen on the
   nearer path; but for this very reason it seems to me more impressive,
   as if one had been truly present at the scene, though not exactly in
   the right place for seeing it.

   62. _The Crucifixion._ I must leave this picture to work its will on
   the spectator; for it is beyond all analysis, and above all praise.


    S

 SAGREDO, PALAZZO, on the Grand Canal, II. 256. Much defaced, but full
   of interest. Its sea story is restored; its first floor has a most
   interesting arcade of the early thirteenth century third order
   windows; its upper windows are the finest fourth and fifth orders of
   early fourteenth century; the group of fourth orders in the centre
   being brought into some resemblance to the late Gothic traceries by
   the subsequent introduction of the quatrefoils above them.

 SALUTE, CHURCH OF STA. MARIA DELLA, on the Grand Canal, II. 378. One
   of the earliest buildings of the Grotesque Renaissance, rendered
   impressive by its position, size, and general proportions. These
   latter are exceedingly good; the grace of the whole building being
   chiefly dependent on the inequality of size in its cupolas, and pretty
   grouping of the two campaniles behind them. It is to be generally
   observed that the proportions of buildings have nothing whatever to
   do with the style or general merits of their architecture. An
   architect trained in the worst schools, and utterly devoid of all
   meaning or purpose in his work, may yet have such a natural gift of
   massing and grouping as will render all his structures effective when
   seen from a distance: such a gift is very general with the late
   Italian builders, so that many of the most contemptible edifices in
   the country have good stage effect so long as we do not approach them.
   The Church of the Salute is farther assisted by the beautiful flight
   of steps in front of it down to the canal; and its façade is rich and
   beautiful of its kind, and was chosen by Turner for the principal
   object in his well-known view of the Grand Canal. The principal faults
   of the building are the meagre windows in the sides of the cupola, and
   the ridiculous disguise of the buttresses under the form of colossal
   scrolls; the buttresses themselves being originally a hypocrisy, for
   the cupola is stated by Lazari to be of timber, and therefore needs
   none. The sacristy contains several precious pictures: the three on
   its roof by Titian, much vaunted, are indeed as feeble as they are
   monstrous; but the small Titian, "St. Mark, with Sts. Cosmo and
   Damian," was, when I first saw it, to my judgment, by far the first
   work of Titian's in Venice. It has since been restored by the Academy,
   and it seemed to me entirely destroyed, but I had not time to examine
   it carefully.

   At the end of the larger sacristy is the lunette which once decorated
   the tomb of the Doge Francesco Dandolo (see above, page 74); and, at
   the side of it, one of the most highly finished Tintorets in Venice,
   namely:

   _The Marriage in Cana._ An immense picture, some twenty-five feet long
   by fifteen high, and said by Lazari to be one of the few which
   Tintoret signed with his name. I am not surprised at his having done
   so in this case. Evidently the work has been a favorite with him, and
   he has taken as much pains as it was ever necessary for his colossal
   strength to take with anything. The subject is not one which admits of
   much singularity or energy in composition. It was always a favorite
   one with Veronese, because it gave dramatic interest to figures in gay
   costumes and of cheerful countenances; but one is surprised to find
   Tintoret, whose tone of mind was always grave, and who did not like to
   make a picture out of brocades and diadems, throwing his whole
   strength into the conception of a marriage feast; but so it is, and
   there are assuredly no female heads in any of his pictures in Venice
   elaborated so far as those which here form the central light. Neither
   is it often that the works of this mighty master conform themselves to
   any of the rules acted upon by ordinary painters; but in this instance
   the popular laws have been observed, and an academy student would be
   delighted to see with what severity the principal light is arranged in
   a central mass, which is divided and made more brilliant by a vigorous
   piece of shadow thrust into the midst of it, and which dies away in
   lesser fragments and sparkling towards the extremities of the picture.
   This mass of light is as interesting by its composition as by its
   intensity. The cicerone who escorts the stranger round the sacristy in
   the course of five minutes, and allows him some forty seconds for the
   contemplation of a picture which the study of six months would not
   entirely fathom, directs his attention very carefully to the "bell'
   effetto di prospettivo," the whole merit of the picture being, in the
   eyes of the intelligent public, that there is a long table in it, one
   end of which looks farther off than the other; but there is more in
   the "bell' effetto di prospettivo" than the observance of the common
   laws of optics. The table is set in a spacious chamber, of which the
   windows at the end let in the light from the horizon, and those in the
   side wall the intense blue of an Eastern sky. The spectator looks all
   along the table, at the farther end of which are seated Christ and the
   Madonna, the marriage guests on each side of it,--on one side men, on
   the other women; the men are set with their backs to the light, which
   passing over their heads and glancing slightly on the tablecloth,
   falls in full length along the line of young Venetian women, who thus
   fill the whole centre of the picture with one broad sunbeam, made up
   of fair faces and golden hair. Close to the spectator a woman has
   risen in amazement, and stretches across the table to show the wine in
   her cup to those opposite; her dark red dress intercepts and enhances
   the mass of gathered light. It is rather curious, considering the
   subject of the picture, that one cannot distinguish either the bride
   or the bridegroom; but the fourth figure from the Madonna in the line
   of women, who wears a white head-dress of lace and rich chains of
   pearls in her hair, may well be accepted for the former, and I think
   that between her and the woman on the Madonna's left hand the unity of
   the line of women is intercepted by a male figure; be this as it may,
   this fourth female face is the most beautiful, as far as I recollect,
   that occurs in the works of the painter, with the exception only of
   the Madonna in the "Flight into Egypt." It is an ideal which occurs
   indeed elsewhere in many of his works, a face at once dark and
   delicate, the Italian cast of feature moulded with the softness and
   childishness of English beauty some half a century ago; but I have
   never seen the ideal so completely worked out by the master. The face
   may best be described as one of the purest and softest of Stothard's
   conceptions, executed with all the strength of Tintoret. The other
   women are all made inferior to this one, but there are beautiful
   profiles and bendings of breasts and necks along the whole line. The
   men are all subordinate, though there are interesting portraits among
   them; perhaps the only fault of the picture being that the faces are a
   little too conspicuous, seen like balls of light among the crowd of
   minor figures which fill the background of the picture. The tone of
   the whole is sober and majestic in the highest degree; the dresses are
   all broad masses of color, and the only parts of the picture which lay
   claim to the expression of wealth or splendor are the head-dresses of
   the women. In this respect the conception of the scene differs widely
   from that of Veronese, and approaches more nearly to the probable
   truth. Still the marriage is not an unimportant one; an immense crowd,
   filling the background, forming superbly rich mosaic of color against
   the distant sky. Taken as a whole, the picture is perhaps the most
   perfect example which human art has produced of the utmost possible
   force and sharpness of shadow united with richness of local color. In
   all the other works of Tintoret, and much more of other colorists,
   either the light and shade or the local color is predominant; in the
   one case the picture has a tendency to look as if painted by
   candle-light, in the other it becomes daringly conventional, and
   approaches the conditions of glass-painting. This picture unites
   color as rich as Titian's with light and shade as forcible as
   Rembrandt's, and far more decisive.

   There are one or two other interesting pictures of the early Venetian
   schools in this sacristy, and several important tombs in the adjoining
   cloister; among which that of Francesco Dandolo, transported here from
   the Church of the Frari, deserves especial attention. See above, p.
   74.

 SALVATORE, CHURCH OF ST. Base Renaissance, occupying the place of the
   ancient church, under the porch of which the Pope Alexander III. is
   said to have passed the night. M. Lazari states it to have been richly
   decorated with mosaics; now all is gone.

   In the interior of the church are some of the best examples of
   Renaissance sculptural monuments in Venice. (See above, Chap. II. §
   LXXX.) It is said to possess an important pala of silver, of the
   thirteenth century, one of the objects in Venice which I much regret
   having forgotten to examine; besides two Titians, a Bonifazio, and a
   John Bellini. The latter ("The Supper at Emmaus") must, I think, have
   been entirely repainted: it is not only unworthy of the master, but
   unlike him; as far, at least, as I could see from below, for it is
   hung high.

 SANUDO PALAZZO. At the Miracoli. A noble Gothic palace of the fourteenth
   century, with Byzantine fragments and cornices built into its walls,
   especially round the interior court, in which the staircase is very
   noble. Its door, opening on the quay, is the only one in Venice
   entirely uninjured; retaining its wooden valve richly sculptured, its
   wicket for examination of the stranger demanding admittance, and its
   quaint knocker in the form of a fish.

 SCALZI, CHURCH OF THE. It possesses a fine John Bellini, and is renowned
   through Venice for its precious marbles. I omitted to notice above, in
   speaking of the buildings of the Grotesque Renaissance, that many of
   them are remarkable for a kind of dishonesty, even in the use of
   _true_ marbles, resulting not from motives of economy, but from mere
   love of juggling and falsehood for their own sake. I hardly know which
   condition of mind is meanest, that which has pride in plaster made to
   look like marble, or that which takes delight in marble made to look
   like silk. Several of the later churches in Venice, more especially
   those of the Jesuiti, of San Clemente, and this of the Scalzi, rest
   their chief claims to admiration on their having curtains and cushions
   cut out of rock. The most ridiculous example is in San Clemente, and
   the most curious and costly are in the Scalzi; which latter church is
   a perfect type of the vulgar abuse of marble in every possible way, by
   men who had no eye for color, and no understanding of any merit in a
   work of art but that which arises from costliness of material, and
   such powers of imitation as are devoted in England to the manufacture
   of peaches and eggs out of Derbyshire spar.

 SEBASTIAN, CHURCH OF ST. The tomb, and of old the monument, of Paul
   Veronese. It is full of his noblest pictures, or of what once were
   such; but they seemed to me for the most part destroyed by repainting.
   I had not time to examine them justly, but I would especially direct
   the traveller's attention to the small Madonna over the second altar
   on the right of the nave, still a perfect and priceless treasure.

 SERVI, CHURCH OF THE. Only two of its gates and some ruined walls are
   left, in one of the foulest districts of the city. It was one of the
   most interesting monuments of the early fourteenth century Gothic; and
   there is much beauty in the fragments yet remaining. How long they may
   stand I know not, the whole building having been offered me for sale,
   ground and all, or stone by stone, as I chose, by its present
   proprietor, when I was last in Venice. More real good might at present
   be effected by any wealthy person who would devote his resources to
   the preservation of such monuments wherever they exist, by freehold
   purchase of the entire ruin, and afterwards by taking proper charge of
   it, and forming a garden round it, than by any other mode of
   protecting or encouraging art. There is no school, no lecturer, like a
   ruin of the early ages.

 SEVERO, FONDAMENTA SAN, palace at, II. 264.

 SILVESTRO, CHURCH OF ST. Of no importance in itself, but it contains
   two very interesting pictures: the first, a "St. Thomas of Canterbury
   with the Baptist and St. Francis," by Girolamo Santa Croce, a superb
   example of the Venetian religious school; the second by Tintoret,
   namely:

   _The Baptism of Christ._ (Over the first altar on the right of the
   nave.) An upright picture, some ten feet wide by fifteen high; the top
   of it is arched, representing the Father supported by angels. It
   requires little knowledge of Tintoret to see that these figures are
   not by his hand. By returning to the opposite side of the nave, the
   join in the canvas may be plainly seen, the upper part of the picture
   having been entirely added on: whether it had this upper part before
   it was repainted, or whether originally square, cannot now be told,
   but I believe it had an upper part which has been destroyed. I am not
   sure if even the dove and the two angels which are at the top of the
   older part of the picture are quite genuine. The rest of it is
   magnificent, though both the figures of the Saviour and the Baptist
   show some concession on the part of the painter to the imperative
   requirement of his age, that nothing should be done except in an
   attitude; neither are there any of his usual fantastic imaginations.
   There is simply the Christ in the water and the St. John on the shore,
   without attendants, disciples, or witnesses of any kind; but the power
   of the light and shade, and the splendor of the landscape, which on
   the whole is well preserved, render it a most interesting example. The
   Jordan is represented as a mountain brook, receiving a tributary
   stream in a cascade from the rocks, in which St. John stands: there is
   a rounded stone in the centre of the current; and the parting of the
   water at this, as well as its rippling among the roots of some dark
   trees on the left, are among the most accurate remembrances of nature
   to be found in any of the works of the great masters. I hardly know
   whether most to wonder at the power of the man who thus broke through
   the neglect of nature which was universal at his time; or at the
   evidences, visible throughout the whole of the conception, that he was
   still content to paint from slight memories of what he had seen in
   hill countries, instead of following out to its full depth the
   fountain which he had opened. There is not a stream among the hills of
   Priuli which in any quarter of a mile of its course would not have
   suggested to him finer forms of cascade than those which he has idly
   painted at Venice.

 SIMEONE, PROFETA, CHURCH OF ST. Very important, though small, possessing
   the precious statue of St. Simeon, above noticed, II. 309. The rare
   early Gothic capitals of the nave are only interesting to the
   architect; but in the little passage by the side of the church,
   leading out of the Campo, there is a curious Gothic monument built
   into the wall, very beautiful in the placing of the angels in the
   spandrils, and rich in the vine-leaf moulding above.

 SIMEONE, PICCOLO, CHURCH OF ST. One of the ugliest churches in Venice or
   elsewhere. Its black dome, like an unusual species of gasometer, is
   the admiration of modern Italian architects.


 SOSPIRI, PONTE DE'. The well known "Bridge of Sighs," a work of no
   merit, and of a late period (see Vol. II. p. 304), owing the interest
   it possesses chiefly to its pretty name, and to the ignorant
   sentimentalism of Byron.

 SPIRITO SANTO, CHURCH OF THE. Of no importance.

 STEFANO, CHURCH OF ST. An interesting building of central Gothic, the
   best ecclesiastical example of it in Venice. The west entrance is much
   later than any of the rest, and is of the richest Renaissance Gothic,
   a little anterior to the Porta della Carta, and first-rate of its
   kind. The manner of the introduction of the figure of the angel at the
   top of the arch is full of beauty. Note the extravagant crockets and
   cusp finials as signs of decline.

 STEFANO, CHURCH OF ST., at Murano (pugnacity of its abbot), II. 33. The
   church no longer exists.

 STROPE, CAMPIELLO DELLA, house in, II. 266.


    T


 TANA, windows at the, II. 260.

 TIEPOLO, PALAZZO, on the Grand Canal. Of no importance.

 TOLENTINI, CHURCH OF THE. One of the basest and coldest works of the
   late Renaissance. It is said to contain two Bonifazios.

 TOMA, CHURCH OF ST. Of no importance.

 TOMA, PONTE SAN. There is an interesting ancient doorway opening on the
   canal close to this bridge, probably of the twelfth century, and a
   good early Gothic door, opening upon the bridge itself.

 TORCELLO, general aspect of, II. 12; Santa Fosca at, I. 117, II. 13;
   duomo, II. 14; mosaics of, II. 196; measures of, II. 378; date of, II.
   380.

 TREVISAN, PALAZZO, I. 369, III. 212.

 TRON, PALAZZO. Of no importance.

 TROVASO, CHURCH OF ST. Itself of no importance, but containing two
   pictures by Tintoret, namely:

   1. _The Temptation of St. Anthony._ (Altar piece in the chapel on the
   left of the choir.) A small and very carefully finished picture, but
   marvellously temperate and quiet in treatment, especially considering
   the subject, which one would have imagined likely to inspire the
   painter with one of his most fantastic visions. As if on purpose to
   disappoint us, both the effect, and the conception of the figures, are
   perfectly quiet, and appear the result much more of careful study than
   of vigorous imagination. The effect is one of plain daylight; there
   are a few clouds drifting in the distance, but with no wildness in
   them, nor is there any energy or heat in the flames which mantle about
   the waist of one of the figures. But for the noble workmanship, we
   might almost fancy it the production of a modern academy; yet as we
   begin to read the picture, the painter's mind becomes felt. St.
   Anthony is surrounded by four figures, one of which only has the form
   of a demon, and he is in the background, engaged in no more terrific
   act of violence toward St. Anthony, than endeavoring to pull off his
   mantle; he has, however, a scourge over his shoulder, but this is
   probably intended for St. Anthony's weapon of self-discipline, which
   the fiend, with a very Protestant turn of mind, is carrying off. A
   broken staff, with a bell hanging to it, at the saint's feet, also
   expresses his interrupted devotion. The three other figures beside him
   are bent on more cunning mischief: the woman on the left is one of
   Tintoret's best portraits of a young and bright-eyed Venetian beauty.
   It is curious that he has given so attractive a countenance to a type
   apparently of the temptation to violate the power of poverty, for this
   woman places one hand in a vase full of coins, and shakes golden
   chains with the other. On the opposite side of the saint, another
   woman, admirably painted, but of a far less attractive countenance, is
   a type of the lusts of the flesh, yet there is nothing gross or
   immodest in her dress or gesture. She appears to have been baffled,
   and for the present to have given up addressing the saint: she lays
   one hand upon her breast, and might be taken for a very respectable
   person, but that there are flames playing about her loins. A recumbent
   figure on the ground is of less intelligible character, but may
   perhaps be meant for Indolence; at all events, he has torn the saint's
   book to pieces. I forgot to note, that under the figure representing
   Avarice, there is a creature like a pig; whether actual pig or not is
   unascertainable, for the church is dark, the little light that comes
   on the picture falls on it the wrong way, and one third of the lower
   part of it is hidden by a white case, containing a modern daub, lately
   painted by way of an altar piece; the meaning, as well as the merit,
   of the grand old picture being now far beyond the comprehension both
   of priests and people.

   2. _The Last Supper._ (On the left-hand side of the Chapel of the
   Sacrament.) A picture which has been through the hands of the Academy,
   and is therefore now hardly worth notice. Its conception seems always
   to have been vulgar, and far below Tintoret's usual standard; there is
   singular baseness in the circumstance, that one of the near Apostles,
   while all the others are, as usual, intent upon Christ's words, "One
   of you shall betray me," is going to help himself to wine out of a
   bottle which stands behind him. In so doing he stoops towards the
   table, the flask being on the floor. If intended for the action of
   Judas at this moment, there is the painter's usual originality in the
   thought; but it seems to me rather done to obtain variation of
   posture, in bringing the red dress into strong contrast with the
   tablecloth. The color has once been fine, and there are fragments of
   good painting still left; but the light does not permit these to be
   seen, and there is too much perfect work of the master's in Venice, to
   permit us to spend time on retouched remnants. The picture is only
   worth mentioning, because it is ignorantly and ridiculously referred
   to by Kugler as characteristic of Tintoret.


    V

 VITALI, CHURCH OF ST. Said to contain a picture by Vittor Carpaccio,
   over the high altar: otherwise of no importance.


 VOLTO SANTO, CHURCH OF THE. An interesting but desecrated ruin of the
   fourteenth century; fine in style. Its roof retains some fresco
   coloring, but, as far as I recollect, of later date than the
   architecture.


    Z

 ZACCARIA, CHURCH OF ST. Early Renaissance, and fine of its kind; a
   Gothic chapel attached to it is of great beauty. It contains the best
   John Bellini in Venice, after that of San G. Grisostomo, "The Virgin,
   with Four Saints;" and is said to contain another John Bellini and a
   Tintoret, neither of which I have seen.

 ZITELLE, CHURCH OF THE. Of no importance.

 ZOBENIGO, CHURCH OF SANTA MARIA, III. 124. It contains one valuable
   Tintoret, namely:

   _Christ with Sta. Justina and St. Augustin._ (Over the third altar on
   the south side of the nave.) A picture of small size, and upright,
   about ten feet by eight. Christ appears to be descending out of the
   clouds between the two saints, who are both kneeling on the sea shore.
   It is a Venetian sea, breaking on a flat beach, like the Lido, with a
   scarlet galley in the middle distance, of which the chief use is to
   unite the two figures by a point of color. Both the saints are
   respectable Venetians of the lower class, in homely dresses and with
   homely faces. The whole picture is quietly painted, and somewhat
   slightly; free from all extravagance, and displaying little power
   except in the general truth or harmony of colors so easily laid on. It
   is better preserved than usual, and worth dwelling upon as an instance
   of the style of the master when _at rest_.


FOOTNOTES:

  [71]  "Am I in Italy? Is this the Mincius?
         Are those the distant turrets of Verona?
         And shall I sup where Juliet at the Masque
         Saw her loved Montague, and now sleeps by him?
         Such questions hourly do I ask myself;
         And not a stone in a crossway inscribed
         'To Mantua,' 'To Ferrara,' but excites
         Surprise, and doubt, and self-congratulation."

    Alas, after a few short months, spent even in the scenes dearest to
    history, we can feel thus no more.

  [72] I have always called this church, in the text, simply "St. John
    and Paul," not Sts. John and Paul, just as the Venetians say San
    Giovanni e Paolo, and not Santi G., &c.





       *       *       *       *       *





Library Edition

The Complete Works of John Ruskin

STONES OF VENICE

VOLUMES I-II







National Library Association
New York             Chicago




The Complete Works of John Ruskin

Volume VIII

STONES OF VENICE

VOLUME II




THE STONES OF VENICE

VOLUME II.

The Sea Stories




ADVERTISEMENT.


It was originally intended that this Work should consist of two volumes
only; the subject has extended to three. The second volume, however,
will conclude the account of the ancient architecture of Venice. The
third will embrace the Early, the Roman, and the Grotesque Renaissance;
and an Index, which, as it gives, in alphabetical order, a brief account
of all the buildings in Venice, or references to the places where they
are mentioned in the text, will be found a convenient guide for the
traveller. In order to make it more serviceable, I have introduced some
notices of the pictures which I think most interesting in the various
churches, and in the Scuola di San Rocco.




CONTENTS.


  FIRST, OR BYZANTINE, PERIOD.

                         CHAPTER I.
                                                      PAGE
    The Throne,                                          1

                        CHAPTER II.
    Torcello,                                           11

                       CHAPTER III.
    Murano,                                             27

                        CHAPTER IV.
    St. Mark's,                                         57

                        CHAPTER V.
    Byzantine Palaces,                                 118


  SECOND, OR GOTHIC, PERIOD.

                        CHAPTER VI.
    The Nature of Gothic,                              151

                       CHAPTER VII.
    Gothic Palaces,                                    231

                       CHAPTER VIII.
    The Ducal Palace,                                  281


  APPENDIX.

     1. The Gondolier's Cry,                           375
     2. Our Lady of Salvation,                         378
     3. Tides of Venice and Measures at Torcello,      378
     4. Date of the Duomo of Torcello,                 380
     5. Modern Pulpits,                                380
     6. Apse of Murano,                                382
     7. Early Venetian Dress,                          383
     8. Inscriptions at Murano,                        384
     9. Shafts of St. Mark's,                          384
    10. Proper Sense of the Word Idolatry,             388
    11. Situations of Byzantine Palaces,               391
    12. Modern Paintings on Glass,                     394




LIST OF PLATES.


                                                           Facing Page
 Plate 1. Plans of Torcello and Murano,                             14

   "   2. The Acanthus of Torcello,                                 15

   "   3. Inlaid Bands of Murano,                                   40

   "   4. Sculptures of Murano,                                     42

   "   5. Archivolt in the Duomo of Murano,                         45

   "   6. The Vine, Free and in Service,                            96

   "   7. Byzantine Capitals--Convex Group,                        131

   "   8. Byzantine Capitals--Concave Group,                       132

   "   9. Lily Capital of St. Mark's,                              136

   "  10. The Four Venetian Flower Order,                          137

   "  11. Byzantine Sculptures,                                    138

   "  12. Linear and Surface Gothic,                               224

   "  13. Balconies,                                               247

   "  14. The Orders of Venetian Arches,                           248

   "  15. Windows of the Second Order,                             254

   "  16. Windows of the Fourth Order,                             257

   "  17. Windows of the Early Gothic Palaces,                     259

   "  18. Windows of the Fifth Order,                              266

   "  19. Leafage of the Vine Angle,                               308

   "  20. Leafage of the Venetian Capitals,                        368




               THE

        STONES OF VENICE.

  FIRST, OR BYZANTINE, PERIOD.




CHAPTER I.

THE THRONE.


§ I. In the olden days of travelling, now to return no more, in which
distance could not be vanquished without toil, but in which that toil
was rewarded, partly by the power of deliberate survey of the countries
through which the journey lay, and partly by the happiness of the
evening hours, when, from the top of the last hill he had surmounted,
the traveller beheld the quiet village where he was to rest, scattered
among the meadows beside its valley stream; or, from the long-hoped-for
turn in the dusty perspective of the causeway, saw, for the first time,
the towers of some famed city, faint in the rays of sunset--hours of
peaceful and thoughtful pleasure, for which the rush of the arrival in
the railway station is perhaps not always, or to all men, an
equivalent,--in those days, I say, when there was something more to be
anticipated and remembered in the first aspect of each successive
halting-place, than a new arrangement of glass roofing and iron girder,
there were few moments of which the recollection was more fondly
cherished by the traveller than that which, as I endeavored to describe
in the close of the last chapter, brought him within sight of Venice, as
his gondola shot into the open lagoon from the canal of Mestre. Not but
that the aspect of the city itself was generally the source of some
slight disappointment, for, seen in this direction, its buildings are
far less characteristic than those of the other great towns of Italy;
but this inferiority was partly disguised by distance, and more than
atoned for by the strange rising of its walls and towers out of the
midst, as it seemed, of the deep sea, for it was impossible that the
mind or the eye could at once comprehend the shallowness of the vast
sheet of water which stretched away in leagues of rippling lustre to the
north and south, or trace the narrow line of islets bounding it to the
east. The salt breeze, the white moaning sea-birds, the masses of black
weed separating and disappearing gradually, in knots of heaving shoal,
under the advance of the steady tide, all proclaimed it to be indeed the
ocean on whose bosom the great city rested so calmly; not such blue,
soft, lake-like ocean as bathes the Neapolitan promontories, or sleeps
beneath the marble rocks of Genoa, but a sea with the bleak power of our
own northern waves, yet subdued into a strange spacious rest, and
changed from its angry pallor into a field of burnished gold, as the sun
declined behind the belfry tower of the lonely island church, fitly
named "St. George of the Seaweed." As the boat drew nearer to the city,
the coast which the traveller had just left sank behind him into one
long, low, sad-colored line, tufted irregularly with brushwood and
willows: but, at what seemed its northern extremity, the hills of Arqua
rose in a dark cluster of purple pyramids, balanced on the bright mirage
of the lagoon; two or three smooth surges of inferior hill extended
themselves about their roots, and beyond these, beginning with the
craggy peaks above Vicenza, the chain of the Alps girded the whole
horizon to the north--a wall of jagged blue, here and there showing
through its clefts a wilderness of misty precipices, fading far back
into the recesses of Cadore, and itself rising and breaking away
eastward, where the sun struck opposite upon its snow, into mighty
fragments of peaked light, standing up behind the barred clouds of
evening, one after another, countless, the crown of the Adrian Sea,
until the eye turned back from pursuing them, to rest upon the nearer
burning of the campaniles of Murano, and on the great city, where it
magnified itself along the waves, as the quick silent pacing of the
gondola drew nearer and nearer. And at last, when its walls were
reached, and the outmost of its untrodden streets was entered, not
through towered gate or guarded rampart, but as a deep inlet between two
rocks of coral in the Indian sea; when first upon the traveller's sight
opened the long ranges of columned palaces,--each with its black boat
moored at the portal,--each with its image cast down, beneath its feet,
upon that green pavement which every breeze broke into new fantasies of
rich tessellation; when first, at the extremity of the bright vista, the
shadowy Rialto threw its colossal curve slowly forth from behind the
palace of the Camerlenghi; that strange curve, so delicate, so
adamantine, strong as a mountain cavern, graceful as a bow just bent;
when first, before its moonlike circumference was all risen, the
gondolier's cry, "Ah! Stalí,"[1] struck sharp upon the ear, and the prow
turned aside under the mighty cornices that half met over the narrow
canal, where the plash of the water followed close and loud, ringing
along the marble by the boat's side; and when at last that boat darted
forth upon the breadth of silver sea, across which the front of the
Ducal palace, flushed with its sanguine veins, looks to the snowy dome
of Our Lady of Salvation,[2] it was no marvel that the mind should be so
deeply entranced by the visionary charm of a scene so beautiful and so
strange, as to forget the darker truths of its history and its being.
Well might it seem that such a city had owed her existence rather to the
rod of the enchanter, than the fear of the fugitive; that the waters
which encircled her had been chosen for the mirror of her state, rather
than the shelter of her nakedness; and that all which in nature was wild
or merciless,--Time and Decay, as well as the waves and tempests,--had
been won to adorn her instead of to destroy, and might still spare, for
ages to come, that beauty which seemed to have fixed for its throne the
sands of the hour-glass as well as of the sea.

§ II. And although the last few eventful years, fraught with change to
the face of the whole earth, have been more fatal in their influence on
Venice than the five hundred that preceded them; though the noble
landscape of approach to her can now be seen no more, or seen only by a
glance, as the engine slackens its rushing on the iron line; and though
many of her palaces are for ever defaced, and many in desecrated ruins,
there is still so much of magic in her aspect, that the hurried
traveller, who must leave her before the wonder of that first aspect has
been worn away, may still be led to forget the humility of her origin,
and to shut his eyes to the depth of her desolation. They, at least, are
little to be envied, in whose hearts the great charities of the
imagination lie dead, and for whom the fancy has no power to repress the
importunity of painful impressions, or to raise what is ignoble, and
disguise what is discordant, in a scene so rich in its remembrances, so
surpassing in its beauty. But for this work of the imagination there
must be no permission during the task which is before us. The impotent
feelings of romance, so singularly characteristic of this century, may
indeed gild, but never save the remains of those mightier ages to which
they are attached like climbing flowers; and they must be torn away from
the magnificent fragments, if we would see them as they stood in their
own strength. Those feelings, always as fruitless as they are fond, are
in Venice not only incapable of protecting, but even of discerning, the
objects to which they ought to have been attached. The Venice of modern
fiction and drama is a thing of yesterday, a mere efflorescence of
decay, a stage dream which the first ray of daylight must dissipate into
dust. No prisoner, whose name is worth remembering, or whose sorrow
deserved sympathy, ever crossed that "Bridge of Sighs," which is the
centre of the Byronic ideal of Venice; no great merchant of Venice ever
saw that Rialto under which the traveller now passes with breathless
interest: the statue which Byron makes Faliero address as of one of his
great ancestors was erected to a soldier of fortune a hundred and fifty
years after Faliero's death; and the most conspicuous parts of the city
have been so entirely altered in the course of the last three centuries,
that if Henry Dandolo or Francis Foscari could be summoned from their
tombs, and stood each on the deck of his galley at the entrance of the
Grand Canal, that renowned entrance, the painter's favorite subject, the
novelist's favorite scene, where the water first narrows by the steps of
the Church of La Salute,--the mighty Doges would not know in what spot
of the world they stood, would literally not recognize one stone of the
great city, for whose sake, and by whose ingratitude, their grey hairs
had been brought down with bitterness to the grave. The remains of
_their_ Venice lie hidden behind the cumbrous masses which were the
delight of the nation in its dotage; hidden in many a grass-grown court,
and silent pathway, and lightless canal, where the slow waves have
sapped their foundations for five hundred years, and must soon prevail
over them for ever. It must be our task to glean and gather them forth,
and restore out of them some faint image of the lost city, more gorgeous
a thousand-fold than that which now exists, yet not created in the
day-dream of the prince, nor by the ostentation of the noble, but built
by iron hands and patient hearts, contending against the adversity of
nature and the fury of man, so that its wonderfulness cannot be grasped
by the indolence of imagination, but only after frank inquiry into the
true nature of that wild and solitary scene, whose restless tides and
trembling sands did indeed shelter the birth of the city, but long
denied her dominion.

§ III. When the eye falls casually on a map of Europe, there is no
feature by which it is more likely to be arrested than the strange
sweeping loop formed by the junction of the Alps and Apennines, and
enclosing the great basin of Lombardy. This return of the mountain chain
upon itself causes a vast difference in the character of the
distribution of its débris on its opposite sides. The rock fragments and
sediment which the torrents on the north side of the Alps bear into the
plains are distributed over a vast extent of country, and, though here
and there lodged in beds of enormous thickness, soon permit the firm
substrata to appear from underneath them; but all the torrents which
descend from the southern side of the High Alps, and from the northern
slope of the Apennines, meet concentrically in the recess or mountain
bay which the two ridges enclose; every fragment which thunder breaks
out of their battlements, and every grain of dust which the summer rain
washes from their pastures, is at last laid at rest in the blue sweep of
the Lombardic plain; and that plain must have risen within its rocky
barriers as a cup fills with wine, but for two contrary influences which
continually depress, or disperse from its surface, the accumulation of
the ruins of ages.

§ IV. I will not tax the reader's faith in modern science by insisting
on the singular depression of the surface of Lombardy, which appears for
many centuries to have taken place steadily and continually; the main
fact with which we have to do is the gradual transport, by the Po and
its great collateral rivers, of vast masses of the finer sediment to the
sea. The character of the Lombardic plains is most strikingly expressed
by the ancient walls of its cities, composed for the most part of large
rounded Alpine pebbles alternating with narrow courses of brick; and was
curiously illustrated in 1848, by the ramparts of these same pebbles
thrown up four or five feet high round every field, to check the
Austrian cavalry in the battle under the walls of Verona. The finer dust
among which these pebbles are dispersed is taken up by the rivers, fed
into continual strength by the Alpine snow, so that, however pure their
waters may be when they issue from the lakes at the foot of the great
chain, they become of the color and opacity of clay before they reach
the Adriatic; the sediment which they bear is at once thrown down as
they enter the sea, forming a vast belt of low land along the eastern
coast of Italy. The powerful stream of the Po of course builds forward
the fastest; on each side of it, north and south, there is a tract of
marsh, fed by more feeble streams, and less liable to rapid change than
the delta of the central river. In one of these tracts is built RAVENNA,
and in the other VENICE.

§ V. What circumstances directed the peculiar arrangement of this great
belt of sediment in the earliest times, it is not here the place to
inquire. It is enough for us to know that from the mouths of the Adige
to those of the Piave there stretches, at a variable distance of from
three to five miles from the actual shore, a bank of sand, divided into
long islands by narrow channels of sea. The space between this bank and
the true shore consists of the sedimentary deposits from these and other
rivers, a great plain of calcareous mud, covered, in the neighborhood of
Venice, by the sea at high water, to the depth in most places of a foot
or a foot and a half, and nearly everywhere exposed at low tide, but
divided by an intricate network of narrow and winding channels, from
which the sea never retires. In some places, according to the run of the
currents, the land has risen into marshy islets, consolidated, some by
art, and some by time, into ground firm enough to be built upon, or
fruitful enough to be cultivated: in others, on the contrary, it has not
reached the sea-level; so that, at the average low water, shallow
lakelets glitter among its irregularly exposed fields of seaweed. In the
midst of the largest of these, increased in importance by the confluence
of several large river channels towards one of the openings in the sea
bank, the city of Venice itself is built, on a crowded cluster of
islands; the various plots of higher ground which appear to the north
and south of this central cluster, have at different periods been also
thickly inhabited, and now bear, according to their size, the remains of
cities, villages, or isolated convents and churches, scattered among
spaces of open ground, partly waste and encumbered by ruins, partly
under cultivation for the supply of the metropolis.

§ VI. The average rise and fall of the tide is about three feet (varying
considerably with the seasons[3]); but this fall, on so flat a shore, is
enough to cause continual movement in the waters, and in the main canals
to produce a reflux which frequently runs like a mill stream. At high
water no land is visible for many miles to the north or south of Venice,
except in the form of small islands crowned with towers or gleaming with
villages: there is a channel, some three miles wide, between the city
and the mainland, and some mile and a half wide between it and the sandy
breakwater called the Lido, which divides the lagoon from the Adriatic,
but which is so low as hardly to disturb the impression of the city's
having been built in the midst of the ocean, although the secret of its
true position is partly, yet not painfully, betrayed by the clusters of
piles set to mark the deep-water channels, which undulate far away in
spotty chains like the studded backs of huge sea-snakes, and by the
quick glittering of the crisped and crowded waves that flicker and dance
before the strong winds upon the unlifted level of the shallow sea. But
the scene is widely different at low tide. A fall of eighteen or twenty
inches is enough to show ground over the greater part of the lagoon; and
at the complete ebb the city is seen standing in the midst of a dark
plain of seaweed, of gloomy green, except only where the larger branches
of the Brenta and its associated streams converge towards the port of
the Lido. Through this salt and sombre plain the gondola and the
fishing-boat advance by tortuous channels, seldom more than four or five
feet deep, and often so choked with slime that the heavier keels furrow
the bottom till their crossing tracks are seen through the clear sea
water like the ruts upon a wintry road, and the oar leaves blue gashes
upon the ground at every stroke, or is entangled among the thick weed
that fringes the banks with the weight of its sullen waves, leaning to
and fro upon the uncertain sway of the exhausted tide. The scene is
often profoundly oppressive, even at this day, when every plot of higher
ground bears some fragment of fair building: but, in order to know what
it was once, let the traveller follow in his boat at evening the
windings of some unfrequented channel far into the midst of the
melancholy plain; let him remove, in his imagination, the brightness of
the great city that still extends itself in the distance, and the walls
and towers from the islands that are near; and so wait, until the bright
investiture and sweet warmth of the sunset are withdrawn from the
waters, and the black desert of their shore lies in its nakedness
beneath the night, pathless, comfortless, infirm, lost in dark languor
and fearful silence, except where the salt runlets plash into the
tideless pools, or the sea-birds flit from their margins with a
questioning cry; and he will be enabled to enter in some sort into the
horror of heart with which this solitude was anciently chosen by man for
his habitation. They little thought, who first drove the stakes into the
sand, and strewed the ocean reeds for their rest, that their children
were to be the princes of that ocean, and their palaces its pride; and
yet, in the great natural laws that rule that sorrowful wilderness, let
it be remembered what strange preparation had been made for the things
which no human imagination could have foretold, and how the whole
existence and fortune of the Venetian nation were anticipated or
compelled, by the setting of those bars and doors to the rivers and the
sea. Had deeper currents divided their islands, hostile navies would
again and again have reduced the rising city into servitude; had
stronger surges beaten their shores, all the richness and refinement of
the Venetian architecture must have been exchanged for the walls and
bulwarks of an ordinary sea-port. Had there been no tide, as in other
parts of the Mediterranean, the narrow canals of the city would have
become noisome, and the marsh in which it was built pestiferous. Had the
tide been only a foot or eighteen inches higher in its rise, the
water-access to the doors of the palaces would have been impossible:
even as it is, there is sometimes a little difficulty, at the ebb, in
landing without setting foot upon the lower and slippery steps: and the
highest tides sometimes enter the courtyards, and overflow the entrance
halls. Eighteen inches more of difference between the level of the flood
and ebb would have rendered the doorsteps of every palace, at low water,
a treacherous mass of weeds and limpets, and the entire system of
water-carriage for the higher classes, in their easy and daily
intercourse, must have been done away with. The streets of the city
would have been widened, its network of canals filled up, and all the
peculiar character of the place and the people destroyed.

§ VII. The reader may perhaps have felt some pain in the contrast
between this faithful view of the site of the Venetian Throne, and the
romantic conception of it which we ordinarily form; but this pain, if he
have felt it, ought to be more than counterbalanced by the value of the
instance thus afforded to us at once of the inscrutableness and the
wisdom of the ways of God. If, two thousand years ago, we had been
permitted to watch the slow settling of the slime of those turbid rivers
into the polluted sea, and the gaining upon its deep and fresh waters of
the lifeless, impassable, unvoyageable plain, how little could we have
understood the purpose with which those islands were shaped out of the
void, and the torpid waters enclosed with their desolate walls of sand!
How little could we have known, any more than of what now seems to us
most distressful, dark, and objectless, the glorious aim which was then
in the mind of Him in whose hand are all the corners of the earth! how
little imagined that in the laws which were stretching forth the gloomy
margins of those fruitless banks, and feeding the bitter grass among
their shallows, there was indeed a preparation, and _the only
preparation possible_, for the founding of a city which was to be set
like a golden clasp on the girdle of the earth, to write her history on
the white scrolls of the sea-surges, and to word it in their thunder,
and to gather and give forth, in worldwide pulsation, the glory of the
West and of the East, from the burning heart of her Fortitude and
Splendor.


FOOTNOTES

  [1] Appendix 1, "The Gondolier's Cry."

  [2] Appendix 2, "Our Lady of Salvation."

  [3] Appendix 3, "Tides of Venice."




CHAPTER II.

Torcello.


§ I. Seven miles to the north of Venice, the banks of sand, which near
the city rise little above low-water mark, attain by degrees a higher
level, and knit themselves at last into fields of salt morass, raised
here and there into shapeless mounds, and intercepted by narrow creeks
of sea. One of the feeblest of these inlets, after winding for some time
among buried fragments of masonry, and knots of sunburnt weeds whitened
with webs of fucus, stays itself in an utterly stagnant pool beside a
plot of greener grass covered with ground ivy and violets. On this mound
is built a rude brick campanile, of the commonest Lombardic type, which
if we ascend towards evening (and there are none to hinder us, the door
of its ruinous staircase swinging idly on its hinges), we may command
from it one of the most notable scenes in this wide world of ours. Far
as the eye can reach, a waste of wild sea moor, of a lurid ashen grey;
not like our northern moors with their jet-black pools and purple heath,
but lifeless, the color of sackcloth, with the corrupted sea-water
soaking through the roots of its acrid weeds, and gleaming hither and
thither through its snaky channels. No gathering of fantastic mists, nor
coursing of clouds across it; but melancholy clearness of space in the
warm sunset, oppressive, reaching to the horizon of its level gloom. To
the very horizon, on the north-east; but, to the north and west, there
is a blue line of higher land along the border of it, and above this,
but farther back, a misty band of mountains, touched with snow. To the
east, the paleness and roar of the Adriatic, louder at momentary
intervals as the surf breaks on the bars of sand; to the south, the
widening branches of the calm lagoon, alternately purple and pale
green, as they reflect the evening clouds or twilight sky; and almost
beneath our feet, on the same field which sustains the tower we gaze
from, a group of four buildings, two of them little larger than cottages
(though built of stone, and one adorned by a quaint belfry), the third
an octagonal chapel, of which we can see but little more than the flat
red roof with its rayed tiling, the fourth, a considerable church with
nave and aisles, but of which, in like manner, we can see little but the
long central ridge and lateral slopes of roof, which the sunlight
separates in one glowing mass from the green field beneath and grey moor
beyond. There are no living creatures near the buildings, nor any
vestige of village or city round about them. They lie like a little
company of ships becalmed on a far-away sea.

§ II. Then look farther to the south. Beyond the widening branches of
the lagoon, and rising out of the bright lake into which they gather,
there are a multitude of towers, dark, and scattered among square-set
shapes of clustered palaces, a long and irregular line fretting the
southern sky.

Mother and daughter, you behold them both in their widowhood,--TORCELLO
and VENICE.

Thirteen hundred years ago, the grey moorland looked as it does this
day, and the purple mountains stood as radiantly in the deep distances
of evening; but on the line of the horizon, there were strange fires
mixed with the light of sunset, and the lament of many human voices
mixed with the fretting of the waves on their ridges of sand. The flames
rose from the ruins of Altinum; the lament from the multitude of its
people, seeking, like Israel of old, a refuge from the sword in the
paths of the sea.

The cattle are feeding and resting upon the site of the city that they
left; the mower's scythe swept this day at dawn over the chief street of
the city that they built, and the swathes of soft grass are now sending
up their scent into the night air, the only incense that fills the
temple of their ancient worship. Let us go down into that little space
of meadow land.

§ III. The inlet which runs nearest to the base of the campanile is not
that by which Torcello is commonly approached. Another, somewhat
broader, and overhung by alder copse, winds out of the main channel of
the lagoon up to the very edge of the little meadow which was once the
Piazza of the city, and there, stayed by a few grey stones which present
some semblance of a quay, forms its boundary at one extremity. Hardly
larger than an ordinary English farmyard, and roughly enclosed on each
side by broken palings and hedges of honeysuckle and briar, the narrow
field retires from the water's edge, traversed by a scarcely traceable
footpath, for some forty or fifty paces, and then expanding into the
form of a small square, with buildings on three sides of it, the fourth
being that which opens to the water. Two of these, that on our left and
that in front of us as we approach from the canal, are so small that
they might well be taken for the out-houses of the farm, though the
first is a conventual building, and the other aspires to the title of
the "Palazzo publico," both dating as far back as the beginning of the
fourteenth century; the third, the octagonal church of Santa Fosca, is
far more ancient than either, yet hardly on a larger scale. Though the
pillars of the portico which surrounds it are of pure Greek marble, and
their capitals are enriched with delicate sculpture, they, and the
arches they sustain, together only raise the roof to the height of a
cattle-shed; and the first strong impression which the spectator
receives from the whole scene is, that whatever sin it may have been
which has on this spot been visited with so utter a desolation, it could
not at least have been ambition. Nor will this impression be diminished
as we approach, or enter, the larger church to which the whole group of
building is subordinate. It has evidently been built by men in flight
and distress,[4] who sought in the hurried erection of their island
church such a shelter for their earnest and sorrowful worship as, on the
one hand, could not attract the eyes of their enemies by its splendor,
and yet, on the other, might not awaken too bitter feelings by its
contrast with the churches which they had seen destroyed. There is
visible everywhere a simple and tender effort to recover some of the
form of the temples which they had loved, and to do honor to God by that
which they were erecting, while distress and humiliation prevented the
desire, and prudence precluded the admission, either of luxury of
ornament or magnificence of plan. The exterior is absolutely devoid of
decoration, with the exception only of the western entrance and the
lateral door, of which the former has carved sideposts and architrave,
and the latter, crosses of rich sculpture; while the massy stone
shutters of the windows, turning on huge rings of stone, which answer
the double purpose of stanchions and brackets, cause the whole building
rather to resemble a refuge from Alpine storm than the cathedral of a
populous city; and, internally, the two solemn mosaics of the eastern
and western extremities,--one representing the Last Judgment, the other
the Madonna, her tears falling as her hands are raised to bless,--and
the noble range of pillars which enclose the space between, terminated
by the high throne for the pastor and the semicircular raised seats for
the superior clergy, are expressive at once of the deep sorrow and the
sacred courage of men who had no home left them upon earth, but who
looked for one to come, of men "persecuted but not forsaken, cast down
but not destroyed."

§ IV. I am not aware of any other early church in Italy which has this
peculiar expression in so marked a degree; and it is so consistent with
all that Christian architecture ought to express in every age (for the
actual condition of the exiles who built the cathedral of Torcello is
exactly typical of the spiritual condition which every Christian ought
to recognize in himself, a state of homelessness on earth, except so far
as he can make the Most High his habitation), that I would rather fix
the mind of the reader on this general character than on the separate
details, however interesting, of the architecture itself. I shall
therefore examine these only so far as is necessary to give a clear idea
of the means by which the peculiar expression of the building is
attained.

[Illustration: Plate I.
               PLANS OF TORCELLO AND MURANO.]

§ V. On the opposite page, the uppermost figure, 1, is a rude plan
of the church. I do not answer for the thickness and external
disposition of the walls, which are not to our present purpose, and
which I have not carefully examined; but the interior arrangement is
given with sufficient accuracy. The church is built on the usual plan of
the Basilica[5] that is to say, its body divided into a nave and aisles
by two rows of massive shafts, the roof of the nave being raised high
above the aisles by walls sustained on two ranks of pillars, and pierced
with small arched windows. At Torcello the aisles are also lighted in
the same manner, and the nave is nearly twice their breadth.[6]

[Illustration: Plate II.
               THE ACANTHUS OF TORCELLO.]

The capitals of all the great shafts are of white marble, and are among
the best I have ever seen, as examples of perfectly calculated effect
from every touch of the chisel. Mr. Hope calls them "indifferently
imitated from the Corinthian:"[7] but the expression is as inaccurate as
it is unjust; every one of them is different in design, and their
variations are as graceful as they are fanciful. I could not, except by
an elaborate drawing, give any idea of the sharp, dark, deep
penetrations of the chisel into their snowy marble, but a single example
is given in the opposite plate, fig. 1, of the nature of the changes
effected in them from the Corinthian type. In this capital, although a
kind of acanthus (only with rounded lobes) is indeed used for the upper
range of leaves, the lower range is not acanthus at all, but a kind of
vine, or at least that species of plant which stands for vine in all
early Lombardic and Byzantine work (vide Vol. I. Appendix 8); the leaves
are trefoiled, and the stalks cut clear so that they might be grasped
with the hand, and cast sharp dark shadows, perpetually changing, across
the bell of the capital behind them. I have drawn one of these vine
plants larger in fig. 2, that the reader may see how little imitation
of the Corinthian there is in them, and how boldly the stems of the
leaves are detached from the ground. But there is another circumstance
in this ornament still more noticeable. The band which encircles the
shaft beneath the spring of the leaves is copied from the common
classical wreathed or braided fillet, of which the reader may see
examples on almost every building of any pretensions in modern London.
But the mediæval builders could not be content with the dead and
meaningless scroll: the Gothic energy and love of life, mingled with the
early Christian religious symbolism, were struggling daily into more
vigorous expression, and they turned the wreathed band into a serpent of
three times the length necessary to undulate round the shaft, which,
knotting itself into a triple chain, shows at one side of the shaft its
tail and head, as if perpetually gliding round it beneath the stalks of
the vines. The vine, as is well known, was one of the early symbols of
Christ, and the serpent is here typical either of the eternity of his
dominion, or of the Satanic power subdued.

[Illustration: FIG. 1.]

§ VI. Nor even when the builder confines himself to the acanthus leaf
(or to that representation of it, hereafter to be more particularly
examined, constant in Romanesque work) can his imagination allow him to
rest content with its accustomed position. In a common Corinthian
capital the leaves nod forward only, thrown out on every side from the
bell which they surround: but at the base of one of the capitals on the
opposite side of the nave from this of the vines,[8] two leaves are
introduced set with their sides outwards, forming spirals by curling
back, half-closed, in the position shown in fig. 4 in Plate II., there
represented as in a real acanthus leaf; for it will assist our future
inquiries into the ornamentation of capitals that the reader should be
acquainted with the form of the acanthus leaf itself. I have drawn it,
therefore, in the two positions, figs. 3 and 4 in Plate II.; while fig.
5 is the translation of the latter form into marble by the sculptor of
Torcello. It is not very like the acanthus, but much liker than any
Greek work; though still entirely conventional in its cinquefoiled
lobes. But these are disposed with the most graceful freedom of line,
separated at the roots by deep drill holes, which tell upon the eye far
away like beads of jet; and changed, before they become too crowded to
be effective, into a vigorous and simple zigzagged edge, which saves the
designer some embarrassment in the perspective of the terminating
spiral. But his feeling of nature was greater than his knowledge of
perspective; and it is delightful to see how he has rooted the whole
leaf in the strong rounded under-stem, the indication of its closing
with its face inwards, and has thus given organization and elasticity to
the lovely group of spiral lines; a group of which, even in the lifeless
sea-shell, we are never weary, but which becomes yet more delightful
when the ideas of elasticity and growth are joined to the sweet
succession of its involution.

§ VII. It is not, however, to be expected that either the mute language
of early Christianity (however important a part of the expression of the
building at the time of its erection), or the delicate fancies of the
Gothic leafage springing into new life, should be read, or perceived, by
the passing traveller who has never been taught to expect anything in
architecture except five orders: yet he can hardly fail to be struck by
the simplicity and dignity of the great shafts themselves; by the frank
diffusion of light, which prevents their severity from becoming
oppressive; by the delicate forms and lovely carving of the pulpit and
chancel screen; and, above all, by the peculiar aspect of the eastern
extremity of the church, which, instead of being withdrawn, as in later
cathedrals, into a chapel dedicated to the Virgin, or contributing by
the brilliancy of its windows to the splendor of the altar, and
theatrical effect of the ceremonies performed there, is a simple and
stern semicircular recess, filled beneath by three ranks of seats,
raised one above the other, for the bishop and presbyters, that they
might watch as well as guide the devotions of the people, and discharge
literally in the daily service the functions of bishops or _overseers_
of the flock of God.

§ VIII. Let us consider a little each of these characters in succession;
and first (for of the shafts enough has been said already), what is very
peculiar to this church, its luminousness. This perhaps strikes the
traveller more from its contrast with the excessive gloom of the Church
of St. Mark's; but it is remarkable when we compare the Cathedral of
Torcello with any of the contemporary basilicas in South Italy or
Lombardic churches in the North. St. Ambrogio at Milan, St. Michele at
Pavia, St. Zeno at Verona, St. Frediano at Lucca, St. Miniato at
Florence, are all like sepulchral caverns compared with Torcello, where
the slightest details of the sculptures and mosaics are visible, even
when twilight is deepening. And there is something especially touching
in our finding the sunshine thus freely admitted into a church built by
men in sorrow. They did not need the darkness; they could not perhaps
bear it. There was fear and depression upon them enough, without a
material gloom. They sought for comfort in their religion, for tangible
hopes and promises, not for threatenings or mysteries; and though the
subjects chosen for the mosaics on the walls are of the most solemn
character, there are no artificial shadows cast upon them, nor dark
colors used in them: all is fair and bright, and intended evidently to
be regarded in hopefulness, and not with terror.

§ IX. For observe this choice of subjects. It is indeed possible that
the walls of the nave and aisles, which are now whitewashed, may have
been covered with fresco or mosaic, and thus have supplied a series of
subjects, on the choice of which we cannot speculate. I do not, however,
find record of the destruction of any such works; and I am rather
inclined to believe that at any rate the central division of the
building was originally decorated, as it is now, simply by mosaics
representing Christ, the Virgin, and the apostles, at one extremity, and
Christ coming to judgment at the other. And if so, I repeat, observe the
significance of this choice. Most other early churches are covered with
imagery sufficiently suggestive of the vivid interest of the builders in
the history and occupations of the world. Symbols or representations of
political events, portraits of living persons, and sculptures of
satirical, grotesque, or trivial subjects are of constant occurrence,
mingled with the more strictly appointed representations of scriptural
or ecclesiastical history; but at Torcello even these usual, and one
should have thought almost necessary, successions of Bible events do not
appear. The mind of the worshipper was fixed entirely upon two great
facts, to him the most precious of all facts,--the present mercy of
Christ to His Church, and His future coming to judge the world. That
Christ's mercy was, at this period, supposed chiefly to be attainable
through the pleading of the Virgin, and that therefore beneath the
figure of the Redeemer is seen that of the weeping Madonna in the act of
intercession, may indeed be matter of sorrow to the Protestant beholder,
but ought not to blind him to the earnestness and singleness of the
faith with which these men sought their sea-solitudes; not in hope of
founding new dynasties, or entering upon new epochs of prosperity, but
only to humble themselves before God, and to pray that in His infinite
mercy He would hasten the time when the sea should give up the dead
which were in it, and Death and Hell give up the dead which were in
them, and when they might enter into the better kingdom, "where the
wicked cease from troubling and the weary are at rest."

§ X. Nor were the strength and elasticity of their minds, even in the
least matters, diminished by thus looking forward to the close of all
things. On the contrary, nothing is more remarkable than the finish and
beauty of all the portions of the building, which seem to have been
actually executed for the place they occupy in the present structure.
The rudest are those which they brought with them from the mainland; the
best and most beautiful, those which appear to have been carved for
their island church: of these, the new capitals already noticed, and the
exquisite panel ornaments of the chancel screen, are the most
conspicuous; the latter form a low wall across the church between the
six small shafts whose places are seen in the plan, and serve to enclose
a space raised two steps above the level of the nave, destined for the
singers, and indicated also in the plan by an open line _a b c d_. The
bas-reliefs on this low screen are groups of peacocks and lions, two
face to face on each panel, rich and fantastic beyond description,
though not expressive of very accurate knowledge either of leonine or
pavonine forms. And it is not until we pass to the back of the stair of
the pulpit, which is connected with the northern extremity of this
screen, that we find evidence of the haste with which the church was
constructed.

§ XI. The pulpit, however, is not among the least noticeable of its
features. It is sustained on the four small detached shafts marked at
_p_ in the plan, between the two pillars at the north side of the
screen; both pillars and pulpit studiously plain, while the staircase
which ascends to it is a compact mass of masonry (shaded in the plan),
faced by carved slabs of marble; the parapet of the staircase being also
formed of solid blocks like paving-stones, lightened by rich, but not
deep, exterior carving. Now these blocks, or at least those which adorn
the staircase towards the aisle, have been brought from the mainland;
and, being of size and shape not easily to be adjusted to the
proportions of the stair, the architect has cut out of them pieces of
the size he needed, utterly regardless of the subject or symmetry of the
original design. The pulpit is not the only place where this rough
procedure has been permitted: at the lateral door of the church are two
crosses, cut out of slabs of marble, formerly covered with rich
sculpture over their whole surfaces, of which portions are left on the
surface of the crosses; the lines of the original design being, of
course, just as arbitrarily cut by the incisions between the arms, as
the patterns upon a piece of silk which has been shaped anew. The fact
is, that in all early Romanesque work, large surfaces are covered with
sculpture for the sake of enrichment only; sculpture which indeed had
always meaning, because it was easier for the sculptor to work with some
chain of thought to guide his chisel, than without any; but it was not
always intended, or at least not always hoped, that this chain of
thought might be traced by the spectator. All that was proposed appears
to have been the enrichment of surface, so as to make it delightful to
the eye; and this being once understood, a decorated piece of marble
became to the architect just what a piece of lace or embroidery is to a
dressmaker, who takes of it such portions as she may require, with
little regard to the places where the patterns are divided. And though
it may appear, at first sight, that the procedure is indicative of
bluntness and rudeness of feeling, we may perceive, upon reflection,
that it may also indicate the redundance of power which sets little
price upon its own exertion. When a barbarous nation builds its
fortress-walls out of fragments of the refined architecture it has
overthrown, we can read nothing but its savageness in the vestiges of
art which may thus chance to have been preserved; but when the new work
is equal, if not superior, in execution, to the pieces of the older art
which are associated with it, we may justly conclude that the rough
treatment to which the latter have been subjected is rather a sign of
the hope of doing better things, than of want of feeling for those
already accomplished. And, in general, this careless fitting of ornament
is, in very truth, an evidence of life in the school of builders, and of
their making a due distinction between work which is to be used for
architectural effect, and work which is to possess an abstract
perfection; and it commonly shows also that the exertion of design is so
easy to them, and their fertility so inexhaustible, that they feel no
remorse in using somewhat injuriously what they can replace with so
slight an effort.

§ XII. It appears however questionable in the present instance, whether,
if the marbles had not been carved to his hand, the architect would have
taken the trouble to enrich them. For the execution of the rest of the
pulpit is studiously simple, and it is in this respect that its design
possesses, it seems to me, an interest to the religious spectator
greater than he will take in any other portion of the building. It is
supported, as I said, on a group of four slender shafts; itself of a
slightly oval form, extending nearly from one pillar of the nave to the
next, so as to give the preacher free room for the action of the entire
person, which always gives an unaffected impressiveness to the
eloquence of the southern nations. In the centre of its curved front, a
small bracket and detached shaft sustain the projection of a narrow
marble desk (occupying the place of a cushion in a modern pulpit), which
is hollowed out into a shallow curve on the upper surface, leaving a
ledge at the bottom of the slab, so that a book laid upon it, or rather
into it, settles itself there, opening as if by instinct, but without
the least chance of slipping to the side, or in any way moving beneath
the preacher's hands.[9] Six balls, or rather almonds, of purple marble
veined with white are set round the edge of the pulpit, and form its
only decoration. Perfectly graceful, but severe and almost cold in its
simplicity, built for permanence and service, so that no single member,
no stone of it, could be spared, and yet all are firm and uninjured as
when they were first set together, it stands in venerable contrast both
with the fantastic pulpits of mediæval cathedrals and with the rich
furniture of those of our modern churches. It is worth while pausing for
a moment to consider how far the manner of decorating a pulpit may have
influence on the efficiency of its service, and whether our modern
treatment of this, to us all-important, feature of a church be the best
possible.

§ XIII. When the sermon is good we need not much concern ourselves about
the form of the pulpit. But sermons cannot always be good; and I believe
that the temper in which the congregation set themselves to listen may
be in some degree modified by their perception of fitness or unfitness,
impressiveness or vulgarity, in the disposition of the place appointed
for the speaker,--not to the same degree, but somewhat in the same way,
that they may be influenced by his own gestures or expression,
irrespective of the sense of what he says. I believe, therefore, in the
first place, that pulpits ought never to be highly decorated; the
speaker is apt to look mean or diminutive if the pulpit is either on a
very large scale or covered with splendid ornament, and if the interest
of the sermon should flag the mind is instantly tempted to wander. I
have observed that in almost all cathedrals, when the pulpits are
peculiarly magnificent, sermons are not often preached from them; but
rather, and especially if for any important purpose, from some temporary
erection in other parts of the building: and though this may often be
done because the architect has consulted the effect upon the eye more
than the convenience of the ear in the placing of his larger pulpit, I
think it also proceeds in some measure from a natural dislike in the
preacher to match himself with the magnificence of the rostrum, lest the
sermon should not be thought worthy of the place. Yet this will rather
hold of the colossal sculptures, and pyramids of fantastic tracery which
encumber the pulpits of Flemish and German churches, than of the
delicate mosaics and ivory-like carving of the Romanesque basilicas, for
when the form is kept simple, much loveliness of color and costliness of
work may be introduced, and yet the speaker not be thrown into the shade
by them.

§ XIV. But, in the second place, whatever ornaments we admit ought
clearly to be of a chaste, grave, and noble kind; and what furniture we
employ, evidently more for the honoring of God's word than for the ease
of the preacher. For there are two ways of regarding a sermon, either as
a human composition, or a Divine message. If we look upon it entirely as
the first, and require our clergymen to finish it with their utmost care
and learning, for our better delight whether of ear or intellect, we
shall necessarily be led to expect much formality and stateliness in its
delivery, and to think that all is not well if the pulpit have not a
golden fringe round it, and a goodly cushion in front of it, and if the
sermon be not fairly written in a black book, to be smoothed upon the
cushion in a majestic manner before beginning; all this we shall duly
come to expect: but we shall at the same time consider the treatise thus
prepared as something to which it is our duty to listen without
restlessness for half an hour or three quarters, but which, when that
duty has been decorously performed, we may dismiss from our minds in
happy confidence of being provided with another when next it shall be
necessary. But if once we begin to regard the preacher, whatever his
faults, as a man sent with a message to us, which it is a matter of life
or death whether we hear or refuse; if we look upon him as set in charge
over many spirits in danger of ruin, and having allowed to him but an
hour or two in the seven days to speak to them; if we make some endeavor
to conceive how precious these hours ought to be to him, a small vantage
on the side of God after his flock have been exposed for six days
together to the full weight of the world's temptation, and he has been
forced to watch the thorn and the thistle springing in their hearts, and
to see what wheat had been scattered there snatched from the wayside by
this wild bird and the other, and at last, when breathless and weary
with the week's labor they give him this interval of imperfect and
languid hearing, he has but thirty minutes to get at the separate hearts
of a thousand men, to convince them of all their weaknesses, to shame
them for all their sins, to warn them of all their dangers, to try by
this way and that to stir the hard fastenings of those doors where the
Master himself has stood and knocked yet none opened, and to call at the
openings of those dark streets where Wisdom herself hath stretched forth
her hands and no man regarded,--thirty minutes to raise the dead
in,--let us but once understand and feel this, and we shall look with
changed eyes upon that frippery of gay furniture about the place from
which the message of judgment must be delivered, which either breathes
upon the dry bones that they may live, or, if ineffectual, remains
recorded in condemnation, perhaps against the utterer and listener
alike, but assuredly against one of them. We shall not so easily bear
with the silk and gold upon the seat of judgment, nor with ornament of
oratory in the mouth of the messenger: we shall wish that his words may
be simple, even when they are sweetest, and the place from which he
speaks like a marble rock in the desert, about which the people have
gathered in their thirst.

§ XV. But the severity which is so marked in the pulpit at Torcello is
still more striking in the raised seats and episcopal throne which
occupy the curve of the apse. The arrangement at first somewhat recalls
to the mind that of the Roman amphitheatres; the flight of steps which
lead up to the central throne divides the curve of the continuous steps
or seats (it appears in the first three ranges questionable which were
intended, for they seem too high for the one, and too low and close for
the other), exactly as in an amphitheatre the stairs for access
intersect the sweeping ranges of seats. But in the very rudeness of this
arrangement, and especially in the want of all appliances of comfort
(for the whole is of marble, and the arms of the central throne are not
for convenience, but for distinction, and to separate it more
conspicuously from the undivided seats), there is a dignity which no
furniture of stalls nor carving of canopies ever could attain, and well
worth the contemplation of the Protestant, both as sternly significative
of an episcopal authority which in the early days of the Church was
never disputed, and as dependent for all its impressiveness on the utter
absence of any expression either of pride or self-indulgence.

§ XVI. But there is one more circumstance which we ought to remember as
giving peculiar significance to the position which the episcopal throne
occupies in this island church, namely, that in the minds of all early
Christians the Church itself was most frequently symbolized under the
image of a ship, of which the bishop was the pilot. Consider the force
which this symbol would assume in the imaginations of men to whom the
spiritual Church had become an ark of refuge in the midst of a
destruction hardly less terrible than that from which the eight souls
were saved of old, a destruction in which the wrath of man had become as
broad as the earth and as merciless as the sea, and who saw the actual
and literal edifice of the Church raised up, itself like an ark in the
midst of the waters. No marvel if with the surf of the Adriatic rolling
between them and the shores of their birth, from which they were
separated for ever, they should have looked upon each other as the
disciples did when the storm came down on the Tiberias Lake, and have
yielded ready and loving obedience to those who ruled them in His name,
who had there rebuked the winds and commanded stillness to the sea. And
if the stranger would yet learn in what spirit it was that the dominion
of Venice was begun, and in what strength she went forth conquering and
to conquer, let him not seek to estimate the wealth of her arsenals or
number of her armies, nor look upon the pageantry of her palaces, nor
enter into the secrets of her councils; but let him ascend the highest
tier of the stern ledges that sweep round the altar of Torcello, and
then, looking as the pilot did of old along the marble ribs of the
goodly temple ship, let him repeople its veined deck with the shadows of
its dead mariners, and strive to feel in himself the strength of heart
that was kindled within them, when first, after the pillars of it had
settled in the sand, and the roof of it had been closed against the
angry sky that was still reddened by the fires of their
homesteads,--first, within the shelter of its knitted walls, amidst the
murmur of the waste of waves and the beating of the wings of the
sea-birds round the rock that was strange to them,--rose that ancient
hymn, in the power of their gathered voices:

  THE SEA IS HIS, AND HE MADE IT:
  AND HIS HANDS PREPARED THE DRY LAND.


FOOTNOTES

  [4] Appendix 4, "Date of the Duomo of Torcello."

  [5] For a full account of the form and symbolical meaning of the
    Basilica, see Lord Lindsay's "Christian Art," vol. i. p. 12. It is
    much to be regretted that the Chevalier Bunsen's work on the
    Basilicas of Rome is not translated into English.

  [6] The measures are given in Appendix 3.

  [7] Hope's "Historical Essay on Architecture" (third edition, 1840),
    chap. ix. p. 95. In other respects Mr. Hope has done justice to this
    building, and to the style of the early Christian churches in
    general.

  [8] A sketch has been given of this capital in my folio work.

  [9] Appendix 5, "Modern Pulpits."




CHAPTER III.

MURANO.


§ I. The decay of the city of Venice is, in many respects, like that of
an outwearied and aged human frame; the cause of its decrepitude is
indeed at the heart, but the outward appearances of it are first at the
extremities. In the centre of the city there are still places where some
evidence of vitality remains, and where, with kind closing of the eyes
to signs, too manifest even there, of distress and declining fortune,
the stranger may succeed in imagining, for a little while, what must
have been the aspect of Venice in her prime. But this lingering
pulsation has not force enough any more to penetrate into the suburbs
and outskirts of the city; the frost of death has there seized upon it
irrevocably, and the grasp of mortal disease is marked daily by the
increasing breadth of its belt of ruin. Nowhere is this seen more
grievously than along the great north-eastern boundary, once occupied by
the smaller palaces of the Venetians, built for pleasure or repose; the
nobler piles along the grand canal being reserved for the pomp and
business of daily life. To such smaller palaces some garden ground was
commonly attached, opening to the water-side; and, in front of these
villas and gardens, the lagoon was wont to be covered in the evening by
gondolas: the space of it between this part of the city and the island
group of Murano being to Venice, in her time of power, what its parks
are to London; only gondolas were used instead of carriages, and the
crowd of the population did not come out till towards sunset, and
prolonged their pleasures far into the night, company answering to
company with alternate singing.

§ II. If, knowing this custom of the Venetians, and with a vision in
his mind of summer palaces lining the shore, and myrtle gardens sloping
to the sea, the traveller now seeks this suburb of Venice, he will be
strangely and sadly surprised to find a new but perfectly desolate quay,
about a mile in length, extending from the arsenal to the Sacca della
Misericordia, in front of a line of miserable houses built in the course
of the last sixty or eighty years, yet already tottering to their ruin;
and not less to find that the principal object in the view which these
houses (built partly in front and partly on the ruins of the ancient
palaces) now command is a dead brick wall, about a quarter of a mile
across the water, interrupted only by a kind of white lodge, the
cheerfulness of which prospect is not enhanced by his finding that this
wall encloses the principal public cemetery of Venice. He may, perhaps,
marvel for a few moments at the singular taste of the old Venetians in
taking their pleasure under a churchyard wall: but, on further inquiry,
he will find that the building on the island, like those on the shore,
is recent, that it stands on the ruins of the Church of St. Cristoforo
della Pace; and that with a singular, because unintended, moral, the
modern Venetians have replaced the Peace of the Christ-bearer by the
Peace of Death, and where they once went, as the sun set daily, to their
pleasure, now go, as the sun sets to each of them for ever, to their
graves.

§ III. Yet the power of Nature cannot be shortened by the folly, nor her
beauty altogether saddened by the misery, of man. The broad tides still
ebb and flow brightly about the island of the dead, and the linked
conclave of the Alps know no decline from their old pre-eminence, nor
stoop from their golden thrones in the circle of the horizon. So lovely
is the scene still, in spite of all its injuries, that we shall find
ourselves drawn there again and again at evening out of the narrow
canals and streets of the city, to watch the wreaths of the sea-mists
weaving themselves like mourning veils around the mountains far away,
and listen to the green waves as they fret and sigh along the cemetery
shore.

§ IV. But it is morning now: we have a hard day's work to do at Murano,
and our boat shoots swiftly from beneath the last bridge of Venice, and
brings us out into the open sea and sky.

The pure cumuli of cloud lie crowded and leaning against one another,
rank beyond rank, far over the shining water, each cut away at its
foundation by a level line, trenchant and clear, till they sink to the
horizon like a flight of marble steps, except where the mountains meet
them, and are lost in them, barred across by the grey terraces of those
cloud foundations, and reduced into one crestless bank of blue, spotted
here and there with strange flakes of wan, aerial, greenish light,
strewed upon them like snow. And underneath is the long dark line of the
mainland, fringed with low trees; and then the wide-waving surface of
the burnished lagoon trembling slowly, and shaking out into forked bands
of lengthening light the images of the towers of cloud above. To the
north, there is first the great cemetery wall, then the long stray
buildings of Murano, and the island villages beyond, glittering in
intense crystalline vermilion, like so much jewellery scattered on a
mirror, their towers poised apparently in the air a little above the
horizon, and their reflections, as sharp and vivid and substantial as
themselves, thrown on the vacancy between them and the sea. And thus the
villages seem standing on the air; and, to the east, there is a cluster
of ships that seem sailing on the land; for the sandy line of the Lido
stretches itself between us and them, and we can see the tall white
sails moving beyond it, but not the sea, only there is a sense of the
great sea being indeed there, and a solemn strength of gleaming light in
sky above.

§ V. The most discordant feature in the whole scene is the cloud which
hovers above the glass furnaces of Murano; but this we may not regret,
as it is one of the last signs left of human exertion among the ruinous
villages which surround us. The silent gliding of the gondola brings it
nearer to us every moment; we pass the cemetery, and a deep sea-channel
which separates it from Murano, and finally enter a narrow water-street,
with a paved footpath on each side, raised three or four feet above the
canal, and forming a kind of quay between the water and the doors of the
houses. These latter are, for the most part, low, but built with massy
doors and windows of marble or Istrian stone, square-set and barred with
iron; buildings evidently once of no mean order, though now inhabited
only by the poor. Here and there an ogee window of the fourteenth
century, or a doorway deeply enriched with cable mouldings, shows itself
in the midst of more ordinary features; and several houses, consisting
of one story only carried on square pillars, forming a short arcade
along the quay, have windows sustained on shafts of red Verona marble,
of singular grace and delicacy. All now in vain: little care is there
for their delicacy or grace among the rough fishermen sauntering on the
quay with their jackets hanging loose from their shoulders, jacket and
cap and hair all of the same dark-greenish sea-grey. But there is some
life in the scene, more than is usual in Venice: the women are sitting
at their doors knitting busily, and various workmen of the glass-houses
sifting glass dust upon the pavement, and strange cries coming from one
side of the canal to the other, and ringing far along the crowded water,
from venders of figs and grapes, and gourds and shell-fish; cries partly
descriptive of the eatables in question, but interspersed with others of
a character unintelligible in proportion to their violence, and
fortunately so if we may judge by a sentence which is stencilled in
black, within a garland, on the whitewashed walls of nearly every other
house in the street, but which, how often soever written, no one seems
to regard: "Bestemme non più. Lodate Gesù."

§ VI. We push our way on between large barges laden with fresh water
from Fusina, in round white tubs seven feet across, and complicated
boats full of all manner of nets that look as if they could never be
disentangled, hanging from their masts and over their sides; and
presently pass under a bridge with the lion of St. Mark on its
archivolt, and another on a pillar at the end of the parapet, a small
red lion with much of the puppy in his face, looking vacantly up into
the air (in passing we may note that, instead of feathers, his wings are
covered with hair, and in several other points the manner of his
sculpture is not uninteresting). Presently the canal turns a little to
the left, and thereupon becomes more quiet, the main bustle of the
water-street being usually confined to the first straight reach of it,
some quarter of a mile long, the Cheapside of Murano. We pass a
considerable church on the left, St. Pietro, and a little square
opposite to it with a few acacia trees, and then find our boat suddenly
seized by a strong green eddy, and whirled into the tide-way of one of
the main channels of the lagoon, which divides the town of Murano into
two parts by a deep stream some fifty yards over, crossed only by one
wooden bridge. We let ourselves drift some way down the current, looking
at the low line of cottages on the other side of it, hardly knowing if
there be more cheerfulness or melancholy in the way the sunshine glows
on their ruinous but whitewashed walls, and sparkles on the rushing of
the green water by the grass-grown quay. It needs a strong stroke of the
oar to bring us into the mouth of another quiet canal on the farther
side of the tide-way, and we are still somewhat giddy when we run the
head of the gondola into the sand on the left-hand side of this more
sluggish stream, and land under the east end of the Church of San
Donato, the "Matrice" or "Mother" Church of Murano.

§ VII. It stands, it and the heavy campanile detached from it a few
yards, in a small triangular field of somewhat fresher grass than is
usual near Venice, traversed by a paved walk with green mosaic of short
grass between the rude squares of its stones, bounded on one side by
ruinous garden walls, on another by a line of low cottages, on the
third, the base of the triangle, by the shallow canal from which we have
just landed. Near the point of the triangular space is a simple well,
bearing date 1502; in its widest part, between the canal and campanile,
is a four-square hollow pillar, each side formed by a separate slab of
stone, to which the iron hasps are still attached that once secured the
Venetian standard.

The cathedral itself occupies the northern angle of the field,
encumbered with modern buildings, small outhouse-like chapels, and
wastes of white wall with blank square windows, and itself utterly
defaced in the whole body of it, nothing but the apse having been
spared; the original plan is only discoverable by careful examination,
and even then but partially. The whole impression and effect of the
building are irretrievably lost, but the fragments of it are still most
precious.

We must first briefly state what is known of its history.

§ VIII. The legends of the Romish Church, though generally more insipid
and less varied than those of Paganism, deserve audience from us on this
ground, if on no other, that they have once been sincerely believed by
good men, and have had no ineffective agency in the foundation of the
existent European mind. The reader must not therefore accuse me of
trifling, when I record for him the first piece of information I have
been able to collect respecting the cathedral of Murano: namely, that
the emperor Otho the Great, being overtaken by a storm on the Adriatic,
vowed, if he were preserved, to build and dedicate a church to the
Virgin, in whatever place might be most pleasing to her; that the storm
thereupon abated; and the Virgin appearing to Otho in a dream showed
him, covered with red lilies, that very triangular field on which we
were but now standing, amidst the ragged weeds and shattered pavement.
The emperor obeyed the vision; and the church was consecrated on the
15th of August, 957.

§ IX. Whatever degree of credence we may feel disposed to attach to this
piece of history, there is no question that a church was built on this
spot before the close of the tenth century: since in the year 999 we
find the incumbent of the Basilica (note this word, it is of some
importance) di Santa Maria Plebania di Murano taking an oath of
obedience to the Bishop of the Altinat church, and engaging at the same
time to give the said bishop his dinner on the Domenica in Albis, when
the prelate held a confirmation in the mother church, as it was then
commonly called, of Murano. From this period, for more than a century, I
can find no records of any alterations made in the fabric of the church,
but there exist very full details of the quarrels which arose between
its incumbents and those of San Stefano, San Cipriano, San Salvatore,
and the other churches of Murano, touching the due obedience which their
less numerous or less ancient brotherhoods owed to St. Mary's.

These differences seem to have been renewed at the election of every new
abbot by each of the fraternities, and must have been growing serious
when the patriarch of Grado, Henry Dandolo, interfered in 1102, and, in
order to seal a peace between the two principal opponents, ordered that
the abbot of St. Stephen's should be present at the service in St.
Mary's on the night of the Epiphany, and that the abbot of St. Mary's
should visit him of St. Stephen's on St. Stephen's day; and that then
the two abbots "should eat apples and drink good wine together, in peace
and charity."[10]

§ X. But even this kindly effort seems to have been without result: the
irritated pride of the antagonists remained unsoothed by the love-feast
of St. Stephen's day; and the breach continued to widen until the abbot
of St. Mary's obtained a timely accession to his authority in the year
1125. The Doge Domenico Michele, having in the second crusade secured
such substantial advantages for the Venetians as might well
counterbalance the loss of part of their trade with the East, crowned
his successes by obtaining possession in Cephalonia of the body of St.
Donato, bishop of Euroea; which treasure he having presented on his
return to the Murano basilica, that church was thenceforward called the
church of Sts. Mary and Donato. Nor was the body of the saint its only
acquisition: St. Donato's principal achievement had been the destruction
of a terrible dragon in Epirus; Michele brought home the bones of the
dragon as well as of the saint; the latter were put in a marble
sarcophagus, and the former hung up over the high altar.

§ XI. But the clergy of St. Stefano were indomitable. At the very moment
when their adversaries had received this formidable accession of
strength, they had the audacity "ad onta de' replicati giuramenti, e
dell'inveterata consuetudine,"[11] to refuse to continue in the
obedience which they had vowed to their mother church. The matter was
tried in a provincial council; the votaries of St. Stephen were
condemned, and remained quiet for about twenty years, in wholesome dread
of the authority conferred on the abbot of St. Donate, by the Pope's
legate, to suspend any o the clergy of the island from their office if
they refused submission. In 1172, however, they appealed to Pope
Alexander III, and were condemned again: and we find the struggle
renewed at every promising opportunity, during the course of the 12th
and 13th centuries; until at last, finding St. Donate and the dragon
together too strong for him, the abbot of St. Stefano "discovered" in
his church the bodies of two hundred martyrs at once!--a discovery, it
is to be remembered, in some sort equivalent in those days to that of
California in ours. The inscription, however, on the façade of the
church, recorded it with quiet dignity:--"MCCCLXXIV. a di XIV. di
Aprile. Furono trovati nella presente chiesa del protomartire San
Stefano, duecento e più corpi de' Santi Martiri, dal Ven. Prete Matteo
Fradello, piovano della chiesa."[12] Corner, who gives this inscription,
which no longer exists, goes on to explain with infinite gravity, that
the bodies in question, "being of infantile form and stature, are
reported by tradition to have belonged to those fortunate innocents who
suffered martyrdom under King Herod; but that when, or by whom, the
church was enriched with so vast a treasure, is not manifested by any
document."[13]

§ XII. The issue of the struggle is not to our present purpose. We have
already arrived at the fourteenth century without finding record of any
effort made by the clergy of St. Mary's to maintain their influence by
restoring or beautifying their basilica; which is the only point at
present of importance to us. That great alterations were made in it at
the time of the acquisition of the body of St. Donato is however highly
probable, the mosaic pavement of the interior, which bears its date
inscribed, 1140, being probably the last of the additions. I believe
that no part of the ancient church can be shown to be of more recent
date than this; and I shall not occupy the reader's time by any inquiry
respecting the epochs or authors of the destructive modern restorations;
the wreck of the old fabric, breaking out beneath them here and there,
is generally distinguishable from them at a glance; and it is enough for
the reader to know that none of these truly ancient fragments can be
assigned to a more recent date than 1140, and that some of them may with
probability be looked upon as remains of the shell of the first church,
erected in the course of the latter half of the tenth century. We shall
perhaps obtain some further reason for this belief as we examine these
remains themselves.

§ XIII. Of the body of the church, unhappily, they are few and obscure;
but the general form and extent of the building, as shown in the plan,
Plate I. fig. 2, are determined, first, by the breadth of the uninjured
east end D E; secondly, by some remains of the original brickwork of the
clerestory, and in all probability of the side walls also, though these
have been refaced; and finally by the series of nave shafts, which are
still perfect. The doors A and B may or may not be in their original
positions; there must of course have been always, as now, a principal
entrance at the west end. The ground plan is composed, like that of
Torcello, of nave and aisles only, but the clerestory has transepts
extending as far as the outer wall of the aisles. The semicircular apse,
thrown out in the centre of the east end, is now the chief feature of
interest in the church, though the nave shafts and the eastern
extremities of the aisles, outside, are also portions of the original
building; the latter having been modernized in the interior, it cannot
now be ascertained whether, as is probable, the aisles had once round
ends as well as the choir. The spaces F G form small chapels, of which G
has a straight terminal wall behind its altar, and F a curved one,
marked by the dotted line; the partitions which divide these chapels
from the presbytery are also indicated by dotted lines, being modern
work.

§ XIV. The plan is drawn carefully to scale, but the relation in which
its proportions are disposed can hardly be appreciated by the eye. The
width of the nave from shaft to opposite shaft is 32 feet 8 inches: of
the aisles, from the shaft to the wall, 16 feet 2 inches, or allowing 2
inches for the thickness of the modern wainscot, 16 feet 4 inches, half
the breadth of the nave exactly. The intervals between the shafts are
exactly one fourth of the width of the nave, or 8 feet 2 inches, and the
distance between the great piers which form the pseudo-transept is 24
feet 6 inches, exactly three times the interval of the shafts. So the
four distances are accurately in arithmetical proportion; i.e.

                                  Ft. In.
  Interval of shafts               8   2
  Width of aisle                  16   4
  Width of transept               24   6
  Width of nave                   32   8

The shafts average 5 feet 4 inches in circumference, as near the base as
they can be got at, being covered with wood; and the broadest sides of
the main piers are 4 feet 7 inches wide, their narrowest sides 3 feet 6
inches. The distance _a c_ from the outmost angle of these piers to the
beginning of the curve of the apse is 25 feet, and from that point the
apse is nearly semicircular, but it is so encumbered with renaissance
fittings that its form cannot be ascertained with perfect accuracy. It
is roofed by a concha, or semi-dome; and the external arrangement of its
walls provides for the security of this dome by what is, in fact, a
system of buttresses as effective and definite as that of any of the
northern churches, although the buttresses are obtained entirely by
adaptations of the Roman shaft and arch, the lower story being formed by
a thick mass of wall lightened by ordinary semicircular round-headed
niches, like those used so extensively afterwards in renaissance
architecture, each niche flanked by a pair of shafts standing clear of
the wall, and bearing deeply moulded arches thrown over the niche. The
wall with its pillars thus forms a series of massy buttresses (as seen
in the ground plan), on the top of which is an open gallery, backed by a
thinner wall, and roofed by arches whose shafts are set above the pairs
of shafts below. On the heads of these arches rests the roof. We have,
therefore, externally a heptagonal apse, chiefly of rough and common
brick, only with marble shafts and a few marble ornaments; but for that
very reason all the more interesting, because it shows us what may be
done, and what was done, with materials such as are now at our own
command; and because in its proportions, and in the use of the few
ornaments it possesses, it displays a delicacy of feeling rendered
doubly notable by the roughness of the work in which laws so subtle are
observed, and with which so thoughtful ornamentation is associated.

§ XV. First, for its proportions: I shall have occasion in Chapter V. to
dwell at some length on the peculiar subtlety of the early Venetian
perception for ratios of magnitude; the relations of the sides of this
heptagonal apse supply one of the first and most curious instances of
it. The proportions above given of the nave and aisles might have been
dictated by a mere love of mathematical precision; but those of the apse
could only have resulted from a true love of harmony.

In fig. 6, Plate I. the plan of this part of the church is given on a
large scale, showing that its seven external sides are arranged on a
line less than a semicircle, so that if the figure were completed, it
would have sixteen sides; and it will be observed also, that the seven
sides are arranged in four magnitudes, the widest being the central one.
The brickwork is so much worn away, that the measures of the arches are
not easily ascertainable, but those of the plinth on which they stand,
which is nearly uninjured, may be obtained accurately. This plinth is
indicated by the open line in the ground plan, and its sides measure
respectively:

                                  Ft.  In.
  1st. _a b_ in plan               6    7
  2nd. _b c_                       7    7
  3rd. _c d_                       7    5
  4th. _d e_ (central)             7   10
  5th. _e f_                       7    5
  6th  _f g_                       7    8
  7th. _g h_                       6   10

§ XVI. Now observe what subtle feeling is indicated by this delicacy of
proportion. How fine must the perceptions of grace have been in those
builders who could not be content without _some_ change between the
second and third, the fifth and sixth terms of proportion, such as
should oppose the general direction of its cadence, and yet _were_
content with a diminution of two inches on a breadth of seven feet and a
half! For I do not suppose that the reader will think the curious
lessening of the third and fifth arch a matter of accident, and even if
he did so, I shall be able to prove to him hereafter that it was not,
but that the early builders were always desirous of obtaining some
alternate proportion of this kind. The relations of the numbers are not
easily comprehended in the form of feet and inches, but if we reduce the
first four of them into inches, and then subtract some constant number,
suppose 75, from them all, the remainders 4, 16, 14, 19, will exhibit
the ratio of proportion in a clearer, though exaggerated form.

§ XVII. The pairs of circular spots at _b_, _c_, _d_, etc., on the
ground plan fig. 6, represent the bearing shafts, which are all of solid
marble as well as their capitals. Their measures and various other
particulars respecting them are given in Appendix 6. "Apse of Murano;"
here I only wish the reader to note the coloring of their capitals.
Those of the two single shafts in the angles (_a_, _h_) are both of deep
purple marble; the two next pairs, _b_ and _g_, are of white marble; the
pairs _c_ and _f_ are of purple, and _d_ and _e_ are of white: thus
alternating with each other on each side; two white meeting in the
centre. Now observe, _the purple capitals are all left plain; the white
are all sculptured_. For the old builders knew that by carving the
purple capitals they would have injured them in two ways: first, they
would have mixed a certain quantity of grey shadow with the surface hue,
and so adulterated the purity of the color; secondly, they would have
drawn away the thoughts from the color, and prevented the mind from
fixing upon it or enjoying it, by the degree of attention which the
sculpture would have required. So they left their purple capitals full
broad masses of color; and sculptured the white ones, which would
otherwise have been devoid of interest.

§ XVIII. But the feature which is most to be noted in this apse is a
band of ornament, which runs round it like a silver girdle, composed of
sharp wedges of marble, preciously inlaid, and set like jewels into the
brickwork; above it there is another band of triangular recesses in the
bricks, of nearly similar shape, and it seems equally strange that all
the marbles should have fallen from it, or that it should have been
originally destitute of them. The reader may choose his hypothesis; but
there is quite enough left to interest us in the lower band, which is
fortunately left in its original state, as is sufficiently proved by the
curious niceties in the arrangement of its colors, which are assuredly
to be attributed to the care of the first builder. A word or two, in the
first place, respecting the means of color at his disposal.

§ XIX. I stated that the building was, for the most part, composed of
yellow brick. This yellow is very nearly pure, much more positive and
somewhat darker than that of our English light brick, and the material
of the brick is very good and hard, looking, in places, almost
vitrified, and so compact as to resemble stone. Together with this brick
occurs another of a deep full red, and more porous substance, which is
used for decoration chiefly, while all the parts requiring strength are
composed of the yellow brick. Both these materials are _cast into any
shape and size_ the builder required, either into curved pieces for the
arches, or flat tiles for filling the triangles; and, what is still more
curious, the thickness of the yellow bricks used for the walls varies
considerably, from two inches to four; and their length also, some of
the larger pieces used in important positions being a foot and a half
long.

With these two kinds of brick, the builder employed five or six kinds of
marble: pure white, and white veined with purple; a brecciated marble of
white and black; a brecciated marble of white and deep green; another,
deep red, or nearly of the color of Egyptian porphyry; and a grey and
black marble, in fine layers.

§ XX. The method of employing these materials will be understood at once
by a reference to the opposite plate (Plate III.), which represents two
portions of the lower band. I could not succeed in expressing the
variation and chequering of color in marble, by real tints in the print;
and have been content, therefore, to give them in line engraving. The
different triangles are, altogether, of ten kinds:

  a. Pure white marble with sculptured surface (as the third and fifth
       in the upper series of Plate III.).

  b. Cast triangle of red brick with a sculptured round-headed piece of
       white marble inlaid (as the first and seventh of the upper
       series, Plate III.).

  c. A plain triangle of greenish black marble, now perhaps
       considerably paler in color than when first employed (as the
       second and sixth of the upper series of Plate III.).

  d. Cast red brick triangle, with a diamond inlaid of the
       above-mentioned black marble (as the fourth in the upper series
       of Plate III.).

  e. Cast white brick, with an inlaid round-headed piece of marble,
       variegated with black and yellow, or white and violet (not seen
       in the plate).

  f. Occurs only once, a green-veined marble, forming the upper part of
       the triangle, with a white piece below.

  g. Occurs only once. A brecciated marble of intense black and pure
       white, the centre of the lower range in Plate III.

  h. Sculptured white marble with a triangle of veined purple marble
       inserted (as the first, third, fifth, and seventh of the lower
       range in Plate III.).

  i. Yellow or white marble veined with purple (as the second and sixth
       of the lower range in Plate III.).

  k. Pure purple marble, not seen in this plate.

[Illustration: Plate III.
               INLAID BANDS OF MURANO.]

§ XXI. The band, then, composed of these triangles, set close to each
other in varied but not irregular relations, is thrown, like a necklace
of precious stones, round the apse and along the ends of the aisles;
each side of the apse taking, of course, as many triangles as its width
permits. If the reader will look back to the measures of the sides of
the apse, given before, p. 42, he will see that the first and seventh of
the series, being much narrower than the rest, cannot take so many
triangles in their band. Accordingly, they have only six each, while the
other five sides have seven. Of these groups of seven triangles each,
that used for the third and fifth sides of the apse is the uppermost in
Plate III.; and that used for the centre of the apse, and of the whole
series, is the lowermost in the same plate; _the piece of black and
white marble being used to emphasize the centre of the chain_, exactly
as a painter would use a dark touch for a similar purpose.

§ XXII. And now, with a little trouble, we can set before the reader, at
a glance, the arrangement of the groups along the entire extremity of
the church.

There are thirteen recesses, indicative of thirteen arches, seen in the
ground plan, fig. 2, Plate I. Of these, the second and twelfth arches
rise higher than the rest; so high as to break the decorated band; and
the groups of triangles we have to enumerate are, therefore, only eleven
in number; one above each of the eleven low arches. And of these eleven,
the first and second, tenth and eleventh, are at the ends of the aisles;
while the third to the ninth, inclusive, go round the apse. Thus, in the
following table, the numerals indicate the place of each entire group
(counting from the south to the north side of the church, or from left
to right), and the letters indicate the species of triangle of which it
is composed, as described in the list given above.

                        6. h. i. h. g. h. i. h.
         5. b. c. a. d. a. c. b.       7. b. c. a. d. a. c. b.
      4. b. a. b. c. a. e. a.             8. a. e. a. c. b. a. b.
    3. b. a. b. e. b. a.                       9. a. b. e. b. a. b.
  2. a. b. c.                                     10. a. b. c. b.
  1. a. b. c. b. a.                               11. b. a. c. f. a. a.

The central group is put first, that it may be seen how the series on
the two sides of the apse answer each other. It was a very curious freak
to insert the triangle e, in the outermost place _but one_ of both the
fourth and eighth sides of the apse, and in the outermost _but two_ in
the third and ninth; in neither case having any balance to it in its own
group, and the real balance being only effected on the other side of the
apse, which it is impossible that any one should see at the same time.
This is one of the curious pieces of system which so often occur in
mediæval work, of which the key is now lost. The groups at the ends of
the transepts correspond neither in number nor arrangement; we shall
presently see why, but must first examine more closely the treatment of
the triangles themselves, and the nature of the floral sculpture
employed upon them.

[Illustration: Plate IV.
               SCULPTURES OF MURANO.]

§ XXIII. As the scale of Plate III. is necessarily small, I have given
three of the sculptured triangles on a larger scale in Plate IV.
opposite. Fig. 3 is one of the four in the lower series of Plate IV.,
and figs. 4 and 5 from another group. The forms of the trefoils are here
seen more clearly; they, and all the other portions of the design, are
thrown out in low and flat relief, the intermediate spaces being cut out
to the depth of about a quarter of an inch. I believe these vacant
spaces were originally filled with a black composition, which is used in
similar sculptures at St. Mark's, and of which I found some remains in
an archivolt moulding here, though not in the triangles. The surface of
the whole would then be perfectly smooth, and the ornamental form
relieved by a ground of dark grey; but, even though this ground is lost,
the simplicity of the method insures the visibility of all its parts at
the necessary distance (17 or 18 feet), and the quaint trefoils have a
crispness and freshness of effect which I found it almost impossible to
render in a drawing. Nor let us fail to note in passing how strangely
delightful to the human mind the trefoil always is. We have it here
repeated five or six hundred times in the space of a few yards, and yet
are never weary of it. In fact, there are two mystical feelings at the
root of our enjoyment of this decoration: the one is the love of
trinity in unity, the other that of the sense of fulness with order; of
every place being instantly filled, and yet filled with propriety and
ease; the leaves do not push each other, nor put themselves out of their
own way, and yet whenever there is a vacant space, a leaf is always
ready to step in and occupy it.

§ XXIV. I said the trefoil was five or six hundred times repeated. It is
so, but observe, it is hardly ever twice of the same size; and this law
is studiously and resolutely observed. In the carvings _a_ and _b_ of
the upper series, Plate III., the diminution of the leaves might indeed
seem merely representative of the growth of the plant. But look at the
lower: the triangles of inlaid purple marble are made much more nearly
equilateral than those of white marble, into whose centres they are set,
so that the leaves may continually diminish in size as the ornament
descends at the sides. The reader may perhaps doubt the accuracy of the
drawing on the smaller scale, but in that given larger, fig. 3, Plate
IV., the angles are all measured, and the _purposeful_ variation of
width in the border therefore admits of no dispute.[14] Remember how
absolutely this principle is that of nature; the same leaf continually
repeated, but never twice of the same size. Look at the clover under
your feet, and then you will see what this Murano builder meant, and
that he was not altogether a barbarian.

§ XXV. Another point I wish the reader to observe is, the importance
attached to _color_ in the mind of the designer. Note especially--for it
is of the highest importance to see how the great principles of art are
carried out through the whole building--that, as only the white capitals
are sculptured below, only the white triangles are sculptured above. No
colored triangle is touched with sculpture; note also, that in the two
principal groups of the apse, given in Plate III., the centre of the
group is color, not sculpture, and the eye is evidently intended to be
drawn as much to the chequers of the stone, as to the intricacies of the
chiselling. It will be noticed also how much more precious the lower
series, which is central in the apse, is rendered, than the one above it
in the plate, which flanks it: there is no brick in the lower one, and
three kinds of variegated marble are used in it, whereas the upper is
composed of brick, with black and white marble only; and lastly--for
this is especially delightful--see how the workman made his chiselling
finer where it was to go with the variegated marbles, and used a bolder
pattern with the coarser brick and dark stone. The subtlety and
perfection of artistical feeling in all this are so redundant, that in
the building itself the eye can rest upon this colored chain with the
same kind of delight that it has in a piece of the embroidery of Paul
Veronese.

[Illustration: Fig. II.]

§ XXVI. Such being the construction of the lower band, that of the upper
is remarkable only for the curious change in its proportions. The two
are separated, as seen in the little woodcut here at the side, by a
string-course composed of two layers of red bricks, of which the
uppermost projects as a cornice, and is sustained by an intermediate
course of irregular brackets, obtained by setting the thick yellow
bricks edgeways, in the manner common to this day. But the wall above is
carried up perpendicularly from this projection, so that the whole upper
band is advanced to the thickness of a brick over the lower one. The
result of this is, of course, that each side of the apse is four or five
inches broader above than below; so that the same number of triangles
which filled a whole side of the lower band, leave an inch or two blank
at each angle in the upper. This would have looked awkward, if there had
been the least appearance of its being an accidental error; so that, in
order to draw the eye to it, and show that it is done on purpose, the
upper triangles are made about two inches higher than the lower ones, so
as to be much more acute in proportion and effect, and actually to
look considerably narrower, though of the same width at the base. By
this means they are made lighter in effect, and subordinated to the
richly decorated series of the lower band, and the two courses, instead
of repeating, unite with each other, and become a harmonious whole.

[Illustration: Plate V.
               Archivolt in the Duomo of Murano.]

In order, however, to make still more sure that this difference in the
height of the triangles should not escape the eye, another course of
plain bricks is added above their points, increasing the width of the
band by another two inches. There are five courses of bricks in the
lower band, and it measures 1 ft. 6 in. in height: there are seven
courses in the upper (of which six fall between the triangles), and it
measures 1 ft. 10 in. in height, except at the extremity of the northern
aisle, where for some mysterious reason the intermediate cornice is
sloped upwards so as to reduce the upper triangles to the same height as
those below. And here, finally, observe how determined the builder was
that the one series should not be a mere imitation of the other; he
could not now make them acute by additional height--so he here, and here
only, _narrowed their bases_, and we have seven of them above, to six
below.

§ XXVII. We come now to the most interesting portion of the whole east
end, the archivolt at the end of the northern aisle.

It was above stated, that the band of triangles was broken by two higher
arches at the ends of the aisles. That, however, on the northern side of
the apse does not entirely interrupt, but lifts it, and thus forms a
beautiful and curious archivolt, drawn opposite, in Plate V. The upper
band of triangles cannot rise together with the lower, as it would
otherwise break the cornice prepared to receive the second story; and
the curious zigzag with which its triangles die away against the sides
of the arch, exactly as waves break upon the sand, is one of the most
curious features in the structure.

It will be also seen that there is a new feature in the treatment of the
band itself when it turns the arch. Instead of leaving the bricks
projecting between the sculptured or colored stones, reversed triangles
of marble are used, inlaid to an equal depth with the others in the
brickwork, but projecting beyond them so as to produce a sharp dark line
of zigzag at their junctions. Three of these supplementary stones have
unhappily fallen out, so that it is now impossible to determine the full
harmony of color in which they were originally arranged. The central
one, corresponding to the keystone in a common arch, is, however, most
fortunately left, with two lateral ones on the right hand, and one on
the left.

§ XXVIII. The keystone, if it may be so called, is of white marble, the
lateral voussoirs of purple; and these are the only colored stones in
the whole building which are sculptured; but they are sculptured in a
way which, more satisfactorily proves that the principle above stated
was understood by the builders, than if they had been left blank. The
object, observe, was to make the archivolt as rich as possible; eight of
the white sculptured marbles were used upon it in juxtaposition. Had the
purple marbles been left altogether plain, they would have been out of
harmony with the elaboration of the rest. It became necessary to touch
them with sculpture as a mere sign of carefulness and finish, but at the
same time destroying their colored surface as little as possible. _The
ornament is merely outlined upon them with a fine incision_, as if it
had been etched out on their surface preparatory to being carved. In two
of them it is composed merely of three concentric lines, parallel with
the sides of the triangle; in the third, it is a wreath of beautiful
design, which I have drawn of larger size in fig. 2, Plate V., that the
reader may see how completely the surface is left undestroyed by the
delicate incisions of the chisel, and may compare the method of working
with that employed on the white stones, two of which are given in that
plate, figs. 4 and 5. The keystone, of which we have not yet spoken, is
the only white stone worked with the light incision; its design not
being capable of the kind of workmanship given to the floral ornaments,
and requiring either to be carved in complete relief, or left as we see
it. It is given at fig. 1 of Plate IV. The sun and moon on each side of
the cross are, as we shall see in the fifth Chapter, constantly employed
on the keystones of Byzantine arches.

§ XXIX. We must not pass without notice the grey and green pieces of
marble inserted at the flanks of the arch. For, observe, there was a
difficulty in getting the forms of the triangle into anything like
reconciliation at this point, and a mediæval artist always delights in a
difficulty: instead of concealing it, he boasts of it; and just as we
saw above that he directed the eye to the difficulty of filling the
expanded sides of the upper band by elongating his triangles, so here,
having to put in a piece of stone of awkward shape, he makes that very
stone the most conspicuous in the whole arch, on both sides, by using in
one case a dark, cold grey; in the other a vigorous green, opposed to
the warm red and purple and white of the stones above and beside it. The
green and white piece on the right is of a marble, as far as I know,
exceedingly rare. I at first thought the white fragments were inlaid, so
sharply are they defined upon their ground. They are indeed inlaid, but
I believe it is by nature; and that the stone is a calcareous breccia of
great mineralogical interest. The white spots are of singular value in
giving piquancy to the whole range of more delicate transitional hues
above. The effect of the whole is, however, generally injured by the
loss of the three large triangles above. I have no doubt they were
purple, like those which remain, and that the whole arch was thus one
zone of white, relieved on a purple ground, encircled by the scarlet
cornices of brick, and the whole chord of color contrasted by the two
precious fragments of grey and green at either side.

§ XXX. The two pieces of carved stone inserted at each side of the arch,
as seen at the bottom of Plate V., are of different workmanship from the
rest; they do not match each other, and form part of the evidence which
proves that portions of the church had been brought from the mainland.
One bears an inscription, which, as its antiquity is confirmed by the
shapelessness of its letters, I was much gratified by not being able to
read; but M. Lazari, the intelligent author of the latest and best
Venetian guide, with better skill, has given as much of it as remains,
thus:

[Illustration: T    SCEMARIEDIGENETRICISETBEATIESTEFANIMART
               IRIEGOINDIGNVSETPECCATURDOMENICUST]

I have printed the letters as they are placed in the inscription, in
order that the reader may form some idea of the difficulty of reading
such legends when the letters, thus thrown into one heap, are themselves
of strange forms, and half worn away; any gaps which at all occur
between them coming in the wrong places. There is no doubt, however, as
to the reading of this fragment:--"T ... Sancte Marie Domini Genetricis
et beati Estefani martiri ego indignus et peccator Domenicus T." On
these two initial and final T's, expanding one into Templum, the other
into Torcellanus, M. Lazari founds an ingenious conjecture that the
inscription records the elevation of the church under a certain bishop
Dominic of Torcello (named in the Altinat Chronicle), who flourished in
the middle of the ninth century. If this were so, as the inscription
occurs broken off on a fragment inserted scornfully in the present
edifice, this edifice must be of the twelfth century, worked with
fragments taken from the ruins of that built in the ninth. The two T's
are, however, hardly a foundation large enough to build the church upon,
a hundred years before the date assigned to it both by history and
tradition (see above, § VIII.): and the reader has yet to be made aware
of the principal fact bearing on the question.

§ XXXI. Above the first story of the apse runs, as he knows already, a
gallery under open arches, protected by a light balustrade. This
balustrade is worked on the _outside_ with mouldings, of which I shall
only say at present that they are of exactly the same school as the
greater part of the work of the existing church. But the great
horizontal pieces of stone which form the top of this balustrade are
fragments of an older building turned inside out. They are covered with
sculptures on the back, only to be seen by mounting into the gallery.
They have once had an arcade of low wide arches traced on their surface,
the spandrils filled with leafage, and archivolts enriched with studded
chainwork and with crosses in their centres. These pieces have been used
as waste marble by the architect of the existing apse. The small arches
of the present balustrade are cut mercilessly through the old work, and
the profile of the balustrade is cut out of what was once the back of
the stone; only some respect is shown for the crosses in the old design,
the blocks are cut so that these shall be not only left uninjured, but
come in the centre of the balustrades.

§ XXXII. Now let the reader observe carefully that this balustrade of
Murano is a fence of other things than the low gallery round the
deserted apse. It is a barrier between two great schools of early
architecture. On one side it was cut by Romanesque workmen of the early
Christian ages, and furnishes us with a distinct type of a kind of
ornament which, as we meet with other examples of it, we shall be able
to describe in generic terms, and to throw back behind this balustrade,
out of our way. The _front_ of the balustrade presents us with a totally
different condition of design, less rich, more graceful, and here shown
in its simplest possible form. From the outside of this bar of marble we
shall commence our progress in the study of existing Venetian
architecture. The only question is, do we begin from the tenth or from
the twelfth century?

§ XXXIII. I was in great hopes once of being able to determine this
positively; but the alterations in all the early buildings of Venice are
so numerous, and the foreign fragments introduced so innumerable, that I
was obliged to leave the question doubtful. But one circumstance must be
noted, bearing upon it closely.

In the woodcut on page 50, Fig. III., _b_ is an archivolt of Murano, _a_
one of St. Mark's; the latter acknowledged by all historians and all
investigators to be of the twelfth century.

_All_ the twelfth century archivolts in Venice, without exception, are
on the model of _a_, differing only in their decorations and sculpture.
There is not one which resembles that of Murano.

But the deep mouldings of Murano are almost exactly similar to those of
St. Michele of Pavia, and other Lombard churches built, some as early as
the seventh, others in the eighth, ninth, and tenth centuries.

On this ground it seems to me probable that the existing apse of Murano
is part of the original earliest church, and that the inscribed
fragments used in it have been brought from the mainland. The
balustrade, however, may still be later than the rest; it will be
examined, hereafter, more carefully.[15]

I have not space to give any farther account of the exterior of the
building, though one half of what is remarkable in it remains untold. We
must now see what is left of interest within the walls.

[Illustration: Fig. III.]

§ XXXIV. All hope is taken away by our first glance; for it falls on a
range of shafts whose bases are concealed by wooden panelling, and which
sustain arches decorated in the most approved style of Renaissance
upholstery, with stucco roses in squares under the soffits, and egg and
arrow mouldings on the architraves, gilded, on a ground of spotty black
and green, with a small pink-faced and black-eyed cherub on every
keystone; the rest of the church being for the most part concealed
either by dirty hangings, or dirtier whitewash, or dim pictures on
warped and wasting canvas; all vulgar, vain, and foul. Yet let us not
turn back, for in the shadow of the apse our more careful glance shows
us a Greek Madonna, pictured on a field of gold; and we feel giddy at
the first step we make on the pavement, for it, also, is of Greek mosaic
waved like the sea, and dyed like a dove's neck.

§ XXXV. Nor are the original features of the rest of the edifice
altogether indecipherable; the entire series of shafts marked in the
ground plan on each side of the nave, from the western entrance to the
apse, are nearly uninjured; and I believe the stilted arches they
sustain are those of the original fabric, though the masonry is covered
by the Renaissance stucco mouldings. Their capitals, for a wonder, are
left bare, and appear to have sustained no farther injury than has
resulted from the insertion of a large brass chandelier into each of
their abaci, each chandelier carrying a sublime wax candle two inches
thick, fastened with wire to the wall above. The due arrangement of
these appendages, previous to festal days, can only be effected from a
ladder set against the angle of the abacus; and ten minutes before I
wrote this sentence, I had the privilege of watching the candlelighter
at his work, knocking his ladder about the heads of the capitals as if
they had given him personal offence. He at last succeeded in breaking
away one of the lamps altogether, with a bit of the marble of the
abacus; the whole falling in ruin to the pavement, and causing much
consultation and clamor among a tribe of beggars who were assisting the
sacristan with their wisdom respecting the festal arrangements.

§ XXXVI. It is fortunate that the capitals themselves, being somewhat
rudely cut, can bear this kind of treatment better than most of those in
Venice. They are all founded on the Corinthian type, but the leaves are
in every one different: those of the easternmost capital of the southern
range are the best, and very beautiful, but presenting no feature of
much interest, their workmanship being inferior to most of the
imitations of Corinthian common at the period; much more to the rich
fantasies which we have seen at Torcello. The apse itself, to-day (12th
September, 1851), is not to be described; for just in front of it,
behind the altar, is a magnificent curtain of new red velvet with a
gilt edge and two golden tassels, held up in a dainty manner by two
angels in the upholsterer's service; and above all, for concentration of
effect, a star or sun, some five feet broad, the spikes of which conceal
the whole of the figure of the Madonna except the head and hands.

§ XXXVII. The pavement is however still left open, and it is of infinite
interest, although grievously distorted and defaced. For whenever a new
chapel has been built, or a new altar erected, the pavement has been
broken up and readjusted so as to surround the newly inserted steps or
stones with some appearance of symmetry; portions of it either covered or
carried away, others mercilessly shattered or replaced by modern
imitations, and those of very different periods, with pieces of the old
floor left here and there in the midst of them, and worked round so as to
deceive the eye into acceptance of the whole as ancient. The portion,
however, which occupies the western extremity of the nave, and the parts
immediately adjoining it in the aisles, are, I believe, in their original
positions, and very little injured: they are composed chiefly of groups
of peacocks, lions, stags, and griffins,--two of each in a group,
drinking out of the same vase, or shaking claws together,--enclosed by
interlacing bands, and alternating with chequer or star patterns, and
here and there an attempt at representation of architecture, all worked
in marble mosaic. The floors of Torcello and of St. Mark's are executed
in the same manner; but what remains at Murano is finer than either, in
the extraordinary play of color obtained by the use of variegated
marbles. At St. Mark's the patterns are more intricate, and the pieces
far more skilfully set together; but each piece is there commonly of one
color: at Murano every fragment is itself variegated, and all are
arranged with a skill and feeling not to be caught, and to be observed
with deep reverence, for that pavement is not dateless, like the rest of
the church; it bears its date on one of its central circles, 1140, and
is, in my mind, one of the most precious monuments in Italy, showing thus
early, and in those rude chequers which the bared knee of the Murano
fisher wears in its daily bending, the beginning of that mighty spirit of
Venetian color, which was to be consummated in Titian.

§ XXXVIII. But we must quit the church for the present, for its
garnishings are completed; the candles are all upright in their sockets,
and the curtains drawn into festoons, and a paste-board crescent, gay
with artificial flowers, has been attached to the capital of every
pillar, in order, together with the gilt angels, to make the place look
as much like Paradise as possible. If we return to-morrow, we shall find
it filled with woful groups of aged men and women, wasted and
fever-struck, fixed in paralytic supplication, half-kneeling,
half-couched upon the pavement; bowed down, partly in feebleness, partly
in a fearful devotion, with their grey clothes cast far over their
faces, ghastly and settled into a gloomy animal misery, all but the
glittering eyes and muttering lips.

Fit inhabitants, these, for what was once the Garden of Venice, "a
terrestrial paradise,--a place of nymphs and demi-gods!"[16]

§ XXXIX. We return, yet once again, on the following day. Worshippers
and objects of worship, the sickly crowd and gilded angels, all are
gone; and there, far in the apse, is seen the sad Madonna standing in
her folded robe, lifting her hands in vanity of blessing. There is
little else to draw away our thoughts from the solitary image. An old
wooden tablet, carved into a rude effigy of San Donato, which occupies
the central niche in the lower part of the tribune, has an interest of
its own, but is unconnected with the history of the older church. The
faded frescoes of saints, which cover the upper tier of the wall of the
apse, are also of comparatively recent date, much more the piece of
Renaissance workmanship, shaft and entablature, above the altar, which
has been thrust into the midst of all, and has cut away part of the feet
of the Madonna. Nothing remains of the original structure but the
semi-dome itself, the cornice whence it springs, which is the same as
that used on the exterior of the church, and the border and face-arch
which surround it. The ground of the dome is of gold, unbroken except by
the upright Madonna, and usual inscription, M R [Greek: Theta] V. The
figure wears a robe of blue, deeply fringed with gold, which seems to be
gathered on the head and thrown back on the shoulders, crossing the
breast, and falling in many folds to the ground. The under robe, shown
beneath it where it opens at the breast, is of the same color; the
whole, except the deep gold fringe, being simply the dress of the women
of the time. "Le donne, anco elle del 1100, vestivano _di turchino con
manti in spalla_, che le coprivano dinanzi e di dietro."[17]

Round the dome there is a colored mosaic border; and on the edge of its
arch, legible by the whole congregation, this inscription:

  "QUOS EVA CONTRIVIT, PIA VIRGO MARIA REDEMIT;
   HANC CUNCTI LAUDENT, QUI CRISTI MUNERE GAUDENT."[18]

The whole edifice is, therefore, simply a temple to the Virgin: to her
is ascribed the fact of Redemption, and to her its praise.

§ XL. "And is this," it will be asked of me, "the time, is this the
worship, to which you would have us look back with reverence and
regret?" Inasmuch as redemption is ascribed to the Virgin, No. Inasmuch
as redemption is a thing desired, believed, rejoiced in, Yes,--and Yes a
thousand times. As far as the Virgin is worshipped in place of God, No;
but as far as there is the evidence of worship itself, and of the sense
of a Divine presence, Yes. For there is a wider division of men than
that into Christian and Pagan: before we ask what a man worships, we
have to ask whether he worships at all. Observe Christ's own words on
this head: "God is a spirit; and they that worship Him must worship Him
in spirit, _and_ in truth." The worshipping in spirit comes first, and
it does not necessarily imply the worshipping in truth. Therefore, there
is first the broad division of men into Spirit worshippers and Flesh
worshippers; and then, of the Spirit worshippers, the farther division
into Christian and Pagan,--worshippers in Falsehood or in Truth. I
therefore, for the moment, omit all inquiry how far the Mariolatry of
the early church did indeed eclipse Christ, or what measure of deeper
reverence for the Son of God was still felt through all the grosser
forms of Madonna worship. Let that worship be taken at its worst; let
the goddess of this dome of Murano be looked upon as just in the same
sense an idol as the Athene of the Acropolis, or the Syrian Queen of
Heaven; and then, on this darkest assumption, balance well the
difference between those who worship and those who worship not;--that
difference which there is in the sight of God, in all ages, between the
calculating, smiling, self-sustained, self-governed man, and the
believing, weeping, wondering, struggling, Heaven-governed man;--between
the men who say in their hearts "there is no God," and those who
acknowledge a God at every step, "if haply they might feel after Him and
find Him." For that is indeed the difference which we shall find, in the
end, between the builders of this day and the builders on that sand
island long ago. They _did_ honor something out of themselves; they did
believe in spiritual presence judging, animating, redeeming them; they
built to its honor and for its habitation; and were content to pass away
in nameless multitudes, so only that the labor of their hands might fix
in the sea-wilderness a throne for their guardian angel. In this was
their strength, and there was indeed a Spirit walking with them on the
waters, though they could not discern the form thereof, though the
Masters voice came not to them, "It is I." What their error cost them,
we shall see hereafter; for it remained when the majesty and the
sincerity of their worship had departed, and remains to this day.
Mariolatry is no special characteristic of the twelfth century; on the
outside of that very tribune of San Donato, in its central recess, is an
image of the Virgin which receives the reverence once paid to the blue
vision upon the inner dome. With rouged cheeks and painted brows, the
frightful doll stands in wretchedness of rags, blackened with the smoke
of the votive lamps at its feet; and if we would know what has been lost
or gained by Italy in the six hundred years that have worn the marbles
of Murano, let us consider how far the priests who set up this to
worship, the populace who have this to adore, may be nobler than the men
who conceived that lonely figure standing on the golden field, or than
those to whom it seemed to receive their prayer at evening, far away,
where they only saw the blue clouds rising out of the burning sea.


FOOTNOTES

  [10] "Mela, e buon vino, con pace e carità," Memorie Storiche de'
    Veneti Primi e Secondi, di Jacopo Filiasi (Padua, 1811), tom. iii.
    cap. 23. Perhaps, in the choice of the abbot's cheer, there was some
    occult reference to the verse of Solomon's Song: "Stay me with
    flagons, comfort me with apples."

  [11] Notizie Storiche delle Chiese di Venezia, illustrate da Flaminio
    Corner (Padua, 1758), p. 615.

  [12] "On the 14th day of April, 1374, there were found, in this
    church of the first martyr St. Stefano, two hundred and more bodies
    of holy martyrs, by the venerable priest, Matthew Fradello,
    incumbent of the church."

  [13] Notizie Storiche, p. 620.

  [14] The intention is farther confirmed by the singular variation in
    the breadth of the small fillet which encompasses the inner marble.
    It is much narrower at the bottom than at the sides, so as to
    recover the original breadth in the lower border.

  [15] Its elevation is given to scale in fig. 4, Plate XIII., below.

  [16] "Luogo de' ninfe e de' semidei."--_M. Andrea Calmo_, quoted by
    Mutinelli, Annali Urbani di Venezia (Venice, 1841), p. 362.

  [17] "The women, even as far back as 1100, wore dresses of blue,
    with mantles on the shoulder, which clothed them before and
    behind."--_Sansorino_.

    It would be difficult to imagine a dress more modest and beautiful.
    See Appendix 7.

  [18]   "Whom Eve destroyed, the pious Virgin Mary redeemed;
          All praise her, who rejoice in the Grace of Christ."

    Vide Appendix 8.




CHAPTER IV.

ST. MARK'S.


§ I. "And so Barnabas took Mark, and sailed unto Cyprus." If as the
shores of Asia lessened upon his sight, the spirit of prophecy had
entered into the heart of the weak disciple who had turned back when his
hand was on the plough, and who had been judged, by the chiefest of
Christ's captains, unworthy thenceforward to go forth with him to the
work,[19] how wonderful would he have thought it, that by the lion
symbol in future ages he was to be represented among men! how woful,
that the war-cry of his name should so often reanimate the rage of the
soldier, on those very plains where he himself had failed in the courage
of the Christian, and so often dye with fruitless blood that very
Cypriot Sea, over whose waves, in repentance and shame, he was following
the Son of Consolation!

§ II. That the Venetians possessed themselves of his body in the ninth
century, there appears no sufficient reason to doubt, nor that it was
principally in consequence of their having done so, that they chose him
for their patron saint. There exists, however, a tradition that before
he went into Egypt he had founded the Church at Aquileia, and was thus,
in some sort, the first bishop of the Venetian isles and people. I
believe that this tradition stands on nearly as good grounds as that of
St. Peter having been the first bishop of Rome;[20] but, as usual, it is
enriched by various later additions and embellishments, much resembling
the stories told respecting the church of Murano. Thus we find it
recorded by the Santo Padre who compiled the "Vite de' Santi spettanti
alle Chiese di Venezia,"[21] that "St. Mark having seen the people of
Aquileia well grounded in religion, and being called to Rome by St.
Peter, before setting off took with him the holy bishop Hermagoras, and
went in a small boat to the marshes of Venice. There were at that period
some houses built upon a certain high bank called Rialto, and the boat
being driven by the wind was anchored in a marshy place, when St. Mark,
snatched into ecstasy, heard the voice of an angel saying to him: 'Peace
be to thee, Mark; here shall thy body rest.'" The angel goes on to
foretell the building of "una stupenda, ne più veduta Città;" but the
fable is hardly ingenious enough to deserve farther relation.

§ III. But whether St. Mark was first bishop of Aquileia or not, St.
Theodore was the first patron of the city; nor can he yet be considered
as having entirely abdicated his early right, as his statue, standing on
a crocodile, still companions the winged lion on the opposing pillar of
the piazzetta. A church erected to this Saint is said to have occupied,
before the ninth century, the site of St. Mark's; and the traveller,
dazzled by the brilliancy of the great square, ought not to leave it
without endeavoring to imagine its aspect in that early time, when it
was a green field cloister-like and quiet,[22] divided by a small canal,
with a line of trees on each side; and extending between the two
churches of St. Theodore and St. Geminian, as the little piazza of
Torcello lies between its "palazzo" and cathedral.

§ IV. But in the year 813, when the seat of government was finally
removed to the Rialto, a Ducal Palace, built on the spot where the
present one stands, with a Ducal Chapel beside it,[23] gave a very
different character to the Square of St. Mark; and fifteen years later,
the acquisition of the body of the Saint, and its deposition in the
Ducal Chapel, perhaps not yet completed, occasioned the investiture of
that chapel with all possible splendor. St. Theodore was deposed from
his patronship, and his church destroyed, to make room for the
aggrandizement of the one attached to the Ducal Palace, and
thenceforward known as "St. Mark's."[24]

§ V. This first church was however destroyed by fire, when the Ducal
Palace was burned in the revolt against Candiano, in 976. It was partly
rebuilt by his successor, Pietro Orseolo, on a larger scale; and, with
the assistance of Byzantine architects, the fabric was carried on under
successive Doges for nearly a hundred years; the main building being
completed in 1071, but its incrustation with marble not till
considerably later. It was consecrated on the 8th of October, 1085,[25]
according to Sansovino and the author of the "Chiesa Ducale di S.
Marco," in 1094 according to Lazari, but certainly between 1084 and
1096, those years being the limits of the reign of Vital Falier; I
incline to the supposition that it was soon after his accession to the
throne in 1085, though Sansovino writes, by mistake, Ordelafo instead of
Vital Falier. But, at all events, before the close of the eleventh
century the great consecration of the church took place. It was again
injured by fire in 1106, but repaired; and from that time to the fall of
Venice there was probably no Doge who did not in some slight degree
embellish or alter the fabric, so that few parts of it can be
pronounced boldly to be of any given date. Two periods of interference
are, however, notable above the rest: the first, that in which the
Gothic school, had superseded the Byzantine towards the close of the
fourteenth century, when the pinnacles, upper archivolts, and window
traceries were added to the exterior, and the great screen, with various
chapels and tabernacle-work, to the interior; the second, when the
Renaissance school superseded the Gothic, and the pupils of Titian and
Tintoret substituted, over one half of the church, their own
compositions for the Greek mosaics with which it was originally
decorated;[26] happily, though with no good will, having left enough to
enable us to imagine and lament what they destroyed. Of this irreparable
loss we shall have more to say hereafter; meantime, I wish only to fix
in the reader's mind the succession of periods of alteration as firmly
and simply as possible.

§ VI. We have seen that the main body of the church may be broadly
stated to be of the eleventh century, the Gothic additions of the
fourteenth, and the restored mosaics of the seventeenth. There is no
difficulty in distinguishing at a glance the Gothic portions from the
Byzantine; but there is considerable difficulty in ascertaining how
long, during the course of the twelfth and thirteenth centuries,
additions were made to the Byzantine church, which cannot be easily
distinguished from the work of the eleventh century, being purposely
executed in the same manner. Two of the most important pieces of
evidence on this point are, a mosaic in the south transept, and another
over the northern door of the façade; the first representing the
interior, the second the exterior, of the ancient church.

§ VII. It has just been stated that the existing building was
consecrated by the Doge Vital Falier. A peculiar solemnity was given to
that act of consecration, in the minds of the Venetian people, by what
appears to have been one of the best arranged and most successful
impostures ever attempted by the clergy of the Romish church. The body
of St. Mark had, without doubt, perished in the conflagration of 976;
but the revenues of the church depended too much upon the devotion
excited by these relics to permit the confession of their loss. The
following is the account given by Corner, and believed to this day by
the Venetians, of the pretended miracle by which it was concealed.

"After the repairs undertaken by the Doge Orseolo, the place in which
the body of the holy Evangelist rested had been altogether forgotten; so
that the Doge Vital Falier was entirely ignorant of the place of the
venerable deposit. This was no light affliction, not only to the pious
Doge, but to all the citizens and people; so that at last, moved by
confidence in the Divine mercy, they determined to implore, with prayer
and fasting, the manifestation of so great a treasure, which did not now
depend upon any human effort. A general fast being therefore proclaimed,
and a solemn procession appointed for the 25th day of June, while the
people assembled in the church interceded with God in fervent prayers
for the desired boon, they beheld, with as much amazement as joy, a
slight shaking in the marbles of a pillar (near the place where the
altar of the Cross is now), which, presently falling to the earth,
exposed to the view of the rejoicing people the chest of bronze in which
the body of the Evangelist was laid."

§ VIII. Of the main facts of this tale there is no doubt. They were
embellished afterwards, as usual, by many fanciful traditions; as, for
instance, that, when the sarcophagus was discovered, St. Mark extended
his hand out of it, with a gold ring on one of the fingers, which he
permitted a noble of the Dolfin family to remove; and a quaint and
delightful story was further invented of this ring, which I shall not
repeat here, as it is now as well known as any tale of the Arabian
Nights. But the fast and the discovery of the coffin, by whatever means
effected, are facts; and they are recorded in one of the best-preserved
mosaics of the north transept, executed very certainly not long after
the event had taken place, closely resembling in its treatment that of
the Bayeux tapestry, and showing, in a conventional manner, the
interior of the church, as it then was, filled by the people, first in
prayer, then in thanksgiving, the pillar standing open before them, and
the Doge, in the midst of them, distinguished by his crimson bonnet
embroidered with gold, but more unmistakably by the inscription "Dux"
over his head, as uniformly is the case in the Bayeux tapestry, and most
other pictorial works of the period. The church is, of course, rudely
represented, and the two upper stories of it reduced to a small scale in
order to form a background to the figures; one of those bold pieces of
picture history which we in our pride of perspective, and a thousand
things besides, never dare attempt. We should have put in a column or
two of the real or perspective size, and subdued it into a vague
background: the old workman crushed the church together that he might
get it all in, up to the cupolas; and has, therefore, left us some
useful notes of its ancient form, though any one who is familiar with
the method of drawing employed at the period will not push the evidence
too far. The two pulpits are there, however, as they are at this day,
and the fringe of mosaic flower-work which then encompassed the whole
church, but which modern restorers have destroyed, all but one fragment
still left in the south aisle. There is no attempt to represent the
other mosaics on the roof, the scale being too small to admit of their
being represented with any success; but some at least of those mosaics
had been executed at that period, and their absence in the
representation of the entire church is especially to be observed, in
order to show that we must not trust to any negative evidence in such
works. M. Lazari has rashly concluded that the central archivolt of St.
Mark's _must_ be posterior to the year 1205, because it does not appear
in the representation of the exterior of the church over the northern
door;[27] but he justly observes that this mosaic (which is the other
piece of evidence we possess respecting the ancient form of the
building) cannot itself be earlier than 1205, since it represents the
bronze horses which were brought from Constantinople in that year. And
this one fact renders it very difficult to speak with confidence
respecting the date of any part of the exterior of St. Mark's; for we
have above seen that it was consecrated in the eleventh century, and yet
here is one of its most important exterior decorations assuredly
retouched, if not entirely added, in the thirteenth, although its style
would have led us to suppose it had been an original part of the fabric.
However, for all our purposes, it will be enough for the reader to
remember that the earliest parts of the building belong to the eleventh,
twelfth, and first part of the thirteenth century; the Gothic portions
to the fourteenth; some of the altars and embellishments to the
fifteenth and sixteenth; and the modern portion of the mosaics to the
seventeenth.

§ IX. This, however, I only wish him to recollect in order that I may
speak generally of the Byzantine architecture of St. Mark's, without
leading him to suppose the whole church to have been built and decorated
by Greek artists. Its later portions, with the single exception of the
seventeenth century mosaics, have been so dexterously accommodated to
the original fabric that the general effect is still that of a Byzantine
building; and I shall not, except when it is absolutely necessary,
direct attention to the discordant points, or weary the reader with
anatomical criticism. Whatever in St. Mark's arrests the eye, or affects
the feelings, is either Byzantine, or has been modified by Byzantine
influence; and our inquiry into its architectural merits need not
therefore be disturbed by the anxieties of antiquarianism, or arrested
by the obscurities of chronology.

§ X. And now I wish that the reader, before I bring him into St. Mark's
Place, would imagine himself for a little time in a quiet English
cathedral town, and walk with me to the west front of its cathedral. Let
us go together up the more retired street, at the end of which we can
see the pinnacles of one of the towers, and then through the low grey
gateway, with its battlemented top and small latticed window in the
centre, into the inner private-looking road or close, where nothing
goes in but the carts of the tradesmen who supply the bishop and the
chapter, and where there are little shaven grass-plots, fenced in by
neat rails, before old-fashioned groups of somewhat diminutive and
excessively trim houses, with little oriel and bay windows jutting out
here and there, and deep wooden cornices and eaves painted cream color
and white, and small porches to their doors in the shape of
cockle-shells, or little, crooked, thick, indescribable wooden gables
warped a little on one side; and so forward till we come to larger
houses, also old-fashioned, but of red brick, and with gardens behind
them, and fruit walls, which show here and there, among the nectarines,
the vestiges of an old cloister arch or shaft, and looking in front on
the cathedral square itself, laid out in rigid divisions of smooth grass
and gravel walk, yet not uncheerful, especially on the sunny side where
the canons' children are walking with their nurserymaids. And so, taking
care not to tread on the grass, we will go along the straight walk to
the west front, and there stand for a time, looking up at its
deep-pointed porches and the dark places between their pillars where
there were statues once, and where the fragments, here and there, of a
stately figure are still left, which has in it the likeness of a king,
perhaps indeed a king on earth, perhaps a saintly king long ago in
heaven; and so higher and higher up to the great mouldering wall of
rugged sculpture and confused arcades, shattered, and grey, and grisly
with heads of dragons and mocking fiends, worn by the rain and swirling
winds into yet unseemlier shape, and colored on their stony scales by
the deep russet-orange lichen, melancholy gold; and so, higher still, to
the bleak towers, so far above that the eye loses itself among the
bosses of their traceries, though they are rude and strong, and only
sees like a drift of eddying black points, now closing, now scattering,
and now settling suddenly into invisible places among the bosses and
flowers, the crowed of restless birds that fill the whole square with
that strange clangor of theirs, so harsh and yet so soothing, like the
cries of birds on a solitary coast between the cliffs and sea.

§ XI. Think for a little while of that scene, and the meaning of all its
small formalisms, mixed with its serene sublimity. Estimate its
secluded, continuous, drowsy felicities, and its evidence of the sense
and steady performance of such kind of duties as can be regulated by the
cathedral clock; and weigh the influence of those dark towers on all who
have passed through the lonely square at their feet for centuries, and
on all who have seen them rising far away over the wooded plain, or
catching on their square masses the last rays of the sunset, when the
city at their feet was indicated only by the mist at the bend of the
river. And then let us quickly recollect that we are in Venice, and land
at the extremity of the Calle Lunga San Moisè, which may be considered
as there answering to the secluded street that led us to our English
cathedral gateway.

§ XII. We find ourselves in a paved alley, some seven feet wide where it
is widest, full of people, and resonant with cries of itinerant
salesmen,--a shriek in their beginning, and dying away into a kind of
brazen ringing, all the worse for its confinement between the high
houses of the passage along which we have to make our way. Over-head an
inextricable confusion of rugged shutters, and iron balconies and
chimney flues pushed out on brackets to save room, and arched windows
with projecting sills of Istrian stone, and gleams of green leaves here
and there where a fig-tree branch escapes over a lower wall from some
inner cortile, leading the eye up to the narrow stream of blue sky high
over all. On each side, a row of shops, as densely set as may be,
occupying, in fact, intervals between the square stone shafts, about
eight feet high, which carry the first floors: intervals of which one is
narrow and serves as a door; the other is, in the more respectable
shops, wainscoted to the height of the counter and glazed above, but in
those of the poorer tradesmen left open to the ground, and the wares
laid on benches and tables in the open air, the light in all cases
entering at the front only, and fading away in a few feet from the
threshold into a gloom which the eye from without cannot penetrate, but
which is generally broken by a ray or two from a feeble lamp at the
back of the shop, suspended before a print of the Virgin. The less pious
shop-keeper sometimes leaves his lamp unlighted, and is contented with a
penny print; the more religious one has his print colored and set in a
little shrine with a gilded or figured fringe, with perhaps a faded
flower or two on each side, and his lamp burning brilliantly. Here at
the fruiterer's, where the dark-green water-melons are heaped upon the
counter like cannon balls, the Madonna has a tabernacle of fresh laurel
leaves; but the pewterer next door has let his lamp out, and there is
nothing to be seen in his shop but the dull gleam of the studded
patterns on the copper pans, hanging from his roof in the darkness. Next
comes a "Vendita Frittole e Liquori," where the Virgin, enthroned in a
very humble manner beside a tallow candle on a back shelf, presides over
certain ambrosial morsels of a nature too ambiguous to be defined or
enumerated. But a few steps farther on, at the regular wine-shop of the
calle, where we are offered "Vino Nostrani a Soldi 28·32," the Madonna
is in great glory, enthroned above ten or a dozen large red casks of
three-year-old vintage, and flanked by goodly ranks of bottles of
Maraschino, and two crimson lamps; and for the evening, when the
gondoliers will come to drink out, under her auspices, the money they
have gained during the day, she will have a whole chandelier.

§ XIII. A yard or two farther, we pass the hostelry of the Black Eagle,
and, glancing as we pass through the square door of marble, deeply
moulded, in the outer wall, we see the shadows of its pergola of vines
resting on an ancient well, with a pointed shield carved on its side;
and so presently emerge on the bridge and Campo San Moisè, whence to the
entrance into St. Mark's Place, called the Bocca di Piazza (mouth of the
square), the Venetian character is nearly destroyed, first by the
frightful façade of San Moisè, which we will pause at another time to
examine, and then by the modernizing of the shops as they near the
piazza, and the mingling with the lower Venetian populace of lounging
groups of English and Austrians. We will push fast through them into the
shadow of the pillars at the end of the "Bocca di Piazza," and then we
forget them all; for between those pillars there opens a great light,
and, in the midst of it, as we advance slowly, the vast tower of St.
Mark seems to lift itself visibly forth from the level field of
chequered stones; and, on each side, the countless arches prolong
themselves into ranged symmetry, as if the rugged and irregular houses
that pressed together above us in the dark alley had been struck back
into sudden obedience and lovely order, and all their rude casements and
broken walls had been transformed into arches charged with goodly
sculpture, and fluted shafts of delicate stone.

§ XIV. And well may they fall back, for beyond those troops of ordered
arches there rises a vision out of the earth, and all the great square
seems to have opened from it in a kind of awe, that we may see it far
away;--a multitude of pillars and white domes, clustered into a long low
pyramid of colored light; a treasure-heap, it seems, partly of gold, and
partly of opal and mother-of-pearl, hollowed beneath into five great
vaulted porches, ceiled with fair mosaic, and beset with sculpture of
alabaster, clear as amber and delicate as ivory,--sculpture fantastic
and involved, of palm leaves and lilies, and grapes and pomegranates,
and birds clinging and fluttering among the branches, all twined
together into an endless network of buds and plumes; and, in the midst
of it, the solemn forms of angels, sceptred, and robed to the feet, and
leaning to each other across the gates, their figures indistinct among
the gleaming of the golden ground through the leaves beside them,
interrupted and dim, like the morning light as it faded back among the
branches of Eden, when first its gates were angel-guarded long ago. And
round the walls of the porches there are set pillars of variegated
stones, jasper and porphyry, and deep-green serpentine spotted with
flakes of snow, and marbles, that half refuse and half yield to the
sunshine, Cleopatra-like, "their bluest veins to kiss"--the shadow, as
it steals back from them, revealing line after line of azure undulation,
as a receding tide leaves the waved sand; their capitals rich with
interwoven tracery, rooted knots of herbage, and drifting leaves of
acanthus and vine, and mystical signs, all beginning and ending in the
Cross; and above them, in the broad archivolts, a continuous chain of
language and of life--angels, and the signs of heaven, and the labors of
men, each in its appointed season upon the earth; and above these,
another range of glittering pinnacles, mixed with white arches edged
with scarlet flowers,--a confusion of delight, amidst which the breasts
of the Greek horses are seen blazing in their breadth of golden
strength, and the St. Mark's Lion, lifted on a blue field covered with
stars, until at last, as if in ecstasy, the crests of the arches break
into a marble foam, and toss themselves far into the blue sky in flashes
and wreaths of sculptured spray, as if the breakers on the Lido shore
had been frost-bound before they fell, and the sea-nymphs had inlaid
them with coral and amethyst.

Between that grim cathedral of England and this, what an interval! There
is a type of it in the very birds that haunt them; for, instead of the
restless crowd, hoarse-voiced and sable-winged, drifting on the bleak
upper air, the St. Mark's porches are full of doves, that nestle among
the marble foliage, and mingle the soft iridescence of their living
plumes, changing at every motion, with the tints, hardly less lovely,
that have stood unchanged for seven hundred years.

§ XV. And what effect has this splendor on those who pass beneath it?
You may walk from sunrise to sunset, to and fro, before the gateway of
St. Mark's, and you will not see an eye lifted to it, nor a countenance
brightened by it. Priest and layman, soldier and civilian, rich and
poor, pass by it alike regardlessly. Up to the very recesses of the
porches, the meanest tradesmen of the city push their counters; nay, the
foundations of its pillars are themselves the seats--not "of them that
sell doves" for sacrifice, but of the vendors of toys and caricatures.
Round the whole square in front of the church there is almost a
continuous line of cafés, where the idle Venetians of the middle classes
lounge, and read empty journals; in its centre the Austrian bands play
during the time of vespers, their martial music jarring with the organ
notes,--the march drowning the miserere, and the sullen crowd
thickening round them,--a crowd, which, if it had its will, would
stiletto every soldier that pipes to it. And in the recesses of the
porches, all day long, knots of men of the lowest classes, unemployed
and listless, lie basking in the sun like lizards; and unregarded
children,--every heavy glance of their young eyes full of desperation
and stony depravity, and their throats hoarse with cursing,--gamble,
and fight, and snarl, and sleep, hour after hour, clashing their bruised
centesimi upon the marble ledges of the church porch. And the images of
Christ and His angels look down upon it continually.

That we may not enter the church out of the midst of the horror of this,
let us turn aside under the portico which looks towards the sea, and
passing round within the two massive pillars brought from St. Jean
d'Acre, we shall find the gate of the Baptistery; let us enter there.
The heavy door closes behind us instantly, and the light, and the
turbulence of the Piazzetta, are together shut out by it.

§ XVI. We are in a low vaulted room; vaulted, not with arches, but with
small cupolas starred with gold, and chequered with gloomy figures: in
the centre is a bronze font charged with rich bas-reliefs, a small
figure of the Baptist standing above it in a single ray of light that
glances across the narrow room, dying as it falls from a window high in
the wall, and the first thing that it strikes, and the only thing that
it strikes brightly, is a tomb. We hardly know if it be a tomb indeed;
for it is like a narrow couch set beside the window, low-roofed and
curtained, so that it might seem, but that it has some height above the
pavement, to have been drawn towards the window, that the sleeper might
be wakened early;--only there are two angels who have drawn the curtain
back, and are looking down upon him. Let us look also, and thank that
gentle light that rests upon his forehead for ever, and dies away upon
his breast.

The face is of a man in middle life, but there are two deep furrows
right across the forehead, dividing it like the foundations of a tower:
the height of it above is bound by the fillet of the ducal cap. The
rest of the features are singularly small and delicate, the lips sharp,
perhaps the sharpness of death being added to that of the natural lines;
but there is a sweet smile upon them, and a deep serenity upon the whole
countenance. The roof of the canopy above has been blue, filled with
stars; beneath, in the centre of the tomb on which the figure rests, is
a seated figure of the Virgin, and the border of it all around is of
flowers and soft leaves, growing rich and deep, as if in a field in
summer.

It is the Doge Andrea Dandolo, a man early great among the great of
Venice; and early lost. She chose him for her king in his 36th year; he
died ten years later, leaving behind him that history to which we owe
half of what we know of her former fortunes.

§ XVII. Look round at the room in which he lies. The floor of it is of
rich mosaic, encompassed by a low seat of red marble, and its walls are
of alabaster, but worn and shattered, and darkly stained with age,
almost a ruin,--in places the slabs of marble have fallen away
altogether, and the rugged brickwork is seen through the rents, but all
beautiful; the ravaging fissures fretting their way among the islands
and channelled zones of the alabaster, and the time-stains on its
translucent masses darkened into fields of rich golden brown, like the
color of seaweed when the sun strikes on it through deep sea. The light
fades away into the recess of the chamber towards the altar, and the eye
can hardly trace the lines of the bas-relief behind it of the baptism of
Christ: but on the vaulting of the roof the figures are distinct, and
there are seen upon it two great circles, one surrounded by the
"Principalities and powers in heavenly places," of which Milton has
expressed the ancient division in the single massy line,

  "Thrones, Dominations, Princedoms, Virtues, Powers,"

and around the other, the Apostles; Christ the centre of both; and upon
the walls, again and again repeated, the gaunt figure of the Baptist, in
every circumstance of his life and death; and the streams of the Jordan
running down between their cloven rocks; the axe laid to the root of a
fruitless tree that springs upon their shore. "Every tree that bringeth
not forth good fruit shall be hewn down, and cast into the fire." Yes,
verily: to be baptized with fire, or to be cast therein; it is the
choice set before all men. The march-notes still murmur through the
grated window, and mingle with the sounding in our ears of the sentence
of judgment, which the old Greek has written on that Baptistery wall.
Venice has made her choice.

§ XVIII. He who lies under that stony canopy would have taught her
another choice, in his day, if she would have listened to him; but he
and his counsels have long been forgotten by her, and the dust lies upon
his lips.

Through the heavy door whose bronze network closes the place of his
rest, let us enter the church itself. It is lost in still deeper
twilight, to which the eye must be accustomed for some moments before
the form of the building can be traced; and then there opens before us a
vast cave, hewn out into the form of a Cross, and divided into shadowy
aisles by many pillars. Round the domes of its roof the light enters
only through narrow apertures like large stars; and here and there a ray
or two from some far away casement wanders into the darkness, and casts
a narrow phosphoric stream upon the waves of marble that heave and fall
in a thousand colors along the floor. What else there is of light is
from torches, or silver lamps, burning ceaselessly in the recesses of
the chapels; the roof sheeted with gold, and the polished walls covered
with alabaster, give back at every curve and angle some feeble gleaming
to the flames; and the glories round the heads of the sculptured saints
flash out upon us as we pass them, and sink again into the gloom. Under
foot and over head, a continual succession of crowded imagery, one
picture passing into another, as in a dream; forms beautiful and
terrible mixed together; dragons and serpents, and ravening beasts of
prey, and graceful birds that in the midst of them drink from running
fountains and feed from vases of crystal; the passions and the pleasures
of human life symbolized together, and the mystery of its redemption;
for the mazes of interwoven lines and changeful pictures lead always at
last to the Cross, lifted and carved in every place and upon every
stone; sometimes with the serpent of eternity wrapt round it, sometimes
with doves beneath its arms, and sweet herbage growing forth from its
feet; but conspicuous most of all on the great rood that crosses the
church before the altar, raised in bright blazonry against the shadow of
the apse. And although in the recesses of the aisles and chapels, when
the mist of the incense hangs heavily, we may see continually a figure
traced in faint lines upon their marble, a woman standing with her eyes
raised to heaven, and the inscription above her, "Mother of God," she is
not here the presiding deity. It is the Cross that is first seen, and
always, burning in the centre of the temple; and every dome and hollow
of its roof has the figure of Christ in the utmost height of it, raised
in power, or returning in judgment.

§ XIX. Nor is this interior without effect on the minds of the people.
At every hour of the day there are groups collected before the various
shrines, and solitary worshippers scattered through the darker places of
the church, evidently in prayer both deep and reverent, and, for the
most part, profoundly sorrowful. The devotees at the greater number of
the renowned shrines of Romanism may be seen murmuring their appointed
prayers with wandering eyes and unengaged gestures; but the step of the
stranger does not disturb those who kneel on the pavement of St. Mark's;
and hardly a moment passes, from early morning to sunset, in which we
may not see some half-veiled figure enter beneath the Arabian porch,
cast itself into long abasement on the floor of the temple, and then
rising slowly with more confirmed step, and with a passionate kiss and
clasp of the arms given to the feet of the crucifix, by which the lamps
burn always in the northern aisle, leave the church, as if comforted.

§ XX. But we must not hastily conclude from this that the nobler
characters of the building have at present any influence in fostering a
devotional spirit. There is distress enough in Venice to bring many to
their knees, without excitement from external imagery; and whatever
there may be in the temper of the worship offered in St. Mark's more
than can be accounted for by reference to the unhappy circumstances of
the city, is assuredly not owing either to the beauty of its
architecture or to the impressiveness of the Scripture histories
embodied in its mosaics. That it has a peculiar effect, however slight,
on the popular mind, may perhaps be safely conjectured from the number
of worshippers which it attracts, while the churches of St. Paul and the
Frari, larger in size and more central in position, are left
comparatively empty.[28] But this effect is altogether to be ascribed to
its richer assemblage of those sources of influence which address
themselves to the commonest instincts of the human mind, and which, in
all ages and countries, have been more or less employed in the support
of superstition. Darkness and mystery; confused recesses of building;
artificial light employed in small quantity, but maintained with a
constancy which seems to give it a kind of sacredness; preciousness of
material easily comprehended by the vulgar eye; close air loaded with a
sweet and peculiar odor associated only with religious services, solemn
music, and tangible idols or images having popular legends attached to
them,--these, the stage properties of superstition, which have been from
the beginning of the world, and must be to the end of it, employed by
all nations, whether openly savage or nominally civilized, to produce a
false awe in minds incapable of apprehending the true nature of the
Deity, are assembled in St. Mark's to a degree, as far as I know,
unexampled in any other European church. The arts of the Magus and the
Brahmin are exhausted in the animation of a paralyzed Christianity; and
the popular sentiment which these arts excite is to be regarded by us
with no more respect than we should have considered ourselves justified
in rendering to the devotion of the worshippers at Eleusis, Ellora, or
Edfou.[29]

§ XXI. Indeed, these inferior means of exciting religious emotion were
employed in the ancient Church as they are at this day, but not employed
alone. Torchlight there was, as there is now; but the torchlight
illumined Scripture histories on the walls, which every eye traced and
every heart comprehended, but which, during my whole residence in
Venice, I never saw one Venetian regard for an instant. I never heard
from any one the most languid expression of interest in any feature of
the church, or perceived the slightest evidence of their understanding
the meaning of its architecture; and while, therefore, the English
cathedral, though no longer dedicated to the kind of services for which
it was intended by its builders, and much at variance in many of its
characters with the temper of the people by whom it is now surrounded,
retains yet so much of its religious influence that no prominent feature
of its architecture can be said to exist altogether in vain, we have in
St. Mark's a building apparently still employed in the ceremonies for
which it was designed, and yet of which the impressive attributes have
altogether ceased to be comprehended by its votaries. The beauty which
it possesses is unfelt, the language it uses is forgotten; and in the
midst of the city to whose service it has so long been consecrated, and
still filled by crowds of the descendants of those to whom it owes its
magnificence, it stands, in reality, more desolate than the ruins
through which the sheep-walk passes unbroken in our English valleys; and
the writing on its marble walls is less regarded and less powerful for
the teaching of men, than the letters which the shepherd follows with
his finger, where the moss is lightest on the tombs in the desecrated
cloister.

§ XXII. It must therefore be altogether without reference to its present
usefulness, that we pursue our inquiry into the merits and meaning of
the architecture of this marvellous building; and it can only be after
we have terminated that inquiry, conducting it carefully on abstract
grounds, that we can pronounce with any certainty how far the present
neglect of St. Mark's is significative of the decline of the Venetian
character, or how far this church is to be considered as the relic of a
barbarous age, incapable of attracting the admiration, or influencing
the feelings of a civilized community.

The inquiry before us is twofold. Throughout the first volume, I
carefully kept the study of _expression_ distinct from that of abstract
architectural perfection; telling the reader that in every building we
should afterwards examine, he would have first to form a judgment of its
construction and decorative merit, considering it merely as a work of
art; and then to examine farther, in what degree it fulfilled its
expressional purposes. Accordingly, we have first to judge of St. Mark's
merely as a piece of architecture, not as a church; secondly, to
estimate its fitness for its special duty as a place of worship, and the
relation in which it stands, as such, to those northern cathedrals that
still retain so much of the power over the human heart, which the
Byzantine domes appear to have lost for ever.

§ XXIII. In the two succeeding sections of this work, devoted
respectively to the examination of the Gothic and Renaissance buildings
in Venice, I have endeavored to analyze and state, as briefly as
possible, the true nature of each school,--first in Spirit, then in
Form. I wished to have given a similar analysis, in this section, of the
nature of Byzantine architecture; but could not make my statements
general, because I have never seen this kind of building on its native
soil. Nevertheless, in the following sketch of the principles
exemplified in St. Mark's, I believe that most of the leading features
and motives of the style will be found clearly enough distinguished to
enable the reader to judge of it with tolerable fairness, as compared
with the better known systems of European architecture in the middle
ages.

§ XXIV. Now the first broad characteristic of the building, and the root
nearly of every other important peculiarity in it, is its confessed
_incrustation_. It is the purest example in Italy of the great school of
architecture in which the ruling principle is the incrustation of brick
with more precious materials; and it is necessary before we proceed to
criticise any one of its arrangements, that the reader should carefully
consider the principles which are likely to have influenced, or might
legitimately influence, the architects of such a school, as
distinguished from those whose designs are to be executed in massive
materials.

It is true, that among different nations, and at different times, we may
find examples of every sort and degree of incrustation, from the mere
setting of the larger and more compact stones by preference at the
outside of the wall, to the miserable construction of that modern brick
cornice, with its coating of cement, which, but the other day, in
London, killed its unhappy workmen in its fall.[30] But just as it is
perfectly possible to have a clear idea of the opposing characteristics
of two different species of plants or animals, though between the two
there are varieties which it is difficult to assign either to the one or
the other, so the reader may fix decisively in his mind the legitimate
characteristics of the incrusted and the massive styles, though between
the two there are varieties which confessedly unite the attributes of
both. For instance, in many Roman remains, built of blocks of tufa and
incrusted with marble, we have a style, which, though truly solid,
possesses some of the attributes of incrustation; and in the Cathedral
of Florence, built of brick and coated with marble, the marble facing is
so firmly and exquisitely set, that the building, though in reality
incrusted, assumes the attributes of solidity. But these intermediate
examples need not in the least confuse our generally distinct ideas of
the two families of buildings: the one in which the substance is alike
throughout, and the forms and conditions of the ornament assume or prove
that it is so, as in the best Greek buildings, and for the most part in
our early Norman and Gothic; and the other, in which the substance is of
two kinds, one internal, the other external, and the system of
decoration is founded on this duplicity, as pre-eminently in St. Mark's.

§ XXV. I have used the word duplicity in no depreciatory sense. In
chapter ii. of the "Seven Lamps," § 18, I especially guarded this
incrusted school from the imputation of insincerity, and I must do so
now at greater length. It appears insincere at first to a Northern
builder, because, accustomed to build with solid blocks of freestone, he
is in the habit of supposing the external superficies of a piece of
masonry to be some criterion of its thickness. But, as soon as he gets
acquainted with the incrusted style, he will find that the Southern
builders had no intention to deceive him. He will see that every slab of
facial marble is fastened to the next by a confessed _rivet_, and that
the joints of the armor are so visibly and openly accommodated to the
contours of the substance within, that he has no more right to complain
of treachery than a savage would have, who, for the first time in his
life seeing a man in armor, had supposed him to be made of solid steel.
Acquaint him with the customs of chivalry, and with the uses of the coat
of mail, and he ceases to accuse of dishonesty either the panoply or the
knight.

These laws and customs of the St. Mark's architectural chivalry it must
be our business to develope.

§ XXVI. First, consider the natural circumstances which give rise to
such a style. Suppose a nation of builders, placed far from any quarries
of available stone, and having precarious access to the mainland where
they exist; compelled therefore either to build entirely with brick, or
to import whatever stone they use from great distances, in ships of
small tonnage, and for the most part dependent for speed on the oar
rather than the sail. The labor and cost of carriage are just as great,
whether they import common or precious stone, and therefore the natural
tendency would always be to make each shipload as valuable as possible.
But in proportion to the preciousness of the stone, is the limitation of
its possible supply; limitation not determined merely by cost, but by
the physical conditions of the material, for of many marbles, pieces
above a certain size are not to be had for money. There would also be a
tendency in such circumstances to import as much stone as possible ready
sculptured, in order to save weight; and therefore, if the traffic of
their merchants led them to places where there were ruins of ancient
edifices, to ship the available fragments of them home. Out of this
supply of marble, partly composed of pieces of so precious a quality
that only a few tons of them could be on any terms obtained, and partly
of shafts, capitals, and other portions of foreign buildings, the island
architect has to fashion, as best he may, the anatomy of his edifice. It
is at his choice either to lodge his few blocks of precious marble here
and there among his masses of brick, and to cut out of the sculptured
fragments such new forms as may be necessary for the observance of fixed
proportions in the new building; or else to cut the colored stones into
thin pieces, of extent sufficient to face the whole surface of the
walls, and to adopt a method of construction irregular enough to admit
the insertion of fragmentary sculptures; rather with a view of
displaying their intrinsic beauty, than of setting them to any regular
service in the support of the building.

An architect who cared only to display his own skill, and had no respect
for the works of others, would assuredly have chosen the former
alternative, and would have sawn the old marbles into fragments in order
to prevent all interference with his own designs. But an architect who
cared for the preservation of noble work, whether his own or others',
and more regarded the beauty of his building than his own fame, would
have done what those old builders of St. Mark's did for us, and saved
every relic with which he was entrusted.

§ XXVII. But these were not the only motives which influenced the
Venetians in the adoption of their method of architecture. It might,
under all the circumstances above stated, have been a question with
other builders, whether to import one shipload of costly jaspers, or
twenty of chalk flints; and whether to build a small church faced with
porphyry and paved with agate, or to raise a vast cathedral in
freestone. But with the Venetians it could not be a question for an
instant; they were exiles from ancient and beautiful cities, and had
been accustomed to build with their ruins, not less in affection than in
admiration: they had thus not only grown familiar with the practice of
inserting older fragments in modern buildings, but they owed to that
practice a great part of the splendor of their city, and whatever charm
of association might aid its change from a Refuge into a Home. The
practice which began in the affections of a fugitive nation, was
prolonged in the pride of a conquering one; and beside the memorials of
departed happiness, were elevated the trophies of returning victory. The
ship of war brought home more marble in triumph than the merchant vessel
in speculation; and the front of St. Mark's became rather a shrine at
which to dedicate the splendor of miscellaneous spoil, than the
organized expression of any fixed architectural law, or religious
emotion.

§ XXVIII. Thus far, however, the justification of the style of this
church depends on circumstances peculiar to the time of its erection,
and to the spot where it arose. The merit of its method, considered in
the abstract, rests on far broader grounds.

In the fifth chapter of the "Seven Lamps," § 14, the reader will find
the opinion of a modern architect of some reputation, Mr. Wood, that the
chief thing remarkable in this church "is its extreme ugliness;" and he
will find this opinion associated with another, namely, that the works
of the Caracci are far preferable to those of the Venetian painters.
This second statement of feeling reveals to us one of the principal
causes of the first; namely, that Mr. Wood had not any perception of
color, or delight in it. The perception of color is a gift just as
definitely granted to one person, and denied to another, as an ear for
music; and the very first requisite for true judgment of St. Mark's, is
the perfection of that color-faculty which few people ever set
themselves seriously to find out whether they possess or not. For it is
on its value as a piece of perfect and unchangeable coloring, that the
claims of this edifice to our respect are finally rested; and a deaf man
might as well pretend to pronounce judgment on the merits of a full
orchestra, as an architect trained in the composition of form only, to
discern the beauty of St. Mark's. It possesses the charm of color in
common with the greater part of the architecture, as well as of the
manufactures, of the East; but the Venetians deserve especial note as
the only European people who appear to have sympathized to the full with
the great instinct of the Eastern races. They indeed were compelled to
bring artists from Constantinople to design the mosaics of the vaults of
St. Mark's, and to group the colors of its porches; but they rapidly
took up and developed, under more masculine conditions, the system of
which the Greeks had shown them the example: while the burghers and
barons of the North were building their dark streets and grisly castles
of oak and sandstone, the merchants of Venice were covering their
palaces with porphyry and gold; and at last, when her mighty painters
had created for her a color more priceless than gold or porphyry, even
this, the richest of her treasures, she lavished upon walls whose
foundations were beaten by the sea; and the strong tide, as it runs
beneath the Rialto, is reddened to this day by the reflection of the
frescoes of Giorgione.

§ XXIX. If, therefore, the reader does not care for color, I must
protest against his endeavor to form any judgment whatever of this
church of St. Mark's. But, if he both cares for and loves it, let him
remember that the school of incrusted architecture is _the only one in
which perfect and permanent chromatic decoration is possible_; and let
him look upon every piece of jasper and alabaster given to the architect
as a cake of very hard color, of which a certain portion is to be ground
down or cut off, to paint the walls with. Once understand this
thoroughly, and accept the condition that the body and availing strength
of the edifice are to be in brick, and that this under muscular power
of brickwork is to be clothed with the defence and the brightness of the
marble, as the body of an animal is protected and adorned by its scales
or its skin, and all the consequent fitnesses and laws of the structure
will be easily discernible: These I shall state in their natural order.

§ XXX. LAW I. _That the plinths and cornices used for binding the armor
are to be light and delicate._ A certain thickness, at least two or
three inches, must be required in the covering pieces (even when
composed of the strongest stone, and set on the least exposed parts), in
order to prevent the chance of fracture, and to allow for the wear of
time. And the weight of this armor must not be trusted to cement; the
pieces must not be merely glued to the rough brick surface, but
connected with the mass which they protect by binding cornices and
string courses; and with each other, so as to secure mutual support,
aided by the rivetings, but by no means dependent upon them. And, for
the full honesty and straight-forwardness of the work, it is necessary
that these string courses and binding plinths should not be of such
proportions as would fit them for taking any important part in the hard
work of the inner structure, or render them liable to be mistaken for
the great cornices and plinths already explained as essential parts of
the best solid building. They must be delicate, slight, and visibly
incapable of severer work than that assigned to them.

§ XXXI. LAW II. _Science of inner structure is to be abandoned._ As the
body of the structure is confessedly of inferior, and comparatively
incoherent materials, it would be absurd to attempt in it any expression
of the higher refinements of construction. It will be enough that by its
mass we are assured of its sufficiency and strength; and there is the
less reason for endeavoring to diminish the extent of its surface by
delicacy of adjustment, because on the breadth of that surface we are to
depend for the better display of the color, which is to be the chief
source of our pleasure in the building. The main body of the work,
therefore, will be composed of solid walls and massive piers; and
whatever expression of finer structural science we may require, will be
thrown either into subordinate portions of it, or entirely directed to
the support of the external mail, where in arches or vaults it might
otherwise appear dangerously independent of the material within.

§ XXXII. LAW III. _All shafts are to be solid._ Wherever, by the
smallness of the parts, we may be driven to abandon the incrusted
structure at all, it must be abandoned altogether. The eye must never be
left in the least doubt as to what is solid and what is coated. Whatever
appears _probably_ solid, must be _assuredly_ so, and therefore it
becomes an inviolable law that no shaft shall ever be incrusted. Not
only does the whole virtue of a shaft depend on its consolidation, but
the labor of cutting and adjusting an incrusted coat to it would be
greater than the saving of material is worth. Therefore the shaft, of
whatever size, is always to be solid; and because the incrusted
character of the rest of the building renders it more difficult for the
shafts to clear themselves from suspicion, they must not, in this
incrusted style, be in any place jointed. No shaft must ever be used but
of one block; and this the more, because the permission given to the
builder to have his walls and piers as ponderous as he likes, renders it
quite unnecessary for him to use shafts of any fixed size. In our Norman
and Gothic, where definite support is required at a definite point, it
becomes lawful to build up a tower of small stones in the shape of a
shaft. But the Byzantine is allowed to have as much support as he wants
from the walls in every direction, and he has no right to ask for
further license in the structure of his shafts. Let him, by generosity
in the substance of his pillars, repay us for the permission we have
given him to be superficial in his walls. The builder in the chalk
valleys of France and England may be blameless in kneading his clumsy
pier out of broken flint and calcined lime; but the Venetian, who has
access to the riches of Asia and the quarries of Egypt, must frame at
least his shafts out of flawless stone.

§ XXXIII. And this for another reason yet. Although, as we have said, it
is impossible to cover the walls of a large building with color, except
on the condition of dividing the stone into plates, there is always a
certain appearance of meanness and niggardliness in the procedure. It is
necessary that the builder should justify himself from this suspicion;
and prove that it is not in mere economy or poverty, but in the real
impossibility of doing otherwise, that he has sheeted his walls so
thinly with the precious film. Now the shaft is exactly the portion of
the edifice in which it is fittest to recover his honor in this respect.
For if blocks of jasper or porphyry be inserted in the walls, the
spectator cannot tell their thickness, and cannot judge of the
costliness of the sacrifice. But the shaft he can measure with his eye
in an instant, and estimate the quantity of treasure both in the mass of
its existing substance, and in that which has been hewn away to bring it
into its perfect and symmetrical form. And thus the shafts of all
buildings of this kind are justly regarded as an expression of their
wealth, and a form of treasure, just as much as the jewels or gold in
the sacred vessels; they are, in fact, nothing else than large
jewels,[31] the block of precious serpentine or jasper being valued
according to its size and brilliancy of color, like a large emerald or
ruby; only the bulk required to bestow value on the one is to be
measured in feet and tons, and on the other in lines and carats. The
shafts must therefore be, without exception, of one block in all
buildings of this kind; for the attempt in any place to incrust or joint
them would be a deception like that of introducing a false stone among
jewellery (for a number of joints of any precious stone are of course
not equal in value to a single piece of equal weight), and would put an
end at once to the spectator's confidence in the expression of wealth in
any portion of the structure, or of the spirit of sacrifice in those who
raised it.

§ XXXIV. LAW IV. _The shafts may sometimes be independent of the
construction._ Exactly in proportion to the importance which the shaft
assumes as a large jewel, is the diminution of its importance as a
sustaining member; for the delight which we receive in its abstract
bulk, and beauty of color, is altogether independent of any perception
of its adaptation to mechanical necessities. Like other beautiful things
in this world, its end is to _be_ beautiful; and, in proportion to its
beauty, it receives permission to be otherwise useless. We do not blame
emeralds and rubies because we cannot make them into heads of hammers.
Nay, so far from our admiration of the jewel shaft being dependent on
its doing work for us, it is very possible that a chief part of its
preciousness may consist in a delicacy, fragility, and tenderness of
material, which must render it utterly unfit for hard work; and
therefore that we shall admire it the more, because we perceive that if
we were to put much weight upon it, it would be crushed. But, at all
events, it is very clear that the primal object in the placing of such
shafts must be the display of their beauty to the best advantage, and
that therefore all imbedding of them in walls, or crowding of them into
groups, in any position in which either their real size or any portion
of their surface would be concealed, is either inadmissible altogether,
or objectionable in proportion to their value; that no symmetrical or
scientific arrangements of pillars are therefore ever to be expected in
buildings of this kind, and that all such are even to be looked upon as
positive errors and misapplications of materials: but that, on the
contrary, we must be constantly prepared to see, and to see with
admiration, shafts of great size and importance set in places where
their real service is little more than nominal, and where the chief end
of their existence is to catch the sunshine upon their polished sides,
and lead the eye into delighted wandering among the mazes of their azure
veins.

§ XXXV. LAW V. _The shafts may be of variable size._ Since the value of
each shaft depends upon its bulk, and diminishes with the diminution of
its mass, in a greater ratio than the size itself diminishes, as in the
case of all other jewellery, it is evident that we must not in general
expect perfect symmetry and equality among the series of shafts, any
more than definiteness of application; but that, on the contrary, an
accurately observed symmetry ought to give us a kind of pain, as proving
that considerable and useless loss has been sustained by some of the
shafts, in being cut down to match with the rest. It is true that
symmetry is generally sought for in works of smaller jewellery; but,
even there, not a perfect symmetry, and obtained under circumstances
quite different from those which affect the placing of shafts in
architecture. First: the symmetry is usually imperfect. The stones that
seem to match each other in a ring or necklace, appear to do so only
because they are so small that their differences are not easily measured
by the eye; but there is almost always such difference between them as
would be strikingly apparent if it existed in the same proportion
between two shafts nine or ten feet in height. Secondly: the quantity of
stones which pass through a jeweller's hands, and the facility of
exchange of such small objects, enable the tradesman to select any
number of stones of approximate size; a selection, however, often
requiring so much time, that perfect symmetry in a group of very fine
stones adds enormously to their value. But the architect has neither the
time nor the facilities of exchange. He cannot lay aside one column in a
corner of his church till, in the course of traffic, he obtain another
that will match it; he has not hundreds of shafts fastened up in
bundles, out of which he can match sizes at his ease; he cannot send to
a brother-tradesman and exchange the useless stones for available ones,
to the convenience of both. His blocks of stone, or his ready hewn
shafts, have been brought to him in limited number, from immense
distances; no others are to be had; and for those which he does not
bring into use, there is no demand elsewhere. His only means of
obtaining symmetry will therefore be, in cutting down the finer masses
to equality with the inferior ones; and this we ought not to desire him
often to do. And therefore, while sometimes in a Baldacchino, or an
important chapel or shrine, this costly symmetry may be necessary, and
admirable in proportion to its probable cost, in the general fabric we
must expect to see shafts introduced of size and proportion continually
varying, and such symmetry as may be obtained among them never
altogether perfect, and dependent for its charm frequently on strange
complexities and unexpected rising and falling of weight and accent in
its marble syllables; bearing the same relation to a rigidly chiselled
and proportioned architecture that the wild lyric rhythm of Æschylus or
Pindar bears to the finished measures of Pope.

§ XXXVI. The application of the principles of jewellery to the smaller
as well as the larger blocks, will suggest to us another reason for the
method of incrustation adopted in the walls. It often happens that the
beauty of the veining in some varieties of alabaster is so great, that
it becomes desirable to exhibit it by dividing the stone, not merely to
economize its substance, but to display the changes in the disposition
of its fantastic lines. By reversing one of two thin plates successively
taken from the stone, and placing their corresponding edges in contact,
a perfectly symmetrical figure may be obtained, which will enable the
eye to comprehend more thoroughly the position of the veins. And this is
actually the method in which, for the most part, the alabasters of St.
Mark are employed; thus accomplishing a double good,--directing the
spectator, in the first place, to close observation of the nature of the
stone employed, and in the second, giving him a farther proof of the
honesty of intention in the builder: for wherever similar veining is
discovered in two pieces, the fact is declared that they have been cut
from the same stone. It would have been easy to disguise the similarity
by using them in different parts of the building; but on the contrary
they are set edge to edge, so that the whole system of the architecture
may be discovered at a glance by any one acquainted with the nature of
the stones employed. Nay, but, it is perhaps answered me, not by an
ordinary observer; a person ignorant of the nature of alabaster might
perhaps fancy all these symmetrical patterns to have been found in the
stone itself, and thus be doubly deceived, supposing blocks to be solid
and symmetrical which were in reality subdivided and irregular. I grant
it; but be it remembered, that in all things, ignorance is liable to be
deceived, and has no right to accuse anything but itself as the source
of the deception. The style and the words are dishonest, not which are
liable to be misunderstood if subjected to no inquiry, but which are
deliberately calculated to lead inquiry astray. There are perhaps no
great or noble truths, from those of religion downwards, which present
no mistakeable aspect to casual or ignorant contemplation. Both the
truth and the lie agree in hiding themselves at first, but the lie
continues to hide itself with effort, as we approach to examine it; and
leads us, if undiscovered, into deeper lies; the truth reveals itself in
proportion to our patience and knowledge, discovers itself kindly to our
pleading, and leads us, as it is discovered, into deeper truths.

§ XXXVII. LAW VI. _The decoration must be shallow in cutting._ The
method of construction being thus systematized, it is evident that a
certain style of decoration must arise out of it, based on the primal
condition that over the greater part of the edifice there can be _no
deep cutting_. The thin sheets of covering stones do not admit of it; we
must not cut them through to the bricks; and whatever ornaments we
engrave upon them cannot, therefore, be more than an inch deep at the
utmost. Consider for an instant the enormous differences which this
single condition compels between the sculptural decoration of the
incrusted style, and that of the solid stones of the North, which may be
hacked and hewn into whatever cavernous hollows and black recesses we
choose; struck into grim darknesses and grotesque projections, and
rugged ploughings up of sinuous furrows, in which any form or thought
may be wrought out on any scale,--mighty statues with robes of rock and
crowned foreheads burning in the sun, or venomous goblins and stealthy
dragons shrunk into lurking-places of untraceable shade: think of this,
and of the play and freedom given to the sculptor's hand and temper, to
smite out and in, hither and thither, as he will; and then consider what
must be the different spirit of the design which is to be wrought on
the smooth surface of a film of marble, where every line and shadow must
be drawn with the most tender pencilling and cautious reserve of
resource,--where even the chisel must not strike hard, lest it break
through the delicate stone, nor the mind be permitted in any impetuosity
of conception inconsistent with the fine discipline of the hand.
Consider that whatever animal or human form is to be suggested, must be
projected on a flat surface; that all the features of the countenance,
the folds of the drapery, the involutions of the limbs, must be so
reduced and subdued that the whole work becomes rather a piece of fine
drawing than of sculpture; and then follow out, until you begin to
perceive their endlessness, the resulting differences of character which
will be necessitated in every part of the ornamental designs of these
incrusted churches, as compared with that of the Northern schools. I
shall endeavor to trace a few of them only.

§ XXXVIII. The first would of course be a diminution of the builder's
dependence upon human form as a source of ornament: since exactly in
proportion to the dignity of the form itself is the loss which it must
sustain in being reduced to a shallow and linear bas-relief, as well as
the difficulty of expressing it at all under such conditions. Wherever
sculpture can be solid, the nobler characters of the human form at once
lead the artist to aim at its representation, rather than at that of
inferior organisms; but when all is to be reduced to outline, the forms
of flowers and lower animals are always more intelligible, and are felt
to approach much more to a satisfactory rendering of the objects
intended, than the outlines of the human body. This inducement to seek
for resources of ornament in the lower fields of creation was powerless
in the minds of the great Pagan nations, Ninevite, Greek, or Egyptian:
first, because their thoughts were so concentrated on their own
capacities and fates, that they preferred the rudest suggestion of human
form to the best of an inferior organism; secondly, because their
constant practice in solid sculpture, often colossal, enabled them to
bring a vast amount of science into the treatment of the lines, whether
of the low relief, the monochrome vase, or shallow hieroglyphic.

§ XXXIX. But when various ideas adverse to the representation of animal,
and especially of human, form, originating with the Arabs and iconoclast
Greeks, had begun at any rate to direct the builders' minds to seek for
decorative materials in inferior types, and when diminished practice in
solid sculpture had rendered it more difficult to find artists capable
of satisfactorily reducing the high organisms to their elementary
outlines, the choice of subject for surface sculpture would be more and
more uninterruptedly directed to floral organisms, and human and animal
form would become diminished in size, frequency, and general importance.
So that, while in the Northern solid architecture we constantly find the
effect of its noblest features dependent on ranges of statues, often
colossal, and full of abstract interest, independent of their
architectural service, in the Southern incrusted style we must expect to
find the human form for the most part subordinate and diminutive, and
involved among designs of foliage and flowers, in the manner of which
endless examples had been furnished by the fantastic ornamentation of
the Romans, from which the incrusted style had been directly derived.

§ XL. Farther. In proportion to the degree in which his subject must be
reduced to abstract outline will be the tendency in the sculptor to
abandon naturalism of representation, and subordinate every form to
architectural service. Where the flower or animal can be hewn into bold
relief, there will always be a temptation to render the representation
of it more complete than is necessary, or even to introduce details and
intricacies inconsistent with simplicity of distant effect. Very often a
worse fault than this is committed; and in the endeavor to give vitality
to the stone, the original ornamental purpose of the design is
sacrificed or forgotten. But when nothing of this kind can be attempted,
and a slight outline is all that the sculptor can command, we may
anticipate that this outline will be composed with exquisite grace; and
that the richness of its ornamental arrangement will atone for the
feebleness of its power of portraiture. On the porch of a Northern
cathedral we may seek for the images of the flowers that grow in the
neighboring fields, and as we watch with wonder the grey stones that
fret themselves into thorns, and soften into blossoms, we may care
little that these knots of ornament, as we retire from them to
contemplate the whole building, appear unconsidered or confused. On the
incrusted building we must expect no such deception of the eye or
thoughts. It may sometimes be difficult to determine, from the
involutions of its linear sculpture, what were the natural forms which
originally suggested them: but we may confidently expect that the grace
of their arrangement will always be complete; that there will not be a
line in them which could be taken away without injury, nor one wanting
which could be added with advantage.

§ XLI. Farther. While the sculptures of the incrusted school will thus
be generally distinguished by care and purity rather than force, and
will be, for the most part, utterly wanting in depth of shadow, there
will be one means of obtaining darkness peculiarly simple and obvious,
and often in the sculptor's power. Wherever he can, without danger,
leave a hollow behind his covering slabs, or use them, like glass, to
fill an aperture in the wall, he can, by piercing them with holes,
obtain points or spaces of intense blackness to contrast with the light
tracing of the rest of his design. And we may expect to find this
artifice used the more extensively, because, while it will be an
effective means of ornamentation on the exterior of the building, it
will be also the safest way of admitting light to the interior, still
totally excluding both rain and wind. And it will naturally follow that
the architect, thus familiarized with the effect of black and sudden
points of shadow, will often seek to carry the same principle into other
portions of his ornamentation, and by deep drill-holes, or perhaps
inlaid portions of black color, to refresh the eye where it may be
wearied by the lightness of the general handling.

§ XLII. Farther. Exactly in proportion to the degree in which the force
of sculpture is subdued, will be the importance attached to color as a
means of effect or constituent of beauty. I have above stated that the
incrusted style was the only one in which perfect or permanent color
decoration was _possible_. It is also the only one in which a true
system of color decoration was ever likely to be invented. In order to
understand this, the reader must permit me to review with some care the
nature of the principles of coloring adopted by the Northern and
Southern nations.

§ XLIII. I believe that from the beginning of the world there has never
been a true or fine school of art in which color was despised. It has
often been imperfectly attained and injudiciously applied, but I believe
it to be one of the essential signs of life in a school of art, that it
loves color; and I know it to be one of the first signs of death in the
Renaissance schools, that they despised color.

Observe, it is not now the question whether our Northern cathedrals are
better with color or without. Perhaps the great monotone grey of Nature
and of Time is a better color than any that the human hand can give; but
that is nothing to our present business. The simple fact is, that the
builders of those cathedrals laid upon them the brightest colors they
could obtain, and that there is not, as far as I am aware, in Europe,
any monument of a truly noble school which has not been either painted
all over, or vigorously touched with paint, mosaic, and gilding in its
prominent parts. Thus far Egyptians, Greeks, Goths, Arabs, and mediæval
Christians all agree: none of them, when in their right senses, ever
think of doing without paint; and, therefore, when I said above that the
Venetians were the only people who had thoroughly sympathized with the
Arabs in this respect, I referred, first, to their intense love of
color, which led them to lavish the most expensive decorations on
ordinary dwelling-houses; and, secondly, to that perfection of the
color-instinct in them, which enabled them to render whatever they did,
in this kind, as just in principle as it was gorgeous in appliance. It
is this principle of theirs, as distinguished from that of the Northern
builders, which we have finally to examine.

§ XLIV. In the second chapter of the first volume, it was noticed that
the architect of Bourges Cathedral liked hawthorn, and that the porch of
his cathedral was therefore decorated with a rich wreath of it; but
another of the predilections of that architect was there unnoticed,
namely, that he did not at all like _grey_ hawthorn, but preferred it
green, and he painted it green accordingly, as bright as he could. The
color is still left in every sheltered interstice of the foliage. He
had, in fact, hardly the choice of any other color; he might have gilded
the thorns, by way of allegorizing human life, but if they were to be
painted at all, they could hardly be painted any tiling but green, and
green all over. People would have been apt to object to any pursuit of
abstract harmonies of color, which might have induced him to paint his
hawthorn blue.

§ XLV. In the same way, whenever the subject of the sculpture was
definite, its color was of necessity definite also; and, in the hands of
the Northern builders, it often became, in consequence, rather the means
of explaining and animating the stories of their stone-work, than a
matter of abstract decorative science. Flowers were painted red, trees
green, and faces flesh-color; the result of the whole being often far
more entertaining than beautiful. And also, though in the lines of the
mouldings and the decorations of shafts or vaults, a richer and more
abstract method of coloring was adopted (aided by the rapid development
of the best principles of color in early glass-painting), the vigorous
depths of shadow in the Northern sculpture confused the architect's eye,
compelling him to use violent colors in the recesses, if these were to
be seen as color at all, and thus injured his perception of more
delicate color harmonies; so that in innumerable instances it becomes
very disputable whether monuments even of the best times were improved
by the color bestowed upon them, or the contrary. But, in the South, the
flatness and comparatively vague forms of the sculpture, while they
appeared to call for color in order to enhance their interest, presented
exactly the conditions which would set it off to the greatest advantage;
breadth of surface displaying even the most delicate tints in the
lights, and faintness of shadow joining with the most delicate and
pearly greys of color harmony; while the subject of the design being in
nearly all cases reduced to mere intricacy of ornamental line, might be
colored in any way the architect chose without any loss of rationality.
Where oak-leaves and roses were carved into fresh relief and perfect
bloom, it was necessary to paint the one green and the other red; but in
portions of ornamentation where there was nothing which could be
definitely construed into either an oak-leaf or a rose, but a mere
labyrinth of beautiful lines, becoming here something like a leaf, and
there something like a flower, the whole tracery of the sculpture might
be left white, and grounded with gold or blue, or treated in any other
manner best harmonizing with the colors around it. And as the
necessarily feeble character of the sculpture called for and was ready
to display the best arrangements of color, so the precious marbles in
the architect's hands give him at once the best examples and the best
means of color. The best examples, for the tints of all natural stones
are as exquisite in quality as endless in change; and the best means,
for they are all permanent.

§ XLVI. Every motive thus concurred in urging him to the study of
chromatic decoration, and every advantage was given him in the pursuit
of it; and this at the very moment when, as presently to be noticed, the
_naïveté_ of barbaric Christianity could only be forcibly appealed to by
the help of colored pictures: so that, both externally and internally,
the architectural construction became partly merged in pictorial effect;
and the whole edifice is to be regarded less as a temple wherein to
pray, than as itself a Book of Common Prayer, a vast illuminated missal,
bound with alabaster instead of parchment, studded with porphyry pillars
instead of jewels, and written within and without in letters of enamel
and gold.

§ XLVII. LAW VII. _That the impression of the architecture is not to be
dependent on size._ And now there is but one final consequence to be
deduced. The reader understands, I trust, by this time, that the claims
of these several parts of the building upon his attention will depend
upon their delicacy of design, their perfection of color, their
preciousness of material, and their legendary interest. All these
qualities are independent of size, and partly even inconsistent with it.
Neither delicacy of surface sculpture, nor subtle gradations of color,
can be appreciated by the eye at a distance; and since we have seen that
our sculpture is generally to be only an inch or two in depth, and that
our coloring is in great part to be produced with the soft tints and
veins of natural stones, it will follow necessarily that none of the
parts of the building can be removed far from the eye, and therefore
that the whole mass of it cannot be large. It is not even desirable that
it should be so; for the temper in which the mind addresses itself to
contemplate minute and beautiful details is altogether different from
that in which it submits itself to vague impressions of space and size.
And therefore we must not be disappointed, but grateful, when we find
all the best work of the building concentrated within a space
comparatively small; and that, for the great cliff-like buttresses and
mighty piers of the North, shooting up into indiscernible height, we
have here low walls spread before us like the pages of a book, and
shafts whose capitals we may touch with our hand.

§ XLVIII. The due consideration of the principles above stated will
enable the traveller to judge with more candor and justice of the
architecture of St. Mark's than usually it would have been possible for
him to do while under the influence of the prejudices necessitated by
familiarity with the very different schools of Northern art. I wish it
were in my power to lay also before the general reader some
exemplification of the manner in which these strange principles are
developed in the lovely building. But exactly in proportion to the
nobility of any work, is the difficulty of conveying a just impression
of it; and wherever I have occasion to bestow high praise, there it is
exactly most dangerous for me to endeavor to illustrate my meaning,
except by reference to the work itself. And, in fact, the principal
reason why architectural criticism is at this day so far behind all
other, is the impossibility of illustrating the best architecture
faithfully. Of the various schools of painting, examples are accessible
to every one, and reference to the works themselves is found sufficient
for all purposes of criticism; but there is nothing like St. Mark's or
the Ducal Palace to be referred to in the National Gallery, and no
faithful illustration of them is possible on the scale of such a volume
as this. And it is exceedingly difficult on any scale. Nothing is so
rare in art, as far as my own experience goes, as a fair illustration of
architecture; _perfect_ illustration of it does not exist. For all good
architecture depends upon the adaptation of its chiselling to the effect
at a certain distance from the eye; and to render the peculiar confusion
in the midst of order, and uncertainty in the midst of decision, and
mystery in the midst of trenchant lines, which are the result of
distance, together with perfect expression of the peculiarities of the
design, requires the skill of the most admirable artist, devoted to the
work with the most severe conscientiousness, neither the skill nor the
determination having as yet been given to the subject. And in the
illustration of details, every building of any pretensions to high
architectural rank would require a volume of plates, and those finished
with extraordinary care. With respect to the two buildings which are the
principal subjects of the present volume, St. Mark's and the Ducal
Palace, I have found it quite impossible to do them the slightest
justice by any kind of portraiture; and I abandoned the endeavor in the
case of the latter with less regret, because in the new Crystal Palace
(as the poetical public insist upon calling it, though it is neither a
palace, nor of crystal) there will be placed, I believe, a noble cast of
one of its angles. As for St. Mark's, the effort was hopeless from the
beginning. For its effect depends not only upon the most delicate
sculpture in every part, but, as we have just stated, eminently on its
color also, and that the most subtle, variable, inexpressible color in
the world,--the color of glass, of transparent alabaster, of polished
marble, and lustrous gold. It would be easier to illustrate a crest of
Scottish mountain, with its purple heather and pale harebells at their
fullest and fairest, or a glade of Jura forest, with its floor of
anemone and moss, than a single portico of St. Mark's. The fragment of
one of its archivolts, given at the bottom of the opposite Plate, is not
to illustrate the thing itself, but to illustrate the impossibility of
illustration.

§ XLIX. It is left a fragment, in order to get it on a larger scale; and
yet even on this scale it is too small to show the sharp folds and
points of the marble vine-leaves with sufficient clearness. The ground
of it is gold, the sculpture in the spandrils is not more than an inch
and a half deep, rarely so much. It is in fact nothing more than an
exquisite sketching of outlines in marble, to about the same depth as in
the Elgin frieze; the draperies, however, being filled with close folds,
in the manner of the Byzantine pictures, folds especially necessary
here, as large masses could not be expressed in the shallow sculpture
without becoming insipid; but the disposition of these folds is always
most beautiful, and often opposed by broad and simple spaces, like that
obtained by the scroll in the hand of the prophet, seen in the plate.

[Illustration: Plate VI.
               THE VINE TREE, AND IN SERVICE.]

The balls in the archivolt project considerably, and the interstices
between their interwoven bands of marble are filled with colors like the
illuminations of a manuscript; violet, crimson, blue, gold, and green
alternately: but no green is ever used without an intermixture of blue
pieces in the mosaic, nor any blue without a little centre of pale
green; sometimes only a single piece of glass a quarter of an inch
square, so subtle was the feeling for color which was thus to be
satisfied.[32] The intermediate circles have golden stars set on an
azure ground, varied in the same manner; and the small crosses seen in
the intervals are alternately blue and subdued scarlet, with two small
circles of white set in the golden ground above and beneath them, each
only about half an inch across (this work, remember, being on the
outside of the building, and twenty feet above the eye), while the blue
crosses have each a pale green centre. Of all this exquisitely
mingled hue, no plate, however large or expensive, could give any
adequate conception; but, if the reader will supply in imagination to
the engraving what he supplies to a common woodcut of a group of
flowers, the decision of the respective merits of modern and of
Byzantine architecture may be allowed to rest on this fragment of St.
Mark's alone.

From the vine-leaves of that archivolt, though there is no direct
imitation of nature in them, but on the contrary a studious subjection
to architectural purpose more particularly to be noticed hereafter, we
may yet receive the same kind of pleasure which we have in seeing true
vine-leaves and wreathed branches traced upon golden light; its stars
upon their azure ground ought to make us remember, as its builder
remembered, the stars that ascend and fall in the great arch of the sky:
and I believe that stars, and boughs, and leaves, and bright colors are
everlastingly lovely, and to be by all men beloved; and, moreover, that
church walls grimly seared with squared lines, are not better nor nobler
things than these. I believe the man who designed and the men who
delighted in that archivolt to have been wise, happy, and holy. Let the
reader look back to the archivolt I have already given out of the
streets of London (Plate XIII. Vol. I.), and see what there is in it to
make us any of the three. Let him remember that the men who design such
work as that call St. Mark's a barbaric monstrosity, and let him judge
between us.

§ L. Some farther details of the St. Mark's architecture, and especially
a general account of Byzantine capitals, and of the principal ones at
the angles of the church, will be found in the following chapter.[33]
Here I must pass on to the second part of our immediate subject, namely,
the inquiry how far the exquisite and varied ornament of St. Mark's fits
it, as a Temple, for its sacred purpose, and would be applicable in the
churches of modern times. We have here evidently two questions: the
first, that wide and continually agitated one, whether richness of
ornament be right in churches at all; the second, whether the ornament
of St. Mark's be of a truly ecclesiastical and Christian character.

§ LI. In the first chapter of the "Seven Lamps of Architecture" I
endeavored to lay before the reader some reasons why churches ought to
be richly adorned, as being the only places in which the desire of
offering a portion of all precious things to God could be legitimately
expressed. But I left wholly untouched the question: whether the church,
as such, stood in need of adornment, or would be better fitted for its
purposes by possessing it. This question I would now ask the reader to
deal with briefly and candidly.

The chief difficulty in deciding it has arisen from its being always
presented to us in an unfair form. It is asked of us, or we ask of
ourselves, whether the sensation which we now feel in passing from our
own modern dwelling-house, through a newly built street, into a
cathedral of the thirteenth century, be safe or desirable as a
preparation for public worship. But we never ask whether that sensation
was at all calculated upon by the builders of the cathedral.

§ LII. Now I do not say that the contrast of the ancient with the modern
building, and the strangeness with which the earlier architectural forms
fall upon the eye, are at this day disadvantageous. But I do say, that
their effect, whatever it may be, was entirely uncalculated upon by the
old builder. He endeavored to make his work beautiful, but never
expected it to be strange. And we incapacitate ourselves altogether from
fair judgment of its intention, if we forget that, when it was built, it
rose in the midst of other work fanciful and beautiful as itself; that
every dwelling-house in the middle ages was rich with the same ornaments
and quaint with the same grotesques which fretted the porches or
animated the gargoyles of the cathedral; that what we now regard with
doubt and wonder, as well as with delight, was then the natural
continuation, into the principal edifice of the city, of a style which
was familiar to every eye throughout all its lanes and streets; and that
the architect had often no more idea of producing a peculiarly
devotional impression by the richest color and the most elaborate
carving, than the builder of a modern meeting-house has by his
whitewashed walls and square-cut casements.[34]

§ LIII. Let the reader fix this great fact well in his mind, and then
follow out its important corollaries. We attach, in modern days, a kind
of sacredness to the pointed arch and the groined roof, because, while
we look habitually out of square windows and live under flat ceilings,
we meet with the more beautiful forms in the ruins of our abbeys. But
when those abbeys were built, the pointed arch was used for every shop
door, as well as for that of the cloister, and the feudal baron and
freebooter feasted, as the monk sang, under vaulted roofs; not because
the vaulting was thought especially appropriate to either the revel or
psalm, but because it was then the form in which a strong roof was
easiest built. We have destroyed the goodly architecture of our cities;
we have substituted one wholly devoid of beauty or meaning; and then we
reason respecting the strange effect upon our minds of the fragments
which, fortunately, we have left in our churches, as if those churches
had always been designed to stand out in strong relief from all the
buildings around them, and Gothic architecture had always been, what it
is now, a religious language, like Monkish Latin. Most readers know, if
they would arouse their knowledge, that this was not so; but they take
no pains to reason the matter out: they abandon themselves drowsily to
the impression that Gothic is a peculiarly ecclesiastical style; and
sometimes, even, that richness in church ornament is a condition or
furtherance of the Romish religion. Undoubtedly it has become so in
modern times: for there being no beauty in our recent architecture, and
much in the remains of the past, and these remains being almost
exclusively ecclesiastical, the High Church and Romanist parties have
not been slow in availing themselves of the natural instincts which were
deprived of all food except from this source; and have willingly
promulgated the theory, that because all the good architecture that is
now left is expressive of High Church or Romanist doctrines, all good
architecture ever has been and must be so,--a piece of absurdity from
which, though here and there a country clergyman may innocently believe
it, I hope the common sense of the nation will soon manfully quit
itself. It needs but little inquiry into the spirit of the past, to
ascertain what, once for all, I would desire here clearly and forcibly
to assert, that wherever Christian church architecture has been good and
lovely, it has been merely the perfect development of the common
dwelling-house architecture of the period; that when the pointed arch
was used in the street, it was used in the church; when the round arch
was used in the street, it was used in the church; when the pinnacle was
set over the garret window, it was set over the belfry tower; when the
flat roof was used for the drawing-room, it was used for the nave. There
is no sacredness in round arches, nor in pointed; none in pinnacles, nor
in buttresses; none in pillars, nor in traceries. Churches were larger
than most other buildings, because they had to hold more people; they
were more adorned than most other buildings, because they were safer
from violence, and were the fitting subjects of devotional offering: but
they were never built in any separate, mystical, and religious style;
they were built in the manner that was common and familiar to everybody
at the time. The flamboyant traceries that adorn the façade of Rouen
Cathedral had once their fellows in every window of every house in the
market-place; the sculptures that adorn the porches of St. Mark's had
once their match on the walls of every palace on the Grand Canal; and
the only difference between the church and the dwelling-house was, that
there existed a symbolical meaning in the distribution of the parts of
all buildings meant for worship, and that the painting or sculpture was,
in the one case, less frequently of profane subject than in the other. A
more severe distinction cannot be drawn: for secular history was
constantly introduced into church architecture; and sacred history or
allusion generally formed at least one half of the ornament of the
dwelling-house.

§ LIV. This fact is so important, and so little considered, that I must
be pardoned for dwelling upon it at some length, and accurately marking
the limits of the assertion I have made. I do not mean that every
dwelling-house of mediæval cities was as richly adorned and as exquisite
in composition as the fronts of their cathedrals, but that they
presented features of the same kind, often in parts quite as beautiful;
and that the churches were not separated by any change of style from the
buildings round them, as they are now, but were merely more finished and
full examples of a universal style, rising out of the confused streets
of the city as an oak tree does out of an oak copse, not differing in
leafage, but in size and symmetry. Of course the quainter and smaller
forms of turret and window necessary for domestic service, the inferior
materials, often wood instead of stone, and the fancy of the
inhabitants, which had free play in the design, introduced oddnesses,
vulgarities, and variations into house architecture, which were
prevented by the traditions, the wealth, and the skill of the monks and
freemasons; while, on the other hand, conditions of vaulting,
buttressing, and arch and tower building, were necessitated by the mere
size of the cathedral, of which it would be difficult to find examples
elsewhere. But there was nothing more in these features than the
adaptation of mechanical skill to vaster requirements; there was nothing
intended to be, or felt to be, especially ecclesiastical in any of the
forms so developed; and the inhabitants of every village and city, when
they furnished funds for the decoration of their church, desired merely
to adorn the house of God as they adorned their own, only a little more
richly, and with a somewhat graver temper in the subjects of the
carving. Even this last difference is not always clearly discernible:
all manner of ribaldry occurs in the details of the ecclesiastical
buildings of the North, and at the time when the best of them were
built, every man's house was a kind of temple; a figure of the Madonna,
or of Christ, almost always occupied a niche over the principal door,
and the Old Testament histories were curiously interpolated amidst the
grotesques of the brackets and the gables.

§ LV. And the reader will now perceive that the question respecting
fitness of church decoration rests in reality on totally different
grounds from those commonly made foundations of argument. So long as our
streets are walled with barren brick, and our eyes rest continually, in
our daily life, on objects utterly ugly, or of inconsistent and
meaningless design, it may be a doubtful question whether the faculties
of eye and mind which are capable of perceiving beauty, having been left
without food during the whole of our active life, should be suddenly
feasted upon entering a place of worship; and color, and music, and
sculpture should delight the senses, and stir the curiosity of men
unaccustomed to such appeal, at the moment when they are required to
compose themselves for acts of devotion;--this, I say, may be a doubtful
question: but it cannot be a question at all, that if once familiarized
with beautiful form and color, and accustomed to see in whatever human
hands have executed for us, even for the lowest services, evidence of
noble thought and admirable skill, we shall desire to see this evidence
also in whatever is built or labored for the house of prayer; that the
absence of the accustomed loveliness would disturb instead of assisting
devotion; and that we should feel it as vain to ask whether, with our
own house full of goodly craftsmanship, we should worship God in a house
destitute of it, as to ask whether a pilgrim whose day's journey had led
him through fair woods and by sweet waters, must at evening turn aside
into some barren place to pray.

§ LVI. Then the second question submitted to us, whether the ornament of
St. Mark's be truly ecclesiastical and Christian, is evidently
determined together with the first; for, if not only the permission of
ornament at all, but the beautiful execution of it, be dependent on our
being familiar with it in daily life, it will follow that no style of
noble architecture _can_ be exclusively ecclesiastical. It must be
practised in the dwelling before it be perfected in the church, and it
is the test of a noble style that it shall be applicable to both; for if
essentially false and ignoble, it may be made to fit the dwelling-house,
but never can be made to fit the church: and just as there are many
principles which will bear the light of the world's opinion, yet will
not bear the light of God's word, while all principles which will bear
the test of Scripture will also bear that of practice, so in
architecture there are many forms which expediency and convenience may
apparently justify, or at least render endurable, in daily use, which
will yet be found offensive the moment they are used for church service;
but there are none good for church service, which cannot bear daily use.
Thus the Renaissance manner of building is a convenient style for
dwelling-houses, but the natural sense of all religious men causes them
to turn from it with pain when it has been used in churches; and this
has given rise to the popular idea that the Roman style is good for
houses and the Gothic for churches. This is not so; the Roman style is
essentially base, and we can bear with it only so long as it gives us
convenient windows and spacious rooms; the moment the question of
convenience is set aside, and the expression or beauty of the style is
tried by its being used in a church, we find it fail. But because the
Gothic and Byzantine styles are fit for churches they are not therefore
less fit for dwellings. They are in the highest sense fit and good for
both, nor were they ever brought to perfection except where they were
used for both.

§ LVII. But there is one character of Byzantine work which, according to
the time at which it was employed, may be considered as either fitting
or unfitting it for distinctly ecclesiastical purposes; I mean the
essentially pictorial character of its decoration. We have already seen
what large surfaces it leaves void of bold architectural features, to be
rendered interesting merely by surface ornament or sculpture. In this
respect Byzantine work differs essentially from pure Gothic styles,
which are capable of filling every vacant space by features purely
architectural, and may be rendered, if we please, altogether independent
of pictorial aid. A Gothic church may be rendered impressive by mere
successions of arches, accumulations of niches, and entanglements of
tracery. But a Byzantine church requires expression and interesting
decoration over vast plane surfaces,--decoration which becomes noble
only by becoming pictorial; that is to say, by representing natural
objects,--men, animals, or flowers. And, therefore, the question whether
the Byzantine style be fit for church service in modern days, becomes
involved in the inquiry, what effect upon religion has been or may yet
be produced by pictorial art, and especially by the art of the
mosaicist?

§ LVIII. The more I have examined the subject the more dangerous I have
found it to dogmatize respecting the character of the art which is
likely, at a given period, to be most useful to the cause of religion.
One great fact first meets me. I cannot answer for the experience of
others, but I never yet met with a Christian whose heart was thoroughly
set upon the world to come, and, so far as human judgment could
pronounce, perfect and right before God, who cared about art at all. I
have known several very noble Christian men who loved it intensely, but
in them there was always traceable some entanglement of the thoughts
with the matters of this world, causing them to fall into strange
distresses and doubts, and often leading them into what they themselves
would confess to be errors in understanding, or even failures in duty. I
do not say that these men may not, many of them, be in very deed nobler
than those whose conduct is more consistent; they may be more tender in
the tone of all their feelings, and farther-sighted in soul, and for
that very reason exposed to greater trials and fears, than those whose
hardier frame and naturally narrower vision enable them with less effort
to give their hands to God and walk with Him. But still, the general
fact is indeed so, that I have never known a man who seemed altogether
right and calm in faith, who seriously cared about art; and when
casually moved by it, it is quite impossible to say beforehand by what
class of art this impression will on such men be made. Very often it is
by a theatrical commonplace, more frequently still by false sentiment. I
believe that the four painters who have had, and still have, the most
influence, such as it is, on the ordinary Protestant Christian mind, are
Carlo Dolci, Guercino, Benjamin West, and John Martin. Raphael, much as
he is talked about, is, I believe in very fact, rarely looked at by
religious people; much less his master, or any of the truly great
religious men of old. But a smooth Magdalen of Carlo Dolci with a tear
on each cheek, or a Guercino Christ or St. John, or a Scripture
illustration of West's, or a black cloud with a flash of lightning in it
of Martin's, rarely fails of being verily, often deeply, felt for the
time.

§ LIX. There are indeed many very evident reasons for this; the chief
one being that, as all truly great religious painters have been hearty
Romanists, there are none of their works which do not embody, in some
portions of them, definitely Romanist doctrines. The Protestant mind is
instantly struck by these, and offended by them, so as to be incapable
of entering, or at least rendered indisposed to enter, farther into the
heart of the work, or to the discovering those deeper characters of it,
which are not Romanist, but Christian, in the everlasting sense and
power of Christianity. Thus most Protestants, entering for the first
time a Paradise of Angelico, would be irrevocably offended by finding
that the first person the painter wished them to speak to was St.
Dominic; and would retire from such a heaven as speedily as
possible,--not giving themselves time to discover, that whether dressed
in black, or white, or grey, and by whatever name in the calendar they
might be called, the figures that filled that Angelico heaven were
indeed more saintly, and pure, and full of love in every feature, than
any that the human hand ever traced before or since. And thus
Protestantism, having foolishly sought for the little help it requires
at the hand of painting from the men who embodied no Catholic doctrine,
has been reduced to receive it from those who believed neither
Catholicism nor Protestantism, but who read the Bible in search of the
picturesque. We thus refuse to regard the painters who passed their
lives in prayer, but are perfectly ready to be taught by those who spent
them in debauchery. There is perhaps no more popular Protestant picture
than Salvator's "Witch of Endor," of which the subject was chosen by the
painter simply because, under the names of Saul and the Sorceress, he
could paint a captain of banditti, and a Neapolitan hag.

§ LX. The fact seems to be that strength of religious feeling is capable
of supplying for itself whatever is wanting in the rudest suggestions of
art, and will either, on the one hand, purify what is coarse into
inoffensiveness, or, on the other, raise what is feeble into
impressiveness. Probably all art, as such, is unsatisfactory to it; and
the effort which it makes to supply the void will be induced rather by
association and accident than by the real merit of the work submitted to
it. The likeness to a beloved friend, the correspondence with a habitual
conception, the freedom from any strange or offensive particularity,
and, above all, an interesting choice of incident, will win admiration
for a picture when the noblest efforts of religious imagination would
otherwise fail of power. How much more, when to the quick capacity of
emotion is joined a childish trust that the picture does indeed
represent a fact! it matters little whether the fact be well or ill
told; the moment we believe the picture to be true, we complain little
of its being ill-painted. Let it be considered for a moment, whether the
child, with its colored print, inquiring eagerly and gravely which is
Joseph, and which is Benjamin, is not more capable of receiving a
strong, even a sublime, impression from the rude symbol which it invests
with reality by its own effort, than the connoisseur who admires the
grouping of the three figures in Raphael's "Telling of the Dreams;" and
whether also, when the human mind is in right religious tone, it has not
always this childish power--I speak advisedly, this power--a noble one,
and possessed more in youth than at any period of after life, but
always, I think, restored in a measure by religion--of raising into
sublimity and reality the rudest symbol which is given to it of
accredited truth.

§ LXI. Ever since the period of the Renaissance, however, the truth has
not been accredited; the painter of religious subject is no longer
regarded as the narrator of a fact, but as the inventor of an idea.[35]
We do not severely criticise the manner in which a true history is
told, but we become harsh investigators of the faults of an invention;
so that in the modern religious mind, the capacity of emotion, which
renders judgment uncertain, is joined with an incredulity which renders
it severe; and this ignorant emotion, joined with ignorant observance of
faults, is the worst possible temper in which any art can be regarded,
but more especially sacred art. For as religious faith renders emotion
facile, so also it generally renders expression simple; that is to say a
truly religious painter will very often be ruder, quainter, simpler, and
more faulty in his manner of working, than a great irreligious one. And
it was in this artless utterance, and simple acceptance, on the part of
both the workman and the beholder, that all noble schools of art have
been cradled; it is in them that they _must_ be cradled to the end of
time. It is impossible to calculate the enormous loss of power in modern
days, owing to the imperative requirement that art shall be methodical
and learned: for as long as the constitution of this world remains
unaltered, there will be more intellect in it than there can be
education; there will be many men capable of just sensation and vivid
invention, who never will have time to cultivate or polish their natural
powers. And all unpolished power is in the present state of society
lost; in other things as well as in the arts, but in the arts
especially: nay, in nine cases out of ten, people mistake the polish for
the power. Until a man has passed through a course of academy
studentship, and can draw in an approved manner with French chalk, and
knows foreshortening, and perspective, and something of anatomy, we do
not think he can possibly be an artist; what is worse, we are very apt
to think that we can _make_ him an artist by teaching him anatomy, and
how to draw with French chalk; whereas the real gift in him is utterly
independent of all such accomplishments: and I believe there are many
peasants on every estate, and laborers in every town, of Europe, who
have imaginative powers of a high order, which nevertheless cannot be
used for our good, because we do not choose to look at anything but what
is expressed in a legal and scientific way. I believe there is many a
village mason who, set to carve a series of Scripture or any other
histories, would find many a strange and noble fancy in his head, and
set it down, roughly enough indeed, but in a way well worth our having.
But we are too grand to let him do this, or to set up his clumsy work
when it is done; and accordingly the poor stone-mason is kept hewing
stones smooth at the corners, and we build our church of the smooth
square stones, and consider ourselves wise.

§ LXII. I shall pursue this subject farther in another place; but I
allude to it here in order to meet the objections of those persons who
suppose the mosaics of St. Mark's, and others of the period, to be
utterly barbarous as representations of religious history. Let it be
granted that they are so; we are not for that reason to suppose they
were ineffective in religious teaching. I have above spoken of the whole
church as a great Book of Common Prayer; the mosaics were its
illuminations, and the common people of the time were taught their
Scripture history by means of them, more impressively perhaps, though
far less fully, than ours are now by Scripture reading. They had no
other Bible, and--Protestants do not often enough consider this--_could_
have no other. We find it somewhat difficult to furnish our poor with
printed Bibles; consider what the difficulty must have been when they
could be given only in manuscript. The walls of the church necessarily
became the poor man's Bible, and a picture was more easily read upon the
walls than a chapter. Under this view, and considering them merely as
the Bible pictures of a great nation in its youth, I shall finally
invite the reader to examine the connexion and subjects of these
mosaics; but in the meantime I have to deprecate the idea of their
execution being in any sense barbarous. I have conceded too much to
modern prejudice, in permitting them to be rated as mere childish
efforts at colored portraiture: they have characters in them of a very
noble kind; nor are they by any means devoid of the remains of the
science of the later Roman empire. The character of the features is
almost always fine, the expression stern and quiet, and very solemn, the
attitudes and draperies always majestic in the single figures, and in
those of the groups which are not in violent action;[36] while the
bright coloring and disregard of chiaroscuro cannot be regarded as
imperfections, since they are the only means by which the figures could
be rendered clearly intelligible in the distance and darkness of the
vaulting. So far am I from considering them barbarous, that I believe of
all works of religious art whatsoever, these, and such as these, have
been the most effective. They stand exactly midway between the debased
manufacture of wooden and waxen images which is the support of Romanist
idolatry all over the world, and the great art which leads the mind away
from the religious subject to the art itself. Respecting neither of
these branches of human skill is there, nor can there be, any question.
The manufacture of puppets, however influential on the Romanist mind of
Europe, is certainly not deserving of consideration as one of the fine
arts. It matters literally nothing to a Romanist what the image he
worships is like. Take the vilest doll that is screwed together in a
cheap toy-shop, trust it to the keeping of a large family of children,
let it be beaten about the house by them till it is reduced to a
shapeless block, then dress it in a satin frock and declare it to have
fallen from heaven, and it will satisfactorily answer all Romanist
purposes. Idolatry,[37] it cannot be too often repeated, is no
encourager of the fine arts. But, on the other hand, the highest
branches of the fine arts are no encouragers either of idolatry or of
religion. No picture of Leonardo's or Raphael's, no statue of Michael
Angelo's, has ever been worshipped, except by accident. Carelessly
regarded, and by ignorant persons, there is less to attract in them than
in commoner works. Carefully regarded, and by intelligent persons, they
instantly divert the mind from their subject to their art, so that
admiration takes the place of devotion. I do not say that the Madonna di
S. Sisto, the Madonna del Cardellino, and such others, have not had
considerable religious influence on certain minds, but I say that on the
mass of the people of Europe they have had none whatever; while by far
the greater number of the most celebrated statues and pictures are never
regarded with any other feelings than those of admiration of human
beauty, or reverence for human skill. Effective religious art,
therefore, has always lain, and I believe must always lie, between the
two extremes--of barbarous idol-fashioning on one side, and magnificent
craftsmanship on the other. It consists partly in missal painting, and
such book-illustrations as, since the invention of printing, have taken
its place; partly in glass-painting; partly in rude sculpture on the
outsides of buildings; partly in mosaics; and partly in the frescoes and
tempera pictures which, in the fourteenth century, formed the link
between this powerful, because imperfect, religious art, and the
impotent perfection which succeeded it.

§ LXIII. But of all these branches the most important are the inlaying
and mosaic of the twelfth and thirteenth centuries, represented in a
central manner by these mosaics of St. Mark's. Missal-painting could
not, from its minuteness, produce the same sublime impressions, and
frequently merged itself in mere ornamentation of the page. Modern
book-illustration has been so little skilful as hardly to be worth
naming. Sculpture, though in some positions it becomes of great
importance, has always a tendency to lose itself in architectural
effect; and was probably seldom deciphered, in all its parts, by the
common people, still less the traditions annealed in the purple burning
of the painted window. Finally, tempera pictures and frescoes were often
of limited size or of feeble color. But the great mosaics of the twelfth
and thirteenth centuries covered the walls and roofs of the churches
with inevitable lustre; they could not be ignored or escaped from; their
size rendered them majestic, their distance mysterious, their color
attractive. They did not pass into confused or inferior decorations;
neither were they adorned with any evidences of skill or science, such
as might withdraw the attention from their subjects. They were before
the eyes of the devotee at every interval of his worship; vast
shadowings forth of scenes to whose realization he looked forward, or of
spirits whose presence he invoked. And the man must be little capable of
receiving a religious impression of any kind, who, to this day, does not
acknowledge some feeling of awe, as he looks up at the pale countenances
and ghastly forms which haunt the dark roofs of the Baptisteries of
Parma and Florence, or remains altogether untouched by the majesty of
the colossal images of apostles, and of Him who sent apostles, that look
down from the darkening gold of the domes of Venice and Pisa.

§ LXIV. I shall, in a future portion of this work, endeavor to discover
what probabilities there are of our being able to use this kind of art
in modern churches; but at present it remains for us to follow out the
connexion of the subjects represented in St. Mark's so as to fulfil our
immediate object, and form an adequate conception of the feelings of its
builders, and of its uses to those for whom it was built.

Now there is one circumstance to which I must, in the outset, direct the
reader's special attention, as forming a notable distinction between
ancient and modern days. Our eyes are now familiar and wearied with
writing; and if an inscription is put upon a building, unless it be
large and clear, it is ten to one whether we ever trouble ourselves to
decipher it. But the old architect was sure of readers. He knew that
every one would be glad to decipher all that he wrote; that they would
rejoice in possessing the vaulted leaves of his stone manuscript; and
that the more he gave them, the more grateful would the people be. We
must take some pains, therefore, when we enter St. Mark's, to read all
that is inscribed, or we shall not penetrate into the feeling either of
the builder or of his times.

§ LXV. A large atrium or portico is attached to two sides of the church,
a space which was especially reserved for unbaptized persons and new
converts. It was thought right that, before their baptism, these persons
should be led to contemplate the great facts of the Old Testament
history; the history of the Fall of Man, and of the lives of Patriarchs
up to the period of the Covenant by Moses: the order of the subjects in
this series being very nearly the same as in many Northern churches, but
significantly closing with the Fall of the Manna, in order to mark to
the catechumen the insufficiency of the Mosaic covenant for
salvation,--"Our fathers did eat manna in the wilderness, and are
dead,"--and to turn his thoughts to the true Bread of which that manna
was the type.

§ LXVI. Then, when after his baptism he was permitted to enter the
church, over its main entrance he saw, on looking back, a mosaic of
Christ enthroned, with the Virgin on one side and St. Mark on the other,
in attitudes of adoration. Christ is represented as holding a book open
upon his knee, on which is written: "I AM THE DOOR; BY ME IF ANY MAN
ENTER IN, HE SHALL BE SAVED." On the red marble moulding which surrounds
the mosaic is written: "I AM THE GATE OF LIFE; LET THOSE WHO ARE MINE
ENTER BY ME." Above, on the red marble fillet which forms the cornice of
the west end of the church, is written, with reference to the figure of
Christ below: "WHO HE WAS, AND FROM WHOM HE CAME, AND AT WHAT PRICE HE
REDEEMED THEE, AND WHY HE MADE THEE, AND GAVE THEE ALL THINGS, DO THOU
CONSIDER."

Now observe, this was not to be seen and read only by the catechumen
when he first entered the church; every one who at any time entered, was
supposed to look back and to read this writing; their daily entrance
into the church was thus made a daily memorial of their first entrance
into the spiritual Church; and we shall find that the rest of the book
which was opened for them upon its walls continually led them in the
same manner to regard the visible temple as in every part a type of the
invisible Church of God.

§ LXVII. Therefore the mosaic of the first dome, which is over the head
of the spectator as soon as he has entered by the great door (that door
being the type of baptism), represents the effusion of the Holy Spirit,
as the first consequence and seal of the entrance into the Church of
God. In the centre of the cupola is the Dove, enthroned in the Greek
manner, as the Lamb is enthroned, when the Divinity of the Second and
Third Persons is to be insisted upon together with their peculiar
offices. From the central symbol of the Holy Spirit twelve streams of
fire descend upon the heads of the twelve apostles, who are represented
standing around the dome; and below them, between the windows which are
pierced in its walls, are represented, by groups of two figures for each
separate people, the various nations who heard the apostles speak, at
Pentecost, every man in his own tongue. Finally, on the vaults, at the
four angles which support the cupola, are pictured four angels, each
bearing a tablet upon the end of a rod in his hand: on each of the
tablets of the three first angels is inscribed the word "Holy;" on that
of the fourth is written "Lord;" and the beginning of the hymn being
thus put into the mouths of the four angels, the words of it are
continued around the border of the dome, uniting praise to God for the
gift of the Spirit, with welcome to the redeemed soul received into His
Church:

    "HOLY, HOLY, HOLY, LORD GOD OF SABAOTH:
       HEAVEN AND EARTH ARE FULL OF THY GLORY.
          HOSANNA IN THE HIGHEST:
  BLESSED IS HE THAT COMETH IN THE NAME OF THE LORD."

And observe in this writing that the convert is required to regard the
outpouring of the Holy Spirit especially as a work of _sanctification_.
It is the _holiness_ of God manifested in the giving of His Spirit to
sanctify those who had become His children, which the four angels
celebrate in their ceaseless praise; and it is on account of this
holiness that the heaven and earth are said to be full of His glory.

§ LXVIII. After thus hearing praise rendered to God by the angels for
the salvation of the newly-entered soul, it was thought fittest that the
worshipper should be led to contemplate, in the most comprehensive forms
possible, the past evidence and the future hopes of Christianity, as
summed up in three facts without assurance of which all faith is vain;
namely that Christ died, that He rose again, and that He ascended into
heaven, there to prepare a place for His elect. On the vault between the
first and second cupolas are represented the crucifixion and
resurrection of Christ, with the usual series of intermediate
scenes,--the treason of Judas, the judgment of Pilate, the crowning with
thorns, the descent into Hades, the visit of the women to the sepulchre,
and the apparition to Mary Magdalene. The second cupola itself, which is
the central and principal one of the church, is entirely occupied by the
subject of the Ascension. At the highest point of it Christ is
represented as rising into the blue heaven, borne up by four angels, and
throned upon a rainbow, the type of reconciliation. Beneath him, the
twelve apostles are seen upon the Mount of Olives, with the Madonna,
and, in the midst of them, the two men in white apparel who appeared at
the moment of the Ascension, above whom, as uttered by them, are
inscribed the words, "Ye men of Galilee, why stand ye gazing up into
heaven? This Christ, the Son of God, as He is taken from you, shall so
come, the arbiter of the earth, trusted to do judgment and justice."

§ LXIX. Beneath the circle of the apostles, between the windows of the
cupola, are represented the Christian virtues, as sequent upon the
crucifixion of the flesh, and the spiritual ascension together with
Christ. Beneath them, on the vaults which support the angles of the
cupola, are placed the four Evangelists, because on their evidence our
assurance of the fact of the ascension rests; and, finally, beneath
their feet, as symbols of the sweetness and fulness of the Gospel which
they declared, are represented the four rivers of Paradise, Pison,
Gihon, Tigris, and Euphrates.

§ LXX. The third cupola, that over the altar, represents the witness of
the Old Testament to Christ; showing him enthroned in its centre, and
surrounded by the patriarchs and prophets. But this dome was little seen
by the people;[38] their contemplation was intended to be chiefly drawn to
that of the centre of the church, and thus the mind of the worshipper was
at once fixed on the main groundwork and hope of Christianity,--"Christ is
risen," and "Christ shall come." If he had time to explore the minor
lateral chapels and cupolas, he could find in them the whole series of
New Testament history, the events of the Life of Christ, and the
Apostolic miracles in their order, and finally the scenery of the Book
of Revelation;[39] but if he only entered, as often the common people do
to this hour, snatching a few moments before beginning the labor of the
day to offer up an ejaculatory prayer, and advanced but from the main
entrance as far as the altar screen, all the splendor of the glittering
nave and variegated dome, if they smote upon his heart, as they might
often, in strange contrast with his reed cabin among the shallows of the
lagoon, smote upon it only that they might proclaim the two great
messages--"Christ is risen," and "Christ shall come." Daily, as the
white cupolas rose like wreaths of sea-foam in the dawn, while the
shadowy campanile and frowning palace were still withdrawn into the
night, they rose with the Easter Voice of Triumph,--"Christ is risen;"
and daily, as they looked down upon the tumult of the people, deepening
and eddying in the wide square that opened from their feet to the sea,
they uttered above them the sentence of warning,--"Christ shall come."

§ LXXXI. And this thought may surely dispose the reader to look with
some change of temper upon the gorgeous building and wild blazonry of
that shrine of St. Mark's. He now perceives that it was in the hearts of
the old Venetian people far more than a place of worship. It was at once
a type of the Redeemed Church of God, and a scroll for the written word
of God. It was to be to them, both an image of the Bride, all glorious
within, her clothing of wrought gold; and the actual Table of the Law
and the Testimony, written within and without. And whether honored as
the Church or as the Bible, was it not fitting that neither the gold nor
the crystal should be spared in the adornment of it; that, as the symbol
of the Bride, the building of the wall thereof should be of jasper,[40]
and the foundations of it garnished with all manner of precious stones;
and that, as the channel of the World, that triumphant utterance of the
Psalmist should be true of it,--"I have rejoiced in the way of thy
testimonies, as much as in all riches?" And shall we not look with
changed temper down the long perspective of St. Mark's Place towards the
sevenfold gates and glowing domes of its temple, when we know with what
solemn purpose the shafts of it were lifted above the pavement of the
populous square? Men met there from all countries of the earth, for
traffic or for pleasure; but, above the crowd swaying for ever to and
fro in the restlessness of avarice or thirst of delight, was seen
perpetually the glory of the temple, attesting to them, whether they
would hear or whether they would forbear, that there was one treasure
which the merchantmen might buy without a price, and one delight better
than all others, in the word and the statutes of God. Not in the
wantonness of wealth, not in vain ministry to the desire of the eyes or
the pride of life, were those marbles hewn into transparent strength,
and those arches arrayed in the colors of the iris. There is a message
written in the dyes of them, that once was written in blood; and a sound
in the echoes of their vaults, that one day shall fill the vault of
heaven,--"He shall return, to do judgment and justice." The strength of
Venice was given her, so long as she remembered this: her destruction
found her when she had forgotten this; and it found her irrevocably,
because she forgot it without excuse. Never had city a more glorious
Bible. Among the nations of the North, a rude and shadowy sculpture
filled their temples with confused and hardly legible imagery; but, for
her, the skill and the treasures of the East had gilded every letter,
and illumined every page, till the Book-Temple shone from afar off like
the star of the Magi. In other cities, the meetings of the people were
often in places withdrawn from religious association, subject to
violence and to change; and on the grass of the dangerous rampart, and
in the dust of the troubled street, there were deeds done and counsels
taken, which, if we cannot justify, we may sometimes forgive. But the
sins of Venice, whether in her palace or in her piazza, were done with
the Bible at her right hand. The walls on which its testimony was
written were separated but by a few inches of marble from those which
guarded the secrets of her councils, or confined the victims of her
policy. And when in her last hours she threw off all shame and all
restraint, and the great square of the city became filled with the
madness of the whole earth, be it remembered how much her sin was
greater, because it was done in the face of the House of God, burning
with the letters of His Law. Mountebank and masquer laughed their laugh,
and went their way; and a silence has followed them, not unforetold; for
amidst them all, through century after century of gathering vanity and
festering guilt, that white dome of St. Mark's had uttered in the dead
ear of Venice, "Know thou, that for all these things God will bring thee
into judgment."


FOOTNOTES

  [19] Acts, xiii. 13; xv. 38, 39.

  [20] The reader who desires to investigate it may consult Galliciolli,
    "Delle Memorie Venete" (Venice, 1795), tom. ii. p. 332, and the
    authorities quoted by him.

  [21] Venice, 1761, tom. i. p. 126.

  [22] St. Mark's Place, "partly covered by turf, and planted with a
    few trees; and on account of its pleasant aspect called Brollo or
    Broglio, that is to say, Garden." The canal passed through it, over
    which is built the bridge of the Malpassi, Galliciolli, lib. i. cap.
    viii.

  [23] My authorities for this statement are given below, in the chapter
    on the Ducal Palace.

  [24] In the Chronicles, "Sancti Marci Ducalis Cappella."

  [25] "To God the Lord, the glorious Virgin Annunciate, and the
    Protector St. Mark."--_Corner_, p. 14. It is needless to trouble the
    reader with the various authorities for the above statements: I have
    consulted the best. The previous inscription once existing on the
    church itself:

      "Anno milleno transacto bisque trigeno
       Desuper undecimo fuit facta primo,"

    is no longer to be seen, and is conjectured by Corner, with much
    probability, to have perished "in qualche ristauro."

  [26] Signed Bartolomeus Bozza, 1634, 1647, 1656, &c.

  [27] Guida di Venezia, p. 6.

  [28] The mere warmth of St. Mark's in winter, which is much greater
    than that of the other two churches above named, must, however, be
    taken into consideration, as one of the most efficient causes of its
    being then more frequented.

  [29] I said above that the larger number of the devotees entered by
    the "Arabian" porch; the porch, that is to say, on the north side of
    the church, remarkable for its rich Arabian archivolt, and through
    which access is gained immediately to the northern transept. The
    reason is, that in that transept is the chapel of the Madonna, which
    has a greater attraction for the Venetians than all the rest of the
    church besides. The old builders kept their images of the Virgin
    subordinate to those of Christ; but modern Romanism has retrograded
    from theirs, and the most glittering portions of the whole church
    are the two recesses behind this lateral altar, covered with silver
    hearts dedicated to the Virgin.

  [30] Vide "Builder," for October, 1851.

  [31] "Quivi presso si vedi una colonna di tanta bellezza e finezza
    che e riputato _piutosto gioia che pietra_."--_Sansovino_, of the
    verd-antique pillar in San Jacomo dell' Orio. A remarkable piece of
    natural history and moral philosophy, connected with this subject,
    will be found in the second chapter of our third volume, quoted from
    the work of a Florentine architect of the fifteenth century.

  [32] The fact is, that no two tesseræ of the glass are exactly of
    the same tint, the greens being all varied with blues, the blues of
    different depths, the reds of different clearness, so that the
    effect of each mass of color is full of variety, like the stippled
    color of a fruit piece.

  [33] Some illustration, also, of what was said in § XXXIII. above,
    respecting the value of the shafts of St. Mark's as large jewels,
    will be found in Appendix 9, "Shafts of St. Mark's."

  [34] See the farther notice of this subject in Vol. III. Chap. IV.

  [35] I do not mean that modern Christians believe less in the
    _facts_ than ancient Christians, but they do not believe in the
    representation of the facts as true. We look upon the picture as
    this or that painter's conception; the elder Christians looked upon
    it as this or that painter's description of what had actually taken
    place. And in the Greek Church all painting is, to this day,
    strictly a branch of tradition. See M. Dideron's admirably written
    introduction to his Iconographie Chrétienne, p. 7:--"Un de mes
    compagnons s'étonnait de retrouver à la Panagia de St. Luc, le saint
    Jean Chrysostome qu'il avait dessiné dans le baptistère de St. Marc,
    à Venise. Le costume des personnages est partout et en tout temps le
    même, non-seulement pour la forme, mais pour la couleur, mais pour
    le dessin, mais jusque pour le nombre et l'épaisseur des plis."

  [36] All the effects of Byzantine art to represent violent action
    are inadequate, most of them ludicrously so, even when the
    sculptural art is in other respects far advanced. The early Gothic
    sculptors, on the other hand, fail in all points of refinement, but
    hardly ever in expression of action. This distinction is of course
    one of the necessary consequences of the difference in all respects
    between the repose of the Eastern, and activity of the Western,
    mind, which we shall have to trace out completely in the inquiry
    into the nature of Gothic.

  [37] Appendix 10, "Proper Sense of the word Idolatry."

  [38] It is also of inferior workmanship, and perhaps later than the
    rest. Vide Lord Lindsay, vol. i. p. 124, note.

  [39] The old mosaics from the Revelation have perished, and have been
    replaced by miserable work of the seventeenth century.

  [40] Rev. xxi. 18.




CHAPTER V.

BYZANTINE PALACES.


§ I. The account of the architecture of St. Mark's given in the previous
chapter has, I trust, acquainted the reader sufficiently with the spirit
of the Byzantine style: but he has probably, as yet, no clear idea of
its generic forms. Nor would it be safe to define these after an
examination of St. Mark's alone, built as it was upon various models,
and at various periods. But if we pass through the city, looking for
buildings which resemble St. Mark's--first, in the most important
feature of incrustation; secondly, in the character of the
mouldings,--we shall find a considerable number, not indeed very
attractive in their first address to the eye, but agreeing perfectly,
both with each other, and with the earliest portions of St. Mark's, in
every important detail; and to be regarded, therefore, with profound
interest, as indeed the remains of an ancient city of Venice, altogether
different in aspect from that which now exists. From these remains we
may with safety deduce general conclusions touching the forms of
Byzantine architecture, as practised in Eastern Italy, during the
eleventh, twelfth, and thirteenth centuries.

§ II. They agree in another respect, as well as in style. All are either
ruins, or fragments disguised by restoration. Not one of them is
uninjured or unaltered; and the impossibility of finding so much as an
angle or a single story in perfect condition is a proof, hardly less
convincing than the method of their architecture, that they were indeed
raised during the earliest phases of the Venetian power. The mere
fragments, dispersed in narrow streets, and recognizable by a single
capital, or the segment of an arch, I shall not enumerate: but, of
important remains, there are six in the immediate neighborhood of the
Rialto, one in the Rio di Ca' Foscari, and one conspicuously placed
opposite the great Renaissance Palace known as the Vendramin Calerghi,
one of the few palaces still inhabited[41] and well maintained; and
noticeable, moreover, as having a garden beside it, rich with
evergreens, and decorated by gilded railings and white statues that cast
long streams of snowy reflection down into the deep water. The vista of
canal beyond is terminated by the Church of St. Geremia, another but
less attractive work of the Renaissance; a mass of barren brickwork,
with a dull leaden dome above, like those of our National Gallery. So
that the spectator has the richest and meanest of the late architecture
of Venice before him at once: the richest, let him observe, a piece of
private luxury; the poorest, that which was given to God. Then, looking
to the left, he will see the fragment of the work of earlier ages,
testifying against both, not less by its utter desolation than by the
nobleness of the traces that are still left of it.

§ III. It is a ghastly ruin; whatever is venerable or sad in its wreck
being disguised by attempts to put it to present uses of the basest
kind. It has been composed of arcades borne by marble shafts, and walls
of brick faced with marble: but the covering stones have been torn away
from it like the shroud from a corpse; and its walls, rent into a
thousand chasms, are filled and refilled with fresh brickwork, and the
seams and hollows are choked with clay and whitewash, oozing and
trickling over the marble,--itself blanched into dusty decay by the
frosts of centuries. Soft grass and wandering leafage have rooted
themselves in the rents, but they are not suffered to grow in their own
wild and gentle way, for the place is in a sort inhabited; rotten
partitions are nailed across its corridors, and miserable rooms
contrived in its western wing; and here and there the weeds are
indolently torn down, leaving their haggard fibres to struggle again
into unwholesome growth when the spring next stirs them: and thus, in
contest between death and life, the unsightly heap is festering to its
fall.

Of its history little is recorded, and that little futile. That it once
belonged to the dukes of Ferrara, and was bought from them in the
sixteenth century, to be made a general receptacle for the goods of the
Turkish merchants, whence it is now generally known as the Fondaco, or
Fontico, de' Turchi, are facts just as important to the antiquary, as
that, in the year 1852, the municipality of Venice allowed its lower
story to be used for a "deposito di Tabacchi." Neither of this, nor of
any other remains of the period, can we know anything but what their own
stones will tell us.

§ IV. The reader will find in Appendix 11, written chiefly for the
traveller's benefit, an account of the situation and present state of
the other seven Byzantine palaces. Here I shall only give a general
account of the most interesting points in their architecture.

They all agree in being round-arched and incrusted with marble, but
there are only six in which the original disposition of the parts is
anywise traceable; namely, those distinguished in the Appendix as the
Fondaco de' Turchi, Casa Loredan, Caso Farsetti, Rio-Foscari House,
Terraced House, and Madonnetta House:[42] and these six agree farther in
having continuous arcades along their entire fronts from one angle to
the other, and in having their arcades divided, in each case, into a
centre and wings; both by greater size in the midmost arches, and by the
alternation of shafts in the centre, with pilasters, or with small
shafts, at the flanks.

§ V. So far as their structure can be traced, they agree also in having
tall and few arches in their lower stories, and shorter and more
numerous arches above: but it happens most unfortunately that in the
only two cases in which the second stories are left the ground floors
are modernized, and in the others where the sea stories are left the
second stories are modernized; so that we never have more than two
tiers of the Byzantine arches, one above the other. These, however, are
quite enough to show the first main point on which I wish to insist,
namely, the subtlety of the feeling for proportion in the Greek
architects; and I hope that even the general reader will not allow
himself to be frightened by the look of a few measurements, for, if he
will only take the little pains necessary to compare them, he will, I am
almost certain, find the result not devoid of interest.

[Illustration: Fig. IV.]

§ VI. I had intended originally to give elevations of all these palaces;
but have not had time to prepare plates requiring so much labor and
care. I must, therefore, explain the position of their parts in the
simplest way in my power.

The Fondaco de' Turchi has sixteen arches in its sea story, and
twenty-six above them in its first story, the whole based on a
magnificent foundation, built of blocks of red marble, some of them
seven feet long by a foot and a half thick, and raised to a height of
about five feet above high-water mark. At this level, the elevation of
one half of the building, from its flank to the central pillars of its
arcades, is rudely given in Fig. IV., in the previous page. It is only
drawn to show the arrangement of the parts, as the sculptures which are
indicated by the circles and upright oblongs between the arches are too
delicate to be shown in a sketch three times the size of this. The
building once was crowned with an Arabian parapet; but it was taken down
some years since, and I am aware of no authentic representation of its
details. The greater part of the sculptures between the arches,
indicated in the woodcut only by blank circles, have also fallen, or
been removed, but enough remain on the two flanks to justify the
representation given in the diagram of their original arrangement.

And now observe the dimensions. The small arches of the wings in the
ground story, _a_, _a_, _a_, measure, in breadth, from

                                  Ft.  In.
  shaft to shaft                   4    5
  interval _b_                     7    6½
  interval _c_                     7   11
  intervals _d_, _e_, _f_, &c.     8    1

The difference between the width of the arches _b_ and _c_ is
necessitated by the small recess of the cornice on the left hand as
compared with that of the great capitals; but this sudden difference of
half a foot between the two extreme arches of the centre offended the
builder's eye, so he diminished the next one, _unnecessarily_, two
inches, and thus obtained the gradual cadence to the flanks, from eight
feet down to four and a half, in a series of continually increasing
steps. Of course the effect cannot be shown in the diagram, as the first
difference is less than the thickness of its lines. In the upper story
the capitals are all nearly of the same height, and there was no
occasion for the difference between the extreme arches. Its twenty-six
arches are placed, four small ones above each lateral three of the lower
arcade, and eighteen larger above the central ten; thus throwing the
shafts into all manner of relative positions, and completely confusing
the eye in any effort to count them: but there is an exquisite symmetry
running through their apparent confusion; for it will be seen that the
four arches in each flank are arranged in two groups, of which one has a
large single shaft in the centre, and the other a pilaster and two small
shafts. The way in which the large shaft is used as an echo of those in
the central arcade, dovetailing them, as it were, into the system of the
pilasters,--just as a great painter, passing from one tone of color to
another, repeats, over a small space, that which he has left,--is highly
characteristic of the Byzantine care in composition. There are other
evidences of it in the arrangement of the capitals, which will be
noticed below in the seventh chapter. The lateral arches of this upper
arcade measure 3 ft. 2 in. across, and the central 3 ft. 11 in., so that
the arches in the building are altogether of six magnitudes.

§ VII. Next let us take the Casa Loredan. The mode of arrangement of its
pillars is precisely like that of the Fondaco de' Turchi, so that I
shall merely indicate them by vertical lines in order to be able to
letter the intervals. It has five arches in the centre of the lower
story, and two in each of its wings.

[Illustration]

                                                      Ft.  In.
  The midmost interval, _a_, of the central five, is   6    1
  The two on each side, _b_, _b_                       5    2
  The two extremes, _c_, _c_                           4    9
  Inner arches of the wings, _d_, _d_                  4    4
  Outer arches of the wings, _e_, _e_                  4    6

The gradation of these dimensions is visible at a glance; the boldest
step being here taken nearest the centre, while in the Fondaco it is
farthest from the centre. The first loss here is of eleven inches, the
second of five, the third of five, and then there is a most subtle
increase of two inches in the extreme arches, as if to contradict the
principle of diminution, and stop the falling away of the building by
firm resistance at its flanks.

I could not get the measures of the upper story accurately, the palace
having been closed all the time I was in Venice; but it has seven
central arches above the five below, and three at the flanks above the
two below, the groups being separated by double shafts.

§ VIII. Again, in the Casa Farsetti, the lower story has a centre of
five arches, and wings of two. Referring, therefore, to the last figure,
which will answer for this palace also, the measures of the intervals
are:

                                  Ft.  In.
  _a_                              8    0
  _b_                              5   10
  _c_                              5    4
  _d_ and _e_                      5    3

It is, however, possible that the interval _c_ and the wing arches may
have been intended to be similar; for one of the wing arches measures 5
ft. 4 in. We have thus a simpler proportion than any we have hitherto
met with; only two losses taking place, the first of 2 ft. 2 in., the
second of 6 inches.

The upper story has a central group of seven arches, whose widths are 4
ft. 1 in.

                                  Ft.  In.
  The next arch on each side       3    5
  The three arches of each wing    3    6

Here again we have a most curious instance of the subtlety of eye which
was not satisfied without a third dimension, but _could_ be satisfied
with a difference of an inch on three feet and a half.

§ IX. In the Terraced House, the ground floor is modernized, but the
first story is composed of a centre of five arches, with wings of two,
measuring as follows:

                                             Ft.  In.
  Three midmost arches of the central group   4    0
  Outermost arch of the central group         4    6
  Innermost arch of the wing                  4   10
  Outermost arch of the wing[43]              5    0

Here the greatest step is towards the centre; but the increase, which is
unusual, is towards the outside, the gain being successively six, four,
and two inches.

I could not obtain the measures of the second story, in which only the
central group is left; but the two outermost arches are visibly larger
than the others, thus beginning a correspondent proportion to the one
below, of which the lateral quantities have been destroyed by
restorations.

§ X. Finally, in the Rio-Foscari House, the central arch is the
principal feature, and the four lateral ones form one magnificent wing;
the dimensions being from the centre to the side:

                                  Ft.  In.
  Central arch                     9    9
  Second   "                       3    8
  Third    "                       3   10
  Fourth   "                       3   10
  Fifth    "                       3    8

The difference of two inches on nearly three feet in the two midmost
arches being all that was necessary to satisfy the builder's eye.

§ XI. I need not point out to the reader that these singular and minute
harmonies of proportion indicate, beyond all dispute, not only that the
buildings in which they are found are of one school, but (so far as
these subtle coincidences of measurement can still be traced in them) in
their original form. No modern builder has any idea of connecting his
arches in this manner, and restorations in Venice are carried on with
too violent hands to admit of the supposition that such refinements
would be even noticed in the progress of demolition, much less imitated
in heedless reproduction. And as if to direct our attention especially
to this character, as indicative of Byzantine workmanship, the most
interesting example of all will be found in the arches of the front of
St. Mark's itself, whose proportions I have not noticed before, in order
that they might here be compared with those of the contemporary palaces.

[Illustration: Fig. V.]

§ XII. The doors actually employed for entrance in the western façade
are as usual five, arranged as at _a_ in the annexed woodcut, Fig. V.;
but the Byzantine builder could not be satisfied with so simple a group,
and he introduced, therefore, two minor arches at the extremities, as at
_b_, by adding two small porticos which are of _no use whatever_ except
to consummate the proportions of the façade, and themselves to exhibit
the most exquisite proportions in arrangements of shaft and archivolt
with which I am acquainted in the entire range of European architecture.

Into these minor particulars I cannot here enter; but observe the
dimensions of the range of arches in the façade, as thus completed by
the flanking porticos:

                                                Ft.  In.
  The space of its central archivolt is         31    8
        "     the two on each side, about[44]   19    8
        "     the two succeeding, about         20    4
        "     small arches at flanks, about      6    0

[Illustration: Fig. VI.]

I need not make any comment upon the subtle difference of eight inches
on twenty feet between the second and third dimensions. If the reader
will be at the pains to compare the whole evidence now laid before him,
with that deduced above from the apse of Murano, he cannot but confess
that it amounts to an irrefragable proof of an intense perception of
harmony in the relation of quantities, on the part of the Byzantine
architects; a perception which we have at present lost so utterly as
hardly to be able even to conceive it. And let it not be said, as it was
of the late discoveries of subtle curvature in the Parthenon,[45] that
what is not to be demonstrated without laborious measurement, cannot
have influence on the beauty of the design. The eye is continually
influenced by what it cannot detect; nay, it is not going too far to
say, that it is most influenced by what it detects least. Let the
painter define, if he can, the variations of lines on which depend the
changes of expression in the human countenance. The greater he is, the
more he will feel their subtlety, and the intense difficulty of
perceiving all their relations, or answering for the consequences of a
variation of a hair's breadth in a single curve. Indeed, there is
nothing truly noble either in color or in form, but its power depends on
circumstances infinitely too intricate to be explained, and almost too
subtle to be traced. And as for these Byzantine buildings, we only do
not feel them because we do not _watch_ them; otherwise we should as
much enjoy the variety of proportion in their arches, as we do at
present that of the natural architecture of flowers and leaves. Any of
us can feel in an instant the grace of the leaf group, _b_, in the
annexed figure; and yet that grace is simply owing to its being
proportioned like the façade of St. Mark's; each leaflet answering to an
arch,--the smallest at the root, to those of the porticos. I have tried
to give the proportion quite accurately in _b_; but as the difference
between the second and third leaflets is hardly discernible on so small
a scale, it is somewhat exaggerated in _a_.[46] Nature is often far more
subtle in her proportions. In looking at some of the nobler species of
lilies, full in the front of the flower, we may fancy for a moment that
they form a symmetrical six-petaled star; but on examining them more
closely, we shall find that they are thrown into a group of three
magnitudes by the expansion of two of the inner petals above the stamens
to a breadth greater than any of the four others; while the third inner
petal, on which the stamens rest, contracts itself into the narrowest of
the six, and the three under petals remain of one intermediate
magnitude, as seen in the annexed figure.

[Illustration: Fig. VII.]

§ XIII. I must not, however, weary the reader with this subject, which
has always been a favorite one with me, and is apt to lead too far; we
will return to the palaces on the Grand Canal. Admitting, then, that
their fragments are proved, by the minute correspondences of their
arrangement, to be still in their original positions, they indicate to
us a form, whether of palace or dwelling-house, in which there were,
universally, central galleries, or loggias, opening into apartments on
each wing, the amount of light admitted being immense; and the general
proportions of the building, slender, light, and graceful in the utmost
degree, it being in fact little more than an aggregate of shafts and
arches. Of the interior disposition of these palaces there is in no
instance the slightest trace left, nor am I well enough acquainted with
the existing architecture of the East to risk any conjecture on this
subject. I pursue the statement of the facts which still are
ascertainable respecting their external forms.

§ XIV. In every one of the buildings above mentioned, except the
Rio-Foscari House (which has only one great entrance between its wings),
the central arcades are sustained, at least in one story, and generally
in both, on bold detached cylindrical shafts, with rich capitals, while
the arches of the wings are carried on smaller shafts assisted by
portions of wall, which become pilasters of greater or less width.

And now I must remind the reader of what was pointed out above (Vol. I.
Chap. XXVII. §§ III. XXXV. XL.), that there are two great orders of
capitals in the world; that one of these is convex in its contour, the
other concave; and that richness of ornament, with all freedom of fancy,
is for the most part found in the one, and severity of ornament, with
stern discipline of the fancy, in the other.

Of these two families of capitals both occur in the Byzantine period,
but the concave group is the longest-lived, and extends itself into the
Gothic times. In the account which I gave of them in the first volume,
they were illustrated by giving two portions of a simple curve, that of
a salvia leaf. We must now investigate their characters more in detail;
and these may be best generally represented by considering both families
as formed upon the types of flowers,--the one upon that of the
water-lily, the other upon that of the convolvulus. There was no
intention in the Byzantine architects to imitate either one or the other
of these flowers; but, as I have already so often repeated, all
beautiful works of art must either intentionally imitate or accidentally
resemble natural forms; and the direct comparison with the natural forms
which these capitals most resemble, is the likeliest mode of fixing
their distinctions in the reader's mind.

The one then, the convex family, is modelled according to the commonest
shapes of that great group of flowers which form rounded cups, like that
of the water-lily, the leaves springing horizontally from the stalk, and
closing together upwards. The rose is of this family, but her cup is
filled with the luxuriance of her leaves; the crocus, campanula,
ranunculus, anemone, and almost all the loveliest children of the field,
are formed upon the same type.

The other family resembles the convolvulus, trumpet-flower, and such
others, in which the lower part of the bell is slender, and the lip
curves outwards at the top. There are fewer flowers constructed on this
than on the convex model; but in the organization of trees and of
clusters of herbage it is seen continually. Of course, both of these
conditions are modified, when applied to capitals, by the enormously
greater thickness of the stalk or shaft, but in other respects the
parallelism is close and accurate; and the reader had better at once fix
the flower outlines in his mind,[47] and remember them as representing
the only two orders of capitals that the world has ever seen, or can
see.

§ XV. The examples of the concave family in the Byzantine times are
found principally either in large capitals founded on the Greek
Corinthian, used chiefly for the nave pillars of churches, or in the
small lateral shafts of the palaces. It appears somewhat singular that
the pure Corinthian form should have been reserved almost exclusively
for nave pillars, as at Torcello, Murano, and St. Mark's; it occurs,
indeed, together with almost every other form, on the exterior of St.
Mark's also, but never so definitely as in the nave and transept shafts.
Of the conditions assumed by it at Torcello enough has been said; and
one of the most delicate of the varieties occurring in St. Mark's is
given in Plate VIII., fig. 15, remarkable for the cutting of the sharp
thistle-like leaves into open relief, so that the light sometimes shines
through them from behind, and for the beautiful curling of the
extremities of the leaves outwards, joining each other at the top, as in
an undivided flower.

§ XVI. The other characteristic examples of the concave groups in the
Byzantine times are as simple as those resulting from the Corinthian are
rich. They occur on the _small_ shafts at the flanks of the Fondaco de'
Turchi, the Casa Farsetti, Casa Loredan, Terraced House, and upper
story of the Madonnetta House, in forms so exactly similar that the two
figures 1 and 2 in Plate VIII. may sufficiently represent them all. They
consist merely of portions cut out of the plinths or string-courses
which run along all the faces of these palaces, by four truncations in
the form of arrowy leaves (fig. 1, Fondaco de' Turchi), and the whole
rounded a little at the bottom so as to fit the shaft. When they occur
between two arches they assume the form of the group fig. 2 (Terraced
House). Fig. 3 is from the central arches of the Casa Farsetti, and is
only given because either it is a later restoration or a form absolutely
unique in the Byzantine period.

[Illustration: Plate VII.
               BYZANTINE CAPITALS. CONVEX GROUP.]

§ XVII. The concave group, however, was not naturally pleasing to the
Byzantine mind. Its own favorite capital was of the bold convex or
cushion shape, so conspicuous in all the buildings of the period that I
have devoted Plate VII., opposite, entirely to its illustration. The
form in which it is first used is practically obtained from a square
block laid on the head of the shaft (fig. 1, Plate VII.), by first
cutting off the lower corners, as in fig. 2, and then rounding the
edges, as in fig. 3; this gives us the bell stone: on this is laid a
simple abacus, as seen in fig. 4, which is the actual form used in the
upper arcade of Murano, and the framework of the capital is complete.
Fig. 5 shows the general manner and effect of its decoration on the same
scale; the other figures, 6 and 7, both from the apse of Murano, 8, from
the Terraced House, and 9, from the Baptistery of St. Mark's, show the
method of chiselling the surfaces in capitals of average richness, such
as occur everywhere, for there is no limit to the fantasy and beauty of
the more elaborate examples.

§ XVIII. In consequence of the peculiar affection entertained for these
massy forms by the Byzantines, they were apt, when they used any
condition of capital founded on the Corinthian, to modify the concave
profile by making it bulge out at the bottom. Fig. 1, _a_, Plate X., is
the profile of a capital of the pure concave family; and observe, it
needs a fillet or cord round the neck of the capital to show where it
separates from the shaft. Fig. 4, _a_, on the other hand, is the
profile of the pure convex group, which not only needs no such
projecting fillet, but would be encumbered by it; while fig. 2, _a_, is
the profile of one of the Byzantine capitals (Fondaco de' Turchi, lower
arcade) founded on Corinthian, of which the main sweep is concave, but
which bends below into the convex bell-shape, where it joins the shaft.
And, lastly, fig. 3, _a_, is the profile of the nave shafts of St.
Mark's, where, though very delicately granted, the concession to the
Byzantine temper is twofold; first at the spring of the curve from the
base, and secondly the top, where it again becomes convex, though the
expression of the Corinthian bell is still given to it by the bold
concave leaves.

§ XIX. These, then, being the general modifications of Byzantine
profiles, I have thrown together in Plate VIII., opposite, some of the
most characteristic examples of the decoration of the concave and
transitional types; their localities are given in the note below,[48]
and the following are the principal points to be observed respecting
them.

The purest concave forms, 1 and 2, were never decorated in the earliest
times, except sometimes by an incision or rib down the centre of their
truncations on the angles.

[Illustration: Plate VIII.
               BYZANTINE CAPITALS. CONCAVE GROUP.]

Figures 4, 5, 6, and 7 show some of the modes of application of a
peculiarly broad-lobed acanthus leaf, very characteristic of native
Venetian work; 4 and 5 are from the same building, two out of a group of
four, and show the boldness of the variety admitted in the management
even of the capitals most closely derived from the Corinthian. I never
saw one of these Venetian capitals in all respects like another. The
trefoils into which the leaves fall at the extremities are, however, for
the most part similar, though variously disposed, and generally niche
themselves one under the other, as very characteristically in fig. 7.
The form 8 occurs in St. Mark's only, and there very frequently: 9 at
Venice occurs, I think, in St. Mark's only; but it is a favorite early
Lombardic form. 10, 11, and 12 are all highly characteristic. 10 occurs
with more fantastic interweaving upon its sides in the upper stories of
St. Mark's; 11 is derived, in the Casa Loredan, from the great lily
capitals of St. Mark's, of which more presently. 13 and 15 are peculiar
to St. Mark's. 14 is a lovely condition, occurring both there and in the
Fondaco de' Turchi.

The modes in which the separate portions of the leaves are executed in
these and other Byzantine capitals, will be noticed more at length
hereafter. Here I only wish the reader to observe two things, both with
respect to these and the capitals of the convex family on the former
Plate: first the Life, secondly, the Breadth, of these capitals, as
compared with Greek forms.

§ XX. I say, first, the Life. Not only is every one of these capitals
differently fancied, but there are many of them which _have no two sides
alike_. Fig. 5, for instance, varies on every side in the arrangement of
the pendent leaf in its centre; fig. 6 has a different plant on each of
its four upper angles. The birds are each cut with a different play of
plumage in figs. 9 and 12, and the vine-leaves are every one varied in
their position in fig. 13. But this is not all. The differences in the
character of ornamentation between them and the Greek capitals, all show
a greater love of nature; the leaves are, every one of them, more
founded on realities, sketched, however rudely, more directly from the
truth; and are continually treated in a manner which shows the mind of
the workman to have been among the living herbage, not among Greek
precedents. The hard outlines in which, for the sake of perfect
intelligibility, I have left this Plate, have deprived the examples of
the vitality of their light and shade; but the reader can nevertheless
observe the _ideas_ of life occurring perpetually: at the top of fig.
4, for instance, the small leaves turned sideways; in fig. 5, the formal
volutes of the old Corinthian transformed into a branching tendril; in
fig. 6, the bunch of grapes thrown carelessly in at the right-hand
corner, in defiance of all symmetry; in fig. 7, the volutes knitted into
wreaths of ivy; in fig. 14, the leaves, drifted, as it were, by a
whirlwind round the capital by which they rise; while figs. 13 and 15
are as completely living leaves as any of the Gothic time. These designs
may or may not be graceful; what grace or beauty they have is not to be
rendered in mere outline,--but they are indisputably more _natural_ than
any Greek ones, and therefore healthier, and tending to greatness.

§ XXI. In the second place, note in all these examples, the excessive
breadth of the masses, however afterwards they may be filled with
detail. Whether we examine the contour of the simpler convex bells, or
those of the leaves which bend outwards from the richer and more
Corinthian types, we find they are all outlined by grand and simple
curves, and that the whole of their minute fretwork and thistle-work is
cast into a gigantic mould which subdues all their multitudinous points
and foldings to its own inevitable dominion. And the fact is, that in
the sweeping lines and broad surfaces of these Byzantine sculptures we
obtain, so far as I know, for the first time in the history of art, the
germ of that unity of perfect ease in every separate part, with perfect
subjection to an enclosing form or directing impulse, which was brought
to its most intense expression in the compositions of the two men in
whom the art of Italy consummated itself and expired--Tintoret and
Michael Angelo.

I would not attach too much importance to the mere habit of working on
the rounded surface of the stone, which is often as much the result of
haste or rudeness as of the desire for breadth, though the result
obtained is not the less beautiful. But in the capital from the Fondaco
de' Turchi, fig. 6, it will be seen that while the sculptor had taken
the utmost care to make his leaves free, graceful, and sharp in effect,
he was dissatisfied with their separation, and could not rest until he
had enclosed them with an unbroken line, like that of a pointed arch;
and the same thing is done in many different ways in other capitals of
the same building, and in many of St. Mark's: but one such instance
would have been enough to prove, if the loveliness of the profiles
themselves did not do so, that the sculptor understood and loved the
laws of generalization; and that the feeling which bound his prickly
leaves, as they waved or drifted round the ridges of his capital, into
those broad masses of unbroken flow, was indeed one with that which made
Michael Angelo encompass the principal figure in his Creation of Adam
with the broad curve of its cloudy drapery. It may seem strange to
assert any connexion between so great a conception and these rudely hewn
fragments of ruined marble; but all the highest principles of art are as
universal as they are majestic, and there is nothing too small to
receive their influence. They rule at once the waves of the mountain
outline, and the sinuosities of the minutest lichen that stains its
shattered stones.

§ XXII. We have not yet spoken of the three braided and chequered
capitals, numbered 10, 11, and 12. They are representations of a group,
with which many most interesting associations are connected. It was
noticed in the last chapter, that the method of covering the exterior of
buildings with thin pieces of marble was likely to lead to a system of
lighting the interior by minute perforation. In order to obtain both
light and air, without admitting any unbroken body of sunshine, in warm
countries, it became a constant habit of the Arabian architects to
pierce minute and starlike openings in slabs of stone; and to employ the
stones so pierced where the Gothic architects employ traceries.
Internally, the form of stars assumed by the light as it entered[49]
was, in itself, an exquisite decoration; but, externally, it was felt
necessary to add some slight ornament upon the surface of the perforated
stone; and it was soon found that, as the small perforations had a
tendency to look scattered and spotty, the most effective treatment of
the intermediate surfaces would be one which bound them together, and
gave unity and repose to the pierced and disturbed stone: universally,
therefore, those intermediate spaces were carved into the semblance of
interwoven fillets, which alternately sank beneath and rose above each
other as they met. This system of braided or woven ornament was not
confined to the Arabs; it is universally pleasing to the instinct of
mankind. I believe that nearly all early ornamentation is full of
it,--more especially, perhaps, Scandinavian and Anglo-Saxon; and
illuminated manuscripts depend upon it for their loveliest effects of
intricate color, up to the close of the thirteenth century. There are
several very interesting metaphysical reasons for this strange and
unfailing delight, felt in a thing so simple. It is not often that any
idea of utility has power to enhance the true impressions of beauty; but
it is possible that the enormous importance of the art of weaving to
mankind may give some interest, if not actual attractiveness, to any
type or image of the invention to which we owe, at once, our comfort and
our pride. But the more profound reason lies in the innate love of
mystery and unity; in the joy that the human mind has in contemplating
any kind of maze or entanglement, so long as it can discern, through its
confusion, any guiding clue or connecting plan: a pleasure increased and
solemnized by some dim feeling of the setting forth, by such symbols, of
the intricacy, and alternate rise and fall, subjection and supremacy, of
human fortune; the

  "Weave the warp, and weave the woof,"

of Fate and Time.

[Illustration: Plate IX.
               LILY CAPITAL OF ST. MARKS.]

§ XXIII. But be this as it may, the fact is that we are never tired of
contemplating this woven involution; and that, in some degree, the
sublime pleasure which we have in watching the branches of trees, the
intertwining of the grass, and the tracery of the higher clouds, is
owing to it, not less than that which we receive from the fine meshes of
the robe, the braiding of the hair, and the various glittering of the
linked net or wreathed chain. Byzantine ornamentation, like that of
almost all nations in a state of progress, is full of this kind of work:
but it occurs most conspicuously, though most simply, in the minute
traceries which surround their most solid capitals; sometimes merely in
a reticulated veil, as in the tenth figure in the Plate, sometimes
resembling a basket, on the edges of which are perched birds and other
animals. The diamonded ornament in the eleventh figure is substituted
for it in the Casa Loredan, and marks a somewhat later time and a
tendency to the ordinary Gothic chequer; but the capitals which show it
most definitely are those already so often spoken of as the lily
capitals of St. Mark's, of which the northern one is carefully drawn in
Plate IX.

[Illustration: Plate X.
               THE FOUR VENETIAN FLOWER ORDERS.]

§ XXIV. These capitals, called barbarous by our architects, are without
exception the most subtle pieces of composition in broad contour which I
have ever met with in architecture. Their profile is given in the
opposite Plate X. fig. 3, _b_; the inner line in the figure being that
of the stone behind the lily, the outer that of the external network,
taken through the side of the capital; while fig. 3, _c_ is the outer
profile at its angle; and the reader will easily understand that the
passing of the one of these lines into the other is productive of the
most exquisite and wonderful series of curvatures possible within such
compass, no two views of the capital giving the same contour. Upon these
profoundly studied outlines, as remarkable for their grace and
complexity as the general mass of the capital is for solid strength and
proportion to its necessary service, the braided work is wrought with
more than usual care; perhaps, as suggested by the Marchese Selvatico,
with some idea of imitating those "nets of chequerwork and wreaths of
chainwork" on the chapiters of Solomon's temple, which are, I suppose,
the first instances on record of an ornamentation of this kind thus
applied. The braided work encloses on each of the four sides of the
capital a flower whose form, derived from that of the lily, though as
usual modified, in every instance of its occurrence, in some minor
particulars, is generally seen as represented in fig. 11 of Plate VIII.
It is never without the two square or oblong objects at the extremity of
the tendrils issuing from its root, set like vessels to catch the dew
from the points of its leaves; but I do not understand their meaning.
The abacus of the capital has already been given at _a_, Plate XVI.,
Vol. I.; but no amount of illustrations or eulogium would be enough to
make the reader understand the perfect beauty of the thing itself, as
the sun steals from interstice to interstice of its marble veil, and
touches with the white lustre of its rays at mid-day the pointed leaves
of its thirsty lilies.

In all the capitals hitherto spoken of, the form of the head of the bell
has been square, and its varieties of outline have been obtained in the
transition from the square of the abacus to the circular outline of the
shafts. A far more complex series of forms results from the division of
the bell by recesses into separate lobes or leaves, like those of a rose
or tulip, which are each in their turn covered with flower-work or
hollowed into reticulation. The example (fig. 10, Plate VII.) from St.
Mark's will give some idea of the simplest of these conditions: perhaps
the most exquisite in Venice, on the whole, is the central capital of
the upper arcade of the Fondaco de' Turchi.

Such are the principal generic conditions of the Byzantine capital; but
the reader must always remember that the examples given are single
instances, and those not the most beautiful but the most intelligible,
chosen out of thousands: the designs of the capitals of St. Mark's alone
would form a volume.

[Illustration: Plate XI.
               BYZANTINE SCULPTURE.]

§ XXV. Of the archivolts which these capitals generally sustain, details
are given in the Appendix and in the notice of Venetian doors in Chapter
VII. In the private palaces, the ranges of archivolt are for the most
part very simple, with dentilled mouldings; and all the ornamental
effect is entrusted to pieces of sculpture set in the wall above or
between the arches, in the manner shown in Plate XV., below, Chapter
VII. These pieces of sculpture are either crosses, upright oblongs, or
circles: of all the three forms an example is given in Plate XI.
opposite. The cross was apparently an invariable ornament, placed either
in the centre of the archivolt of the doorway, or in the centre of the
first story above the windows; on each side of it the circular and
oblong ornaments were used in various alternation. In too many instances
the wall marbles have been torn away from the earliest Byzantine
palaces, so that the crosses are left on their archivolts only. The best
examples of the cross set above the windows are found in houses of the
transitional period: one in the Campo St^a M. Formosa; another, in which
a cross is placed between every window, is still well preserved in the
Campo St^a Maria Mater Domini; another, on the Grand Canal, in the
parish of the Apostoli, has two crosses, one on each side of the first
story, and a bas-relief of Christ enthroned in the centre; and finally,
that from which the larger cross in the Plate was taken in the house
once belonging to Marco Polo, at San Giovanni Grisostomo.

§ XXVI. This cross, though graceful and rich, and given because it
happens to be one of the best preserved, is uncharacteristic in one
respect; for, instead of the central rose at the meeting of the arms, we
usually find a hand raised in the attitude of blessing, between the sun
and moon, as in the two smaller crosses seen in the Plate. In nearly all
representations of the Crucifixion, over the whole of Europe, at the
period in question, the sun and the moon are introduced, one on each
side of the cross,--the sun generally, in paintings, as a red star; but
I do not think with any purpose of indicating the darkness at the time
of the agony; especially because, had this been the intention, the moon
ought not to have been visible, since it could not have been in the
heavens during the day at the time of passover. I believe rather that
the two luminaries are set there in order to express the entire
dependence of the heavens and the earth upon the work of the Redemption:
and this view is confirmed by our frequently finding the sun and moon
set in the same manner beside the figure of Christ, as in the centre of
the great archivolt of St. Mark's, or beside the hand signifying
benediction, without any cross, in some other early archivolts;[50]
while, again, not unfrequently they are absent from the symbol of the
cross itself, and its saving power over the whole of creation is
indicated only by fresh leaves springing from its foot, or doves feeding
beside it; and so also, in illuminated Bibles, we find the series of
pictures representing the Creation terminate in the Crucifixion, as the
work by which all the families of created beings subsist, no less than
that in sympathy with which "the whole creation groaneth and travaileth
in pain together until now."

§ XXVII. This habit of placing the symbol of the Christian faith in the
centres of their palaces was, as I above said, universal in early
Venice; it does not cease till about the middle of the fourteenth
century. The other sculptures, which were set above or between the
arches, consist almost invariably of groups of birds or beasts; either
standing opposite to each other with a small pillar or spray of leafage
between them, or else tearing and devouring each other. The multitude of
these sculptures, especially of the small ones enclosed in circles, as
figs 5 and 6, Plate XI., which are now scattered through the city of
Venice, is enormous, but they are seldom to be seen in their original
positions. When the Byzantine palaces were destroyed, these fragments
were generally preserved, and inserted again in the walls of the new
buildings, with more or less attempt at symmetry; fragments of friezes
and mouldings being often used in the same manner; so that the mode of
their original employment can only be seen in St. Mark's, the Fondaco
de' Turchi, Braided House, and one or two others. The most remarkable
point about them is, that the groups of beasts or birds on each side of
the small pillars bear the closest possible resemblance to the group of
Lions over the gate of Mycenæ; and the whole of the ornamentation of
that gate, as far as I can judge of it from drawings, is so like
Byzantine sculpture, that I cannot help sometimes suspecting the
original conjecture of the French antiquarians, that it was a work of
the middle ages, to be not altogether indefensible. By far the best
among the sculptures at Venice are those consisting of groups thus
arranged; the first figure in Plate XI. is one of those used on St.
Mark's, and, with its chain of wreathen work round it, is very
characteristic of the finest kind, except that the immediate trunk or
pillar often branches into luxuriant leafage, usually of the vine, so
that the whole ornament seems almost composed from the words of Ezekiel.
"A great eagle with great wings, long-winged, full of feathers, which
had divers colors, came into Lebanon, and took the highest branch of the
cedar: He cropped off the top of his young twigs; and _carried it into a
city of traffic; he set it in a city of merchants_. He took also of the
seed of the land, ... and it grew, and became a spreading vine of low
stature, _whose branches turned towards him, and the roots thereof were
under him_."

§ XXVIII. The groups of contending and devouring animals are always much
ruder in cutting, and take somewhat the place in Byzantine sculpture
which the lower grotesques do in the Gothic; true, though clumsy,
grotesques being sometimes mingled among them, as four bodies joined to
one head in the centre;[51] but never showing any attempt at variety of
invention, except only in the effective disposition of the light and
shade, and in the vigor and thoughtfulness of the touches which indicate
the plumes of the birds or foldings of the leaves. Care, however, is
always taken to secure variety enough to keep the eye entertained, no
two sides of these Byzantine ornaments being in all respects the same:
for instance, in the chainwork round the first figure in Plate XI. there
are two circles enclosing squares on the left-hand side of the arch at
the top, but two smaller circles and a diamond on the other, enclosing
one square, and two small circular spots or bosses; and in the line of
chain at the bottom there is a circle on the right, and a diamond on the
left, and so down to the working of the smallest details. I have
represented this upper sculpture as dark, in order to give some idea of
the general effect of these ornaments when seen in shadow against light;
an effect much calculated upon by the designer, and obtained by the use
of a golden ground formed of glass mosaic inserted in the hollows of the
marble. Each square of glass has the leaf gold upon its surface
protected by another thin film of glass above it, so that no time or
weather can affect its lustre, until the pieces of glass are bodily torn
from their setting. The smooth glazed surface of the golden ground is
washed by every shower of rain, but the marble usually darkens into an
amber color in process of time; and when the whole ornament is cast into
shadow, the golden surface, being perfectly reflective, refuses the
darkness, and shows itself in bright and burnished light behind the dark
traceries of the ornament. Where the marble has retained its perfect
whiteness, on the other hand, and is seen in sunshine, it is shown as a
snowy tracery on a golden ground; and the alternations and intermingling
of these two effects form one of the chief enchantments of Byzantine
ornamentation.

§ XXIX. How far the system of grounding with gold and color, universal
in St. Mark's, was carried out in the sculptures of the private palaces,
it is now impossible to say. The wrecks of them which remain, as above
noticed, show few of their ornamental sculptures in their original
position; and from those marbles which were employed in succeeding
buildings, during the Gothic period, the fragments of their mosaic
grounds would naturally rather have been removed than restored. Mosaic,
while the most secure of all decorations if carefully watched and
refastened when it loosens, may, if neglected and exposed to weather, in
process of time disappear so as to leave no vestige of its existence.
However this may have been, the assured facts are, that both the shafts
of the pillars and the facing of the old building were of veined or
variously colored marble: the capitals and sculptures were either, as
they now appear, of pure white marble, relieved upon the veined ground;
or, which is infinitely the more probable, grounded in the richer
palaces with mosaic of gold, in the inferior ones with blue color; and
only the leaves and edges of the sculpture gilded. These brighter hues
were opposed by bands of deeper color, generally alternate russet and
green, in the archivolts,--bands which still remain in the Casa Loredan
and Fondaco de' Turchi, and in a house in the Corte del Remer, near the
Rialto, as well as in St. Mark's; and by circular disks of green
serpentine and porphyry, which, together with the circular sculptures,
appear to have been an ornament peculiarly grateful to the Eastern mind,
derived probably in the first instance from the suspension of shields
upon the wall, as in the majesty of ancient Tyre. "The men of Arvad with
thine army were upon thy walls round about, and the Gammadins were in
thy towers: they hanged their shields upon thy walls round about; they
have made thy beauty perfect."[52] The sweet and solemn harmony of
purple with various green (the same, by the by, to which the hills of
Scotland owe their best loveliness) remained a favorite chord of color
with the Venetians, and was constantly used even in the later palaces;
but never could have been seen in so great perfection as when opposed to
the pale and delicate sculpture of the Byzantine time.

§ XXX. Such, then, was that first and fairest Venice which rose out of
the barrenness of the lagoon, and the sorrow of her people; a city of
graceful arcades and gleaming walls, veined with azure and warm with
gold, and fretted with white sculpture like frost upon forest branches
turned to marble. And yet, in this beauty of her youth, she was no city
of thoughtless pleasure. There was still a sadness of heart upon her,
and a depth of devotion, in which lay all her strength. I do not insist
upon the probable religious signification of many of the sculptures
which are now difficult of interpretation; but the temper which made the
cross the principal ornament of every building is not to be
misunderstood, nor can we fail to perceive, in many of the minor
sculptural subjects, meanings perfectly familiar to the mind of early
Christianity. The peacock, used in preference to every other bird, is
the well-known symbol of the resurrection; and when drinking from a
fountain (Plate XI. fig. 1) or from a font (Plate XI. fig. 5), is, I
doubt not, also a type of the new life received in faithful baptism. The
vine, used in preference to all other trees, was equally recognized as,
in all cases, a type either of Christ himself[53] or of those who were
in a state of visible or professed union with him. The dove, at its
foot, represents the coming of the Comforter; and even the groups of
contending animals had, probably, a distinct and universally apprehended
reference to the powers of evil. But I lay no stress on these more
occult meanings. The principal circumstance which marks the seriousness
of the early Venetian mind is perhaps the last in which the reader would
suppose it was traceable;--that love of bright and pure color which, in
a modified form, was afterwards the root of all the triumph of the
Venetian schools of painting, but which, in its utmost simplicity, was
characteristic of the Byzantine period only; and of which, therefore, in
the close of our review of that period, it will be well that we should
truly estimate the significance. The fact is, we none of us enough
appreciate the nobleness and sacredness of color. Nothing is more common
than to hear it spoken of as a subordinate beauty,--nay, even as the
mere source of a sensual pleasure; and we might almost believe that we
were daily among men who

  "Could strip, for aught the prospect yields
   To them, their verdure from the fields;
   And take the radiance from the clouds
   With which the sun his setting shrouds."

But it is not so. Such expressions are used for the most part in
thoughtlessness; and if the speakers would only take the pains to
imagine what the world and their own existence would become, if the blue
were taken from the sky, and the gold from the sunshine, and the verdure
from the leaves, and the crimson from the blood which is the life of
man, the flush from the cheek, the darkness from the eye, the radiance
from the hair,--if they could but see for an instant, white human
creatures living in a white world,--they would soon feel what they owe
to color. The fact is, that, of all God's gifts to the sight of man,
color is the holiest, the most divine, the most solemn. We speak rashly
of gay color, and sad color, for color cannot at once be good and gay.
All good color is in some degree pensive, the loveliest is melancholy,
and the purest and most thoughtful minds are those which love color the
most.

§ XXXI. I know that this will sound strange in many ears, and will be
especially startling to those who have considered the subject chiefly
with reference to painting; for the great Venetian schools of color are
not usually understood to be either pure or pensive, and the idea of its
pre-eminence is associated in nearly every mind with the coarseness of
Rubens, and the sensualities of Correggio and Titian. But a more
comprehensive view of art will soon correct this impression. It will be
discovered, in the first place, that the more faithful and earnest the
religion of the painter, the more pure and prevalent is the system of
his color. It will be found, in the second place, that where color
becomes a primal intention with a painter otherwise mean or sensual, it
instantly elevates him, and becomes the one sacred and saving element in
his work. The very depth of the stoop to which the Venetian painters and
Rubens sometimes condescend, is a consequence of their feeling
confidence in the power of their color to keep them from falling. They
hold on by it, as by a chain let down from heaven, with one hand, though
they may sometimes seem to gather dust and ashes with the other. And, in
the last place, it will be found that so surely as a painter is
irreligious, thoughtless, or obscene in disposition, so surely is his
coloring cold, gloomy, and valueless. The opposite poles of art in this
respect are Frà Angelico and Salvator Rosa; of whom the one was a man
who smiled seldom, wept often, prayed constantly, and never harbored an
impure thought. His pictures are simply so many pieces of jewellery, the
colors of the draperies being perfectly pure, as various as those of a
painted window, chastened only by paleness, and relieved upon a gold
ground. Salvator was a dissipated jester and satirist, a man who spent
his life in masquing and revelry. But his pictures are full of horror,
and their color is for the most part gloomy grey. Truly it would seem as
if art had so much of eternity in it, that it must take its dye from the
close rather than the course of life:--"In such laughter the heart of
man is sorrowful, and the end of that mirth is heaviness."

§ XXXII. These are no singular instances. I know no law more severely
without exception than this of the connexion of pure color with profound
and noble thought. The late Flemish pictures, shallow in conception and
obscene in subject, are always sober in color. But the early religious
painting of the Flemings is as brilliant in hue as it is holy in
thought. The Bellinis, Francias, Peruginos painted in crimson, and blue,
and gold. The Caraccis, Guidos, and Rembrandts in brown and grey. The
builders of our great cathedrals veiled their casements and wrapped
their pillars with one robe of purple splendor. The builders of the
luxurious Renaissance left their palaces filled only with cold white
light, and in the paleness of their native stone.[54]

§ XXXIII. Nor does it seem difficult to discern a noble reason for this
universal law. In that heavenly circle which binds the statutes of color
upon the front of the sky, when it became the sign of the covenant of
peace, the pure hues of divided light were sanctified to the human heart
for ever; nor this, it would seem, by mere arbitrary appointment, but in
consequence of the fore-ordained and marvellous constitution of those
hues into a sevenfold, or, more strictly still, a threefold order,
typical of the Divine nature itself. Observe also, the name Shem, or
Splendor, given to that son of Noah in whom this covenant with mankind
was to be fulfilled, and see how that name was justified by every one of
the Asiatic races which descended from him. Not without meaning was the
love of Israel to his chosen son expressed by the coat "of many colors;"
not without deep sense of the sacredness of that symbol of purity, did
the lost daughter of David tear it from her breast:--"With such robes
were the king's daughters that were virgins apparelled."[55] We know it
to have been by Divine command that the Israelite, rescued from
servitude, veiled the tabernacle with its rain of purple and scarlet,
while the under sunshine flashed through the fall of the color from its
tenons of gold: but was it less by Divine guidance that the Mede, as he
struggled out of anarchy, encompassed his king with the sevenfold
burning of the battlements of Ecbatana?--of which one circle was golden
like the sun, and another silver like the moon; and then came the great
sacred chord of color, blue, purple, and scarlet; and then a circle
white like the day, and another dark, like night; so that the city rose
like a great mural rainbow, a sign of peace amidst the contending of
lawless races, and guarded, with color and shadow, that seemed to
symbolize the great order which rules over Day, and Night, and Time, the
first organization of the mighty statutes,--the law of the Medes and
Persians, that altereth not.

§ XXXIV. Let us not dream that it is owing to the accidents of tradition
or education that those races possess the supremacy over color which has
always been felt, though but lately acknowledged among men. However
their dominion might be broken, their virtue extinguished, or their
religion defiled, they retained alike the instinct and the power: the
instinct which made even their idolatry more glorious than that of
others, bursting forth in fire-worship from pyramid, cave, and mountain,
taking the stars for the rulers of its fortune, and the sun for the God
of its life; the power which so dazzled and subdued the rough crusader
into forgetfulness of sorrow and of shame, that Europe put on the
splendor which she had learnt of the Saracen, as her sackcloth of
mourning for what she suffered from his sword;--the power which she
confesses to this day, in the utmost thoughtlessness of her pride, or
her beauty, as it treads the costly carpet, or veils itself with the
variegated Cachemire; and in the emulation of the concourse of her
workmen, who, but a few months back, perceived, or at least admitted,
for the first time, the pre-eminence which has been determined from the
birth of mankind, and on whose charter Nature herself has set a
mysterious seal, granting to the Western races, descended from that son
of Noah whose name was Extension, the treasures of the sullen rock, and
stubborn ore, and gnarled forest, which were to accomplish their destiny
across all distance of earth and depth of sea, while she matured the
jewel in the sand, and rounded the pearl in the shell, to adorn the
diadem of him whose name was Splendor.

§ XXXV. And observe, farther, how in the Oriental mind a peculiar
seriousness is associated with this attribute of the love of color; a
seriousness rising out of repose, and out of the depth and breadth of
the imagination, as contrasted with the activity, and consequent
capability of surprise, and of laughter, characteristic of the Western
mind: as a man on a journey must look to his steps always, and view
things narrowly and quickly; while one at rest may command a wider view,
though an unchanging one, from which the pleasure he receives must be
one of contemplation, rather than of amusement or surprise. Wherever the
pure Oriental spirit manifests itself definitely, I believe its work is
serious; and the meeting of the influences of the Eastern and Western
races is perhaps marked in Europe more by the dying away of the
grotesque laughter of the Goth than by any other sign. I shall have more
to say on this head in other places of this volume; but the point I wish
at present to impress upon the reader is, that the bright hues of the
early architecture of Venice were no sign of gaiety of heart, and that
the investiture with the mantle of many colors by which she is known
above all other cities of Italy and of Europe, was not granted to her in
the fever of her festivity, but in the solemnity of her early and
earnest religion. She became in after times the revel of the earth, the
masque of Italy; and _therefore_ is she now desolate: but her glorious
robe of gold and purple was given her when first she rose a vestal from
the sea, not when she became drunk with the wine of her fornication.

§ XXXVI. And we have never yet looked with enough reverence upon the
separate gift which was thus bestowed upon her; we have never enough
considered what an inheritance she has left us, in the works of those
mighty painters who were the chief of her children. That inheritance is
indeed less than it ought to have been, and other than it ought to have
been; for before Titian and Tintoret arose,--the men in whom her work
and her glory should have been together consummated,--she had already
ceased to lead her sons in the way of truth and life, and they erred
much, and fell short of that which was appointed for them. There is no
subject of thought more melancholy, more wonderful, than the way in
which God permits so often His best gifts to be trodden under foot of
men, His richest treasures to be wasted by the moth, and the mightiest
influences of His Spirit, given but once in the world's history, to be
quenched and shortened by miseries of chance and guilt. I do not wonder
at what men Suffer, but I wonder often at what they Lose. We may see how
good rises out of pain and evil; but the dead, naked, eyeless loss, what
good comes of that? The fruit struck to the earth before its ripeness;
the glowing life and goodly purpose dissolved away in sudden death; the
words, half spoken, choked upon the lips with clay for ever; or,
stranger than all, the whole majesty of humanity raised to its fulness,
and every gift and power necessary for a given purpose, at a given
moment, centred in one man, and all this perfected blessing permitted to
be refused, perverted, crushed, cast aside by those who need it
most,--the city which is Not set on a hill, the candle that giveth light
to None that are in the house:--these are the heaviest mysteries of this
strange world, and, it seems to me, those which mark its curse the most.
And it is true that the power with which this Venice had been entrusted,
was perverted, when at its highest, in a thousand miserable ways; still,
it was possessed by her alone; to her all hearts have turned which could
be moved by its manifestation, and none without being made stronger and
nobler by what her hand had wrought. That mighty Landscape, of dark
mountains that guard the horizon with their purple towers, and solemn
forests, that gather their weight of leaves, bronzed with sunshine, not
with age, into those gloomy masses fixed in heaven, which storm and
frost have power no more to shake, or shed;--that mighty Humanity, so
perfect and so proud, that hides no weakness beneath the mantle, and
gains no greatness from the diadem; the majesty of thoughtful form, on
which the dust of gold and flame of jewels are dashed as the sea-spray
upon the rock, and still the great Manhood seems to stand bare against
the blue sky;--that mighty Mythology, which fills the daily walks of men
with spiritual companionship, and beholds the protecting angels break
with their burning presence through the arrow-flights of
battle:--measure the compass of that field of creation, weigh the value
of the inheritance that Venice thus left to the nations of Europe, and
then judge if so vast, so beneficent a power could indeed have been
rooted in dissipation or decay. It was when she wore the ephod of the
priest, not the motley of the masquer, that the fire fell upon her from
heaven; and she saw the first rays of it through the rain of her own
tears, when, as the barbaric deluge ebbed from the hills of Italy, the
circuit of her palaces, and the orb of her fortunes, rose together, like
the Iris, painted upon the Cloud.


FOOTNOTES

  [41] In the year 1851, by the Duchesse de Berri.

  [42] Of the Braided House and Casa Businello, described in the
    Appendix, only the great central arcades remain.

  [43] Only one wing of the first story is left. See Appendix 11.

  [44] I am obliged to give these measures approximately, because,
    this front having been studied by the builder with unusual care, not
    one of its measures is the same as another; and the symmetries
    between the correspondent arches are obtained by changes in the
    depth of their mouldings and variations in their heights, far too
    complicated for me to enter into here; so that of the two arches
    stated as 19 ft. 8 in. in span, one is in reality 19 ft. 6½ in., the
    other 19 ft. 10 in., and of the two stated as 20 ft. 4 in., one is
    20 ft. and the other 20 ft. 8 in.

  [45] By Mr. Penrose.

  [46] I am sometimes obliged, unfortunately, to read my woodcuts
    backwards owing to my having forgotten to reverse them on the wood.

  [47] Vide Plate X. figs. 1 and 4.

  [48]
    1. Fondaco de' Turehi, lateral        8. St. Mark's.
         pillars.                         9. St. Mark's.
    2. Terraced House, lateral pillars.  10. Braided House, upper arcade.
    3. Casa Farsetti, central pillars,   11. Casa Loredan, upper arcade.
         upper arcade.                   12. St. Mark's.
    4. Casa Loredan, lower arcade.       13. St. Mark's.
    5. Casa Loredan, lower arcade.       14. Fondaco de' Turchi, upper
    6. Fondaco de' Turchi, upper arcade.       arcade.
    7. Casa Loredan, upper arcade.       15. St. Mark's.

 [49] Compare "Seven Lamps," chap. ii. § 22.

 [50] Two of these are represented in the second number of my folio work
   upon Venice.

 [51] The absence of the true grotesque spirit in Byzantine work will be
   examined in the third chapter of the third volume.

 [52] Ezekiel, xxvii. 11.

 [53] Perhaps this type is in no place of Scripture more touchingly used
   than in Lamentations, i. 12, where the word "afflicted" is rendered in
   the Vulgate "vindemiavit," "vintaged."

 [54] Appendix 12, "Modern Painting on Glass."

 [55] 2 Samuel, xiii. 18.




SECOND, OR GOTHIC, PERIOD.


CHAPTER VI.

THE NATURE OF GOTHIC.


§ I. If the reader will look back to the division of our subject which
was made in the first chapter of the first volume, he will find that we
are now about to enter upon the examination of that school of Venetian
architecture which forms an intermediate step between the Byzantine and
Gothic forms; but which I find may be conveniently considered in its
connexion with the latter style. In order that we may discern the
tendency of each step of this change, it will be wise in the outset to
endeavor to form some general idea of its final result. We know already
what the Byzantine architecture is from which the transition was made,
but we ought to know something of the Gothic architecture into which it
led. I shall endeavor therefore to give the reader in this chapter an
idea, at once broad and definite, of the true nature of _Gothic_
architecture, properly so called; not of that of Venice only, but of
universal Gothic: for it will be one of the most interesting parts of
our subsequent inquiry, to find out how far Venetian architecture
reached the universal or perfect type of Gothic, and how far it either
fell short of it, or assumed foreign and independent forms.

§ II. The principal difficulty in doing this arises from the fact that
every building of the Gothic period differs in some important respect
from every other; and many include features which, if they occurred in
other buildings, would not be considered Gothic at all; so that all we
have to reason upon is merely, if I may be allowed so to express it, a
greater or less degree of _Gothicness_ in each building we examine. And
it is this Gothicness,--the character which, according as it is found
more or less in a building, makes it more or less Gothic,--of which I
want to define the nature; and I feel the same kind of difficulty in
doing so which would be encountered by any one who undertook to explain,
for instance, the nature of Redness, without any actual red thing to
point to, but only orange and purple things. Suppose he had only a piece
of heather and a dead oak-leaf to do it with. He might say, the color
which is mixed with the yellow in this oak-leaf, and with the blue in
this heather, would be red, if you had it separate; but it would be
difficult, nevertheless, to make the abstraction perfectly intelligible:
and it is so in a far greater degree to make the abstraction of the
Gothic character intelligible, because that character itself is made up
of many mingled ideas, and can consist only in their union. That is to
say, pointed arches do not constitute Gothic, nor vaulted roofs, nor
flying buttresses, nor grotesque sculptures; but all or some of these
things, and many other things with them, when they come together so as
to have life.

§ III. Observe also, that, in the definition proposed, I shall only
endeavor to analyze the idea which I suppose already to exist in the
reader's mind. We all have some notion, most of us a very determined
one, of the meaning of the term Gothic; but I know that many persons
have this idea in their minds without being able to define it: that is
to say, understanding generally that Westminster Abbey is Gothic, and
St. Paul's is not, that Strasburg Cathedral is Gothic, and St. Peter's
is not, they have, nevertheless, no clear notion of what it is that they
recognize in the one or miss in the other, such as would enable them to
say how far the work at Westminster or Strasburg is good and pure of its
kind: still less to say of any non-descript building, like St. James's
Palace or Windsor Castle, how much right Gothic element there is in it,
and how much wanting, And I believe this inquiry to be a pleasant and
profitable one; and that there will be found something more than
usually interesting in tracing out this grey, shadowy, many-pinnacled
image of the Gothic spirit within us; and discerning what fellowship
there is between it and our Northern hearts. And if, at any point of the
inquiry, I should interfere with any of the reader's previously formed
conceptions, and use the term Gothic in any sense which he would not
willingly attach to it, I do not ask him to accept, but only to examine
and understand, my interpretation, as necessary to the intelligibility
of what follows in the rest of the work.

§ IV. We have, then, the Gothic character submitted to our analysis,
just as the rough mineral is submitted to that of the chemist, entangled
with many other foreign substances, itself perhaps in no place pure, or
ever to be obtained or seen in purity for more than an instant; but
nevertheless a thing of definite and separate nature, however
inextricable or confused in appearance. Now observe: the chemist defines
his mineral by two separate kinds of character; one external, its
crystalline form, hardness, lustre, &c.; the other internal, the
proportions and nature of its constituent atoms. Exactly in the same
manner, we shall find that Gothic architecture has external forms, and
internal elements. Its elements are certain mental tendencies of the
builders, legibly expressed in it; as fancifulness, love of variety,
love of richness, and such others. Its external forms are pointed
arches, vaulted roofs, &c. And unless both the elements and the forms
are there, we have no right to call the style Gothic. It is not enough
that it has the Form, if it have not also the power and life. It is not
enough that it has the Power, if it have not the form. We must therefore
inquire into each of these characters successively; and determine first,
what is the Mental Expression, and secondly, what the Material Form, of
Gothic architecture, properly so called.

1st. Mental Power or Expression. What characters, we have to discover,
did the Gothic builders love, or instinctively express in their work, as
distinguished from all other builders?

§ V. Let us go back for a moment to our chemistry, and note that, in
defining a mineral by its constituent parts, it is not one nor another
of them, that can make up the mineral, but the union of all: for
instance, it is neither in charcoal, nor in oxygen, nor in lime, that
there is the making of chalk, but in the combination of all three in
certain measures; they are all found in very different things from
chalk, and there is nothing like chalk either in charcoal or in oxygen,
but they are nevertheless necessary to its existence.

So in the various mental characters which make up the soul of Gothic. It
is not one nor another that produces it; but their union in certain
measures. Each one of them is found in many other architectures besides
Gothic; but Gothic cannot exist where they are not found, or, at least,
where their place is not in some way supplied. Only there is this great
difference between the composition of the mineral, and of the
architectural style, that if we withdraw one of its elements from the
stone, its form is utterly changed, and its existence as such and such a
mineral is destroyed; but if we withdraw one of its mental elements from
the Gothic style, it is only a little less Gothic than it was before,
and the union of two or three of its elements is enough already to
bestow a certain Gothicness of character, which gains in intensity as we
add the others, and loses as we again withdraw them.

§ VI. I believe, then, that the characteristic or moral elements of
Gothic are the following, placed in the order of their importance:

  1. Savageness.
  2. Changefulness.
  3. Naturalism.
  4. Grotesqueness.
  5. Rigidity.
  6. Redundance.

These characters are here expressed as belonging to the building; as
belonging to the builder, they would be expressed thus:--1. Savageness,
or Rudeness. 2. Love of Change. 3. Love of Nature. 4. Disturbed
Imagination. 5, Obstinacy. 6. Generosity. And I repeat, that the
withdrawal of any one, or any two, will not at once destroy the Gothic
character of a building, but the removal of a majority of them will. I
shall proceed to examine them in their order.

§ VII. 1. SAVAGENESS. I am not sure when the word "Gothic" was first
generically applied to the architecture of the North; but I presume
that, whatever the date of its original usage, it was intended to imply
reproach, and express the barbaric character of the nations among whom
that architecture arose. It never implied that they were literally of
Gothic lineage, far less that their architecture had been originally
invented by the Goths themselves; but it did imply that they and their
buildings together exhibited a degree of sternness and rudeness, which,
in contradistinction to the character of Southern and Eastern nations,
appeared like a perpetual reflection of the contrast between the Goth
and the Roman in their first encounter. And when that fallen Roman, in
the utmost impotence of his luxury, and insolence of his guilt, became
the model for the imitation of civilized Europe, at the close of the
so-called Dark ages, the word Gothic became a term of unmitigated
contempt, not unmixed with aversion. From that contempt, by the exertion
of the antiquaries and architects of this century, Gothic architecture
has been sufficiently vindicated; and perhaps some among us, in our
admiration of the magnificent science of its structure, and sacredness
of its expression, might desire that the term of ancient reproach should
be withdrawn, and some other, of more apparent honorableness, adopted in
its place. There is no chance, as there is no need, of such a
substitution. As far as the epithet was used scornfully, it was used
falsely; but there is no reproach in the word, rightly understood; on
the contrary, there is a profound truth, which the instinct of mankind
almost unconsciously recognizes. It is true, greatly and deeply true,
that the architecture of the North is rude and wild; but it is not true,
that, for this reason, we are to condemn it, or despise. Far otherwise:
I believe it is in this very character that it deserves our profoundest
reverence.

§ VIII. The charts of the world which have been drawn up by modern
science have thrown into a narrow space the expression of a vast amount
of knowledge, but I have never yet seen any one pictorial enough to
enable the spectator to imagine the kind of contrast in physical
character which exists between Northern and Southern countries. We know
the differences in detail, but we have not that broad glance and grasp
which would enable us to feel them in their fulness. We know that
gentians grow on the Alps, and olives on the Apennines; but we do not
enough conceive for ourselves that variegated mosaic of the world's
surface which a bird sees in its migration, that difference between the
district of the gentian and of the olive which the stork and the swallow
see far off, as they lean upon the sirocco wind. Let us, for a moment,
try to raise ourselves even above the level of their flight, and imagine
the Mediterranean lying beneath us like an irregular lake, and all its
ancient promontories sleeping in the sun: here and there an angry spot
of thunder, a grey stain of storm, moving upon the burning field; and
here and there a fixed wreath of white volcano smoke, surrounded by its
circle of ashes; but for the most part a great peacefulness of light,
Syria and Greece, Italy and Spain, laid like pieces of a golden pavement
into the sea-blue, chased, as we stoop nearer to them, with bossy beaten
work of mountain chains, and glowing softly with terraced gardens, and
flowers heavy with frankincense, mixed among masses of laurel, and
orange and plumy palm, that abate with their grey-green shadows the
burning of the marble rocks, and of the ledges of porphyry sloping under
lucent sand. Then let us pass farther towards the north, until we see
the orient colors change gradually into a vast belt of rainy green,
where the pastures of Switzerland, and poplar valleys of France, and
dark forests of the Danube and Carpathians stretch from the mouths of
the Loire to those of the Volga, seen through clefts in grey swirls of
rain-cloud and flaky veils of the mist of the brooks, spreading low
along the pasture lands: and then, farther north still, to see the earth
heave into mighty masses of leaden rock and heathy moor, bordering with
a broad waste of gloomy purple that belt of field and wood, and
splintering into irregular and grisly islands amidst the northern seas,
beaten by storm and chilled by ice-drift, and tormented by furious
pulses of contending tide, until the roots of the last forests fail from
among the hill ravines, and the hunger of the north wind bites their
peaks into barrenness; and, at last, the wall of ice, durable like iron,
sets, deathlike, its white teeth against us out of the polar twilight.
And, having once traversed in thought its gradation of the zoned iris of
the earth in all its material vastness, let us go down nearer to it, and
watch the parallel change in the belt of animal life: the multitudes of
swift and brilliant creatures that glance in the air and sea, or tread
the sands of the southern zone; striped zebras and spotted leopards,
glistening serpents, and birds arrayed in purple and scarlet. Let us
contrast their delicacy and brilliancy of color, and swiftness of
motion, with the frost-cramped strength, and shaggy covering, and dusky
plumage of the northern tribes; contrast the Arabian horse with the
Shetland, the tiger and leopard with the wolf and bear, the antelope
with the elk, the bird of paradise with the osprey: and then,
submissively acknowledging the great laws by which the earth and all
that it bears are ruled throughout their being, let us not condemn, but
rejoice at the expression by man of his own rest in the statutes of the
lands that gave him birth. Let us watch him with reverence as he sets
side by side the burning gems, and smoothes with soft sculpture the
jasper pillars, that are to reflect a ceaseless sunshine, and rise into
a cloudless sky: but not with less reverence let us stand by him, when,
with rough strength and hurried stroke, he smites an uncouth animation
out of the rocks which he has torn from among the moss of the moorland,
and heaves into the darkened air the pile of iron buttress and rugged
wall, instinct with work of an imagination as wild and wayward as the
northern sea; creations of ungainly shape and rigid limb, but full of
wolfish life; fierce as the winds that beat, and changeful as the clouds
that shade them.

There is, I repeat, no degradation, no reproach in this, but all dignity
and honorableness; and we should err grievously in refusing either to
recognise as an essential character of the existing architecture of the
North, or to admit as a desirable character in that which it yet may be,
this wildness of thought, and roughness of work; this look of mountain
brotherhood between the cathedral and the Alp; this magnificence of
sturdy power, put forth only the more energetically because the fine
finger-touch was chilled away by the frosty wind, and the eye dimmed by
the moor-mist, or blinded by the hail; this outspeaking of the strong
spirit of men who may not gather redundant fruitage from the earth, nor
bask in dreamy benignity of sunshine, but must break the rock for bread,
and cleave the forest for fire, and show, even in what they did for
their delight, some of the hard habits of the arm and heart that grew on
them as they swung the axe or pressed the plough.

§ IX. If, however, the savageness of Gothic architecture, merely as an
expression of its origin among Northern nations, may be considered, in
some sort, a noble character, it possesses a higher nobility still, when
considered as an index, not of climate, but of religious principle.

In the 13th and 14th paragraphs of Chapter XXI. of the first volume of
this work, it was noticed that the systems of architectural ornament,
properly so called, might be divided into three:--1. Servile ornament,
in which the execution or power of the inferior workman is entirely
subjected to the intellect of the higher:--2. Constitutional ornament,
in which the executive inferior power is, to a certain point,
emancipated and independent, having a will of its own, yet confessing
its inferiority and rendering obedience to higher powers;--and 3.
Revolutionary ornament, in which no executive inferiority is admitted at
all. I must here explain the nature of these divisions at somewhat
greater length.

Of Servile ornament, the principal schools are the Greek, Ninevite, and
Egyptian; but their servility is of different kinds. The Greek
master-workman was far advanced in knowledge and power above the
Assyrian or Egyptian. Neither he nor those for whom he worked could
endure the appearance of imperfection in anything; and, therefore, what
ornament he appointed to be done by those beneath him was composed of
mere geometrical forms,--balls, ridges, and perfectly symmetrical
foliage,--which could be executed with absolute precision by line and
rule, and were as perfect in their way when completed, as his own figure
sculpture. The Assyrian and Egyptian, on the contrary, less cognizant of
accurate form in anything, were content to allow their figure sculpture
to be executed by inferior workmen, but lowered the method of its
treatment to a standard which every workman could reach, and then
trained him by discipline so rigid, that there was no chance of his
falling beneath the standard appointed. The Greek gave to the lower
workman no subject which he could not perfectly execute. The Assyrian
gave him subjects which he could only execute imperfectly, but fixed a
legal standard for his imperfection. The workman was, in both systems, a
slave.[56]

§ X. But in the mediæval, or especially Christian, system of ornament,
this slavery is done away with altogether; Christianity having
recognized, in small things as well as great, the individual value of
every soul. But it not only recognizes its value; it confesses its
imperfection, in only bestowing dignity upon the acknowledgment of
unworthiness. That admission of lost power and fallen nature, which the
Greek or Ninevite felt to be intensely painful, and, as far as might be,
altogether refused, the Christian makes daily and hourly, contemplating
the fact of it without fear, as tending, in the end, to God's greater
glory. Therefore, to every spirit which Christianity summons to her
service, her exhortation is: Do what you can, and confess frankly what
you are unable to do; neither let your effort be shortened for fear of
failure, nor your confession silenced for fear of shame. And it is,
perhaps, the principal admirableness of the Gothic schools of
architecture, that they thus receive the results of the labor of
inferior minds; and out of fragments full of imperfection, and betraying
that imperfection in every touch, indulgently raise up a stately and
unaccusable whole.

§ XI. But the modern English mind has this much in common with that of
the Greek, that it intensely desires, in all things, the utmost
completion or perfection compatible with their nature. This is a noble
character in the abstract, but becomes ignoble when it causes us to
forget the relative dignities of that nature itself, and to prefer the
perfectness of the lower nature to the imperfection of the higher; not
considering that as, judged by such a rule, all the brute animals would
be preferable to man, because more perfect in their functions and kind,
and yet are always held inferior to him, so also in the works of man,
those which are more perfect in their kind are always inferior to those
which are, in their nature, liable to more faults and shortcomings. For
the finer the nature, the more flaws it will show through the clearness
of it; and it is a law of this universe, that the best things shall be
seldomest seen in their best form. The wild grass grows well and
strongly, one year with another; but the wheat is, according to the
greater nobleness of its nature, liable to the bitterer blight. And
therefore, while in all things that we see, or do, we are to desire
perfection, and strive for it, we are nevertheless not to set the meaner
thing, in its narrow accomplishment, above the nobler thing, in its
mighty progress; not to esteem smooth minuteness above shattered
majesty; not to prefer mean victory to honorable defeat; not to lower
the level of our aim, that we may the more surely enjoy the complacency
of success. But, above all, in our dealings with the souls of other men,
we are to take care how we check, by severe requirement or narrow
caution, efforts which might otherwise lead to a noble issue; and, still
more, how we withhold our admiration from great excellences, because
they are mingled with rough faults. Now, in the make and nature of every
man, however rude or simple, whom we employ in manual labor, there are
some powers for better things: some tardy imagination, torpid capacity
of emotion, tottering steps of thought, there are, even at the worst;
and in most cases it is all our own fault that they _are_ tardy or
torpid. But they cannot be strengthened, unless we are content to take
them in their feebleness, and unless we prize and honor them in their
imperfection above the best and most perfect manual skill. And this is
what we have to do with all our laborers; to look for the _thoughtful_
part of them, and get that out of them, whatever we lose for it,
whatever faults and errors we are obliged to take with it. For the best
that is in them cannot manifest itself, but in company with much error.
Understand this clearly: You can teach a man to draw a straight line,
and to cut one; to strike a curved line, and to carve it; and to copy
and carve any number of given lines or forms, with admirable speed and
perfect precision; and you find his work perfect of its kind: but if you
ask him to think about any of those forms, to consider if he cannot find
any better in his own head, he stops; his execution becomes hesitating;
he thinks, and ten to one he thinks wrong; ten to one he makes a mistake
in the first touch he gives to his work as a thinking being. But you
have made a man of him for all that. He was only a machine before, an
animated tool.

§ XII. And observe, you are put to stern choice in this matter. You must
either made a tool of the creature, or a man of him. You cannot make
both. Men were not intended to work with the accuracy of tools, to be
precise and perfect in all their actions. If you will have that
precision out of them, and make their fingers measure degrees like
cog-wheels, and their arms strike curves like compasses, you must
unhumanize them. All the energy of their spirits must be given to make
cogs and compasses of themselves. All their attention and strength must
go to the accomplishment of the mean act. The eye of the soul must be
bent upon the finger-point, and the soul's force must fill all the
invisible nerves that guide it, ten hours a day, that it may not err
from its steely precision, and so soul and sight be worn away, and the
whole human being be lost at last--a heap of sawdust, so far as its
intellectual work in this world is concerned; saved only by its Heart,
which cannot go into the form of cogs and compasses, but expands, after
the ten hours are over, into fireside humanity. On the other hand, if
you will make a man of the working creature, you cannot make a tool. Let
him but begin to imagine, to think, to try to do anything worth doing;
and the engine-turned precision is lost at once. Out come all his
roughness, all his dulness, all his incapability; shame upon shame,
failure upon failure, pause after pause: but out comes the whole majesty
of him also; and we know the height of it only, when we see the clouds
settling upon him. And, whether the clouds be bright or dark, there will
be transfiguration behind and within them.

§ XIII. And now, reader, look round this English room of yours, about
which you have been proud so often, because the work of it was so good
and strong, and the ornaments of it so finished. Examine again all those
accurate mouldings, and perfect polishings, and unerring adjustments of
the seasoned wood and tempered steel. Many a time you have exulted over
them, and thought how great England was, because her slightest work was
done so thoroughly. Alas! if read rightly, these perfectnesses are signs
of a slavery in our England a thousand times more bitter and more
degrading than that of the scourged African, or helot Greek. Men may be
beaten, chained, tormented, yoked like cattle, slaughtered like summer
flies, and yet remain in one sense, and the best sense, free. But to
smother their souls within them, to blight and hew into rotting pollards
the suckling branches of their human intelligence, to make the flesh and
skin which, after the worm's work on it, is to see God, into leathern
thongs to yoke machinery with,--this it is to be slave-masters indeed;
and there might be more freedom in England, though her feudal lords'
lightest words were worth men's lives, and though the blood of the vexed
husbandman dropped in the furrows of her fields, than there is while
the animation of her multitudes is sent like fuel to feed the factory
smoke, and the strength of them is given daily to be wasted into the
fineness of a web, or racked into the exactness of a line.

§ XIV. And, on the other hand, go forth again to gaze upon the old
cathedral front, where you have smiled so often at the fantastic
ignorance of the old sculptors: examine once more those ugly goblins,
and formless monsters, and stern statues, anatomiless and rigid; but do
not mock at them, for they are signs of the life and liberty of every
workman who struck the stone; a freedom of thought, and rank in scale of
being, such as no laws, no charters, no charities can secure; but which
it must be the first aim of all Europe at this day to regain for her
children.

§ XV. Let me not be thought to speak wildly or extravagantly. It is
verily this degradation of the operative into a machine, which, more
than any other evil of the times, is leading the mass of the nations
everywhere into vain, incoherent, destructive struggling for a freedom
of which they cannot explain the nature to themselves. Their universal
outcry against wealth, and against nobility, is not forced from them
either by the pressure of famine, or the sting of mortified pride. These
do much, and have done much in all ages; but the foundations of society
were never yet shaken as they are at this day. It is not that men are
ill fed, but that they have no pleasure in the work by which they make
their bread, and therefore look to wealth as the only means of pleasure.
It is not that men are pained by the scorn of the upper classes, but
they cannot endure their own; for they feel that the kind of labor to
which they are condemned is verily a degrading one, and makes them less
than men. Never had the upper classes so much sympathy with the lower,
or charity for them, as they have at this day, and yet never were they
so much hated by them: for, of old, the separation between the noble and
the poor was merely a wall built by law; now it is a veritable
difference in level of standing, a precipice between upper and lower
grounds in the field of humanity and there is pestilential air at the
bottom of it. I know not if a day is ever to come when the nature of
right freedom will be understood, and when men will see that to obey
another man, to labor for him, yield reverence to him or to his place,
is not slavery. It is often the best kind of liberty,--liberty from
care. The man who says to one, Go, and he goeth, and to another, Come,
and he cometh, has, in most cases, more sense of restraint and
difficulty than the man who obeys him. The movements of the one are
hindered by the burden on his shoulder; of the other, by the bridle on
his lips: there is no way by which the burden may be lightened; but we
need not suffer from the bridle if we do not champ at it. To yield
reverence to another, to hold ourselves and our lives at his disposal,
is not slavery; often, it is the noblest state in which a man can live
in this world. There is, indeed, a reverence which is servile, that is
to say, irrational or selfish: but there is also noble reverence, that
is to say, reasonable and loving; and a man is never so noble as when he
is reverent in this kind; nay, even if the feeling pass the bounds of
mere reason, so that it be loving, a man is raised by it. Which had, in
reality, most of the serf nature in him,--the Irish peasant who was
lying in wait yesterday for his landlord, with his musket muzzle thrust
through the ragged hedge; or that old mountain servant, who, 200 years
ago, at Inverkeithing, gave up his own life and the lives of his seven
sons for his chief?[57]--and as each fell, calling forth his brother to
the death, "Another for Hector!" And therefore, in all ages and all
countries, reverence has been paid and sacrifice made by men to each
other, not only without complaint, but rejoicingly; and famine, and
peril, and sword, and all evil, and all shame, have been borne willingly
in the causes of masters and kings; for all these gifts of the heart
ennobled the men who gave, not less than the men who received them, and
nature prompted, and God rewarded the sacrifice. But to feel their souls
withering within them, unthanked, to find their whole being sunk into an
unrecognized abyss, to be counted off into a heap of mechanism,
numbered with its wheels, and weighed with its hammer strokes;--this
nature bade not,--this God blesses not,--this humanity for no long time
is able to endure.

§ XVI. We have much studied and much perfected, of late, the great
civilized invention of the division of labor; only we give it a false
name. It is not, truly speaking, the labor that is divided; but the
men:--Divided into mere segments of men--broken into small fragments and
crumbs of life; so that all the little piece of intelligence that is
left in a man is not enough to make a pin, or a nail, but exhausts
itself in making the point of a pin, or the head of a nail. Now it is a
good and desirable thing, truly, to make many pins in a day; but if we
could only see with what crystal sand their points were polished,--sand
of human soul, much to be magnified before it can be discerned for what
it is,--we should think there might be some loss in it also. And the
great cry that rises from all our manufacturing cities, louder than
their furnace blast, is all in very deed for this,--that we manufacture
everything there except men; we blanch cotton, and strengthen steel, and
refine sugar, and shape pottery; but to brighten, to strengthen, to
refine, or to form a single living spirit, never enters into our
estimate of advantages. And all the evil to which that cry is urging our
myriads can be met only in one way: not by teaching nor preaching, for
to teach them is but to show them their misery, and to preach to them,
if we do nothing more than preach, is to mock at it. It can be met only
by a right understanding, on the part of all classes, of what kinds of
labor are good for men, raising them, and making them happy; by a
determined sacrifice of such convenience, or beauty, or cheapness as is
to be got only by the degradation of the workman; and by equally
determined demand for the products and results of healthy and ennobling
labor.

§ XVII. And how, it will be asked, are these products to be recognized,
and this demand to be regulated? Easily: by the observance of three
broad and simple rules:

1. Never encourage the manufacture of any article not absolutely
necessary, in the production of which _Invention_ has no share.

2. Never demand an exact finish for its own sake, but only for some
practical or noble end.

3. Never encourage imitation or copying of any kind, except for the sake
of preserving record of great works.

The second of these principles is the only one which directly rises out
of the consideration of our immediate subject; but I shall briefly
explain the meaning and extent of the first also, reserving the
enforcement of the third for another place.

1. Never encourage the manufacture of anything not necessary, in the
production of which invention has no share.

For instance. Glass beads are utterly unnecessary, and there is no
design or thought employed in their manufacture. They are formed by
first drawing out the glass into rods; these rods are chopped up into
fragments of the size of beads by the human hand, and the fragments are
then rounded in the furnace. The men who chop up the rods sit at their
work all day, their hands vibrating with a perpetual and exquisitely
timed palsy, and the beads dropping beneath their vibration like hail.
Neither they, nor the men who draw out the rods, or fuse the fragments,
have the smallest occasion for the use of any single human faculty; and
every young lady, therefore, who buys glass beads is engaged in the
slave-trade, and in a much more cruel one than that which we have so
long been endeavoring to put down.

But glass cups and vessels may become the subjects of exquisite
invention; and if in buying these we pay for the invention, that is to
say for the beautiful form, or color, or engraving, and not for mere
finish of execution, we are doing good to humanity.

§ XVIII. So, again, the cutting of precious stones, in all ordinary
cases, requires little exertion of any mental faculty; some tact and
judgment in avoiding flaws, and so on, but nothing to bring out the
whole mind. Every person who wears cut jewels merely for the sake of
their value is, therefore, a slave-driver.

But the working of the goldsmith, and the various designing of grouped
jewellery and enamel-work, may become the subject of the most noble
human intelligence. Therefore, money spent in the purchase of
well-designed plate, of precious engraved vases, cameos, or enamels,
does good to humanity; and, in work of this kind, jewels may be employed
to heighten its splendor; and their cutting is then a price paid for the
attainment of a noble end, and thus perfectly allowable.

§ XIX. I shall perhaps press this law farther elsewhere, but our
immediate concern is chiefly with the second, namely, never to demand an
exact finish, when it does not lead to a noble end. For observe, I have
only dwelt upon the rudeness of Gothic, or any other kind of
imperfectness, as admirable, where it was impossible to get design or
thought without it. If you are to have the thought of a rough and
untaught man, you must have it in a rough and untaught way; but from an
educated man, who can without effort express his thoughts in an educated
way, take the graceful expression, and be thankful. Only _get_ the
thought, and do not silence the peasant because he cannot speak good
grammar, or until you have taught him his grammar. Grammar and
refinement are good things, both, only be sure of the better thing
first. And thus in art, delicate finish is desirable from the greatest
masters, and is always given by them. In some places Michael Angelo,
Leonardo, Phidias, Perugino, Turner, all finished with the most
exquisite care; and the finish they give always leads to the fuller
accomplishment of their noble purposes. But lower men than these cannot
finish, for it requires consummate knowledge to finish consummately, and
then we must take their thoughts as they are able to give them. So the
rule is simple: Always look for invention first, and after that, for
such execution as will help the invention, and as the inventor is
capable of without painful effort, and _no more_. Above all, demand no
refinement of execution where there is no thought, for that is slaves'
work, unredeemed. Rather choose rough work than smooth work, so only
that the practical purpose be answered, and never imagine there is
reason to be proud of anything that may be accomplished by patience and
sandpaper.

§ XX. I shall only give one example, which however will show the reader
what I mean, from the manufacture already alluded to, that of glass. Our
modern glass is exquisitely clear in its substance, true in its form,
accurate in its cutting. We are proud of this. We ought to be ashamed of
it. The old Venice glass was muddy, inaccurate in all its forms, and
clumsily cut, if at all. And the old Venetian was justly proud of it.
For there is this difference between the English and Venetian workman,
that the former thinks only of accurately matching his patterns, and
getting his curves perfectly true and his edges perfectly sharp, and
becomes a mere machine for rounding curves and sharpening edges, while
the old Venetian cared not a whit whether his edges were sharp or not,
but he invented a new design for every glass that he made, and never
moulded a handle or a lip without a new fancy in it. And therefore,
though some Venetian glass is ugly and clumsy enough, when made by
clumsy and uninventive workmen, other Venetian glass is so lovely in its
forms that no price is too great for it; and we never see the same form
in it twice. Now you cannot have the finish and the varied form too. If
the workman is thinking about his edges, he cannot be thinking of his
design; if of his design, he cannot think of his edges. Choose whether
you will pay for the lovely form or the perfect finish, and choose at
the same moment whether you will make the worker a man or a grindstone.

§ XXI. Nay, but the reader interrupts me,--"If the workman can design
beautifully, I would not have him kept at the furnace. Let him be taken
away and made a gentleman, and have a studio, and design his glass
there, and I will have it blown and cut for him by common workmen, and
so I will have my design and my finish too."

All ideas of this kind are founded upon two mistaken suppositions: the
first, that one man's thoughts can be, or ought to be, executed by
another man's hands; the second, that manual labor is a degradation,
when it is governed by intellect.

On a large scale, and in work determinable by line and rule, it is
indeed both possible and necessary that the thoughts of one man should
be carried out by the labor of others; in this sense I have already
defined the best architecture to be the expression of the mind of
manhood by the hands of childhood. But on a smaller scale, and in a
design which cannot be mathematically defined, one man's thoughts can
never be expressed by another: and the difference between the spirit of
touch of the man who is inventing, and of the man who is obeying
directions, is often all the difference between a great and a common
work of art. How wide the separation is between original and second-hand
execution, I shall endeavor to show elsewhere; it is not so much to our
purpose here as to mark the other and more fatal error of despising
manual labor when governed by intellect; for it is no less fatal an
error to despise it when thus regulated by intellect, than to value it
for its own sake. We are always in these days endeavoring to separate
the two; we want one man to be always thinking, and another to be always
working, and we call one a gentleman, and the other an operative;
whereas the workman ought often to be thinking, and the thinker often to
be working, and both should be gentlemen, in the best sense. As it is,
we make both ungentle, the one envying, the other despising, his
brother; and the mass of society is made up of morbid thinkers, and
miserable workers. Now it is only by labor that thought can be made
healthy, and only by thought that labor can be made happy, and the two
cannot be separated with impunity. It would be well if all of us were
good handicraftsmen in some kind, and the dishonor of manual labor done
away with altogether; so that though there should still be a trenchant
distinction of race between nobles and commoners, there should not,
among the latter, be a trenchant distinction of employment, as between
idle and working men, or between men of liberal and illiberal
professions. All professions should be liberal, and there should be less
pride felt in peculiarity of employment, and more in excellence of
achievement. And yet more, in each several profession, no master should
be too proud to do its hardest work. The painter should grind his own
colors; the architect work in the mason's yard with his men; the
master-manufacturer be himself a more skilful operative than any man in
his mills; and the distinction between one man and another be only in
experience and skill, and the authority and wealth which these must
naturally and justly obtain.

§ XXII. I should be led far from the matter in hand, if I were to pursue
this interesting subject. Enough, I trust, has been said to show the
reader that the rudeness or imperfection which at first rendered the
term "Gothic" one of reproach is indeed, when rightly understood, one of
the most noble characters of Christian architecture, and not only a
noble but an _essential_ one. It seems a fantastic paradox, but it is
nevertheless a most important truth, that no architecture can be truly
noble which is _not_ imperfect. And this is easily demonstrable. For
since the architect, whom we will suppose capable of doing all in
perfection, cannot execute the whole with his own hands, he must either
make slaves of his workmen in the old Greek, and present English
fashion, and level his work to a slave's capacities, which is to degrade
it; or else he must take his workmen as he finds them, and let them show
their weaknesses together with their strength, which will involve the
Gothic imperfection, but render the whole work as noble as the intellect
of the age can make it.

§ XXIII. But the principle may be stated more broadly still. I have
confined the illustration of it to architecture, but I must not leave it
as if true of architecture only. Hitherto I have used the words
imperfect and perfect merely to distinguish between work grossly
unskilful, and work executed with average precision and science; and I
have been pleading that any degree of unskilfulness should be admitted,
so only that the laborer's mind had room for expression. But, accurately
speaking, no good work whatever can be perfect, and _the demand for
perfection is always a sign of a misunderstanding of the ends of art_.

§ XXIV. This for two reasons, both based on everlasting laws. The first,
that no great man ever stops working till he has reached his point of
failure; that is to say, his mind is always far in advance of his
powers of execution, and the latter will now and then give way in trying
to follow it; besides that he will always give to the inferior portions
of his work only such inferior attention as they require; and according
to his greatness he becomes so accustomed to the feeling of
dissatisfaction with the best he can do, that in moments of lassitude or
anger with himself he will not care though the beholder be dissatisfied
also. I believe there has only been one man who would not acknowledge
this necessity, and strove always to reach perfection, Leonardo; the end
of his vain effort being merely that he would take ten years to a
picture, and leave it unfinished. And therefore, if we are to have great
men working at all, or less men doing their best, the work will be
imperfect, however beautiful. Of human work none but what is bad can be
perfect, in its own bad way.[58]

§ XXV. The second reason is, that imperfection is in some sort essential
to all that we know of life. It is the sign of life in a mortal body,
that is to say, of a state of progress and change. Nothing that lives
is, or can be, rigidly perfect; part of it is decaying, part nascent.
The foxglove blossom,--a third part bud, a third part past, a third part
in full bloom,--is a type of the life of this world. And in all things
that live there are certain, irregularities and deficiencies which are
not only signs of life, but sources of beauty. No human face is exactly
the same in its lines on each side, no leaf perfect in its lobes, no
branch in its symmetry. All admit irregularity as they imply change; and
to banish imperfection is to destroy expression, to check exertion, to
paralyse vitality. All things are literally better, lovelier, and more
beloved for the imperfections which have been divinely appointed, that
the law of human life may be Effort, and the law of human judgment,
Mercy.

Accept this then for a universal law, that neither architecture nor any
other noble work of man can be good unless it be imperfect; and let us
be prepared for the otherwise strange fact, which we shall discern
clearly as we approach the period of the Renaissance, that the first
cause of the fall of the arts of Europe was a relentless requirement of
perfection, incapable alike either of being silenced by veneration for
greatness, or softened into forgiveness of simplicity.

Thus far then of the Rudeness or Savageness, which is the first mental
element of Gothic architecture. It is an element in many other healthy
architectures also, as in Byzantine and Romanesque; but true Gothic
cannot exist without it.

§ XXVI. The second mental element above named was CHANGEFULNESS, or
Variety.

I have already enforced the allowing independent operation to the
inferior workman, simply as a duty _to him_, and as ennobling the
architecture by rendering it more Christian. We have now to consider
what reward we obtain for the performance of this duty, namely, the
perpetual variety of every feature of the building.

Wherever the workman is utterly enslaved, the parts of the building must
of course be absolutely like each other; for the perfection of his
execution can only be reached by exercising him in doing one thing, and
giving him nothing else to do. The degree in which the workman is
degraded may be thus known at a glance, by observing whether the several
parts of the building are similar or not; and if, as in Greek work, all
the capitals are alike, and all the mouldings unvaried, then the
degradation is complete; if, as in Egyptian or Ninevite work, though the
manner of executing certain figures is always the same, the order of
design is perpetually varied, the degradation is less total; if, as in
Gothic work, there is perpetual change both in design and execution, the
workman must have been altogether set free.

§ XXVII. How much the beholder gains from the liberty of the laborer may
perhaps be questioned in England, where one of the strongest instincts
in nearly every mind is that Love of Order which makes us desire that
our house windows should pair like our carriage horses, and allows us
to yield our faith unhesitatingly to architectural theories which fix a
form for everything and forbid variation from it. I would not impeach
love of order: it is one of the most useful elements of the English
mind; it helps us in our commerce and in all purely practical matters;
and it is in many cases one of the foundation stones of morality. Only
do not let us suppose that love of order is love of art. It is true that
order, in its highest sense, is one of the necessities of art, just as
time is a necessity of music; but love of order has no more to do with
our right enjoyment of architecture or painting, than love of
punctuality with the appreciation of an opera. Experience, I fear,
teaches us that accurate and methodical habits in daily life are seldom
characteristic of those who either quickly perceive, or richly possess,
the creative powers of art; there is, however, nothing inconsistent
between the two instincts, and nothing to hinder us from retaining our
business habits, and yet fully allowing and enjoying the noblest gifts
of Invention. We already do so, in every other branch of art except
architecture, and we only do _not_ so there because we have been taught
that it would be wrong. Our architects gravely inform us that, as there
are four rules of arithmetic, there are five orders of architecture; we,
in our simplicity, think that this sounds consistent, and believe them.
They inform us also that there is one proper form for Corinthian
capitals, another for Doric, and another for Ionic. We, considering that
there is also a proper form for the letters A, B, and C, think that this
also sounds consistent, and accept the proposition. Understanding,
therefore, that one form of the said capitals is proper, and no other,
and having a conscientious horror of all impropriety, we allow the
architect to provide us with the said capitals, of the proper form, in
such and such a quantity, and in all other points to take care that the
legal forms are observed; which having done, we rest in forced
confidence that we are well housed.

§ XXVIII. But our higher instincts are not deceived. We take no pleasure
in the building provided for us, resembling that which we take in a new
book or a new picture. We may be proud of its size, complacent in its
correctness, and happy in its convenience. We may take the same pleasure
in its symmetry and workmanship as in a well-ordered room, or a skilful
piece of manufacture. And this we suppose to be all the pleasure that
architecture was ever intended to give us. The idea of reading a
building as we would read Milton or Dante, and getting the same kind of
delight out of the stones as out of the stanzas, never enters our minds
for a moment. And for good reason:--There is indeed rhythm in the
verses, quite as strict as the symmetries or rhythm of the architecture,
and a thousand times more beautiful, but there is something else than
rhythm. The verses were neither made to order, nor to match, as the
capitals were; and we have therefore a kind of pleasure in them other
than a sense of propriety. But it requires a strong effort of common
sense to shake ourselves quit of all that we have been taught for the
last two centuries, and wake to the perception of a truth just as simple
and certain as it is new: that great art, whether expressing itself in
words, colors, or stones, does _not_ say the same thing over and over
again; that the merit of architectural, as of every other art, consists
in its saying new and different things; that to repeat itself is no more
a characteristic of genius in marble than it is of genius in print; and
that we may, without offending any laws of good taste, require of an
architect, as we do of a novelist, that he should be not only correct,
but entertaining.

Yet all this is true, and self-evident; only hidden from us, as many
other self-evident things are, by false teaching. Nothing is a great
work of art, for the production of which either rules or models can be
given. Exactly so far as architecture works on known rules, and from
given models, it is not an art, but a manufacture; and it is, of the two
procedures, rather less rational (because more easy) to copy capitals or
mouldings from Phidias, and call ourselves architects, than to copy
heads and hands from Titian, and call ourselves painters.

§ XXIX. Let us then understand at once, that change or variety is as
much a necessity to the human heart and brain in buildings as in books;
that there is no merit, though there is some occasional use, in
monotony; and that we must no more expect to derive either pleasure or
profit from an architecture whose ornaments are of one pattern, and
whose pillars are of one proportion, than we should out of a universe in
which the clouds were all of one shape, and the trees all of one size.

§ XXX. And this we confess in deeds, though not in words. All the
pleasure which the people of the nineteenth century take in art, is in
pictures, sculpture, minor objects of virtù, or mediæval architecture,
which we enjoy under the term picturesque: no pleasure is taken anywhere
in modern buildings, and we find all men of true feeling delighting to
escape out of modern cities into natural scenery: hence, as I shall
hereafter show, that peculiar love of landscape which is characteristic
of the age. It would be well, if, in all other matters, we were as ready
to put up with what we dislike, for the sake of compliance with
established law, as we are in architecture.

§ XXXI. How so debased a law ever came to be established, we shall see
when we come to describe the Renaissance schools: here we have only to
note, as the second most essential element of the Gothic spirit, that it
broke through that law wherever it found it in existence; it not only
dared, but delighted in, the infringement of every servile principle;
and invented a series of forms of which the merit was, not merely that
they were new, but that they were _capable of perpetual novelty_. The
pointed arch was not merely a bold variation from the round, but it
admitted of millions of variations in itself; for the proportions of a
pointed arch are changeable to infinity, while a circular arch is always
the same. The grouped shaft was not merely a bold variation from the
single one, but it admitted of millions of variations in its grouping,
and in the proportions resultant from its grouping. The introduction of
tracery was not only a startling change in the treatment of window
lights, but admitted endless changes in the interlacement of the tracery
bars themselves. So that, while in all living Christian architecture the
love of variety exists, the Gothic schools exhibited that love in
culminating energy; and their influence, wherever it extended itself,
may be sooner and farther traced by this character than by any other;
the tendency to the adoption of Gothic types being always first shown by
greater irregularity and richer variation in the forms of the
architecture it is about to supersede, long before the appearance of the
pointed arch or of any other recognizable _outward_ sign of the Gothic
mind.

§ XXXII. We must, however, herein note carefully what distinction there
is between a healthy and a diseased love of change; for as it was in
healthy love of change that the Gothic architecture rose, it was partly
in consequence of diseased love of change that it was destroyed. In
order to understand this clearly, it will be necessary to consider the
different ways in which change and monotony are presented to us in
nature; both having their use, like darkness and light, and the one
incapable of being enjoyed without the other: change being most
delightful after some prolongation of monotony, as light appears most
brilliant after the eyes have been for some time closed.

§ XXXIII. I believe that the true relations of monotony and change may
be most simply understood by observing them in music. We may therein
notice, first, that there is a sublimity and majesty in monotony which
there is not in rapid or frequent variation. This is true throughout all
nature. The greater part of the sublimity of the sea depends on its
monotony; so also that of desolate moor and mountain scenery; and
especially the sublimity of motion, as in the quiet, unchanged fall and
rise of an engine beam. So also there is sublimity in darkness which
there is not in light.

§ XXXIV. Again, monotony after a certain time, or beyond a certain
degree, becomes either uninteresting or intolerable, and the musician is
obliged to break it in one or two ways: either while the air or passage
is perpetually repeated, its notes are variously enriched and
harmonized; or else, after a certain number of repeated passages, an
entirely new passage is introduced, which is more or less delightful
according to the length of the previous monotony. Nature, of course,
uses both these kinds of variation perpetually. The sea-waves,
resembling each other in general mass, but none like its brother in
minor divisions and curves, are a monotony of the first kind; the great
plain, broken by an emergent rock or clump of trees, is a monotony of
the second.

§ XXXV. Farther: in order to the enjoyment of the change in either case,
a certain degree of patience is required from the hearer or observer. In
the first case, he must be satisfied to endure with patience the
recurrence of the great masses of sound or form, and to seek for
entertainment in a careful watchfulness of the minor details. In the
second case, he must bear patiently the infliction of the monotony for
some moments, in order to feel the full refreshment of the change. This
is true even of the shortest musical passage in which the element of
monotony is employed. In cases of more majestic monotony, the patience
required is so considerable that it becomes a kind of pain,--a price
paid for the future pleasure.

§ XXXVI. Again: the talent of the composer is not in the monotony, but
in the changes: he may show feeling and taste by his use of monotony in
certain places or degrees; that is to say, by his _various_ employment
of it; but it is always in the new arrangement or invention that his
intellect is shown, and not in the monotony which relieves it.

Lastly: if the pleasure of change be too often repeated, it ceases to be
delightful, for then change itself becomes monotonous, and we are driven
to seek delight in extreme and fantastic degrees of it. This is the
diseased love of change of which we have above spoken.

§ XXXVII. From these facts we may gather generally that monotony is, and
ought to be, in itself painful to us, just as darkness is; that an
architecture which is altogether monotonous is a dark or dead
architecture; and, of those who love it, it may be truly said, "they
love darkness rather than light." But monotony in certain measure, used
in order to give value to change, and, above all, that _transparent_
monotony which, like the shadows of a great painter, suffers all manner
of dimly suggested form to be seen through the body of it, is an
essential in architectural as in all other composition; and the
endurance of monotony has about the same place in a healthy mind that
the endurance of darkness has: that is to say, as a strong intellect
will have pleasure in the solemnities of storm and twilight, and in the
broken and mysterious lights that gleam among them, rather than in mere
brilliancy and glare, while a frivolous mind will dread the shadow and
the storm; and as a great man will be ready to endure much darkness of
fortune in order to reach greater eminence of power or felicity, while
an inferior man will not pay the price; exactly in like manner a great
mind will accept, or even delight in, monotony which would be wearisome
to an inferior intellect, because it has more patience and power of
expectation, and is ready to pay the full price for the great future
pleasure of change. But in all cases it is not that the noble nature
loves monotony, any more than it loves darkness or pain. But it can bear
with it, and receives a high pleasure in the endurance or patience, a
pleasure necessary to the well-being of this world; while those who will
not submit to the temporary sameness, but rush from one change to
another, gradually dull the edge of change itself, and bring a shadow
and weariness over the whole world from which there is no more escape.

§ XXXVIII. From these general uses of variety in the economy of the
world, we may at once understand its use and abuse in architecture. The
variety of the Gothic schools is the more healthy and beautiful, because
in many cases it is entirely unstudied, and results, not from the mere
love of change, but from practical necessities. For in one point of view
Gothic is not only the best, but the _only rational_ architecture, as
being that which can fit itself most easily to all services, vulgar or
noble. Undefined in its slope of roof, height of shaft, breadth of arch,
or disposition of ground plan, it can shrink into a turret, expand into
a hall, coil into a staircase, or spring into a spire, with undegraded
grace and unexhausted energy; and whenever it finds occasion for change
in its form or purpose, it submits to it without the slightest sense of
loss either to its unity or majesty,--subtle and flexible like a fiery
serpent, but ever attentive to the voice of the charmer. And it is one
of the chief virtues of the Gothic builders, that they never suffered
ideas of outside symmetries and consistencies to interfere with the real
use and value of what they did. If they wanted a window, they opened
one; a room, they added one; a buttress, they built one; utterly
regardless of any established conventionalities of external appearance,
knowing (as indeed it always happened) that such daring interruptions of
the formal plan would rather give additional interest to its symmetry
than injure it. So that, in the best times of Gothic, a useless window
would rather have been opened in an unexpected place for the sake of the
surprise, than a useful one forbidden for the sake of symmetry. Every
successive architect, employed upon a great work, built the pieces he
added in his own way, utterly regardless of the style adopted by his
predecessors; and if two towers were raised in nominal correspondence at
the sides of a cathedral front, one was nearly sure to be different from
the other, and in each the style at the top to be different from the
style at the bottom.[59]

§ XXXIX. These marked variations were, however, only permitted as part
of the great system of perpetual change which ran through every member
of Gothic design, and rendered it as endless a field for the beholder's
inquiry, as for the builder's imagination: change, which in the best
schools is subtle and delicate, and rendered more delightful by
intermingling of a noble monotony; in the more barbaric schools is
somewhat fantastic and redundant; but, in all, a necessary and constant
condition of the life of the school. Sometimes the variety is in one
feature, sometimes in another; it may be in the capitals or crockets, in
the niches or the traceries, or in all together, but in some one or
other of the features it will be found always. If the mouldings are
constant, the surface sculpture will change; if the capitals are of a
fixed design, the traceries will change; if the traceries are
monotonous, the capitals will change; and if even, as in some fine
schools, the early English for example, there is the slightest
approximation to an unvarying type of mouldings, capitals, and floral
decoration, the variety is found in the disposition of the masses, and
in the figure sculpture.

§ XL. I must now refer for a moment, before we quit the consideration of
this, the second mental element of Gothic, to the opening of the third
chapter of the "Seven Lamps of Architecture," in which the distinction
was drawn (§ 2) between man gathering and man governing; between his
acceptance of the sources of delight from nature, and his developement
of authoritative or imaginative power in their arrangement: for the two
mental elements, not only of Gothic, but of all good architecture, which
we have just been examining, belong to it, and are admirable in it,
chiefly as it is, more than any other subject of art, the work of man,
and the expression of the average power of man. A picture or poem is
often little more than a feeble utterance of man's admiration of
something out of himself; but architecture approaches more to a creation
of his own, born of his necessities, and expressive of his nature. It is
also, in some sort, the work of the whole race, while the picture or
statue are the work of one only, in most cases more highly gifted than
his fellows. And therefore we may expect that the first two elements of
good architecture should be expressive of some great truths commonly
belonging to the whole race, and necessary to be understood or felt by
them in all their work that they do under the sun. And observe what they
are: the confession of Imperfection and the confession of Desire of
Change. The building of the bird and the bee needs not express anything
like this. It is perfect and unchanging. But just because we are
something better than birds or bees, our building must confess that we
have not reached the perfection we can imagine, and cannot rest in the
condition we have attained. If we pretend to have reached either
perfection or satisfaction, we have degraded ourselves and our work.
God's work only may express that; but ours may never have that sentence
written upon it,--"And behold, it was very good." And, observe again,
it is not merely as it renders the edifice a book of various knowledge,
or a mine of precious thought, that variety is essential to its
nobleness. The vital principle is not the love of _Knowledge_, but the
love of _Change_. It is that strange _disquietude_ of the Gothic spirit
that is its greatness; that restlessness of the dreaming mind, that
wanders hither and thither among the niches, and flickers feverishly
around the pinnacles, and frets and fades in labyrinthine knots and
shadows along wall and roof, and yet is not satisfied, nor shall be
satisfied. The Greek could stay in his triglyph furrow, and be at peace;
but the work of the Gothic heart is fretwork still, and it can neither
rest in, nor from, its labor, but must pass on, sleeplessly, until its
love of change shall be pacified for ever in the change that must come
alike on them that wake and them that sleep.

§ XLI. The third constituent element of the Gothic mind was stated to be
NATURALISM; that is to say, the love of natural objects for their own
sake, and the effort to represent them frankly, unconstrained by
artistical laws.

This characteristic of the style partly follows in necessary connexion
with those named above. For, so soon as the workman is left free to
represent what subjects he chooses, he must look to the nature that is
round him for material, and will endeavor to represent it as he sees it,
with more or less accuracy according to the skill he possesses, and with
much play of fancy, but with small respect for law. There is, however, a
marked distinction between the imaginations of the Western and Eastern
races, even when both are left free; the Western, or Gothic, delighting
most in the representation of facts, and the Eastern (Arabian, Persian,
and Chinese) in the harmony of colors and forms. Each of these
intellectual dispositions has its particular forms of error and abuse,
which, though I have often before stated, I must here again briefly
explain; and this the rather, because the word Naturalism is, in one of
its senses, justly used as a term of reproach, and the questions
respecting the real relations of art and nature are so many and so
confused throughout all the schools of Europe at this day, that I
cannot clearly enunciate any single truth without appearing to admit, in
fellowship with it, some kind of error, unless the reader will bear with
me in entering into such an analysis of the subject as will serve us for
general guidance.

§ XLII. We are to remember, in the first place, that the arrangement of
colors and lines is an art analogous to the composition[60] of music,
and entirely independent of the representation of facts. Good coloring
does not necessarily convey the image of anything but itself. It
consists in certain proportions and arrangements of rays of light, but
not in likenesses to anything. A few touches of certain greys and
purples laid by a master's hand on white paper, will be good coloring;
as more touches are added beside them, we may find out that they were
intended to represent a dove's neck, and we may praise, as the drawing
advances, the perfect imitation of the dove's neck. But the good
coloring does not consist in that imitation, but in the abstract
qualities and relations of the grey and purple.

In like manner, as soon as a great sculptor begins to shape his work out
of the block, we shall see that its lines are nobly arranged, and of
noble character. We may not have the slightest idea for what the forms
are intended, whether they are of man or beast, of vegetation or
drapery. Their likeness to anything does not affect their nobleness.
They are magnificent forms, and that is all we need care to know of
them, in order to say whether the workman is a good or bad sculptor.

§ XLIII. Now the noblest art is an exact unison of the abstract value,
with the imitative power, of forms and colors. It is the noblest
composition, used to express the noblest facts. But the human mind
cannot in general unite the two perfections: it either pursues the fact
to the neglect of the composition, or pursues the composition to the
neglect of the fact.

§ XLIV. And it is intended by the Deity that it _should_ do this; the
best art is not always wanted. Facts are often wanted without art, as in
a geological diagram; and art often without facts, as in a Turkey
carpet. And most men have been made capable of giving either one or the
other, but not both; only one or two, the very highest, can give both.

Observe then. Men are universally divided, as respects their artistical
qualifications, into three great classes; a right, a left, and a centre.
On the right side are the men of facts, on the left the men of
design,[61] in the centre the men of both.

The three classes of course pass into each other by imperceptible
gradations. The men of facts are hardly ever altogether without powers
of design; the men of design are always in some measure cognizant of
facts; and as each class possesses more or less of the powers of the
opposite one, it approaches to the character of the central class. Few
men, even in that central rank, are so exactly throned on the summit of
the crest that they cannot be perceived to incline in the least one way
or the other, embracing both horizons with their glance. Now each of
these classes has, as I above said, a healthy function in the world, and
correlative diseases or unhealthy functions; and, when the work of
either of them is seen in its morbid condition, we are apt to find fault
with the class of workmen, instead of finding fault only with the
particular abuse which has perverted their action.

§ XLV. Let us first take an instance of the healthy action of the three
classes on a simple subject, so as fully to understand the distinction
between them, and then we shall more easily examine the corruptions to
which they are liable. Fig. 1 in Plate VI. is a spray of vine with a
bough of cherry-tree, which I have outlined from nature as accurately as
I could, without in the least endeavoring to compose or arrange the
form. It is a simple piece of fact-work, healthy and good as such, and
useful to any one who wanted to know plain truths about tendrils of
vines, but there is no attempt at design in it. Plate XIX., below,
represents a branch of vine used to decorate the angle of the Ducal
Palace. It is faithful as a representation of vine, and yet so designed
that every leaf serves an architectural purpose, and could not be spared
from its place without harm. This is central work; fact and design
together. Fig. 2 in Plate VI. is a spandril from St. Mark's, in which
the forms of the vine are dimly suggested, the object of the design
being merely to obtain graceful lines and well proportioned masses upon
the gold ground. There is not the least attempt to inform the spectator
of any facts about the growth of the vine; there are no stalks or
tendrils,--merely running bands with leaves emergent from them, of which
nothing but the outline is taken from the vine, and even that
imperfectly. This is design, unregardful of facts.

Now the work is, in all these three cases, perfectly healthy. Fig. 1 is
not bad work because it has not design, nor Fig. 2 bad work because it
has not facts. The object of the one is to give pleasure through truth,
and of the other to give pleasure through composition. And both are
right.

What, then, are the diseased operations to which the three classes of
workmen are liable?

§ XLVI. Primarily, two; affecting the two inferior classes:

1st, When either of those two classes Despises the other:

2nd, When either of the two classes Envies the other; producing,
therefore, four forms of dangerous error.

First, when the men of facts despise design. This is the error of the
common Dutch painters, of merely imitative painters of still life,
flowers, &c., and other men who, having either the gift of accurate
imitation or strong sympathies with nature, suppose that all is done
when the imitation is perfected or sympathy expressed. A large body of
English landscapists come into this class, including most clever
sketchers from nature, who fancy that to get a sky of true tone, and a
gleam of sunshine or sweep of shower faithfully expressed, is all that
can be required of art. These men are generally themselves answerable
for much of their deadness of feeling to the higher qualities of
composition. They probably have not originally the high gifts of design,
but they lose such powers as they originally possessed by despising, and
refusing to study, the results of great power of design in others. Their
knowledge, as far as it goes, being accurate, they are usually
presumptuous and self-conceited, and gradually become incapable of
admiring anything but what is like their own works. They see nothing in
the works of great designers but the faults, and do harm almost
incalculable in the European society of the present day by sneering at
the compositions of the greatest men of the earlier ages,[62] because
they do not absolutely tally with their own ideas of "Nature."

§ XLVII. The second form of error is when the men of design despise
facts. All noble design must deal with facts to a certain extent, for
there is no food for it but in nature. The best colorist invents best by
taking hints from natural colors; from birds, skies, or groups of
figures. And if, in the delight of inventing fantastic color and form
the truths of nature are wilfully neglected, the intellect becomes
comparatively decrepit, and that state of art results which we find
among the Chinese. The Greek designers delighted in the facts of the
human form, and became great in consequence; but the facts of lower
nature were disregarded by them, and their inferior ornament became,
therefore, dead and valueless.

§ XLVIII. The third form of error is when the men of facts envy design:
that is to say, when, having only imitative powers, they refuse to
employ those powers upon the visible world around them; but, having been
taught that composition is the end of art, strive to obtain the
inventive powers which nature has denied them, study nothing but the
works of reputed designers, and perish in a fungous growth of plagiarism
and laws of art.

Here was the great error of the beginning of this century; it is the
error of the meanest kind of men that employ themselves in painting, and
it is the most fatal of all, rendering those who fall into it utterly
useless, incapable of helping the world with either truth or fancy,
while, in all probability, they deceive it by base resemblances of both,
until it hardly recognizes truth or fancy when they really exist.

§ XLIX. The fourth form of error is when the men of design envy facts;
that is to say, when the temptation of closely imitating nature leads
them to forget their own proper ornamental function, and when they lose
the power of the composition for the sake of graphic truth; as, for
instance, in the hawthorn moulding so often spoken of round the porch of
Bourges Cathedral, which, though very lovely, might perhaps, as we saw
above, have been better, if the old builder, in his excessive desire to
make it look like hawthorn, had not painted it green.

§ L. It is, however, carefully to be noted, that the two morbid
conditions to which the men of facts are liable are much more dangerous
and harmful than those to which the men of design are liable. The morbid
state of men of design injures themselves only; that of the men of facts
injures the whole world. The Chinese porcelain-painter is, indeed, not
so great a man as he might be, but he does not want to break everything
that is not porcelain; but the modern English fact-hunter, despising
design, wants to destroy everything that does not agree with his own
notions of truth, and becomes the most dangerous and despicable of
iconoclasts, excited by egotism instead of religion. Again: the Bourges
sculptor, painting his hawthorns green, did indeed somewhat hurt the
effect of his own beautiful design, but did not prevent any one from
loving hawthorn: but Sir George Beaumont, trying to make Constable paint
grass brown _instead_ of green, was setting himself between Constable
and nature, blinding the painter, and blaspheming the work of God.

§ LI. So much, then, of the diseases of the inferior classes, caused by
their envying or despising each other. It is evident that the men of the
central class cannot be liable to any morbid operation of this kind,
they possessing the powers of both.

But there is another order of diseases which affect all the three
classes, considered with respect to their pursuit of facts. For observe,
all the three classes are in some degree pursuers of facts; even the men
of design not being in any case altogether independent of external
truth. Now, considering them _all_ as more or less searchers after
truth, there is another triple division to be made of them. Everything
presented to them in nature has good and evil mingled in it: and
artists, considered as searchers after truth, are again to be divided
into three great classes, a right, a left, and a centre. Those on the
right perceive, and pursue, the good, and leave the evil: those in the
centre, the greatest, perceive and pursue the good and evil together,
the whole thing as it verily is: those on the left perceive and pursue
the evil, and leave the good.

§ LII. The first class, I say, take the good and leave the evil. Out of
whatever is presented to them, they gather what it has of grace, and
life, and light, and holiness, and leave all, or at least as much as
possible, of the rest undrawn. The faces of their figures express no
evil passions; the skies of their landscapes are without storm; the
prevalent character of their color is brightness, and of their
chiaroscuro fulness of light. The early Italian and Flemish painters,
Angelico and Hemling, Perugino, Francia, Raffaelle in his best time,
John Bellini, and our own Stothard, belong eminently to this class.

§ LIII. The second, or greatest class, render all that they see in
nature unhesitatingly, with a kind of divine grasp and government of the
whole, sympathizing with all the good, and yet confessing, permitting,
and bringing good out of the evil also. Their subject is infinite as
nature, their color equally balanced between splendor and sadness,
reaching occasionally the highest degrees of both, and their chiaroscuro
equally balanced between light and shade.

The principal men of this class are Michael Angelo, Leonardo, Giotto,
Tintoret, and Turner. Raffaelle in his second time, Titian, and Rubens
are transitional; the first inclining to the eclectic, and the last two
to the impure class, Raffaelle rarely giving all the evil, Titian and
Rubens rarely all the good.

§ LIV. The last class perceive and imitate evil only. They cannot draw
the trunk of a tree without blasting and shattering it, nor a sky except
covered with stormy clouds: they delight in the beggary and brutality of
the human race; their color is for the most part subdued or lurid, and
the greatest spaces of their pictures are occupied by darkness.

Happily the examples of this class are seldom seen in perfection.
Salvator Rosa and Caravaggio are the most characteristic: the other men
belonging to it approach towards the central rank by imperceptible
gradations, as they perceive and represent more and more of good. But
Murillo, Zurbaran, Camillo Procaccini, Rembrandt, and Teniers, all
belong naturally to this lower class.

§ LV. Now, observe: the three classes into which artists were previously
divided, of men of fact, men of design, and men of both, are all of
Divine institution; but of these latter three, the last is in no wise of
Divine institution. It is entirely human, and the men who belong to it
have sunk into it by their own faults. They are, so far forth, either
useless or harmful men. It is indeed good that evil should be
occasionally represented, even in its worst forms, but never that it
should be taken delight in: and the mighty men of the central class will
always give us all that is needful of it; sometimes, as Hogarth did,
dwelling upon it bitterly as satirists,--but this with the more effect,
because they will neither exaggerate it, nor represent it mercilessly,
and without the atoning points that all evil shows to a Divinely guided
glance, even at its deepest. So then, though the third class will
always, I fear, in some measure exist, the two necessary classes are
only the first two; and this is so far acknowledged by the general sense
of men, that the basest class has been confounded with the second; and
painters have been divided commonly only into two ranks, now known, I
believe, throughout Europe by the names which they first received in
Italy, "Puristi and Naturalisti." Since, however, in the existing state
of things, the degraded or evil-loving class, though less defined than
that of the Puristi, is just as vast as it is indistinct, this division
has done infinite dishonor to the great faithful painters of nature: and
it has long been one of the objects I have had most at heart to show
that, in reality, the Purists, in their sanctity, are less separated
from these natural painters than the Sensualists in their foulness; and
that the difference, though less discernible, is in reality greater,
between the man who pursues evil for its own sake, and him who bears
with it for the sake of truth, than between this latter and the man who
will not endure it at all.

§ LVI. Let us, then, endeavor briefly to mark the real relations of
these three vast ranks of men, whom I shall call, for convenience in
speaking of them, Purists, Naturalists, and Sensualists; not that these
terms express their real characters, but I know no word, and cannot coin
a convenient one, which would accurately express the opposite of Purist;
and I keep the terms Purist and Naturalist in order to comply, as far as
possible, with the established usage of language on the Continent. Now,
observe: in saying that nearly everything presented to us in nature has
mingling in it of good and evil, I do not mean that nature is
conceivably improvable, or that anything that God has made could be
called evil, if we could see far enough into its uses, but that, with
respect to immediate effects or appearances, it may be so, just as the
hard rind or bitter kernel of a fruit may be an evil to the eater,
though in the one is the protection of the fruit, and in the other its
continuance. The Purist, therefore, does not mend nature, but receives
from nature and from God that which is good for him; while the
Sensualist fills himself "with the husks that the swine did eat."

The three classes may, therefore, be likened to men reaping wheat, of
which the Purists take the fine flour, and the Sensualists the chaff and
straw, but the Naturalists take all home, and make their cake of the
one, and their couch of the other.

§ LVII. For instance. We know more certainly every day that whatever
appears to us harmful in the universe has some beneficent or necessary
operation; that the storm which destroys a harvest brightens the
sunbeams for harvests yet unsown, and that the volcano which buries a
city preserves a thousand from destruction. But the evil is not for the
time less fearful, because we have learned it to be necessary; and we
easily understand the timidity or the tenderness of the spirit which
would withdraw itself from the presence of destruction, and create in
its imagination a world of which the peace should be unbroken, in which
the sky should not darken nor the sea rage, in which the leaf should not
change nor the blossom wither. That man is greater, however, who
contemplates with an equal mind the alternations of terror and of
beauty; who, not rejoicing less beneath the sunny sky, can bear also to
watch the bars of twilight narrowing on the horizon; and, not less
sensible to the blessing of the peace of nature, can rejoice in the
magnificence of the ordinances by which that peace is protected and
secured. But separated from both by an immeasurable distance would be
the man who delighted in convulsion and disease for their own sake; who
found his daily food in the disorder of nature mingled with the
suffering of humanity; and watched joyfully at the right hand of the
Angel whose appointed work is to destroy as well as to accuse, while the
corners of the House of feasting were struck by the wind from the
wilderness.

§ LVIII. And far more is this true, when the subject of contemplation is
humanity itself. The passions of mankind are partly protective, partly
beneficent, like the chaff and grain of the corn; but none without their
use, none without nobleness when seen in balanced unity with the rest
of the spirit which they are charged to defend. The passions of which
the end is the continuance of the race; the indignation which is to arm
it against injustice, or strengthen it to resist wanton injury; and the
fear[63] which lies at the root of prudence, reverence, and awe, are all
honorable and beautiful, so long as man is regarded in his relations to
the existing world. The religious Purist, striving to conceive him
withdrawn from those relations, effaces from the countenance the traces
of all transitory passion, illumines it with holy hope and love, and
seals it with the serenity of heavenly peace; he conceals the forms of
the body by the deep-folded garment, or else represents them under
severely chastened types, and would rather paint them emaciated by the
fast, or pale from the torture, than strengthened by exertion, or
flushed by emotion. But the great Naturalist takes the human being in
its wholeness, in its mortal as well as its spiritual strength. Capable
of sounding and sympathizing with the whole range of its passions, he
brings one majestic harmony out of them all; he represents it fearlessly
in all its acts and thoughts, in its haste, its anger, its sensuality,
and its pride, as well as in its fortitude or faith, but makes it noble
in them all; he casts aside the veil from the body, and beholds the
mysteries of its form like an angel looking down on an inferior
creature: there is nothing which he is reluctant to behold, nothing that
he is ashamed to confess; with all that lives, triumphing, falling, or
suffering, he claims kindred, either in majesty or in mercy, yet
standing, in a sort, afar off, unmoved even in the deepness of his
sympathy; for the spirit within him is too thoughtful to be grieved, too
brave to be appalled, and too pure to be polluted.

§ LIX. How far beneath these two ranks of men shall we place, in the
scale of being, those whose pleasure is only in sin or in suffering; who
habitually contemplate humanity in poverty or decrepitude, fury or
sensuality; whose works are either temptations to its weakness, or
triumphs over its ruin, and recognize no other subjects for thought or
admiration than the subtlety of the robber, the rage of the soldier, or
the joy of the Sybarite. It seems strange, when thus definitely stated,
that such a school should exist. Yet consider a little what gaps and
blanks would disfigure our gallery and chamber walls, in places that we
have long approached with reverence, if every picture, every statue,
were removed from them, of which the subject was either the vice or the
misery of mankind, portrayed without any moral purpose: consider the
innumerable groups having reference merely to various forms of passion,
low or high; drunken revels and brawls among peasants, gambling or
fighting scenes among soldiers, amours and intrigues among every class,
brutal battle pieces, banditti subjects, gluts of torture and death in
famine, wreck, or slaughter, for the sake merely of the
excitement,--that quickening and suppling of the dull spirit that cannot
be gained for it but by bathing it in blood, afterward to wither back
into stained and stiffened apathy; and then that whole vast false heaven
of sensual passion, full of nymphs, satyrs, graces, goddesses, and I
know not what, from its high seventh circle in Correggio's Antiope, down
to the Grecized ballet-dancers and smirking Cupids of the Parisian
upholsterer. Sweep away all this, remorselessly, and see how much art we
should have left.

§ LX. And yet these are only the grossest manifestations of the tendency
of the school. There are subtler, yet not less certain, signs of it in
the works of men who stand high in the world's list of sacred painters.
I doubt not that the reader was surprised when I named Murillo among the
men of this third rank. Yet, go into the Dulwich Gallery, and meditate
for a little over that much celebrated picture of the two beggar boys,
one eating lying on the ground, the other standing beside him. We have
among our own painters one who cannot indeed be set beside Murillo as a
painter of Madonnas, for he is a pure Naturalist, and, never having seen
a Madonna, does not paint any; but who, as a painter of beggar or
peasant boys, may be set beside Murillo, or any one else,--W. Hunt. He
loves peasant boys, because he finds them more roughly and picturesquely
dressed, and more healthily colored, than others. And he paints all
that he sees in them fearlessly; all the health and humor, and
freshness, and vitality, together with such awkwardness and stupidity,
and what else of negative or positive harm there may be in the creature;
but yet so that on the whole we love it, and find it perhaps even
beautiful, or if not, at least we see that there is capability of good
in it, rather than of evil; and all is lighted up by a sunshine and
sweet color that makes the smock-frock as precious as cloth of gold. But
look at those two ragged and vicious vagrants that Murillo has gathered
out of the street. You smile at first, because they are eating so
naturally, and their roguery is so complete. But is there anything else
than roguery there, or was it well for the painter to give his time to
the painting of those repulsive and wicked children? Do you feel moved
with any charity towards children as you look at them? Are we the least
more likely to take any interest in ragged schools, or to help the next
pauper child that comes in our way, because the painter has shown us a
cunning beggar feeding greedily? Mark the choice of the act. He might
have shown hunger in other ways, and given interest to even this act of
eating, by making the face wasted, or the eye wistful. But he did not
care to do this. He delighted merely in the disgusting manner of eating,
the food filling the cheek; the boy is not hungry, else he would not
turn round to talk and grin as he eats.

§ LXI. But observe another point in the lower figure. It lies so that
the sole of the foot is turned towards the spectator; not because it
would have lain less easily in another attitude, but that the painter
may draw, and exhibit, the grey dust engrained in the foot. Do not call
this the painting of nature: it is mere delight in foulness. The lesson,
if there be any, in the picture, is not one whit the stronger. We all
know that a beggar's bare foot cannot be clean; there is no need to
thrust its degradation into the light, as if no human imagination were
vigorous enough for its conception.

§ LXII. The position of the Sensualists, in treatment of landscape, is
less distinctly marked than in that of the figure: because even the
wildest passions of nature are noble: but the inclination is manifested
by carelessness in marking generic form in trees and flowers: by their
preferring confused and irregular arrangements of foliage or foreground
to symmetrical and simple grouping; by their general choice of such
picturesqueness as results from decay, disorder, and disease, rather
than of that which is consistent with the perfection of the things in
which it is found; and by their imperfect rendering of the elements of
strength and beauty in all things. I propose to work out this subject
fully in the last volume of "Modern Painters;" but I trust that enough
has been here said to enable the reader to understand the relations of
the three great classes of artists, and therefore also the kinds of
morbid condition into which the two higher (for the last has no other
than a morbid condition) are liable to fall. For, since the function of
the Naturalists is to represent, as far as may be, the whole of nature,
and the Purists to represent what is absolutely good for some special
purpose or time, it is evident that both are liable to error from
shortness of sight, and the last also from weakness of judgment. I say,
in the first place, both may err from shortness of sight, from not
seeing all that there is in nature; seeing only the outsides of things,
or those points of them which bear least on the matter in hand. For
instance, a modern continental Naturalist sees the anatomy of a limb
thoroughly, but does not see its color against the sky, which latter
fact is to a painter far the more important of the two. And because it
is always easier to see the surface than the depth of things, the full
sight of them requiring the highest powers of penetration, sympathy, and
imagination, the world is full of vulgar Naturalists: not Sensualists,
observe, not men who delight in evil; but men who never see the deepest
good, and who bring discredit on all painting of Nature by the little
that they discover in her. And the Purist, besides being liable to this
same shortsightedness, is liable also to fatal errors of judgment; for
he may think that good which is not so, and that the highest good which
is the least. And thus the world is full of vulgar Purists,[64] who
bring discredit on all selection by the silliness of their choice; and
this the more, because the very becoming a Purist is commonly indicative
of some slight degree of weakness, readiness to be offended, or
narrowness of understanding of the ends of things: the greatest men
being, in all times of art, Naturalists, without any exception; and the
greatest Purists being those who approach nearest to the Naturalists, as
Benozzo Gozzoli and Perugino. Hence there is a tendency in the
Naturalists to despise the Purists, and in the Purists to be offended
with the Naturalists (not understanding them, and confounding them with
the Sensualists); and this is grievously harmful to both.

§ LXIII. Of the various forms of resultant mischief it is not here the
place to speak: the reader may already be somewhat wearied with a
statement which has led us apparently so far from our immediate subject.
But the digression was necessary, in order that I might clearly define
the sense in which I use the word Naturalism when I state it to be the
third most essential characteristic of Gothic architecture. I mean that
the Gothic builders belong to the central or greatest rank in _both_ the
classifications of artists which we have just made; that, considering
all artists as either men of design, men of facts, or men of both, the
Gothic builders were men of both; and that again, considering all
artists as either Purists, Naturalists, or Sensualists, the Gothic
builders were Naturalists.

§ LXIV. I say first, that the Gothic builders were of that central class
which unites fact with design; but that the part of the work which was
more especially their own was the truthfulness. Their power of
artistical invention or arrangement was not greater than that of
Romanesque and Byzantine workmen: by those workmen they were taught the
principles, and from them received their models, of design; but to the
ornamental feeling and rich fancy of the Byzantine the Gothic builder
added a love of _fact_ which is never found in the South. Both Greek and
Roman used conventional foliage in their ornament, passing into
something that was not foliage at all, knotting itself into strange
cup-like buds or clusters, and growing out of lifeless rods instead of
stems; the Gothic sculptor received these types, at first, as things
that ought to be, just as we have a second time received them; but he
could not rest in them. He saw there was no veracity in them, no
knowledge, no vitality. Do what he would, he could not help liking the
true leaves better; and cautiously, a little at a time, he put more of
nature into his work, until at last it was all true, retaining,
nevertheless, every valuable character of the original well-disciplined
and designed arrangement.[65]

§ LXV. Nor is it only in external and visible subject that the Gothic
workman wrought for truth: he is as firm in his rendering of imaginative
as of actual truth; that is to say, when an idea would have been by a
Roman, or Byzantine, symbolically represented, the Gothic mind realizes
it to the utmost. For instance, the purgatorial fire is represented in
the mosaic of Torcello (Romanesque) as a red stream, longitudinally
striped like a riband, descending out of the throne of Christ, and
gradually extending itself to envelope the wicked. When we are once
informed what this means, it is enough for its purpose; but the Gothic
inventor does not leave the sign in need of interpretation. He makes the
fire as like real fire as he can; and in the porch of St. Maclou at
Rouen the sculptured flames burst out of the Hades gate, and flicker up,
in writhing tongues of stone, through the interstices of the niches, as
if the church itself were on fire. This is an extreme instance, but it
is all the more illustrative of the entire difference in temper and
thought between the two schools of art, and of the intense love of
veracity which influenced the Gothic design.

§ LXVI. I do not say that this love of veracity is always healthy in its
operation. I have above noticed the errors into which it falls from
despising design; and there is another kind of error noticeable in the
instance just given, in which the love of truth is too hasty, and seizes
on a surface truth instead of an inner one. For in representing the
Hades fire, it is not the mere _form_ of the flame which needs most to
be told, but its unquenchableness, its Divine ordainment and limitation,
and its inner fierceness, not physical and material, but in being the
expression of the wrath of God. And these things are not to be told by
imitating the fire that flashes out of a bundle of sticks. If we think
over his symbol a little, we shall perhaps find that the Romanesque
builder told more truth in that likeness of a blood-red stream, flowing
between definite shores and out of God's throne, and expanding, as if
fed by a perpetual current, into the lake wherein the wicked are cast,
than the Gothic builder in those torch-flickerings about his niches. But
this is not to our immediate purpose; I am not at present to insist upon
the faults into which the love of truth was led in the later Gothic
times, but on the feeling itself, as a glorious and peculiar
characteristic of the Northern builders. For, observe, it is not, even
in the above instance, love of truth, but want of thought, which
_causes_ the fault. The love of truth, as such, is good, but when it is
misdirected by thoughtlessness or over-excited by vanity, and either
seizes on facts of small value, or gathers them chiefly that it may
boast of its grasp and apprehension, its work may well become dull or
offensive. Yet let us not, therefore, blame the inherent love of facts,
but the incautiousness of their selection, and impertinence of their
statement.

§ LXVII. I said, in the second place, that Gothic work, when referred to
the arrangement of all art, as purist, naturalist, or sensualist, was
naturalist. This character follows necessarily on its extreme love of
truth, prevailing over the sense of beauty, and causing it to take
delight in portraiture of every kind, and to express the various
characters of the human countenance and form, as it did the varieties of
leaves and the ruggedness of branches. And this tendency is both
increased and ennobled by the same Christian humility which we saw
expressed in the first character of Gothic work, its rudeness. For as
that resulted from a humility which confessed the imperfection of the
_workman_, so this naturalist portraiture is rendered more faithful by
the humility which confesses the imperfection of the _subject_. The
Greek sculptor could neither bear to confess his own feebleness, nor to
tell the faults of the forms that he portrayed. But the Christian
workman, believing that all is finally to work together for good, freely
confesses both, and neither seeks to disguise his own roughness of work,
nor his subject's roughness of make. Yet this frankness being joined,
for the most part, with depth of religious feeling in other directions,
and especially with charity, there is sometimes a tendency to Purism in
the best Gothic sculpture; so that it frequently reaches great dignity
of form and tenderness of expression, yet never so as to lose the
veracity of portraiture, wherever portraiture is possible: not exalting
its kings into demi-gods, nor its saints into archangels, but giving
what kingliness and sanctity was in them, to the full, mixed with due
record of their faults; and this in the most part with a great
indifference like that of Scripture history, which sets down, with
unmoved and unexcusing resoluteness, the virtues and errors of all men
of whom it speaks, often leaving the reader to form his own estimate of
them, without an indication of the judgment of the historian. And this
veracity is carried out by the Gothic sculptors in the minuteness and
generality, as well as the equity, of their delineation: for they do not
limit their art to the portraiture of saints and kings, but introduce
the most familiar scenes and most simple subjects; filling up the
backgrounds of Scripture histories with vivid and curious
representations of the commonest incidents of daily life, and availing
themselves of every occasion in which, either as a symbol, or an
explanation of a scene or time, the things familiar to the eye of the
workman could be introduced and made of account. Hence Gothic sculpture
and painting are not only full of valuable portraiture of the greatest
men, but copious records of all the domestic customs and inferior arts
of the ages in which it flourished.[66]

§ LXVIII. There is, however, one direction in which the Naturalism of
the Gothic workmen is peculiarly manifested; and this direction is even
more characteristic of the school than the Naturalism itself; I mean
their peculiar fondness for the forms of Vegetation. In rendering the
various circumstances of daily life, Egyptian and Ninevite sculpture is
as frank and as diffuse as the Gothic. From the highest pomps of state
or triumphs of battle, to the most trivial domestic arts and amusements,
all is taken advantage of to fill the field of granite with the
perpetual interest of a crowded drama; and the early Lombardic and
Romanesque sculpture is equally copious in its description of the
familiar circumstances of war and the chase. But in all the scenes
portrayed by the workmen of these nations, vegetation occurs only as an
explanatory accessory; the reed is introduced to mark the course of the
river, or the tree to mark the covert of the wild beast, or the ambush
of the enemy, but there is no especial interest in the forms of the
vegetation strong enough to induce them to make it a subject of separate
and accurate study. Again, among the nations who followed the arts of
design exclusively, the forms of foliage introduced were meagre and
general, and their real intricacy and life were neither admired nor
expressed. But to the Gothic workman the living foliage became a subject
of intense affection, and he struggled to render all its characters with
as much accuracy as was compatible with the laws of his design and the
nature of his material, not unfrequently tempted in his enthusiasm to
transgress the one and disguise the other.

§ LXIX. There is a peculiar significancy in this, indicative both of
higher civilization and gentler temperament, than had before been
manifested in architecture. Rudeness, and the love of change, which we
have insisted upon as the first elements of Gothic, are also elements
common to all healthy schools. But here is a softer element mingled with
them, peculiar to the Gothic itself. The rudeness or ignorance which
would have been painfully exposed in the treatment of the human form,
are still not so great as to prevent the successful rendering of the
wayside herbage; and the love of change, which becomes morbid and
feverish in following the haste of the hunter, and the rage of the
combatant, is at once soothed and satisfied as it watches the wandering
of the tendril, and the budding of the flower. Nor is this all: the new
direction of mental interest marks an infinite change in the means and
the habits of life. The nations whose chief support was in the chase,
whose chief interest was in the battle, whose chief pleasure was in the
banquet, would take small care respecting the shapes of leaves and
flowers; and notice little in the forms of the forest trees which
sheltered them, except the signs indicative of the wood which would make
the toughest lance, the closest roof, or the clearest fire. The
affectionate observation of the grace and outward character of
vegetation is the sure sign of a more tranquil and gentle existence,
sustained by the gifts, and gladdened by the splendor, of the earth. In
that careful distinction of species, and richness of delicate and
undisturbed organization, which characterize the Gothic design, there is
the history of rural and thoughtful life, influenced by habitual
tenderness, and devoted to subtle inquiry; and every discriminating and
delicate touch of the chisel, as it rounds the petal or guides the
branch, is a prophecy of the developement of the entire body of the
natural sciences, beginning with that of medicine, of the recovery of
literature, and the establishment of the most necessary principles of
domestic wisdom and national peace.

§ LXX. I have before alluded to the strange and vain supposition, that
the original conception of Gothic architecture had been derived from
vegetation,--from the symmetry of avenues, and the interlacing of
branches. It is a supposition which never could have existed for a
moment in the mind of any person acquainted with early Gothic; but,
however idle as a theory, it is most valuable as a testimony to the
character of the perfected style. It is precisely because the reverse of
this theory is the fact, because the Gothic did not arise out of, but
develope itself into, a resemblance to vegetation, that this resemblance
is so instructive as an indication of the temper of the builders. It was
no chance suggestion of the form of an arch from the bending of a bough,
but a gradual and continual discovery of a beauty in natural forms which
could be more and more perfectly transferred into those of stone, that
influenced at once the heart of the people, and the form of the edifice.
The Gothic architecture arose in massy and mountainous strength,
axe-hewn, and iron-bound, block heaved upon block by the monk's
enthusiasm and the soldier's force; and cramped and stanchioned into
such weight of grisly wall, as might bury the anchoret in darkness, and
beat back the utmost storm of battle, suffering but by the same narrow
crosslet the passing of the sunbeam, or of the arrow. Gradually, as that
monkish enthusiasm became more thoughtful, and as the sound of war
became more and more intermittent beyond the gates of the convent or the
keep, the stony pillar grew slender and the vaulted roof grew light,
till they had wreathed themselves into the semblance of the summer woods
at their fairest, and of the dead field-flowers, long trodden down in
blood, sweet monumental statues were set to bloom for ever, beneath the
porch of the temple, or the canopy of the tomb.

§ LXXI. Nor is it only as a sign of greater gentleness or refinement of
mind, but as a proof of the best possible direction of this refinement,
that the tendency of the Gothic to the expression of vegetative life is
to be admired. That sentence of Genesis, "I have given thee every green
herb for meat," like all the rest of the book, has a profound symbolical
as well as a literal meaning. It is not merely the nourishment of the
body, but the food of the soul, that is intended. The green herb is, of
all nature, that which is most essential to the healthy spiritual life
of man. Most of us do not need fine scenery; the precipice and the
mountain peak are not intended to be seen by all men,--perhaps their
power is greatest over those who are unaccustomed to them. But trees,
and fields, and flowers were made for all, and are necessary for all.
God has connected the labor which is essential to the bodily sustenance,
with the pleasures which are healthiest for the heart; and while He made
the ground stubborn, He made its herbage fragrant, and its blossoms
fair. The proudest architecture that man can build has no higher honor
than to bear the image and recall the memory of that grass of the field
which is, at once, the type and the support of his existence; the goodly
building is then most glorious when it is sculptured into the likeness
of the leaves of Paradise; and the great Gothic spirit, as we showed it
to be noble in its disquietude, is also noble in its hold of nature; it
is, indeed, like the dove of Noah, in that she found no rest upon the
face of the waters,--but like her in this also, "LO, IN HER MOUTH WAS AN
OLIVE BRANCH, PLUCKED OFF."

§ LXXII. The fourth essential element of the Gothic mind was above
stated to be the sense of the GROTESQUE; but I shall defer the endeavor
to define this most curious and subtle character until we have occasion
to examine one of the divisions of the Renaissance schools, which was
morbidly influenced by it (Vol. III. Chap. III.). It is the less
necessary to insist upon it here, because every reader familiar with
Gothic architecture must understand what I mean, and will, I believe,
have no hesitation in admitting that the tendency to delight in
fantastic and ludicrous, as well as in sublime, images, is a universal
instinct of the Gothic imagination.

§ LXXIII. The fifth element above named was RIGIDITY; and this character
I must endeavor carefully to define, for neither the word I have used,
nor any other that I can think of, will express it accurately. For I
mean, not merely stable, but _active_ rigidity; the peculiar energy
which gives tension to movement, and stiffness to resistance, which
makes the fiercest lightning forked rather than curved, and the stoutest
oak-branch angular rather than bending, and is as much seen in the
quivering of the lance as in the glittering of the icicle.

§ LXXIV. I have before had occasion (Vol. I. Chap. XIII. § VII.) to note
some manifestations of this energy or fixedness; but it must be still
more attentively considered here, as it shows itself throughout the
whole structure and decoration of Gothic work. Egyptian and Greek
buildings stand, for the most part, by their own weight and mass, one
stone passively incumbent on another: but in the Gothic vaults and
traceries there is a stiffness analogous to that of the bones of a limb,
or fibres of a tree; an elastic tension and communication of force from
part to part, and also a studious expression of this throughout every
visible line of the building. And, in like manner, the Greek and
Egyptian ornament is either mere surface engraving, as if the face of
the wall had been stamped with a seal, or its lines are flowing, lithe,
and luxuriant; in either case, there is no expression of energy in
framework of the ornament itself. But the Gothic ornament stands out in
prickly independence, and frosty fortitude, jutting into crockets, and
freezing into pinnacles; here starting up into a monster, there
germinating into a blossom; anon knitting itself into a branch,
alternately thorny, bossy, and bristly, or writhed into every form of
nervous entanglement; but, even when most graceful, never for an instant
languid, always quickset; erring, if at all, ever on the side of
brusquerie.

§ LXXV. The feelings or habits in the workman which give rise to this
character in the work, are more complicated and various than those
indicated by any other sculptural expression hitherto named. There is,
first, the habit of hard and rapid working; the industry of the tribes
of the North, quickened by the coldness of the climate, and giving an
expression of sharp energy to all they do (as above noted, Vol. I. Chap.
XIII. § VII.), as opposed to the languor of the Southern tribes, however
much of fire there may be in the heart of that languor, for lava itself
may flow languidly. There is also the habit of finding enjoyment in the
signs of cold, which is never found, I believe, in the inhabitants of
countries south of the Alps. Cold is to them an unredeemed evil, to be
suffered, and forgotten as soon as may be; but the long winter of the
North forces the Goth (I mean the Englishman, Frenchman, Dane, or
German), if he would lead a happy life at all, to find sources of
happiness in foul weather as well as fair, and to rejoice in the
leafless as well as in the shady forest. And this we do with all our
hearts; finding perhaps nearly as much contentment by the Christmas fire
as in the summer sunshine, and gaining health and strength on the
ice-fields of winter, as well as among the meadows of spring. So that
there is nothing adverse or painful to our feelings in the cramped and
stiffened structure of vegetation checked by cold; and instead of
seeking, like the Southern sculptor, to express only the softness of
leafage nourished in all tenderness, and tempted into all luxuriance by
warm winds and glowing rays, we find pleasure in dwelling upon the
crabbed, perverse, and morose animation of plants that have known little
kindness from earth or heaven, but, season after season, have had their
best efforts palsied by frost, their brightest buds buried under snow,
and their goodliest limbs lopped by tempest.

§ LXXVI. There are many subtle sympathies and affections which join to
confirm the Gothic mind in this peculiar choice of subject; and when we
add to the influence of these, the necessities consequent upon the
employment of a rougher material, compelling the workman to seek for
vigor of effect, rather than refinement of texture or accuracy of form,
we have direct and manifest causes for much of the difference between
the northern and southern cast of conception: but there are indirect
causes holding a far more important place in the Gothic heart, though
less immediate in their influence on design. Strength of will,
independence of character, resoluteness of purpose, impatience of undue
control, and that general tendency to set the individual reason against
authority, and the individual deed against destiny, which, in the
Northern tribes, has opposed itself throughout all ages to the languid
submission, in the Southern, of thought to tradition, and purpose to
fatality, are all more or less traceable in the rigid lines, vigorous
and various masses, and daringly projecting and independent structure of
the Northern Gothic ornament: while the opposite feelings are in like
manner legible in the graceful and softly guided waves and wreathed
bands, in which Southern decoration is constantly disposed; in its
tendency to lose its independence, and fuse itself into the surface of
the masses upon which it is traced; and in the expression seen so often,
in the arrangement of those masses themselves, of an abandonment of
their strength to an inevitable necessity, or a listless repose.

§ LXXVII. There is virtue in the measure, and error in the excess, of
both these characters of mind, and in both of the styles which they have
created; the best architecture, and the best temper, are those which
unite them both; and this fifth impulse of the Gothic heart is therefore
that which needs most caution in its indulgence. It is more definitely
Gothic than any other, but the best Gothic building is not that which is
_most_ Gothic: it can hardly be too frank in its confession of rudeness,
hardly too rich in its changefulness, hardly too faithful in its
naturalism; but it may go too far in its rigidity, and, like the great
Puritan spirit in its extreme, lose itself either in frivolity of
division, or perversity of purpose.[67] It actually did so in its later
times; but it is gladdening to remember that in its utmost nobleness,
the very temper which has been thought most adverse to it, the
Protestant spirit of self-dependence and inquiry, was expressed in its
every line. Faith and aspiration there were, in every Christian
ecclesiastical building, from the first century to the fifteenth; but
the moral habits to which England in this age owes the kind of greatness
that she has,--the habits of philosophical investigation, of accurate
thought, of domestic seclusion and independence, of stern self-reliance,
and sincere upright searching into religious truth,--were only traceable
in the features which were the distinctive creation of the Gothic
schools, in the veined foliage, and thorny fretwork, and shadowy niche,
and buttressed pier, and fearless height of subtle pinnacle and crested
tower, sent like an "unperplexed question up to Heaven."[68]

§ LXXVIII. Last, because the least essential, of the constituent
elements of this noble school, was placed that of REDUNDANCE,--the
uncalculating bestowal of the wealth of its labor. There is, indeed,
much Gothic, and that of the best period, in which this element is
hardly traceable, and which depends for its effect almost exclusively on
loveliness of simple design and grace of uninvolved proportion: still,
in the most characteristic buildings, a certain portion of their effect
depends upon accumulation of ornament; and many of those which have most
influence on the minds of men, have attained it by means of this
attribute alone. And although, by careful study of the school, it is
possible to arrive at a condition of taste which shall be better
contented by a few perfect lines than by a whole façade covered with
fretwork, the building which only satisfies such a taste is not to be
considered the best. For the very first requirement of Gothic
architecture being, as we saw above, that it shall both admit the aid,
and appeal to the admiration, of the rudest as well as the most refined
minds, the richness of the work is, paradoxical as the statement may
appear, a part of its humility. No architecture is so haughty as that
which is simple; which refuses to address the eye, except in a few clear
and forceful lines; which implies, in offering so little to our regards,
that all it has offered is perfect; and disdains, either by the
complexity or the attractiveness of its features, to embarrass our
investigation, or betray us into delight. That humility, which is the
very life of the Gothic school, is shown not only in the imperfection,
but in the accumulation, of ornament. The inferior rank of the workman
is often shown as much in the richness, as the roughness, of his work;
and if the co-operation of every hand, and the sympathy of every heart,
are to be received, we must be content to allow the redundance which
disguises the failure of the feeble, and wins the regard of the
inattentive. There are, however, far nobler interests mingling, in the
Gothic heart, with the rude love of decorative accumulation: a
magnificent enthusiasm, which feels as if it never could do enough to
reach the fulness of its ideal; an unselfishness of sacrifice, which
would rather cast fruitless labor before the altar than stand idle in
the market; and, finally, a profound sympathy with the fulness and
wealth of the material universe, rising out of that Naturalism whose
operation we have already endeavored to define. The sculptor who sought
for his models among the forest leaves, could not but quickly and deeply
feel that complexity need not involve the loss of grace, nor richness
that of repose; and every hour which he spent in the study of the minute
and various work of Nature, made him feel more forcibly the barrenness
of what was best in that of man: nor is it to be wondered at, that,
seeing her perfect and exquisite creations poured forth in a profusion
which conception could not grasp nor calculation sum, he should think
that it ill became him to be niggardly of his own rude craftsmanship;
and where he saw throughout the universe a faultless beauty lavished on
measureless spaces of broidered field and blooming mountain, to grudge
his poor and imperfect labor to the few stones that he had raised one
upon another, for habitation or memorial. The years of his life passed
away before his task was accomplished; but generation succeeded
generation with unwearied enthusiasm, and the cathedral front was at
last lost in the tapestry of its traceries, like a rock among the
thickets and herbage of spring.

§ LXXIX. We have now, I believe, obtained a view approaching to
completeness of the various moral or imaginative elements which composed
the inner spirit of Gothic architecture. We have, in the second place,
to define its outward form.

Now, as the Gothic spirit is made up of several elements, some of which
may, in particular examples, be wanting, so the Gothic form is made up
of minor conditions of form, some of which may, in particular examples,
be imperfectly developed.

We cannot say, therefore, that a building is either Gothic or not Gothic
in form, any more than we can in spirit. We can only say that it is more
or less Gothic, in proportion to the number of Gothic forms which it
unites.

§ LXXX. There have been made lately many subtle and ingenious endeavors
to base the definition of Gothic form entirely upon the roof-vaulting;
endeavors which are both forced and futile: for many of the best Gothic
buildings in the world have roofs of timber, which have no more
connexion with the main structure of the walls of the edifice than a hat
has with that of the head it protects; and other Gothic buildings are
merely enclosures of spaces, as ramparts and walls, or enclosures of
gardens or cloisters, and have no roofs at all, in the sense in which
the word "roof" is commonly accepted. But every reader who has ever
taken the slightest interest in architecture must know that there is a
great popular impression on this matter, which maintains itself stiffly
in its old form, in spite of all ratiocination and definition; namely,
that a flat lintel from pillar to pillar is Grecian, a round arch Norman
or Romanesque, and a pointed arch Gothic.

And the old popular notion, as far as it goes, is perfectly right, and
can never be bettered. The most striking outward feature in all Gothic
architecture is, that it is composed of pointed arches, as in Romanesque
that it is in like manner composed of round; and this distinction would
be quite as clear, though the roofs were taken off every cathedral in
Europe. And yet, if we examine carefully into the real force and meaning
of the term "roof" we shall perhaps be able to retain the old popular
idea in a definition of Gothic architecture which shall also express
whatever dependence that architecture has upon true forms of roofing.

§ LXXXI. In Chap. XIII. of the first volume, the reader will remember
that roofs were considered as generally divided into two parts; the roof
proper, that is to say, the shell, vault, or ceiling, internally
visible; and the roof-mask, which protects this lower roof from the
weather. In some buildings these parts are united in one framework; but,
in most, they are more or less independent of each other, and in nearly
all Gothic buildings there is considerable interval between them.

Now it will often happen, as above noticed, that owing to the nature of
the apartments required, or the materials at hand, the roof proper may
be flat, coved, or domed, in buildings which in their walls employ
pointed arches, and are, in the straitest sense of the word, Gothic in
all other respects. Yet so far forth as the roofing alone is concerned,
they are not Gothic unless the pointed arch be the principal form
adopted either in the stone vaulting or the timbers of the roof proper.

I shall say then, in the first place, that "Gothic architecture is that
which uses, if possible, the pointed arch in the roof proper." This is
the first step in our definition.

§ LXXXII. Secondly. Although there may be many advisable or necessary
forms for the lower roof or ceiling, there is, in cold countries exposed
to rain and snow, only one advisable form for the roof-mask, and that is
the gable, for this alone will throw off both rain and snow from all
parts of its surface as speedily as possible. Snow can lodge on the top
of a dome, not on the ridge of a gable. And thus, as far as roofing is
concerned, the gable is a far more essential feature of Northern
architecture than the pointed vault, for the one is a thorough
necessity, the other often a graceful conventionality: the gable occurs
in the timber roof of every dwelling-house and every cottage, but not
the vault; and the gable built on a polygonal or circular plan, is the
origin of the turret and spire;[69] and all the so-called aspiration of
Gothic architecture is, as above noticed (Vol. I. Chap. XII. § VI.),
nothing more than its developement. So that we must add to our
definition another clause, which will be, at present, by far the most
important, and it will stand thus: "Gothic architecture is that which
uses the pointed arch for the roof proper, and the gable for the
roof-mask."

§ LXXXIII. And here, in passing, let us notice a principle as true in
architecture as in morals. It is not the _compelled_, but the _wilful_,
transgression of law which corrupts the character. Sin is not in the
act, but in the choice. It is a law for Gothic architecture, that it
shall use the pointed arch for its roof proper; but because, in many
cases of domestic building, this becomes impossible for want of room
(the whole height of the apartment being required everywhere), or in
various other ways inconvenient, flat ceilings may be used, and yet the
Gothic shall not lose its purity. But in the roof-mask, there can be no
necessity nor reason for a change of form: the gable is the best; and if
any other--dome, or bulging crown, or whatsoever else--be employed at
all, it must be in pure caprice, and wilful transgression of law. And
wherever, therefore, this is done, the Gothic has lost its character; it
is pure Gothic no more.

§ LXXXIV. And this last clause of the definition is to be more strongly
insisted upon, because it includes multitudes of buildings, especially
domestic, which are Gothic in spirit, but which we are not in the habit
of embracing in our general conception of Gothic architecture;
multitudes of street dwelling-houses and straggling country farm-houses,
built with little care for beauty, or observance of Gothic laws in
vaults or windows, and yet maintaining their character by the sharp and
quaint gables of the roofs. And, for the reason just given, a house is
far more Gothic which has square windows, and a boldly gabled roof, than
the one which has pointed arches for the windows, and a domed or flat
roof. For it often happened in the best Gothic times, as it must in all
times, that it was more easy and convenient to make a window square than
pointed; not but that, as above emphatically stated, the richness of
church architecture was also found in domestic; and systematically "when
the pointed arch was used in the church it was used in the street," only
in all times there were cases in which men could not build as they
would, and were obliged to construct their doors or windows in the
readiest way; and this readiest way was then, in small work, as it will
be to the end of time, to put a flat stone for a lintel and build the
windows as in Fig. VIII.; and the occurrence of such windows in a
building or a street will not un-Gothicize them, so long as the bold
gable roof be retained, and the spirit of the work be visibly Gothic in
other respects. But if the roof be wilfully and conspicuously of any
other form than the gable,--if it be domed, or Turkish, or Chinese,--the
building has positive corruption mingled with its Gothic elements, in
proportion to the conspicuousness of the roof; and, if not absolutely
un-Gothicized, can maintain its character only by such vigor of vital
Gothic energy in other parts as shall cause the roof to be forgotten,
thrown off like an eschar from the living frame. Nevertheless, we must
always admit that it _may_ be forgotten, and that if the Gothic seal be
indeed set firmly on the walls, we are not to cavil at the forms
reserved for the tiles and leads. For, observe, as our definition at
present stands, being understood of large roofs only, it will allow a
conical glass-furnace to be a Gothic building, but will _not_ allow so
much, either of the Duomo of Florence, or the Baptistery of Pisa. We
must either mend it, therefore, or understand it in some broader sense.

[Illustration: Fig. VIII.]

§ LXXXV. And now, if the reader will look back to the fifth paragraph of
Chap. III. Vol. I., he will find that I carefully extended my definition
of a roof so as to include more than is usually understood by the term.
It was there said to be the covering of a space, _narrow or wide_. It
does not in the least signify, with respect to the real nature of the
covering, whether the space protected be two feet wide, or ten; though
in the one case we call the protection an arch, in the other a vault or
roof. But the real point to be considered is, the manner in which this
protection stands, and not whether it is narrow or broad. We call the
vaulting of a bridge "an arch," because it is narrow with respect to the
river it crosses; but if it were built above us on the ground, we should
call it a waggon vault, because then we should feel the breadth of it.
The real question is the nature of the curve, not the extent of space
over which it is carried: and this is more the case with respect to
Gothic than to any other architecture; for, in the greater number of
instances, the form of the roof is entirely dependent on the ribs; the
domical shells being constructed in all kinds of inclinations, quite
undeterminable by the eye, and all that is definite in their character
being fixed by the curves of the ribs.

[Illustration: Fig. IX.]

§ LXXXVI. Let us then consider our definition as including the narrowest
arch, or tracery bar, as well as the broadest roof, and it will be
nearly a perfect one. For the fact is, that all good Gothic is nothing
more than the developement, in various ways, and on every conceivable
scale, of the group formed by the _pointed arch for the bearing line_
below, and _the gable for the protecting line_ above; and from the huge,
gray, shaly slope of the cathedral roof, with its elastic pointed vaults
beneath, to the slight crown-like points that enrich the smallest niche
of its doorway, one law and one expression will be found in all. The
modes of support and of decoration are infinitely various, but the real
character of the building, in all good Gothic, depends upon the single
lines of the gable over the pointed arch, Fig. IX., endlessly rearranged
or repeated. The larger woodcut, Fig. X., represents three
characteristic conditions of the treatment of the group: _a_, from a
tomb at Verona (1328); _b_, one of the lateral porches at Abbeville;
_c_, one of the uppermost points of the great western façade of Rouen
Cathedral; both these last being, I believe, early work of the fifteenth
century. The forms of the pure early English and French Gothic are too
well known to need any notice; my reason will appear presently for
choosing, by way of example, these somewhat rare conditions.

[Illustration: Fig. X.]

§ LXXXVII. But, first, let us try whether we cannot get the forms of the
other great architectures of the world broadly expressed by relations of
the same lines into which we have compressed the Gothic. We may easily
do this if the reader will first allow me to remind him of the true
nature of the pointed arch, as it was expressed in § X. Chap. X. of the
first volume. It was said there, that it ought to be called a "curved
gable," for, strictly speaking, an "arch" cannot be "pointed." The
so-called pointed arch ought always to be considered as a gable, with
its sides curved in order to enable them to bear pressure from without.
Thus considering it, there are but three ways in which an interval
between piers can be bridged,--the three ways represented by A, B, and
C, Fig. XI.,[70] on page 213,--A, the lintel; B, the round arch; C, the
gable. All the architects in the world will never discover any other
ways of bridging a space than these three; they may vary the curve of
the arch, or curve the sides of the gable, or break them; but in doing
this they are merely modifying or subdividing, not adding to the generic
forms.

§ LXXXVIII. Now there are three good architectures in the world, and
there never can be more, correspondent to each of these three simple
ways of covering in a space, which is the original function of all
architectures. And those three architectures are _pure_ exactly in
proportion to the simplicity and directness with which they express the
condition of roofing on which they are founded. They have many
interesting varieties, according to their scale, manner of decoration,
and character of the nations by whom they are practised, but all their
varieties are finally referable to the three great heads:--

  A, Greek: Architecture of the Lintel.
  B, Romanesque: Architecture of the Round Arch.
  C, Gothic: Architecture of the Gable.

[Illustration: Fig. XI.]

The three names, Greek, Romanesque, and Gothic, are indeed inaccurate
when used in this vast sense, because they imply national limitations;
but the three architectures may nevertheless not unfitly receive their
names from those nations by whom they were carried to the highest
perfections. We may thus briefly state their existing varieties.

§ LXXXIX. A. GREEK: Lintel Architecture. The worst of the three; and,
considered with reference to stone construction, always in some measure
barbarous. Its simplest type is Stonehenge; its most refined, the
Parthenon; its noblest, the Temple of Karnak.

In the hands of the Egyptian, it is sublime; in those of the Greek,
pure; in those of the Roman, rich; and in those of the Renaissance
builder, effeminate.

B. ROMANESQUE: Round-arch Architecture. Never thoroughly developed until
Christian times. It falls into two great branches, Eastern and Western,
or Byzantine and Lombardic; changing respectively in process of time,
with certain helps from each other, into Arabian Gothic and Teutonic
Gothic. Its most perfect Lombardic type is the Duomo of Pisa; its most
perfect Byzantine type (I believe), St. Mark's at Venice. Its highest
glory is, that it has no corruption. It perishes in giving birth to
another architecture as noble as itself.

C. GOTHIC: Architecture of the Gable. The daughter of the Romanesque;
and, like the Romanesque, divided into two great branches, Western and
Eastern, or pure Gothic and Arabian Gothic; of which the latter is
called Gothic, only because it has many Gothic forms, pointed arches,
vaults, &c., but its spirit remains Byzantine, more especially in the
form of the roof-mask, of which, with respect to these three great
families, we have next to determine the typical form.

§ XC. For, observe, the distinctions we have hitherto been stating,
depend on the form of the stones first laid from pier to pier; that is
to say, of the simplest condition of roofs proper. Adding the relations
of the roof-mask to these lines, we shall have the perfect type of form
for each school.

[Illustration: Fig. XII.]

In the Greek, the Western Romanesque, and Western Gothic, the roof-mask
is the gable: in the Eastern Romanesque, and Eastern Gothic, it is the
dome: but I have not studied the roofing of either of these last two
groups, and shall not venture to generalize them in a diagram. But the
three groups, in the hands of the Western builders, may be thus simply
represented: _a_, Fig. XII., Greek;[71] _b_, Western Romanesque; _c_,
Western, or true, Gothic.

Now, observe, first, that the relation of the roof-mask to the roof
proper, in the Greek type, forms that pediment which gives its most
striking character to the temple, and is the principal recipient of its
sculptural decoration. The relation of these lines, therefore, is just
as important in the Greek as in the Gothic schools.

[Illustration: Fig. XIII.]

§ XCI. Secondly, the reader must observe the difference of steepness in
the Romanesque and Gothic gables. This is not an unimportant
distinction, nor an undecided one. The Romanesque gable does not pass
gradually into the more elevated form; there is a great gulf between the
two; the whole effect of all Southern architecture being dependent upon
the use of the flat gable, and of all Northern upon that of the acute. I
need not here dwell upon the difference between the lines of an Italian
village, or the flat tops of most Italian towers, and the peaked gables
and spires of the North, attaining their most fantastic developement, I
believe, in Belgium: but it may be well to state the law of separation,
namely, that a Gothic gable _must_ have all its angles acute, and a
Romanesque one _must_ have the upper one obtuse: or, to give the reader
a simple practical rule, take any gable, _a_ or _b_, Fig. XIII., and
strike a semicircle on its base; if its top rises above the semicircle,
as at _b_, it is a Gothic gable; if it falls beneath it, a Romanesque
one; but the best forms in each group are those which are distinctly
steep, or distinctly low. In the figure _f_ is, perhaps, the average of
Romanesque slope, and _g_ of Gothic.

[Illustration: Fig. XIV.]

§ XCII. But although we do not find a transition from one school into
the other in the slope of the gables, there is often a confusion between
the two schools in the association of the gable with the arch below it.
It has just been stated that the pure Romanesque condition is the round
arch under the low gable, _a_, Fig. XIV., and the pure Gothic condition
is the pointed arch under the high gable, _b_. But in the passage from
one style to the other, we sometimes find the two conditions reversed;
the pointed arch under a low gable, as _d_, or the round arch under a
high gable, as _c_. The form _d_ occurs in the tombs of Verona, and _c_
in the doors of Venice.

§ XCIII. We have thus determined the relation of Gothic to the other
architectures of the world, as far as regards the main lines of its
construction; but there is still one word which needs to be added to our
definition of its form, with respect to a part of its decoration, which
rises out of that construction. We have seen that the first condition of
its form is, that it shall have pointed arches. When Gothic is perfect,
therefore, it will follow that the pointed arches must be built in the
strongest possible manner.

[Illustration: Fig. XV.]

Now, if the reader will look back to Chapter XI. of Vol. I., he will
find the subject of the masonry of the pointed arch discussed at length,
and the conclusion deduced, that of all possible forms of the pointed
arch (a certain weight of material being given), that generically
represented at _e_, Fig. XV., is the strongest. In fact, the reader can
see in a moment that the weakness of the pointed arch is in its flanks,
and that by merely thickening them gradually at this point all chance of
fracture is removed. Or, perhaps, more simply still:--Suppose a gable
built of stone, as at _a_, and pressed upon from without by a weight in
the direction of the arrow, clearly it would be liable to fall in, as at
_b_. To prevent this, we make a pointed arch of it, as at _c_; and now
it cannot fall inwards, but if pressed upon from above may give way
outwards, as at _d_. But at last we build as at _e_, and now it can
neither fall out nor in.

§ XCIV. The forms of arch thus obtained, with a pointed projection
called a cusp on each side, must for ever be delightful to the human
mind, as being expressive of the utmost strength and permanency
obtainable with a given mass of material. But it was not by any such
process of reasoning, nor with any reference to laws of construction,
that the cusp was originally invented. It is merely the special
application to the arch of the great ornamental system of FOLIATION; or
the adaptation of the forms of leafage which has been above insisted
upon as the principal characteristic of Gothic Naturalism. This love of
foliage was exactly proportioned, in its intensity, to the increase of
strength in the Gothic spirit: in the Southern Gothic it is _soft_
leafage that is most loved; in the Northern _thorny_ leafage. And if we
take up any Northern illuminated manuscript of the great Gothic time, we
shall find every one of its leaf ornaments surrounded by a thorny
structure laid round it in gold or in color; sometimes apparently copied
faithfully from the prickly developement of the root of the leaf in the
thistle, running along the stems and branches exactly as the thistle
leaf does along its own stem, and with sharp spines proceeding from the
points, as in Fig. XVI. At other times, and for the most part in work in
the thirteenth century, the golden ground takes the form of pure and
severe cusps, sometimes enclosing the leaves, sometimes filling up the
forks of the branches (as in the example fig. 1, Plate I. Vol. III.),
passing imperceptibly from the distinctly vegetable condition (in which
it is just as certainly representative of the thorn, as other parts of
the design are of the bud, leaf, and fruit) into the crests on the
necks, or the membranous sails of the wings, of serpents, dragons, and
other grotesques, as in Fig. XVII., and into rich and vague fantasies of
curvature; among which, however, the pure cusped system of the pointed
arch is continually discernible, not accidentally, but designedly
indicated, and connecting itself with the literally architectural
portions of the design.

[Illustration: Fig. XVI.]

[Illustration: Fig. XVII.]

§ XCV. The system, then, of what is called Foliation, whether simple, as
in the cusped arch, or complicated, as in tracery, rose out of this love
of leafage; not that the form of the arch is intended to _imitate_ a
leaf, but _to be invested with the same characters of beauty which the
designer had discovered in the leaf_. Observe, there is a wide
difference between these two intentions. The idea that large Gothic
structure, in arches and roofs, was intended to imitate vegetation is,
as above noticed, untenable for an instant in the front of facts. But
the Gothic builder perceived that, in the leaves which he copied for his
minor decorations, there was a peculiar beauty, arising from certain
characters of curvature in outline, and certain methods of subdivision
and of radiation in structure. On a small scale, in his sculptures and
his missal-painting, he copied the leaf or thorn itself; on a large
scale he adopted from it its abstract sources of beauty, and gave the
same kinds of curvatures and the same species of subdivision to the
outline of his arches, so far as was consistent with their strength,
never, in any single instance, suggesting the resemblance to leafage by
_irregularity_ of outline, but keeping the structure perfectly simple,
and, as we have seen, so consistent with the best principles of masonry,
that in the finest Gothic designs of arches, which are always _single_
cusped (the cinquefoiled arch being licentious, though in early work
often very lovely), it is literally impossible, without consulting the
context of the building, to say whether the cusps have been added for
the sake of beauty or of strength; nor, though in mediæval architecture
they were, I believe, assuredly first employed in mere love of their
picturesque form, am I absolutely certain that their earliest invention
was not a structural effort. For the earliest cusps with which I am
acquainted are those used in the vaults of the great galleries of the
Serapeum, discovered in 1850 by M. Maniette at Memphis, and described by
Colonel Hamilton in a paper read in February last before the Royal
Society of Literature.[72] The roofs of its galleries were admirably
shown in Colonel Hamilton's drawings made to scale upon the spot, and
their profile is a cusped round arch, perfectly pure and simple; but
whether thrown into this form for the sake of strength or of grace, I am
unable to say.

§ XCVI. It is evident, however, that the structural advantage of the
cusp is available only in the case of arches on a comparatively small
scale. If the arch becomes very large, the projections under the flanks
must become too ponderous to be secure; the suspended weight of stone
would be liable to break off, and such arches are therefore never
constructed with heavy cusps, but rendered secure by general mass of
masonry; and what additional _appearance_ of support may be thought
necessary (sometimes a considerable degree of _actual_ support) is given
by means of tracery.

[Illustration: Fig. XVIII.]

§ XCVII. Of what I stated in the second chapter of the "Seven Lamps"
respecting the nature of tracery, I need repeat here only this much,
that it began in the use of penetrations through the stone-work of
windows or walls, cut into forms which looked like stars when seen from
within, and like leaves when seen from without: the name foil or feuille
being universally applied to the separate lobes of their extremities,
and the pleasure received from them being the same as that which we feel
in the triple, quadruple, or other radiated leaves of vegetation, joined
with the perception of a severely geometrical order and symmetry. A few
of the most common forms are represented, unconfused by exterior
mouldings, in Fig. XVIII., and the best traceries are nothing more than
close clusters of such forms, with mouldings following their outlines.

§ XCVIII. The term "foliated," therefore, is equally descriptive of the
most perfect conditions both of the simple arch and of the traceries by
which, in later Gothic, it is filled; and this foliation is an essential
character of the style. No Gothic is either good or characteristic which
is not foliated either in its arches or apertures. Sometimes the bearing
arches are foliated, and the ornamentation above composed of figure
sculpture; sometimes the bearing arches are plain, and the ornamentation
above them is composed of foliated apertures. But the element of
foliation _must_ enter somewhere, or the style is imperfect. And our
final definition of Gothic will, therefore, stand thus:--

"_Foliated_ Architecture, which uses the pointed arch for the roof
proper, and the gable for the roof-mask."

§ XCIX. And now there is but one point more to be examined, and we have
done.

[Illustration: Fig. XIX.]

Foliation, while it is the most distinctive and peculiar, is also the
easiest method of decoration which Gothic architecture possesses; and,
although in the disposition of the proportions and forms of foils, the
most noble imagination may be shown, yet a builder without imagination
at all, or any other faculty of design, can produce some effect upon the
mass of his work by merely covering it with foolish foliation. Throw any
number of crossing lines together at random, as in Fig. XIX., and fill
their squares and oblong openings with quatrefoils and cinquefoils, and
you will immediately have what will stand, with most people, for very
satisfactory Gothic. The slightest possible acquaintance with existing
forms will enable any architect to vary his patterns of foliation with
as much ease as he would those of a kaleidoscope, and to produce a
building which the present European public will think magnificent,
though there may not be, from foundation to coping, one ray of
invention, or any other intellectual merit, in the whole mass of it. But
floral decoration, and the disposition of mouldings, require some skill
and thought; and, if they are to be agreeable at all, must be verily
invented, or accurately copied. They cannot be drawn altogether at
random, without becoming so commonplace as to involve detection: and
although, as I have just said, the noblest imagination may be shown in
the dispositions of traceries, there is far more room for its play and
power when those traceries are associated with floral or animal
ornament; and it is probable, _à priori_, that, wherever true invention
exists, such ornament will be employed in profusion.

§ C. Now, all Gothic may be divided into two vast schools, one early,
the other late;[73] of which the former, noble, inventive, and
progressive, uses the element of foliation moderately, that of floral
and figure sculpture decoration profusely; the latter, ignoble,
uninventive, and declining, uses foliation immoderately, floral and
figure sculpture subordinately. The two schools touch each other at that
instant of momentous change, dwelt upon in the "Seven Lamps," chap, ii.,
a period later or earlier in different districts, but which may be
broadly stated as the middle of the fourteenth century; both styles
being, of course, in their highest excellence at the moment when they
meet, the one ascending to the point of junction, the one declining from
it, but, at first, not in any marked degree, and only showing the
characters which justify its being above called, generically, ignoble,
as its declension reaches steeper slope.

§ CI. Of these two great schools, the first uses foliation only in large
and simple masses, and covers the minor members, cusps, &c., of that
foliation, with various sculpture. The latter decorates foliation itself
with minor foliation, and breaks its traceries into endless and
lace-like subdivision of tracery.

A few instances will explain the difference clearly. Fig. 2, Plate XII.,
represents half of an eight-foiled aperture from Salisbury; where the
element of foliation is employed in the larger disposition of the starry
form; but in the decoration of the cusp it has entirely disappeared, and
the ornament is floral.

[Illustration: Plate XII.
               LINEAR AND SURFACE GOTHIC.]

But in fig. 1, which is part of a fringe round one of the later windows
in Rouen Cathedral, the foliation is first carried boldly round the
arch, and then each cusp of it divided into other forms of foliation.
The two larger canopies of niches below, figs. 5 and 6, are respectively
those seen at the flanks of the two uppermost examples of gabled Gothic
in Fig. X., p. 213. Those examples were there chosen in order also to
illustrate the distinction in the character of ornamentation which we
are at present examining; and if the reader will look back to them, and
compare their methods of treatment, he will at once be enabled to fix
that distinction clearly in his mind. He will observe that in the
uppermost the element of foliation is scrupulously confined to the
bearing arches of the gable, and of the lateral niches, so that, on any
given side of the monument, only three foliated arches are discernible.
All the rest of the ornamentation is "bossy sculpture," set on the broad
marble surface. On the point of the gable are set the shield and
dog-crest of the Scalas, with its bronze wings, as of a dragon, thrown
out from it on either side; below, an admirably sculptured oak-tree
fills the centre of the field; beneath it is the death of Abel, Abel
lying dead upon his face on one side, Cain opposite, looking up to
heaven in terror: the border of the arch is formed of various leafage,
alternating with the scala shield; and the cusps are each filled by one
flower, and two broad flowing leaves. The whole is exquisitely relieved
by color; the ground being of pale red Verona marble, and the statues
and foliage of white Carrara marble, inlaid.

§ CII. The figure below it, _b_, represents the southern lateral door
of the principal church in Abbeville: the smallness of the scale
compelled me to make it somewhat heavier in the lines of its traceries
than it is in reality, but the door itself is one of the most exquisite
pieces of flamboyant Gothic in the world; and it is interesting to see
the shield introduced here, at the point of the gable, in exactly the
same manner as in the upper example, and with precisely the same
purpose,--to stay the eye in its ascent, and to keep it from being
offended by the sharp point of the gable, the reversed angle of the
shield being so energetic as completely to balance the upward tendency
of the great convergent lines. It will be seen, however, as this example
is studied, that its other decorations are altogether different from
those of the Veronese tomb; that, here, the whole effect is dependent on
mere multiplications of similar lines of tracery, sculpture being hardly
introduced except in the seated statue under the central niche, and,
formerly, in groups filling the shadowy hollows under the small niches
in the archivolt, but broken away in the Revolution. And if now we turn
to Plate XII., just passed, and examine the heads of the two lateral
niches there given from each of these monuments on a larger scale, the
contrast will be yet more apparent. The one from Abbeville (fig. 5),
though it contains much floral work of the crisp Northern kind in its
finial and crockets, yet depends for all its effect on the various
patterns of foliation with which its spaces are filled; and it is so cut
through and through that it is hardly stronger than a piece of lace:
whereas the pinnacle from Verona depends for its effect on one broad
mass of shadow, boldly shaped into the trefoil in its bearing arch; and
there is no other trefoil on that side of the niche. All the rest of its
decoration is floral, or by almonds and bosses; and its surface of stone
is unpierced, and kept in broad light, and the mass of it thick and
strong enough to stand for as many more centuries as it has already
stood, scatheless, in the open street of Verona. The figures 3 and 4,
above each niche, show how the same principles are carried out into the
smallest details of the two edifices, 3 being the moulding which
borders the gable at Abbeville, and 4, that in the same position at
Verona; and as thus in all cases the distinction in their treatment
remains the same, the one attracting the eye to broad sculptured
_surfaces_, the other to involutions of intricate _lines_, I shall
hereafter characterize the two schools, whenever I have occasion to
refer to them, the one as Surface-Gothic, the other as Linear-Gothic.

§ CIII. Now observe: it is not, at present, the question, whether the
form of the Veronese niche, and the design of its flower-work, be as
good as they might have been; but simply, which of the two architectural
principles is the greater and better. And this we cannot hesitate for an
instant in deciding. The Veronese Gothic is strong in its masonry,
simple in its masses, but perpetual in its variety. The late French
Gothic is weak in masonry, broken in mass, and repeats the same idea
continually. It is very beautiful, but the Italian Gothic is the nobler
style.

§ CIV. Yet, in saying that the French Gothic repeats one idea, I mean
merely that it depends too much upon the foliation of its traceries. The
disposition of the traceries themselves is endlessly varied and
inventive; and indeed, the mind of the French workman was, perhaps, even
richer in fancy than that of the Italian, only he had been taught a less
noble style. This is especially to be remembered with respect to the
subordination of figure sculpture above noticed as characteristic of the
later Gothic.

It is not that such sculpture is wanting; on the contrary, it is often
worked into richer groups, and carried out with a perfection of
execution, far greater than those which adorn the earlier buildings:
but, in the early work, it is vigorous, prominent, and essential to the
beauty of the whole; in the late work it is enfeebled, and shrouded in
the veil of tracery, from which it may often be removed with little harm
to the general effect.[74]

[Illustration: Fig. XX.]

§ CV. Now the reader may rest assured that no principle of art is more
absolute than this,--that a composition from which anything can be
removed without doing mischief is always so far forth inferior. On this
ground, therefore, if on no other, there can be no question, for a
moment, which of the two schools is the greater; although there are many
most noble works in the French traceried Gothic, having a sublimity of
their own dependent on their extreme richness and grace of line, and for
which we may be most grateful to their builders. And, indeed, the
superiority of the Surface-Gothic cannot be completely felt, until we
compare it with the more degraded Linear schools, as, for instance, with
our own English Perpendicular. The ornaments of the Veronese niche,
which we have used for our example, are by no means among the best of
their school, yet they will serve our purpose for such a comparison.
That of its pinnacle is composed of a single upright flowering plant, of
which the stem shoots up through the centres of the leaves, and bears a
pendent blossom, somewhat like that of the imperial lily. The leaves are
thrown back from the stem with singular grace and freedom, and
foreshortened, as if by a skilful painter, in the shallow marble relief.
Their arrangement is roughly shown in the little woodcut at the side
(Fig. XX.); and if the reader will simply try the experiment for
himself,--first, of covering a piece of paper with crossed lines, as if
for accounts, and filling all the interstices with any foliation that
comes into his head, as in Figure XIX. above; and then, of trying to
fill the point of a gable with a piece of leafage like that in Figure
XX. above, putting the figure itself aside,--he will presently find that
more thought and invention are required to design this single minute
pinnacle, than to cover acres of ground with English perpendicular.

§ CVI. We have now, I believe, obtained a sufficiently accurate
knowledge both of the spirit and form of Gothic architecture; but it
may, perhaps, be useful to the general reader, if, in conclusion, I set
down a few plain and practical rules for determining, in every instance,
whether a given building be good Gothic or not, and, if not Gothic,
whether its architecture is of a kind which will probably reward the
pains of careful examination.

§ CVII. First. Look if the roof rises in a steep gable, high above the
walls. If it does not do this, there is something wrong; the building is
not quite pure Gothic, or has been altered.

§ CVIII. Secondly. Look if the principal windows and doors have pointed
arches with gables over them. If not pointed arches, the building is not
Gothic; if they have not any gables over them, it is either not pure, or
not first-rate.

If, however, it has the steep roof, the pointed arch, and gable all
united, it is nearly certain to be a Gothic building of a very fine
time.

§ CIX. Thirdly. Look if the arches are cusped, or apertures foliated. If
the building has met the first two conditions, it is sure to be foliated
somewhere; but, if not everywhere, the parts which are unfoliated are
imperfect, unless they are large bearing arches, or small and sharp
arches in groups, forming a kind of foliation by their own multiplicity,
and relieved by sculpture and rich mouldings. The upper windows, for
instance, in the east end of Westminster Abbey are imperfect for want of
foliation. If there be no foliation anywhere, the building is assuredly
imperfect Gothic.

§ CX. Fourthly. If the building meets all the first three conditions,
look if its arches in general, whether of windows and doors, or of minor
ornamentation, are carried on _true shafts with bases and capitals_. If
they are, then the building is assuredly of the finest Gothic style. It
may still, perhaps, be an imitation, a feeble copy, or a bad example of
a noble style; but the manner of it, having met all these four
conditions, is assuredly first-rate.

If its apertures have not shafts and capitals, look if they are plain
openings in the walls, studiously simple, and unmoulded at the sides;
as, for instance, the arch in Plate XIX. Vol. I. If so, the building may
still be of the finest Gothic, adapted to some domestic or military
service. But if the sides of the window be moulded, and yet there are no
capitals at the spring of the arch, it is assuredly of an inferior
school.

This is all that is necessary to determine whether the building be of a
fine Gothic style. The next tests to be applied are in order to discover
whether it be good architecture or not: for it may be very impure
Gothic, and yet very noble architecture; or it may be very pure Gothic,
and yet, if a copy, or originally raised by an ungifted builder, very
bad architecture.

If it belong to any of the great schools of color, its criticism becomes
as complicated, and needs as much care, as that of a piece of music, and
no general rules for it can be given; but if not--

§ CXI. First. See if it looks as if it had been built by strong men; if
it has the sort of roughness, and largeness, and nonchalance, mixed in
places with the exquisite tenderness which seems always to be the
sign-manual of the broad vision, and massy power of men who can see
_past_ the work they are doing, and betray here and there something like
disdain for it. If the building has this character, it is much already
in its favor; it will go hard but it proves a noble one. If it has not
this, but is altogether accurate, minute, and scrupulous in its
workmanship, it must belong to either the very best or the very worst of
schools: the very best, in which exquisite design is wrought out with
untiring and conscientious care, as in the Giottesque Gothic; or the
very worst, in which mechanism has taken the place of design. It is more
likely, in general, that it should belong to the worst than the best: so
that, on the whole, very accurate workmanship is to be esteemed a bad
sign; and if there is nothing remarkable about the building but its
precision, it may be passed at once with contempt.

§ CXII. Secondly. Observe if it be irregular, its different parts
fitting themselves to different purposes, no one caring what becomes of
them, so that they do their work. If one part always answers accurately
to another part, it is sure to be a bad building; and the greater and
more conspicuous the irregularities, the greater the chances are that it
is a good one. For instance, in the Ducal Palace, of which a rough
woodcut is given in Chap. VIII., the general idea is sternly
symmetrical; but two windows are lower than the rest of the six; and if
the reader will count the arches of the small arcade as far as to the
great balcony, he will find it is not in the centre, but set to the
right-hand side by the whole width of one of those arches. We may be
pretty sure that the building is a good one; none but a master of his
craft would have ventured to do this.

§ CXIII. Thirdly. Observe if all the traceries, capitals, and other
ornaments are of perpetually varied design. If not, the work is
assuredly bad.

§ CXIV. Lastly. _Read_ the sculpture. Preparatory to reading it, you
will have to discover whether it is legible (and, if legible, it is
nearly certain to be worth reading). On a good building, the sculpture
is _always_ so set, and on such a scale, that at the ordinary distance
from which the edifice is seen, the sculpture shall be thoroughly
intelligible and interesting. In order to accomplish this, the uppermost
statues will be ten or twelve feet high, and the upper ornamentation
will be colossal, increasing in fineness as it descends, till on the
foundation it will often be wrought as if for a precious cabinet in a
king's chamber; but the spectator will not notice that the upper
sculptures are colossal. He will merely feel that he can see them
plainly, and make them all out at his ease.

And, having ascertained this, let him set himself to read them.
Thenceforward the criticism of the building is to be conducted precisely
on the same principles as that of a book; and it must depend on the
knowledge, feeling, and not a little on the industry and perseverance of
the reader, whether, even in the case of the best works, he either
perceive them to be great, or feel them to be entertaining.


FOOTNOTES

  [56] The third kind of ornament, the Renaissance, is that in which
    the inferior detail becomes principal, the executor of every minor
    portion being required to exhibit skill and possess knowledge as
    great as that which is possessed by the master of the design; and in
    the endeavor to endow him with this skill and knowledge, his own
    original power is overwhelmed, and the whole building becomes a
    wearisome exhibition of well-educated imbecility. We must fully
    inquire into the nature of this form of error, when we arrive at the
    examination of the Renaissance schools.

  [57] Vide Preface to "Fair Maid of Perth."

  [58] The Elgin marbles are supposed by many persons to be "perfect."
    In the most important portions they indeed approach perfection, but
    only there. The draperies are unfinished, the hair and wool of the
    animals are unfinished, and the entire bas-reliefs of the frieze are
    roughly cut.

  [59] In the eighth chapter we shall see a remarkable instance of
    this sacrifice of symmetry to convenience in the arrangement of the
    windows of the Ducal Palace.

  [60] I am always afraid to use this word "Composition;" it is so
    utterly misused in the general parlance respecting art. Nothing is
    more common than to hear divisions of art into "form, composition,
    and color," or "light and shade and composition," or "sentiment and
    composition," or it matters not what else and composition; the
    speakers in each case attaching a perfectly different meaning to the
    word, generally an indistinct one, and always a wrong one.
    Composition is, in plain English, "putting together," and it means
    the putting together of lines, of forms, of colors, of shades, or of
    ideas. Painters compose in color, compose in thought, compose in
    form, and compose in effect: the word being of use merely in order
    to express a scientific, disciplined, and inventive arrangement of
    any of these, instead of a merely natural or accidental one.

  [61] Design is used in this place as expressive of the power to
    arrange lines and colors nobly. By facts, I mean facts perceived by
    the eye and mind, not facts accumulated by knowledge. See the
    chapter on Roman Renaissance (Vol. III. Chap. II.) for this
    distinction.

  [62] "Earlier," that is to say, pre-Raphaelite ages. Men of this
    stamp will praise Claude, and such other comparatively debased
    artists; but they cannot taste the work of the thirteenth century.

  [63] Not selfish fear, caused by want of trust in God, or of
    resolution in the soul.

  [64] I reserve for another place the full discussion of this
    interesting subject, which here would have led me too far; but it
    must be noted, in passing, that this vulgar Purism, which rejects
    truth, not because it is vicious, but because it is humble, and
    consists not in choosing what is good, but in disguising what is
    rough, extends itself into every species of art. The most definite
    instance of it is the dressing of characters of peasantry in an
    opera or ballet scene; and the walls of our exhibitions are full of
    works of art which "exalt nature" in the same way, not by revealing
    what is great in the heart, but by smoothing what is coarse in the
    complexion. There is nothing, I believe, so vulgar, so hopeless, so
    indicative of an irretrievably base mind, as this species of Purism.
    Of healthy Purism carried to the utmost endurable length in this
    direction, exalting the heart first, and the features with it,
    perhaps the most characteristic instance I can give is Stothard's
    vignette to "Jorasse," in Rogers's Italy; at least it would be so if
    it could be seen beside a real group of Swiss girls. The poems of
    Rogers, compared with those of Crabbe, are admirable instances of
    the healthiest Purism and healthiest Naturalism in poetry. The first
    great Naturalists of Christian art were Orcagna and Giotto.

  [65] The reader will understand this in a moment by glancing at Plate
    XX., the last in this volume, where the series 1 to 12 represents
    the change in one kind of leaf, from the Byzantine to the perfect
    Gothic.

  [66] The best art either represents the facts of its own day, or, if
    facts of the past, expresses them with accessories of the time in
    which the work was done. All good art, representing past events, is
    therefore full of the most frank anachronism, and always _ought_ to
    be. No painter has any business to be an antiquarian. We do not want
    his impressions or suppositions respecting things that are past. We
    want his clear assertions respecting things present.

  [67] See the account of the meeting at Talla Linns, in 1682, given
    in the fourth chapter of the "Heart of Midlothian." At length they
    arrived at the conclusion that "they who owned (or allowed) such
    names as Monday, Tuesday, January, February, and so forth, served
    themselves heirs to the same if not greater punishment than had been
    denounced against the idolaters of old."

  [68] See the beautiful description of Florence in Elizabeth Browning's
    "Casa Guidi Windows," which is not only a noble poem, but the only
    book I have seen which, favoring the Liberal cause in Italy, gives a
    just account of the incapacities of the modern Italian.

  [69] Salisbury spire is only a tower with a polygonal gabled roof of
    stone, and so also the celebrated spires of Caen and Coutances.

  [70] Or by the shaded portions of Fig. XXIX. Vol. I.

  [71] The reader is not to suppose that Greek architecture had always,
    or often, flat ceilings, because I call its lintel the roof proper.
    He must remember I always use these terms of the first simple
    arrangements of materials that bridge a space; bringing in the real
    roof afterwards, if I can. In the case of Greek temples it would be
    vain to refer their structure to the real roof, for many were
    hypæthral, and without a roof at all. I am unfortunately more
    ignorant of Egyptian roofing than even of Arabian, so that I cannot
    bring this school into the diagram; but the gable appears to have
    been magnificently used for a bearing roof. Vide Mr. Fergusson's
    section of the Pyramid of Geezeh, "Principles of Beauty in Art,"
    Plate I., and his expressions of admiration of Egyptian roof
    masonry, page 201.

  [72] See 'Athenæum,' March 5th, 1853.

  [73] Late, and chiefly confined to Northern countries, so that the
    two schools may be opposed either as Early and Late Gothic, or (in
    the fourteenth century) as Southern and Northern Gothic.

  [74] In many of the best French Gothic churches, the groups of figures
    have been all broken away at the Revolution, without much harm to
    the picturesqueness, though with grievous loss to the historical
    value of the architecture: whereas, if from the niche at Verona we
    were to remove its floral ornaments, and the statue beneath it,
    nothing would remain but a rude square trefoiled shell, utterly
    valueless, or even ugly.




CHAPTER VII.

GOTHIC PALACES.


§ I. The buildings out of the remnants of which we have endeavored to
recover some conception of the appearance of Venice during the Byzantine
period, contribute hardly anything at this day to the effect of the
streets of the city. They are too few and too much defaced to attract
the eye or influence the feelings. The charm which Venice still
possesses, and which for the last fifty years has rendered it the
favorite haunt of all the painters of picturesque subject, is owing to
the effect of the palaces belonging to the period we have now to
examine, mingled with those of the Renaissance.

This effect is produced in two different ways. The Renaissance palaces
are not more picturesque in themselves than the club-houses of Pall
Mall; but they become delightful by the contrast of their severity and
refinement with the rich and rude confusion of the sea life beneath
them, and of their white and solid masonry with the green waves. Remove
from beneath them the orange sails of the fishing boats, the black
gliding of the gondolas, the cumbered decks and rough crews of the
barges of traffic, and the fretfulness of the green water along their
foundations, and the Renaissance palaces possess no more interest than
those of London or Paris. But the Gothic palaces are picturesque in
themselves, and wield over us an independent power. Sea and sky, and
every other accessory might be taken away from them, and still they
would be beautiful and strange. They are not less striking in the
loneliest streets of Padua and Vicenza (where many were built during the
period of the Venetian authority in those cities) than in the most
crowded thoroughfares of Venice itself; and if they could be
transported into the midst of London, they would still not altogether
lose their power over the feelings.

§ II. The best proof of this is in the perpetual attractiveness of all
pictures, however poor in skill, which have taken for their subject the
principal of these Gothic buildings, the Ducal Palace. In spite of all
architectural theories and teachings, the paintings of this building are
always felt to be delightful; we cannot be wearied by them, though often
sorely tried; but we are not put to the same trial in the case of the
palaces of the Renaissance. They are never drawn singly, or as the
principal subject, nor can they be. The building which faces the Ducal
Palace on the opposite side of the Piazzetta is celebrated among
architects, but it is not familiar to our eyes; it is painted only
incidentally, for the completion, not the subject, of a Venetian scene;
and even the Renaissance arcades of St. Mark's Place, though frequently
painted, are always treated as a mere avenue to its Byzantine church and
colossal tower. And the Ducal Palace itself owes the peculiar charm
which we have hitherto felt, not so much to its greater size as compared
with other Gothic buildings, or nobler design (for it never yet has been
rightly drawn), as to its comparative isolation. The other Gothic
structures are as much injured by the continual juxtaposition of the
Renaissance palaces, as the latter are aided by it; they exhaust their
own life by breathing it into the Renaissance coldness: but the Ducal
Palace stands comparatively alone, and fully expresses the Gothic power.

[Illustration: Fig. XXI.]

§ III. And it is just that it should be so seen, for it is the original
of nearly all the rest. It is not the elaborate and more studied
developement of a national style, but the great and sudden invention of
one man, instantly forming a national style, and becoming the model for
the imitation of every architect in Venice for upwards of a century. It
was the determination of this one fact which occupied me the greater
part of the time I spent in Venice. It had always appeared to me most
strange that there should be in no part of the city any incipient or
imperfect types of the form of the Ducal Palace; it was difficult to
believe that so mighty a building had been the conception of one man,
not only in disposition and detail, but in style; and yet impossible,
had it been otherwise, but that some early examples of approximate
Gothic form must exist. There is not one. The palaces built between the
final cessation of the Byzantine style, about 1300, and the date of the
Ducal Palace (1320-1350), are all completely distinct in character, so
distinct that I at first intended the account of them to form a separate
section of this volume; and there is literally _no_ transitional form
between them and the perfection of the Ducal Palace. Every Gothic
building in Venice which resembles the latter is a copy of it. I do not
mean that there was no Gothic in Venice before the Ducal Palace, but
that the mode of its application to domestic architecture had not been
determined. The real root of the Ducal Palace is the apse of the church
of the Frari. The traceries of that apse, though earlier and ruder in
workmanship, are nearly the same in mouldings, and precisely the same in
treatment (especially in the placing of the lions' heads), as those of
the great Ducal Arcade; and the originality of thought in the architect
of the Ducal Palace consists in his having adapted those traceries, in a
more highly developed and finished form, to civil uses. In the apse of
the church they form narrow and tall window lights, somewhat more
massive than those of Northern Gothic, but similar in application: the
thing to be done was to adapt these traceries to the forms of domestic
building necessitated by national usage. The early palaces consisted, as
we have seen, of arcades sustaining walls faced with marble, rather
broad and long than elevated. This form was kept for the Ducal Palace;
but instead of round arches from shaft to shaft, the Frari traceries
were substituted, with two essential modifications. Besides being
enormously increased in scale and thickness, that they might better bear
the superincumbent weight, the quatrefoil, which in the Frari windows is
above the arch, as at _a_, Fig. XXI., on previous page, was, in the
Ducal Palace, put between the arches, as at _b_; the main reason for
this alteration being that the bearing power of the arches, which was
now to be trusted with the weight of a wall forty feet high,[75] was
thus thrown _between_ the quatrefoils, instead of under them, and
thereby applied at far better advantage. And, in the second place, the
joints of the masonry were changed. In the Frari (as often also in St.
John and St. Paul's) the tracery is formed of two simple cross bars or
slabs of stone, pierced into the requisite forms, and separated by a
horizontal joint, just on a level with the lowest cusp of the
quatrefoils, as seen in Fig. XXI., _a_. But at the Ducal Palace the
horizontal joint is in the centre of the quatrefoils, and two others are
introduced beneath it at right angles to the run of the mouldings, as
seen in Fig. XXI., _b_.[76] The Ducal Palace builder was sternly
resolute in carrying out this rule of masonry. In the traceries of the
large upper windows, where the cusps are cut through as in the
quatrefoil Fig. XXII., the lower cusp is left partly solid, as at _a_,
merely that the joint _a b_ may have its right place and direction.

[Illustration: Fig. XXII.]

§ IV. The ascertaining the formation of the Ducal Palace traceries from
those of the Frari, and its priority to all other buildings which
resemble it in Venice, rewarded me for a great deal of uninteresting
labor in the examination of mouldings and other minor features of the
Gothic palaces, in which alone the internal evidence of their date was
to be discovered, there being no historical records whatever respecting
them. But the accumulation of details on which the complete proof of the
fact depends, could not either be brought within the compass of this
volume, or be made in anywise interesting to the general reader. I shall
therefore, without involving myself in any discussion, give a brief
account of the developement of Gothic design in Venice, as I believe it
to have taken place. I shall possibly be able at some future period so
to compress the evidence on which my conviction rests, as to render it
intelligible to the public, while, in the meantime, some of the more
essential points of it are thrown together in the Appendix, and in the
history of the Ducal Palace given in the next chapter.

§ V. According, then, to the statement just made, the Gothic
architecture of Venice is divided into two great periods: one, in which,
while various irregular Gothic tendencies are exhibited, no consistent
type of domestic building was developed; the other, in which a formed
and consistent school of domestic architecture resulted from the direct
imitation of the great design of the Ducal Palace. We must deal with
these two periods separately; the first of them being that which has
been often above alluded to, under the name of the transitional period.

We shall consider in succession the general form, the windows, doors,
balconies, and parapets, of the Gothic palaces belonging to each of
these periods.

§ VI. First. General Form.

We have seen that the wrecks of the Byzantine palaces consisted merely
of upper and lower arcades surrounding cortiles; the disposition of the
interiors being now entirely changed, and their original condition
untraceable. The entrances to these early buildings are, for the most
part, merely large circular arches, the central features of their
continuous arcades: they do not present us with definitely separated
windows and doors.

But a great change takes place in the Gothic period. These long arcades
break, as it were, into pieces, and coagulate into central and lateral
windows, and small arched doors, pierced in great surfaces of brick
wall. The sea story of a Byzantine palace consists of seven, nine, or
more arches in a continuous line; but the sea story of a Gothic palace
consists of a door and one or two windows on each side, as in a modern
house. The first story of a Byzantine palace consists of, perhaps,
eighteen or twenty arches, reaching from one side of the house to the
other; the first story of a Gothic palace consists of a window of four
or five lights in the centre, and one or two single windows on each
side. The germ, however, of the Gothic arrangement is already found in
the Byzantine, where, as we have seen, the arcades, though continuous,
are always composed of a central mass and two wings of smaller arches.
The central group becomes the door or the middle light of the Gothic
palace, and the wings break into its lateral windows.

§ VII. But the most essential difference in the entire arrangement, is
the loss of the unity of conception which, regulated Byzantine
composition. How subtle the sense of gradation which disposed the
magnitudes of the early palaces we have seen already, but I have not
hitherto noticed that the Byzantine work was centralized in its
ornamentation as much as in its proportions. Not only were the lateral
capitals and archivolts kept comparatively plain, while the central ones
were sculptured, but the midmost piece of sculpture, whatever it might
be,--capital, inlaid circle, or architrave,--was always made superior to
the rest. In the Fondaco de' Turchi, for instance, the midmost capital
of the upper arcade is the key to the whole group, larger and more
studied than all the rest; and the lateral ones are so disposed as to
answer each other on the opposite sides, thus, A being put for the
central one,

  F E B C +A+ C B E F,

a sudden break of the system being admitted in one unique capital at the
extremity of the series.

§ VIII. Now, long after the Byzantine arcades had been contracted into
windows, this system of centralization was more or less maintained; and
in all the early groups of windows of five lights the midmost capital is
different from the two on each side of it, which always correspond. So
strictly is this the case, that whenever the capitals of any group of
windows are not centralized in this manner, but are either entirely like
each other, or all different, so as to show no correspondence, it is a
certain proof, even if no other should exist, of the comparative
lateness of the building.

In every group of windows in Venice which I was able to examine, and
which were centralized in this manner, I found evidence in their
mouldings of their being _anterior_ to the Ducal Palace. That palace did
away with the subtle proportion and centralization of the Byzantine. Its
arches are of equal width, and its capitals are all different and
ungrouped; some, indeed, are larger than the rest, but this is not for
the sake of proportion, only for particular service when more weight is
to be borne. But, among other evidences of the early date of the sea
façade of that building, is one subtle and delicate concession to the
system of centralization which is finally closed. The capitals of the
upper arcade are, as I said, all different, and show no arranged
correspondence with each other; but _the central one is of pure Parian
marble_, while all the others are of Istrian stone.

The bold decoration of the central window and balcony above, in the
Ducal Palace, is only a peculiar expression of the principality of the
central window, which was characteristic of the Gothic period not less
than of the Byzantine. In the private palaces the central windows become
of importance by their number of lights; in the Ducal Palace such an
arrangement was, for various reasons, inconvenient, and the central
window, which, so far from being more important than the others, is
every way inferior in design to the two at the eastern extremity of the
façade, was nevertheless made the leading feature by its noble canopy
and balcony.

§ IX. Such being the principal differences in the general conception of
the Byzantine and Gothic palaces, the particulars in the treatment of
the latter are easily stated. The marble facings are gradually removed
from the walls; and the bare brick either stands forth confessed boldly,
contrasted with the marble shafts and archivolts of the windows, or it
is covered with stucco painted in fresco, of which more hereafter. The
Ducal Palace, as in all other respects, is an exact expression of the
middle point in the change. It still retains marble facing; but instead
of being disposed in slabs as in the Byzantine times, it is applied in
solid bricks or blocks of marble, 11½ inches long, by 6 inches high.

The stories of the Gothic palaces are divided by string courses,
considerably bolder in projection than those of the Byzantines, and more
highly decorated; and while the angles of the Byzantine palaces are
quite sharp and pure, those of the Gothic palaces are wrought into a
chamfer, filled by small twisted shafts which have capitals under the
cornice of each story.

§ X. These capitals are little observed in the general effect, but the
shafts are of essential importance in giving an aspect of firmness to
the angle; a point of peculiar necessity in Venice, where, owning to the
various convolutions of the canals, the angles of the palaces are not
only frequent, but often necessarily _acute_, every inch of ground being
valuable. In other cities, the appearance as well as the assurance of
stability can always be secured by the use of massy stones, as in the
fortress palaces of Florence; but it must have been always desirable at
Venice to build as lightly as possible, in consequence of the
comparative insecurity of the foundations. The early palaces were, as we
have seen, perfect models of grace and lightness, and the Gothic, which
followed, though much more massive in the style of its details, never
admitted more weight into its structure than was absolutely necessary
for its strength, Hence, every Gothic palace has the appearance of
enclosing as many rooms, and attaining as much strength, as is possible,
with a minimum quantity of brick and stone. The traceries of the
windows, which in Northern Gothic only support the _glass_, at Venice
support the _building_; and thus the greater ponderousness of the
_traceries_ is only an indication of the greater lightness of the
_structure_. Hence, when the Renaissance architects give their opinions
as to the stability of the Ducal Palace when injured by fire, one of
them, Christofore Sorte, says, that he thinks it by no means laudable
that the "Serenissimo Dominio" of the Venetian senate "should live in a
palace built in the air."[77] And again, Andrea della Valle says,
that[78] "the wall of the saloon is thicker by fifteen inches than the
shafts below it, projecting nine inches within, and six without,
_standing as if in the air_, above the piazza;"[79] and yet this wall is
so nobly and strongly knit together, that Rusconi, though himself
altogether devoted to the Renaissance school, declares that the fire
which had destroyed the whole interior of the palace had done this wall
no more harm than the bite of a fly to an elephant. "Troveremo che el
danno che ha patito queste muraglie sarà conforme alla beccatura d' una
mosca fatta ad un elefante."[80]

§ XI. And so in all the other palaces built at the time, consummate
strength was joined with a lightness of form and sparingness of material
which rendered it eminently desirable that the eye should be convinced,
by every possible expedient, of the stability of the building; and these
twisted pillars at the angles are not among the least important means
adopted for this purpose, for they seem to bind the walls together as a
cable binds a chest. In the Ducal Palace, where they are carried up the
angle of an unbroken wall forty feet high, they are divided into
portions, gradually diminishing in length towards the top, by circular
bands or rings, set with the nail-head or dog-tooth ornament, vigorously
projecting, and giving the column nearly the aspect of the stalk of a
reed; its diminishing proportions being exactly arranged as they are by
Nature in all jointed plants. At the top of the palace, like the
wheat-stalk branching into the ear of corn, it expands into a small
niche with a pointed canopy, which joins with the fantastic parapet in
at once relieving, and yet making more notable by its contrast, the
weight of massy wall below. The arrangement is seen in the woodcut,
Chap. VIII.; the angle shafts being slightly exaggerated in thickness,
together with their joints, as otherwise they would hardly have been
intelligible on so small a scale.

The Ducal Palace is peculiar in these niches at the angles, which
throughout the rest of the city appear on churches only; but some may
perhaps have been removed by restorations, together with the parapets
with which they were associated.

[Illustration: Fig. XXIII.]

§ XII. Of these roof parapets of Venice, it has been already noticed
that the examples which remain differ from those of all other cities of
Italy in their purely ornamental character. (Chap. I. § XII.) They are
not battlements, properly so-called; still less machicolated cornices,
such as crown the fortress palaces of the great mainland nobles; but
merely adaptations of the light and crown-like ornaments which crest the
walls of the Arabian mosque. Nor are even these generally used on the
main walls of the palaces themselves. They occur on the Ducal Palace,
on the Casa d' Oro, and, some years back, were still standing on the
Fondaco de' Turchi; but the majority of the Gothic Palaces have the
plain dog-tooth cornice under the tiled projecting roof (Vol. I. Chap.
XIV. § IV.); and the highly decorated parapet is employed only on the
tops of walls which surround courts or gardens, and which, without such
decoration, would have been utterly devoid of interest. Fig. XXIII.
represents, at _b_, part of a parapet of this kind which surrounds the
courtyard of a palace in the Calle del Bagatin, between San G.
Grisostomo, and San Canzian: the whole is of brick, and the mouldings
peculiarly sharp and varied; the height of each separate pinnacle being
about four feet, crowning a wall twelve or fifteen feet high: a piece of
the moulding which surrounds the quatrefoil is given larger in the
figure at _a_, together with the top of the small arch below, having the
common Venetian dentil round it, and a delicate little moulding with
dog-tooth ornament to carry the flanks of the arch. The moulding of the
brick is throughout sharp and beautiful in the highest degree. One of
the most curious points about it is the careless way in which the curved
outlines of the pinnacles are cut into the plain brickwork, with no
regard whatever to the places of its joints. The weather of course wears
the bricks at the exposed joints, and jags the outline a little; but the
work has stood, evidently from the fourteenth century, without
sustaining much harm.

§ XIII. This parapet may be taken as a general type of the
_wall_-parapet of Venice in the Gothic period; some being much less
decorated, and others much more richly: the most beautiful in Venice is
in the little Calle, opening on the Campo and Traghetto San Samuele; it
has delicately carved devices in stone let into each pinnacle.

The parapets of the palaces themselves were lighter and more fantastic,
consisting of narrow lance-like spires of marble, set between the
broader pinnacles, which were in such cases generally carved into the
form of a fleur-de-lis: the French word gives the reader the best idea
of the form, though he must remember that this use of the lily for the
parapets has nothing to do with France, but is the carrying out of the
Byzantine system of floral ornamentation, which introduced the outline
of the lily everywhere; so that I have found it convenient to call its
most beautiful capitals, the _lily_ capitals of St. Mark's. But the
occurrence of this flower, more distinctly than usual, on the
battlements of the Ducal Palace, was the cause of some curious political
speculation in the year 1511, when a piece of one of these battlements
was shaken down by the great earthquake of that year. Sanuto notes in
his diary that "the piece that fell was just that which bore the lily,"
and records sundry sinister anticipations, founded on this important
omen, of impending danger to the adverse French power. As there happens,
in the Ducal Palace, to be a joint in the pinnacles which exactly
separates the "part which bears the lily" from that which is fastened to
the cornice, it is no wonder that the omen proved fallacious.

§ XIV. The decorations of the parapet were completed by attaching gilded
balls of metal to the extremities of the leaves of the lilies, and of
the intermediate spires, so as literally to form for the wall a diadem
of silver touched upon the points with gold; the image being rendered
still more distinct in the Casa d' Oro, by variation in the height of
the pinnacles, the highest being in the centre of the front.

Very few of these light roof parapets now remain; they are, of course,
the part of the building which dilapidation first renders it necessary
to remove. That of the Ducal Palace, however, though often, I doubt not,
restored, retains much of the ancient form, and is exceedingly
beautiful, though it has no appearance from below of being intended for
protection, but serves only, by its extreme lightness, to relieve the
eye when wearied by the breadth of wall beneath; it is nevertheless a
most serviceable defence for any person walking along the edge of the
roof. It has some appearance of insecurity, owing to the entire
independence of the pieces of stone composing it, which, though of
course fastened by iron, look as if they stood balanced on the cornice
like the pillars of Stonehenge; but I have never heard of its having
been disturbed by anything short of an earthquake; and, as we have
seen, even the great earthquake of 1511, though it much injured the
Gorne, or battlements at the Casa d' Oro, and threw down several statues
at St. Mark's,[81] only shook one lily from the brow of the Ducal
Palace.

[Illustration: Fig. XXIV.]

§ XV. Although, however, these light and fantastic forms appear to have
been universal in the battlements meant primarily for decoration, there
was another condition of parapet altogether constructed for the
protection of persons walking on the roofs or in the galleries of the
churches, and from these more substantial and simple defences, the
BALCONIES, to which the Gothic palaces owe half of their picturesque
effect, were immediately derived; the balcony being, in fact, nothing
more than a portion of such roof parapets arranged round a projecting
window-sill sustained on brackets, as in the central example of the
annexed figure. We must, therefore, examine these defensive balustrades
and the derivative balconies consecutively.

§ XVI. Obviously, a parapet with an unbroken edge, upon which the arm
may rest (a condition above noticed, Vol. I. p. 157., as essential to
the proper performance of its duty), can be constructed only in one of
three ways. It must either be (1) of solid stone, decorated, if at all,
by mere surface sculpture, as in the uppermost example in Fig. XXIV.,
above; or (2) pierced into some kind of tracery, as in the second; or
(3) composed of small pillars carrying a level bar of stone, as in the
third; this last condition being, in a diseased and swollen form,
familiar to us in the balustrades of our bridges.[82]

§ XVII. (1.) Of these three kinds, the first, which is employed for the
pulpit at Torcello and in the nave of St. Mark's, whence the uppermost
example is taken, is beautiful when sculpture so rich can be employed
upon it; but it is liable to objection, first, because it is heavy and
unlike a parapet when seen from below; and, secondly, because it is
inconvenient in use. The position of leaning over a balcony becomes
cramped and painful if long continued, unless the foot can be sometimes
advanced _beneath_ the ledge on which the arm leans, i. e. between the
balusters or traceries, which of course cannot be done in the solid
parapet: it is also more agreeable to be able to see partially down
through the penetrations, than to be obliged to lean far over the edge.
The solid parapet was rarely used in Venice after the earlier ages.

§ XVIII. (2.) The Traceried Parapet is chiefly used in the Gothic of the
North, from which the above example, in the Casa Contarini Fasan, is
directly derived. It is, when well designed, the richest and most
beautiful of all forms, and many of the best buildings of France and
Germany are dependent for half their effect upon it; its only fault
being a slight tendency to fantasticism. It was never frankly received
in Venice, where the architects had unfortunately returned to the
Renaissance forms before the flamboyant parapets were fully developed in
the North; but, in the early stage of the Renaissance, a kind of pierced
parapet was employed, founded on the old Byzantine interwoven
traceries; that is to say, the slab of stone was pierced here and there
with holes, and then an interwoven pattern traced on the surface round
them. The difference in system will be understood in a moment by
comparing the uppermost example in the figure at the side, which is a
Northern parapet from the Cathedral of Abbeville, with the lowest, from
a secret chamber in the Casa Foscari. It will be seen that the Venetian
one is far more simple and severe, yet singularly piquant, the black
penetrations telling sharply on the plain broad surface. Far inferior in
beauty, it has yet one point of superiority to that of Abbeville, that
it proclaims itself more definitely to be stone. The other has rather
the look of lace.

[Illustration: Fig. XXV.]

The intermediate figure is a panel of the main balcony of the Ducal
Palace, and is introduced here as being an exactly transitional
condition between the Northern and Venetian types. It was built when the
German Gothic workmen were exercising considerable influence over those
in Venice, and there was some chance of the Northern parapet introducing
itself. It actually did so, as above shown, in the Casa Contarini Fasan,
but was for the most part stoutly resisted and kept at bay by the
Byzantine form, the lowest in the last figure, until that form itself
was displaced by the common, vulgar, Renaissance baluster; a grievous
loss, for the severe pierced type was capable of a variety as endless as
the fantasticism of our own Anglo-Saxon manuscript ornamentation.

§ XIX. (3.) The Baluster Parapet. Long before the idea of tracery had
suggested itself to the minds either of Venetian or any other
architects, it had, of course, been necessary to provide protection for
galleries, edges of roofs, &c.; and the most natural form in which such
protection could be obtained was that of a horizontal bar or hand-rail,
sustained upon short shafts or balusters, as in Fig. XXIV. p. 243. This
form was, above all others, likely to be adopted where variations of
Greek or Roman pillared architecture were universal in the larger masses
of the building; the parapet became itself a small series of columns,
with capitals and architraves; and whether the cross-bar laid upon them
should be simply horizontal, and in contact with their capitals, or
sustained by mimic arches, round or pointed, depended entirely on the
system adopted in the rest of the work. Where the large arches were
round, the small balustrade arches would be so likewise; where those
were pointed, these would become so in sympathy with them.

§ XX. Unfortunately, wherever a balcony or parapet is used in an
inhabited house, it is, of course, the part of the structure which first
suffers from dilapidation, as well as that of which the security is most
anxiously cared for. The main pillars of a casement may stand for
centuries unshaken under the steady weight of the superincumbent wall,
but the cement and various insetting of the balconies are sure to be
disturbed by the irregular pressures and impulses of the persons leaning
on them; while, whatever extremity of decay may be allowed in other
parts of the building, the balcony, as soon as it seems dangerous, will
assuredly be removed or restored. The reader will not, if he considers
this, be surprised to hear that, among all the remnants of the Venetian
domestic architecture of the eleventh, twelfth, and thirteenth
centuries, there is not a single instance of the original balconies
being preserved. The palace mentioned below (§ XXXII.), in the piazza of
the Rialto, has, indeed, solid slabs of stone between its shafts, but I
cannot be certain that they are of the same period; if they are, this is
the only existing example of the form of protection employed for
casements during this transitional period, and it cannot be reasoned
from as being the general one.

§ XXI. It is only, therefore, in the churches of Torcello, Murano, and
St. Mark's, that the ancient forms of gallery defence may still be seen.
At Murano, between the pillars of the apse, a beautiful balustrade is
employed, of which a single arch is given in the Plate opposite, fig. 4,
with its section, fig. 5.; and at St. Mark's, a noble round-arched
parapet, with small pillars of precisely the same form as those of
Murano, but shorter, and bound at the angles into groups of four by the
serpentine knot so often occurring in Lombardic work, runs round the
whole exterior of the lower story of the church, and round great part of
its interior galleries, alternating with the more fantastic form, fig.
6. In domestic architecture, the remains of the original balconies begin
to occur first in the beginning of the fourteenth century, when the
round arch had entirely disappeared; and the parapet consists, almost
without exception, of a series of small trefoiled arches, cut boldly
through a bar of stone which rests upon the shafts, at first very
simple, and generally adorned with a cross at the point of each arch, as
in fig. 7 in the last Plate, which gives the angle of such a balcony on
a large scale; but soon enriched into the beautiful conditions, figs. 2
and 3, and sustained on brackets formed of lions' heads, as seen in the
central example of their entire effect, fig. 1.

[Illustration: Plate XIII.
               BALCONIES.]

§ XXII. In later periods, the round arches return; then the interwoven
Byzantine form; and finally, as above noticed, the common English or
classical balustrade; of which, however, exquisite examples, for grace
and variety of outline, are found designed in the backgrounds of Paul
Veronese. I could willingly follow out this subject fully, but it is
impossible to do so without leaving Venice; for the chief city of Italy,
as far as regards the strict effect of the balcony, is Verona; and if we
were once to lose ourselves among the sweet shadows of its lonely
streets, where the falling branches of the flowers stream like fountains
through the pierced traceries of the marble, there is no saying whether
we might soon be able to return to our immediate work. Yet before
leaving the subject of the balcony[83] altogether, I must allude, for a
moment, to the peculiar treatment of the iron-work out of which it is
frequently wrought on the mainland of Italy--never in Venice. The iron
is always wrought, not cast, beaten first into thin leaves, and then cut
either into strips or bands, two or three inches broad, which are bent
into various curves to form the sides of the balcony, or else into
actual leafage, sweeping and free, like the leaves of nature, with which
it is richly decorated. There is no end to the variety of design, no
limit to the lightness and flow of the forms, which the workman can
produce out of iron treated in this manner; and it is very nearly as
impossible for any metal-work, so handled, to be poor, or ignoble in
effect, as it is for cast metal-work to be otherwise.

§ XXIII. We have next to examine those features of the Gothic palaces in
which the transitions of their architecture are most distinctly
traceable; namely, the arches of the windows and doors.

It has already been repeatedly stated, that the Gothic style had formed
itself completely on the mainland, while the Byzantines still retained
their influence at Venice; and that the history of early Venetian Gothic
is therefore not that of a school taking new forms independently of
external influence, but the history of the struggle of the Byzantine
manner with a contemporary style quite as perfectly organized as itself,
and far more energetic. And this struggle is exhibited partly in the
gradual change of the Byzantine architecture into other forms, and
partly by isolated examples of genuine Gothic taken prisoner, as it
were, in the contest; or rather entangled among the enemy's forces, and
maintaining their ground till their friends came up to sustain them. Let
us first follow the steps of the gradual change, and then give some
brief account of the various advanced guards and forlorn hopes of the
Gothic attacking force.

[Illustration: Plate XIV.
               THE ORDERS OF VENETIAN ARCHES.]

§ XXIV. The uppermost shaded series of six forms of windows in Plate
XIV., opposite, represents, at a glance, the modifications of this
feature in Venetian palaces, from the eleventh to the fifteenth century.
Fig. 1 is Byzantine, of the eleventh and twelfth centuries; figs. 2
and 3 transitional, of the thirteenth and early fourteenth centuries;
figs. 4 and 5 pure Gothic, of the thirteenth, fourteenth and early
fifteenth; and fig. 6. late Gothic, of the fifteenth century,
distinguished by its added finial. Fig. 4 is the longest-lived of all
these forms: it occurs first in the thirteenth century; and, sustaining
modifications only in its mouldings, is found also in the middle of the
fifteenth.

I shall call these the six orders[84] of Venetian windows, and when I
speak of a window of the fourth, second, or sixth order, the reader will
only have to refer to the numerals at the top of Plate XIV.

Then the series below shows the principal forms found in each period,
belonging to each several order; except 1 _b_ to 1 _c_, and the two
lower series, numbered 7 to 16, which are types of Venetian doors.

§ XXV. We shall now be able, without any difficulty, to follow the
course of transition, beginning with the first order, 1 and 1 _a_, in
the second row. The horse-shoe arch, 1 _b_, is the door-head commonly
associated with it, and the other three in the same row occur in St.
Mark's exclusively; 1 _c_ being used in the nave, in order to give a
greater appearance of lightness to its great lateral arcades, which at
first the spectator supposes to be round-arched, but he is struck by a
peculiar grace and elasticity in the curves for which he is unable to
account, until he ascends into the galleries whence the true form of the
arch is discernible. The other two--1 _d_, from the door of the
southern transept, and 1 _c_, from that of the treasury,--sufficiently
represent a group of fantastic forms derived from the Arabs, and of
which the exquisite decoration is one of the most important features in
St. Mark's. Their form is indeed permitted merely to obtain more fantasy
in the curves of this decoration.[85] The reader can see in a moment,
that, as pieces of masonry, or bearing arches, they are infirm or
useless, and therefore never could be employed in any building in which
dignity of structure was the primal object. It is just because structure
is _not_ the primal object in St. Mark's, because it has no severe
weights to bear, and much loveliness of marble and sculpture to exhibit,
that they are therein allowable. They are of course, like the rest of
the building, built of brick and faced with marble, and their inner
masonry, which must be very ingenious, is therefore not discernible.
They have settled a little, as might have been expected, and the
consequence is, that there is in every one of them, except the upright
arch of the treasury, a small fissure across the marble of the flanks.

[Illustration: Fig. XXVI.]

§ XXVI. Though, however, the Venetian builders adopted these Arabian
forms of arch where grace of ornamentation was their only purpose, they
saw that such arrangements were unfit for ordinary work; and there is no
instance, I believe, in Venice, of their having used any of them for a
dwelling-house in the truly Byzantine period. But so soon as the Gothic
influence began to be felt, and the pointed arch forced itself upon
them, their first concession to its attack was the adoption, in
preference to the round arch, of the form 3 _a_ (Plate XIV., above); the
point of the Gothic arch forcing itself up, as it were, through the top
of the semicircle which it was soon to supersede.

§ XXVII. The woodcut above, Fig. XXVI., represents the door and two of
the lateral windows of a house in the Corte del Remer, facing the Grand
Canal, in the parish of the Apostoli. It is remarkable as having its
great entrance on the first floor, attained by a bold flight of steps,
sustained on pure _pointed_ arches wrought in brick. I cannot tell if
these arches are contemporary with the building, though it must always
have had an access of the kind. The rest of its aspect is Byzantine,
except only that the rich sculptures of its archivolt show in combats of
animals, beneath the soffit, a beginning of the Gothic fire and energy.
The moulding of its plinth is of a Gothic profile,[86] and the windows
are pointed, not with a reversed curve, but in a pure straight gable,
very curiously contrasted with the delicate bending of the pieces of
marble armor cut for the shoulders of each arch. There is a two-lighted
window, such as that seen in the vignette, on each side of the door,
sustained in the centre by a basket-worked Byzantine capital: the mode
of covering the brick archivolt with marble, both in the windows and
doorway, is precisely like that of the true Byzantine palaces.

[Illustration: Fig. XXVII.]

§ XXVIII. But as, even on a small scale, these arches are weak, if
executed in brickwork, the appearance of this sharp point in the outline
was rapidly accompanied by a parallel change in the method of building;
and instead of constructing the arch of brick and coating it with
marble, the builders formed it of three pieces of hewn stone inserted
in the wall, as in Fig. XXVII. Not, however, at first in this perfect
form. The endeavor to reconcile the grace of the reversed arch with the
strength of the round one, and still to build in brick, ended at first
in conditions such as that represented at _a_, Fig. XXVIII., which is a
window in the Calle del Pistor, close to the church of the Apostoli, a
very interesting and perfect example. Here, observe, the poor round arch
is still kept to do all the hard work, and the fantastic ogee takes its
pleasure above, in the form of a moulding merely, a chain of bricks cast
to the required curve. And this condition, translated into stone-work,
becomes a window of the second order (_b_5, Fig. XXVIII., or 2, in Plate
XIV.); a form perfectly strong and serviceable, and of immense
importance in the transitional architecture of Venice.

[Illustration: Fig. XXVIII.]

§ XXIX. At _b_, Fig. XXVIII., as above, is given one of the earliest and
simplest occurrences of the second order window (in a double group,
exactly like the brick transitional form _a_), from a most important
fragment of a defaced house in the Salizzada San Liò, close to the
Merceria. It is associated with a fine _pointed_ brick arch,
indisputably of contemporary work, towards the close of the thirteenth
century, and it is shown to be later than the previous example, _a_, by
the greater developement of its mouldings. The archivolt profile,
indeed, is the simpler of the two, not having the sub-arch; as in the
brick example; but the other mouldings are far more developed. Fig.
XXIX. shows at 1 the arch profiles, at 2 the capital profiles, at 3 the
basic-plinth profiles, of each window, _a_ and _b_.

[Illustration: Fig. XXIX.]

§ XXX. But the second order window soon attained nobler developement. At
once simple, graceful, and strong, it was received into all the
architecture of the period, and there is hardly a street in Venice which
does not exhibit some important remains of palaces built with this form
of window in many stories, and in numerous groups. The most extensive
and perfect is one upon the Grand Canal in the parish of the Apostoli,
near the Rialto, covered with rich decoration, in the Byzantine manner,
between the windows of its first story; but not completely
characteristic of the transitional period, because still retaining the
dentil in the arch mouldings, while the transitional houses all have the
simple roll. Of the fully established type, one of the most extensive
and perfect examples is in a court in the Calle di Rimedio, close to the
Ponte dell' Angelo, near St. Mark's Place. Another looks out upon a
small square garden, one of the few visible in the centre of Venice,
close by the Corte Salviati (the latter being known to every cicerone as
that from which Bianca Capello fled). But, on the whole, the most
interesting to the traveller is that of which I have given a vignette
opposite.

But for this range of windows, the little piazza SS. Apostoli would be
one of the least picturesque in Venice; to those, however, who seek it
on foot, it becomes geographically interesting from the extraordinary
involution of the alleys leading to it from the Rialto. In Venice, the
straight road is usually by water, and the long road by land; but the
difference of distance appears, in this case, altogether inexplicable.
Twenty or thirty strokes of the oar will bring a gondola from the foot
of the Rialto to that of the Ponte SS. Apostoli; but the unwise
pedestrian, who has not noticed the white clue beneath his feet,[87] may
think himself fortunate, if, after a quarter of an hour's wandering
among the houses behind the Fondaco de' Tedeschi, he finds himself
anywhere in the neighborhood of the point he seeks. With much patience,
however, and modest following of the guidance of the marble thread, he
will at last emerge over a steep bridge into the open space of the
Piazza, rendered cheerful in autumn by a perpetual market of
pomegranates, and purple gourds, like enormous black figs; while the
canal, at its extremity, is half-blocked up by barges laden with vast
baskets of grapes as black as charcoal, thatched over with their own
leaves.

Looking back, on the other side of this canal, he will see the windows
represented in Plate XV., which, with the arcade of pointed arches
beneath them, are the remains of the palace once belonging to the
unhappy doge, Marino Faliero.

The balcony is, of course, modern, and the series of windows has been of
greater extent, once terminated by a pilaster on the left hand, as well
as on the right; but the terminal arches have been walled up. What
remains, however, is enough, with its sculptured birds and dragons, to
give the reader a very distinct idea of the second order window in its
perfect form. The details of the capitals, and other minor portions, if
these interest him, he will find given in the final Appendix.

[Illustration: Plate XV.
               WINDOWS OF THE SECOND ORDER.
               CASA FALIER.]

§ XXXI. The advance of the Gothic spirit was, for a few years, checked
by this compromise between the round and pointed arch. The truce,
however, was at last broken, in consequence of the discovery that the
keystone would do duty quite as well in the form _b_ as in the form _a_,
Fig. XXX., and the substitution of _b_, at the head of the arch, gives
us the window of the third order, 3 _b_, 3 _d_, and 3 _e_, in Plate XIV.
The forms 3 _a_ and 3 _c_ are exceptional; the first occurring, as we
have seen, in the Corte del Remer, and in one other palace on the Grand
Canal, close to the Church of St. Eustachio; the second only, as far as
I know, in one house on the Canna-Reggio, belonging to the true Gothic
period. The other three examples, 3 _b_, 3 _d_, 3 _e_, are generally
characteristic of the third order; and it will be observed that they
differ not merely in mouldings, but in slope of sides, and this latter
difference is by far the most material. For in the example 3 _b_ there
is hardly any true Gothic expression; it is still the pure Byzantine
arch, with a point thrust up through it: but the moment the flanks
slope, as in 3 _d_, the Gothic expression is definite, and the entire
school of the architecture is changed.

[Illustration: Fig. XXX.]

This slope of the flanks occurs, first, in so slight a degree as to be
hardly perceptible, and gradually increases until, reaching the form 3
_e_ at the close of the thirteenth century, the window is perfectly
prepared for a transition into the fifth order.

§ XXXII. The most perfect examples of the third order in Venice are the
windows of the ruined palace of Marco Querini, the father-in-law of
Bajamonte Tiepolo, in consequence of whose conspiracy against the
government this palace was ordered to be razed in 1310; but it was only
partially ruined, and was afterwards used as the common shambles. The
Venetians have now made a poultry market of the lower story (the
shambles being removed to a suburb), and a prison of the upper, though
it is one of the most important and interesting monuments in the city,
and especially valuable as giving us a secure date for the central form
of these very rare transitional windows. For, as it was the palace of
the father-in-law of Bajamonte, and the latter was old enough to assume
the leadership of a political faction in 1280,[88] the date of the
accession to the throne of the Doge Pietro Gradenigo, we are secure of
this palace having been built not later than the middle of the
thirteenth century. Another example, less refined in workmanship, but,
if possible, still more interesting, owing to the variety of its
capitals, remains in the little piazza opening to the Rialto, on the St.
Mark's side of the Grand Canal. The house faces the bridge, and its
second story has been built in the thirteenth century, above a still
earlier Byzantine cornice remaining, or perhaps introduced from some
other ruined edifice, in the walls of the first floor. The windows of
the second story are of pure third order; four of them are represented
above, with their flanking pilaster, and capitals varying constantly in
the form of the flower or leaf introduced between their volutes.

[Illustration: Fig. XXXI.]

§ XXXIII. Another most important example exists in the lower story of
the Casa Sagredo, on the Grand Canal, remarkable as having the early
upright form (3 _b_, Plate XIV.) with a somewhat late moulding. Many
others occur in the fragmentary ruins in the streets: but the two
boldest conditions which I found in Venice are those of the
Chapter-House of the Frari, in which the Doge Francesco Dandolo was
buried circa 1339; and those of the flank of the Ducal Palace itself
absolutely corresponding with those of the Frari, and therefore of
inestimable value in determining the date of the palace. Of these more
hereafter.

[Illustration: Plate XVI.
               WINDOWS OF THE FOURTH ORDER.]

[Illustration: Fig. XXXII.]

§ XXXIV. Contemporarily with these windows of the second and third
orders, those of the fourth (4 _a_ and 4 _b_, in Plate XIV.) occur, at
first in pairs, and with simple mouldings, precisely similar to those of
the second order, but much more rare, as in the example at the side,
Fig. XXXII., from the Salizada San Liò; and then, enriching their
mouldings as shown in the continuous series 4 _c_, 4 _d_, of Plate XIV.,
associate themselves with the fifth order windows of the perfect Gothic
period. There is hardly a palace in Venice without some example, either
early or late, of these fourth order windows; but the Plate opposite
(XVI.) represents one of their purest groups at the close of the
thirteenth century, from a house on the Grand Canal, nearly opposite the
Church of the Scalzi. I have drawn it from the side, in order that the
great depth of the arches may be seen, and the clear detaching of the
shafts from the sheets of glass behind. The latter, as well as the
balcony, are comparatively modern; but there is no doubt that if glass
were used in the old window, it was set behind the shafts, at the same
depth. The entire modification of the interiors of all the Venetian
houses by recent work has however prevented me from entering into any
inquiry as to the manner in which the ancient glazing was attached to
the interiors of the windows.

The fourth order window is found in great richness and beauty at Verona,
down to the latest Gothic times, as well as in the earliest, being then
more frequent than any other form. It occurs, on a grand scale, in the
old palace of the Scaligers, and profusely throughout the streets of the
city. The series 4 _a_ to 4 _e_, Plate XIV., shows its most ordinary
conditions and changes of arch-line: 4 _a_ and 4 _b_ are the early
Venetian forms; 4 _c_, later, is general at Venice; 4 _d_, the best and
most piquant condition, owing to its fantastic and bold projection of
cusp, is common to Venice and Verona; 4 _e_ is early Veronese.

§ XXXV. The reader will see at once, in descending to the fifth row in
Plate XIV., representing the windows of the fifth order, that they are
nothing more than a combination of the third and fourth. By this union
they become the nearest approximation to a perfect Gothic form which
occurs characteristically at Venice; and we shall therefore pause on the
threshold of this final change, to glance back upon, and gather
together, those fragments of purer pointed architecture which were above
noticed as the forlorn hopes of the Gothic assault.

[Illustration: Fig. XXXIII.]

[Illustration: Fig. XXXIV.]

The little Campiello San Rocco is entered by a sotto-portico behind the
church of the Frari. Looking back, the upper traceries of the
magnificent apse are seen towering above the irregular roofs and
chimneys of the little square; and our lost Prout was enabled to bring
the whole subject into an exquisitely picturesque composition, by the
fortunate occurrence of four quaint trefoiled windows in one of the
houses on the right. Those trefoils are among the most ancient efforts
of Gothic art in Venice. I have given a rude sketch of them in Fig.
XXXIII. They are built entirely of brick, except the central shaft
and capital, which are of Istrian stone. Their structure is the simplest
possible; the trefoils being cut out of the radiating bricks which form
the pointed arch, and the edge or upper limit of that pointed arch
indicated by a roll moulding formed of cast bricks, in length of about a
foot, and ground at the bottom so as to meet in one, as in Fig. XXXIV.
The capital of the shaft is one of the earliest transitional forms;[89]
and observe the curious following out, even in this minor instance, of
the great law of centralization above explained with respect to the
Byzantine palaces. There is a central shaft, a pilaster on each side,
and then the wall. The pilaster has, by way of capital, a square flat
brick, projecting a little, and cast, at the edge, into the form of the
first type of all cornices (_a_, p. 63, Vol. I.; the reader ought to
glance back at this passage, if he has forgotten it); and the shafts and
pilasters all stand, without any added bases, on a projecting plinth of
the same simple profile. These windows have been much defaced; but I
have not the least doubt that their plinths are the original ones: and
the whole group is one of the most valuable in Venice, as showing the
way in which the humblest houses, in the noble times, followed out the
system of the larger palaces, as far as they could, in their rude
materials. It is not often that the dwellings of the lower orders are
preserved to us from the thirteenth century.

[Illustration: Plate XVII.
               WINDOWS OF THE EARLY GOTHIC PALACES.]

§ XXXVI. In the two upper lines of the opposite Plate (XVII.), I have
arranged some of the more delicate and finished examples of Gothic work
of this period. Of these, fig. 4 is taken from the outer arcade of San
Fermo of Verona, to show the condition of mainland architecture, from
which all these Venetian types were borrowed. This arch, together with
the rest of the arcade, is wrought in fine stone, with a band of inlaid
red brick, the whole chiselled and fitted with exquisite precision, all
Venetian work being coarse in comparison. Throughout the streets of
Verona, arches and windows of the thirteenth century are of continual
occurrence, wrought, in this manner, with brick and stone; sometimes
the brick alternating with the stones of the arch, as in the finished
example given in Plate XIX. of the first volume, and there selected in
preference to other examples of archivolt decoration, because furnishing
a complete type of the master school from which the Venetian Gothic is
derived.

§ XXXVII. The arch from St. Fermo, however, fig. 4, Plate XVII.,
corresponds more closely, in its entire simplicity, with the little
windows from the Campiello San Rocco; and with the type 5 set beside it
in Plate XVII., from a very ancient house in the Corte del Forno at
Santa Marina (all in brick); while the upper examples, 1 and 2, show the
use of the flat but highly enriched architrave, for the connection of
which with Byzantine work see the final Appendix, Vol. III., under the
head "Archivolt." These windows (figs. 1 and 2, Plate XVII.) are from a
narrow alley in a part of Venice now exclusively inhabited by the lower
orders, close to the arsenal;[90] they are entirely wrought in brick,
with exquisite mouldings, not cast, but _moulded in the clay by the
hand_, so that there is not one piece of the arch like another; the
pilasters and shafts being, as usual, of stone.

§ XXXVIII. And here let me pause for a moment, to note what one should
have thought was well enough known in England,--yet I could not perhaps
touch upon anything less considered,--the real use of brick. Our fields
of good clay were never given us to be made into oblong morsels of one
size. They were given us that we might play with them, and that men who
could not handle a chisel, might knead out of them some expression of
human thought. In the ancient architecture of the clay districts of
Italy, every possible adaptation of the material is found exemplified:
from the coarsest and most brittle kinds, used in the mass of the
structure, to bricks for arches and plinths, cast in the most perfect
curves, and of almost every size, strength, and hardness; and moulded
bricks, wrought into flower-work and tracery as fine as raised patterns
upon china. And, just as many of the finest works of the Italian
sculptors were executed in porcelain, many of the best thoughts of their
architects are expressed in brick, or in the softer material of terra
cotta; and if this were so in Italy, where there is not one city from
whose towers we may not descry the blue outline of Alp or Apennine,
everlasting quarries of granite or marble, how much more ought it to be
so among the fields of England! I believe that the best academy for her
architects, for some half century to come, would be the brick-field; for
of this they may rest assured, that till they know how to use clay, they
will never know how to use marble.

§ XXXIX. And now observe, as we pass from fig. 2 to fig. 3, and from
fig. 5 to fig. 6, in Plate XVII., a most interesting step of transition.
As we saw above, § XIV., the round arch yielding to the Gothic, by
allowing a point to emerge at its summit, so here we have the Gothic
conceding something to the form which had been assumed by the round; and
itself slightly altering its outline so as to meet the condescension of
the round arch half way. At page 137 of the first volume, I have drawn
to scale one of these minute concessions of the pointed arch, granted at
Verona out of pure courtesy to the Venetian forms, by one of the purest
Gothic ornaments in the world; and the small window here, fig. 6, is a
similar example at Venice itself, from the Campo Santa Maria Mater
Domini, where the reversed curve at the head of the pointed arch is just
perceptible and no more. The other examples, figs. 3 and 7, the first
from a small but very noble house in the Merceria, the second from an
isolated palace at Murano, show more advanced conditions of the reversed
curve, which, though still employing the broad decorated architrave of
the earlier examples, are in all other respects prepared for the
transition to the simple window of the fifth order.

§ XL. The next example, the uppermost of the three lower series in Plate
XVII., shows this order in its early purity; associated with
intermediate decorations like those of the Byzantines, from a palace
once belonging to the Erizzo family, near the Arsenal. The ornaments
appear to be actually of Greek workmanship (except, perhaps, the two
birds over the central arch, which are bolder, and more free in
treatment), and built into the Gothic fronts; showing, however, the
early date of the whole by the manner of their insertion, corresponding
exactly with that employed in the Byzantine palaces, and by the covering
of the intermediate spaces with sheets of marble, which, however,
instead of being laid over the entire wall, are now confined to the
immediate spaces between and above the windows, and are bounded by a
dentil moulding.

In the example below this the Byzantine ornamentation has vanished, and
the fifth order window is seen in its generic form, as commonly employed
throughout the early Gothic period. Such arcades are of perpetual
occurrence; the one in the Plate was taken from a small palace on the
Grand Canal, nearly opposite the Casa Foscari. One point in it deserves
especial notice, the increased size of the lateral window as compared
with the rest: a circumstance which occurs in a great number of the
groups of windows belonging to this period, and for which I have never
been able to account.

§ XLI. Both these figures have been most carefully engraved; and the
uppermost will give the reader a perfectly faithful idea of the general
effect of the Byzantine sculptures, and of the varied alabaster among
which they are inlaid, as well as of the manner in which these pieces
are set together, every joint having been drawn on the spot: and the
transition from the embroidered and silvery richness of this
architecture, in which the Byzantine ornamentation was associated with
the Gothic form of arch, to the simplicity of the pure Gothic arcade as
seen in the lower figure, is one of the most remarkable phenomena in the
history of Venetian art. If it had occurred suddenly, and at an earlier
period, it might have been traced partly to the hatred of the Greeks,
consequent upon the treachery of Manuel Comnenus,[91] and the fatal war
to which it led; but the change takes place gradually, and not till a
much later period. I hoped to have been able to make some careful
inquiries into the habits of domestic life of the Venetians before and
after the dissolution of their friendly relations with Constantinople;
but the labor necessary for the execution of my more immediate task has
entirely prevented this: and I must be content to lay the succession of
the architectural styles plainly before the reader, and leave the
collateral questions to the investigation of others; merely noting this
one assured fact, that _the root of all that is greatest in Christian
art is struck in the thirteenth century_; that the temper of that
century is the life-blood of all manly work thenceforward in Europe; and
I suppose that one of its peculiar characteristics was elsewhere, as
assuredly in Florence, a singular simplicity in domestic life:

  "I saw Bellincion Berti walk abroad
   In leathern girdle, and a clasp of bone;
   And, with no artful coloring on her cheeks,
   His lady leave the glass. The sons I saw
   Of Verli and of Vecchio, well content
   With unrobed jerkin, and their good dames handling
   The spindle and the flax....
   One waked to tend the cradle, hushing it
   With sounds that lulled the parents' infancy;
   Another, with her maidens, drawing off
   The tresses from the distaff, lectured them
   Old tales of Troy, and Fesole, and Rome."[92]

§ XLII. Such, then, is the simple fact at Venice, that from the
beginning of the thirteenth century there is found a singular increase
of simplicity in all architectural ornamentation; the rich Byzantine
capitals giving place to a pure and severe type hereafter to be
described,[93] and the rich sculptures vanishing from the walls, nothing
but the marble facing remaining. One of the most interesting examples of
this transitional state is a palace at San Severo, just behind the Casa
Zorzi. This latter is a Renaissance building, utterly worthless in every
respect, but known to the Venetian Ciceroni; and by inquiring for it,
and passing a little beyond it down the Fondamenta San Severo, the
traveller will see, on the other side of the canal, a palace which the
Ciceroni never notice, but which is unique in Venice for the
magnificence of the veined purple alabasters with which it has been
decorated, and for the manly simplicity of the foliage of its capitals.
Except in these, it has no sculpture whatever, and its effect is
dependent entirely on color. Disks of green serpentine are inlaid on the
field of purple alabaster; and the pillars are alternately of red marble
with white capitals, and of white marble with red capitals. Its windows
appear of the third order; and the back of the palace, in a small and
most picturesque court, shows a group of windows which are, perhaps, the
most superb examples of that order in Venice. But the windows to the
front have, I think, been of the fifth order, and their cusps have been
cut away.

§ XLIII. When the Gothic feeling began more decidedly to establish
itself, it evidently became a question with the Venetian builders, how
the intervals between the arches, now left blank by the abandonment of
the Byzantine sculptures, should be enriched in accordance with the
principles of the new school. Two most important examples are left of
the experiments made at this period: one at the Ponte del Forner, at San
Cassano, a noble house in which the spandrils of the windows are filled
by the emblems of the four Evangelists, sculptured in deep relief, and
touching the edges of the arches with their expanded wings; the other
now known as the Palazzo Cicogna, near the church of San Sebastiano, in
the quarter called "of the Archangel Raphael," in which a large space of
wall above the windows is occupied by an intricate but rude tracery of
involved quatrefoils. Of both these palaces I purposed to give drawings
in my folio work; but I shall probably be saved the trouble by the
publication of the beautiful calotypes lately made at Venice of both;
and it is unnecessary to represent them here, as they are unique in
Venetian architecture, with the single exception of an unimportant
imitation of the first of them in a little by-street close to the Campo
Sta. Maria Formosa. For the question as to the mode of decorating the
interval between the arches was suddenly and irrevocably determined by
the builder of the Ducal Palace, who, as we have seen, taking his first
idea from the traceries of the Frari, and arranging those traceries as
best fitted his own purpose, designed the great arcade (the lowest of
the three in Plate XVII.), which thenceforward became the established
model for every work of importance in Venice. The palaces built on this
model, however, most of them not till the beginning of the fifteenth
century, belong properly to the time of the Renaissance; and what little
we have to note respecting them may be more clearly stated in connexion
with other facts characteristic of that period.

§ XLIV. As the examples in Plate XVII. are necessarily confined to the
upper parts of the windows, I have given in the Plate opposite
(XVIII[94]) examples of the fifth order window, both in its earliest and
in its fully developed form, completed from base to keystone. The upper
example is a beautiful group from a small house, never of any size or
pretension, and now inhabited only by the poor, in the Campiello della
Strope, close to the Church of San Giacomo de Lorio. It is remarkable
for its excessive purity of curve, and is of very early date, its
mouldings being simpler than usual.[95] The lower example is from the
second story of a palace belonging to the Priuli family, near San
Lorenzo, and shows one feature to which our attention has not hitherto
been directed, namely, the penetration of the cusp, leaving only a
silver thread of stone traced on the darkness of the window. I need not
say that, in this condition, the cusp ceases to have any constructive
use, and is merely decorative, but often exceedingly beautiful. The
steps of transition from the early solid cusp to this slender thread are
noticed in the final Appendix, under the head "Tracery Bars;" the
commencement of the change being in the thinning of the stone, which is
not cut through until it is thoroughly emaciated. Generally speaking,
the condition in which the cusp is found is a useful test of age, when
compared with other points; the more solid it is, the more ancient: but
the massive form is often found associated with the perforated, as late
as the beginning of the fourteenth century. In the Ducal Palace, the
lower or bearing traceries have the solid cusp, and the upper traceries
of the windows, which are merely decorative., have the perforated cusp,
both with exquisite effect.

[Illustration: Plate XVIII.
               WINDOWS OF THE FIFTH ORDER.]

§ XLV. The smaller balconies between the great shafts in the lower
example in Plate XVIII. are original and characteristic: not so the
lateral one of the detached window, which has been restored; but by
imagining it to be like that represented in fig. 1, Plate XIII., above,
which is a perfect window of the finest time of the fifth order, the
reader will be enabled to form a complete idea of the external
appearance of the principal apartments in the house of a noble of
Venice, at the beginning of the fourteenth century.

§ XLVI. Whether noble, or merchant, or, as frequently happened, both,
every Venetian appears, at this time, to have raised his palace or
dwelling-house upon one type. Under every condition of importance,
through every variation of size, the forms and mode of decoration of all
the features were universally alike; not servilely alike, but
fraternally; not with the sameness of coins cast from one mould, but
with the likeness of the members of one family. No fragment of the
period is preserved, in which the windows, be they few or many, a group
of three or an arcade of thirty, have not the noble cusped arch of the
fifth order. And they are especially to be noted by us at this day,
because these refined and richly ornamented forms were used in the
habitations of a nation as laborious, as practical, as brave, and as
prudent as ourselves; and they were built at a time when that nation was
struggling with calamities and changes threatening its existence almost
every hour. And, farther, they are interesting because perfectly
applicable to modern habitation. The refinement of domestic life appears
to have been far advanced in Venice from her earliest days; and the
remains of her Gothic palaces are, at this day, the most delightful
residences in the city, having undergone no change in external form, and
probably having been rather injured than rendered more convenient by the
modifications which poverty and Renaissance taste, contending with the
ravages of time, have introduced in the interiors. So that, in Venice,
and the cities grouped around it, Vicenza, Padua, and Verona, the
traveller may ascertain, by actual experience, the effect which would be
produced upon the comfort or luxury of daily life by the revival of the
Gothic school of architecture. He can still stand upon the marble
balcony in the soft summer air, and feel its smooth surface warm from
the noontide as he leans on it in the twilight; he can still see the
strong sweep of the unruined traceries drawn on the deep serenity of the
starry sky, and watch the fantastic shadows of the clustered arches
shorten in the moonlight on the chequered floor; or he may close the
casements fitted to their unshaken shafts against such wintry winds as
would have made an English house vibrate to its foundation, and, in
either case, compare their influence on his daily home feeling with that
of the square openings in his English wall.

§ XLVII. And let him be assured, if he find there is more to be enjoyed
in the Gothic window, there is also more to be trusted. It is the best
and strongest building, as it is the most beautiful. I am not now
speaking of the particular form of Venetian Gothic, but of the general
strength of the pointed arch as opposed to that of the level lintel of
the square window; and I plead for the introduction of the Gothic form
into our domestic architecture, not merely because it is lovely, but
because it is the only form of faithful, strong, enduring, and honorable
building, in such materials as come daily to our hands. By increase of
scale and cost, it is possible to build, in any style, what will last
for ages; but only in the Gothic is it possible to give security and
dignity to work wrought with imperfect means and materials. And I trust
that there will come a time when the English people may see the folly of
building basely and insecurely. It is common with those architects
against whose practice my writings have hitherto been directed, to call
them merely theoretical and imaginative. I answer, that there is not a
single principle asserted either in the "Seven Lamps" or here, but is of
the simplest, sternest veracity, and the easiest practicability; that
buildings, raised as I would have them, would stand unshaken for a
thousand years; and the buildings raised by the architects who oppose
them will not stand for one hundred and fifty, they sometimes do not
stand for an hour. There is hardly a week passes without some
catastrophe brought about by the base principles of modern building;
some vaultless floor that drops the staggering crowd through the jagged
rents of its rotten timbers; some baseless bridge that is washed away by
the first wave of a summer flood; some fungous wall of nascent
rottenness that a thunder-shower soaks down with its workmen into a heap
of slime and death.[96] These we hear of, day by day: yet these indicate
but the thousandth part of the evil. The portion of the national income
sacrificed in mere bad building, in the perpetual repairs, and swift
condemnation and pulling down of ill-built shells of houses, passes all
calculation. And the weight of the penalty is not yet felt; it will tell
upon our children some fifty years hence, when the cheap work, and
contract work, and stucco and plaster work, and bad iron work, and all
the other expedients of modern rivalry, vanity, and dishonesty, begin to
show themselves for what they are.

[Illustration: Fig. XXXV.]

§ XLVIII. Indeed, dishonesty and false economy will no more build safely
in Gothic than in any other style: but of all forms which we could
possibly employ, to be framed hastily and out of bad materials, the
common square window is the worst; and its level head of brickwork (_a_,
Fig. XXXV.) is the weakest way of covering a space. Indeed, in the
hastily heaped shells of modern houses, there may be seen often even a
worse manner of placing the bricks, as at _b_, supporting them by a bit
of lath till the mortar dries; but even when worked with the utmost
care, and having every brick tapered into the form of a voussoir and
accurately fitted, I have seen such a window-head give way, and a wide
fissure torn through all the brickwork above it, two years after it was
built; while the pointed arch of the Veronese Gothic, wrought in brick
also, occurs at every corner of the streets of the city, untouched since
the thirteenth century, and without a single flaw.

§ XLIX. Neither can the objection, so often raised against the pointed
arch, that it will not admit the convenient adjustment of modern sashes
and glass, hold for an instant. There is not the smallest necessity,
because the arch is pointed, that the aperture should be so. The work of
the arch is to sustain the building above; when this is once done
securely, the pointed head of it may be filled in any way we choose. In
the best cathedral doors it is always filled by a shield of solid stone;
in many early windows of the best Gothic it is filled in the same
manner, the introduced slab of stone becoming a field for rich
decoration; and there is not the smallest reason why lancet windows,
used in bold groups, with each pointed arch filled by a sculptured
tympanum, should not allow as much light to enter, and in as convenient
a way, as the most luxuriously glazed square windows of our brick
houses. Give the groups of associated lights bold gabled canopies;
charge the gables with sculpture and color; and instead of the base and
almost useless Greek portico, letting the rain and wind enter it at
will, build the steeply vaulted and completely sheltered Gothic porch;
and on all these fields for rich decoration let the common workman carve
what he pleases, to the best of his power, and we may have a school of
domestic architecture in the nineteenth century, which will make our
children grateful to us, and proud of us, till the thirtieth.

§ L. There remains only one important feature to be examined, the
entrance gate or door. We have already observed that the one seems to
pass into the other, a sign of increased love of privacy rather than of
increased humility, as the Gothic palaces assume their perfect form. In
the Byzantine palaces the entrances appear always to have been rather
great gates than doors, magnificent semicircular arches opening to the
water, and surrounded by rich sculpture in the archivolts. One of these
entrances is seen in the small woodcut above, Fig. XXV., and another has
been given carefully in my folio work: their sculpture is generally of
grotesque animals scattered among leafage, without any definite meaning;
but the great outer entrance of St. Mark's, which appears to have been
completed some time after the rest of the fabric, differs from all
others in presenting a series of subjects altogether Gothic in feeling,
selection, and vitality of execution, and which show the occult entrance
of the Gothic spirit before it had yet succeeded in effecting any
modification of the Byzantine forms. These sculptures represent the
months of the year employed in the avocations usually attributed to them
throughout the whole compass of the middle ages, in Northern
architecture and manuscript calendars, and at last exquisitely versified
by Spenser. For the sake of the traveller in Venice, who should examine
this archivolt carefully, I shall enumerate these sculptures in their
order, noting such parallel representations as I remember in other work.

§ LI. There are four successive archivolts, one within the other,
forming the great central entrance of St. Mark's. The first is a
magnificent external arch, formed of obscure figures mingled among
masses of leafage, as in ordinary Byzantine work; within this there is a
hemispherical dome, covered with modern mosaic; and at the back of this
recess the other three archivolts follow consecutively, two sculptured,
one plain; the one with which we are concerned is the outermost.

It is carved both on its front and under-surface or soffit; on the front
are seventeen female figures bearing scrolls, from which the legends are
unfortunately effaced. These figures were once gilded on a dark blue
ground, as may still be seen in Gentile Bellini's picture of St. Mark's
in the Accademia delle Belle Arti. The sculptures of the months are on
the under-surface, beginning at the bottom on the left hand of the
spectator as he enters, and following in succession round the archivolt;
separated, however, into two groups, at its centre, by a beautiful
figure of the youthful Christ, sitting in the midst of a slightly
hollowed sphere covered with stars to represent the firmament, and with
the attendant sun and moon, set one on each side to rule over the day
and over the night.

§ LII. The months are personified as follows:--

1. JANUARY, _Carrying home a noble tree on his shoulders, the leafage of
which nods forwards, and falls nearly to his feet._ Superbly cut. This
is a rare representation of him. More frequently he is represented as
the two-headed Janus, sitting at a table, drinking at one mouth and
eating at the other. Sometimes as an old man, warming his feet at a
fire, and drinking from a bowl; though this type is generally reserved
for February. Spenser, however, gives the same symbol as that on St.
Mark's:

     "Numbd with holding all the day
  An hatchet keene, with which he felled wood."

His sign, Aquarius, is obscurely indicated in the archivolt by some wavy
lines representing water, unless the figure has been broken away.

2. FEBRUARY. _Sitting in a carved chair, warming his bare feet at a
blazing fire._ Generally, when he is thus represented, there is a pot
hung over the fire, from the top of the chimney. Sometimes he is pruning
trees, as in Spenser:

               "Yet had he by his side
  His plough and harnesse fit to till the ground,
  And tooles to prune the trees."

Not unfrequently, in the calendars, this month is represented by a
female figure carrying candles, in honor of the Purification of the
Virgin.

His sign, Pisces, is prominently carved above him.

3. MARCH. Here, as almost always in Italy, _a warrior_: the Mars of the
Latins being of course, in mediæval work, made representative of the
military power of the place and period; and thus, at Venice, having the
winged Lion painted upon his shield. In Northern work, however, I think
March is commonly employed in pruning trees; or, at least, he is so
when that occupation is left free for him by February's being engaged
with the ceremonies of Candlemas. Sometimes, also, he is reaping a low
and scattered kind of grain; and by Spenser, who exactly marks the
junction of mediæval and classical feeling, his military and
agricultural functions are united, while also, in the Latin manner, he
is made the first of the months.

  "First sturdy March, with brows full sternly bent,
   And armed strongly, rode upon a Ram,
   The same which over Hellespontus swam;
   Yet in his hand a spade he also bent,
   And in a bag all sorts of seeds ysame,[97]
   Which on the earth he strowed as he went."

His sign, the Ram, is very superbly carved above him in the archivolt.

4. APRIL. Here, _carrying a sheep upon his shoulder_. A rare
representation of him. In Northern work he is almost universally
gathering flowers, or holding them triumphantly in each hand. The
Spenserian mingling of this mediæval image with that of his being wet
with showers, and wanton with love, by turning his zodiacal sign,
Taurus, into the bull of Europa, is altogether exquisite.

  "Upon a Bull he rode, the same which led
   Europa floting through the Argolick fluds:
   His horns were gilden all with golden studs,
   And garnished with garlonds goodly dight
   Of all the fairest flowres and freshest buds
   Which th' earth brings forth; and _wet he seemed in sight
   With waves, through which he waded for his love's delight_."

5. MAY _is seated, while two young maidens crown him with flowers._ A
very unusual representation, even in Italy; where, as in the North, he
is almost always riding out hunting or hawking, sometimes playing on a
musical instrument. In Spenser, this month is personified as "the
fayrest mayd on ground," borne on the shoulders of the Twins.

In this archivolt there are only two heads to represent the zodiacal
sign.

The summer and autumnal months are always represented in a series of
agricultural occupations, which, of course, vary with the locality in
which they occur; but generally in their order only. Thus, if June is
mowing, July is reaping; if July is mowing, August is reaping; and so
on. I shall give a parallel view of some of these varieties presently;
but, meantime, we had better follow the St Mark's series, as it is
peculiar in some respects.

6. JUNE. _Reaping._ The corn and sickle sculptured with singular care
and precision, in bold relief, and the zodiacal sign, the Crab, above,
also worked with great spirit. Spenser puts plough irons into his hand.
Sometimes he is sheep-shearing; and, in English and northern French
manuscripts, carrying a kind of fagot or barrel, of the meaning of which
I am not certain.

7. JULY. _Mowing._ A very interesting piece of sculpture, owing to the
care with which the flowers are wrought out among the long grass. I do
not remember ever finding July but either reaping or mowing. Spenser
works him hard, and puts him to both labors:

  "Behinde his backe a sithe, and by his side
   Under his belt he bore a sickle circling wide."

8. AUGUST. Peculiarly represented in this archivolt, _sitting in a
chair, with his head upon his hand, as if asleep; the Virgin_ (the
zodiacal sign) _above him, lifting up her hand_. This appears to be a
peculiarly Italian version of the proper employment of August. In
Northern countries he is generally threshing, or gathering grapes.
Spenser merely clothes him with gold, and makes him lead forth

             "the righteous Virgin, which of old
  Lived here on earth, and plenty made abound."

9. SEPTEMBER. _Bearing home grapes in a basket._ Almost always sowing,
in Northern work. By Spenser, with his usual exquisite ingenuity,
employed in gathering in the general harvest, and _portioning it out
with the Scales_, his zodiacal sign.

10. OCTOBER. _Wearing a conical hat, and digging busily with a long
spade._ In Northern work he is sometimes a vintager, sometimes beating
the acorns out of an oak to feed swine. When September is vintaging,
October is generally sowing. Spenser employs him in the harvest both of
vine and olive.

11. NOVEMBER. _Seems to be catching small birds in a net._ I do not
remember him so employed elsewhere. He is nearly always killing pigs;
sometimes beating the oak for them; with Spenser, fatting them.

12. DECEMBER. _Killing swine._ It is hardly ever that this employment is
not given to one or other of the terminal months of the year. If not so
engaged, December is usually putting new loaves into the oven; sometimes
killing oxen. Spenser properly makes him feasting and drinking instead
of January.

§ LIII. On the next page I have given a parallel view of the employment
of the months from some Northern manuscripts, in order that they may be
more conveniently compared with the sculptures of St. Mark's, in their
expression of the varieties of climate and agricultural system. Observe
that the letter (f.) in some of the columns, opposite the month of May,
means that he has a falcon on his fist; being, in those cases,
represented as riding out, in high exultation, on a caparisoned white
horse. A series nearly similar to that of St. Mark's occurs on the door
of the Cathedral of Lucca, and on that of the Baptistery of Pisa; in
which, however, if I recollect rightly, February is fishing, and May has
something resembling an umbrella in his hand, instead of a hawk. But, in
all cases, the figures are treated with the peculiar spirit of the
Gothic sculptors; and this archivolt is the first expression of that
spirit which is to be found in Venice.

   SECOND PERIOD

 +---------+--------------+---------------+---------------+---------------+
 |         |              |   MS. French. |   MS. French. |   MS. French. |
 |         | St. Mark's.  |   Late 13th   |   Late 13th   |   Late 13th   |
 |         |              |    Century    |    Century    |    Century    |
 |---------+--------------+---------------+---------------+---------------+
 |         |              |               |               |               |
 |January  |Carrying wood.|Janus feasting.|Janus feasting.|Drinking and   |
 |         |              |               |               | stirring fire.|
 |         |              |               |               |               |
 |February |Warming feet. |Warming feet.  |Warming feet.  |Pruning.       |
 |         |              |               |               |               |
 |March    |Going to war. |Pruning.       |Pruning.       |Striking       |
 |         |              |               |               | with axe.     |
 |         |              |               |               |               |
 |April    |Carrying      |Gathering      |Gathering      |Gathering      |
 |         | sheep.       | flowers.      | flowers.      | flowers.      |
 |         |              |               |               |               |
 |May      |Crowned with  |Riding (f.).   |Riding (f.).   |Playing        |
 |         | flowers.     |               |               | violin.       |
 |         |              |               |               |               |
 |June     |Reaping.      |Mowing.        |Mowing.        |Gathering large|
 |         |              |               |               | red flowers.  |
 |         |              |               |               |               |
 |July     |Mowing.       |Reaping.       |Reaping.       |Mowing.        |
 |         |              |               |               |               |
 |August   |Asleep.       |Threshing.     |Gathering      |Reaping.       |
 |         |              |               | grapes.       |               |
 |         |              |               |               |               |
 |September|Carrying      |Sowing.        |Sowing.        |Drinking wine. |
 |         | grapes.      |               |               |               |
 |         |              |               |               |               |
 |October  |Digging.      |Gathering      |Beating oak.   |Sowing.        |
 |         |              | grapes.       |               |               |
 |         |              |               |               |               |
 |November |Catching      |Beating oak.   |Killing swine. |Killing swine. |
 |         | birds.       |               |               |               |
 |         |              |               |               |               |
 |December |Killing swine.|Killing swine. |Baking.        |Killing oxen.  |
 +---------+--------------+---------------+---------------+---------------+

 +---------+-------------------+-------------------+------------------+
 |         |    MS. French.    |   MS. English.    |   MS. Flemish.   |
 |         |Early 14th Century.|Early 15th Century.|  15th Century.   |
 |---------+-------------------+-------------------+------------------|
 |         |                   |                   |                  |
 |January  |Warming feet.      | Janus feasting.   |Feasting          |
 |         |                   |                   |                  |
 |         |                   |                   |                  |
 |February |Bearing candles.   | Warming feet.     |Warming hands.    |
 |         |                   |                   |                  |
 |March    |Pruning.           | Carrying candles. |Reaping.          |
 |         |                   |                   |                  |
 |April    |Gathering flowers. | Pruning.          |Gathering flowers.|
 |         |                   |                   |                  |
 |May      |Riding (f.).       | Riding (f.).      |Riding with lady  |
 |         |                   |                   | on pillion.      |
 |         |                   |                   |                  |
 |June     |Carrying (fagots?) | Carrying fagots.  |Sheep-shearing.   |
 |         |                   |                   |                  |
 |         |                   |                   |                  |
 |July     |Mowing.            | Mowing.           |Mowing.           |
 |         |                   |                   |                  |
 |August   |Reaping.           | Reaping.          |Reaping.          |
 |         |                   |                   |                  |
 |September|Threshing.         | Threshing.        |Sowing.           |
 |         |                   |                   |                  |
 |October  |Sowing.            | Sowing.           |Beating oak.      |
 |         |                   |                   |                  |
 |November |Killing swine.     | Killing swine.    |Pressing (grapes?)|
 |         |                   |                   |                  |
 |December |Baking.            | Baking.           |Killing swine.    |
 +---------+-------------------+-------------------+------------------+

§ LIV. In the private palaces, the entrances soon admitted some
concession to the Gothic form also. They pass through nearly the same
conditions of change as the windows, with these three differences:
first, that no arches of the fantastic fourth order occur in any
doorways; secondly, that the pure pointed arch occurs earlier, and much
oftener, in doorways than in window-heads; lastly, that the entrance
itself, if small, is nearly always square-headed in the earliest
examples, without any arch above, but afterwards the arch is thrown
across above the lintel. The interval between the two, or tympanum, is
filled with sculpture, or closed by iron bars, with sometimes a
projecting gable, to form a porch, thrown over the whole, as in the
perfect example, 7 _a_, Plate XIV., above. The other examples in the two
lower lines, 6 and 7, of that Plate are each characteristic of an
enormous number of doors, variously decorated, from the thirteenth to
the close of the fifteenth century. The particulars of their mouldings
are given in the final Appendix.

§ LV. It was useless, on the small scale of this Plate, to attempt any
delineation of the richer sculptures with which the arches are filled;
so that I have chosen for it the simplest examples I could find of the
forms to be illustrated: but, in all the more important instances, the
door-head is charged either with delicate ornaments and inlaid patterns
in variously colored brick, or with sculptures, consisting always of the
shield or crest of the family, protected by an angel. Of these more
perfect doorways I have given three examples carefully, in my folio
work; but I must repeat here one part of the account of their subjects
given in its text, for the convenience of those to whom the larger work
may not be accessible.

§ LVI. "In the earlier ages, all agree thus far, that the name of the
family is told, and together with it there is always an intimation that
they have placed their defence and their prosperity in God's hands;
frequently accompanied with some general expression of benediction to
the person passing over the threshold. This is the general theory of an
old Venetian doorway;--the theory of modern doorways remains to be
explained: it may be studied to advantage in our rows of new-built
houses, or rather of new-built house, changeless for miles together,
from which, to each inhabitant, we allot his proper quantity of windows,
and a Doric portico. The Venetian carried out his theory very simply. In
the centre of the archivolt we find almost invariably, in the older
work, the hand between the sun and moon in the attitude of blessing,
expressing the general power and presence of God, the source of light.
On the tympanum is the shield of the family. Venetian heraldry requires
no beasts for supporters, but usually prefers angels, neither the
supporters nor crests forming any necessary part of Venetian bearings.
Sometimes, however, human figures, or grotesques, are substituted; but,
in that case, an angel is almost always introduced above the shield,
bearing a globe in his left hand, and therefore clearly intended for the
'Angel of the Lord,' or, as it is expressed elsewhere, the 'Angel of His
Presence.' Where elaborate sculpture of this kind is inadmissible, the
shield is merely represented as suspended by a leather thong; and a
cross is introduced above the archivolt. The Renaissance architects
perceived the irrationality of all this, cut away both crosses and
angels, and substituted heads of satyrs, which were the proper presiding
deities of Venice in the Renaissance periods, and which in our own
domestic institutions, we have ever since, with much piety and sagacity,
retained."

§ LVII. The habit of employing some religious symbol, or writing some
religious legend, over the door of the house, does not entirely
disappear until far into the period of the Renaissance. The words "Peace
be to this house" occur on one side of a Veronese gateway, with the
appropriate and veracious inscription S.P.Q.R., on a Roman standard, on
the other; and "Blessed is he that cometh in the name of the Lord," is
written on one of the doorways of a building added at the flank of the
Casa Barbarigo, in the sixteenth or seventeenth century. It seems to be
only modern Protestantism which is entirely ashamed of _all_ symbols and
words that appear in anywise like a confession of faith.

§ LVIII. This peculiar feeling is well worthy of attentive analysis. It
indeed, in most cases, hardly deserves the name of a feeling; for the
meaningless doorway is merely an ignorant copy of heathen models: but
yet, if it were at this moment proposed to any of us, by our architects,
to remove the grinning head of a satyr, or other classical or Palladian
ornament, from the keystone of the door, and to substitute for it a
cross, and an inscription testifying our faith, I believe that most
persons would shrink from the proposal with an obscure and yet
overwhelming sense that things would be sometimes done, and thought,
within the house which would make the inscription on its gate a base
hypocrisy. And if so, let us look to it, whether that strong reluctance
to utter a definite religious profession, which so many of us feel, and
which, not very carefully examining into its dim nature, we conclude to
be modesty, or fear of hypocrisy, or other such form of amiableness, be
not, in very deed, neither less nor more than Infidelity; whether
Peter's "I know not the man" be not the sum and substance of all these
misgivings and hesitations; and whether the shamefacedness which we
attribute to sincerity and reverence, be not such shamefacedness as may
at last put us among those of whom the Son of Man shall be ashamed.

§ LIX. Such are the principal circumstances to be noted in the external
form and details of the Gothic palaces; of their interior arrangements
there is little left unaltered. The gateways which we have been
examining almost universally lead, in the earlier palaces, into a long
interior court, round which the mass of the palace is built; and in
which its first story is reached by a superb external staircase,
sustained on four or five pointed arches gradually increasing as they
ascend, both in height and span,--this change in their size being, so
far as I remember, peculiar to Venice, and visibly a consequence of the
habitual admission of arches of different sizes in the Byzantine
façades. These staircases are protected by exquisitely carved parapets,
like those of the outer balconies, with lions or grotesque heads set on
the angles, and with true projecting balconies on their landing-places.
In the centre of the court there is always a marble well; and these
wells furnish some of the most superb examples of Venetian sculpture. I
am aware only of one remaining from the Byzantine period; it is
octagonal, and treated like the richest of our Norman fonts: but the
Gothic wells of every date, from the thirteenth century downwards, are
innumerable, and full of beauty, though their form is little varied;
they being, in almost every case, treated like colossal capitals of
pillars, with foliage at the angles, and the shield of the family upon
their sides.

§ LX. The interior apartments always consist of one noble hall on the
first story, often on the second also, extending across the entire depth
of the house, and lighted in front by the principal groups of its
windows, while smaller apartments open from it on either side. The
ceilings, where they remain untouched, are of bold horizontal beams,
richly carved and gilded; but few of these are left from the true Gothic
times, the Venetian interiors having, in almost every case, been
remodelled by the Renaissance architects. This change, _however_, for
once, we cannot regret, as the walls and ceilings, when so altered, were
covered with the noblest works of Veronese, Titian, and Tintoret; nor
the interior walls only, but, as before noticed, often the exteriors
also. Of the color decorations of the Gothic exteriors I have,
therefore, at present taken no notice, as it will be more convenient to
embrace this subject in one general view of the systems of coloring of
the Venetian palaces, when we arrive at the period of its richest
developement.[98] The details, also, of most interest, respecting the
forms and transitional decoration of their capitals, will be given in
the final Appendix to the next volume, where we shall be able to include
in our inquiry the whole extent of the Gothic period; and it remains for
us, therefore, at present, only to review the history, fix the date, and
note the most important particulars in the structure of the building
which at once consummates and embodies the entire system of the Gothic
architecture of Venice,--the DUCAL PALACE.


FOOTNOTES

  [75] 38 ft. 2 in., without its cornice, which is 10 inches deep, and
    sustains pinnacles of stone 7 feet high. I was enabled to get the
    measures by a scaffolding erected in 1851 to repair the front.

  [76] I believe the necessary upper joint is vertical, through the
    uppermost lobe of the quatrefoil, as in the figure; but I have lost
    my memorandum of this joint.

  [77] "Dice, che non lauda per alcun modo di metter questo Serenissimo
    Dominio in tanto pericolo d' habitar un palazzo fabricato in
    aria."--_Pareri di XV. Architetti, con illustrazioni dell' Abbate
    Giuseppe Cadorin_ (Venice, 1838), p. 104.

  [78] "Il muro della sala è più grosso delle colonne sott' esso piedi
    uno e onze tre, et posto in modo che onze sei sta come in aere sopra
    la piazza, et onze nove dentro."--_Pareri di XV. Architetti_, p. 47.

  [79] Compare "Seven Lamps," chap. iii. § 7.

  [80] Pareri, above quoted, p. 21.

  [81] It is a curious proof how completely, even so early as the
    beginning of the sixteenth century, the Venetians had lost the habit
    of _reading_ the religious art of their ancient churches, that
    Sanuto, describing this injury, says, that "four of the _Kings_ in
    marble fell from their pinnacles above the front, at St. Mark's
    church;" and presently afterwards corrects his mistake, and
    apologises for it thus: "These were four saints, St. Constantine,
    St. Demetrius, St. George, and St. Theodore, all Greek saints. _They
    look like Kings_." Observe the perfect, because unintentional,
    praise given to the old sculptor.

    I quote the passage from the translation of these precious diaries
    of Sanuto, by my friend Mr. Rawdon Brown, a translation which I hope
    will some day become a standard book in English libraries.

  [82] I am not speaking here of iron balconies. See below, § XXII.

  [83] A Some details respecting the mechanical structure of the
    Venetian balcony are given in the final Appendix.

  [84] I found it convenient in my own memoranda to express them
    simply as fourths, seconds, &c. But "order" is an excellent word for
    any known group of forms, whether of windows, capitals, bases,
    mouldings, or any other architectural feature, provided always that
    it be not understood in any wise to imply preëminence or isolation
    in these groups. Thus I may rationally speak of the six orders of
    Venetian windows, provided I am ready to allow a French architect to
    speak of the six or seven, or eight, or seventy or eighty, orders of
    Norman windows, if so many are distinguishable; and so also we may
    rationally speak, for the sake of intelligibility, of the five
    orders of Greek pillars, provided only we understand that there may
    be five millions of orders as good or better, of pillars _not_
    Greek.

  [85] Or in their own curves; as, on a small scale, in the balustrade
    fig. 6, Plate XIII., above.

  [86] For all details of this kind, the reader is referred to the
    final Appendix in Vol. III.

  [87] Two threads of white marble, each about an inch wide, inlaid in
    the dark grey pavement, indicate the road to the Rialto from the
    farthest extremity of the north quarter of Venice. The peasant or
    traveller, lost in the intricacy of the pathway in this portion of
    the city, cannot fail, after a few experimental traverses, to cross
    these white lines, which thenceforward he has nothing to do but to
    follow, though their capricious sinuosities will try his patience
    not a little.

  [88] An account of the conspiracy of Bajamonte may be found in
    almost any Venetian history; the reader may consult Mutinelli,
    Annali Urbani, lib. iii.

  [89] See account of series of capitals in final Appendix.

  [90] If the traveller desire to find them (and they are worth
    seeking), let him row from the Fondamenta S. Biagio down the Rio
    della Tana, and look, on his right, for a low house with windows in
    it like those in the woodcut No. XXXI. above, p. 256. Let him go in
    at the door of the portico in the middle of this house, and he will
    find himself in a small alley, with the windows in question on each
    side of him.

  [91] The bitterness of feeling with which the Venetians must have
    remembered this, was probably the cause of their magnificent heroism
    in the final siege of the city under Dandolo, and, partly, of the
    excesses which disgraced their victory. The conduct of the allied
    army of the Crusaders on this occasion cannot, however, be brought
    in evidence of general barbarism in the thirteenth century: first,
    because the masses of the crusading armies were in great part
    composed of the refuse of the nations of Europe; and secondly,
    because such a mode of argument might lead us to inconvenient
    conclusions respecting ourselves, so long as the horses of the
    Austrian cavalry are stabled in the cloister of the convent which
    contains the Last Supper of Leonardo da Vinci. See Appendix 3, Vol.
    III.: "Austrian Government in Italy."

  [92] It is generally better to read ten lines of any poet in the
    original language, however painfully, than ten cantos of a
    translation. But an exception may be made in favor of Cary's Dante.
    If no poet ever was liable to lose more in translation, none was
    ever so carefully translated; and I hardly know whether most to
    admire the rigid fidelity, or the sweet and solemn harmony, of
    Cary's verse. There is hardly a fault in the fragment quoted above,
    except the word "lectured," for Dante's beautiful "favoleggiava;"
    and even in this case, joining the first words of the following
    line, the translation is strictly literal. It is true that the
    conciseness and the rivulet-like melody of Dante must continually be
    lost; but if I could only read English, and had to choose, for a
    library narrowed by poverty, between Cary's Dante and our own
    original Milton, I should choose Cary without an instant's pause.

  [93] See final Appendix, Vol. III., under head "Capitals."

  [94] This Plate is not from a drawing of mine. It has been engraved
    by Mr. Armytage, with great skill, from two daguerreotypes.

  [95] Vide final Appendix, under head "Archivolt."

  [96] "On Thursday, the 20th, the front walls of two of the new
    houses now building in Victoria Street, Westminster, fell to the
    ground.... The roof was on, _and a massive compo cornice_ was put up
    at top, as well as dressings to the upper windows. The roof is
    formed by girders and 4½-brick arches in cement, covered with
    asphalt to form a flat. The failure is attributed _to the quantity
    of rain which has fallen_. Others suppose that some of the girders
    were defective, and gave way, carrying the walls with
    them."--_Builder_, for January 29th, 1853. The rest of this volume
    might be filled with such notices, if we sought for them.

  [97] "Ysame," collected together.

  [98] Vol. III. Chap. I. I have had considerable difficulty in the
    arrangement of these volumes, so as to get the points bearing upon
    each other grouped in consecutive and intelligible order.




CHAPTER VIII.

THE DUCAL PALACE.


§ I. It was stated in the commencement of the preceding chapter that the
Gothic art of Venice was separated by the building of the Ducal Palace
into two distinct periods; and that in all the domestic edifices which
were raised for half a century after its completion, their
characteristic and chiefly effective portions were more or less directly
copied from it. The fact is, that the Ducal Palace was the great work of
Venice at this period, itself the principal effort of her imagination,
employing her best architects in its masonry, and her best painters in
its decoration, for a long series of years; and we must receive it as a
remarkable testimony to the influence which it possessed over the minds
of those who saw it in its progress, that, while in the other cities of
Italy every palace and church was rising in some original and daily more
daring form, the majesty of this single building was able to give pause
to the Gothic imagination in its full career; stayed the restlessness of
innovation in an instant, and forbade the powers which had created it
thenceforth to exert themselves in new directions, or endeavor to summon
an image more attractive.

§ II. The reader will hardly believe that while the architectural
invention of the Venetians was thus lost, Narcissus-like, in
self-contemplation, the various accounts of the progress of the building
thus admired and beloved are so confused as frequently to leave it
doubtful to what portion of the palace they refer; and that there is
actually, at the time being, a dispute between the best Venetian
antiquaries, whether the main façade of the palace be of the fourteenth
or fifteenth century. The determination of this question is of course
necessary before we proceed to draw any conclusions from the style of
the work; and it cannot be determined without a careful review of the
entire history of the palace, and of all the documents relating to it. I
trust that this review may not be found tedious,--assuredly it will not
be fruitless,--bringing many facts before us, singularly illustrative of
the Venetian character.

§ III. Before, however, the reader can enter upon any inquiry into the
history of this building, it is necessary that he should be thoroughly
familiar with the arrangement and names of its principal parts, as it at
present stands; otherwise he cannot comprehend so much as a single
sentence of any of the documents referring to it. I must do what I can,
by the help of a rough plan and bird's-eye view, to give him the
necessary topographical knowledge:

Fig. XXXVI. opposite is a rude ground plan of the buildings round St.
Mark's Place; and the following references will clearly explain their
relative positions:

  A. St. Mark's Place.
  B. Piazzetta.
  P. V. Procuratie Vecchie.
  P. N. (opposite) Procuratie Nuove.
  P. L. Libreria Vecchia.
  I. Piazzetta de' Leoni.
  T. Tower of St. Mark.
  F F. Great Façade of St. Mark's Church.
  M. St. Mark's. (It is so united with the Ducal Palace, that the
       separation cannot be indicated in the plan, unless all the walls
       had been marked, which would have confused the whole.)
  D D D. Ducal Palace.                          g s. Giant's stair.
  C. Court of Ducal Palace.                     J. Judgment angle.
  c. Porta della Carta.                         a. Fig-tree angle.
  p p. Ponte della Paglia (Bridge of Straw).
  S. Ponte de' Sospiri (Bridge of Sighs).
  R R. Riva de' Schiavoni.

The reader will observe that the Ducal Palace is arranged somewhat in
the form of a hollow square, of which one side faces the Piazzetta, B,
and another the quay called the Riva de' Schiavoni, R R; the third is on
the dark canal called the "Rio del Palazzo," and the fourth joins the
Church of St. Mark.

[Illustration: Fig. XXXVI.]

[Illustration: Fig. XXXVII.]

Of this fourth side, therefore, nothing can be seen. Of the other three
sides we shall have to speak constantly; and they will be respectively
called, that towards the Piazzetta, the "Piazzetta Façade;" that towards
the Riva de' Schiavoni, the "Sea Façade;" and that towards the Rio del
Palazzo, the "Rio Façade." This Rio, or canal, is usually looked upon by
the traveller with great respect, or even horror, because it passes
under the Bridge of Sighs. It is, however, one of the principal
thoroughfares of the city; and the bridge and its canal together occupy,
in the mind of a Venetian, very much the position of Fleet Street and
Temple Bar in that of a Londoner,--at least, at the time when Temple Bar
was occasionally decorated with human heads. The two buildings closely
resemble each other in form.

§ IV. We must now proceed to obtain some rough idea of the appearance
and distribution of the palace itself; but its arrangement will be
better understood by supposing ourselves raised some hundred and fifty
feet above the point in the lagoon in front of it, so as to get a
general view of the Sea Façade and Rio Façade (the latter in very steep
perspective), and to look down into its interior court. Fig. XXXVII.
roughly represents such a view, omitting all details on the roofs, in
order to avoid confusion. In this drawing we have merely to notice that,
of the two bridges seen on the right, the uppermost, above the black
canal, is the Bridge of Sighs; the lower one is the Ponte della Paglia,
the regular thoroughfare from quay to quay, and, I believe, called the
Bridge of Straw, because the boats which brought straw from the mainland
used to sell it at this place. The corner of the palace, rising above
this bridge, and formed by the meeting of the Sea Façade and Rio Façade,
will always be called the Vine angle, because it is decorated by a
sculpture of the drunkenness of Noah. The angle opposite will be called
the Fig-tree angle, because it is decorated by a sculpture of the Fall
of Man. The long and narrow range of building, of which the roof is seen
in perspective behind this angle, is the part of the palace fronting the
Piazzetta; and the angle under the pinnacle most to the left of the two
which terminate it will be called, for a reason presently to be stated,
the Judgment angle. Within the square formed by the building is seen its
interior court (with one of its wells), terminated by small and
fantastic buildings of the Renaissance period, which face the Giant's
Stair, of which the extremity is seen sloping down on the left.

§ V. The great façade which fronts the spectator looks southward. Hence
the two traceried windows lower than the rest, and to the right of the
spectator, may be conveniently distinguished as the "Eastern Windows."
There are two others like them, filled with tracery, and at the same
level, which look upon the narrow canal between the Ponte della Paglia
and the Bridge of Sighs: these we may conveniently call the "Canal
Windows." The reader will observe a vertical line in this dark side of
the palace, separating its nearer and plainer wall from a long
four-storied range of rich architecture. This more distant range is
entirely Renaissance: its extremity is not indicated, because I have no
accurate sketch of the small buildings and bridges beyond it, and we
shall have nothing whatever to do with this part of the palace in our
present inquiry. The nearer and undecorated wall is part of the older
palace, though much defaced by modern opening of common windows,
refittings of the brickwork, &c.

[Illustration: Fig. XXXVIII.]

§ VI. It will be observed that the façade is composed of a smooth mass
of wall, sustained on two tiers of pillars, one above the other. The
manner in which these support the whole fabric will be understood at
once by the rough section, fig. XXXVIII., which is supposed to be taken
right through the palace to the interior court, from near the middle of
the Sea Façade. Here _a_ and _d_ are the rows of shafts, both in the
inner court and on the Façade, which carry the main walls; _b_, _c_ are
solid walls variously strengthened with pilasters. A, B, C are the three
stories of the interior of the palace.

The reader sees that it is impossible for any plan to be more simple,
and that if the inner floors and walls of the stories A, B were
removed, there could be left merely the form of a basilica,--two high
walls, carried on ranges of shafts, and roofed by a low gable.

The stories A, B are entirely modernized, and divided into confused
ranges of small apartments, among which what vestiges remain of ancient
masonry are entirely undecipherable, except by investigations such as I
have had neither the time nor, as in most cases they would involve the
removal of modern plastering, the opportunity, to make. With the
subdivisions of this story, therefore, I shall not trouble the reader;
but those of the great upper story, C, are highly important.

§ VII. In the bird's-eye view above, fig. XXXVII., it will be noticed
that the two windows on the right are lower than the other four of the
façade. In this arrangement there is one of the most remarkable
instances I know of the daring sacrifice of symmetry to convenience,
which was noticed in Chap. VII. as one of the chief noblenesses of the
Gothic schools.

The part of the palace in which the two lower windows occur, we shall
find, was first built, and arranged in four stories in order to obtain
the necessary number of apartments. Owing to circumstances, of which we
shall presently give an account, it became necessary, in the beginning
of the fourteenth century, to provide another large and magnificent
chamber for the meeting of the senate. That chamber was added at the
side of the older building; but, as only one room was wanted, there was
no need to divide the added portion into two stories. The entire height
was given to the single chamber, being indeed not too great for just
harmony with its enormous length and breadth. And then came the question
how to place the windows, whether on a line with the two others, or
above them.

The ceiling of the new room was to be adorned by the paintings of the
best masters in Venice, and it became of great importance to raise the
light near that gorgeous roof, as well as to keep the tone of
illumination in the Council Chamber serene; and therefore to introduce
light rather in simple masses than in many broken streams. A modern
architect, terrified at the idea of violating external symmetry, would
have sacrificed both the pictures and the peace of the council. He would
have placed the larger windows at the same level with the other two, and
have introduced above them smaller windows, like those of the upper
story in the older building, as if that upper story had been continued
along the façade. But the old Venetian thought of the honor of the
paintings, and the comfort of the senate, before his own reputation. He
unhesitatingly raised the large windows to their proper position with
reference to the interior of the chamber, and suffered the external
appearance to take care of itself. And I believe the whole pile rather
gains than loses in effect by the variation thus obtained in the spaces
of wall above and below the windows.

§ VIII. On the party wall, between the second and third windows, which
faces the eastern extremity of the Great Council Chamber, is painted the
Paradise of Tintoret; and this wall will therefore be hereafter called
the "Wall of the Paradise."

In nearly the centre of the Sea Façade, and between the first and second
windows of the Great Council Chamber, is a large window to the ground,
opening on a balcony, which is one of the chief ornaments of the palace,
and will be called in future the "Sea Balcony."

The façade which looks on the Piazetta is very nearly like this to the
Sea, but the greater part of it was built in the fifteenth century, when
people had become studious of their symmetries. Its side windows are all
on the same level. Two light the west end of the Great Council Chamber,
one lights a small room anciently called the Quarantia Civil Nuova; the
other three, and the central one, with a balcony like that to the Sea,
light another large chamber, called Sala del Scrutinio, or "Hall of
Enquiry," which extends to the extremity of the palace above the Porta
della Carta.

§ IX. The reader is now well enough acquainted with the topography of
the existing building, to be able to follow the accounts of its history.


We have seen above, that there were three principal styles of Venetian
architecture; Byzantine, Gothic, and Renaissance.

The Ducal Palace, which was the great work of Venice, was built
successively in the three styles. There was a Byzantine Ducal Palace, a
Gothic Ducal Palace, and a Renaissance Ducal Palace. The second
superseded the first totally; a few stones of it (if indeed so much) are
all that is left. But the third superseded the second in part only, and
the existing building is formed by the union of the two.

We shall review the history of each in succession.[99]

1st. The BYZANTINE PALACE.

In the year of the death of Charlemagne, 813,[100] the Venetians
determined to make the island of Rialto the seat of the government and
capital of their state. Their Doge, Angelo or Agnello Participazio,
instantly took vigorous means for the enlargement of the small group of
buildings which were to be the nucleus of the future Venice. He
appointed persons to superintend the raising of the banks of sand, so as
to form more secure foundations, and to build wooden bridges over the
canals. For the offices of religion, he built the Church of St. Mark;
and on, or near, the spot where the Ducal Palace now stands, he built a
palace for the administration of the government.[101]

The history of the Ducal Palace therefore begins with the birth of
Venice, and to what remains of it, at this day, is entrusted the last
representation of her power.

§ X. Of the exact position and form of this palace of Participazio
little is ascertained. Sansovino says that it was "built near the Ponte
della Paglia, and answeringly on the Grand Canal,"[102] towards San
Giorgio; that is to say, in the place now occupied by the Sea Façade;
but this was merely the popular report of his day. We know, however,
positively, that it was somewhere upon the site of the existing palace;
and that it had an important front towards the Piazzetta, with which, as
we shall see hereafter, the present palace at one period was
incorporated. We know, also, that it was a pile of some magnificence,
from the account given by Sagornino of the visit paid by the Emperor
Otho the Great, to the Doge Pietro Orseolo II. The chronicler says that
the Emperor "beheld carefully all the beauty of the palace;"[103] and
the Venetian historians express pride in the building's being worthy of
an emperor's examination. This was after the palace had been much
injured by fire in the revolt against Candiano IV.,[104] and just
repaired, and richly adorned by Orseolo himself, who is spoken of by
Sagornino as having also "adorned the chapel of the Ducal Palace" (St.
Mark's) with ornaments of marble and gold.[105] There can be no doubt
whatever that the palace at this period resembled and impressed the
other Byzantine edifices of the city, such as the Fondaco de Turchi,
&c., whose remains have been already described; and that, like them, it
was covered with sculpture, and richly adorned with gold and color.

§ XI. In the year 1106, it was for the second time injured by fire,[106]
but repaired before 1116, when it received another emperor, Henry V. (of
Germany), and was again honored by imperial praise.[107] Between 1173
and the close of the century, it seems to have been again repaired and
much enlarged by the Doge Sebastian Ziani. Sansovino says that this Doge
not only repaired it, but "enlarged it in every direction;"[108] and,
after this enlargement, the palace seems to have remained untouched for
a hundred years, until, in the commencement of the fourteenth century,
the works of the Gothic Palace were begun. As, therefore, the old
Byzantine building was, at the time when those works first interfered
with it, in the form given to it by Ziani, I shall hereafter always
speak of it as the _Ziani_ Palace; and this the rather, because the only
chronicler whose words are perfectly clear respecting the existence of
part of this palace so late as the year 1422, speaks of it as built by
Ziani. The old "palace, of which half remains to this day, was built, as
we now see it, by Sebastian Ziani."[109]

So far, then, of the Byzantine Palace.

§ XII. 2nd. The GOTHIC PALACE. The reader, doubtless, recollects that
the important change in the Venetian government which gave stability to
the aristocratic power took place about the year 1297,[110] under the
Doge Pietro Gradenigo, a man thus characterized by Sansovino:--"A prompt
and prudent man, of unconquerable determination and great eloquence, who
laid, so to speak, the foundations of the eternity of this republic, by
the admirable regulations which he introduced into the government."

We may now, with some reason, doubt of their admirableness; but their
importance, and the vigorous will and intellect of the Doge, are not to
be disputed. Venice was in the zenith of her strength, and the heroism
of her citizens was displaying itself in every quarter of the
world.[111] The acquiescence in the secure establishment of the
aristocratic power was an expression, by the people, of respect for the
families which had been chiefly instrumental in raising the commonwealth
to such a height of prosperity.

The Serrar del Consiglio fixed the numbers of the Senate within certain
limits, and it conferred upon them a dignity greater than they had ever
before possessed. It was natural that the alteration in the character of
the assembly should be attended by some change in the size, arrangement,
or decoration of the chamber in which they sat.

We accordingly find it recorded by Sansovino, that "in 1301 another
saloon was begun on the Rio del Palazzo, _under the Doge Gradenigo_, and
finished in 1309, _in which year the Grand Council first sat in
it_."[112] In the first year, therefore, of the fourteenth century, the
Gothic Ducal Palace of Venice was begun; and as the Byzantine Palace
was, in its foundation, coeval with that of the state, so the Gothic
Palace was, in its foundation, coeval with that of the aristocratic
power. Considered as the principal representation of the Venetian school
of architecture, the Ducal Palace is the Parthenon of Venice, and
Gradenigo its Pericles.

§ XIII. Sansovino, with a caution very frequent among Venetian
historians, when alluding to events connected with the Serrar del
Consiglio, does not specially mention the cause for the requirement of
the new chamber; but the Sivos Chronicle is a little more distinct in
expression. "In 1301, it was determined to build a great saloon _for the
assembling_ of the Great Council, and the room was built which is _now_
called the Sala del Scrutinio."[113] _Now_, that is to say, at the time
when the Sivos Chronicle was written; the room has long ago been
destroyed, and its name given to another chamber on the opposite side of
the palace: but I wish the reader to remember the date 1301, as marking
the commencement of a great architectural epoch, in which took place the
first appliance of the energy of the aristocratic power, and of the
Gothic style, to the works of the Ducal Palace. The operations then
begun were continued, with hardly an interruption, during the whole
period of the prosperity of Venice. We shall see the new buildings
consume, and take the place of, the Ziani Palace, piece by piece: and
when the Ziani Palace was destroyed, they fed upon themselves; being
continued round the square, until, in the sixteenth century, they
reached the point where they had been begun in the fourteenth, and
pursued the track they had then followed some distance beyond the
junction; destroying or hiding their own commencement, as the serpent,
which is the type of eternity, conceals its tail in its jaws.

§ XIV. We cannot, therefore, _see_ the extremity, wherein lay the sting
and force of the whole creature,--the chamber, namely, built by the Doge
Gradenigo; but the reader must keep that commencement and the date of it
carefully in his mind. The body of the Palace Serpent will soon become
visible to us.

The Gradenigo Chamber was somewhere on the Rio Façade, behind the
present position of the Bridge of Sighs; i.e. about the point marked on
the roof by the dotted lines in the woodcut; it is not known whether low
or high, but probably on a first story. The great façade of the Ziani
Palace being, as above mentioned, on the Piazzetta, this chamber was as
far back and out of the way as possible; secrecy and security being
obviously the points first considered.

§ XV. But the newly constituted Senate had need of other additions to
the ancient palace besides the Council Chamber. A short, but most
significant, sentence is added to Sansovino's account of the
construction of that room. "There were, _near_ _it_," he says, "the
Cancellaria, and the _Gheba_ or _Gabbia_, afterwards called the Little
Tower."[114]

Gabbia means a "cage;" and there can be no question that certain
apartments were at this time added at the top of the palace and on the
Rio Façade, which were to be used as prisons. Whether any portion of the
old Torresella still remains is a doubtful question; but the apartments
at the top of the palace, in its fourth story, were still used for
prisons as late as the beginning of the seventeenth century.[115] I wish
the reader especially to notice that a separate tower or range of
apartments was built for this purpose, in order to clear the government
of the accusations so constantly made against them, by ignorant or
partial historians, of wanton cruelty to prisoners. The stories commonly
told respecting the "piombi" of the Ducal Palace are utterly false.
Instead of being, as usually reported, small furnaces under the leads of
the palace, they were comfortable rooms, with good flat roofs of larch,
and carefully ventilated.[116] The new chamber, then, and the prisons,
being built, the Great Council first sat in their retired chamber on the
Rio in the year 1309.

§ XVI. Now, observe the significant progress of events. They had no
sooner thus established themselves in power than they were disturbed by
the conspiracy of the Tiepolos, in the year 1310. In consequence of that
conspiracy the Council of Ten was created, still under the Doge
Gradenigo; who, having finished his work and left the aristocracy of
Venice armed with this terrible power, died in the year 1312, some say
by poison. He was succeeded by the Doge Marino Giorgio, who reigned
only one year; and then followed the prosperous government of John
Soranzo. There is no mention of any additions to the Ducal Palace during
his reign, but he was succeeded by that Francesco Dandolo, the
sculptures on whose tomb, still existing in the cloisters of the Salute,
may be compared by any traveller with those of the Ducal Palace. Of him
it is recorded in the Savina Chronicle: "This Doge also had the great
gate built which is at the entry of the palace, above which is his
statue kneeling, with the gonfalon in hand, before the feet of the Lion
of St. Mark's."[117]

§ XVII. It appears, then, that after the Senate had completed their
Council Chamber and the prisons, they required a nobler door than that
of the old Ziani Palace for their Magnificences to enter by. This door
is twice spoken of in the government accounts of expenses, which are
fortunately preserved,[118] in the following terms:--

"1335, June 1. We, Andrew Dandolo and Mark Loredano, procurators of
   St. Mark's, have paid to Martin the stone-cutter and his
   associates[119] ... for a stone of which the lion is made which is
   put over the gate of the palace."

"1344, November 4. We have paid thirty-five golden ducats for making
   gold leaf, to gild the lion which is over the door of the palace
   stairs."

The position of this door is disputed, and is of no consequence to the
reader, the door itself having long ago disappeared, and been replaced
by the Porta della Carta.

§ XVIII. But before it was finished, occasion had been discovered for
farther improvements. The Senate found their new Council Chamber
inconveniently small, and, about thirty years after its completion,
began to consider where a larger and more magnificent one might be
built. The government was now thoroughly established, and it was
probably felt that there was some meanness in the retired position, as
well as insufficiency in the size, of the Council Chamber on the Rio.
The first definite account which I find of their proceedings, under
these circumstances, is in the Caroldo Chronicle:[120]

"1340. On the 28th of December, in the preceding year, Master Marco
Erizzo, Nicolo Soranzo, and Thomas Gradenigo, were chosen to examine
where a new saloon might be built in order to assemble therein the
Greater Council.... On the 3rd of June, 1341, the Great Council elected
two procurators of the work of this saloon, with a salary of eighty
ducats a year."

It appears from the entry still preserved in the Archivio, and quoted by
Cadorin, that it was on the 28th of December, 1340, that the
commissioners appointed to decide on this important matter gave in their
report to the Grand Council, and that the decree passed thereupon for
the commencement of a new Council Chamber on the Grand Canal.[121]

_The room then begun is the one now in existence_, and its building
involved the building of all that is best and most beautiful in the
present Ducal Palace, the rich arcades of the lower stories being all
prepared for sustaining this Sala del Gran Consiglio.

§ XIX. In saying that it is the same now in existence, I do not mean
that it has undergone no alterations; as we shall see hereafter, it has
been refitted again and again, and some portions of its walls rebuilt;
but in the place and form in which it first stood, it still stands; and
by a glance at the position which its windows occupy, as shown in fig.
XXXVII. above, the reader will see at once that whatever can be known
respecting the design of the Sea Façade, must be gleaned out of the
entries which refer to the building of this Great Council Chamber.

Cadorin quotes two of great importance, to which we shall return in due
time, made during the progress of the work in 1342 and 1344; then one of
1349, resolving that the works at the Ducal Palace, which had been
discontinued during the plague, should be resumed; and finally one in
1362, which speaks of the Great Council Chamber as having been neglected
and suffered to fall into "great desolation," and resolves that it shall
be forthwith completed.[122]

The interruption had not been caused by the plague only, but by the
conspiracy of Faliero, and the violent death of the master builder.[123]
The work was resumed in 1362, and completed within the next three years,
at least so far as that Guariento was enabled to paint his Paradise on
the walls;[124] so that the building must, at any rate, have been roofed
by this time. Its decorations and fittings, however, were long in
completion; the paintings on the roof being only executed in 1400.[125]
They represented the heavens covered with stars,[126] this being, says
Sansovino, the bearings of the Doge Steno. Almost all ceilings and
vaults were at this time in Venice covered with stars, without any
reference to armorial bearings; but Steno claims, under his noble title
of Stellifer, an important share in completing the chamber, in an
inscription upon two square tablets, now inlaid in the walls on each
side of the great window towards the sea:

  "MILLE QUADRINGENTI CURREBANT QUATUOR ANNI
   HOC OPUS ILLUSTRIS MICHAEL DUX STELLIFER AUXIT."

And in fact it is to this Doge that we owe the beautiful balcony of that
window, though the work above it is partly of more recent date; and I
think the tablets bearing this important inscription have been taken out
and reinserted in the newer masonry. The labor of these final
decorations occupied a total period of sixty years. The Grand Council
sat in the finished chamber for the first time in 1423. In that year the
Gothic Ducal Palace of Venice was completed. It had taken, to build it,
the energies of the entire period which I have above described as the
central one of her life.

§ XX. 3rd. The RENAISSANCE PALACE. I must go back a step or two, in
order to be certain that the reader understands clearly the state of the
palace in 1423. The works of addition or renovation had now been
proceeding, at intervals, during a space of a hundred and twenty-three
years. Three generations at least had been accustomed to witness the
gradual advancement of the form of the Ducal Palace into more stately
symmetry, and to contrast the works of sculpture and painting with which
it was decorated,--full of the life, knowledge, and hope of the
fourteenth century,--with the rude Byzantine chiselling of the palace of
the Doge Ziani. The magnificent fabric just completed, of which the new
Council Chamber was the nucleus, was now habitually known in Venice as
the "Palazzo Nuovo;" and the old Byzantine edifice, now ruinous, and
more manifest in its decay by its contrast with the goodly stones of the
building which had been raised at its side, was of course known as the
"Palazzo Vecchio."[127] That fabric, however, still occupied the
principal position in Venice. The new Council Chamber had been erected
by the side of it towards the Sea; but there was not then the wide quay
in front, the Riva dei Schiavoni, which now renders the Sea Façade as
important as that to the Piazzetta. There was only a narrow walk
between the pillars and the water; and the _old_ palace of Ziani still
faced the Piazzetta, and interrupted, by its decrepitude, the
magnificence of the square where the nobles daily met. Every increase of
the beauty of the new palace rendered the discrepancy between it and the
companion building more painful; and then began to arise in the minds of
all men a vague idea of the necessity of destroying the old palace, and
completing the front of the Piazzetta with the same splendor as the Sea
Façade. But no such sweeping measure of renovation had been contemplated
by the Senate when they first formed the plan of their new Council
Chamber. First a single additional room, then a gateway, then a larger
room; but all considered merely as necessary additions to the palace,
not as involving the entire reconstruction of the ancient edifice. The
exhaustion of the treasury, and the shadows upon the political horizon,
rendered it more than imprudent to incur the vast additional expense
which such a project involved; and the Senate, fearful of itself, and
desirous to guard against the weakness of its own enthusiasm, passed a
decree, like the effort of a man fearful of some strong temptation to
keep his thoughts averted from the point of danger. It was a decree, not
merely that the old palace should not be rebuilt, but that no one should
_propose_ rebuilding it. The feeling of the desirableness of doing so
was too strong to permit fair discussion, and the Senate knew that to
bring forward such a motion was to carry it.

§ XXI. The decree, thus passed in order to guard against their own
weakness, forbade any one to speak of rebuilding the old palace under
the penalty of a thousand ducats. But they had rated their own
enthusiasm too low: there was a man among them whom the loss of a
thousand ducats could not deter from proposing what he believed to be
for the good of the state.

Some excuse was given him for bringing forward the motion, by a fire
which occurred in 1419, and which injured both the church of St. Mark's,
and part of the old palace fronting the Piazzetta. What followed, I
shall relate in the words of Sanuto.[128]

§ XXII. "Therefore they set themselves with all diligence and care to
repair and adorn sumptuously, first God's house; but in the Prince's
house things went on more slowly, _for it did not please the Doge[129]
to restore it in the form in which it was before_; and they could not
rebuild it altogether in a better manner, so great was the parsimony of
these old fathers; because it was forbidden by laws, which condemned in
a penalty of a thousand ducats any one who should propose to throw down
the _old_ palace, and to rebuild it more richly and with greater
expense. But the Doge, who was magnanimous, and who desired above all
things what was honorable to the city, had the thousand ducats carried
into the Senate Chamber, and then proposed that the palace should be
rebuilt; saying: that, 'since the late fire had ruined in great part the
Ducal habitation (not only his own private palace, but all the places
used for public business) this occasion was to be taken for an
admonishment sent from God, that they ought to rebuild the palace more
nobly, and in a way more befitting the greatness to which, by God's
grace, their dominions had reached; and that his motive in proposing
this was neither ambition, nor selfish interest: that, as for ambition,
they might have seen in the whole course of his life, through so many
years, that he had never done anything for ambition, either in the city,
or in foreign business; but in all his actions had kept justice first in
his thoughts, and then the advantage of the state, and the honor of the
Venetian name: and that, as far as regarded his private interest, if it
had not been for this accident of the fire, he would never have thought
of changing anything in the palace into either a more sumptuous or a
more honorable form; and that during the many years in which he had
lived in it, he had never endeavored to make any change, but had always
been content with it, as his predecessors had left it; and that he knew
well that, if they took in hand to build it as he exhorted and besought
them, being now very old, and broken down with many toils, God would
call him to another life before the walls were raised a pace from the
ground. And that therefore they might perceive that he did not advise
them to raise this building for his own convenience, but only for the
honor of the city and its Dukedom; and that the good of it would never
be felt by him, but by his successors.' Then he said, that 'in order, as
he had always done, to observe the laws,... he had brought with him the
thousand ducats which had been appointed as the penalty for proposing
such a measure, so that he might prove openly to all men that it was not
his own advantage that he sought, but the dignity of the state.'" There
was no one (Sanuto goes on to tell us) who ventured, or desired, to
oppose the wishes of the Doge; and the thousand ducats were unanimously
devoted to the expenses of the work. "And they set themselves with much
diligence to the work; and the palace was begun in the form and manner
in which it is at present seen; but, as Mocenigo had prophesied, not
long after, he ended his life, and not only did not see the work brought
to a close, but hardly even begun."

§ XXIII. There are one or two expressions in the above extracts which,
if they stood alone, might lead the reader to suppose that the whole
palace had been thrown down and rebuilt. We must however remember, that,
at this time, the new Council Chamber, which had been one hundred years
in building, was actually unfinished, the council had not yet sat in it;
and it was just as likely that the Doge should then propose to destroy
and rebuild it, as in this year, 1853, it is that any one should propose
in our House of Commons to throw down the new Houses of Parliament,
under the title of the "old palace," and rebuild _them_.

§ XXIV. The manner in which Sanuto expresses himself will at once be
seen to be perfectly natural, when it is remembered that although we now
speak of the whole building as the "Ducal Palace," it consisted, in the
minds of the old Venetians, of four distinct buildings. There were in it
the palace, the state prisons, the senate-house, and the offices of
public business; in other words, it was Buckingham Palace, the Tower of
olden days, the Houses of Parliament, and Downing Street, all in one;
and any of these four portions might be spoken of, without involving an
allusion to any other. "Il Palazzo" was the Ducal residence, which, with
most of the public offices, Mocenigo _did_ propose to pull down and
rebuild, and which was actually pulled down and rebuilt. But the new
Council Chamber, of which the whole façade to the Sea consisted, never
entered into either his or Sanuto's mind for an instant, as necessarily
connected with the Ducal residence.

I said that the new Council Chamber, at the time when Mocenigo brought
forward his measure, had never yet been used. It was in the year
1422[130] that the decree passed to rebuild the palace: Mocenigo died in
the following year,[131] and Francesco Foscari was elected in his room.
The Great Council Chamber was used for the first time on the day when
Foscari entered the Senate as Doge,--the 3rd of April, 1423, according
to the Caroldo Chronicle;[132] the 23rd, which is probably correct, by
an anonymous MS., No. 60, in the Correr Museum;[133]--and, the following
year, on the 27th of March, the first hammer was lifted up against the
old palace of Ziani.[134]

§ XXV. That hammer stroke was the first act of the period properly
called the "Renaissance." It was the knell of the architecture of
Venice,--and of Venice herself.

The central epoch of her life was past; the decay had already begun: I
dated its commencement above (Ch. I. Vol. 1.) from the death of
Mocenigo. A year had not yet elapsed since that great Doge had been
called to his account: his patriotism, always sincere, had been in this
instance mistaken; in his zeal for the honor of future Venice, he had
forgotten what was due to the Venice of long ago. A thousand palaces
might be built upon her burdened islands, but none of them could take
the place, or recall the memory, of that which was first built upon her
unfrequented shore. It fell; and, as if it had been the talisman of her
fortunes, the city never flourished again.

§ XXVI. I have no intention of following out, in their intricate
details, the operations which were begun under Foscari and continued
under succeeding Doges till the palace assumed its present form, for I
am not in this work concerned, except by occasional reference, with the
architecture of the fifteenth century: but the main facts are the
following. The palace of Ziani was destroyed; the existing façade to the
Piazzetta built, so as both to continue and to resemble, in most
particulars, the work of the Great Council Chamber. It was carried back
from the Sea as far as the Judgment angle; beyond which is the Porta
della Carta, begun in 1439, and finished in two years, under the Doge
Foscari;[135] the interior buildings connected with it were added by the
Doge Christopher Moro (the Othello of Shakspeare)[136] in 1462.

§ XXVII. By reference to the figure the reader will see that we have now
gone the round of the palace, and that the new work of 1462 was close
upon the first piece of the Gothic palace, the _new_ Council Chamber of
1301. Some remnants of the Ziani Palace were perhaps still left between
the two extremities of the Gothic Palace; or, as is more probable, the
last stones of it may have been swept away after the fire of 1419, and
replaced by new apartments for the Doge. But whatever buildings, old or
new, stood on this spot at the time of the completion of the Porta della
Carta were destroyed by another great fire in 1479, together with so
much of the palace on the Rio that, though the saloon of Gradenigo, then
known as the Sala de' Pregadi, was not destroyed, it became necessary to
reconstruct the entire façades of the portion of the palace behind the
Bridge of Sighs, both towards the court and canal. This work was
entrusted to the best Renaissance architects of the close of the
fifteenth and opening of the sixteenth centuries; Antonio Ricci
executing the Giant's staircase, and on his absconding with a large sum
of the public money, Pietro Lombardo taking his place. The whole work
must have been completed towards the middle of the sixteenth century.
The architects of the palace, advancing round the square and led by
fire, had more than reached the point from which they had set out; and
the work of 1560 was joined to the work of 1301-1340, at the point
marked by the conspicuous vertical line in Figure XXXVII. on the Rio
Façade.

§ XXVIII. But the palace was not long permitted to remain in this
finished form. Another terrific fire, commonly called the great fire,
burst out in 1574, and destroyed the inner fittings and all the precious
pictures of the Great Council Chamber, and of all the upper rooms on the
Sea Façade, and most of those on the Rio Façade, leaving the building a
mere shell, shaken and blasted by the flames. It was debated in the
Great Council whether the ruin should not be thrown down, and an
entirely new palace built in its stead. The opinions of all the leading
architects of Venice were taken, respecting the safety of the walls, or
the possibility of repairing them as they stood. These opinions, given
in writing, have been preserved, and published by the Abbé Cadorin, in
the work already so often referred to; and they form one of the most
important series of documents connected with the Ducal Palace.

I cannot help feeling some childish pleasure in the accidental
resemblance to my own name in that of the architect whose opinion was
first given in favor of the ancient fabric, Giovanni Rusconi. Others,
especially Palladio, wanted to pull down the old palace, and execute
designs of their own; but the best architects in Venice, and to his
immortal honor, chiefly Francesco Sansovino, energetically pleaded for
the Gothic pile, and prevailed. It was successfully repaired, and
Tintoret painted his noblest picture on the wall from which the Paradise
of Guariento had withered before the flames.

§ XXIX. The repairs necessarily undertaken at this time were however
extensive, and interfere in many directions with the earlier work of the
palace: still the only serious alteration in its form was the
transposition of the prisons, formerly at the top of the palace, to the
other side of the Rio del Palazzo; and the building of the Bridge of
Sighs, to connect them with the palace, by Antonio da Ponte. The
completion of this work brought the whole edifice into its present form;
with the exception of alterations in doors, partitions, and staircases
among the inner apartments, not worth noticing, and such barbarisms and
defacements as have been suffered within the last fifty years, by, I
suppose, nearly every building of importance in Italy.

§ XXX. Now, therefore, we are liberty to examine some of the details of
the Ducal Palace, without any doubt about their dates. I shall not,
however, give any elaborate illustrations of them here, because I could
not do them justice on the scale of the page of this volume, or by means
of line engraving. I believe a new era is opening to us in the art of
illustration,[137] and that I shall be able to give large figures of the
details of the Ducal Palace at a price which will enable every person
who is interested in the subject to possess them; so that the cost and
labor of multiplying illustrations here would be altogether wasted. I
shall therefore direct the reader's attention only to points of interest
as can be explained in the text.

§ XXXI. First, then, looking back to the woodcut at the beginning of
this chapter, the reader will observe that, as the building was very
nearly square on the ground plan, a peculiar prominence and importance
were given to its angles, which rendered it necessary that they should
be enriched and softened by sculpture. I do not suppose that the fitness
of this arrangement will be questioned; but if the reader will take the
pains to glance over any series of engravings of church towers or other
four-square buildings in which great refinement of form has been
attained, he will at once observe how their effect depends on some
modification of the sharpness of the angle, either by groups of
buttresses, or by turrets and niches rich in sculpture. It is to be
noted also that this principle of breaking the angle is peculiarly
Gothic, arising partly out of the necessity of strengthening the flanks
of enormous buildings, where composed of imperfect materials, by
buttresses or pinnacles; partly out of the conditions of Gothic warfare,
which generally required a tower at the angle; partly out of the natural
dislike of the meagreness of effect in buildings which admitted large
surfaces of wall, if the angle were entirely unrelieved. The Ducal
Palace, in its acknowledgment of this principle, makes a more definite
concession to the Gothic spirit than any of the previous architecture of
Venice. No angle, up to the time of its erection, had been otherwise
decorated than by a narrow fluted pilaster of red marble, and the
sculpture was reserved always, as in Greek and Roman work, for the plane
surfaces of the building, with, as far as I recollect, two exceptions
only, both in St. Mark's; namely, the bold and grotesque gargoyle on its
north-west angle, and the angels which project from the four inner
angles under the main cupola; both of these arrangements being plainly
made under Lombardic influence. And if any other instances occur, which
I may have at present forgotten, I am very sure the Northern influence
will always be distinctly traceable in them.

§ XXXII. The Ducal Palace, however, accepts the principle in its
completeness, and throws the main decoration upon its angles. The
central window, which looks rich and important in the woodcut, was
entirely restored in the Renaissance time, as we have seen, under the
Doge Steno; so that we have no traces of its early treatment; and the
principal interest of the older palace is concentrated in the angle
sculpture, which is arranged in the following manner. The pillars of the
two bearing arcades are much enlarged in thickness at the angles, and
their capitals increased in depth, breadth, and fulness of subject;
above each capital, on the angle of the wall, a sculptural subject is
introduced, consisting, in the great lower arcade, of two or more
figures of the size of life; in the upper arcade, of a single angel
holding a scroll: above these angels rise the twisted pillars with their
crowning niches, already noticed in the account of parapets in the
seventh chapter; thus forming an unbroken line of decoration from the
ground to the top of the angle.

§ XXXIII. It was before noticed that one of the corners of the palace
joins the irregular outer buildings connected with St. Mark's, and is
not generally seen. There remain, therefore, to be decorated, only the
three angles, above distinguished as the Vine angle, the Fig-tree angle,
and the Judgment angle; and at these we have, according to the
arrangement just explained,--

First, Three great bearing capitals (lower arcade).

Secondly, Three figure subjects of sculpture above them (lower arcade).

Thirdly, Three smaller bearing capitals (upper arcade).

Fourthly, Three angels above them (upper arcade).

Fifthly, Three spiral shafts with niches.

§ XXXIV. I shall describe the bearing capitals hereafter, in their
order, with the others of the arcade; for the first point to which the
reader's attention ought to be directed is the choice of subject in the
great figure sculptures above them. These, observe, are the very corner
stones of the edifice, and in them we may expect to find the most
important evidences of the feeling, as well as of the skill, of the
builder. If he has anything to say to us of the purpose with which he
built the palace, it is sure to be said here; if there was any lesson
which he wished principally to teach to those for whom he built, here
it is sure to be inculcated; if there was any sentiment which they
themselves desired to have expressed in the principal edifice of their
city, this is the place in which we may be secure of finding it legibly
inscribed.

§ XXXV. Now the first two angles, of the Vine and Fig-tree, belong to
the old, or true Gothic, Palace; the third angle belongs to the
Renaissance imitation of it: therefore, at the first two angles, it is
the Gothic spirit which is going to speak to us; and, at the third, the
Renaissance spirit.

The reader remembers, I trust, that the most characteristic sentiment of
all that we traced in the working of the Gothic heart, was the frank
confession of its own weakness; and I must anticipate, for a moment, the
results of our inquiry in subsequent chapters, so far as to state that
the principal element in the Renaissance spirit, is its firm confidence
in its own wisdom.

Hear, then, the two spirits speak for themselves.

The first main sculpture of the Gothic Palace is on what I have called
the angle of the Fig-tree:

Its subject is the FALL OF MAN.

The second sculpture is on the angle of the Vine:

Its subject is the DRUNKENNESS OF NOAH.

The Renaissance sculpture is on the Judgment angle:

Its subject is the JUDGMENT OF SOLOMON.

It is impossible to overstate, or to regard with too much admiration,
the significance of this single fact. It is as if the palace had been
built at various epochs, and preserved uninjured to this day, for the
sole purpose of teaching us the difference in the temper of the two
schools.

§ XXXVI. I have called the sculpture on the Fig-tree angle the principal
one; because it is at the central bend of the palace, where it turns to
the Piazzetta (the façade upon the Piazzetta being, as we saw above, the
more important one in ancient times). The great capital, which sustains
this Fig-tree angle, is also by far more elaborate than the head of the
pilaster under the Vine angle, marking the preëminence of the former in
the architect's mind. It is impossible to say which was first executed,
but that of the Fig-tree angle is somewhat rougher in execution, and
more stiff in the design of the figures, so that I rather suppose it to
have been the earliest completed.

[Illustration: Plate XIX.
               LEAFAGE OF THE VINE ANGLE.]

§ XXXVII. In both the subjects, of the Fall and the Drunkenness, the
tree, which forms the chiefly decorative portion of the sculpture,--fig
in the one case, vine in the other,--was a necessary adjunct. Its trunk,
in both sculptures, forms the true outer angle of the palace; boldly cut
separate from the stone-work behind, and branching out above the figures
so as to enwrap each side of the angle, for several feet, with its deep
foliage. Nothing can be more masterly or superb than the sweep of this
foliage on the Fig-tree angle; the broad leaves lapping round the
budding fruit, and sheltering from sight, beneath their shadows, birds
of the most graceful form and delicate plumage. The branches are,
however, so strong, and the masses of stone hewn into leafage so large,
that, notwithstanding the depth of the undercutting, the work remains
nearly uninjured; not so at the Vine angle, where the natural delicacy
of the vine-leaf and tendril having tempted the sculptor to greater
effort, he has passed the proper limits of his art, and cut the upper
stems so delicately that half of them have been broken away by the
casualties to which the situation of the sculpture necessarily exposes
it. What remains is, however, so interesting in its extreme refinement,
that I have chosen it for the subject of the opposite illustration
rather than the nobler masses of the fig-tree, which ought to be
rendered on a larger scale. Although half of the beauty of the
composition is destroyed by the breaking away of its central masses,
there is still enough in the distribution of the variously bending
leaves, and in the placing of the birds on the lighter branches, to
prove to us the power of the designer. I have already referred to this
Plate as a remarkable instance of the Gothic Naturalism; and, indeed, it
is almost impossible for the copying of nature to be carried farther
than in the fibres of the marble branches, and the careful finishing of
the tendrils: note especially the peculiar expression of the knotty
joints of the vine in the light branch which rises highest. Yet only
half the finish of the work can be seen in the Plate: for, in several
cases, the sculptor has shown the under sides of the leaves turned
boldly to the light, and has literally _carved every rib and vein upon
them, in relief_; not merely the main ribs which sustain the lobes of
the leaf, and actually project in nature, but the irregular and sinuous
veins which chequer the membranous tissues between them, and which the
sculptor has represented conventionally as relieved like the others, in
order to give the vine leaf its peculiar tessellated effect upon the
eye.

§ XXXVIII. As must always be the case in early sculpture, the figures
are much inferior to the leafage; yet so skilful in many respects, that
it was a long time before I could persuade myself that they had indeed
been wrought in the first half of the fourteenth century. Fortunately,
the date is inscribed upon a monument in the Church of San Simeon
Grande, bearing a recumbent statue of the saint, of far finer
workmanship, in every respect, than those figures of the Ducal Palace,
yet so like them, that I think there can be no question that the head of
Noah was wrought by the sculptor of the palace in emulation of that of
the statue of St. Simeon. In this latter sculpture, the face is
represented in death; the mouth partly open, the lips thin and sharp,
the teeth carefully sculptured beneath; the face full of quietness and
majesty, though very ghastly; the hair and beard flowing in luxuriant
wreaths, disposed with the most masterly freedom, yet severity, of
design, far down upon the shoulders; the hands crossed upon the body,
carefully studied, and the veins and sinews perfectly and easily
expressed, yet without any attempt at extreme finish or display of
technical skill. This monument bears date 1317,[138] and its sculptor
was justly proud of it; thus recording his name:

  "CELAVIT MARCUS OPUS HOC INSIGNE ROMANIS,
     LAUDIBUS NON PARCUS EST SUA DIGNA MANUS."

§ XXXIX. The head of the Noah on the Ducal Palace, evidently worked in
emulation of this statue, has the same profusion of flowing hair and
beard, but wrought in smaller and harder curls; and the veins on the
arms and breast are more sharply drawn, the sculptor being evidently
more practised in keen and fine lines of vegetation than in those of the
figure; so that, which is most remarkable in a workman of this early
period, he has failed in telling his story plainly, regret and wonder
being so equally marked on the features of all the three brothers that
it is impossible to say which is intended for Ham. Two of the heads of
the brothers are seen in the Plate; the third figure is not with the
rest of the group, but set at a distance of about twelve feet, on the
other side of the arch which springs from the angle capital.

§ XL. It may be observed, as a farther evidence of the date of the
group, that, in the figures of all the three youths, the feet are
protected simply by a bandage arranged in crossed folds round the ankle
and lower part of the limb; a feature of dress which will be found in
nearly every piece of figure sculpture in Venice, from the year 1300 to
1380, and of which the traveller may see an example within three hundred
yards of this very group, in the bas-reliefs on the tomb of the Doge
Andrea Dandolo (in St. Mark's), who died in 1354.

§ XLI. The figures of Adam and Eve, sculptured on each side of the
Fig-tree angle, are more stiff than those of Noah and his sons, but are
better fitted for their architectural service; and the trunk of the
tree, with the angular body of the serpent writhed around it, is more
nobly treated as a terminal group of lines than that of the vine.

The Renaissance sculptor of the figures of the Judgment of Solomon has
very nearly copied the fig-tree from this angle, placing its trunk
between the executioner and the mother, who leans forward to stay his
hand. But, though the whole group is much more free in design than those
of the earlier palace, and in many ways excellent in itself, so that it
always strikes the eye of a careless observer more than the others, it
is of immeasurably inferior spirit in the workmanship; the leaves of the
tree, though far more studiously varied in flow than those of the
fig-tree from which they are partially copied, have none of its truth to
nature; they are ill set on the stems, bluntly defined on the edges, and
their curves are not those of growing leaves, but of wrinkled drapery.

§ XLII. Above these three sculptures are set, in the upper arcade, the
statues of the archangels Raphael, Michael, and Gabriel: their positions
will be understood by reference to the lowest figure in Plate XVII.,
where that of Raphael above the Vine angle is seen on the right. A
diminutive figure of Tobit follows at his feet, and he bears in his hand
a scroll with this inscription:

  EFICE Q
  SOFRE
  TUR AFA
  EL REVE
  RENDE
  QUIETU

i.e. Effice (quæso?) fretum, Raphael reverende, quietum.[139] I could
not decipher the inscription on the scroll borne by the angel Michael;
and the figure of Gabriel, which is by much the most beautiful feature
of the Renaissance portion of the palace, has only in its hand the
Annunciation lily.

§ XLIII. Such are the subjects of the main sculptures decorating the
angles of the palace; notable, observe, for their simple expression of
two feelings, the consciousness of human frailty, and the dependence
upon Divine guidance and protection: this being, of course, the general
purpose of the introduction of the figures of the angels; and, I
imagine, intended to be more particularly conveyed by the manner in
which the small figure of Tobit follows the steps of Raphael, just
touching the hem of his garment. We have next to examine the course of
divinity and of natural history embodied by the old sculpture in the
great series of capitals which support the lower arcade of the palace;
and which, being at a height of little more than eight feet above the
eye, might be read, like the pages of a book, by those (the noblest men
in Venice) who habitually walked beneath the shadow of this great arcade
at the time of their first meeting each other for morning converse.

§ XLIV. The principal sculptures of the capitals consist of
personifications of the Virtues and Vices, the favorite subjects of
decorative art, at this period, in all the cities of Italy; and there is
so much that is significant in the various modes of their distinction
and general representation, more especially with reference to their
occurrence as expressions of praise to the dead in sepulchral
architecture, hereafter to be examined, that I believe the reader may
both happily and profitably rest for a little while beneath the first
vault of the arcade, to review the manner in which these symbols of the
virtues were first invented by the Christian imagination, and the
evidence they generally furnish of the state of religious feeling in
those by whom they were recognised.

§ XLV. In the early ages of Christianity, there was little care taken to
analyze character. One momentous question was heard over the whole
world,--Dost thou believe in the Lord with all thine heart? There was
but one division among men,--the great unatoneable division between the
disciple and adversary. The love of Christ was all, and in all; and in
proportion to the nearness of their memory of His person and teaching,
men understood the infinity of the requirements of the moral law, and
the manner in which it alone could be fulfilled. The early Christians
felt that virtue, like sin, was a subtle universal thing, entering into
every act and thought, appearing outwardly in ten thousand diverse
ways, diverse according to the separate framework of every heart in
which it dwelt; but one and the same always in its proceeding from the
love of God, as sin is one and the same in proceeding from hatred of
God. And in their pure, early, and practical piety, they saw there was
no need for codes of morality, or systems of metaphysics. Their virtue
comprehended everything, entered into everything; it was too vast and
too spiritual to be defined; but there was no need of its definition.
For through faith, working by love, they knew that all human excellence
would be developed in due order; but that, without faith, neither reason
could define, nor effort reach, the lowest phase of Christian virtue.
And therefore, when any of the Apostles have occasion to describe or
enumerate any forms of vice or virtue by name, there is no attempt at
system in their words. They use them hurriedly and energetically,
heaping the thoughts one upon another, in order as far as possible to
fill the reader's mind with a sense of the infinity both of crime and of
righteousness. Hear St. Paul describe sin: "Being filled with all
unrighteousness, fornication, wickedness, covetousness, maliciousness;
full of envy, murder, debate, deceit, malignity; whisperers, backbiters,
haters of God, despiteful, proud, boasters, inventors of evil things,
disobedient to parents, without understanding, covenant breakers,
without natural affection, implacable, unmerciful." There is evidently
here an intense feeling of the universality of sin; and in order to
express it, the Apostle hurries his words confusedly together, little
caring about their order, as knowing all the vices to be indissolubly
connected one with another. It would be utterly vain to endeavor to
arrange his expressions as if they had been intended for the ground of
any system, or to give any philosophical definition of the vices.[140]
So also hear him speaking of virtue: "Rejoice in the Lord. Let your
moderation be known unto all men. Be careful for nothing, but in
everything let your requests be made known unto God; and whatsoever
things are honest, whatsoever things are just, whatsoever things are
pure, whatsoever things are lovely, whatsoever things are of good
report, if there be any virtue, and if there be any praise, think on
these things." Observe, he gives up all attempt at definition; he leaves
the definition to every man's heart, though he writes so as to mark the
overflowing fulness of his own vision of virtue. And so it is in all
writings of the Apostles; their manner of exhortation, and the kind of
conduct they press, vary according to the persons they address, and the
feeling of the moment at which they write, and never show any attempt at
logical precision. And, although the words of their Master are not thus
irregularly uttered, but are weighed like fine gold, yet, even in His
teaching, there is no detailed or organized system of morality; but the
command only of that faith and love which were to embrace the whole
being of man: "On these two commandments hang all the law and the
prophets." Here and there an incidental warning against this or that
more dangerous form of vice or error, "Take heed and beware of
covetousness," "Beware of the leaven of the Pharisees;" here and there a
plain example of the meaning of Christian love, as in the parables of
the Samaritan and the Prodigal, and His own perpetual example: these
were the elements of Christ's constant teaching; for the Beatitudes,
which are the only approximation to anything like a systematic
statement, belong to different conditions and characters of individual
men, not to abstract virtues. And all early Christians taught in the
same manner. They never cared to expound the nature of this or that
virtue; for they knew that the believer who had Christ, had all. Did he
need fortitude? Christ was his rock: Equity? Christ was his
righteousness: Holiness? Christ was his sanctification: Liberty? Christ
was his redemption: Temperance? Christ was his ruler: Wisdom? Christ was
his light: Truthfulness? Christ was the truth: Charity? Christ was love.

§ XLVI. Now, exactly in proportion as the Christian religion became less
vital, and as the various corruptions which time and Satan brought into
it were able to manifest themselves, the person and offices of Christ
were less dwelt upon, and the virtues of Christians more. The Life of
the Believer became in some degree separated from the Life of Christ;
and his virtue, instead of being a stream flowing forth from the throne
of God, and descending upon the earth, began to be regarded by him as a
pyramid upon earth, which he had to build up, step by step, that from
the top of it he might reach the Heavens. It was not possible to measure
the waves of the water of life, but it was perfectly possible to measure
the bricks of the Tower of Babel; and gradually, as the thoughts of men
were withdrawn from their Redeemer, and fixed upon themselves, the
virtues began to be squared, and counted, and classified, and put into
separate heaps of firsts and seconds; some things being virtuous
cardinally, and other things virtuous only north-north-west. It is very
curious to put in close juxtaposition the words of the Apostles and of
some of the writers of the fifteenth century touching sanctification.
For instance, hear first St. Paul to the Thessalonians: "The very God of
peace sanctify you wholly; and I pray God your whole spirit and soul and
body be preserved blameless unto the coming of our Lord Jesus Christ.
Faithful is he that calleth you, who also will do it." And then the
following part of a prayer which I translate from a MS. of the fifteenth
century: "May He (the Holy Spirit) govern the five Senses of my body;
may He cause me to embrace the Seven Works of Mercy, and firmly to
believe and observe the Twelve Articles of the Faith and the Ten
Commandments of the Law, and defend me from the Seven Mortal Sins, even
to the end."

§ XLVII. I do not mean that this quaint passage is generally
characteristic of the devotion of the fifteenth century: the very prayer
out of which it is taken is in other parts exceedingly beautiful:[141]
but the passage is strikingly illustrative of the tendency of the later
Romish Church, more especially in its most corrupt condition, just
before the Reformation, to throw all religion into forms and ciphers;
which tendency, as it affected Christian ethics, was confirmed by the
Renaissance enthusiasm for the works of Aristotle and Cicero, from whom
the code of the fifteenth century virtues was borrowed, and whose
authority was then infinitely more revered by all the Doctors of the
Church than that either of St. Paul or St. Peter.

§ XLVIII. Although, however, this change in the tone of the Christian
mind was most distinctly manifested when the revival of literature
rendered the works of the heathen philosophers the leading study of all
the greatest scholars of the period, it had been, as I said before,
taking place gradually from the earliest ages. It is, as far as I know,
that root of the Renaissance poison-tree, which, of all others, is
deepest struck; showing itself in various measures through the writings
of all the Fathers, of course exactly in proportion to the respect which
they paid to classical authors, especially to Plato, Aristotle, and
Cicero. The mode in which the pestilent study of that literature
affected them may be well illustrated by the examination of a single
passage from the works of one of the best of them, St. Ambrose, and of
the mode in which that passage was then amplified and formulized by
later writers.

§ XLIX. Plato, indeed, studied alone, would have done no one any harm.
He is profoundly spiritual and capacious in all his views, and embraces
the small systems of Aristotle and Cicero, as the solar system does the
Earth. He seems to me especially remarkable for the sense of the great
Christian virtue of Holiness, or sanctification; and for the sense of
the presence of the Deity in all things, great or small, which always
runs in a solemn undercurrent beneath his exquisite playfulness and
irony; while all the merely moral virtues may be found in his writings
defined in the most noble manner, as a great painter defines his
figures, _without outlines_. But the imperfect scholarship of later ages
seems to have gone to Plato, only to find in him the system of Cicero;
which indeed was very definitely expressed by him. For it having been
quickly felt by all men who strove, unhelped by Christian faith, to
enter at the strait gate into the paths of virtue, that there were four
characters of mind which were protective or preservative of all that was
best in man, namely, Prudence, Justice, Courage, and Temperance,[142]
these were afterwards, with most illogical inaccuracy, called cardinal
_virtues_, Prudence being evidently no virtue, but an intellectual gift:
but this inaccuracy arose partly from the ambiguous sense of the Latin
word "virtutes," which sometimes, in mediæval language, signifies
virtues, sometimes powers (being occasionally used in the Vulgate for
the word "hosts," as in Psalm ciii. 21, cxlviii. 2, &c., while
"fortitudines" and "exercitus" are used for the same word in other
places), so that Prudence might properly be styled a power, though not
properly a virtue; and partly from the confusion of Prudence with
Heavenly Wisdom. The real rank of these four virtues, if so they are to
be called, is however properly expressed by the term "cardinal." They
are virtues of the compass, those by which all others are directed and
strengthened; they are not the greatest virtues, but the restraining or
modifying virtues, thus Prudence restrains zeal, Justice restrains
mercy, Fortitude and Temperance guide the entire system of the passions;
and, thus understood, these virtues properly assumed their peculiar
leading or guiding position in the system of Christian ethics. But in
Pagan ethics, they were not only guiding, but comprehensive. They meant
a great deal more on the lips of the ancients, than they now express to
the Christian mind. Cicero's Justice includes charity, beneficence, and
benignity, truth, and faith in the sense of trustworthiness. His
Fortitude includes courage, self-command, the scorn of fortune and of
all temporary felicities. His Temperance includes courtesy and modesty.
So also, in Plato, these four virtues constitute the sum of education. I
do not remember any more simple or perfect expression of the idea, than
in the account given by Socrates, in the "Alcibiades I.," of the
education of the Persian kings, for whom, in their youth, there are
chosen, he says, four tutors from among the Persian nobles; namely, the
Wisest, the most Just, the most Temperate, and the most Brave of them.
Then each has a distinct duty: "The Wisest teaches the young king the
worship of the gods, and the duties of a king (something more here,
observe, than our 'Prudence!'); the most Just teaches him to speak all
truth, and to act out all truth, through the whole course of his life;
the most Temperate teaches him to allow no pleasure to have the mastery
of him, so that he may be truly free, and indeed a king; and the most
Brave makes him fearless of all things, showing him that the moment he
fears anything, he becomes a slave."

§ L. All this is exceedingly beautiful, so far as it reaches; but the
Christian divines were grievously led astray by their endeavors to
reconcile this system with the nobler law of love. At first, as in the
passage I am just going to quote from St. Ambrose, they tried to graft
the Christian system on the four branches of the Pagan one; but finding
that the tree would not grow, they planted the Pagan and Christian
branches side by side; adding, to the four cardinal virtues, the three
called by the schoolmen theological, namely, Faith, Hope, and Charity:
the one series considered as attainable by the Heathen, but the other by
the Christian only. Thus Virgil to Sordello:

  "Loco e laggiù, non tristo da martiri
    Ma di tenebre solo, ove i lamenti
    Non suonan come guai, ma son sospiri:

         *       *       *       *       *

  Quivi sto io, con quei che le tre sante
    Virtù non si vestiro, e senza vizio
    Conobbei l' altre, e seguir, tutte quante."

  . . . . . "There I with those abide
  Who the Three Holy Virtues put not on,
  But understood the rest, and without blame
  Followed them all."

                                         CARY.

§ LI. This arrangement of the virtues was, however, productive of
infinite confusion and error: in the first place, because Faith is
classed with its own fruits,--the gift of God, which is the root of the
virtues, classed simply as one of them; in the second, because the words
used by the ancients to express the several virtues had always a
different meaning from the same expressions in the Bible, sometimes a
more extended, sometimes a more limited one. Imagine, for instance, the
confusion which must have been introduced into the ideas of a student
who read St. Paul and Aristotle alternately; considering that the word
which the Greek writer uses for Justice, means, with St. Paul,
Righteousness. And lastly, it is impossible to overrate the mischief
produced in former days, as well as in our own, by the mere habit of
reading Aristotle, whose system is so false, so forced, and so
confused, that the study of it at our universities is quite enough to
occasion the utter want of accurate habits of thought which so often
disgraces men otherwise well-educated. In a word, Aristotle mistakes the
Prudence or Temperance which must regulate the operation of the virtues,
for the essence of the virtues themselves; and, striving to show that
all virtues are means between two opposite vices, torments his wit to
discover and distinguish as many pairs of vices as are necessary to the
completion of his system, not disdaining to employ sophistry where
invention fails him.

And, indeed, the study of classical literature, in general, not only
fostered in the Christian writers the unfortunate love of systematizing,
which gradually degenerated into every species of contemptible
formulism, but it accustomed them to work out their systems by the help
of any logical quibble, or verbal subtlety, which could be made
available for their purpose, and this not with any dishonest intention,
but in a sincere desire to arrange their ideas in systematical groups,
while yet their powers of thought were not accurate enough, nor their
common sense stern enough, to detect the fallacy, or disdain the
finesse, by which these arrangements were frequently accomplished.

§ LII. Thus St. Ambrose, in his commentary on Luke vi. 20, is resolved
to transform the four Beatitudes there described into rewards of the
four cardinal Virtues, and sets himself thus ingeniously to the task:

"'Blessed be ye poor.' Here you have Temperance. 'Blessed are ye that
hunger now.' He who hungers, pities those who are an-hungered; in
pitying, he gives to them, and in giving he becomes just (largiendo fit
Justus). 'Blessed are ye that weep now, for ye shall laugh.' Here you
have Prudence, whose part it is to weep, so far as present things are
concerned, and to seek things which are eternal. 'Blessed are ye when
men shall hate you.' Here you have Fortitude."

§ LIII. As a preparation for this profitable exercise of wit, we have
also a reconciliation of the Beatitudes as stated by St. Matthew, with
those of St. Luke, on the ground that "in those eight are these four,
and in these four are those eight;" with sundry remarks on the mystical
value of the number eight, with which I need not trouble the reader.
With St. Ambrose, however, this puerile systematization is quite
subordinate to a very forcible and truthful exposition of the real
nature of the Christian life. But the classification he employs
furnishes ground for farther subtleties to future divines; and in a MS.
of the thirteenth century I find some expressions in this commentary on
St. Luke, and in the treatise on the duties of bishops, amplified into a
treatise on the "Steps of the Virtues: by which every one who perseveres
may, by a straight path, attain to the heavenly country of the Angels."
("Liber de Gradibus Virtutum: quibus ad patriam angelorum supernam
itinere recto ascenditur ab omni perseverante.") These Steps are thirty
in number (one expressly for each day of the month), and the curious
mode of their association renders the list well worth quoting:--

§ LIV. Primus gradus est  Fides Recta.          Unerring faith.
       Secundus "         Spes firma.           Firm hope.
       Tertius  "         Caritas perfecta.     Perfect charity.
          4.    "         Patientia vera.       True patience.
          5.    "         Humilitas sancta.     Holy humility.
          6.    "         Mansuetudo.           Meekness.
          7.    "         Intelligentia.        Understanding.
          8.    "         Compunctio cordis.    Contrition of heart.
          9.    "         Oratio.               Prayer.
         10.    "         Confessio pura.       Pure confession.
         11.    "         Penitentia digna.     Fitting penance.[143]
         12.    "         Abstinentia.          Abstinence (fasting).
         13.    "         Timor Dei.            Fear of God.
         14.    "         Virginitas.           Virginity.
         15.    "         Justicia.             Justice.
         16.    "         Misericordia.         Mercy.
         17.    "         Elemosina.            Almsgiving.
         18.    "         Hospitalitas.         Hospitality.
         19.    "         Honor parentum.       Honoring of parents.
         20.    "         Silencium.            Silence.
         21.    "         Consilium bonum.      Good counsel.
         22.    "         Judicium rectum.      Right judgment.
         23.    "         Exemplum bonum.       Good example.
         24.    "         Visitatio infirmorum. Visitation of the sick.
         25.    "         Frequentatio          Companying with saints.
                             sanctorum.
         26.    "         Oblatio justa.        Just oblations.
         27.    "         Decimas Deo solvere.  Paying tithes to God.
         28.    "         Sapientia.            Wisdom.
         29.    "         Voluntas bona.        Goodwill.
         30.    "         Perseverantia.        Perseverance.

§ LV. The reader will note that the general idea of Christian virtue
embodied in this list is true, exalted, and beautiful; the points of
weakness being the confusion of duties with virtues, and the vain
endeavor to enumerate the various offices of charity as so many separate
virtues; more frequently arranged as seven distinct works of mercy. This
general tendency to a morbid accuracy of classification was associated,
in later times, with another very important element of the Renaissance
mind, the love of personification; which appears to have reached its
greatest vigor in the course of the sixteenth century, and is expressed
to all future ages, in a consummate manner, in the poem of Spenser. It
is to be noted that personification is, in some sort, the reverse of
symbolism, and is far less noble. Symbolism is the setting forth of a
great truth by an imperfect and inferior sign (as, for instance, of the
hope of the resurrection by the form of the phoenix); and it is almost
always employed by men in their most serious moods of faith, rarely in
recreation. Men who use symbolism forcibly are almost always true
believers in what they symbolize. But Personification is the bestowing
of a human or living form upon an abstract idea: it is, in most cases, a
mere recreation of the fancy, and is apt to disturb the belief in the
reality of the thing personified. Thus symbolism constituted the entire
system of the Mosaic dispensation: it occurs in every word of Christ's
teaching; it attaches perpetual mystery to the last and most solemn act
of His life. But I do not recollect a single instance of personification
in any of His words. And as we watch, thenceforward, the history of the
Church, we shall find the declension of its faith exactly marked by the
abandonment of symbolism,[144] and the profuse employment of
personification,--even to such an extent that the virtues came, at last,
to be confused with the saints; and we find in the later Litanies, St.
Faith, St. Hope, St. Charity, and St. Chastity, invoked immediately
after St. Clara and St. Bridget.

§ LVI. Nevertheless, in the hands of its early and earnest masters, in
whom fancy could not overthrow the foundations of faith, personification
is, often thoroughly noble and lovely; the earlier conditions of it
being just as much more spiritual and vital than the later ones, as the
still earlier symbolism was more spiritual than they. Compare, for
instance, Dante's burning Charity, running and returning at the wheels
of the chariot of God,--

            "So ruddy, that her form had scarce
  Been known within a furnace of clear flame,"

with Reynolds's Charity, a nurse in a white dress, climbed upon by three
children.[145] And not only so, but the number and nature of the virtues
differ considerably in the statements of different poets and painters,
according to their own views of religion, or to the manner of life they
had it in mind to illustrate. Giotto, for instance, arranges his system
altogether differently at Assisi, where he is setting forth the monkish
life, and in the Arena Chapel, where he treats of that of mankind in
general, and where, therefore, he gives only the so-called theological
and cardinal virtues; while, at Assisi, the three principal virtues are
those which are reported to have appeared in vision to St. Francis,
Chastity, Obedience, and Poverty: Chastity being attended by Fortitude,
Purity, and Penance; Obedience by Prudence and Humility; Poverty by Hope
and Charity. The systems vary with almost every writer, and in almost
every important work of art which embodies them, being more or less
spiritual according to the power of intellect by which they were
conceived. The most noble in literature are, I suppose, those of Dante
and Spenser: and with these we may compare five of the most interesting
series in the early art of Italy; namely, those of Orcagna, Giotto, and
Simon Memmi, at Florence and Padua, and those of St. Mark's and the
Ducal Palace at Venice. Of course, in the richest of these series, the
vices are personified together with the virtues, as in the Ducal Palace;
and by the form or name of opposed vice, we may often ascertain, with
much greater accuracy than would otherwise be possible, the particular
idea of the contrary virtue in the mind of the writer or painter. Thus,
when opposed to Prudence, or Prudentia, on the one side, we find Folly,
or Stultitia, on the other, it shows that the virtue understood by
Prudence, is not the mere guiding or cardinal virtue, but the Heavenly
Wisdom,[146] opposed to that folly which "hath said in its heart, there
is no God;" and of which it is said, "the thought of foolishness is
sin;" and again, "Such as be foolish shall not stand in thy sight." This
folly is personified, in early painting and illumination, by a
half-naked man, greedily eating an apple or other fruit, and brandishing
a club; showing that sensuality and violence are the two principal
characteristics of Foolishness, and lead into atheism. The figure, in
early Psalters, always forms the letter D, which commences the
fifty-third Psalm, "_Dixit insipiens_."

§ LVII. In reading Dante, this mode of reasoning from contraries is a
great help, for his philosophy of the vices is the only one which admits
of classification; his descriptions of virtue, while they include the
ordinary formal divisions, are far too profound and extended to be
brought under definition. Every line of the "Paradise" is full of the
most exquisite and spiritual expressions of Christian truth; and that
poem is only less read than the "Inferno" because it requires far
greater attention, and, perhaps, for its full enjoyment, a holier heart.


§ LVIII. His system in the "Inferno" is briefly this. The whole nether
world is divided into seven circles, deep within deep, in each of which,
according to its depth, severer punishment is inflicted. These seven
circles, reckoning them downwards, are thus allotted:

  1. To those who have lived virtuously, but knew not Christ.
  2. To Lust.
  3. To Gluttony.
  4. To Avarice and Extravagance.
  5. To Anger and _Sorrow_.
  6. To Heresy.
  7. To Violence and Fraud.

This seventh circle is divided into two parts; of which the first,
reserved for those who have been guilty of Violence, is again divided
into three, apportioned severally to those who have committed, or
desired to commit, violence against their neighbors, against themselves,
or against God.

The lowest hell, reserved for the punishment of Fraud, is itself divided
into ten circles, wherein are severally punished the sins of,--

   1. Betraying women.
   2. Flattery.
   3. Simony.
   4. False prophecy.
   5. Peculation.
   6. Hypocrisy.
   7. Theft.
   8. False counsel.
   9. Schism and Imposture.
  10. Treachery to those who repose entire trust in the traitor.

§ LIX. There is, perhaps, nothing more notable in this most interesting
system than the profound truth couched under the attachment of so
terrible a penalty to sadness or sorrow. It is true that Idleness does
not elsewhere appear in the scheme, and is evidently intended to be
included in the guilt of sadness by the word "accidioso;" but the main
meaning of the poet is to mark the duty of rejoicing in God, according
both to St. Paul's command, and Isaiah's promise, "Thou meetest him that
rejoiceth and worketh righteousness."[147] I do not know words that
might with more benefit be borne with us, and set in our hearts
momentarily against the minor regrets and rebelliousnesses of life, than
these simple ones:

                       "Tristi fummo
  Nel aer dolce, che del sol s' allegra,
  Or ci attristiam, nella belletta negra."

                "We once were sad,
  In the sweet air, made gladsome by the sun,
  Now in these murky settlings are we sad."[148]          CARY.

The virtue usually opposed to this vice of sullenness is Alacritas,
uniting the sense of activity and cheerfulness. Spenser has cheerfulness
simply, in his description, never enough to be loved or praised, of the
virtues of Womanhood; first feminineness or womanhood in specialty;
then,--

    "Next to her sate goodly Shamefastnesse,
   Ne ever durst, her eyes from ground upreare,
   Ne ever once did looke up from her desse,[149]
   As if some blame of evill she did feare
   That in her cheekes made roses oft appeare:
   And her against sweet Cherefulnesse was placed,
   Whose eyes, like twinkling stars in evening cleare,
   Were deckt with smyles that all sad humours chaced.

  "And next to her sate sober Modestie,
   Holding her hand upon her gentle hart;
   And her against, sate comely Curtesie,
   _That unto every person knew her part_;
   And her before was seated overthwart
   Soft Silence, and submisse Obedience,
   Both linckt together never to dispart."

§ LX. Another notable point in Dante's system is the intensity of
uttermost punishment given to treason, the peculiar sin of Italy, and
that to which, at this day, she attributes her own misery with her own
lips. An Italian, questioned as to the causes of the failure of the
campaign of 1848, always makes one answer, "We were betrayed;" and the
most melancholy feature of the present state of Italy is principally
this, that she does not see that, of all causes to which failure might
be attributed, this is at once the most disgraceful, and the most
hopeless. In fact, Dante seems to me to have written almost
prophetically, for the instruction of modern Italy, and chiefly so in
the sixth canto of the "Purgatorio."

§ LXI. Hitherto we have been considering the system of the "Inferno"
only. That of the "Purgatorio" is much simpler, it being divided into
seven districts, in which the souls are severally purified from the sins
of Pride, Envy, Wrath, Indifference, Avarice, Gluttony, and Lust; the
poet thus implying in opposition, and describing in various instances,
the seven virtues of Humility, Kindness,[150] Patience, Zeal, Poverty,
Abstinence, and Chastity, as adjuncts of the Christian character, in
which it may occasionally fail, while the essential group of the three
theological and four cardinal virtues are represented as in direct
attendance on the chariot of the Deity; and all the sins of Christians
are in the seventeenth canto traced to the deficiency or aberration of
Affection.

§ LXII. The system of Spenser is unfinished, and exceedingly
complicated, the same vices and virtues occurring under different forms
in different places, in order to show their different relations to each
other. I shall not therefore give any general sketch of it, but only
refer to the particular personification of each virtue in order to
compare it with that of the Ducal Palace.[151] The peculiar superiority
of his system is in its exquisite setting forth of Chastity under the
figure of Britomart; not monkish chastity, but that of the purest Love.
In completeness of personification no one can approach him; not even in
Dante do I remember anything quite so great as the description of the
Captain of the Lusts of the Flesh:

  "As pale and wan as ashes was his looke;
   His body lean and meagre as a rake;
   And skin all withered like a dryed rooke;
   Thereto as cold and drery as a snake;
   That seemed to tremble evermore, and quake:
   _All in a canvas thin he was bedight,
   And girded with a belt of twisted brake_:
   Upon his head he wore an helmet light,
   Made of a dead man's skull."

He rides upon a tiger, and in his hand is a bow, bent;

  "And many arrows under his right side,
   Headed with flint, and fethers bloody dide."

The horror and the truth of this are beyond everything that I know, out
of the pages of Inspiration. Note the heading of the arrows with flint,
because sharper and more subtle in the edge than steel, and because
steel might consume away with rust, but flint not; and consider in the
whole description how the wasting away of body and soul together, and
the _coldness_ of the heart, which unholy fire has consumed into ashes,
and the loss of all power, and the kindling of all terrible impatience,
and the implanting of thorny and inextricable griefs, are set forth by
the various images, the belt of brake, the tiger steed, and the _light_
helmet, girding the head with death.

§ LXIII. Perhaps the most interesting series of the Virtues expressed in
Italian art are those above mentioned of Simon Memmi in the Spanish
chapel at Florence, of Ambrogio di Lorenzo in the Palazzo Publico of
Pisa, of Orcagna in Or San Michele at Florence, of Giotto at Padua and
Assisi, in mosaic on the central cupola of St. Mark's, and in sculpture
on the pillars of the Ducal Palace. The first two series are carefully
described by Lord Lindsay; both are too complicated for comparison with
the more simple series of the Ducal Palace; the other four of course
agree in giving first the cardinal and evangelical virtues; their
variations in the statement of the rest will be best understood by
putting them in a parallel arrangement.

  ST. MARK'S.           ORCAGNA.         GIOTTO.         DUCAL PALACE.

  Constancy.          Perseverance.                      Constancy.
  Modesty.                                               Modesty.
  Chastity.           Virginity         Chastity.        Chastity.
  Patience.           Patience.                          Patience.
  Mercy.
  Abstinence.                                            Abstinence?
  Piety.[152]           Devotion.
  Benignity.
  Humility.           Humility.         Humility.        Humility.
                      Obedience.        Obedience.       Obedience.
                      Docility.
                      Caution.
                                        Poverty.         _Honesty._
                                                         Liberality.
                                                         _Alacrity_.

§ LXIV. It is curious, that in none of these lists do we find either
_Honesty_ or _Industry_ ranked as a virtue, except in the Venetian one,
where the latter is implied in Alacritas, and opposed not only by
"Accidia" or sloth, but by a whole series of eight sculptures on another
capital, illustrative, as I believe, of the temptations to idleness;
while various other capitals, as we shall see presently, are devoted to
the representation of the active trades. Industry, in Northern art and
Northern morality, assumes a very principal place. I have seen in French
manuscripts the virtues reduced to these seven, Charity, Chastity,
Patience, Abstinence, Humility, Liberality, and Industry: and I doubt
whether, if we were but to add Honesty (or Truth), a wiser or shorter
list could be made out.

§ LXV. We will now take the pillars of the Ducal Palace in their order.
It has already been mentioned (Vol. I. Chap. I. § XLVI.) that there are,
in all, thirty-six great pillars supporting the lower story; and that
these are to be counted from right to left, because then the more
ancient of them come first: and that, thus arranged, the first, which is
not a shaft, but a pilaster, will be the support of the Vine angle; the
eighteenth will be the great shaft of the Fig-tree angle; and the
thirty-sixth, that of the Judgment angle.

§ LXVI. All their capitals, except that of the first, are octagonal, and
are decorated by sixteen leaves, differently enriched in every capital,
but arranged in the same way; eight of them rising to the angles, and
there forming volutes; the eight others set between them, on the sides,
rising half-way up the bell of the capital; there nodding forward, and
showing above them, rising out of their luxuriance, the groups or single
figures which we have to examine.[153] In some instances, the
intermediate or lower leaves are reduced to eight sprays of foliage; and
the capital is left dependent for its effect on the bold position of the
figures. In referring to the figures on the octagonal capitals, I shall
call the outer side, fronting either the Sea or the Piazzetta, the first
side; and so count round from left to right; the fourth side being thus,
of course, the innermost. As, however, the first five arches were walled
up after the great fire, only three sides of their capitals are left
visible, which we may describe as the front and the eastern and western
sides of each.

§ LXVII. FIRST CAPITAL: i.e. of the pilaster at the Vine angle.

In front, towards the Sea. A child holding a bird before him, with its
wings expanded, covering his breast.

On its eastern side. Children's heads among leaves.

On its western side. A child carrying in one hand a comb; in the other,
a pair of scissors.

It appears curious, that this, the principal pilaster of the façade,
should have been decorated only by these graceful grotesques, for I can
hardly suppose them anything more. There may be meaning in them, but I
will not venture to conjecture any, except the very plain and practical
meaning conveyed by the last figure to all Venetian children, which it
would be well if they would act upon. For the rest, I have seen the comb
introduced in grotesque work as early as the thirteenth century, but
generally for the purpose of ridiculing too great care in dressing the
hair, which assuredly is not its purpose here. The children's heads are
very sweet and full of life, but the eyes sharp and small.

§ LXVIII. SECOND CAPITAL. Only three sides of the original work are left
unburied by the mass of added wall. Each side has a bird, one
web-footed, with a fish, one clawed, with a serpent, which opens its
jaws, and darts its tongue at the bird's breast; the third pluming
itself, with a feather between the mandibles of its bill. It is by far
the most beautiful of the three capitals decorated with birds.

THIRD CAPITAL. Also has three sides only left. They have three heads,
large, and very ill cut; one female, and crowned.

FOURTH CAPITAL. Has three children. The eastern one is defaced: the one
in front holds a small bird, whose plumage is beautifully indicated, in
its right hand; and with its left holds up half a walnut, showing the
nut inside: the third holds a fresh fig, cut through, showing the seeds.

The hair of all the three children is differently worked: the first has
luxuriant flowing hair, and a double chin; the second, light flowing
hair falling in pointed locks on the forehead; the third, crisp curling
hair, deep cut with drill holes.

This capital has been copied on the Renaissance side of the palace, only
with such changes in the ideal of the children as the workman thought
expedient and natural. It is highly interesting to compare the child of
the fourteenth with the child of the fifteenth century. The early heads
are full of youthful life, playful, humane, affectionate, beaming with
sensation and vivacity, but with much manliness and firmness, also, not
a little cunning, and some cruelty perhaps, beneath all; the features
small and hard, and the eyes keen. There is the making of rough and
great men in them. But the children of the fifteenth century are dull
smooth-faced dunces, without a single meaning line in the fatness of
their stolid cheeks; and, although, in the vulgar sense, as handsome as
the other children are ugly, capable of becoming nothing but perfumed
coxcombs.

FIFTH CAPITAL. Still three sides only left, bearing three half-length
statues of kings; this is the first capital which bears any inscription.
In front, a king with a sword in his right hand points to a handkerchief
embroidered and fringed, with a head on it, carved on the cavetto of the
abacus. His name is written above, "TITUS VESPASIAN IMPERATOR"
(contracted [Illustration: IPAT.]).

On eastern side, "TRAJANUS IMPERATOR." Crowned, a sword in right hand,
and sceptre in left.

On western, "(OCT)AVIANUS AUGUSTUS IMPERATOR." The "OCT" is broken away.
He bears a globe in his right hand, with "MUNDUS PACIS" upon it; a
sceptre in his left, which I think has terminated in a human figure. He
has a flowing beard, and a singularly high crown; the face is much
injured, but has once been very noble in expression.

SIXTH CAPITAL. Has large male and female heads, very coarsely cut, hard,
and bad.

§ LXIX. SEVENTH CAPITAL. This is the first of the series which is
complete; the first open arch of the lower arcade being between it and
the sixth. It begins the representation of the Virtues.

_First side_. Largitas, or Liberality: always distinguished from the
higher Charity. A male figure, with his lap full of money, which he
pours out of his hand. The coins are plain, circular, and smooth; there
is no attempt to mark device upon them. The inscription above is,
"LARGITAS ME ONORAT."

In the copy of this design on the twenty-fifth capital, instead of
showering out the gold from his open hand, the figure holds it in a
plate or salver, introduced for the sake of disguising the direct
imitation. The changes thus made in the Renaissance pillars are always
injuries.

This virtue is the proper opponent of Avarice; though it does not occur
in the systems of Orcagna or Giotto, being included in Charity. It was a
leading virtue with Aristotle and the other ancients.

§ LXX. _Second side_. Constancy; not very characteristic. An armed man
with a sword in his hand, inscribed, "CONSTANTIA SUM, NIL TIMENS."

This virtue is one of the forms of fortitude, and Giotto therefore sets
as the vice opponent to Fortitude, "Inconstantia," represented as a
woman in loose drapery, falling from a rolling globe. The vision seen in
the interpreter's house in the Pilgrim's Progress, of the man with a
very bold countenance, who says to him who has the writer's ink-horn by
his side, "Set down my name," is the best personification of the
Venetian "Constantia" of which I am aware in literature. It would be
well for us all to consider whether we have yet given the order to the
man with the ink-horn, "Set down my name."

§ LXXI. _Third side_. Discord; holding up her finger, but needing the
inscription above to assure us of her meaning, "DISCORDIA SUM,
DISCORDANS." In the Renaissance copy she is a meek and nun-like person
with a veil.

She is the Atë of Spenser; "mother of debate," thus described in the
fourth book:

  "Her face most fowle and filthy was to see,
   With squinted eyes contrarie wayes intended;
   And loathly mouth, unmeete a mouth to bee,
   That nought but gall and venim comprehended,
   And wicked wordes that God and man offended:
   Her lying tongue was in two parts divided,
   And both the parts did speake, and both contended;
   And as her tongue, so was her hart discided,
   That never thoght one thing, but doubly stil was guided."

Note the fine old meaning of "discided," cut in two; it is a great pity
we have lost this powerful expression. We might keep "determined" for
the other sense of the word.

§ LXXII. _Fourth side._ Patience. A female figure, very expressive and
lovely, in a hood, with her right hand on her breast, the left extended,
inscribed "PATIENTIA MANET MECUM."

She is one of the principal virtues in all the Christian systems: a
masculine virtue in Spenser, and beautifully placed as the _Physician_
in the House of Holinesse. The opponent vice, Impatience, is one of the
hags who attend the Captain of the Lusts of the Flesh; the other being
Impotence. In like manner, in the "Pilgrim's Progress," the opposite of
Patience is Passion; but Spenser's thought is farther carried. His two
hags, Impatience and Impotence, as attendant upon the evil spirit of
Passion, embrace all the phenomena of human conduct, down even to the
smallest matters, according to the adage, "More haste, worse speed."

§ LXXIII. _Fifth side._ Despair. A female figure thrusting a dagger into
her throat, and tearing her long hair, which flows down among the leaves
of the capital below her knees. One of the finest figures of the series;
inscribed "DESPERACIO MÔS (mortis?) CRUDELIS." In the Renaissance copy
she is totally devoid of expression, and appears, instead of tearing her
hair, to be dividing it into long curls on each side.

This vice is the proper opposite of Hope. By Giotto she is represented
as a woman hanging herself, a fiend coming for her soul. Spenser's
vision of Despair is well known, it being indeed currently reported that
this part of the Faerie Queen was the first which drew to it the
attention of Sir Philip Sidney.

§ LXXIV. _Sixth side._ Obedience: with her arms folded; meek, but rude
and commonplace, looking at a little dog standing on its hind legs and
begging, with a collar round its neck. Inscribed "OBEDIENTI * *;" the
rest of the sentence is much defaced, but looks like [Illustration:
Graphic signs]. I suppose the note of contraction above the final A has
disappeared and that the inscription was "Obedientiam domino exhibeo."

This virtue is, of course, a principal one in the monkish systems;
represented by Giotto at Assisi as "an angel robed in black, placing the
finger of his left hand on his mouth, and passing the yoke over the head
of a Franciscan monk kneeling at his feet."[154]

Obedience holds a less principal place in Spenser. We have seen her
above associated with the other peculiar virtues of womanhood.

§ LXXV. _Seventh side._ Infidelity. A man in a turban, with a small
image in his hand, or the image of a child. Of the inscription nothing
but "INFIDELITATE * * *" and some fragmentary letters, "ILI, CERO,"
remain.

By Giotto Infidelity is most nobly symbolized as a woman helmeted, the
helmet having a broad rim which keeps the light from her eyes. She is
covered with heavy drapery, stands infirmly as if about to fall, is
_bound by a cord round her neck to an image_ which she carries in her
hand, and has flames bursting forth at her feet.

In Spenser, Infidelity is the Saracen knight Sans Foy,--

       "Full large of limbe and every joint
  He was, and cared not for God or man a point."

For the part which he sustains in the contest with Godly Fear, or the
Red-cross knight, see Appendix 2, Vol. III.

§ LXXVI. _Eighth side_. Modesty; bearing a pitcher. (In the Renaissance
copy, a vase like a coffee-pot.) Inscribed "MODESTIA [Illustration:
Graphic signs]."

I do not find this virtue in any of the Italian series, except that of
Venice. In Spenser she is of course one of those attendant on
Womanhood, but occurs as one of the tenants of the Heart of Man, thus
portrayed in the second book:

  "Straunge was her tyre, and all her garment blew,
   Close rownd about her tuckt with many a plight:
   Upon her fist the bird which shonneth vew.

          *       *       *       *       *

   And ever and anone with rosy red
   The bashfull blood her snowy cheekes did dye,
   That her became, as polisht yvory
   Which cunning craftesman hand hath overlayd
   With fayre vermilion or pure castory."

§ LXXVII. EIGHTH CAPITAL. It has no inscriptions, and its subjects are
not, by themselves, intelligible; but they appear to be typical of the
degradation of human instincts.

_First side._ A caricature of Arion on his dolphin; he wears a cap
ending in a long proboscis-like horn, and plays a violin with a curious
twitch of the bow and wag of the head, very graphically expressed, but
still without anything approaching to the power of Northern grotesque.
His dolphin has a goodly row of teeth, and the waves beat over his back.

_Second side._ A human figure, with curly hair and the legs of a bear;
the paws laid, with great sculptural skill, upon the foliage. It plays a
violin, shaped like a guitar, with a bent double-stringed bow.

_Third side._ A figure with a serpent's tail and a monstrous head,
founded on a Negro type, hollow-cheeked, large-lipped, and wearing a cap
made of a serpent's skin, holding a fir-cone in its hand.

_Fourth side._ A monstrous figure, terminating below in a tortoise. It
is devouring a gourd, which it grasps greedily with both hands; it wears
a cap ending in a hoofed leg.

_Fifth side._ A centaur wearing a crested helmet, and holding a curved
sword.

_Sixth side._ A knight, riding a headless horse, and wearing chain
armor, with a triangular shield flung behind his back, and a two-edged
sword.

_Seventh side._ A figure like that on the fifth, wearing a round
helmet, and with the legs and tail of a horse. He bears a long mace with
a top like a fir-cone.

_Eighth side._ A figure with curly hair, and an acorn in its hand,
ending below in a fish.

§ LXXVIII. Ninth Capital. _First side._ Faith. She has her left hand on
her breast, and the cross on her right. Inscribed "FIDES OPTIMA IN DEO."
The Faith of Giotto holds the cross in her right hand; in her left, a
scroll with the Apostles' Creed. She treads upon cabalistic books, and
has a key suspended to her waist. Spenser's Faith (Fidelia) is still
more spiritual and noble:

  "She was araied all in lilly white,
   And in her right hand bore a cup of gold,
   With wine and water fild up to the hight,
   In which a serpent did himselfe enfold,
   That horrour made to all that did behold;
   But she no whitt did chaunge her constant mood:
   And in her other hand she fast did hold
   A booke, that was both signd and seald with blood;
   Wherein darke things were writt, hard to be understood."

§ LXXIX. _Second side._ Fortitude. A long-bearded man [Samson?] tearing
open a lion's jaw. The inscription is illegible, and the somewhat vulgar
personification appears to belong rather to Courage than Fortitude. On
the Renaissance copy it is inscribed "FORTITUDO SUM VIRILIS." The Latin
word has, perhaps, been received by the sculptor as merely signifying
"Strength," the rest of the perfect idea of this virtue having been
given in "Constantia" previously. But both these Venetian symbols
together do not at all approach the idea of Fortitude as given generally
by Giotto and the Pisan sculptors; clothed with a lion's skin, knotted
about her neck, and falling to her feet in deep folds; drawing back her
right hand, with the sword pointed towards her enemy; and slightly
retired behind her immovable shield, which, with Giotto, is square, and
rested on the ground like a tower, covering her up to above her
shoulders; bearing on it a lion, and with broken heads of javelins
deeply infixed.

Among the Greeks, this is, of course, one of the principal virtues;
apt, however, in their ordinary conception of it to degenerate into mere
manliness or courage.

§ LXXX. _Third side._ Temperance; bearing a pitcher of water and a cup.
Inscription, illegible here, and on the Renaissance copy nearly so,
"TEMPERANTIA SUM" (INOM' L^s)? only left. In this somewhat vulgar and
most frequent conception of this virtue (afterwards continually
repeated, as by Sir Joshua in his window at New College) temperance is
confused with mere abstinence, the opposite of Gula, or gluttony;
whereas the Greek Temperance, a truly cardinal virtue, is the moderator
of _all_ the passions, and so represented by Giotto, who has placed a
bridle upon her lips, and a sword in her hand, the hilt of which she is
binding to the scabbard. In his system, she is opposed among the vices,
not by Gula or Gluttony, but by Ira, Anger. So also the Temperance of
Spenser, or Sir Guyon, but with mingling of much sternness:

  "A goodly knight, all armd in harnesse meete,
   That from his head no place appeared to his feete,
   His carriage was full comely and upright;
   His countenance demure and temperate;
   But yett so sterne and terrible in sight,
   That cheard his friendes, and did his foes amate."

The Temperance of the Greeks, [Greek: sôphrosynê], involves the idea of
Prudence, and is a most noble virtue, yet properly marked by Plato as
inferior to sacred enthusiasm, though necessary for its government. He
opposes it, under the name "Mortal Temperance" or "the Temperance which
is of men," to divine madness, [Greek: mania], or inspiration; but he
most justly and nobly expresses the general idea of it under the term
[Greek: hubris], which, in the "Phædrus," is divided into various
intemperances with respect to various objects, and set forth under the
image of a black, vicious, diseased and furious horse, yoked by the side
of Prudence or Wisdom (set forth under the figure of a white horse with
a crested and noble head, like that which we have among the Elgin
Marbles) to the chariot of the Soul. The system of Aristotle, as above
stated, is throughout a mere complicated blunder, supported by
sophistry, the laboriously developed mistake of Temperance for the
essence of the virtues which it guides. Temperance in the mediæval
systems is generally opposed by Anger, or by Folly, or Gluttony: but her
proper opposite is Spenser's Acrasia, the principal enemy of Sir Guyon,
at whose gates we find the subordinate vice "Excesse," as the
introduction to Intemperance; a graceful and feminine image, necessary
to illustrate the more dangerous forms of subtle intemperance, as
opposed to the brutal "Gluttony" in the first book. She presses grapes
into a cup, because of the words of St. Paul, "Be not drunk with wine,
wherein is excess;" but always delicately,

  "Into her cup she scruzd with daintie breach
   Of her fine fingers, without fowle empeach,
   That so faire winepresse made the wine more sweet."

The reader will, I trust, pardon these frequent extracts from Spenser,
for it is nearly as necessary to point out the profound divinity and
philosophy of our great English poet, as the beauty of the Ducal Palace.

§ LXXXI. _Fourth side._ Humility; with a veil upon her head, carrying a
lamp in her lap. Inscribed in the copy, "HUMILITAS HABITAT IN ME."

This virtue is of course a peculiarly Christian one, hardly recognized
in the Pagan systems, though carefully impressed upon the Greeks in
early life in a manner which at this day it would be well if we were to
imitate, and, together with an almost feminine modesty, giving an
exquisite grace to the conduct and bearing of the well-educated Greek
youth. It is, of course, one of the leading virtues in all the monkish
systems, but I have not any notes of the manner of its representation.

§ LXXXII. _Fifth side._ Charity. A woman with her lap full of loaves(?),
giving one to a child, who stretches his arm out for it across a broad
gap in the leafage of the capital.

Again very far inferior to the Giottesque rendering of this virtue. In
the Arena Chapel she is distinguished from all the other virtues by
having a circular glory round her head, and a cross of fire; she is
crowned with flowers, presents with her right hand a vase of corn and
fruit, and with her left receives treasure from Christ, who appears
above her, to provide her with the means of continual offices of
beneficence, while she tramples under foot the treasures of the earth.

The peculiar beauty of most of the Italian conceptions of Charity, is in
the subjection of mere munificence to the glowing of her love, always
represented by flames; here in the form of a cross round her head; in
Oreagna's shrine at Florence, issuing from a censer in her hand; and,
with Dante, inflaming her whole form, so that, in a furnace of clear
fire, she could not have been discerned.

Spenser represents her as a mother surrounded by happy children, an idea
afterwards grievously hackneyed and vulgarized by English painters and
sculptors.

§ LXXXIII. _Sixth side._ Justice. Crowned, and with sword. Inscribed in
the copy, "REX SUM JUSTICIE."

This idea was afterwards much amplified and adorned in the only good
capital of the Renaissance series, under the Judgment angle. Giotto has
also given his whole strength to the painting of this virtue,
representing her as enthroned under a noble Gothic canopy, holding
scales, not by the beam, but one in each hand; a beautiful idea, showing
that the equality of the scales of Justice is not owing to natural laws,
but to her own immediate weighing the opposed causes in her own hands.
In one scale is an executioner beheading a criminal; in the other an
angel crowning a man who seems (in Selvatico's plate) to have been
working at a desk or table.

Beneath her feet is a small predella, representing various persons
riding securely in the woods, and others dancing to the sound of music.

Spenser's Justice, Sir Artegall, is the hero of an entire book, and the
betrothed knight of Britomart, or chastity.

§ LXXXIV. _Seventh side._ Prudence. A man with a book and a pair of
compasses, wearing the noble cap, hanging down towards the shoulder, and
bound in a fillet round the brow, which occurs so frequently during the
fourteenth century in Italy in the portraits of men occupied in any
civil capacity.

This virtue is, as we have seen, conceived under very different degrees
of dignity, from mere worldly prudence up to heavenly wisdom, being
opposed sometimes by Stultitia, sometimes by Ignorantia. I do not find,
in any of the representations of her, that her truly distinctive
character, namely, _forethought_, is enough insisted upon: Giotto
expresses her vigilance and just measurement or estimate of all things
by painting her as Janus-headed, and gazing into a convex mirror, with
compasses in her right hand; the convex mirror showing her power of
looking at many things in small compass. But forethought or
anticipation, by which, independently of greater or less natural
capacities, one man becomes more _prudent_ than another, is never enough
considered or symbolized.

The idea of this virtue oscillates, in the Greek systems, between
Temperance and Heavenly Wisdom.

§ LXXXV. _Eighth side._ Hope. A figure full of devotional expression,
holding up its hands as in prayer, and looking to a hand which is
extended towards it out of sunbeams. In the Renaissance copy this hand
does not appear.

Of all the virtues, this is the most distinctively Christian (it could
not, of course, enter definitely into any Pagan scheme); and above all
others, it seems to me the _testing_ virtue,--that by the possession of
which we may most certainly determine whether we are Christians or not;
for many men have charity, that is to say, general kindness of heart, or
even a kind of faith, who have not any habitual _hope_ of, or longing
for, heaven. The Hope of Giotto is represented as winged, rising in the
air, while an angel holds a crown before her. I do not know if Spenser
was the first to introduce our marine virtue, leaning on an anchor, a
symbol as inaccurate as it is vulgar: for, in the first place, anchors
are not for men, but for ships; and in the second, anchorage is the
characteristic not of Hope, but of Faith. Faith is dependent, but Hope
is aspirant. Spenser, however, introduces Hope twice,--the first time as
the Virtue with the anchor; but afterwards fallacious Hope, far more
beautifully, in the Masque of Cupid:

  "She always smyld, and in her hand did hold
   An holy-water sprinckle, dipt in deowe."

§ LXXXVI. Tenth Capital. _First side._ Luxury (the opposite of chastity,
as above explained). A woman with a jewelled chain across her forehead,
smiling as she looks into a mirror, exposing her breast by drawing down
her dress with one hand. Inscribed "LUXURIA SUM IMENSA."

These subordinate forms of vice are not met with so frequently in art as
those of the opposite virtues, but in Spenser we find them all. His
Luxury rides upon a goat:

  "In a greene gowne he clothed was full faire,
   Which underneath did hide his filthinesse,
   And in his hand a burning hart he bare."

But, in fact, the proper and comprehensive expression of this vice is
the Cupid of the ancients; and there is not any minor circumstance more
indicative of the _intense_ difference between the mediæval and the
Renaissance spirit, than the mode in which this god is represented.

I have above said, that all great European art is rooted in the
thirteenth century; and it seems to me that there is a kind of central
year about which we may consider the energy of the middle ages to be
gathered; a kind of focus of time which, by what is to my mind a most
touching and impressive Divine appointment, has been marked for us by
the greatest writer of the middle ages, in the first words he utters;
namely, the year 1300, the "mezzo del cammin" of the life of Dante. Now,
therefore, to Giotto, the contemporary of Dante, and who drew Dante's
still existing portrait in this very year, 1300, we may always look for
the central mediæval idea in any subject: and observe how he represents
Cupid; as one of three, a terrible trinity, his companions being Satan
and Death; and he himself "a lean scarecrow, with bow, quiver, and
fillet, and feet ending in claws,"[155] thrust down into Hell by
Penance, from the presence of Purity and Fortitude. Spenser, who has
been so often noticed as furnishing the exactly intermediate type of
conception between the mediæval and the Renaissance, indeed represents
Cupid under the form of a beautiful winged god, and riding on a lion,
but still no plaything of the Graces, but full of terror:

  "With that the darts which his right hand did straine
   Full dreadfully he shooke, that all did quake,
   And clapt on hye his coloured winges twaine,
   That all his many it afraide did make."

His _many_, that is to say, his company; and observe what a company it
is. Before him go Fancy, Desire, Doubt, Danger, Fear, Fallacious Hope,
Dissemblance, Suspicion, Grief, Fury, Displeasure, Despite, and Cruelty.
After him, Reproach, Repentance, Shame,

  "Unquiet Care, and fond Unthriftyhead,
   Lewd Losse of Time, and Sorrow seeming dead,
   Inconstant Chaunge, and false Disloyalty,
   Consuming Riotise, and guilty Dread
   Of heavenly vengeaunce; faint Infirmity,
   Vile Poverty, and lastly Death with infamy."

Compare these two pictures of Cupid with the Love-god of the
Renaissance, as he is represented to this day, confused with angels, in
every faded form of ornament and allegory, in our furniture, our
literature, and our minds.

§ LXXXVII. _Second side._ Gluttony. A woman in a turban, with a jewelled
cup in her right hand. In her left, the clawed limb of a bird, which she
is gnawing. Inscribed "GULA SINE ORDINE SUM."

Spenser's Gluttony is more than usually fine:

  "His belly was upblowne with luxury,
   And eke with fatnesse swollen were his eyne,
   And like a crane his necke was long and fyne,
   Wherewith he swallowed up excessive feast,
   For want whereof poore people oft did pyne."

He rides upon a swine, and is clad in vine-leaves, with a garland of
ivy. Compare the account of Excesse, above, as opposed to Temperance.

§ LXXXVIII. _Third side._ Pride. A knight, with a heavy and stupid face,
holding a sword with three edges: his armor covered with ornaments in
the form of roses, and with two ears attached to his helmet. The
inscription indecipherable, all but "SUPERBIA."

Spenser has analyzed this vice with great care. He first represents it
as the Pride of life; that is to say, the pride which runs in a deep
under current through all the thoughts and acts of men. As such, it is a
feminine vice, directly opposed to Holiness, and mistress of a castle
called the House of Pryde, and her chariot is driven by Satan, with a
team of beasts, ridden by the mortal sins. In the throne chamber of her
palace she is thus described:

  "So proud she shyned in her princely state,
   Looking to Heaven, for Earth she did disdayne;
   And sitting high, for lowly she did hate:
   Lo, underneath her scornefull feete was layne
   A dreadfull dragon with an hideous trayne;
   And in her hand she held a mirrhour bright,
   Wherein her face she often vewed fayne"

The giant Orgoglio is a baser species of pride, born of the Earth and
Eolus; that is to say, of sensual and vain conceits. His foster-father
and the keeper of his castle is Ignorance. (Book I. canto VIII.)

Finally, Disdain is introduced, in other places, as the form of pride
which vents itself in insult to others.

§ LXXXIX. _Fourth side._ Anger. A woman tearing her dress open at her
breast. Inscription here undecipherable; but in the Renaissance copy it
is "IRA CRUDELIS EST IN ME."

Giotto represents this vice under the same symbol; but it is the weakest
of all the figures in the Arena Chapel. The "Wrath" of Spenser rides upon
a lion, brandishing a fire-brand, his garments stained with blood. Rage,
or Furor, occurs subordinately in other places. It appears to me very
strange that neither Giotto nor Spenser should have given any
representation of the _restrained_ Anger, which is infinitely the most
terrible; both of them make him violent.

§ XC. _Fifth side._ Avarice. An old woman with a veil over her forehead,
and a bag of money in each hand. A figure very marvellous for power of
expression. The throat is all made up of sinews with skinny channels
deep between them, strained as by anxiety, and wasted by famine; the
features hunger-bitten, the eyes hollow, the look glaring and intense,
yet without the slightest: caricature. Inscribed in the Renaissance
copy, "AVARITIA IMPLETOR."

Spenser's Avarice (the vice) is much feebler than this; but the god
Mammon and his kingdom have been described by him with his usual power.
Note the position of the house of Richesse:

  "Betwixt them both was but a little stride,
   That did the House of Richesse from Hell-mouth divide."

It is curious that most moralists confuse avarice with covetousness,
although they are vices totally different in their operation on the
human heart, and on the frame of society. The love of money, the sin of
Judas and Ananias, is indeed the root of all evil in the hardening of
the heart; but "covetousness, which is idolatry," the sin of Ahab, that
is, the inordinate desire of some seen or recognized good,--thus
destroying peace of mind,--is probably productive of much more misery in
heart, and error in conduct, than avarice itself, only covetousness is
not so inconsistent with Christianity: for covetousness may partly
proceed from vividness of the affections and hopes, as in David, and be
consistent with, much charity; not so avarice.

§ XCI. _Sixth side_. Idleness. Accidia. A figure much broken away,
having had its arms round two branches of trees.

I do not know why Idleness should be represented as among trees, unless,
in the Italy of the fourteenth century, forest country was considered as
desert, and therefore the domain of Idleness. Spenser fastens this vice
especially upon the clergy,--

  "Upon a slouthfull asse he chose to ryde,
   Arayd in habit blacke, and amis thin,
   Like to an holy monck, the service to begin.
   And in his hand his portesse still he bare,
   That much was worne, but therein little redd."

And he properly makes him the leader of the train of the vices:

  "May seem the wayne was very evil ledd,
   When such an one had guiding of the way"

Observe that subtle touch of truth in the "wearing" of the portesse,
indicating the abuse of books by idle readers, so thoroughly
characteristic of unwilling studentship from the schoolboy upwards.

§ XCII. _Seventh side._ Vanity. She is smiling complacently as she looks
into a mirror in her lap. Her robe is embroidered with roses, and roses
form her crown. Undecipherable.

There is some confusion in the expression of this vice, between pride in
the personal appearance and lightness of purpose. The word Vanitas
generally, I think, bears, in the mediæval period, the sense given it in
Scripture. "Let not him that is deceived trust in Vanity, for Vanity
shall be his recompense." "Vanity of Vanities." "The Lord knoweth the
thoughts of the wise, that they are vain." It is difficult to find this
sin,--which, after Pride, is the most universal, perhaps the most fatal,
of all, fretting the whole depth of our humanity into storm "to waft a
feather or to drown a fly,"--definitely expressed in art. Even Spenser,
I think, has only partially expressed it under the figure of Phædria,
more properly Idle Mirth, in the second book. The idea is, however,
entirely worked out in the Vanity Fair of the "Pilgrim's Progress."

§ XCIII. _Eighth side._ Envy. One of the noblest pieces of expression in
the series. She is pointing malignantly with her finger; a serpent is
wreathed about her head like a cap, another forms the girdle of her
waist, and a dragon rests in her lap.

Giotto has, however, represented her, with still greater subtlety, as
having her fingers terminating in claws, and raising her right hand with
an expression partly of impotent regret, partly of involuntary grasping;
a serpent, issuing from her mouth, is about to bite her between the
eyes; she has long membranous ears, horns on her head, and flames
consuming her body. The Envy of Spenser is only inferior to that of
Giotto, because the idea of folly and quickness of hearing is not
suggested by the size of the ear: in other respects it is even finer,
joining the idea of fury, in the wolf on which he rides, with that of
corruption on his lips, and of discoloration or distortion in the whole
mind:

                   "Malicious Envy rode
  Upon a ravenous wolfe, and still did chaw
  Between his cankred teeth a venemous tode,
  That all the poison ran about his jaw.
  _All in a kirtle of discolourd say
  He clothed was, ypaynted full of eies_,
  And in his bosome secretly there lay
  An hatefull snake, the which his taile uptyes
  In many folds, and mortall sting implyes."

He has developed the idea in more detail, and still more loathsomely, in
the twelfth canto of the fifth book.

§ XCIV. ELEVENTH CAPITAL. Its decoration is composed of eight birds,
arranged as shown in Plate V. of the "Seven Lamps," which, however, was
sketched from the Renaissance copy. These birds are all varied in form
and action, but not so as to require special description.

§ XCV. TWELFTH CAPITAL. This has been very interesting, but is
grievously defaced, four of its figures being entirely broken away, and
the character of two others quite undecipherable. It is fortunate that
it has been copied in the thirty-third capital of the Renaissance
series, from which we are able to identify the lost figures.

_First side._ Misery. A man with a wan face, seemingly pleading with a
child who has its hands crossed on its breast. There is a buckle at his
own breast in the shape of a cloven heart. Inscribed "MISERIA."

The intention of this figure is not altogether apparent, as it is by no
means treated as a vice; the distress seeming real, and like that of a
parent in poverty mourning over his child. Yet it seems placed here as
in direct opposition to the virtue of Cheerfulness, which follows next
in order; rather, however, I believe, with the intention of illustrating
human life, than the character of the vice which, as we have seen, Dante
placed in the circle of hell. The word in that case would, I think, have
been "Tristitia," the "unholy Griefe" of Spenser--

          "All in sable sorrowfully clad,
  Downe hanging his dull head with heavy chere:

         *       *       *       *       *

  A pair of pincers in his hand he had,
  With which he pinched people to the heart."

He has farther amplified the idea under another figure in the fifth
canto of the fourth book:

  "His name was Care; a blacksmith by his trade,
   That neither day nor night from working spared;
   But to small purpose yron wedges made:
   Those be unquiet thoughts that carefull minds invade.
   Rude was his garment, and to rags all rent,
   Ne better had he, ne for better cared;
   With blistered hands among the cinders brent."

It is to be noticed, however, that in the Renaissance copy this figure
is stated to be, not Miseria, but "Misericordia." The contraction is a
very moderate one, Misericordia being in old MS. written always as
"Mia." If this reading be right, the figure is placed here rather as the
companion, than the opposite, of Cheerfulness; unless, indeed, it is
intended to unite the idea of Mercy and Compassion with that of Sacred
Sorrow.

§ XCVI. _Second side._ Cheerfulness. A woman with long flowing hair,
crowned with roses, playing on a tambourine, and with open lips, as
singing. Inscribed " ALACRITAS."

We have already met with this virtue among those especially set by
Spenser to attend on Womanhood. It is inscribed in the Renaissance copy,
"ALACHRITAS CHANIT MECUM." Note the gutturals of the rich and fully
developed Venetian dialect now affecting the Latin, which is free from
them in the earlier capitals.

§ XCVII. _Third side._ Destroyed; but, from the copy, we find it has
been Stultitia, Folly; and it is there represented simply as a man
_riding_, a sculpture worth the consideration of the English residents
who bring their horses to Venice. Giotto gives Stultitia a feather, cap,
and club. In early manuscripts he is always eating with one hand, and
striking with the other; in later ones he has a cap and bells, or cap
crested with a cock's head, whence the word "coxcomb."

§ XCVIII. _Fourth side._ Destroyed, all but a book, which identifies it
with the "Celestial Chastity" of the Renaissance copy; there represented
as a woman pointing to a book (connecting the convent life with the
pursuit of literature?).

Spenser's Chastity, Britomart, is the most exquisitely wrought of all
his characters; but, as before noticed, she is not the Chastity of the
convent, but of wedded life.

§ XCIX. _Fifth side._ Only a scroll is left; but, from the copy, we find
it has been Honesty or Truth. Inscribed "HONESTATEM DILIGO." It is very
curious, that among all the Christian systems of the virtues which we
have examined, we should find this one in Venice only.

The Truth of Spenser, Una, is, after Chastity, the most exquisite
character in the "Faerie Queen."

§ C. _Sixth side._ Falsehood. An old woman leaning on a crutch; and
inscribed in the copy, "FALSITAS IN ME SEMPER EST." The Fidessa of
Spenser, the great enemy of Una, or Truth, is far more subtly conceived,
probably not without special reference to the Papal deceits. In her true
form she is a loathsome hag, but in her outward aspect,

  "A goodly lady, clad in scarlot red,
   Purfled with gold and pearle;...
   Her wanton palfrey all was overspred
   With tinsell trappings, woven like a wave,
   Whose bridle rung with golden bels and bosses brave."

Dante's Fraud, Geryon, is the finest personification of all, but the
description (Inferno, canto XVII.) is too long to be quoted.

§ CI. _Seventh side._ Injustice. An armed figure holding a halbert; so
also in the copy. The figure used by Giotto with the particular
intention of representing unjust government, is represented at the gate
of an embattled castle in a forest, between rocks, while various deeds
of violence are committed at his feet. Spenser's "Adicia" is a furious
hag, at last transformed into a tiger.

_Eighth side._ A man with a dagger looking sorrowfully at a child, who
turns its back to him. I cannot understand this figure. It is inscribed
in the copy, "ASTINECIA (Abstinentia?) OPITIMA."

§ CII. THIRTEENTH CAPITAL. It has lions' heads all round, coarsely cut.

FOURTEENTH CAPITAL. It has various animals, each sitting on its
haunches. Three dogs, one a greyhound, one long-haired, one short-haired
with bells about its neck; two monkeys, one with fan-shaped hair
projecting on each side of its face; a noble boar, with its tusks,
hoofs, and bristles sharply cut; and a lion and lioness.

§ CIII. FIFTEENTH CAPITAL. The pillar to which it belongs is thicker
than the rest, as well as the one over it in the upper arcade.

The sculpture of this capital is also much coarser, and seems to me
later than that of the rest; and it has no inscription, which is
embarrassing, as its subjects have had much meaning; but I believe
Selvatico is right in supposing it to have been intended for a general
illustration of Idleness.

_First side._ A woman with a distaff; her girdle richly decorated, and
fastened by a buckle.

_Second side._ A youth in a long mantle, with a rose in his hand.

_Third side._ A woman in a turban stroking a puppy which she holds by
the haunches.

_Fourth side._ A man with a parrot.

_Fifth side._ A woman in very rich costume, with braided hair, and dress
thrown into minute folds, holding a rosary(?) in her left hand, her
right on her breast.

_Sixth side._ A man with a very thoughtful face, laying his hand upon
the leaves of the capital.

_Seventh side._ A crowned lady, with a rose in her hand.

_Eighth side._ A boy with a ball in his left hand, and his right laid on
his breast.

§ CIV. SIXTEENTH CAPITAL. It is decorated with eight large heads, partly
intended to be grotesque,[156] and very coarse and bad, except only
that in the sixth side, which is totally different from all the rest,
and looks like a portrait. It is thin, thoughtful, and dignified;
thoroughly fine in every way. It wears a cap surmounted by two winged
lions; and, therefore, I think Selvatico must have inaccurately written
the list given in the note, for this head is certainly meant to express
the superiority of the Venetian character over that of other nations.
Nothing is more remarkable in all early sculpture, than its appreciation
of the signs of dignity of character in the features, and the way in
which it can exalt the principal figure in any subject by a few touches.

§ CV. SEVENTEENTH CAPITAL. This has been so destroyed by the sea wind,
which sweeps at this point of the arcade round the angle of the palace,
that its inscriptions are no longer legible, and great part of its
figures are gone. Selvatico states them as follows: Solomon, the wise;
Priscian, the grammarian; Aristotle, the logician; Tully, the orator;
Pythagoras, the philosopher; Archimedes, the mechanic; Orpheus, the
musician; Ptolemy, the astronomer. The fragments actually remaining are
the following:

_First side._ A figure with two books, in a robe richly decorated with
circles of roses. Inscribed "SALOMON (SAP)IENS."

_Second side._ A man with one book, poring over it: he has had a long
stick or reed in his hand. Of inscription only the letters "GRAMMATIC"
remain.

_Third side._ "ARISTOTLE:" so inscribed. He has a peaked double beard
and a flat cap, from under which his long hair falls down his back.

_Fourth side._ Destroyed.

_Fifth side._ Destroyed, all but a board with three (counters?) on it.

_Sixth side._ A figure with compasses. Inscribed "GEOMET * *"

_Seventh side._ Nothing is left but a guitar with its handle wrought
into a lion's head.

_Eighth side._ Destroyed.

§ CVI. We have now arrived at the EIGHTEENTH CAPITAL, the most
interesting and beautiful of the palace. It represents the planets, and
the sun and moon, in those divisions of the zodiac known to astrologers
as their "houses;" and perhaps indicates, by the position in which they
are placed, the period of the year at which this great corner-stone was
laid. The inscriptions above have been in quaint Latin rhyme, but are
now decipherable only in fragments, and that with the more difficulty
because the rusty iron bar that binds the abacus has broken away, in its
expansion, nearly all the upper portions of the stone, and with them the
signs of contraction, which are of great importance. I shall give the
fragments of them that I could decipher; first as the letters actually
stand (putting those of which I am doubtful in brackets, with a note of
interrogation), and then as I would read them.

§ CVII. It should be premised that, in modern astrology, the houses of
the planets are thus arranged:

  The house of the Sun,      is Leo.
        "          Moon,     "  Cancer.
        "       of Mars,     "  Aries and Scorpio.
        "          Venus,    "  Taurus and Libra.
        "          Mercury,  "  Gemini and Virgo.
        "          Jupiter,  "  Sagittarius and Pisces.
        "          Saturn,   "  Capricorn.
        "          Herschel, "  Aquarius.

The Herschel planet being of course unknown to the old astrologers, we
have only the other six planetary powers, together with the sun; and
Aquarius is assigned to Saturn as his house. I could not find Capricorn
at all; but this sign may have been broken away, as the whole capital is
grievously defaced. The eighth side of the capital, which the Herschel
planet would now have occupied, bears a sculpture of the Creation of
Man: it is the most conspicuous side, the one set diagonally across the
angle; or the eighth in our usual mode of reading the capitals, from
which I shall not depart.

§ CVIII. _The first side_, then, or that towards the Sea, has Aquarius,
as the house of Saturn, represented as a seated figure beautifully
draped, pouring a stream of water out of an amphora over the leaves of
the capital. His inscription is:

  "ET SATURNE DOMUS (ECLOCERUNT?) 1^s 7BRE."

§ CIX. _Second side._ Jupiter, in his houses Sagittarius and Pisces,
represented throned, with an upper dress disposed in radiating folds
about his neck, and hanging down upon his breast, ornamented by small
pendent trefoiled studs or bosses. He wears the drooping bonnet and long
gloves; but the folds about the neck, shot forth to express the rays of
the star, are the most remarkable characteristic of the figure. He
raises his sceptre in his left hand over Sagittarius, represented as the
centaur Chiron; and holds two thunnies in his right. Something rough,
like a third fish, has been broken away below them; the more easily
because this part of the group is entirely undercut, and the two fish
glitter in the light, relieved on the deep gloom below the leaves. The
inscription is:

  "INDE JOVI'[157] DONA PISES SIMUL ATQ^s CIRONA."

Or,

  "Inde Jovis dona
   Pisces simul atque Chirona."

Domus is, I suppose, to be understood before Jovis: "Then the house of
Jupiter gives (or governs?) the fishes and Chiron."

§ CX. _Third side._ Mars, in his houses Aries and Scorpio. Represented
as a very ugly knight in chain mail, seated sideways on the ram, whose
horns are broken away, and having a large scorpion in his left hand,
whose tail is broken also, to the infinite injury of the group, for it
seems to have curled across to the angle leaf, and formed a bright line
of light, like the fish in the hand of Jupiter. The knight carries a
shield, on which fire and water are sculptured, and bears a banner upon
his lance, with the word "DEFEROSUM," which puzzled me for some time. It
should be read, I believe, "De ferro sum;" which would be good
_Venetian_ Latin for "I am of iron."

§ CXI. _Fourth side._ The Sun, in his house Leo. Represented under the
figure of Apollo, sitting on the Lion, with rays shooting from his head,
and the world in his hand. The inscription:

  "TU ES DOMU' SOLIS (QUO *?) SIGNE LEONI."

I believe the first phrase is, "Tunc est Domus solis;" but there is a
letter gone after the "quo," and I have no idea what case of signum
"signe" stands for.

§ CXII. _Fifth side._ Venus, in her houses Taurus and Libra. The most
beautiful figure of the series. She sits upon the bull, who is deep in
the dewlap, and better cut than most of the animals, holding a mirror in
her right hand, and the scales in her left. Her breast is very nobly and
tenderly indicated under the folds of her drapery, which is exquisitely
studied in its fall. What is left of the inscription, runs:

  "LIBRA CUM TAURO DOMUS * * * PURIOR AUR *."

§ CXIII. _Sixth side._ Mercury, represented as wearing a pendent cap,
and holding a book: he is supported by three children in reclining
attitudes, representing his houses Gemini and Virgo. But I cannot
understand the inscription, though more than usually legible.

  "OCCUPAT ERIGONE STIBONS GEMINUQ' LACONE."

§ CXIV. _Seventh side._ The Moon, in her house Cancer. This sculpture,
which is turned towards the Piazzetta, is the most picturesque of the
series. The moon is represented as a woman in a boat, upon the sea, who
raises the crescent in her right hand, and with her left draws a crab
out of the waves, up the boat's side. The moon was, I believe,
represented in Egyptian sculptures as in a boat; but I rather think the
Venetian was not aware of this, and that he meant to express the
peculiar sweetness of the moonlight at Venice, as seen across the
lagoons. Whether this was intended by putting the planet in the boat,
may be questionable, but assuredly the idea was meant to be conveyed by
the dress of the figure. For all the draperies of the other figures on
this capital, as well as on the rest of the façade, are disposed in
severe but full folds, showing little of the forms beneath them; but the
moon's drapery _ripples_ down to her feet, so as exactly to suggest the
trembling of the moonlight on the waves. This beautiful idea is highly
characteristic of the thoughtfulness of the early sculptors: five
hundred men may be now found who could have cut the drapery, as such,
far better, for one who would have disposed its folds with this
intention. The inscription is:

  "LUNE CANCER DOMU T. PBET IORBE SIGNORU."

§ CXV. _Eighth side._ God creating Man. Represented as a throned figure,
with a glory round the head, laying his left hand on the head of a naked
youth, and sustaining him with his right hand. The inscription puzzled
me for a long time; but except the lost r and m of "formavit," and a
letter quite undefaced, but to me unintelligible, before the word Eva,
in the shape of a figure of 7, I have safely ascertained the rest.

  "DELIMO DSADA DECO STAFO * * AVIT7EVA."

Or

    "De limo Dominus Adam, de costa fo(rm) avit Evam;"
  From the dust the Lord made Adam, and from the rib Eve.

I imagine the whole of this capital, therefore--the principal one of the
old palace,--to have been intended to signify, first, the formation of
the planets for the service of man upon the earth; secondly, the entire
subjection of the fates and fortune of man to the will of God, as
determined from the time when the earth and stars were made, and, in
fact, written in the volume of the stars themselves.

Thus interpreted, the doctrines of judicial astrology were not only
consistent with, but an aid to, the most spiritual and humble
Christianity.

In the workmanship and grouping of its foliage, this capital is, on the
whole, the finest I know in Europe. The sculptor has put his whole
strength into it. I trust that it will appear among the other Venetian
casts lately taken for the Crystal Palace; but if not, I have myself
cast all its figures, and two of its leaves, and I intend to give
drawings of them on a large scale in my folio work.

§ CXVI. NINETEENTH CAPITAL. This is, of course, the second counting from
the Sea, on the Piazzetta side of the palace, calling that of the
Fig-tree angle the first.

It is the most important capital, as a piece of evidence in point of
dates, in the whole palace. Great pains have been taken with it, and in
some portion of the accompanying furniture or ornaments of each of its
figures a small piece of colored marble has been inlaid, with peculiar
significance: for the capital represents the _arts of sculpture and
architecture_; and the inlaying of the colored stones (which are far too
small to be effective at a distance, and are found in this one capital
only of the whole series) is merely an expression of the architect's
feeling of the essential importance of this art of inlaying, and of the
value of color generally in his own art.

§ CXVII. _First side._ "ST. SIMPLICIUS": so inscribed. A figure working
with a pointed chisel on a small oblong block of green serpentine, about
four inches long by one wide, inlaid in the capital. The chisel is, of
course, in the left hand, but the right is held up open, with the palm
outwards.

_Second side._ A crowned figure, carving the image of a child on a small
statue, with a ground of red marble. The sculptured figure is highly
finished, and is in type of head much like the Ham or Japheth at the
Vine angle. Inscription effaced.

_Third side._ An old man, uncrowned, but with curling hair, at work on a
small column, with its capital complete, and a little shaft of dark red
marble, spotted with paler red. The capital is precisely of the form of
that found in the palace of the Tiepolos and the other thirteenth
century work of Venice. This one figure would be quite enough, without
any other evidence whatever, to determine the date of this flank of the
Ducal Palace as not later, at all events, than the first half of the
fourteenth century. Its inscription is broken away, all but "DISIPULO."

_Fourth side._ A crowned figure; but the object on which it has been
working is broken away, and all the inscription except "ST. E(N?)AS."

_Fifth side._ A man with a turban, and a sharp chisel, at work on a kind
of panel or niche, the back of which is of red marble.

_Sixth side._ A crowned figure, with hammer and chisel, employed _on a
little range of windows of the fifth order_, having roses set, instead
of orbicular ornaments, between the spandrils, with a rich cornice, and
a band of marble inserted above. This sculpture assures us of the date
of the fifth order window, which it shows to have been universal in the
early fourteenth century.

There are also five arches in the block on which the sculptor is
working, marking the frequency of the number five in the window groups
of the time.

_Seventh side._ A figure at work on a pilaster, with Lombardic
thirteenth century capital (for account of the series of forms in
Venetian capitals, see the final Appendix of the next volume), the shaft
of dark red spotted marble.

_Eighth side._ A figure with a rich open crown, working on a delicate
recumbent statue, the head of which is laid on a pillow covered with a
rich chequer pattern; the whole supported on a block of dark red marble.
Inscription broken away, all but "ST. SYM. (Symmachus?) TV * * ANVS."
There appear, therefore, altogether to have been five saints, two of
them popes, if Simplicius is the pope of that name (three in front, two
on the fourth and sixth sides), alternating with the three uncrowned
workmen in the manual labor of sculpture. I did not, therefore, insult
our present architects in saying above that they "ought to work in the
mason's yard with their men." It would be difficult to find a more
interesting expression of the devotional spirit in which all great work
was undertaken at this time.

§ CXVIII. TWENTIETH CAPITAL. It is adorned with heads of animals, and is
the finest of the whole series in the broad massiveness of its effect;
so simply characteristic, indeed, of the grandeur of style in the
entire building, that I chose it for the first Plate in my folio work.
In spite of the sternness of its plan, however, it is wrought with great
care in surface detail; and the ornamental value of the minute chasing
obtained by the delicate plumage of the birds, and the clustered bees on
the honeycomb in the bear's mouth, opposed to the strong simplicity of
its general form, cannot be too much admired. There are also more grace,
life, and variety in the sprays of foliage on each side of it, and under
the heads, than in any other capital of the series, though the earliness
of the workmanship is marked by considerable hardness and coldness in
the larger heads. A Northern Gothic workman, better acquainted with
bears and wolves than it was possible to become in St. Mark's Place,
would have put far more life into these heads, but he could not have
composed them more skilfully.

§ CXIX. _First side._ A lion with a stag's haunch in his mouth. Those
readers who have the folio plate, should observe the peculiar way in
which the ear is cut into the shape of a ring, jagged or furrowed on the
edge; an archaic mode of treatment peculiar, in the Ducal Palace, to the
lions' heads of the fourteenth century. The moment we reach the
Renaissance work, the lions' ears are smooth. Inscribed simply, "LEO."

_Second side._ A wolf with a dead bird in his mouth, its body
wonderfully true in expression of the passiveness of death. The feathers
are each wrought with a central quill and radiating filaments. Inscribed
"LUPUS."

_Third side._ A fox, not at all like one, with a dead cock in his mouth,
its comb and pendent neck admirably designed so as to fall across the
great angle leaf of the capital, its tail hanging down on the other
side, its long straight feathers exquisitely cut. Inscribed "(VULP?)IS."

_Fourth side._ Entirely broken away.

_Fifth side_. "APER." Well tusked, with a head of maize in his mouth; at
least I suppose it to be maize, though shaped like a pine-cone.

_Sixth side._ "CHANIS." With a bone, very ill cut; and a bald-headed
species of dog, with ugly flap ears.

_Seventh side._ "MUSCIPULUS." With a rat (?) in his mouth.

_Eighth side._ "URSUS." With a honeycomb, covered with large bees.

§ CXX. TWENTY-FIRST CAPITAL. Represents the principal inferior
professions.

_First side._ An old man, with his brow deeply wrinkled, and very
expressive features, beating in a kind of mortar with a hammer.
Inscribed "LAPICIDA SUM."

_Second side._ I believe, a goldsmith; he is striking a small flat bowl
or patera, on a pointed anvil, with a light hammer. The inscription is
gone.

_Third side._ A shoemaker with a shoe in his hand, and an instrument for
cutting leather suspended beside him. Inscription undecipherable.

_Fourth side._ Much broken. A carpenter planing a beam resting on two
horizontal logs. Inscribed "CARPENTARIUS SUM."

_Fifth side._ A figure shovelling fruit into a tub; the latter very
carefully carved from what appears to have been an excellent piece of
cooperage. Two thin laths cross each other over the top of it. The
inscription, now lost, was, according to Selvatico, "MENSURATOR"?

_Sixth side._ A man, with a large hoe, breaking the ground, which lies
in irregular furrows and clods before him. Now undecipherable, but
according to Selvatico, "AGRICHOLA."

_Seventh side._ A man, in a pendent cap, writing on a large scroll which
falls over his knee. Inscribed "NOTARIUS SUM."

_Eighth side._ A man forging a sword, or scythe-blade: he wears a large
skull-cap; beats with a large hammer on a solid anvil; and is inscribed
"FABER SUM."

§ CXXI. TWENTY-SECOND CAPITAL. The Ages of Man; and the influence of the
planets on human life.

_First side._ The moon, governing infancy for four years, according to
Selvatico. I have no note of this side, having, I suppose, been
prevented from raising the ladder against it by some fruit-stall or
other impediment in the regular course of my examination; and then
forgotten to return to it.

_Second side._ A child with a tablet, and an alphabet inscribed on it.
The legend above is

  "MECUREU^s DNT. PUERICIE PAN. X."

Or, "Mercurius dominatur pueritiæ per annos X." (Selvatico reads VII.)
"Mercury governs boyhood for ten (or seven) years."

_Third side._ An older youth, with another tablet, but broken. Inscribed

  "ADOLOSCENCIE * * * P. AN. VII."

Selvatico misses this side altogether, as I did the first, so that the
lost planet is irrecoverable, as the inscription is now defaced. Note
the o for e in adolescentia; so also we constantly find u for o;
showing, together with much other incontestable evidence of the same
kind, how full and deep the old pronunciation of Latin always remained,
and how ridiculous our English mincing of the vowels would have sounded
to a Roman ear.

_Fourth side._ A youth with a hawk on his fist.

     "IUVENTUTI DNT SOL. P. AN. XIX."
  The son governs youth for nineteen years.

_Fifth side._ A man sitting, helmed, with a sword over his shoulder.
Inscribed

    "SENECTUTI DNT MARS. P. AN. XV."
  Mars governs manhood for fifteen years.

_Sixth side._ A very graceful and serene figure, in the pendent cap,
reading.

   "SENICIE DNT JUPITER, P. ANN. XII."
  Jupiter governs age for twelve years.

_Seventh side._ An old man in a skull-cap, praying.

  "DECREPITE DNT SATN UQ^s ADMOTE." (Saturnus usque ad mortem.)
             Saturn governs decrepitude until death.

_Eighth side._ The dead body lying on a mattress.

    "ULTIMA EST MORS PENA PECCATI."
  Last comes death, the penalty of sin.

§ CXXII. Shakspeare's Seven Ages are of course merely the expression of
this early and well known system. He has deprived the dotage of its
devotion; but I think wisely, as the Italian system would imply that
devotion was, or should be, always delayed until dotage.

TWENTY-THIRD CAPITAL. I agree with Selvatico in thinking this has been
restored. It is decorated with large and vulgar heads.

§ CXXIII. TWENTY-FOURTH CAPITAL. This belongs to the large shaft which
sustains the great party wall of the Sala del Gran Consiglio. The shaft
is thicker than the rest; but the capital, though ancient, is coarse and
somewhat inferior in design to the others of the series. It represents
the history of marriage: the lover first seeing his mistress at a
window, then addressing her, bringing her presents; then the bridal, the
birth and the death of a child. But I have not been able to examine
these sculptures properly, because the pillar is encumbered by the
railing which surrounds the two guns set before the Austrian
guard-house.

§ CXXIV. TWENTY-FIFTH CAPITAL. We have here the employments of the
months, with which we are already tolerably acquainted. There are,
however, one or two varieties worth noticing in this series.

_First side._ March. Sitting triumphantly in a rich dress, as the
beginning of the year.

_Second side._ April and May. April with a lamb: May with a feather fan
in her hand.

_Third side._ June. Carrying cherries in a basket.

I did not give this series with the others in the previous chapter,
because this representation of June is peculiarly Venetian. It is called
"the month of cherries," mese delle ceriese, in the popular rhyme on the
conspiracy of Tiepolo, quoted above, Vol. I.

The cherries principally grown near Venice are of a deep red color, and
large, but not of high flavor, though refreshing. They are carved upon
the pillar with great care, all their stalks undercut.

_Fourth side._ July and August. The first reaping; the _leaves_ of the
straw being given, shooting out from the tubular stalk. August,
opposite, beats (the grain?) in a basket.

_Fifth side._ September. A woman standing in a wine-tub, and holding a
branch of vine. Very beautiful.

_Sixth side._ October and November. I could not make out their
occupation; they seem to be roasting or boiling some root over a fire.

_Seventh side._ December. Killing pigs, as usual.

_Eighth side._ January warming his feet, and February frying fish. This
last employment is again as characteristic of the Venetian winter as the
cherries are of the Venetian summer.

The inscriptions are undecipherable, except a few letters here and
there, and the words MARCIUS, APRILIS, and FEBRUARIUS.

This is the last of the capitals of the early palace; the next, or
twenty-sixth capital, is the first of those executed in the fifteenth
century under Foscari; and hence to the Judgment angle the traveller has
nothing to do but to compare the base copies of the earlier work with
their originals, or to observe the total want of invention in the
Renaissance sculptor, wherever he has depended on his own resources.
This, however, always with the exception of the twenty-seventh and of
the last capital, which are both fine.

I shall merely enumerate the subjects and point out the plagiarisms of
these capitals, as they are not worth description.

§ CXXV. TWENTY-SIXTH CAPITAL. Copied from the fifteenth, merely changing
the succession of the figures.

TWENTY-SEVENTH CAPITAL. I think it possible that this may be part of the
old work displaced in joining the new palace with the old; at all
events, it is well designed, though a little coarse. It represents eight
different kinds of fruit, each in a basket; the characters well given,
and groups well arranged, but without much care or finish. The names are
inscribed above, though somewhat unnecessarily, and with certainly as
much disrespect to the beholder's intelligence as the sculptor's art,
namely, ZEREXIS, PIRI, CHUCUMERIS, PERSICI, ZUCHE, MOLONI, FICI, HUVA.
Zerexis (cherries) and Zuche (gourds) both begin with the same letter,
whether meant for z, s, or c I am not sure. The Zuche are the common
gourds, divided into two protuberances, one larger than the other, like
a bottle compresed near the neck; and the Moloni are the long
water-melons, which, roasted, form a staple food of the Venetians to
this day.

§ CXXVI. TWENTY-EIGHTH CAPITAL. Copied from the seventh.

TWENTY-NINTH CAPITAL. Copied from the ninth.

THIRTIETH CAPITAL. Copied from the tenth. The "Accidia" is noticeable as
having the inscription complete, "ACCIDIA ME STRINGIT;" and the
"Luxuria" for its utter want of expression, having a severe and calm
face, a robe up to the neck, and her hand upon her breast. The
inscription is also different: "LUXURIA SUM STERC^S (?) INFERI" (?).

THIRTY-FIRST CAPITAL. Copied from the eighth.

THIRTY-SECOND CAPITAL. Has no inscription, only fully robed figures
laying their hands, without any meaning, on their own shoulders, heads,
or chins, or on the leaves around them.

THIRTY-THIRD CAPITAL. Copied from the twelfth.

THIRTY-FOURTH CAPITAL. Copied from the eleventh.

THIRTY-FIFTH CAPITAL. Has children, with birds or fruit, pretty in
features, and utterly inexpressive, like the cherubs of the eighteenth
century.

§ CXXVII. THIRTY-SIXTH CAPITAL. This is the last of the Piazzetta
façade, the elaborate one under the Judgment angle. Its foliage is
copied from the eighteenth at the opposite side, with an endeavor on the
part of the Renaissance sculptor to refine upon it, by which he has
merely lost some of its truth and force. This capital will, however, be
always thought, at first, the most beautiful of the whole series: and
indeed it is very noble; its groups of figures most carefully studied,
very graceful, and much more pleasing than those of the earlier work,
though with less real power in them; and its foliage is only inferior to
that of the magnificent Fig-tree angle. It represents, on its front or
first side, Justice enthroned, seated on two lions; and on the seven
other sides examples of acts of justice or good government, or figures
of lawgivers, in the following order:

_Second side._ Aristotle, with two pupils, giving laws. Inscribed:

  "ARISTOT * * CHE DIE LEGE."
   Aristotle who declares laws.

_Third side._ I have mislaid my note of this side: Selvatico and Lazari
call it "Isidore" (?).[158]

_Fourth side._ Solon with his pupils. Inscribed:

  "SAL^O UNO DEI SETE SAVI DI GRECIA CHE DIE LEGE."
   Solon, one of the seven sages of Greece, who declares laws.

Note, by the by, the pure Venetian dialect used in this capital, instead
of the Latin in the more ancient ones. One of the seated pupils in this
sculpture is remarkably beautiful in the sweep of his flowing drapery.

_Fifth side._ The chastity of Scipio. Inscribed:

  "ISIPIONE A CHASTITA CH * * * E LA FIA (e la figlia?) * * ARE."

A soldier in a plumed bonnet presents a kneeling maiden to the seated
Scipio, who turns thoughtfully away.

_Sixth side._ Numa Pompilius building churches.

  "NUMA POMPILIO IMPERADOR EDIFICHADOR DI TEMPI E CHIESE."

Numa, in a kind of hat with a crown above it, directing a soldier in
Roman armor (note this, as contrasted with the mail of the earlier
capitals). They point to a tower of three stories filled with tracery.

_Seventh side._ Moses receiving the law. Inscribed:

  "QUANDO MOSE RECEVE LA LEGE I SUL MONTE."

Moses kneels on a rock, whence springs a beautifully fancied tree, with
clusters of three berries in the centre of three leaves, sharp and
quaint, like fine Northern Gothic. The half figure of the Deity comes
out of the abacus, the arm meeting that of Moses, both at full stretch,
with the stone tablets between.

_Eighth side._ Trajan doing justice to the Widow.

  "TRAJANO IMPERADOR CHE FA JUSTITIA A LA VEDOVA."

He is riding spiritedly, his mantle blown out behind: the widow kneeling
before his horse.

§ CXXVIII. The reader will observe that this capital is of peculiar
interest in its relation to the much disputed question of the character
of the later government of Venice. It is the assertion by that
government of its belief that Justice only could be the foundation of
its stability; as these stones of Justice and Judgment are the
foundation of its halls of council. And this profession of their faith
may be interpreted in two ways. Most modern historians would call it, in
common with the continual reference to the principles of justice in the
political and judicial language of the period,[159] nothing more than a
cloak for consummate violence and guilt; and it may easily be proved to
have been so in myriads of instances. But in the main, I believe the
expression of feeling to be genuine. I do not believe, of the majority
of the leading Venetians of this period whose portraits have come down
to us, that they were deliberately and everlastingly hypocrites. I see
no hypocrisy in their countenances. Much capacity of it, much subtlety,
much natural and acquired reserve; but no meanness. On the contrary,
infinite grandeur, repose, courage, and the peculiar unity and
tranquillity of expression which come of sincerity or _wholeness_ of
heart, and which it would take much demonstration to make me believe
could by any possibility be seen on the countenance of an insincere man.
I trust, therefore, that these Venetian nobles of the fifteenth century
did, in the main, desire to do judgment and justice to all men; but, as
the whole system of morality had been by this time undermined by the
teaching of the Romish Church, the idea of justice had become separated
from that of truth, so that dissimulation in the interest of the state
assumed the aspect of duty. We had, perhaps, better consider, with some
carefulness, the mode in which our own government is carried on, and the
occasional difference between parliamentary and private morality, before
we judge mercilessly of the Venetians in this respect. The secrecy with
which their political and criminal trials were conducted, appears to
modern eyes like a confession of sinister intentions; but may it not
also be considered, and with more probability, as the result of an
endeavor to do justice in an age of violence?--the only means by which
Law could establish its footing in the midst of feudalism. Might not
Irish juries at this day justifiably desire to conduct their proceedings
with some greater approximation to the judicial principles of the
Council of Ten? Finally, if we examine, with critical accuracy, the
evidence on which our present impressions of Venetian government are
founded, we shall discover, in the first place, that two-thirds of the
traditions of its cruelties are romantic fables: in the second, that the
crimes of which it can be proved to have been guilty, differ only from
those committed by the other Italian powers in being done less wantonly,
and under profounder conviction of their political expediency: and
lastly, that the final degradation of the Venetian power appears owing
not so much to the principles of its government, as to their being
forgotten in the pursuit of pleasure.

§ CXXIX. We have now examined the portions of the palace which contain
the principal evidence of the feeling of its builders. The capitals of
the upper arcade are exceedingly various in their character; their
design is formed, as in the lower series, of eight leaves, thrown into
volutes at the angles, and sustaining figures at the flanks; but these
figures have no inscriptions, and though evidently not without meaning,
cannot be interpreted without more knowledge than I possess of ancient
symbolism. Many of the capitals toward the Sea appear to have been
restored, and to be rude copies of the ancient ones; others, though
apparently original, have been somewhat carelessly wrought; but those of
them, which are both genuine and carefully treated, are even finer in
composition than any, except the eighteenth, in the lower arcade. The
traveller in Venice ought to ascend into the corridor, and examine with
great care the series of capitals which extend on the Piazzetta side
from the Fig-tree angle to the pilaster which carries the party wall of
the Sala del Gran Consiglio. As examples of graceful composition in
massy capitals meant for hard service and distant effect, these are
among the finest things I know in Gothic art; and that above the
fig-tree is remarkable for its sculptures of the four winds; each on the
side turned towards the wind represented. Levante, the east wind; a
figure with rays round its head, to show that it is always clear weather
when that wind blows, raising the sun out of the sea: Hotro, the south
wind; crowned, holding the sun in its right hand; Ponente, the west
wind; plunging the sun into the sea: and Tramontana, the north wind;
looking up at the north star. This capital should be carefully examined,
if for no other reason than to attach greater distinctness of idea to
the magnificent verbiage of Milton:

                "Thwart of these, as fierce,
  Forth rush the Levant and the Ponent winds,
  Eurus, and Zephyr; with their lateral noise,
  Sirocco and Libecchio."

I may also especially point out the bird feeding its three young ones on
the seventh pillar on the Piazzetta side; but there is no end to the
fantasy of these sculptures; and the traveller ought to observe them all
carefully, until he comes to the great Pilaster or complicated pier
which sustains the party wall of the Sala del Consiglio; that is to say,
the forty-seventh capital of the whole series, counting from the
pilaster of the Vine angle inclusive, as in the series of the lower
arcade. The forty-eighth, forty-ninth, and fiftieth are bad work, but
they are old; the fifty-first is the first Renaissance capital of the
upper arcade: the first new lion's head with smooth ears, cut in the
time of Foscari, is over the fiftieth capital; and that capital, with
its shaft, stands on the apex of the eighth arch from the Sea, on the
Piazzetta side, of which one spandril is masonry of the fourteenth and
the other of the fifteenth century.

§ CXXX. The reader who is not able to examine the building on the spot
may be surprised at the definiteness with which the point of junction is
ascertainable; but a glance at the lowest range of leaves in the
opposite Plate (XX.) will enable him to judge of the grounds on which
the above statement is made. Fig. 12 is a cluster of leaves from the
capital of the Four Winds; early work of the finest time. Fig. 13 is a
leaf from the great Renaissance capital at the Judgment angle, worked in
imitation of the older leafage. Fig. 14 is a leaf from one of the
Renaissance capitals of the upper arcade, which are all worked in the
natural manner of the period. It will be seen that it requires no great
ingenuity to distinguish between such design as that of fig. 12 and that
of fig. 14.

[Illustration: Plate XX.
               LEAFAGE OF THE VENETIAN CAPITALS.]

§ CXXXI. It is very possible that the reader may at first like fig. 14
the best. I shall endeavor, in the next chapter, to show why he should
not; but it must also be noted, that fig. 12 has lost, and fig. 14
gained, both largely, under the hands of the engraver. All the bluntness
and coarseness of feeling in the workmanship of fig. 14 have disappeared
on this small scale, and all the subtle refinements in the broad masses
of fig. 12 have vanished. They could not, indeed, be rendered in line
engraving, unless by the hand of Albert Durer; and I have, therefore,
abandoned, for the present, all endeavor to represent any more important
mass of the early sculpture of the Ducal Palace: but I trust that, in a
few months, casts of many portions will be within the reach of the
inhabitants of London, and that they will be able to judge for
themselves of their perfect, pure, unlabored naturalism; the freshness,
elasticity, and softness of their leafage, united with the most noble
symmetry and severe reserve,--no running to waste, no loose or
experimental lines, no extravagance, and no weakness. Their design is
always sternly architectural; there is none of the wildness or
redundance of natural vegetation, but there is all the strength,
freedom, and tossing flow of the breathing leaves, and all the
undulation of their surfaces, rippled, as they grew, by the summer
winds, as the sands are by the sea.

§ CXXXII. This early sculpture of the Ducal Palace, then, represents the
state of Gothic work in Venice at its central and proudest period, i.e.
circa 1350. After this time, all is decline,--of what nature and by what
steps, we shall inquire in the ensuing chapter; for as this
investigation, though still referring to Gothic architecture, introduces
us to the first symptoms of the Renaissance influence, I have considered
it as properly belonging to the third division of our subject.

§ CXXXIII. And as, under the shadow of these nodding leaves, we bid
farewell to the great Gothic spirit, here also we may cease our
examination of the details of the Ducal Palace; for above its upper
arcade there are only the four traceried windows,[160] and one or two of
the third order on the Rio Façade, which can be depended upon as
exhibiting the original workmanship of the older palace. I examined the
capitals of the four other windows on the façade, and of those on the
Piazzetta, one by one, with great care, and I found them all to be of
far inferior workmanship to those which retain their traceries: I
believe the stone framework of these windows must have been so cracked
and injured by the flames of the great fire, as to render it necessary
to replace it by new traceries; and that the present mouldings and
capitals are base imitations of the original ones. The traceries were at
first, however, restored in their complete form, as the holes for the
bolts which fastened the bases of their shafts are still to be seen in
the window-sills, as well as the marks of the inner mouldings on the
soffits. How much the stone facing of the façade, the parapets, and the
shafts and niches of the angles, retain of their original masonry, it is
also impossible to determine; but there is nothing in the workmanship
of any of them demanding especial notice; still less in the large
central windows on each façade, which are entirely of Renaissance
execution. All that is admirable in these portions of the building is
the disposition of their various parts and masses, which is without
doubt the same as in the original fabric, and calculated, when seen from
a distance, to produce the same impression.

§ CXXXIV. Not so in the interior. All vestige of the earlier modes of
decoration was here, of course, destroyed by the fires; and the severe
and religious work of Guariento and Bellini has been replaced by the
wildness of Tintoret and the luxury of Veronese. But in this case,
though widely different in temper, the art of the renewal was at least
intellectually as great as that which had perished: and though the halls
of the Ducal Palace are no more representative of the character of the
men by whom it was built, each of them is still a colossal casket of
priceless treasure; a treasure whose safety has till now depended on its
being despised, and which at this moment, and as I write, is piece by
piece being destroyed for ever.

§ CXXXV. The reader will forgive my quitting our more immediate subject,
in order briefly to explain the causes and the nature of this
destruction; for the matter is simply the most important of all that can
be brought under our present consideration respecting the state of art
in Europe.

The fact is, that the greater number of persons or societies throughout
Europe, whom wealth, or chance, or inheritance has put in possession of
valuable pictures, do not know a good picture from a bad one,[161] and
have no idea in what the value of a picture really consists. The
reputation of certain works is raised, partly by accident, partly by the
just testimony of artists, partly by the various and generally bad taste
of the public (no picture, that I know of, has ever, in modern times,
attained popularity, in the full sense of the term, without having some
exceedingly bad qualities mingled with its good ones), and when this
reputation has once been completely established, it little matters to
what state the picture may be reduced: few minds are so completely
devoid of imagination as to be unable to invest it with the beauties
which they have heard attributed to it.

§ CXXXVI. This being so, the pictures that are most valued are for the
most part those by masters of established renown, which are highly or
neatly finished, and of a size small enough to admit of their being
placed in galleries or saloons, so as to be made subjects of
ostentation, and to be easily seen by a crowd. For the support of the
fame and value of such pictures, little more is necessary than that they
should be kept bright, partly by cleaning, which is incipient
destruction, and partly by what is called "restoring," that is, painting
over, which is of course total destruction. Nearly all the gallery
pictures in modern Europe have been more or less destroyed by one or
other of these operations, generally exactly in proportion to the
estimation in which they are held; and as, originally, the smaller and
more highly finished works of any great master are usually his worst,
the contents of many of our most celebrated galleries are by this time,
in reality, of very small value indeed.

§ CXXXVII. On the other hand, the most precious works of any noble
painter are usually those which have been done quickly, and in the heat
of the first thought, on a large scale, for places where there was
little likelihood of their being well seen, or for patrons from whom
there was little prospect of rich remuneration. In general, the best
things are done in this way, or else in the enthusiasm and pride of
accomplishing some great purpose, such as painting a cathedral or a
camposanto from one end to the other, especially when the time has been
short, and circumstances disadvantageous.

§ CXXXVIII. Works thus executed are of course despised, on account of
their quantity, as well as their frequent slightness, in the places
where they exist; and they are too large to be portable, and too vast
and comprehensive to be read on the spot, in the hasty temper of the
present age. They are, therefore, almost universally neglected,
whitewashed by custodes, shot at by soldiers, suffered to drop from the
walls piecemeal in powder and rags by society in general; but, which is
an advantage more than counterbalancing all this evil, they are not
often "restored." What is left of them, however fragmentary, however
ruinous, however obscured and defiled, is almost always _the real
thing_; there are no fresh readings: and therefore the greatest
treasures of art which Europe at this moment possesses are pieces of old
plaster on ruinous brick walls, where the lizards burrow and bask, and
which few other living creatures ever approach; and torn sheets of dim
canvas, in waste corners of churches; and mildewed stains, in the shape
of human figures, on the walls of dark chambers, which now and then an
exploring traveller causes to be unlocked by their tottering custode,
looks hastily round, and retreats from in a weary satisfaction at his
accomplished duty.

§ CXXXIX. Many of the pictures on the ceilings and walls of the Ducal
Palace, by Paul Veronese and Tintoret, have been more or less reduced,
by neglect, to this condition. Unfortunately they are not altogether
without reputation, and their state has drawn the attention of the
Venetian authorities and academicians. It constantly happens, that
public bodies who will not pay five pounds to preserve a picture, will
pay fifty to repaint it:[162] and when I was at Venice in 1846, there
were two remedial operations carrying on, at one and the same time, in
the two buildings which contain the pictures of greatest value in the
city (as pieces of color, of greatest value in the world), curiously
illustrative of this peculiarity in human nature. Buckets were set on
the floor of the Scuola di San Rocco, in every shower, to catch the rain
which came through the pictures of Tintoret on the ceiling; while in the
Ducal Palace, those of Paul Veronese were themselves laid on the floor
to be repainted; and I was myself present at the re-illumination of the
breast of a white horse, with a brush, at the end of a stick five feet
long, luxuriously dipped in a common house-painter's vessel of paint.

This was, of course, a large picture. The process has already been
continued in an equally destructive, though somewhat more delicate
manner, over the whole of the humbler canvases on the ceiling of the
Sala del Gran Consiglio; and I heard it threatened when I was last in
Venice (1851-2) to the "Paradise" at its extremity, which is yet in
tolerable condition,--the largest work of Tintoret, and the most
wonderful piece of pure, manly, and masterly oil-painting in the world.

§ CXL. I leave these facts to the consideration of the European patrons
of art. Twenty years hence they will be acknowledged and regretted; at
present, I am well aware, that it is of little use to bring them
forward, except only to explain the present impossibility of stating
what pictures _are_, and what _were_, in the interior of the Ducal
Palace. I can only say, that in the winter of 1851, the "Paradise" of
Tintoret was still comparatively uninjured, and that the Camera di
Collegio, and its antechamber, and the Sala de' Pregadi were full of
pictures by Veronese and Tintoret, that made their walls as precious as
so many kingdoms; so precious indeed, and so full of majesty, that
sometimes when walking at evening on the Lido, whence the great chain of
the Alps, crested with silver clouds, might be seen rising above the
front of the Ducal Palace, I used to feel as much awe in gazing on the
building as on the hills, and could believe that God had done a greater
work in breathing into the narrowness of dust the mighty spirits by
whom its haughty walls had been raised, and its burning legends written,
than in lifting the rocks of granite higher than the clouds of heaven,
and veiling them with their various mantle of purple flower and shadowy
pine.


FOOTNOTES

  [99] The reader will find it convenient to note the following
    editions of the printed books which have been principally consulted
    in the following inquiry. The numbers of the manuscripts referred to
    in the Marcian Library are given with the quotations.

      Sansovino.   Venetia Descritta. 4to, Venice, 1663.
      Sansovino.   Lettera intorno al Palazzo Ducale. 8vo, Venice, 1829.
      Temanza.   Antica Pianta di Venezia, with text. Venice, 1780.
      Cadorin.   Pareri di XV. Architetti. 8vo, Venice, 1838.
      Filiasi.   Memorie storiche. 8vo, Padua, 1811.
      Bettio.   Lettera discorsiva del Palazzo Ducale. 8vo, Venice, 1837.
      Selvatico.   Architettura di Venezia. 8vo, Venice, 1847.

  [100] The year commonly given is 810, as in the Savina Chronicle
    (Cod. Marcianus), p. 13. "Del 810 fece principiar el pallazzo Ducal
    nel luogo ditto Bruolo in confin di S. Moisè, et fece riedificar la
    isola di Eraclia." The Sagornin Chronicle gives 804; and Filiasi,
    vol. vi. chap. 1, corrects this date to 813.

  [101] "Ampliò la città, fornilla di casamenti, _e per il culto d'
    Iddio e l' amministrazione della giustizia_ eresse la cappella di S.
    Marco, e il palazzo di sua residenza."--Pareri, p. 120. Observe,
    that piety towards God, and justice towards man, have been at least
    the nominal purposes of every act and institution of ancient Venice.
    Compare also Temanza, p. 24. "Quello che abbiamo di certo si è che
    il suddetto Agnello lo incominciò da fondamenti, e cost pure la
    cappella ducale di S. Marco."

  [102] What I call the Sea, was called "the Grand Canal" by the
    Venetians, as well as the great water street of the city; but I
    prefer calling it "the Sea," in order to distinguish between that
    street and the broad water in front of the Ducal Palace, which,
    interrupted only by the island of San Giorgio, stretches for many
    miles to the south, and for more than two to the boundary of the
    Lido. It was the deeper channel, just in front of the Ducal Palace,
    continuing the line of the great water street itself which the
    Venetians spoke of as "the Grand Canal." The words of Sansovino are:
    "Fu cominciato dove si vede, vicino al ponte della paglia, et
    rispondente sul canal grande." Filiasi says simply: "The palace was
    built where it now is." "Il palazio fu fatto dove ora pure
    esiste."--Vol. iii. chap. 27. The Savina Chronicle, already quoted,
    says: "In the place called the Bruolo (or Broglio), that is to say,
    on the Piazzetta."

  [103] "Omni decoritate illius perlustrata."--Sagornino, quoted by
    Cadorin and Temanza.

  [104] There is an interesting account of this revolt in Monaci, p.
    68. Some historians speak of the palace as having been destroyed
    entirely; but, that it did not even need important restorations,
    appears from Sagornino's expression, quoted by Cadorin and Temanza.
    Speaking of the Doge Participazio, he says: "Qui Palatii hucusque
    manentis fuerit fabricator." The reparations of the palace are
    usually attributed to the successor of Candiano, Pietro Orseolo I.;
    but the legend, under the picture of that Doge in the Council
    Chamber, speaks only of his rebuilding St. Mark's, and "performing
    many miracles." His whole mind seems to have been occupied with
    ecclesiastical affairs; and his piety was finally manifested in a
    way somewhat startling to the state, by his absconding with a French
    priest to St. Michael's, in Gascony, and there becoming a monk. What
    repairs, therefore, were necessary to the Ducal Palace, were left to
    be undertaken by his son, Orseolo II., above named.

  [105] "Quam non modo marmoreo, verum aureo compsit
    ornamento."--_Temanza_, p. 25.

  [106] "L'anno 1106, uscito fuoco d'una casa privata, arse parte del
    palazzo."--_Sansovino_. Of the beneficial effect of these fires,
    vide Cadorin, p. 121, 123.

  [107] "Urbis situm, ædificiorum decorem, et regiminis æquitatem
    multipliciter commendavit."--_Cronaca Dandolo_, quoted by Cadorin.

  [108] "Non solamente rinovò il palazzo, ma lo aggrandì per ogni
    verso."--_Sansovino_. Zanotto quotes the Altinat Chronicle for
    account of these repairs.

  [109] "El palazzo che anco di mezzo se vede vecchio, per M.
    Sebastian Ziani fu fatto compir, come el se vede."--_Chronicle of
    Pietro Dolfino_, Cod. Ven. p. 47. This Chronicle is spoken of by
    Sansovino as "molto particolare e distinta."--_Sansovino, Venezia
    descritta_, p. 593.--It terminates in the year 1422.

  [110] See Vol. I. Appendix 3.

  [111] Vide Sansovino's enumeration of those who flourished in the
    reign of Gradenigo, p. 564.

  [112] Sansovino, 324, 1.

  [113] "1301 fu presa parte di fare una sala grande per la riduzione
    del gran consiglio, e fu fatta quella che ora si chiama dello
    Scrutinio."--_Cronaca Sivos_, quoted by Cadorin. There is another
    most interesting entry in the Chronicle of Magno, relating to this
    event; but the passage is so ill written, that I am not sure if I
    have deciphered it correctly:--"Del 1301 fu preso de fabrichar la
    sala fo ruina e fu fata (fatta) quella se adoperava a far el pregadi
    e fu adopera per far el Gran Consegio fin 1423, che fu anni 122."
    This last sentence, which is of great importance, is luckily
    unmistakable:--"The room was used for the meetings of the Great
    Council until 1423, that is to say, for 122 years."--_Cod. Ven_.
    tom. i. p. 126. The Chronicle extends from 1253 to 1454.

  [114] "Vi era appresso la Cancellaria, e la Gheba o Gabbia, chiamata
    poi Torresella."--P. 324. A small square tower is seen above the
    Vine angle in the view of Venice dated 1500, and attributed to
    Albert Durer. It appears about 25 feet square, and is very probably
    the Torresella in question.

  [115] Vide Bettio, Lettera, p. 23.

  [116] Bettio, Lettera, p. 20. "Those who wrote without having seen
    them described them as covered with lead; and those who have seen
    them know that, between their flat timber roofs and the sloping
    leaden roof of the palace, the interval is five metres where it is
    least, and nine where it is greatest."

  [117] "Questo Dose anche fese far la porta granda che se al intrar
    del Pallazzo, in su la qual vi e la sua statua che sta in
    zenocchioni con lo confalon in man, davanti li pie de lo Lion S.
    Marco,"--_Savin Chronicle_, Cod. Ven. p. 120.

  [118] These documents I have not examined myself, being satisfied of
    the accuracy of Cadorin, from whom I take the passages quoted.

  [119] "Libras tres, soldos 15 grossorum."--_Cadorin_, 189, 1.

  [120] Cod. Ven., No. CXLI. p. 365.

  [121] Sansovino is more explicit than usual in his reference to this
    decree: "For it having appeared that the place (the first Council
    Chamber) was not capacious enough, the saloon on the Grand Canal was
    ordered." "Per cio parendo che il luogo non fosse capace, fu
    ordinata la Sala sul Canal Grande."--P. 324.

  [122] Cadorin, 185, 2. The decree of 1342 is falsely given as of 1345
    by the Sivos Chronicle, and by Magno; while Sanuto gives the decree
    to its right year, 1342, but speaks of the Council Chamber as only
    begun in 1345.

  [123] Calendario. See Appendix 1, Vol. III.

  [124] "Il primo che vi colorisse fu Guariento, il quale l' anno 1365
    vi fece il Paradiso in testa della sala."--_Sansovino._

  [125] "L' an poi 1400 vi fece il cielo compartita a quadretti d'oro,
    ripieni di stelle, ch' era la insegna del Doge Steno."--_Sansovino_,
    lib. VIII.

  [126] "In questi tempi si messe in oro il cielo della sala del Gran
    Consiglio et si fece il pergolo del finestra grande chi guarda sul
    canale, adornato l'uno e l'altro di stelle, ch' erano l'insegne del
    Doge."--_Sansovino_, lib. XIII. Compare also Pareri, p. 129.

  [127] Baseggio (Pareri, p. 127) is called the Proto of the _New_
    Palace. Farther notes will be found in Appendix 1, Vol. III.

  [128] Cronaca Sanudo, No. CXXV. in the Marcian Library, p. 568.

  [129] Tomaso Mocenigo.

    [130] Vide notes in Appendix.

  [131] On the 4th of April, 1423, according to the copy of the
    Zancarol Chronicle in the Marcian Library, but previously, according
    to the Caroldo Chronicle, which makes Foscari enter the Senate as
    Doge on the 3rd of April.

  [132] "Nella quale (the Sala del Gran Consiglio) non si fece Gran
    Consiglio salvo nell' anno 1423, alli 3 April, et fu il primo giorno
    che il Duce Foscari venisse in Gran Consiglio dopo la sua
    creatione."--Copy in Marcian Library, p. 365.

  [133] "E a di 23 April (1423, by the context) sequente fo fatto Gran
    Conseio in la salla nuovo dovi avanti non esta più fatto Gran
    Conseio si che el primo Gran Conseio dopo la sua (Foscari's)
    creation, fo fatto in la salla nuova, nel qual conseio fu el
    Marchese di Mantoa," &c., p. 426.

  [134] Compare Appendix 1, Vol. III.

  [135] "Tutte queste fatture si compirono sotto il dogado del
    Foscari, nel 1441."--_Pareri_, p. 131.

  [136] This identification has been accomplished, and I think
    conclusively, by my friend Mr. Rawdon Brown, who has devoted all the
    leisure which, during the last twenty years, his manifold offices of
    kindness to almost every English visitant of Venice have left him,
    in discovering and translating the passages of the Venetian records
    which bear upon English history and literature. I shall have
    occasion to take advantage hereafter of a portion of his labors,
    which I trust will shortly be made public.

  [137] See the last chapter of the third volume.

  [138] "IN XRI--NOIE AMEN ANNINCARNATIONIS MCCCXVII. INESETBR." "In the
    name of Christ, Amen, in the year of the incarnation, 1317, in the
    month of September," &c.

  [139] "Oh, venerable Raphael, make thou the gulf calm, we beseech
    thee." The peculiar office of the angel Raphael is, in general,
    according to tradition, the restraining the harmful influences of
    evil spirits. Sir Charles Eastlake told me, that sometimes in this
    office he is represented bearing the gall of the fish caught by
    Tobit; and reminded me of the peculiar superstitions of the
    Venetians respecting the raising of storms by fiends, as embodied in
    the well-known tale of the Fisherman and St. Mark's ring.

  [140] In the original, the succession of words is evidently suggested
    partly by similarity of sound; and the sentence is made weighty by
    an alliteration which is quite lost in our translation; but the very
    allowance of influence to these minor considerations is a proof how
    little any metaphysical order or system was considered necessary in
    the statement.

  [141] It occurs in a prayer for the influence of the Holy Spirit,
    "That He may keep my soul, and direct my way; compose my bearing,
    and form my thoughts in holiness; may He govern my body, and protect
    my mind; strengthen me in action, approve my vows, and accomplish my
    desires; cause me to lead an honest and honorable life, and give me
    good hope, charity and chastity, humility and patience: may He
    govern the Five Senses of my body," &c. The following prayer is also
    very characteristic of this period. It opens with a beautiful
    address to Christ upon the cross; then proceeds thus: "Grant to us,
    O Lord, we beseech thee, this day and ever, the use of penitence, of
    abstinence, of humility, and chastity; and grant to us light,
    judgment, understanding, and true knowledge, even to the end." One
    thing I note in comparing old prayers with modern ones, that however
    quaint, or however erring, they are always tenfold more condensed,
    comprehensive, and to their purpose, whatever that may be. There is
    no dilution in them, no vain or monotonous phraseology. They ask for
    what is desired plainly and earnestly, and never could be shortened
    by a syllable. The following series of ejaculations are deep in
    spirituality, and curiously to our present purpose in the
    philological quaintness of being built upon prepositions:--

     "Domine Jesu Christe, sancta cruce tua apud me sis, ut me defendas.
      Domine Jesu Christe, pro veneranda cruce tua post me sis, ut me
    gubernes.
      Domine Jesu Christe, pro benedicta cruce tua intra me sis, ut me
    reficeas.
      Domine Jesu Christe, pro benedicta cruce tua circa me sis, ut me
    conserves.
      Domine Jesu Christe, pro gloriosa cruce tua ante me sis, ut me
    deduces.
      Domine Jesu Christe, pro laudanda cruce tua super me sis, ut
    benedicas.
      Domine Jesu Christe, pro magnifica cruce tua in me sis, ut me ad
    regnum tuum perducas, per D. N. J. C. Amen."

  [142] This arrangement of the cardinal virtues is said to have been
    first made by Archytas. See D'Ancarville's illustration of the three
    figures of Prudence, Fortitude, and Charity, in Selvatico's
    "Cappellina degli Scrovegni," Padua, 1836.

  [143] Or Penitence: but I rather think this is understood only in
    Compunctio cordis.

  [144] The transformation of a symbol into a reality, observe, as in
    transubstantiation, is as much an abandonment of symbolism as the
    forgetfulness of symbolic meaning altogether.

  [145] On the window of New College, Oxford.

  [146] Uniting the three ideas expressed by the Greek philosophers
    under the terms [Greek: phronêei], [Greek: sophia], and [Greek:
    epistêmê]; and part of the idea of [Greek: sôphrosonê].

  [147] Isa. lxiv. 5.

  [148] I can hardly think it necessary to point out to the reader the
    association between sacred cheerfulness and solemn thought, or to
    explain any appearance of contradiction between passages in which
    (as above in Chap. V.) I have had to oppose sacred pensiveness to
    unholy mirth, and those in which I have to oppose sacred
    cheerfulness to unholy sorrow.

  [149] "Desse," seat

  [150] Usually called Charity: but this virtue in its full sense is
    one of the attendant spirits by the Throne; the Kindness here meant
    is Charity with a special object; or Friendship and Kindness, as
    opposed to Envy, which has always, in like manner, a special object.
    Hence the love of Orestes and Pylades is given as an instance of the
    virtue of Friendship; and the Virgin's, "They have no wine," at
    Cana, of general kindness and sympathy with others' pleasure.

  [151] The "Faerie Queen," like Dante's "Paradise," is only half
    estimated, because few persons take the pains to think out its
    meaning. I have put a brief analysis of the first book in Appendix
    2, Vol. III.; which may perhaps induce the reader to follow out the
    subject for himself. No time devoted to profane literature will be
    better rewarded than that spent _earnestly_ on Spenser.

  [152] Inscribed, I believe, Pietas, meaning general reverence and
    godly fear.

  [153] I have given one of these capitals carefully already in my folio
    work, and hope to give most of the others in due time. It was of no
    use to draw them here, as the scale would have been too small to
    allow me to show the expression of the figures.

  [154] Lord Lindsay, vol. ii. p. 226.

  [155] Lord Lindsay, vol. ii. letter IV.

  [156] Selvatico states that these are intended to be representative
    of eight nations, Latins, Tartars, Turks, Hungarians, Greeks, Goths,
    Egyptians, and Persians. Either the inscriptions are now defaced or
    I have carelessly omitted to note them.

  [157] The comma in these inscriptions stands for a small cuneiform
    mark, I believe of contraction, and the small ^s for a zigzag mark
    of the same kind. The dots or periods are similarly marked, on the
    stone.

  [158] Can they have mistaken the ISIPIONE of the fifth side for the
    word Isidore?

  [159] Compare the speech of the Doge Mocenigo, above,--"first justice,
    and _then_ the interests of the state:" and see Vol. III. Chap. II.
    § LIX.

  [160] Some further details respecting these portions, as well as
    some necessary confirmations of my statements of dates, are,
    however, given in Appendix 1, Vol. III. I feared wearying the
    general reader by introducing them into the text.

  [161] Many persons, capable of quickly sympathizing with any
    excellence, when once pointed out to them, easily deceive themselves
    into the supposition that they are judges of art. There is only one
    real test of such power of judgment. Can they, at a glance, discover
    a good picture obscured by the filth, and confused among the
    rubbish, of the pawnbroker's or dealer's garret?

  [162] This is easily explained. There are, of course, in every place
    and at all periods, bad painters who conscientiously believe that
    they can improve every picture they touch; and these men are
    generally, in their presumption, the most influential over the
    innocence, whether of monarchs or municipalities. The carpenter and
    slater have little influence in recommending the repairs of the
    roof; but the bad painter has great influence, as well as interest,
    in recommending those of the picture.




APPENDIX.

1. THE GONDOLIER'S CRY.


Most persons are now well acquainted with the general aspect of the
Venetian gondola, but few have taken the pains to understand the cries
of warning uttered by its boatmen, although those cries are peculiarly
characteristic, and very impressive to a stranger, and have been even
very sweetly introduced in poetry by Mr. Monckton Milnes. It may perhaps
be interesting to the traveller in Venice to know the general method of
management of the boat to which he owes so many happy hours.

A gondola is in general rowed only by one man, _standing_ at the stern;
those of the upper classes having two or more boatmen, for greater speed
and magnificence. In order to raise the oar sufficiently, it rests, not
on the side of the boat, but on a piece of crooked timber like the
branch of a tree, rising about a foot from the boat's side, and called a
"fórcola." The fórcola is of different forms, according to the size and
uses of the boat, and it is always somewhat complicated in its parts and
curvature, allowing the oar various kinds of rests and catches on both
its sides, but perfectly free play in all cases; as the management of
the boat depends on the gondolier's being able in an instant to place
his oar in any position. The fórcola is set on the right-hand side of
the boat, some six feet from the stern: the gondolier stands on a little
flat platform or deck behind it, and throws nearly the entire weight of
his body upon the forward stroke. The effect of this stroke would be
naturally to turn the boat's head round to the left, as well as to send
it forward; but this tendency is corrected by keeping the blade of the
oar under the water on the return stroke, and raising it gradually, as
a full spoon is raised out of any liquid, so that the blade emerges from
the water only an instant before it again plunges. A _downward_ and
lateral pressure upon the fórcola is thus obtained, which entirely
counteracts the tendency given by the forward stroke; and the effort,
after a little practice, becomes hardly conscious, though, as it adds
some labor to the back stroke, rowing a gondola at speed is hard and
breathless work, though it appears easy and graceful to the looker-on.

If then the gondola is to be turned to the left, the forward impulse is
given without the return stroke; if it is to be turned to the right, the
plunged oar is brought forcibly up to the surface; in either case a
single strong stroke being enough to turn the light and flat-bottomed
boat. But as it has no keel, when the turn is made sharply, as out of
one canal into another very narrow one, the impetus of the boat in its
former direction gives it an enormous lee-way, and it drifts laterally
up against the wall of the canal, and that so forcibly, that if it has
turned at speed, no gondolier can arrest the motion merely by strength
or rapidity of stroke of oar; but it is checked by a strong thrust of
the foot against the wall itself, the head of the boat being of course
turned for the moment almost completely round to the opposite wall, and
greater exertion made to give it, as quickly as possible, impulse in the
new direction.

The boat being thus guided, the cry "Premi" is the order from one
gondolier to another that he should "press" or thrust forward his oar,
without the back stroke, so as to send the boat's head round _to the
left_; and the cry "Stali" is the order that he should give the return
or upward stroke which sends the boat's head round to the _right_.
Hence, if two gondoliers meet under any circumstances which render it a
matter of question on which side they should pass each other, the
gondolier who has at the moment the least power over his boat, cries to
the other, "Premi," if he wishes the boats to pass with their right-hand
sides to each other, and "Stali," if with their left. Now, in turning a
corner, there is of course risk of collision between boats coming from
opposite sides, and warning is always clearly and loudly given on
approaching an angle of the canals. It is of course presumed that the
boat which gives the warning will be nearer the turn than the one which
receives and answers it; and therefore will not have so much time to
check itself or alter its course. Hence the advantage of the turn, that
is, the outside, which allows the fullest swing and greatest room for
lee-way, is always yielded to the boat which gives warning. Therefore,
if the warning boat is going to turn to the right, as it is to have the
outside position, it will keep its own right-hand side to the boat which
it meets, and the cry of warning is therefore "Premi," twice given;
first as soon as it can be heard round the angle, prolonged and loud,
with the accent on the e, and another strongly accented e added, a kind
of question, "Prémi-é," followed at the instant of turning, with "Ah
Premí," with the accent sharp on the final i. If, on the other hand, the
warning boat is going to turn to the left, it will pass with its
left-hand side to the one it meets; and the warning cry is, "Stáli-é, Ah
Stalí." Hence the confused idea in the mind of the traveller that Stali
means "to the left," and "Premi" to the right; while they mean, in
reality, the direct reverse; the Stali, for instance, being the order to
the unseen gondolier who may be behind the corner, coming from the
left-hand side, that he should hold as much as possible _to his own
right_; this being the only safe order for him, whether he is going to
turn the corner himself, or to go straight on; for as the warning
gondola will always swing right across the canal in turning, a collision
with it is only to be avoided by keeping well within it, and close up to
the corner which it turns.

There are several other cries necessary in the management of the
gondola, but less frequently, so that the reader will hardly care for
their interpretation; except only the "sciar," which is the order to the
opposite gondolier to stop the boat as suddenly as possible by slipping
his oar in front of the fórcola. The _cry_ is never heard except when
the boatmen have got into some unexpected position, involving a risk of
collision; but the action is seen constantly, when the gondola is rowed
by two or more men (for if performed by the single gondolier it only
swings the boat's head sharp round to the right), in bringing up at a
landing-place, especially when there is any intent of display, the boat
being first urged to its full speed and then stopped with as much foam
about the oar-blades as possible, the effect being much like that of
stopping a horse at speed by pulling him on his haunches.


2. OUR LADY OF SALVATION.

"Santa Maria della Salute," Our Lady of Health, or of Safety, would be a
more literal translation, yet not perhaps fully expressing the force of
the Italian word in this case. The church was built between 1630 and
1680, in acknowledgment of the cessation of the plague;--of course to
the Virgin, to whom the modern Italian has recourse in all his principal
distresses, and who receives his gratitude for all principal
deliverances.

The hasty traveller is usually enthusiastic in his admiration of this
building; but there is a notable lesson to be derived from it, which is
not often read. On the opposite side of the broad canal of the Giudecca
is a small church, celebrated among Renaissance architects as of
Palladian design, but which would hardly attract the notice of the
general observer, unless on account of the pictures by John Bellini
which it contains, in order to see which the traveller may perhaps
remember having been taken across the Giudecca to the Church of the
"Redentore." But he ought carefully to compare these two buildings with
each other, the one built "to the Virgin," the other "to the Redeemer"
(also a votive offering after the cessation of the plague of 1576); the
one, the most conspicuous church in Venice, its dome, the principal one
by which she is first discerned, rising out of the distant sea: the
other, small and contemptible, on a suburban island, and only becoming
an object of interest because it contains three small pictures! For in
the relative magnitude and conspicuousness of these two buildings, we
have an accurate index of the relative importance of the ideas of the
Madonna and of Christ, in the modern Italian mind.

Some further account of this church is given in the final Index to the
Venetian buildings at the close of the third Volume.


3. TIDES OF VENICE, AND MEASURES AT TORCELLO.

The lowest and highest tides take place in Venice at different periods,
the lowest during the winter, the highest in the summer and autumn.
During the period of the highest tides, the city is exceedingly
beautiful, especially if, as is not unfrequently the case, the water
rises high enough partially to flood St. Mark's Place. Nothing can be
more lovely or fantastic than the scene, when the Campanile and the
Golden Church are reflected in the calm water, and the lighter gondolas
floating under the very porches of the façade. On the other hand, a
winter residence in Venice is rendered peculiarly disagreeable by the
low tides, which sometimes leave the smaller canals entirely dry, and
large banks of mud beneath the houses, along the borders of even the
Grand Canal. The difference between the levels of the highest and lowest
tides I saw in Venice was 6 ft. 3 in. The average fall rise is from two
to three feet.

       *       *       *       *       *

The measures of Torcello were intended for Appendix 4; but having by a
misprint referred the reader to Appendix 3, I give them here. The entire
breadth of the church within the walls is 70 feet; of which the square
bases of the pillars, 3 feet on each side, occupy 6 feet; and the nave,
from base to base, measures 31 ft. 1 in.; the aisles from base to wall,
16 feet odd inches, not accurately ascertainable on account of the
modern wainscot fittings. The intervals between the bases of the pillars
are 8 feet each, increasing towards the altar to 8 ft. 3 in., in order
to allow for a corresponding diminution in the diameter of the bases
from 3 ft. to 2 ft. 11 in. or 2 ft. 10. in. This subtle diminution of
the bases is in order to prevent the eye from feeling the greater
narrowness of the shafts in that part of the nave, their average
circumference being 6 ft. 10 in.; and one, the second on the north side,
reaching 7 feet, while those at the upper end of the nave vary from 6
ft. 8 in. to 6 ft. 4 in. It is probable that this diminution in the more
distant pillars adds slightly to the perspective effect of length in the
body of the church, as it is seen from the great entrance: but whether
this was the intention or not, the delicate adaptation of this
diminished base to the diminished shaft is a piece of fastidiousness in
proportion which I rejoice in having detected; and this the more,
because the rude contours of the bases themselves would little induce
the spectator to anticipate any such refinement.


4. DATE OF THE DUOMO OF TORCELLO.

The first flight to the lagoons for shelter was caused by the invasion
of Attila in the fifth century, so that in endeavoring to throw back the
thought of the reader to the former solitude of the islands, I spoke of
them as they must have appeared "1300 years ago." Altinum, however, was
not finally destroyed till the Lombard invasion in 641, when the
episcopal seat was removed to Torcello, and the inhabitants of the
mainland city, giving up all hope of returning to their former homes,
built their Duomo there. It is a disputed point among Venetian
antiquarians, whether the present church be that which was built in the
seventh century, partially restored in 1008, or whether the words of
Sagornino, "ecclesiam jam vetustate consumptam recreare," justify them
in assuming an entire rebuilding of the fabric. I quite agree with the
Marchese Selvatico, in believing the present church to be the earlier
building, variously strengthened, refitted, and modified by subsequent
care; but, in all its main features, preserving its original aspect,
except, perhaps, in the case of the pulpit and chancel screen, which, if
the Chevalier Bunsen's conclusions respecting early pulpits in the Roman
basilicas be correct (see the next article of this Appendix), may
possibly have been placed in their present position in the tenth
century, and the fragmentary character of the workmanship of the latter,
noticed in §§ X. and XI., would in that case have been the result of
innovation, rather than of haste. The question, however, whether they
are of the seventh or eleventh century, does not in the least affect our
conclusions, drawn from the design of these portions of the church,
respecting pulpits in general.


5. MODERN PULPITS.

There is no character of an ordinary modern English church which appears
to me more to be regretted than the peculiar pompousness of the
furniture of the pulpits, contrasted, as it generally is, with great
meagreness and absence of color in the other portions of the church; a
pompousness, besides, altogether without grace or meaning, and dependent
merely on certain applications of upholstery; which, curiously enough,
are always in worse taste than even those of our drawing-rooms. Nor do
I understand how our congregations can endure the aspect of the wooden
sounding-board attached only by one point of its circumference to an
upright pillar behind the preacher; and looking as if the weight of its
enormous leverage must infallibly, before the sermon is concluded, tear
it from its support, and bring it down upon the preacher's head. These
errors in taste and feeling will however, I believe, be gradually
amended as more Gothic churches are built; but the question of the
position of the pulpit presents a more disputable ground of discussion.
I can perfectly sympathise with the feeling of those who wish the
eastern extremity of the church to form a kind of holy place for the
communion table; nor have I often received a more painful impression
than on seeing the preacher at the Scotch church in George Street,
Portman Square, taking possession of a perfect apse; and occupying
therein, during the course of the service, very nearly the same position
which the figure of Christ does in that of the Cathedral of Pisa. But I
nevertheless believe that the Scotch congregation are perfectly right,
and have restored the real arrangement of the primitive churches. The
Chevalier Bunsen informed me very lately, that, in all the early
basilicas he has examined, the lateral pulpits are of more recent date
than the rest of the building; that he knows of none placed in the
position which they now occupy, both in the basilicas and Gothic
cathedrals, before the ninth century; and that there can be no doubt
that the bishop always preached or exhorted, in the primitive times,
from his throne in the centre of the apse, the altar being always set at
the centre of the church, in the crossing of the transepts. His
Excellency found by experiment in Santa Maria Maggiore, the largest of
the Roman basilicas, that the voice could be heard more plainly from the
centre of the apse than from any other spot in the whole church; and, if
this be so, it will be another very important reason for the adoption of
the Romanesque (or Norman) architecture in our churches, rather than of
the Gothic. The reader will find some farther notice of this question in
the concluding chapter of the third volume.

Before leaving this subject, however, I must be permitted to say one
word to those members of the Scotch Church who are severe in their
requirement of the nominal or apparent extemporization of all addresses
delivered from the pulpit. Whether they do right in giving those among
their ministers who _cannot_ preach extempore, the additional and
useless labor of committing their sermons to memory, may be a disputed
question; but it can hardly be so, that the now not unfrequent habit of
making a desk of the Bible, and reading the sermon stealthily, by
slipping the sheets of it between the sacred leaves, so that the
preacher consults his own notes _on pretence_ of consulting the
Scriptures, is a very unseemly consequence of their over-strictness.


6. APSE OF MURANO.

The following passage succeeded in the original text to § XV. of Chap.
III. Finding it not likely to interest the general reader, I have placed
it here, as it contains matter of some interest to architects.

   "On this plinth, thus carefully studied in relations of magnitude,
   the shafts are set at the angles, as close to each other as possible,
   as seen in the ground-plan. These shafts are founded on pure Roman
   tradition; their bases have no spurs, and the shaft itself is tapered
   in a bold curve, according to the classical model. But, in the
   adjustment of the bases to each other, we have a most curious
   instance of the first beginning of the Gothic principle of
   aggregation of shafts. They have a singularly archaic and simple
   profile, composed of a single cavetto and roll, which are circular,
   on a square plinth. Now when these bases are brought close to each
   other at the angles of the apse, their natural position would be as
   in fig. 3, Plate I., leaving an awkward fissure between the two
   square plinths. This offended the architect's eye; so he cut part of
   each of the bases away, and fitted them close to each other, as in
   fig. 5, Plate I., which is their actual position. As before this
   piece of rough harmonization the circular mouldings reached the sides
   of the squares, they were necessarily cut partly away in the course
   of the adjustment, and run into each other as in the figure, so as to
   give us one of the first Venetian instances of the continuous Gothic
   base.

   "The shafts measure on the average 2 ft. 8½ in. in circumference,
   at the base, tapering so much that under the lowest fillet of their
   necks they measure only 2 feet round, though their height is only 5
   ft. 6 in., losing thus eight inches of girth in five feet and a half
   of height. They are delicately curved all the way up; and are 2½
   in. apart from each other where they are nearest, and about 5 in. at
   the necks of their capitals."


7. EARLY VENETIAN DRESS.

Sansovino's account of the changes in the dress of the Venetians is
brief, masterly, and full of interest; one or two passages are deserving
of careful notice, especially the introductory sentence. "For the
Venetians from their first origin, having made it their aim to be
peaceful and religious, and to keep on an equality with one another,
that equality might induce stability and concord (as disparity produces
confusion and ruin), made their dress a matter of conscience, ...; and
our ancestors, observant lovers of religion, upon which all their acts
were founded, and desiring that their young men should direct themselves
to virtue, the true soul of all human action, _and above all to peace_,
invented a dress conformable to their gravity, such, that in clothing
themselves with it, they might clothe themselves also with modesty and
honor. And because their mind was bent upon giving no offence to any
one, and living quietly as far as might be permitted them, it seemed
good to them to show to every one, even by external signs, this their
endeavor, by wearing a long dress, which was in no wise convenient for
persons of a quick temperament, or of eager and fierce spirits."

Respecting the color of the women's dress, it is noticeable that blue is
called "Venetian color" by Cassiodorus, translated "turchino" by
Filiasi, vol. v. chap. iv. It was a very pale blue, as the place in
which the word occurs is the description by Cassiodorus of the darkness
which came over the sun's disk at the time of the Belisarian wars and
desolation of the Gothic kingdom.


8. INSCRIPTIONS AT MURANO.

There are two other inscriptions on the border of the concha; but these,
being written on the soffit of the face arch, which, as before noticed,
is supported by the last two shafts of the chancel, could not be read by
the congregation, and only with difficulty by those immediately
underneath them. One of them is in black, the other in red letters. The
first:

  "Mutat quod sumsit, quod sollat crimina tandit
   Et quod sumpsit, vultus vestisq. refulsit."

The second:

  "Discipuli testes, prophete certa videntes
   Et cernunt purum, sibi credunt ese futurum."

I have found no notice of any of these inscriptions in any Italian
account of the church of Murano, and have seldom seen even Monkish Latin
less intelligible. There is no mistake in the letters, which are all
large and clear; but wrong letters may have been introduced by ignorant
restorers, as has often happened in St. Mark's.


9. SHAFTS OF ST. MARK.

The principal pillars which carry the nave and transepts, fourteen in
number, are of white alabaster veined with grey and amber; each of a
single block, 15 ft. high, and 6 ft. 2 in. round at the base. I in vain
endeavored to ascertain their probable value. Every sculptor whom I
questioned on this subject told me there were no such pieces of
alabaster in the market, and that they were to be considered as without
price.

On the façade of the church alone are two great ranges of shafts,
seventy-two in the lower range, and seventy-nine in the upper; all of
porphyry, alabaster, and verd-antique or fine marble; the lower about 9
ft., the upper about 7 ft. high, and of various circumferences, from 4
ft. 6 in. to 2 ft. round.

There are now so many published engravings, and, far better than
engravings, calotypes, of this façade, that I may point out one or two
circumstances for the reader's consideration without giving any plate of
it here. And first, we ought to note the relations of the shafts and
wall, the latter being first sheeted with alabaster, and then the
pillars set within two or three inches of it, forming such a grove of
golden marble that the porches open before us as we enter the church
like glades in a deep forest. The reader may perhaps at first question
the propriety of placing the wall so close behind the shafts that the
latter have nearly as little work to do as the statues in a Gothic
porch; but the philosophy of this arrangement is briefly deducible from
the principles stated in the text. The builder had at his disposal
shafts of a certain size only, not fit to sustain the whole weight of
the fabric above. He therefore turns just as much of the wall veil into
shaft as he has strength of marble at his disposal, and leaves the rest
in its massive form. And that there may be no dishonesty in this, nor
any appearance in the shafts of doing more work than is really allotted
to them, many are left visibly with half their capitals projecting
beyond the archivolts they sustain, showing that the wall is very
slightly dependent on their co-operation, and that many of them are
little more than mere bonds or connecting rods between the foundation
and cornices. If any architect ventures to blame such an arrangement,
let him look at our much vaunted early English piers in Salisbury
Cathedral or Westminster Abbey, where the small satellitic shafts are
introduced in the same gratuitous manner, but with far less excuse or
reason: for those small shafts have nothing but their delicacy and
purely theoretical connection with the archivolt mouldings to recommend
them; but the St. Mark's shafts have an intrinsic beauty and value of
the highest order, and the object of the whole system of architecture,
as above stated, is in great part to set forth the beauty and value of
the shaft itself. Now, not only is this accomplished by withdrawing it
occasionally from servile work, but the position here given to it,
within three or four inches of a wall from which it nevertheless stands
perfectly clear all the way up, is exactly that which must best display
its color and quality. When there is much vacant space left behind a
pillar, the shade against which it is relieved is comparatively
indefinite, the eye passes by the shaft, and penetrates into the
vacancy. But when a broad surface of wall is brought near the shaft, its
own shadow is, in almost every effect of sunshine, so sharp and dark as
to throw out its colors with the highest possible brilliancy; if there
be no sunshine, the wall veil is subdued and varied by the most subtle
gradations of delicate half shadow, hardly less advantageous to the
shaft which it relieves. And, as far as regards pure effect in open air
(all artifice of excessive darkness or mystery being excluded), I do not
know anything whatsoever in the whole compass of the European
architecture I have seen, which can for a moment be compared with the
quaint shade and delicate color, like that of Rembrandt and Paul
Veronese united, which the sun brings out, as his rays move from porch
to porch along the St. Mark's façade.

And, as if to prove that this was indeed the builder's intention, and
that he did not leave his shafts idle merely because he did not know how
to set them to work safely, there are two pieces of masonry at the
extremities of the façade, which are just as remarkable for their frank
trust in the bearing power of the shafts as the rest are for their want
of confidence in them. But, before we come to these, we must say a word
or two respecting the second point named above, the superior position of
the shafts.

It was assuredly not in the builder's power, even had he been so
inclined, to obtain shafts high enough to sustain the whole external
gallery, as it is sustained in the nave, on one arcade. He had, as above
noticed, a supply of shafts of every sort and size, from which he chose
the largest for his nave shafts; the smallest were set aside for
windows, jambs, balustrades, supports of pulpits, niches, and such other
services, every conceivable size occurring in different portions of the
building; and the middle-sized shafts were sorted into two classes, of
which on the average one was about two-thirds the length of the other,
and out of these the two stories of the façade and sides of the church
are composed, the smaller shafts of course uppermost, and more numerous
than the lower, according to the ordinary laws of superimposition
adopted by all the Romanesque builders, and observed also in a kind of
architecture quite as beautiful as any we are likely to invent, that of
forest trees.

Nothing is more singular than the way in which this kind of
superimposition (the only right one in the case of shafts) will shock a
professed architect. He has been accustomed to see, in the Renaissance
designs, shaft put on the top of shaft, three or four times over, and he
thinks this quite right; but the moment he is shown a properly
subdivided superimposition, in which the upper shafts diminish in size
and multiply in number, so that the lower pillars would balance them
safely even without cement, he exclaims that it is "against law," as if
he had never seen a tree in his life.

Not that the idea of the Byzantine superimposition was taken from trees,
any more than that of Gothic arches. Both are simple compliances with
laws of nature, and, therefore, approximations to the forms of nature.

There is, however, one very essential difference between tree structure
and the shaft structure in question; namely, that the marble branches,
having no vital connexion with the stem, must be provided with a firm
tablet or second foundation whereon to stand. This intermediate plinth
or tablet runs along the whole façade at one level, is about eighteen
inches thick, and left with little decoration as being meant for hard
service. The small porticos, already spoken of as the most graceful
pieces of composition with which I am acquainted, are sustained on
detached clusters of four or five columns, forming the continuation of
those of the upper series, and each of these clusters is balanced on one
grand detached shaft; as much trust being thus placed in the pillars
here, as is withdrawn from them elsewhere. The northern portico has only
one detached pillar at its outer angle, which sustains three shafts and
a square pilaster; of these shafts the one at the outer angle of the
group is the thickest (so as to balance the pilaster on the inner
angle), measuring 3 ft. 2 in. round, while the others measure only 2 ft.
10 in. and 2 ft. 11 in.; and in order to make this increase of diameter,
and the importance of the shaft, more manifest to the eye, the old
builders made the shaft _shorter_ as well as thicker, increasing the
depth both of its capital and the base, with what is to the thoughtless
spectator ridiculous incongruity, and to the observant one a most
beautiful expression of constructive genius. Nor is this all. Observe:
the whole strength of this angle depends on accuracy of _poise_, not on
breadth or strength of foundation. It is a _balanced_, not a propped
structure: if the balance fails, it must fall instantly; if the balance
is maintained, no matter how the lower shaft is fastened into the
ground, all will be safe. And to mark this more definitely, the great
lower shaft _has a different base from all the others of the façade_,
remarkably high in proportion to the shaft, on a circular instead of a
square plinth, and _without spurs_, while all the other bases have spurs
without exception. Glance back at what is said of the spurs at p. 79 of
the first volume, and reflect that all expression of _grasp_ in the foot
of the pillar is here useless, and to be replaced by one of balance
merely, and you will feel what the old builder wanted to say to us, and
how much he desired us to follow him with our understanding as he laid
stone above stone.

And this purpose of his is hinted to us once more, even by the position
of this base in the ground plan of the foundation of the portico; for,
though itself circular, it sustains a hexagonal plinth _set obliquely to
the walls of the church_, as if expressly to mark to us that it did not
matter how the base was set, so only that the weights were justly
disposed above it.


10. PROPER SENSE OF THE WORD IDOLATRY.

I do not intend, in thus applying the word "Idolatry" to certain
ceremonies of Romanist worship, to admit the propriety of the ordinary
Protestant manner of regarding those ceremonies as distinctively
idolatrous, and as separating the Romanist from the Protestant Church by
a gulf across which we must not look to our fellow-Christians but with
utter reprobation and disdain. The Church of Rome does indeed
distinctively violate the _second_ commandment; but the true force and
weight of the sin of idolatry are in the violation of the first, of
which we are all of us guilty, in probably a very equal degree,
considered only as members of this or that communion, and not as
Christians or unbelievers. Idolatry is, both literally and verily, not
the mere bowing down before sculptures, but the serving or becoming the
slave of any images or imaginations which stand between us and God, and
it is otherwise expressed in Scripture as "walking after the
_Imagination_" of our own hearts. And observe also that while, at least
on one occasion, we find in the Bible an indulgence granted to the mere
external and literal violation of the second commandment, "When I bow
myself in the house of Rimmon, the Lord pardon thy servant in this
thing," we find no indulgence in any instance, or in the slightest
degree, granted to "covetousness, which is idolatry" (Col. iii. 5; no
casual association of terms, observe, but again energetically repeated
in Ephesians, v. 5, "No covetous man, who is an idolater, hath any
inheritance in the kingdom of Christ"); nor any to that denial of God,
idolatry in one of its most subtle forms, following so often on the
possession of that wealth against which Agur prayed so earnestly, "Give
me neither poverty nor riches, lest I be full and deny thee, and say,
'Who is the Lord?'"

And in this sense, which of us is not an idolater? Which of us has the
right, in the fulness of that better knowledge, in spite of which he
nevertheless is not yet separated from the service of this world, to
speak scornfully of any of his brethren, because, in a guiltless
ignorance, they have been accustomed to bow their knees before a statue?
Which of us shall say that there may not be a spiritual worship in their
apparent idolatry, or that there is not a spiritual idolatry in our own
apparent worship?

For indeed it is utterly impossible for one man to judge of the feeling
with which another bows down before an image. From that pure reverence
in which Sir Thomas Brown wrote, "I can dispense with my hat at the
sight of a cross, but not with a thought of my Redeemer," to the worst
superstition of the most ignorant Romanist, there is an infinite series
of subtle transitions; and the point where simple reverence and the use
of the image merely to render conception more vivid, and feeling more
intense, change into definite idolatry by the attribution of Power to
the image itself, is so difficultly determinable that we cannot be too
cautions in asserting that such a change has actually taken place in the
case of any individual. Even when it is definite and certain, we shall
oftener find it the consequence of dulness of intellect than of real
alienation of heart from God; and I have no manner of doubt that half of
the poor and untaught Christians who are this day lying prostrate before
crucifixes, Bambinos, and Volto Santos, are finding more acceptance with
God, than many Protestants who idolize nothing but their own opinions or
their own interests. I believe that those who have worshipped the thorns
of Christ's crown will be found at last to have been holier and wiser
than those who worship the thorns of the world's service, and that to
adore the nails of the cross is a less sin than to adore the hammer of
the workman.

But, on the other hand, though the idolatry of the lower orders in the
Romish Church may thus be frequently excusable, the ordinary subterfuges
by which it is defended are not so. It may be extenuated, but cannot be
denied; and the attribution of power to the image,[163] in which it
consists, is not merely a form of popular feeling, but a tenet of
priestly instruction, and may be proved, over and over again, from any
book of the Romish Church services. Take for instance the following
prayer, which occurs continually at the close of the service of the Holy
Cross:

  "Saincte vraye Croye aourée,
   Qui du corps Dieu fu aournée
   Et de sa sueur arrousée,
   Et de son sanc enluminée,
   Par ta vertu, par ta puissance,
   Defent mon corps de meschance,
   Et montroie moy par ton playsir
   Que vray confes puisse mourir."

  "Oh holy, true, and golden Cross, which wast adorned with God's body,
    and watered with His sweat, and illuminated with His blood, by thy
    healing virtue and thy power, defend my body from mischance; and by
    thy good pleasure, let me make a good confession when I die."

There can be no possible defence imagined for the mere terms in which
this prayer and other such are couched: yet it is always to be
remembered, that in many cases they are rather poetical effusions than
serious prayers; the utterances of imaginative enthusiasm, rather than
of reasonable conviction; and as such, they are rather to be condemned
as illusory and fictitious, than as idolatrous, nor even as such,
condemned altogether, for strong love and faith are often the roots of
them and the errors of affection are better than the accuracies of
apathy. But the unhappy results, among all religious sects, of the habit
of allowing imaginative and poetical belief to take the place of
deliberate, resolute, and prosaic belief, have been fully and admirably
traced by the author of the "Natural History of Enthusiasm."


11. SITUATIONS OF BYZANTINE PALACES.

  (1.) _The Terraced House._

The most conspicuous pile in the midmost reach of the Grand Canal is the
Casa Grimani, now the Post-Office. Letting his boat lie by the steps of
this great palace, the traveller will see, on the other side of the
canal, a building with a small terrace in front of it, and a little
court with a door to the water, beside the terrace. Half of the house is
visibly modern, and there is a great seam, like the edge of a scar,
between it and the ancient remnant, in which the circular bands of the
Byzantine arches will be instantly recognized. This building not having,
as far as I know, any name except that of its present proprietor, I
shall in future distinguish it simply as the Terraced House.


  (2.) _Casa Businello._

To the left of this edifice (looking from the Post-Office) there is a
modern palace, on the other side of which the Byzantine mouldings appear
again in the first and second stories of a house lately restored. It
might be thought that the shafts and arches had been raised yesterday,
the modern walls having been deftly adjusted to them, and all appearance
of antiquity, together with the ornamentation and proportions of the
fabric, having been entirely destroyed. I cannot, however, speak with
unmixed sorrow of these changes, since, without his being implicated in
the shame of them, they fitted this palace to become the residence of
the kindest friend I had in Venice. It is generally known as the Casa
Businello.


  (3.) _The Braided House._

Leaving the steps of the Casa Grimani, and turning the gondola away from
the Rialto, we will pass the Casa Businello, and the three houses which
succeed it on the right. The fourth is another restored palace, white
and conspicuous, but retaining of its ancient structure only the five
windows in its second story, and an ornamental moulding above them which
appears to be ancient, though it is inaccessible without scaffolding,
and I cannot therefore answer for it. But the five central windows are
very valuable; and as their capitals differ from most that we find
(except in St. Mark's), in their plaited or braided border and
basket-worked sides, I shall call this house, in future, the Braided
House.[164]


  (4.) _The Madonnetta House._

On the other side of this palace is the Traghetto called "Della
Madonnetta;" and beyond this Traghetto, still facing the Grand Canal, a
small palace, of which the front shows mere vestiges of arcades, the old
shafts only being visible, with obscure circular seams in the modern
plaster which covers the arches. The side of it is a curious
agglomeration of pointed and round windows in every possible position,
and of nearly every date from the twelfth to the eighteenth century. It
is the smallest of the buildings we have to examine, but by no means the
least interesting: I shall call it, from the name of its Traghetto, the
Madonnetta House.


  (5.) _The Rio Foscari House._

We must now descend the Grand Canal as far as the Palazzo Foscari, and
enter the narrower canal, called the Rio di Ca' Foscari, at the side of
that palace. Almost immediately after passing the great gateway of the
Foscari courtyard, we shall see on our left, in the ruinous and
time-stricken walls which totter over the water, the white curve of a
circular arch covered with sculpture, and fragments of the bases of
small pillars, entangled among festoons of the Erba della Madonna. I
have already, in the folio plates which accompanied the first volume,
partly illustrated this building. In what references I have to make to
it here, I shall speak of it as the Rio Foscari House.


  (6.) _Casa Farsetti._

We have now to reascend the Grand Canal, and approach the Rialto. As
soon as we have passed the Casa Grimani, the traveller will recognize,
on his right, two rich and extensive masses of building, which form
important objects in almost every picturesque view of the noble bridge.
Of these, the first, that farthest from the Rialto, retains great part
of its ancient materials in a dislocated form. It has been entirely
modernized in its upper stories, but the ground floor and first floor
have nearly all their original shafts and capitals, only they have been
shifted hither and thither to give room for the introduction of various
small apartments, and present, in consequence, marvellous anomalies in
proportion. This building is known in Venice as the Casa Farsetti.


  (7.) _Casa Loredan._

The one next to it, though not conspicuous, and often passed with
neglect, will, I believe, be felt at last, by all who examine it
carefully, to be the most beautiful palace in the whole extent of the
Grand Canal. It has been restored often, once in the Gothic, once in the
Renaissance times,--some writers say, even rebuilt; but, if so, rebuilt
in its old form. The Gothic additions harmonize exquisitely with its
Byzantine work, and it is easy, as we examine its lovely central arcade,
to forget the Renaissance additions which encumber it above. It is known
as the Casa Loredan.

       *       *       *       *       *

The eighth palace is the Fondaco de' Turchi, described in the text. A
ninth existed, more interesting apparently than any of these, near the
Church of San Moisè, but it was thrown down in the course of
"improvements" a few years ago. A woodcut of it is given in M. Lazari's
Guide.


12. MODERN PAINTING ON GLASS.

Of all the various principles of art which, in modern days, we have
defied or forgotten, none are more indisputable, and few of more
practical importance than this, which I shall have occasion again and
again to allege in support of many future deductions:

"All art, working with given materials, must propose to itself the
objects which, with those materials, are most perfectly attainable; and
becomes illegitimate and debased if it propose to itself any other
objects, better attainable with other materials."

Thus, great slenderness, lightness, or intricacy of structure,--as in
ramifications of trees, detached folds of drapery, or wreaths of
hair,--is easily and perfectly expressible in metal-work or in painting,
but only with great difficulty and imperfectly expressible in sculpture.
All sculpture, therefore, which professes as its chief end the
expression of such characters, is debased; and if the suggestion of them
be accidentally required of it, that suggestion is only to be given to
an extent compatible with perfect ease of execution in the given
material,--not to the utmost possible extent. For instance: some of the
most delightful drawings of our own water-color painter, Hunt, have been
of birds' nests; of which, in painting, it is perfectly possible to
represent the intricate fibrous or mossy structure; therefore, the
effort is a legitimate one, and the art is well employed. But to carve a
bird's nest out of marble would be physically impossible, and to reach
any approximate expression of its structure would require prolonged and
intolerable labor. Therefore, all sculpture which set itself to carving
birds' nests as an end, or which, if a bird's nest were required of it,
carved it to the utmost possible point of realization, would be debased.
Nothing but the general form, and as much of the fibrous structure as
could be with perfect ease represented, ought to be attempted at all.

But more than this. The workman has not done his duty, and is not
working on safe principles, unless he even so far _honors_ the materials
with which he is working as to set himself to bring out their beauty,
and to recommend and exalt, as far as lie can, their peculiar qualities.
If he is working in marble, he should insist upon and exhibit its
transparency and solidity; if in iron, its strength and tenacity; if in
gold, its ductility; and he will invariably find the material grateful,
and that his work is all the nobler for being eulogistic of the
substance of which it is made. But of all the arts, the working of glass
is that in which we ought to keep these principles most vigorously in
mind. For we owe it so much, and the possession of it is so great a
blessing, that all our work in it should be completely and forcibly
expressive of the peculiar characters which give it so vast a value.

These are two, namely, its DUCTILITY when heated, and TRANSPARENCY when
cold, both nearly perfect. In its employment for vessels, we ought
always to exhibit its ductility, and in its employment for windows, its
transparency. All work in glass is bad which does not, with loud voice,
proclaim one or other of these great qualities.

Consequently, _all cut glass_ is barbarous: for the cutting conceals its
ductility, and confuses it with crystal. Also, all very neat, finished,
and perfect form in glass is barbarous: for this fails in proclaiming
another of its great virtues; namely, the ease with which its light
substance can be moulded or blown into any form, so long as perfect
accuracy be not required. In metal, which, even when heated enough to be
thoroughly malleable, retains yet such weight and consistency as render
it susceptible of the finest handling and retention of the most delicate
form, great precision of workmanship is admissible; but in glass, which
when once softened must be blown or moulded, not hammered, and which is
liable to lose, by contraction or subsidence, the fineness of the forms
given to it, no delicate outlines are to be attempted, but only such
fantastic and fickle grace as the mind of the workman can conceive and
execute on the instant. The more wild, extravagant, and grotesque in
their gracefulness the forms are, the better. No material is so adapted
for giving full play to the imagination, but it must not be wrought with
refinement or painfulness, still less with costliness. For as in
gratitude we are to proclaim its virtues, so in all honesty we are to
confess its imperfections; and while we triumphantly set forth its
transparency, we are also frankly to admit its fragility, and therefore
not to waste much time upon it, nor put any real art into it when
intended for daily use. No workman ought ever to spend more than an hour
in the making of any glass vessel.

Next in the case of windows, the points which we have to insist upon
are, the transparency of the glass and its susceptibility of the most
brilliant colors; and therefore the attempt to turn painted windows into
pretty pictures is one of the most gross and ridiculous barbarisms of
this pre-eminently barbarous century. It originated, I suppose, with the
Germans, who seem for the present distinguished among European nations
by the loss of the sense of color; but it appears of late to have
considerable chance of establishing itself in England: and it is a
two-edged error, striking in two directions; first at the healthy
appreciation of painting, and then at the healthy appreciation of glass.
Color, ground with oil, and laid on a solid opaque ground, furnishes to
the human hand the most exquisite means of expression which the human
sight and invention can find or require. By its two opposite qualities,
each naturally and easily attainable, of transparency in shadow and
opacity in light, it complies with the conditions of nature; and by its
perfect governableness it permits the utmost possible fulness and
subtlety in the harmonies of color, as well as the utmost perfection in
the drawing. Glass, considered as a material for a picture, is exactly
as bad as oil paint is good. It sets out by reversing the conditions of
nature, by making the lights transparent and the shadows opaque; and the
ungovernableness of its color (changing in the furnace), and its
violence (being always on a high key, because produced by actual light),
render it so disadvantageous in every way, that the result of working in
it for pictorial effect would infallibly be the destruction of all the
appreciation of the noble qualities of pictorial color.

In the second place, this modern barbarism destroys the true
appreciation of the qualities of glass. It denies, and endeavors as far
as possible to conceal, the transparency, which is not only its great
virtue in a merely utilitarian point of view, but its great spiritual
character; the character by which in church architecture it becomes
most touchingly impressive, as typical of the entrances of the Holy
Spirit into the heart of man; a typical expression rendered specific and
intense by the purity and brilliancy of its sevenfold hues;[165] and
therefore in endeavoring to turn the window into a picture, we at once
lose the sanctity and power of the noble material, and employ it to an
end which is utterly impossible it should ever worthily attain. The true
perfection of a painted window is to be serene, intense, brilliant, like
flaming jewellery; full of easily legible and quaint subjects, and
exquisitely subtle, yet simple, in its harmonies. In a word, this
perfection has been consummated in the designs, never to be surpassed,
if ever again to be approached by human art, of the French windows of
the twelfth and thirteenth centuries.


FOOTNOTES

  [163] I do not like to hear Protestants speaking with gross and
    uncharitable contempt even of the worship of relics. Elisha once
    trusted his own staff too far; nor can I see any reasonable ground
    for the scorn, or the unkind rebuke, of those who have been taught
    from their youth upwards that to hope even in the hem of the garment
    may sometimes be better than to spend the living on physicians.

  [164] Casa Tiepolo (?) in Lazari's Guide.

  [165] I do not think that there is anything more necessary to the
    progress of European art in the present day than the complete
    understanding of this sanctity of Color. I had much pleasure in
    finding it, the other day, fully understood and thus sweetly
    expressed in a little volume of poems by a Miss Maynard:

      "For still in every land, though to Thy name
       Arose no temple,--still in every age,
       Though heedless man had quite forgot Thy praise,
       _We_ praised Thee; and at rise and set of sun
       Did we assemble duly, and intone
       A choral hymn that all the lands might hear.
       In heaven, on earth, and in the deep we praised Thee,
       Singly, or mingled in sweet sisterhood.
       But now, acknowledged ministrants, we come,
       Co-worshippers with man in this Thy house,
       We, the Seven Daughters of the Light, to praise
       Thee, Light of Light! Thee, God of very God!"

                                         _A Dream of Fair Colors._

    These poems seem to be otherwise remarkable for a very unobtrusive
    and pure religious feeling in subjects connected with art.

       *       *       *       *       *



The Complete Works of John Ruskin

Volume VII

STONES OF VENICE

VOLUME I


[Illustration: VENICE.
               FROM A PAINTING BY
               J. M. W. TURNER.]


Library Edition

The Complete Works of John Ruskin

STONES OF VENICE

VOLUMES I-II







National Library Association
New York             Chicago




THE
STONES OF VENICE

VOLUME I.

THE FOUNDATIONS




PREFACE.


In the course of arranging the following essay, I put many things aside
in my thoughts to be said in the Preface, things which I shall now put
aside altogether, and pass by; for when a book has been advertised a
year and a half, it seems best to present it with as little preface as
possible.

Thus much, however, it is necessary for the reader to know, that, when I
planned the work, I had materials by me, collected at different times of
sojourn in Venice during the last seventeen years, which it seemed to me
might be arranged with little difficulty, and which I believe to be of
value as illustrating the history of Southern Gothic. Requiring,
however, some clearer assurance respecting certain points of chronology,
I went to Venice finally in the autumn of 1849, not doubting but that
the dates of the principal edifices of the ancient city were either
ascertained, or ascertainable without extraordinary research. To my
consternation, I found that the Venetian antiquaries were not agreed
within a century as to the date of the building of the façades of the
Ducal Palace, and that nothing was known of any other civil edifice of
the early city, except that at some time or other it had been fitted up
for somebody's reception, and been thereupon fresh painted. Every date
in question was determinable only by internal evidence, and it became
necessary for me to examine not only every one of the older palaces,
stone by stone, but every fragment throughout the city which afforded
any clue to the formation of its styles. This I did as well as I could,
and I believe there will be found, in the following pages, the only
existing account of the details of early Venetian architecture on which
dependence can be placed, as far as it goes. I do not care to point out
the deficiencies of other works on this subject; the reader will find,
if he examines them, either that the buildings to which I shall
specially direct his attention have been hitherto undescribed, or else
that there are great discrepancies between previous descriptions and
mine: for which discrepancies I may be permitted to give this single and
sufficient reason, that my account of every building is based on
personal examination and measurement of it, and that my taking the pains
so to examine what I had to describe, was a subject of grave surprise to
my Italian friends. The work of the Marchese Selvatico is, however, to
be distinguished with respect; it is clear in arrangement, and full of
useful, though vague, information; and I have found cause to adopt, in
great measure, its views of the chronological succession of the edifices
of Venice. I shall have cause hereafter to quarrel with it on other
grounds, but not without expression of gratitude for the assistance it
has given me. Fontana's "Fabbriche di Venezia" is also historically
valuable, but does not attempt to give architectural detail. Cicognara,
as is now generally known, is so inaccurate as hardly to deserve
mention.

Indeed, it is not easy to be accurate in an account of anything, however
simple. Zoologists often disagree in their descriptions of the curve of
a shell, or the plumage of a bird, though they may lay their specimen on
the table, and examine it at their leisure; how much greater becomes the
likelihood of error in the description of things which must be in many
parts observed from a distance, or under unfavorable circumstances of
light and shade; and of which many of the distinctive features have been
worn away by time. I believe few people have any idea of the cost of
truth in these things; of the expenditure of time necessary to make sure
of the simplest facts, and of the strange way in which separate
observations will sometimes falsify each other, incapable of
reconcilement, owing to some imperceptible inadvertency. I am ashamed of
the number of times in which I have had to say, in the following pages,
"I am not sure," and I claim for them no authority, as if they were
thoroughly sifted from error, even in what they more confidently state.
Only, as far as my time, and strength, and mind served me, I have
endeavored down to the smallest matters, to ascertain and speak the
truth.

Nor was the subject without many and most discouraging difficulties,
peculiar to itself. As far as my inquiries have extended, there is not a
building in Venice, raised prior to the sixteenth century, which has not
sustained essential change in one or more of its most important
features. By far the greater number present examples of three or four
different styles, it may be successive, it may be accidentally
associated; and, in many instances, the restorations or additions have
gradually replaced the entire structure of the ancient fabric, of which
nothing but the name remains, together with a kind of identity,
exhibited in the anomalous association of the modernized portions: the
Will of the old building asserted through them all, stubbornly, though
vainly, expressive; superseded by codicils, and falsified by
misinterpretation; yet animating what would otherwise be a mere group of
fantastic masque, as embarrassing to the antiquary, as to the
mineralogist, the epigene crystal, formed by materials of one substance
modelled on the perished crystals of another. The church of St. Mark's
itself, harmonious as its structure may at first sight appear, is an
epitome of the changes of Venetian architecture from the tenth to the
nineteenth century. Its crypt, and the line of low arches which support
the screen, are apparently the earliest portions; the lower stories of
the main fabric are of the eleventh and twelfth centuries, with later
Gothic interpolations; the pinnacles are of the earliest fully developed
Venetian Gothic (fourteenth century); but one of them, that on the
projection at the eastern extremity of the Piazzetta de Leoni, is of far
finer, and probably earlier workmanship than all the rest. The southern
range of pinnacles is again inferior to the northern and western, and
visibly of later date. Then the screen, which most writers have
described as part of the original fabric, bears its date inscribed on
its architrave, 1394, and with it are associated a multitude of small
screens, balustrades, decorations of the interior building, and probably
the rose window of the south transept. Then come the interpolated
traceries of the front and sides; then the crocketings of the upper
arches, extravagances of the incipient Renaissance: and, finally, the
figures which carry the waterspouts on the north side--utterly barbarous
seventeenth or eighteenth century work--connect the whole with the
plastered restorations of the year 1844 and 1845. Most of the palaces in
Venice have sustained interpolations hardly less numerous; and those of
the Ducal Palace are so intricate, that a year's labor would probably be
insufficient altogether to disentangle and define them. I therefore gave
up all thoughts of obtaining a perfectly clear chronological view of the
early architecture; but the dates necessary to the main purposes of the
book the reader will find well established; and of the evidence brought
forward for those of less importance, he is himself to judge. Doubtful
estimates are never made grounds of argument; and the accuracy of the
account of the buildings themselves, for which alone I pledge myself,
is of course entirely independent of them.

In like manner, as the statements briefly made in the chapters on
construction involve questions so difficult and so general, that I
cannot hope that every expression referring to them will be found free
from error: and as the conclusions to which I have endeavored to lead
the reader are thrown into a form the validity of which depends on that
of each successive step, it might be argued, if fallacy or weakness
could be detected in one of them, that all the subsequent reasonings
were valueless. The reader may be assured, however, that it is not so;
the method of proof used in the following essay being only one out of
many which were in my choice, adopted because it seemed to me the
shortest and simplest, not as being the strongest. In many cases, the
conclusions are those which men of quick feeling would arrive at
instinctively; and I then sought to discover the reasons of what so
strongly recommended itself as truth. Though these reasons could every
one of them, from the beginning to the end of the book, be proved
insufficient, the truth of its conclusions would remain the same. I
should only regret that I had dishonored them by an ill-grounded
defence; and endeavor to repair my error by a better one.

I have not, however, written carelessly; nor should I in any wise have
expressed doubt of the security of the following argument, but that it
is physically impossible for me, being engaged quite as much with
mountains, and clouds, and trees, and criticism of painting, as with
architecture, to verify, as I should desire, the expression of every
sentence bearing upon empirical and technical matters. Life is not long
enough; nor does a day pass by without causing me to feel more bitterly
the impossibility of carrying out to the extent which I should desire,
the separate studies which general criticism continually forces me to
undertake. I can only assure the reader, that he will find the certainty
of every statement I permit myself to make, increase with its
importance; and that, for the security of the final conclusions of the
following essay, as well as for the resolute veracity of its account of
whatever facts have come under my own immediate cognizance, I will
pledge myself to the uttermost.

It was necessary, to the accomplishment of the purpose of the work (of
which account is given in the First Chapter), that I should establish
some canons of judgment, which the general reader should thoroughly
understand, and, if it pleased him, accept, before we took cognizance,
together, of any architecture whatsoever. It has taken me more time and
trouble to do this than I expected; but, if I have succeeded, the thing
done will be of use for many other purposes than that to which it is now
put. The establishment of these canons, which I have called "the
Foundations," and some account of the connection of Venetian
architecture with that of the rest of Europe, have filled the present
volume. The second will, I hope, contain all I have to say about Venice
itself.

It was of course inexpedient to reduce drawings of crowded details to
the size of an octavo volume,--I do not say impossible, but inexpedient;
requiring infinite pains on the part of the engraver, with no result
except farther pains to the beholder. And as, on the other hand, folio
books are not easy reading, I determined to separate the text and the
unreducible plates. I have given, with the principal text, all the
illustrations absolutely necessary to the understanding of it, and, in
the detached work, such additional text as has special reference to the
larger illustrations.

A considerable number of these larger plates were at first intended to
be executed in tinted lithography; but, finding the result
unsatisfactory, I have determined to prepare the principal subjects for
mezzotinting,--a change of method requiring two new drawings to be made
of every subject; one a carefully penned outline for the etcher, and
then a finished drawing upon the etching. This work does not proceed
fast, while I am also occupied with the completion of the text; but the
numbers of it will appear as fast as I can prepare them.

For the illustrations of the body of the work itself, I have used any
kind of engraving which seemed suited to the subjects--line and
mezzotint, on steel, with mixed lithographs and woodcuts, at
considerable loss of uniformity in the appearance of the volume, but, I
hope, with advantage, in rendering the character of the architecture it
describes. And both in the plates and the text I have aimed chiefly at
clear intelligibility; that any one, however little versed in the
subject, might be able to take up the book, and understand what it meant
forthwith. I have utterly failed of my purpose, if I have not made all
the essential parts of the essay intelligible to the least learned, and
easy to the most desultory readers, who are likely to take interest in
the matter at all. There are few passages which even require so much as
an acquaintance with the elements of Euclid, and these may be missed,
without harm to the sense of the rest, by every reader to whom they may
appear mysterious; and the architectural terms necessarily employed
(which are very few) are explained as they occur, or in a note; so that,
though I may often be found trite or tedious, I trust that I shall not
be obscure. I am especially anxious to rid this essay of ambiguity,
because I want to gain the ear of all kinds of persons. Every man has,
at some time of his life, personal interest in architecture. He has
influence on the design of some public building; or he has to buy, or
build, or alter his own house. It signifies less whether the knowledge
of other arts be general or not; men may live without buying pictures or
statues: but, in architecture, all must in some way commit themselves;
they _must_ do mischief, and waste their money, if they do not know how
to turn it to account. Churches, and shops, and warehouses, and
cottages, and small row, and place, and terrace houses, must be built,
and lived in, however joyless or inconvenient. And it is assuredly
intended that all of us should have knowledge, and act upon our
knowledge, in matters with which we are daily concerned, and not to be
left to the caprice of architects or mercy of contractors. There is not,
indeed, anything in the following essay bearing on the special forms and
needs of modern buildings; but the principles it inculcates are
universal; and they are illustrated from the remains of a city which
should surely be interesting to the men of London, as affording the
richest existing examples of architecture raised by a mercantile
community, for civil uses, and domestic magnificence.

  DENMARK HILL, _February_, 1851.




CONTENTS.


                                                    PAGE
  Preface,                                           iii

                          CHAPTER I.
  The Quarry,                                          1

                         CHAPTER II.
  The Virtues of Architecture,                        36

                         CHAPTER III.
  The Six Divisions of Architecture,                  47

                          CHAPTER IV.
  The Wall Base,                                      52

                          CHAPTER V.
  The Wall Veil,                                      58

                         CHAPTER VI.
  The Wall Cornice,                                   63

                         CHAPTER VII.
  The Pier Base,                                      71

                         CHAPTER VIII.
  The Shaft,                                          84

                          CHAPTER IX.
  The Capital,                                       105

                          CHAPTER X.
  The Arch Line,                                     122

                          CHAPTER XI.
  The Arch Masonry,                                  132

                         CHAPTER XII.
  The Arch Load,                                     144

                         CHAPTER XIII.
  The Roof,                                          148

                          CHAPTER XIV.
  The Roof Cornice,                                  155

                          CHAPTER XV.
  The Buttress,                                      166

                          CHAPTER XVI.
  Form of Aperture,                                  174

                         CHAPTER XVII.
  Filling of Aperture,                               183

                         CHAPTER XVIII.
  Protection of Aperture,                            195

                          CHAPTER XIX.
  Superimposition,                                   200

                          CHAPTER XX.
  The Material of Ornament,                          211

                          CHAPTER XXI.
  Treatment of Ornament,                             236

                         CHAPTER XXII.
  The Angle,                                         259

                         CHAPTER XXIII.
  The Edge and Fillet,                               267

                         CHAPTER XXIV.
  The Roll and Recess,                               276

                          CHAPTER XXV.
  The Base,                                          281

                         CHAPTER XXVI.
  The Wall Veil and Shaft,                           294

                         CHAPTER XXVII.
  The Cornice and Capital,                           305

                         CHAPTER XXVIII.
  The Archivolt and Aperture,                        333

                         CHAPTER XXIX.
  The Roof,                                          343

                          CHAPTER XXX.
  The Vestibule,                                     349

         *       *       *       *       *


   APPENDIX.

   1. Foundation of Venice,                          359
   2. Power of the Doges,                            360
   3. Serrar del Consiglio,                          360
   4. S. Pietro di Castello,                         361
   5. Papal Power in Venice,                         362
   6. Renaissance Ornament,                          369
   7. Varieties of the Orders,                       370
   8. The Northern Energy,                           371
   9. Wooden Churches of the North,                  381
  10. Church of Alexandria,                          381
  11. Renaissance Landscape,                         381
  12. Romanist Modern Art,                           384
  13. Mr. Fergusson's System,                        388
  14. Divisions of Humanity,                         394
  15. Instinctive Judgments,                         399
  16. Strength of Shafts,                            402
  17. Answer to Mr. Garbett,                         403
  18. Early English Capitals,                        411
  19. Tombs near St. Anastasia,                      412
  20. Shafts of the Ducal Palace,                    413
  21. Ancient Representations of Water,              417
  22. Arabian Ornamentation,                         429
  23. Varieties of Chamfer,                          429
  24. Renaissance Bases,                             431
  25. Romanist Decoration of Bases,                  432




LIST OF PLATES.


                                                         Facing Page

 Plate 1. Wall Veil Decoration, Ca' Trevisan and Ca' Dario,       13

   "   2. Plans of Piers,                                        100

   "   3. Arch Masonry,                                          134

   "   4. Arch Masonry,                                          137

   "   5. Arch Masonry, Bruletto of Como,                        141

   "   6. Types of Towers,                                       207

   "   7. Abstracts Lines,                                       222

   "   8. Decorations by Disks, Ca' Badoari,                     241

   "   9. Edge Decoration,                                       268

   "  10. Profiles of Bases,                                     283

   "  11. Plans of Bases,                                        288

   "  12. Decorations of Bases,                                  289

   "  13. Wall Veil Decorations,                                 295

   "  14. Spandril Decorations, Ducal Palace,                    298

   "  15. Cornice Profiles,                                      306

   "  16. Cornice Decorations,                                   311

   "  17. Capitals--Concave,                                     323

   "  18. Capitals--Convex,                                      327

   "  19. Archivolt Decoration, Verona,                          333

   "  20. Wall Veil Decoration, Ca' Trevisan,                    369

   "  21. Wall Veil Decoration, San Michele, Lucca,              378




THE STONES OF VENICE.




CHAPTER I.

  THE QUARRY.


§ I. Since the first dominion of men was asserted over the ocean, three
thrones, of mark beyond all others, have been set upon its sands: the
thrones of Tyre, Venice, and England. Of the First of these great powers
only the memory remains; of the Second, the ruin; the Third, which
inherits their greatness, if it forget their example, may be led through
prouder eminence to less pitied destruction.

The exaltation, the sin, and the punishment of Tyre have been recorded
for us, in perhaps the most touching words ever uttered by the Prophets
of Israel against the cities of the stranger. But we read them as a
lovely song; and close our ears to the sternness of their warning: for
the very depth of the Fall of Tyre has blinded us to its reality, and we
forget, as we watch the bleaching of the rocks between the sunshine and
the sea, that they were once "as in Eden, the garden of God."

Her successor, like her in perfection of beauty, though less in
endurance of dominion, is still left for our beholding in the final
period of her decline: a ghost upon the sands of the sea, so weak--so
quiet,--so bereft of all but her loveliness, that we might well doubt,
as we watched her faint reflection in the mirage of the lagoon, which
was the City, and which the Shadow.

I would endeavor to trace the lines of this image before it be for ever
lost, and to record, as far as I may, the warning which seems to me to
be uttered by every one of the fast-gaining waves, that beat, like
passing bells, against the STONES OF VENICE.

§ II. It would be difficult to overrate the value of the lessons which
might be derived from a faithful study of the history of this strange
and mighty city: a history which, in spite of the labor of countless
chroniclers, remains in vague and disputable outline,--barred with
brightness and shade, like the far away edge of her own ocean, where the
surf and the sand-bank are mingled with the sky. The inquiries in which
we have to engage will hardly render this outline clearer, but their
results will, in some degree, alter its aspect; and, so far as they bear
upon it at all, they possess an interest of a far higher kind than that
usually belonging to architectural investigations. I may, perhaps, in
the outset, and in few words, enable the general reader to form a
clearer idea of the importance of every existing expression of Venetian
character through Venetian art, and of the breadth of interest which the
true history of Venice embraces, than he is likely to have gleaned from
the current fables of her mystery or magnificence.

§ III. Venice is usually conceived as an oligarchy: She was so during a
period less than the half of her existence, and that including the days
of her decline; and it is one of the first questions needing severe
examination, whether that decline was owing in any wise to the change in
the form of her government, or altogether, as assuredly in great part,
to changes, in the character of the persons of whom it was composed.

The state of Venice existed Thirteen Hundred and Seventy-six years, from
the first establishment of a consular government on the island of the
Rialto,[1] to the moment when the General-in-chief of the French army of
Italy pronounced the Venetian republic a thing of the past. Of this
period, Two Hundred and Seventy-six[2] years were passed in a nominal
subjection to the cities of old Venetia, especially to Padua, and in an
agitated form of democracy, of which the executive appears to have been
entrusted to tribunes,[3] chosen, one by the inhabitants of each of the
principal islands. For six hundred years,[4] during which the power of
Venice was continually on the increase, her government was an elective
monarchy, her King or doge possessing, in early times at least, as much
independent authority as any other European sovereign, but an authority
gradually subjected to limitation, and shortened almost daily of its
prerogatives, while it increased in a spectral and incapable
magnificence. The final government of the nobles, under the image of a
king, lasted for five hundred years, during which Venice reaped the
fruits of her former energies, consumed them,--and expired.

§ IV. Let the reader therefore conceive the existence of the Venetian
state as broadly divided into two periods: the first of nine hundred,
the second of five hundred years, the separation being marked by what
was called the "Serrar del Consiglio;" that is to say, the final and
absolute distinction of the nobles from the commonalty, and the
establishment of the government in their hands to the exclusion alike of
the influence of the people on the one side, and the authority of the
doge on the other.

Then the first period, of nine hundred years, presents us with the most
interesting spectacle of a people struggling out of anarchy into order
and power; and then governed, for the most part, by the worthiest and
noblest man whom they could find among them,[5] called their Doge or
Leader, with an aristocracy gradually and resolutely forming itself
around him, out of which, and at last by which, he was chosen; an
aristocracy owing its origin to the accidental numbers, influence, and
wealth of some among the families of the fugitives from the older
Venetia, and gradually organizing itself, by its unity and heroism, into
a separate body.

This first period includes the rise of Venice, her noblest achievements,
and the circumstances which determined her character and position among
European powers; and within its range, as might have been anticipated,
we find the names of all her hero princes,--of Pietro Urseolo, Ordalafo
Falier, Domenico Michieli, Sebastiano Ziani, and Enrico Dandolo.

§ V. The second period opens with a hundred and twenty years, the most
eventful in the career of Venice--the central struggle of her
life--stained with her darkest crime, the murder of Carrara--disturbed
by her most dangerous internal sedition, the conspiracy of
Falier--oppressed by her most fatal war, the war of Chiozza--and
distinguished by the glory of her two noblest citizens (for in this
period the heroism of her citizens replaces that of her monarchs),
Vittor Pisani and Carlo Zeno.

I date the commencement of the Fall of Venice from the death of Carlo
Zeno, 8th May, 1418;[6] the _visible_ commencement from that of another
of her noblest and wisest children, the Doge Tomaso Mocenigo, who
expired five years later. The reign of Foscari followed, gloomy with
pestilence and war; a war in which large acquisitions of territory were
made by subtle or fortunate policy in Lombardy, and disgrace,
significant as irreparable, sustained in the battles on the Po at
Cremona, and in the marshes of Caravaggio. In 1454, Venice, the first of
the states of Christendom, humiliated herself to the Turk: in the same
year was established the Inquisition of State,[7] and from this period
her government takes the perfidious and mysterious form under which it
is usually conceived. In 1477, the great Turkish invasion spread terror
to the shores of the lagoons; and in 1508 the league of Cambrai marks
the period usually assigned as the commencement of the decline of the
Venetian power;[8] the commercial prosperity of Venice in the close of
the fifteenth century blinding her historians to the previous evidence
of the diminution of her internal strength.

§ VI. Now there is apparently a significative coincidence between the
establishment of the aristocratic and oligarchical powers, and the
diminution of the prosperity of the state. But this is the very question
at issue; and it appears to me quite undetermined by any historian, or
determined by each in accordance with his own prejudices. It is a triple
question: first, whether the oligarchy established by the efforts of
individual ambition was the cause, in its subsequent operation, of the
Fall of Venice; or (secondly) whether the establishment of the oligarchy
itself be not the sign and evidence, rather than the cause, of national
enervation; or (lastly) whether, as I rather think, the history of
Venice might not be written almost without reference to the construction
of her senate or the prerogatives of her Doge. It is the history of a
people eminently at unity in itself, descendants of Roman race, long
disciplined by adversity, and compelled by its position either to live
nobly or to perish:--for a thousand years they fought for life; for
three hundred they invited death: their battle was rewarded, and their
call was heard.

§ VII. Throughout her career, the victories of Venice, and, at many
periods of it, her safety, were purchased by individual heroism; and the
man who exalted or saved her was sometimes (oftenest) her king,
sometimes a noble, sometimes a citizen. To him no matter, nor to her:
the real question is, not so much what names they bore, or with what
powers they were entrusted, as how they were trained; how they were made
masters of themselves, servants of their country, patient of distress,
impatient of dishonor; and what was the true reason of the change from
the time when she could find saviours among those whom she had cast into
prison, to that when the voices of her own children commanded her to
sign covenant with Death.[9]

§ VIII. On this collateral question I wish the reader's mind to be fixed
throughout all our subsequent inquiries. It will give double interest to
every detail: nor will the interest be profitless; for the evidence
which I shall be able to deduce from the arts of Venice will be both
frequent and irrefragable, that the decline of her political prosperity
was exactly coincident with that of domestic and individual religion.

I say domestic and individual; for--and this is the second point which I
wish the reader to keep in mind--the most curious phenomenon in all
Venetian history is the vitality of religion in private life, and its
deadness in public policy. Amidst the enthusiasm, chivalry, or
fanaticism of the other states of Europe, Venice stands, from first to
last, like a masked statue; her coldness impenetrable, her exertion only
aroused by the touch of a secret spring. That spring was her commercial
interest,--this the one motive of all her important political acts, or
enduring national animosities. She could forgive insults to her honor,
but never rivalship in her commerce; she calculated the glory of her
conquests by their value, and estimated their justice by their facility.
The fame of success remains, when the motives of attempt are forgotten;
and the casual reader of her history may perhaps be surprised to be
reminded, that the expedition which was commanded by the noblest of her
princes, and whose results added most to her military glory, was one in
which while all Europe around her was wasted by the fire of its
devotion, she first calculated the highest price she could exact from
its piety for the armament she furnished, and then, for the advancement
of her own private interests, at once broke her faith[10] and betrayed
her religion.

§ IX. And yet, in the midst of this national criminality, we shall be
struck again and again by the evidences of the most noble individual
feeling. The tears of Dandolo were not shed in hypocrisy, though they
could not blind him to the importance of the conquest of Zara. The habit
of assigning to religion a direct influence over all _his own_ actions,
and all the affairs of _his own_ daily life, is remarkable in every
great Venetian during the times of the prosperity of the state; nor are
instances wanting in which the private feeling of the citizens reaches
the sphere of their policy, and even becomes the guide of its course
where the scales of expediency are doubtfully balanced. I sincerely
trust that the inquirer would be disappointed who should endeavor to
trace any more immediate reasons for their adoption of the cause of
Alexander III. against Barbarossa, than the piety which was excited by
the character of their suppliant, and the noble pride which was provoked
by the insolence of the emperor. But the heart of Venice is shown only
in her hastiest councils; her worldly spirit recovers the ascendency
whenever she has time to calculate the probabilities of advantage, or
when they are sufficiently distinct to need no calculation; and the
entire subjection of private piety to national policy is not only
remarkable throughout the almost endless series of treacheries and
tyrannies by which her empire was enlarged and maintained, but
symbolised by a very singular circumstance in the building of the city
itself. I am aware of no other city of Europe in which its cathedral was
not the principal feature. But the principal church in Venice was the
chapel attached to the palace of her prince, and called the "Chiesa
Ducale." The patriarchal church,[11] inconsiderable in size and mean in
decoration, stands on the outermost islet of the Venetian group, and its
name, as well as its site, is probably unknown to the greater number of
travellers passing hastily through the city. Nor is it less worthy of
remark, that the two most important temples of Venice, next to the ducal
chapel, owe their size and magnificence, not to national effort, but to
the energy of the Franciscan and Dominican monks, supported by the vast
organization of those great societies on the mainland of Italy, and
countenanced by the most pious, and perhaps also, in his generation, the
most wise, of all the princes of Venice,[12] who now rests beneath the
roof of one of those very temples, and whose life is not satirized by
the images of the Virtues which a Tuscan sculptor has placed around his
tomb.

§ X. There are, therefore, two strange and solemn lights in which we
have to regard almost every scene in the fitful history of the Rivo
Alto. We find, on the one hand, a deep and constant tone of individual
religion characterising the lives of the citizens of Venice in her
greatness; we find this spirit influencing them in all the familiar and
immediate concerns of life, giving a peculiar dignity to the conduct
even of their commercial transactions, and confessed by them with a
simplicity of faith that may well put to shame the hesitation with which
a man of the world at present admits (even if it be so in reality) that
religious feeling has any influence over the minor branches of his
conduct. And we find as the natural consequence of all this, a healthy
serenity of mind and energy of will expressed in all their actions, and
a habit of heroism which never fails them, even when the immediate
motive of action ceases to be praiseworthy. With the fulness of this
spirit the prosperity of the state is exactly correspondent, and with
its failure her decline, and that with a closeness and precision which
it will be one of the collateral objects of the following essay to
demonstrate from such accidental evidence as the field of its inquiry
presents. And, thus far, all is natural and simple. But the stopping
short of this religious faith when it appears likely to influence
national action, correspondent as it is, and that most strikingly, with
several characteristics of the temper of our present English
legislature, is a subject, morally and politically, of the most curious
interest and complicated difficulty; one, however, which the range of
my present inquiry will not permit me to approach, and for the treatment
of which I must be content to furnish materials in the light I may be
able to throw upon the private tendencies of the Venetian character.

§ XI. There is, however, another most interesting feature in the policy
of Venice which will be often brought before us; and which a Romanist
would gladly assign as the reason of its irreligion; namely, the
magnificent and successful struggle which she maintained against the
temporal authority of the Church of Rome. It is true that, in a rapid
survey of her career, the eye is at first arrested by the strange drama
to which I have already alluded, closed by that ever memorable scene in
the portico of St. Mark's,[13] the central expression in most men's
thoughts of the unendurable elevation of the pontifical power; it is
true that the proudest thoughts of Venice, as well as the insignia of
her prince, and the form of her chief festival, recorded the service
thus rendered to the Roman Church. But the enduring sentiment of years
more than balanced the enthusiasm of a moment; and the bull of Clement
V., which excommunicated the Venetians and their doge, likening them to
Dathan, Abiram, Absalom, and Lucifer, is a stronger evidence of the
great tendencies of the Venetian government than the umbrella of the
doge or the ring of the Adriatic. The humiliation of Francesco Dandolo
blotted out the shame of Barbarossa, and the total exclusion of
ecclesiastics from all share in the councils of Venice became an
enduring mark of her knowledge of the spirit of the Church of Rome, and
of her defiance of it.

To this exclusion of Papal influence from her councils, the Romanist
will attribute their irreligion, and the Protestant their success.[14]
The first may be silenced by a reference to the character of the policy
of the Vatican itself; and the second by his own shame, when he reflects
that the English legislature sacrificed their principles to expose
themselves to the very danger which the Venetian senate sacrificed
theirs to avoid.

§ XII. One more circumstance remains to be noted respecting the Venetian
government, the singular unity of the families composing it,--unity far
from sincere or perfect, but still admirable when contrasted with the
fiery feuds, the almost daily revolutions, the restless successions of
families and parties in power, which fill the annals of the other states
of Italy. That rivalship should sometimes be ended by the dagger, or
enmity conducted to its ends under the mask of law, could not but be
anticipated where the fierce Italian spirit was subjected to so severe a
restraint: it is much that jealousy appears usually unmingled with
illegitimate ambition, and that, for every instance in which private
passion sought its gratification through public danger, there are a
thousand in which it was sacrificed to the public advantage. Venice may
well call upon us to note with reverence, that of all the towers which
are still seen rising like a branchless forest from her islands, there
is but one whose office was other than that of summoning to prayer, and
that one was a watch-tower only: from first to last, while the palaces
of the other cities of Italy were lifted into sullen fortitudes of
rampart, and fringed with forked battlements for the javelin and the
bow, the sands of Venice never sank under the weight of a war tower, and
her roof terraces were wreathed with Arabian imagery, of golden globes
suspended on the leaves of lilies.[15]

§ XIII. These, then, appear to me to be the points of chief general
interest in the character and fate of the Venetian people. I would next
endeavor to give the reader some idea of the manner in which the
testimony of Art bears upon these questions, and of the aspect which the
arts themselves assume when they are regarded in their true connexion
with the history of the state.

1st. Receive the witness of Painting.

It will be remembered that I put the commencement of the Fall of Venice
as far back as 1418.

Now, John Bellini was born in 1423, and Titian in 1480. John Bellini,
and his brother Gentile, two years older than he, close the line of the
sacred painters of Venice. But the most solemn spirit of religious faith
animates their works to the last. There is no religion in any work of
Titian's: there is not even the smallest evidence of religious temper or
sympathies either in himself, or in those for whom he painted. His
larger sacred subjects are merely themes for the exhibition of pictorial
rhetoric,--composition and color. His minor works are generally made
subordinate to purposes of portraiture. The Madonna in the church of the
Frari is a mere lay figure, introduced to form a link of connexion
between the portraits of various members of the Pesaro family who
surround her.

Now this is not merely because John Bellini was a religious man and
Titian was not. Titian and Bellini are each true representatives of the
school of painters contemporary with them; and the difference in their
artistic feeling is a consequence not so much of difference in their own
natural characters as in their early education: Bellini was brought up
in faith; Titian in formalism. Between the years of their births the
vital religion of Venice had expired.

§ XIV. The _vital_ religion, observe, not the formal. Outward observance
was as strict as ever; and doge and senator still were painted, in
almost every important instance, kneeling before the Madonna or St.
Mark; a confession of faith made universal by the pure gold of the
Venetian sequin. But observe the great picture of Titian's in the ducal
palace, of the Doge Antonio Grimani kneeling before Faith: there is a
curious lesson in it. The figure of Faith is a coarse portrait of one of
Titian's least graceful female models: Faith had become carnal. The eye
is first caught by the flash of the Doge's armor. The heart of Venice
was in her wars, not in her worship.

The mind of Tintoret, incomparably more deep and serious than that of
Titian, casts the solemnity of its own tone over the sacred subjects
which it approaches, and sometimes forgets itself into devotion; but the
principle of treatment is altogether the same as Titian's: absolute
subordination of the religious subject to purposes of decoration or
portraiture.

The evidence might be accumulated a thousandfold from the works of
Veronese, and of every succeeding painter,--that the fifteenth century
had taken away the religious heart of Venice.

§ XV. Such is the evidence of Painting. To collect that of Architecture
will be our task through many a page to come; but I must here give a
general idea of its heads.

Philippe de Commynes, writing of his entry into Venice in 1495, says,--

"Chascun me feit seoir au meillieu de ces deux ambassadeurs qui est
l'honneur d'Italie que d'estre au meillieu; et me menerent au long de la
grant rue, qu'ilz appellent le Canal Grant, et est bien large. Les
gallees y passent à travers et y ay ven navire de quatre cens tonneaux
ou plus pres des maisons: et est la plus belle rue que je croy qui soit
en tout le monde, et la mieulx maisonnee, et va le long de la ville. Les
maisons sont fort grandes et haultes, et de bonne pierre, et les
anciennes toutes painctes; les aultres faictes depuis cent ans: toutes
ont le devant de marbre blanc, qui leur vient d'Istrie, à cent mils de
là, et encores maincte grant piece de porphire et de sarpentine sur le
devant.... C'est la plus triumphante cité que j'aye jamais vene et qui
plus faict d'honneur à ambassadeurs et estrangiers, et qui plus
saigement se gouverne, et où le service de Dieu est le plus
sollempnellement faict: et encores qu'il y peust bien avoir d'aultres
faultes, si je croy que Dieu les a en ayde pour la reverence qu'ilz
portent au service de l'Eglise."[16]

[Illustration: Plate I. Wall-Veil-Decoration.
                        CA'TREVISAN
                        CA'DARIO.]

§ XVI. This passage is of peculiar interest, for two reasons. Observe,
first, the impression of Commynes respecting the religion of Venice: of
which, as I have above said, the forms still remained with some
glimmering of life in them, and were the evidence of what the real life
had been in former times. But observe, secondly, the impression
instantly made on Commynes' mind by the distinction between the elder
palaces and those built "within this last hundred years; which all have
their fronts of white marble brought from Istria, a hundred miles away,
and besides, many a large piece of porphyry and serpentine upon their
fronts."

On the opposite page I have given two of the ornaments of the palaces
which so struck the French ambassador.[17] He was right in his notice of
the distinction. There had indeed come a change over Venetian
architecture in the fifteenth century; and a change of some importance
to us moderns: we English owe to it our St. Paul's Cathedral, and Europe
in general owes to it the utter degradation or destruction of her
schools of architecture, never since revived. But that the reader may
understand this, it is necessary that he should have some general idea
of the connexion of the architecture of Venice with that of the rest of
Europe, from its origin forwards.

§ XVII. All European architecture, bad and good, old and new, is derived
from Greece through Rome, and colored and perfected from the East. The
history of architecture is nothing but the tracing of the various modes
and directions of this derivation. Understand this, once for all: if you
hold fast this great connecting clue, you may string all the types of
successive architectural invention upon it like so many beads. The Doric
and the Corinthian orders are the roots, the one of all Romanesque,
massy-capitaled buildings--Norman, Lombard, Byzantine, and what else you
can name of the kind; and the Corinthian of all Gothic, Early English,
French, German, and Tuscan. Now observe: those old Greeks gave the
shaft; Rome gave the arch; the Arabs pointed and foliated the arch. The
shaft and arch, the frame-work and strength of architecture, are from
the race of Japheth: the spirituality and sanctity of it from Ismael,
Abraham, and Shem.

§ XVIII. There is high probability that the Greek received his shaft
system from Egypt; but I do not care to keep this earlier derivation in
the mind of the reader. It is only necessary that he should be able to
refer to a fixed point of origin, when the form of the shaft was first
perfected. But it may be incidentally observed, that if the Greeks did
indeed receive their Doric from Egypt, then the three families of the
earth have each contributed their part to its noblest architecture: and
Ham, the servant of the others, furnishes the sustaining or bearing
member, the shaft; Japheth the arch; Shem the spiritualisation of both.

§ XIX. I have said that the two orders, Doric and Corinthian, are the
roots of all European architecture. You have, perhaps, heard of five
orders; but there are only two real orders, and there never can be any
more until doomsday. On one of these orders the ornament is convex:
those are Doric, Norman, and what else you recollect of the kind. On the
other the ornament is concave: those are Corinthian, Early English,
Decorated, and what else you recollect of that kind. The transitional
form, in which the ornamental line is straight, is the centre or root of
both. All other orders are varieties of those, or phantasms and
grotesques altogether indefinite in number and species.[18]

§ XX. This Greek architecture, then, with its two orders, was clumsily
copied and varied by the Romans with no particular result, until they
begun to bring the arch into extensive practical service; except only
that the Doric capital was spoiled in endeavors to mend it, and the
Corinthian much varied and enriched with fanciful, and often very
beautiful imagery. And in this state of things came Christianity: seized
upon the arch as her own; decorated it, and delighted in it; invented a
new Doric capital to replace the spoiled Roman one: and all over the
Roman empire set to work, with such materials as were nearest at hand,
to express and adorn herself as best she could. This Roman Christian
architecture is the exact expression of the Christianity of the time,
very fervid and beautiful--but very imperfect; in many respects
ignorant, and yet radiant with a strong, childlike light of imagination,
which flames up under Constantine, illumines all the shores of the
Bosphorus and the Ægean and the Adriatic Sea, and then gradually, as the
people give themselves up to idolatry, becomes Corpse-light. The
architecture sinks into a settled form--a strange, gilded, and embalmed
repose: it, with the religion it expressed; and so would have remained
for ever,--so _does_ remain, where its languor has been undisturbed.[19]
But rough wakening was ordained for it.

§ XXI. This Christian art of the declining empire is divided into two
great branches, western and eastern; one centred at Rome, the other at
Byzantium, of which the one is the early Christian Romanesque, properly
so called, and the other, carried to higher imaginative perfection by
Greek workmen, is distinguished from it as Byzantine. But I wish the
reader, for the present, to class these two branches of art together in
his mind, they being, in points of main importance, the same; that is to
say, both of them a true continuance and sequence of the art of old Rome
itself, flowing uninterruptedly down from the fountain-head, and
entrusted always to the best workmen who could be found--Latins in Italy
and Greeks in Greece; and thus both branches may be ranged under the
general term of Christian Romanesque, an architecture which had lost the
refinement of Pagan art in the degradation of the empire, but which was
elevated by Christianity to higher aims, and by the fancy of the Greek
workmen endowed with brighter forms. And this art the reader may
conceive as extending in its various branches over all the central
provinces of the empire, taking aspects more or less refined, according
to its proximity to the seats of government; dependent for all its power
on the vigor and freshness of the religion which animated it; and as
that vigor and purity departed, losing its own vitality, and sinking
into nerveless rest, not deprived of its beauty, but benumbed and
incapable of advance or change.

§ XXII. Meantime there had been preparation for its renewal. While in
Rome and Constantinople, and in the districts under their immediate
influence, this Roman art of pure descent was practised in all its
refinement, an impure form of it--a patois of Romanesque--was carried by
inferior workmen into distant provinces; and still ruder imitations of
this patois were executed by the barbarous nations on the skirts of the
empire. But these barbarous nations were in the strength of their youth;
and while, in the centre of Europe, a refined and purely descended art
was sinking into graceful formalism, on its confines a barbarous and
borrowed art was organising itself into strength and consistency. The
reader must therefore consider the history of the work of the period as
broadly divided into two great heads: the one embracing the elaborately
languid succession of the Christian art of Rome; and the other, the
imitations of it executed by nations in every conceivable phase of early
organisation, on the edges of the empire, or included in its now merely
nominal extent.

§ XXIII. Some of the barbaric nations were, of course, not susceptible
of this influence; and when they burst over the Alps, appear, like the
Huns, as scourges only, or mix, as the Ostrogoths, with the enervated
Italians, and give physical strength to the mass with which they mingle,
without materially affecting its intellectual character. But others,
both south and north of the empire, had felt its influence, back to the
beach of the Indian Ocean on the one hand, and to the ice creeks of the
North Sea on the other. On the north and west the influence was of the
Latins; on the south and east, of the Greeks. Two nations, pre-eminent
above all the rest, represent to us the force of derived mind on either
side. As the central power is eclipsed, the orbs of reflected light
gather into their fulness; and when sensuality and idolatry had done
their work, and the religion of the empire was laid asleep in a
glittering sepulchre, the living light rose upon both horizons, and the
fierce swords of the Lombard and Arab were shaken over its golden
paralysis.

§ XXIV. The work of the Lombard was to give hardihood and system to the
enervated body and enfeebled mind of Christendom; that of the Arab was
to punish idolatry, and to proclaim the spirituality of worship. The
Lombard covered every church which he built with the sculptured
representations of bodily exercises--hunting and war.[20] The Arab
banished all imagination of creature form from his temples, and
proclaimed from their minarets, "There is no god but God." Opposite in
their character and mission, alike in their magnificence of energy, they
came from the North and from the South, the glacier torrent and the lava
stream: they met and contended over the wreck of the Roman empire; and
the very centre of the struggle, the point of pause of both, the dead
water of the opposite eddies, charged with embayed fragments of the
Roman wreck, is VENICE.

The Ducal palace of Venice contains the three elements in exactly equal
proportions--the Roman, Lombard, and Arab. It is the central building of
the world.

§ XXV. The reader will now begin to understand something of the
importance of the study of the edifices of a city which includes, within
the circuit of some seven or eight miles, the field of contest between
the three pre-eminent architectures of the world:--each architecture
expressing a condition of religion; each an erroneous condition, yet
necessary to the correction of the others, and corrected by them.

§ XXVI. It will be part of my endeavor, in the following work, to mark
the various modes in which the northern and southern architectures were
developed from the Roman: here I must pause only to name the
distinguishing characteristics of the great families. The Christian
Roman and Byzantine work is round-arched, with single and
well-proportioned shafts; capitals imitated from classical Roman;
mouldings more or less so; and large surfaces of walls entirely covered
with imagery, mosaic, and paintings, whether of scripture history or of
sacred symbols.

The Arab school is at first the same in its principal features, the
Byzantine workmen being employed by the caliphs; but the Arab rapidly
introduces characters half Persepolitan, half Egyptian, into the shafts
and capitals: in his intense love of excitement he points the arch and
writhes it into extravagant foliations; he banishes the animal imagery,
and invents an ornamentation of his own (called Arabesque) to replace
it: this not being adapted for covering large surfaces, he concentrates
it on features of interest, and bars his surfaces with horizontal lines
of color, the expression of the level of the Desert. He retains the
dome, and adds the minaret. All is done with exquisite refinement.

§ XXVII. The changes effected by the Lombard are more curious still, for
they are in the anatomy of the building, more than its decoration. The
Lombard architecture represents, as I said, the whole of that of the
northern barbaric nations. And this I believe was, at first, an
imitation in wood of the Christian Roman churches or basilicas. Without
staying to examine the whole structure of a basilica, the reader will
easily understand thus much of it: that it had a nave and two aisles,
the nave much higher than the aisles; that the nave was separated from
the aisles by rows of shafts, which supported, above, large spaces of
flat or dead wall, rising above the aisles, and forming the upper part
of the nave, now called the clerestory, which had a gabled wooden roof.

These high dead walls were, in Roman work, built of stone; but in the
wooden work of the North, they must necessarily have been made of
horizontal boards or timbers attached to uprights on the top of the nave
pillars, which were themselves also of wood.[21] Now, these uprights
were necessarily thicker than the rest of the timbers, and formed
vertical square pilasters above the nave piers. As Christianity extended
and civilisation increased, these wooden structures were changed into
stone; but they were literally petrified, retaining the form which had
been made necessary by their being of wood. The upright pilaster above
the nave pier remains in the stone edifice, and is the first form of the
great distinctive feature of Northern architecture--the vaulting shaft.
In that form the Lombards brought it into Italy, in the seventh century,
and it remains to this day in St. Ambrogio of Milan, and St. Michele of
Pavia.

§ XXVIII. When the vaulting shaft was introduced in the clerestory
walls, additional members were added for its support to the nave piers.
Perhaps two or three pine trunks, used for a single pillar, gave the
first idea of the grouped shaft. Be that as it may, the arrangement of
the nave pier in the form of a cross accompanies the superimposition of
the vaulting shaft; together with corresponding grouping of minor shafts
in doorways and apertures of windows. Thus, the whole body of the
Northern architecture, represented by that of the Lombards, may be
described as rough but majestic work, round-arched, with grouped shafts,
added vaulting shafts, and endless imagery of active life and fantastic
superstitions.

§ XXIX. The glacier stream of the Lombards, and the following one of the
Normans, left their erratic blocks, wherever they had flowed; but
without influencing, I think, the Southern nations beyond the sphere of
their own presence. But the lava stream of the Arab, even after it
ceased to flow, warmed the whole of the Northern air; and the history of
Gothic architecture is the history of the refinement and
spiritualisation of Northern work under its influence. The noblest
buildings of the world, the Pisan-Romanesque, Tuscan (Giottesque)
Gothic, and Veronese Gothic, are those of the Lombard schools
themselves, under its close and direct influence; the various Gothics of
the North are the original forms of the architecture which the Lombards
brought into Italy, changing under the less direct influence of the
Arab.

§ XXX. Understanding thus much of the formation of the great European
styles, we shall have no difficulty in tracing the succession of
architectures in Venice herself. From what I said of the central
character of Venetian art, the reader is not, of course, to conclude
that the Roman, Northern, and Arabian elements met together and
contended for the mastery at the same period. The earliest element was
the pure Christian Roman; but few, if any, remains of this art exist at
Venice; for the present city was in the earliest times only one of many
settlements formed on the chain of marshy islands which extend from the
mouths of the Isonzo to those of the Adige, and it was not until the
beginning of the ninth century that it became the seat of government;
while the cathedral of Torcello, though Christian Roman in general form,
was rebuilt in the eleventh century, and shows evidence of Byzantine
workmanship in many of its details. This cathedral, however, with the
church of Santa Fosca at Torcello, San Giacomo di Rialto at Venice, and
the crypt of St. Mark's, forms a distinct group of buildings, in which
the Byzantine influence is exceedingly slight; and which is probably
very sufficiently representative of the earliest architecture on the
islands.

§ XXXI. The Ducal residence was removed to Venice in 809, and the body
of St. Mark was brought from Alexandria twenty years later. The first
church of St. Mark's was, doubtless, built in imitation of that
destroyed at Alexandria, and from which the relics of the saint had been
obtained. During the ninth, tenth, and eleventh centuries, the
architecture of Venice seems to have been formed on the same model, and
is almost identical with that of Cairo under the caliphs,[22] it being
quite immaterial whether the reader chooses to call both Byzantine or
both Arabic; the workmen being certainly Byzantine, but forced to the
invention of new forms by their Arabian masters, and bringing these
forms into use in whatever other parts of the world they were employed.

To this first manner of Venetian architecture, together with vestiges as
remain of the Christian Roman, I shall devote the first division of the
following inquiry. The examples remaining of it consist of three noble
churches (those of Torcello, Murano, and the greater part of St.
Mark's), and about ten or twelve fragments of palaces.

§ XXXII. To this style succeeds a transitional one, of a character much
more distinctly Arabian: the shafts become more slender, and the arches
consistently pointed, instead of round; certain other changes, not to be
enumerated in a sentence, taking place in the capitals and mouldings.
This style is almost exclusively secular. It was natural for the
Venetians to imitate the beautiful details of the Arabian
dwelling-house, while they would with reluctance adopt those of the
mosque for Christian churches.

I have not succeeded in fixing limiting dates for this style. It appears
in part contemporary with the Byzantine manner, but outlives it. Its
position is, however, fixed by the central date, 1180, that of the
elevation of the granite shafts of the Piazetta, whose capitals are the
two most important pieces of detail in this transitional style in
Venice. Examples of its application to domestic buildings exist in
almost every street of the city, and will form the subject of the second
division of the following essay.

§ XXXIII. The Venetians were always ready to receive lessons in art from
their enemies (else had there been no Arab work in Venice). But their
especial dread and hatred of the Lombards appears to have long prevented
them from receiving the influence of the art which that people had
introduced on the mainland of Italy. Nevertheless, during the practice
of the two styles above distinguished, a peculiar and very primitive
condition of pointed Gothic had arisen in ecclesiastical architecture.
It appears to be a feeble reflection of the Lombard-Arab forms, which
were attaining perfection upon the continent, and would probably, if
left to itself, have been soon merged in the Venetian-Arab school, with
which it had from the first so close a fellowship, that it will be found
difficult to distinguish the Arabian ogives from those which seem to
have been built under this early Gothic influence. The churches of San
Giacopo dell'Orio, San Giovanni in Bragora, the Carmine, and one or two
more, furnish the only important examples of it. But, in the thirteenth
century, the Franciscans and Dominicans introduced from the continent
their morality and their architecture, already a distinct Gothic,
curiously developed from Lombardic and Northern (German?) forms; and the
influence of the principles exhibited in the vast churches of St. Paul
and the Frari began rapidly to affect the Venetian-Arab school. Still
the two systems never became united; the Venetian policy repressed the
power of the church, and the Venetian artists resisted its example; and
thenceforward the architecture of the city becomes divided into
ecclesiastical and civil: the one an ungraceful yet powerful form of the
Western Gothic, common to the whole peninsula, and only showing Venetian
sympathies in the adoption of certain characteristic mouldings; the
other a rich, luxuriant, and entirely original Gothic, formed from the
Venetian-Arab by the influence of the Dominican and Franciscan
architecture, and especially by the engrafting upon the Arab forms of
the most novel feature of the Franciscan work, its traceries. These
various forms of Gothic, the _distinctive_ architecture of Venice,
chiefly represented by the churches of St. John and Paul, the Frari, and
San Stefano, on the ecclesiastical side, and by the Ducal palace, and
the other principal Gothic palaces, on the secular side, will be the
subject of the third division of the essay.

§ XXXIV. Now observe. The transitional (or especially Arabic) style of
the Venetian work is centralised by the date 1180, and is transformed
gradually into the Gothic, which extends in its purity from the middle
of the thirteenth to the beginning of the fifteenth century; that is to
say, over the precise period which I have described as the central epoch
of the life of Venice. I dated her decline from the year 1418; Foscari
became doge five years later, and in his reign the first marked signs
appear in architecture of that mighty change which Philippe de Commynes
notices as above, the change to which London owes St. Paul's, Rome St.
Peter's, Venice and Vicenza the edifices commonly supposed to be their
noblest, and Europe in general the degradation of every art she has
since practised.

§ XXXV. This change appears first in a loss of truth and vitality in
existing architecture all over the world. (Compare "Seven Lamps," chap.
ii.) All the Gothics in existence, southern or northern, were corrupted
at once: the German and French lost themselves in every species of
extravagance; the English Gothic was confined, in its insanity, by a
strait-waistcoat of perpendicular lines; the Italian effloresced on the
mainland into the meaningless ornamentation of the Certosa of Pavia and
the Cathedral of Como (a style sometimes ignorantly called Italian
Gothic), and at Venice into the insipid confusion of the Porta della
Carta and wild crockets of St. Mark's. This corruption of all
architecture, especially ecclesiastical, corresponded with, and marked
the state of religion over all Europe,--the peculiar degradation of the
Romanist superstition, and of public morality in consequence, which
brought about the Reformation.

§ XXXVI. Against the corrupted papacy arose two great divisions of
adversaries, Protestants in Germany and England, Rationalists in France
and Italy; the one requiring the purification of religion, the other its
destruction. The Protestant kept the religion, but cast aside the
heresies of Rome, and with them her arts, by which last rejection he
injured his own character, cramped his intellect in refusing to it one
of its noblest exercises, and materially diminished his influence. It
may be a serious question how far the Pausing of the Reformation has
been a consequence of this error.

The Rationalist kept the arts and cast aside the religion. This
rationalistic art is the art commonly called Renaissance, marked by a
return to pagan systems, not to adopt them and hallow them for
Christianity, but to rank itself under them as an imitator and pupil. In
Painting it is headed by Giulio Romano and Nicolo Poussin; in
Architecture by Sansovino and Palladio.

§ XXXVII. Instant degradation followed in every direction,--a flood of
folly and hypocrisy. Mythologies ill understood at first, then perverted
into feeble sensualities, take the place of the representations of
Christian subjects, which had become blasphemous under the treatment of
men like the Caracci. Gods without power, satyrs without rusticity,
nymphs without innocence, men without humanity, gather into idiot groups
upon the polluted canvas, and scenic affectations encumber the streets
with preposterous marble. Lower and lower declines the level of abused
intellect; the base school of landscape[23] gradually usurps the place
of the historical painting, which had sunk into prurient pedantry,--the
Alsatian sublimities of Salvator, the confectionery idealities of
Claude, the dull manufacture of Gaspar and Canaletto, south of the Alps,
and on the north the patient devotion of besotted lives to delineation
of bricks and fogs, fat cattle and ditchwater. And thus Christianity and
morality, courage, and intellect, and art all crumbling together into
one wreck, we are hurried on to the fall of Italy, the revolution in
France, and the condition of art in England (saved by her Protestantism
from severer penalty) in the time of George II.

§ XXXVIII. I have not written in vain if I have heretofore done anything
towards diminishing the reputation of the Renaissance landscape
painting. But the harm which has been done by Claude and the Poussins is
as nothing when compared to the mischief effected by Palladio, Scamozzi,
and Sansovino. Claude and the Poussins were weak men, and have had no
serious influence on the general mind. There is little harm in their
works being purchased at high prices: their real influence is very
slight, and they may be left without grave indignation to their poor
mission of furnishing drawing-rooms and assisting stranded conversation.
Not so the Renaissance architecture. Raised at once into all the
magnificence of which it was capable by Michael Angelo, then taken up by
men of real intellect and imagination, such as Scamozzi, Sansovino,
Inigo Jones, and Wren, it is impossible to estimate the extent of its
influence on the European mind; and that the more, because few persons
are concerned with painting, and, of those few, the larger number
regard it with slight attention; but all men are concerned with
architecture, and have at some time of their lives serious business with
it. It does not much matter that an individual loses two or three
hundred pounds in buying a bad picture, but it is to be regretted that a
nation should lose two or three hundred thousand in raising a ridiculous
building. Nor is it merely wasted wealth or distempered conception which
we have to regret in this Renaissance architecture: but we shall find in
it partly the root, partly the expression, of certain dominant evils of
modern times--over-sophistication and ignorant classicalism; the one
destroying the healthfulness of general society, the other rendering our
schools and universities useless to a large number of the men who pass
through them.

Now Venice, as she was once the most religious, was in her fall the most
corrupt, of European states; and as she was in her strength the centre
of the pure currents of Christian architecture, so she is in her decline
the source of the Renaissance. It was the originality and splendor of
the palaces of Vicenza and Venice which gave this school its eminence in
the eyes of Europe; and the dying city, magnificent in her dissipation,
and graceful in her follies, obtained wider worship in her decrepitude
than in her youth, and sank from the midst of her admirers into the
grave.

§ XXXIX. It is in Venice, therefore, and in Venice only that effectual
blows can be struck at this pestilent art of the Renaissance. Destroy
its claims to admiration there, and it can assert them nowhere else.
This, therefore, will be the final purpose of the following essay. I
shall not devote a fourth section to Palladio, nor weary the reader with
successive chapters of vituperation; but I shall, in my account of the
earlier architecture, compare the forms of all its leading features with
those into which they were corrupted by the Classicalists; and pause, in
the close, on the edge of the precipice of decline, so soon as I have
made its depths discernible. In doing this I shall depend upon two
distinct kinds of evidence:--the first, the testimony borne by
particular incidents and facts to a want of thought or of feeling in the
builders; from which we may conclude that their architecture must be
bad:--the second, the sense, which I doubt not I shall be able to excite
in the reader, of a systematic ugliness in the architecture itself. Of
the first kind of testimony I shall here give two instances, which may
be immediately useful in fixing in the readers mind the epoch above
indicated for the commencement of decline.

§ XL. I must again refer to the importance which I have above attached
to the death of Carlo Zeno and the doge Tomaso Mocenigo. The tomb of
that doge is, as I said, wrought by a Florentine; but it is of the same
general type and feeling as all the Venetian tombs of the period, and it
is one of the last which retains it. The classical element enters
largely into its details, but the feeling of the whole is as yet
unaffected. Like all the lovely tombs of Venice and Verona, it is a
sarcophagus with a recumbent figure above, and this figure is a faithful
but tender portrait, wrought as far as it can be without painfulness, of
the doge as he lay in death. He wears his ducal robe and bonnet--his
head is laid slightly aside upon his pillow--his hands are simply
crossed as they fall. The face is emaciated, the features large, but so
pure and lordly in their natural chiselling, that they must have looked
like marble even in their animation. They are deeply worn away by
thought and death; the veins on the temples branched and starting; the
skin gathered in sharp folds; the brow high-arched and shaggy; the
eye-ball magnificently large; the curve of the lips just veiled by the
light mustache at the side; the beard short, double, and sharp-pointed:
all noble and quiet; the white sepulchral dust marking like light the
stern angles of the cheek and brow.

This tomb was sculptured in 1424, and is thus described by one of the
most intelligent of the recent writers who represent the popular feeling
respecting Venetian art.

   "Of the Italian school is also the rich but ugly (ricco ma non bel)
   sarcophagus in which repose the ashes of Tomaso Mocenigo. It may be
   called one of the last links which connect the declining art of the
   Middle Ages with that of the Renaissance, which was in its rise. We
   will not stay to particularise the defects of each of the seven
   figures of the front and sides, which represent the cardinal and
   theological virtues; nor will we make any remarks upon those which
   stand in the niches above the pavilion, because we consider them
   unworthy both of the age and reputation of the Florentine school,
   which was then with reason considered the most notable in Italy."[24]

It is well, indeed, not to pause over these defects; but it might have
been better to have paused a moment beside that noble image of a king's
mortality.

§ XLI. In the choir of the same church, St. Giov. and Paolo, is another
tomb, that of the Doge Andrea Vendramin. This doge died in 1478, after a
short reign of two years, the most disastrous in the annals of Venice.
He died of a pestilence which followed the ravage of the Turks, carried
to the shores of the lagoons. He died, leaving Venice disgraced by sea
and land, with the smoke of hostile devastation rising in the blue
distances of Friuli; and there was raised to him the most costly tomb
ever bestowed on her monarchs.

§ XLII. If the writer above quoted was cold beside the statue of one of
the fathers of his country, he atones for it by his eloquence beside the
tomb of the Vendramin. I must not spoil the force of Italian superlative
by translation.

   "Quando si guarda a quella corretta eleganza di profili e di
   proporzioni, a quella squisitezza d'ornamenti, a quel certo sapore
   antico che senza ombra d'imitazione traspare da tutta l'opera"--&c.
   "Sopra ornatissimo zoccolo fornito di squisiti intagli s'alza uno
   stylobate"--&c. "Sotto le colonne, il predetto stilobate si muta
   leggiadramente in piedistallo, poi con bella novità di pensiero e di
   effetto va coronato da un fregio il più gentile che veder si
   possa"--&c. "Non puossi lasciar senza un cenno l'_arca dove_ sta
   chiuso il doge; capo lavoro di pensiero e di esecuzione," &c.

There are two pages and a half of closely printed praise, of which the
above specimens may suffice; but there is not a word of the statue of the
dead from beginning to end. I am myself in the habit of considering this
rather an important part of a tomb, and I was especially interested in it
here, because Selvatico only echoes the praise of thousands. It is
unanimously declared the chef d'oeuvre of Renaissance sepulchral work,
and pronounced by Cicognara (also quoted by Selvatico)

   "Il vertice a cui l'arti Veneziane si spinsero col ministero del
   scalpello,"--"The very culminating point to which the Venetian arts
   attained by ministry of the chisel."

To this culminating point, therefore, covered with dust and cobwebs, I
attained, as I did to every tomb of importance in Venice, by the
ministry of such ancient ladders as were to be found in the sacristan's
keeping. I was struck at first by the excessive awkwardness and want of
feeling in the fall of the hand towards the spectator, for it is thrown
off the middle of the body in order to show its fine cutting. Now the
Mocenigo hand, severe and even stiff in its articulations, has its veins
finely drawn, its sculptor having justly felt that the delicacy of the
veining expresses alike dignity and age and birth. The Vendramin hand is
far more laboriously cut, but its blunt and clumsy contour at once makes
us feel that all the care has been thrown away, and well it may be, for
it has been entirely bestowed in cutting gouty wrinkles about the
joints. Such as the hand is, I looked for its fellow. At first I thought
it had been broken off, but, on clearing away the dust, I saw the
wretched effigy had only _one_ hand, and was a mere block on the inner
side. The face, heavy and disagreeable in its features, is made
monstrous by its semi-sculpture. One side of the forehead is wrinkled
elaborately, the other left smooth; one side only of the doge's cap is
chased; one cheek only is finished, and the other blocked out and
distorted besides; finally, the ermine robe, which is elaborately
imitated to its utmost lock of hair and of ground hair on the one side,
is blocked out only on the other: it having been supposed throughout the
work that the effigy was only to be seen from below, and from one side.

§ XLIII. It was indeed to be so seen by nearly every one; and I do not
blame--I should, on the contrary, have praised--the sculptor for
regulating his treatment of it by its position; if that treatment had
not involved, first, dishonesty, in giving only half a face, a
monstrous mask, when we demanded true portraiture of the dead; and,
secondly, such utter coldness of feeling, as could only consist with an
extreme of intellectual and moral degradation: Who, with a heart in his
breast, could have stayed his hand as he drew the dim lines of the old
man's countenance--unmajestic once, indeed, but at least sanctified by
the solemnities of death--could have stayed his hand, as he reached the
bend of the grey forehead, and measured out the last veins of it at so
much the zecchin?

I do not think the reader, if he has feeling, will expect that much
talent should be shown in the rest of his work, by the sculptor of this
base and senseless lie. The whole monument is one wearisome aggregation
of that species of ornamental flourish, which, when it is done with a
pen, is called penmanship, and when done with a chisel, should be called
chiselmanship; the subject of it being chiefly fat-limbed boys sprawling
on dolphins, dolphins incapable of swimming, and dragged along the sea
by expanded pocket-handkerchiefs.

But now, reader, comes the very gist and point of the whole matter. This
lying monument to a dishonored doge, this culminating pride of the
Renaissance art of Venice, is at least veracious, if in nothing else, in
its testimony to the character of its sculptor. _He was banished from
Venice for forgery_ in 1487.[25]

§ XLIV. I have more to say about this convict's work hereafter; but I
pass at present, to the second, slighter, but yet more interesting piece
of evidence, which I promised.

The ducal palace has two principal façades; one towards the sea, the
other towards the Piazzetta. The seaward side, and, as far as the
seventh main arch inclusive, the Piazzetta side, is work of the early
part of the fourteenth century, some of it perhaps even earlier; while
the rest of the Piazzetta side is of the fifteenth. The difference in
age has been gravely disputed by the Venetian antiquaries, who have
examined many documents on the subject, and quoted some which they never
examined. I have myself collated most of the written documents, and one
document more, to which the Venetian antiquaries never thought of
referring,--the masonry of the palace itself.

§ XLV. That masonry changes at the centre of the eighth arch from the
sea angle on the Piazzetta side. It has been of comparatively small
stones up to that point; the fifteenth century work instantly begins
with larger stones, "brought from Istria, a hundred miles away."[26] The
ninth shaft from the sea in the lower arcade, and the seventeenth, which
is above it, in the upper arcade, commence the series of fifteenth
century shafts. These two are somewhat thicker than the others, and
carry the party-wall of the Sala del Scrutinio. Now observe, reader. The
face of the palace, from this point to the Porta della Carta, was built
at the instance of that noble Doge Mocenigo beside whose tomb you have
been standing; at his instance, and in the beginning of the reign of his
successor, Foscari; that is to say, circa 1424. This is not disputed; it
is only disputed that the sea façade is earlier; of which, however, the
proofs are as simple as they are incontrovertible: for not only the
masonry, but the sculpture, changes at the ninth lower shaft, and that
in the capitals of the shafts both of the upper and lower arcade: the
costumes of the figures introduced in the sea façade being purely
Giottesque, correspondent with Giotto's work in the Arena Chapel at
Padua, while the costume on the other capitals is Renaissance-Classic:
and the lions' heads between the arches change at the same point. And
there are a multitude of other evidences in the statues of the angels,
with which I shall not at present trouble the reader.

§ XLVI. Now, the architect who built under Foscari, in 1424 (remember my
date for the decline of Venice, 1418), was obliged to follow the
principal forms of the older palace. But he had not the wit to invent
new capitals in the same style; he therefore clumsily copied the old
ones. The palace has seventeen main arches on the sea façade, eighteen
on the Piazzetta side, which in all are of course carried by thirty-six
pillars; and these pillars I shall always number from right to left,
from the angle of the palace at the Ponte della Paglia to that next the
Porta della Carta. I number them in this succession, because I thus have
the earliest shafts first numbered. So counted, the 1st, the 18th, and
the 36th, are the great supports of the angles of the palace; and the
first of the fifteenth century series, being, as above stated, the 9th
from the sea on the Piazzetta side, is the 26th of the entire series,
and will always in future be so numbered, so that all numbers above
twenty-six indicate fifteenth century work, and all below it, fourteenth
century, with some exceptional cases of restoration.

Then the copied capitals are: the 28th, copied from the 7th; the 29th,
from the 9th; the 30th, from the 10th; the 31st, from the 8th; the 33rd,
from the 12th; and the 34th, from the 11th; the others being dull
inventions of the 15th century, except the 36th, which is very nobly
designed.

§ XLVII. The capitals thus selected from the earlier portion of the
palace for imitation, together with the rest, will be accurately
described hereafter; the point I have here to notice is in the copy of
the ninth capital, which was decorated (being, like the rest, octagonal)
with figures of the eight Virtues:--Faith, Hope, Charity, Justice,
Temperance, Prudence, Humility (the Venetian antiquaries call it
Humanity!), and Fortitude. The Virtues of the fourteenth century are
somewhat hard-featured; with vivid and living expression, and plain
every-day clothes of the time. Charity has her lap full of apples
(perhaps loaves), and is giving one to a little child, who stretches his
arm for it across a gap in the leafage of the capital. Fortitude tears
open a lion's jaws; Faith lays her hand on her breast, as she beholds
the Cross; and Hope is praying, while above her a hand is seen emerging
from sunbeams--the hand of God (according to that of Revelations, "The
Lord God giveth them light"); and the inscription above is, "Spes optima
in Deo."

§ XLVIII. This design, then, is, rudely and with imperfect chiselling,
imitated by the fifteenth century workmen: the Virtues have lost their
hard features and living expression; they have now all got Roman noses,
and have had their hair curled. Their actions and emblems are, however,
preserved until we come to Hope: she is still praying, but she is
praying to the sun only: _The hand of God is gone._

Is not this a curious and striking type of the spirit which had then
become dominant in the world, forgetting to see God's hand in the light
He gave; so that in the issue, when that light opened into the
Reformation, on the one side, and into full knowledge of ancient
literature on the other, the one was arrested and the other perverted?

§ XLIX. Such is the nature of the accidental evidence on which I shall
depend for the proof of the inferiority of character in the Renaissance
workmen. But the proof of the inferiority of the work itself is not so
easy, for in this I have to appeal to judgments which the Renaissance
work has itself distorted. I felt this difficulty very forcibly as I
read a slight review of my former work, "The Seven Lamps," in "The
Architect:" the writer noticed my constant praise of St. Mark's: "Mr.
Ruskin thinks it a very beautiful building! We," said the Architect,
"think it a very ugly building." I was not surprised at the difference
of opinion, but at the thing being considered so completely a subject of
opinion. My opponents in matters of painting always assume that there
_is_ such a thing as a law of right, and that I do not understand it:
but my architectural adversaries appeal to no law, they simply set their
opinion against mine; and indeed there is no law at present to which
either they or I can appeal. No man can speak with rational decision of
the merits or demerits of buildings: he may with obstinacy; he may with
resolved adherence to previous prejudices; but never as if the matter
could be otherwise decided than by a majority of votes, or pertinacity
of partizanship. I had always, however, a clear conviction that there
_was_ a law in this matter: that good architecture might be indisputably
discerned and divided from the bad; that the opposition in their very
nature and essence was clearly visible; and that we were all of us just
as unwise in disputing about the matter without reference to principle,
as we should be for debating about the genuineness of a coin, without
ringing it. I felt also assured that this law must be universal if it
were conclusive; that it must enable us to reject all foolish and base
work, and to accept all noble and wise work, without reference to style
or national feeling; that it must sanction the design of all truly great
nations and times, Gothic or Greek or Arab; that it must cast off and
reprobate the design of all foolish nations and times, Chinese or
Mexican, or modern European: and that it must be easily applicable to
all possible architectural inventions of human mind. I set myself,
therefore, to establish such a law, in full belief that men are
intended, without excessive difficulty, and by use of their general
common sense, to know good things from bad; and that it is only because
they will not be at the pains required for the discernment, that the
world is so widely encumbered with forgeries and basenesses. I found the
work simpler than I had hoped; the reasonable things ranged themselves
in the order I required, and the foolish things fell aside, and took
themselves away so soon as they were looked in the face. I had then,
with respect to Venetian architecture, the choice, either to establish
each division of law in a separate form, as I came to the features with
which it was concerned, or else to ask the reader's patience, while I
followed out the general inquiry first, and determined with him a code
of right and wrong, to which we might together make retrospective
appeal. I thought this the best, though perhaps the dullest way; and in
these first following pages I have therefore endeavored to arrange those
foundations of criticism, on which I shall rest in my account of
Venetian architecture, in a form clear and simple enough to be
intelligible even to those who never thought of architecture before. To
those who have, much of what is stated in them will be well known or
self-evident; but they must not be indignant at a simplicity on which
the whole argument depends for its usefulness. From that which appears a
mere truism when first stated, they will find very singular consequences
sometimes following,--consequences altogether unexpected, and of
considerable importance; I will not pause here to dwell on their
importance, nor on that of the thing itself to be done; for I believe
most readers will at once admit the value of a criterion of right and
wrong in so practical and costly an art as architecture, and will be apt
rather to doubt the possibility of its attainment than dispute its
usefulness if attained. I invite them, therefore, to a fair trial, being
certain that even if I should fail in my main purpose, and be unable to
induce in my reader the confidence of judgment I desire, I shall at
least receive his thanks for the suggestion of consistent reasons, which
may determine hesitating choice, or justify involuntary preference. And
if I should succeed, as I hope, in making the Stones of Venice
touchstones, and detecting, by the mouldering of her marble, poison more
subtle than ever was betrayed by the rending of her crystal; and if thus
I am enabled to show the baseness of the schools of architecture and
nearly every other art, which have for three centuries been predominant
in Europe, I believe the result of the inquiry may be serviceable for
proof of a more vital truth than any at which I have hitherto hinted.
For observe: I said the Protestant had despised the arts, and the
Rationalist corrupted them. But what has the Romanist done meanwhile? He
boasts that it was the papacy which raised the arts; why could it not
support them when it was left to its own strength? How came it to yield
to Classicalism which was based on infidelity, and to oppose no barrier
to innovations, which have reduced the once faithfully conceived imagery
of its worship to stage decoration? Shall we not rather find that
Romanism, instead of being a promoter of the arts, has never shown
itself capable of a single great conception since the separation of
Protestantism from its side?[27] So long as, corrupt though it might be,
no clear witness had been borne against it, so that it still included in
its ranks a vast number of faithful Christians, so long its arts were
noble. But the witness was borne--the error made apparent; and Rome,
refusing to hear the testimony or forsake the falsehood, has been struck
from that instant with an intellectual palsy, which has not only
incapacitated her from any further use of the arts which once were her
ministers, but has made her worship the shame of its own shrines, and
her worshippers their destroyers. Come, then, if truths such as these
are worth our thoughts; come, and let us know, before we enter the
streets of the Sea city, whether we are indeed to submit ourselves to
their undistinguished enchantment, and to look upon the last changes
which were wrought on the lifted forms of her palaces, as we should on
the capricious towering of summer clouds in the sunset, ere they sank
into the deep of night; or whether, rather, we shall not behold in the
brightness of their accumulated marble, pages on which the sentence of
her luxury was to be written until the waves should efface it, as they
fulfilled--"God has numbered thy kingdom, and finished it."


FOOTNOTES:

  [1] Appendix 1, "Foundation of Venice."

  [2] Appendix 2, "Power of the Doges."

  [3] Sismondi, Hist. des Rép. Ital., vol. i. ch. v.

  [4] Appendix 3, "Serrar del Consiglio."

  [5] "Ha saputo trovar modo che non uno, non pochi, non molti,
    signoreggiano, ma molti buoni, pochi migliori, e insiememente, _un
    ottimo solo_." (_Sansovino._) Ah, well done, Venice! Wisdom this,
    indeed.

  [6] Daru, liv. xii. ch. xii.

  [7] Daru, liv. xvi. cap. xx. We owe to this historian the discovery
    of the statutes of the tribunal and date of its establishment.

  [8] Ominously signified by their humiliation to the Papal power (as
    before to the Turkish) in 1509, and their abandonment of their right
    of appointing the clergy of their territories.

  [9] The senate voted the abdication of their authority by a majority
    of 512 to 14. (Alison, ch. xxiii.)

  [10] By directing the arms of the Crusaders against a Christian
    prince. (Daru, liv. iv. ch. iv. viii.)

  [11] Appendix 4, "San Pietro di Castello."

  [12] Tomaso Mocenigo, above named, § V.

  [13]                         "In that temple porch,
         (The brass is gone, the porphyry remains,)
         Did BARBAROSSA fling his mantle off,
         And kneeling, on his neck receive the foot
         Of the proud Pontiff--thus at last consoled
         For flight, disguise, and many an aguish shake
         On his stone pillow."

    I need hardly say whence the lines are taken: Rogers' "Italy" has, I
    believe, now a place in the best beloved compartment of all
    libraries, and will never be removed from it. There is more true
    expression of the spirit of Venice in the passages devoted to her in
    that poem, than in all else that has been written of her.

  [14] At least, such success as they had. Vide Appendix 5, "The Papal
    Power in Venice."

  [15] The inconsiderable fortifications of the arsenal are no
    exception to this statement, as far as it regards the city itself.
    They are little more than a semblance of precaution against the
    attack of a foreign enemy.

  [16] Mémoires de Commynes, liv. vii. ch. xviii.

  [17] Appendix 6, "Renaissance Ornaments."

  [18] Appendix 7, "Varieties of the Orders."

  [19] The reader will find the _weak_ points of Byzantine
    architecture shrewdly seized, and exquisitely sketched, in the
    opening chapter of the most delightful book of travels I ever
    opened,--Curzon's "Monasteries of the Levant."

  [20] Appendix 8, "The Northern Energy."

  [21] Appendix 9, "Wooden Churches of the North."

  [22] Appendix 10, "Church of Alexandria."

  [23] Appendix 11, "Renaissance Landscape."

  [24] Selvatico, "Architettura di Venezia," p. 147.

  [25] Selvatico, p. 221.

  [26] The older work is of Istrian stone also, but of different
    quality.

  [27] Appendix 12, "Romanist Modern Art."




CHAPTER II.

  THE VIRTUES OF ARCHITECTURE.


§ I. We address ourselves, then, first to the task of determining some
law of right which we may apply to the architecture of all the world and
of all time; and by help of which, and judgment according to which, we
may easily pronounce whether a building is good or noble, as, by
applying a plumb-line, whether it be perpendicular.

The first question will of course be: What are the possible Virtues of
architecture?

In the main, we require from buildings, as from men, two kinds of
goodness: first, the doing their practical duty well: then that they be
graceful and pleasing in doing it; which last is itself another form of
duty.

Then the practical duty divides itself into two branches,--acting and
talking:--acting, as to defend us from weather or violence; talking, as
the duty of monuments or tombs, to record facts and express feelings; or
of churches, temples, public edifices, treated as books of history, to
tell such history clearly and forcibly.

We have thus, altogether, three great branches of architectural virtue,
and we require of any building,--

1. That it act well, and do the things it was intended to do in the best
    way.

2. That it speak well, and say the things it was intended to say in the
    best words.

3. That it look well, and please us by its presence, whatever it has to
    do or say.[28]

§ II. Now, as regards the second of these virtues, it is evident that
we can establish no general laws. First, because it is not a virtue
required in all buildings; there are some which are only for covert or
defence, and from which we ask no conversation. Secondly, because there
are countless methods of expression, some conventional, some natural:
each conventional mode has its own alphabet, which evidently can be no
subject of general laws. Every natural mode is instinctively employed
and instinctively understood, wherever there is true feeling; and this
instinct is above law. The choice of conventional methods depends on
circumstances out of calculation, and that of natural methods on
sensations out of control; so that we can only say that the choice is
right, when we feel that the means are effective; and we cannot always
say that it is wrong when they are not so.

A building which recorded the Bible history by means of a series of
sculptural pictures, would be perfectly useless to a person unacquainted
with the Bible beforehand; on the other hand, the text of the Old and
New Testaments might be written on its walls, and yet the building be a
very inconvenient kind of book, not so useful as if it had been adorned
with intelligible and vivid sculpture. So, again, the power of exciting
emotion must vary or vanish, as the spectator becomes thoughtless or
cold; and the building may be often blamed for what is the fault of its
critic, or endowed with a charm which is of its spectator's creation. It
is not, therefore, possible to make expressional character any fair
criterion of excellence in buildings, until we can fully place ourselves
in the position of those to whom their expression was originally
addressed, and until we are certain that we understand every symbol, and
are capable of being touched by every association which its builders
employed as letters of their language. I shall continually endeavor to
put the reader into such sympathetic temper, when I ask for his judgment
of a building; and in every work I may bring before him I shall point
out, as far as I am able, whatever is peculiar in its expression; nay, I
must even depend on such peculiarities for much of my best evidence
respecting the character of the builders. But I cannot legalize the
judgment for which I plead, nor insist upon it if it be refused. I can
neither force the reader to feel this architectural rhetoric, nor compel
him to confess that the rhetoric is powerful, if it have produced no
impression on his own mind.

§ III. I leave, therefore, the expression of buildings for incidental
notice only. But their other two virtues are proper subjects of
law,--their performance of their common and necessary work, and their
conformity with universal and divine canons of loveliness: respecting
these there can be no doubt, no ambiguity. I would have the reader
discern them so quickly that, as he passes along a street, he may, by a
glance of the eye, distinguish the noble from the ignoble work. He can
do this, if he permit free play to his natural instincts; and all that I
have to do for him is to remove from those instincts the artificial
restraints which prevent their action, and to encourage them to an
unaffected and unbiassed choice between right and wrong.

§ IV. We have, then, two qualities of buildings for subjects of separate
inquiry: their action, and aspect, and the sources of virtue in both;
that is to say, Strength and Beauty, both of these being less admired in
themselves, than as testifying the intelligence or imagination of the
builder.

For we have a worthier way of looking at human than at divine
architecture: much of the value both of construction and decoration, in
the edifices of men, depends upon our being led by the thing produced or
adorned, to some contemplation of the powers of mind concerned in its
creation or adornment. We are not so led by divine work, but are content
to rest in the contemplation of the thing created. I wish the reader to
note this especially: we take pleasure, or _should_ take pleasure, in
architectural construction altogether as the manifestation of an
admirable human intelligence; it is not the strength, not the size, not
the finish of the work which we are to venerate: rocks are always
stronger, mountains always larger, all natural objects more finished;
but it is the intelligence and resolution of man in overcoming physical
difficulty which are to be the source of our pleasure and subject of our
praise. And again, in decoration or beauty, it is less the actual
loveliness of the thing produced, than the choice and invention
concerned in the production, which are to delight us; the love and the
thoughts of the workman more than his work: his work must always be
imperfect, but his thoughts and affections may be true and deep.

§ V. This origin of our pleasure in architecture I must insist upon at
somewhat greater length, for I would fain do away with some of the
ungrateful coldness which we show towards the good builders of old time.
In no art is there closer connection between our delight in the work,
and our admiration of the workman's mind, than in architecture, and yet
we rarely ask for a builder's name. The patron at whose cost, the monk
through whose dreaming, the foundation was laid, we remember
occasionally; never the man who verily did the work. Did the reader ever
hear of William of Sens as having had anything to do with Canterbury
Cathedral? or of Pietro Basegio as in anywise connected with the Ducal
Palace of Venice? There is much ingratitude and injustice in this; and
therefore I desire my reader to observe carefully how much of his
pleasure in building is derived, or should be derived, from admiration
of the intellect of men whose names he knows not.

§ VI. The two virtues of architecture which we can justly weigh, are, we
said, its strength or good construction, and its beauty or good
decoration. Consider first, therefore, what you mean when you say a
building is well constructed or well built; you do not merely mean that
it answers its purpose,--this is much, and many modern buildings fail of
this much; but if it be verily well built, it must answer this purpose
in the simplest way, and with no over-expenditure of means. We require
of a light-house, for instance, that it shall stand firm and carry a
light; if it do not this, assuredly it has been ill built; but it may do
it to the end of time, and yet not be well built. It may have hundreds
of tons of stone in it more than were needed, and have cost thousands
of pounds more than it ought. To pronounce it well or ill built, we must
know the utmost forces it can have to resist, and the best arrangements
of stone for encountering them, and the quickest ways of effecting such
arrangements: then only, so far as such arrangements have been chosen,
and such methods used, is it well built. Then the knowledge of all
difficulties to be met, and of all means of meeting them, and the quick
and true fancy or invention of the modes of applying the means to the
end, are what we have to admire in the builder, even as he is seen
through this first or inferior part of his work. Mental power, observe:
not muscular nor mechanical, nor technical, nor empirical,--pure,
precious, majestic, massy intellect; not to be had at vulgar price, nor
received without thanks, and without asking from whom.

§ VII. Suppose, for instance, we are present at the building of a
bridge: the bricklayers or masons have had their centring erected for
them, and that centring was put together by a carpenter, who had the
line of its curve traced for him by the architect: the masons are
dexterously handling and fitting their bricks, or, by the help of
machinery, carefully adjusting stones which are numbered for their
places. There is probably in their quickness of eye and readiness of
hand something admirable; but this is not what I ask the reader to
admire: not the carpentering, nor the bricklaying, nor anything that he
can presently see and understand, but the choice of the curve, and the
shaping of the numbered stones, and the appointment of that number;
there were many things to be known and thought upon before these were
decided. The man who chose the curve and numbered the stones, had to
know the times and tides of the river, and the strength of its floods,
and the height and flow of them, and the soil of the banks, and the
endurance of it, and the weight of the stones he had to build with, and
the kind of traffic that day by day would be carried on over his
bridge,--all this specially, and all the great general laws of force and
weight, and their working; and in the choice of the curve and numbering
of stones are expressed not only his knowledge of these, but such
ingenuity and firmness as he had, in applying special means to overcome
the special difficulties about his bridge. There is no saying how much
wit, how much depth of thought, how much fancy, presence of mind,
courage, and fixed resolution there may have gone to the placing of a
single stone of it. This is what we have to admire,--this grand power
and heart of man in the thing; not his technical or empirical way of
holding the trowel and laying mortar.

§ VIII. Now there is in everything properly called art this concernment
of the intellect, even in the province of the art which seems merely
practical. For observe: in this bridge-building I suppose no reference
to architectural principles; all that I suppose we want is to get safely
over the river; the man who has taken us over is still a mere
bridge-builder,--a _builder_, not an architect: he may be a rough,
artless, feelingless man, incapable of doing any one truly fine thing
all his days. I shall call upon you to despise him presently in a sort,
but not as if he were a mere smoother of mortar; perhaps a great man,
infinite in memory, indefatigable in labor, exhaustless in expedient,
unsurpassable in quickness of thought. Take good heed you understand him
before you despise him.

§ IX. But why is he to be in anywise despised? By no means despise him,
unless he happen to be without a soul,[29] or at least to show no signs
of it; which possibly he may not in merely carrying you across the
river. He may be merely what Mr. Carlyle rightly calls a human beaver
after all; and there may be nothing in all that ingenuity of his greater
than a complication of animal faculties, an intricate bestiality,--nest
or hive building in its highest development. You need something more
than this, or the man is despicable; you need that virtue of building
through which he may show his affections and delights; you need its
beauty or decoration.

§ X. Not that, in reality, one division of the man is more human than
another. Theologists fall into this error very fatally and continually;
and a man from whom I have learned much, Lord Lindsay, has hurt his
noble book by it, speaking as if the spirit of the man only were
immortal, and were opposed to his intellect, and the latter to the
senses; whereas all the divisions of humanity are noble or brutal,
immortal or mortal, according to the degree of their sanctification; and
there is no part of the man which is not immortal and divine when it is
once given to God, and no part of him which is not mortal by the second
death, and brutal before the first, when it is withdrawn from God. For
to what shall we trust for our distinction from the beasts that perish?
To our higher intellect?--yet are we not bidden to be wise as the
serpent, and to consider the ways of the ant?--or to our affections?
nay; these are more shared by the lower animals than our intelligence.
Hamlet leaps into the grave of his beloved, and leaves it,--a dog had
stayed. Humanity and immortality consist neither in reason, nor in love;
not in the body, nor in the animation of the heart of it, nor in the
thoughts and stirrings of the brain of it,--but in the dedication of
them all to Him who will raise them up at the last day.

§ XI. It is not, therefore, that the signs of his affections, which man
leaves upon his work, are indeed more ennobling than the signs of his
intelligence; but it is the balance of both whose expression we need,
and the signs of the government of them all by Conscience; and
Discretion, the daughter of Conscience. So, then, the intelligent part
of man being eminently, if not chiefly, displayed in the structure of
his work, his affectionate part is to be shown in its decoration; and,
that decoration may be indeed lovely, two things are needed: first, that
the affections be vivid, and honestly shown; secondly, that they be
fixed on the right things.

§ XII. You think, perhaps, I have put the requirements in wrong order.
Logically I have; practically I have not: for it is necessary first to
teach men to speak out, and say what they like, truly; and, in the
second place, to teach them which of their likings are ill set, and
which justly. If a man is cold in his likings and dislikings, or if he
will not tell you what he likes, you can make nothing of him. Only get
him to feel quickly and to speak plainly, and you may set him right. And
the fact is, that the great evil of all recent architectural effort has
not been that men liked wrong things: but that they either cared nothing
about any, or pretended to like what they did not. Do you suppose that
any modern architect likes what he builds, or enjoys it? Not in the
least. He builds it because he has been told that such and such things
are fine, and that he _should_ like them. He pretends to like them, and
gives them a false relish of vanity. Do you seriously imagine, reader,
that any living soul in London likes triglyphs?[30]--or gets any hearty
enjoyment out of pediments?[31] You are much mistaken. Greeks did:
English people never did,--never will. Do you fancy that the architect
of old Burlington Mews, in Regent Street, had any particular
satisfaction in putting the blank triangle over the archway, instead of
a useful garret window? By no manner of means. He had been told it was
right to do so, and thought he should be admired for doing it. Very few
faults of architecture are mistakes of honest choice: they are almost
always hypocrisies.

§ XIII. So, then, the first thing we have to ask of the decoration is
that it should indicate strong liking, and that honestly. It matters not
so much what the thing is, as that the builder should really love it and
enjoy it, and say so plainly. The architect of Bourges Cathedral liked
hawthorns; so he has covered his porch with hawthorn,--it is a perfect
Niobe of May. Never was such hawthorn; you would try to gather it
forthwith, but for fear of being pricked. The old Lombard architects
liked hunting; so they covered their work with horses and hounds, and
men blowing trumpets two yards long. The base Renaissance architects of
Venice liked masquing and fiddling; so they covered their work with
comic masks and musical instruments. Even that was better than our
English way of liking nothing, and professing to like triglyphs.

§ XIV. But the second requirement in decoration, is a sign of our liking
the right thing. And the right thing to be liked is God's work, which He
made for our delight and contentment in this world. And all noble
ornamentation is the expression of man's delight in God's work.

§ XV. So, then, these are the two virtues of building: first, the signs
of man's own good work; secondly, the expression of man's delight in
better work than his own. And these are the two virtues of which I
desire my reader to be able quickly to judge, at least in some measure;
to have a definite opinion up to a certain point. Beyond a certain point
he cannot form one. When the science of the building is great, great
science is of course required to comprehend it; and, therefore, of
difficult bridges, and light-houses, and harbor walls, and river dykes,
and railway tunnels, no judgment may be rapidly formed. But of common
buildings, built in common circumstances, it is very possible for every
man, or woman, or child, to form judgment both rational and rapid. Their
necessary, or even possible, features are but few; the laws of their
construction are as simple as they are interesting. The labor of a few
hours is enough to render the reader master of their main points; and
from that moment he will find in himself a power of judgment which can
neither be escaped nor deceived, and discover subjects of interest where
everything before had appeared barren. For though the laws are few and
simple, the modes of obedience to them are not so. Every building
presents its own requirements and difficulties; and every good building
has peculiar appliances or contrivances to meet them. Understand the
laws of structure, and you will feel the special difficulty in every new
building which you approach; and you will know also, or feel
instinctively,[32] whether it has been wisely met or otherwise. And an
enormous number of buildings, and of styles of buildings, you will be
able to cast aside at once, as at variance with these constant laws of
structure, and therefore unnatural and monstrous.

§ XVI. Then, as regards decoration, I want you only to consult your own
natural choice and liking. There is a right and wrong in it; but you
will assuredly like the right if you suffer your natural instinct to
lead you. Half the evil in this world comes from people not knowing what
they do like, not deliberately setting themselves to find out what they
really enjoy. All people enjoy giving away money, for instance: they
don't know _that_,--they rather think they like keeping it; and they
_do_ keep it under this false impression, often to their great
discomfort. Every body likes to do good; but not one in a hundred finds
_this_ out. Multitudes think they like to do evil; yet no man ever
really enjoyed doing evil since God made the world.

So in this lesser matter of ornament. It needs some little care to try
experiments upon yourself: it needs deliberate question and upright
answer. But there is no difficulty to be overcome, no abstruse reasoning
to be gone into; only a little watchfulness needed, and thoughtfulness,
and so much honesty as will enable you to confess to yourself and to all
men, that you enjoy things, though great authorities say you should not.

§ XVII. This looks somewhat like pride; but it is true humility, a trust
that you have been so created as to enjoy what is fitting for you, and a
willingness to be pleased, as it was intended you should be. It is the
child's spirit, which we are then most happy when we most recover; only
wiser than children in that we are ready to think it subject of
thankfulness that we can still be pleased with a fair color or a dancing
light. And, above all, do not try to make all these pleasures
reasonable, nor to connect the delight which you take in ornament with
that which you take in construction or usefulness. They have no
connection; and every effort that you make to reason from one to the
other will blunt your sense of beauty, or confuse it with sensations
altogether inferior to it. You were made for enjoyment, and the world
was filled with things which you will enjoy, unless you are too proud to
be pleased by them, or too grasping to care for what you cannot turn to
other account than mere delight. Remember that the most beautiful things
in the world are the most useless; peacocks and lilies for instance; at
least I suppose this quill I hold in my hand writes better than a
peacock's would, and the peasants of Vevay, whose fields in spring time
are as white with lilies as the Dent du Midi is with its snow, told me
the hay was none the better for them.

§ XVIII. Our task therefore divides itself into two branches, and these
I shall follow in succession. I shall first consider the construction of
buildings, dividing them into their really necessary members or
features; and I shall endeavor so to lead the reader forward from the
foundation upwards, as that he may find out for himself the best way of
doing everything, and having so discovered it, never forget it. I shall
give him stones, and bricks, and straw, chisels, and trowels, and the
ground, and then ask him to build; only helping him, as I can, if I find
him puzzled. And when he has built his house or church, I shall ask him
to ornament it, and leave it to him to choose the ornaments as I did to
find out the construction: I shall use no influence with him whatever,
except to counteract previous prejudices, and leave him, as far as may
be, free. And when he has thus found out how to build, and chosen his
forms of decoration, I shall do what I can to confirm his confidence in
what he has done. I shall assure him that no one in the world could, so
far, have done better, and require him to condemn, as futile or
fallacious, whatever has no resemblance to his own performances.


FOOTNOTES:

  [28] Appendix 13, "Mr. Fergusson's System."

  [29] Appendix 14, "Divisions of Humanity."

  [30] Triglyph. Literally, "Three Cut." The awkward upright ornament
    with two notches in it, and a cut at each side, to be seen
    everywhere at the tops of Doric colonnades, ancient and modern.

  [31] Pediment. The triangular space above Greek porticoes, as on the
    Mansion House or Royal Exchange.

  [32] Appendix 15: "Instinctive Judgments."




CHAPTER III.

  THE SIX DIVISIONS OF ARCHITECTURE.


§ I. The practical duties of buildings are twofold.

They have either (1), to hold and protect something; or (2), to place or
carry something.

1. Architecture of Protection. This is architecture intended to
   protect men or their possessions from violence of any kind, whether
   of men or of the elements. It will include all churches, houses, and
   treasuries; fortresses, fences, and ramparts; the architecture of the
   hut and sheepfold; of the palace and the citadel: of the dyke,
   breakwater, and sea-wall. And the protection, when of living
   creatures, is to be understood as including commodiousness and
   comfort of habitation, wherever these are possible under the given
   circumstances.

2. Architecture of Position. This is architecture intended to carry
   men or things to some certain places, or to hold them there. This
   will include all bridges, aqueducts, and road architecture;
   light-houses, which have to hold light in appointed places; chimneys
   to carry smoke or direct currents of air; staircases; towers, which
   are to be watched from or cried from, as in mosques, or to hold
   bells, or to place men in positions of offence, as ancient moveable
   attacking towers, and most fortress towers.

§ II. Protective architecture has to do one or all of three things: to
wall a space, to roof it, and to give access to it, of persons, light,
and air; and it is therefore to be considered under the three divisions
of walls, roofs, and apertures.

We will take, first, a short, general view of the connection of these
members, and then examine them in detail: endeavoring always to keep the
simplicity of our first arrangement in view; for protective architecture
has indeed no other members than these, unless flooring and paving be
considered architecture, which it is only when the flooring is also a
roof; the laying of the stones or timbers for footing being pavior's or
carpenter's work, rather than architect's; and, at all events, work
respecting the well or ill doing of which we shall hardly find much
difference of opinion, except in points of æsthetics. We shall therefore
concern ourselves only with the construction of walls, roofs, and
apertures.

§ III. 1. _Walls._--A wall is an even and united fence, whether of wood,
earth, stone, or metal. When meant for purposes of mere partition or
enclosure, it remains a wall proper: but it has generally also to
sustain a certain vertical or lateral pressure, for which its strength
is at first increased by some general addition to its thickness; but if
the pressure becomes very great, it is gathered up into _piers_ to
resist vertical pressure, and supported by _buttresses_ to resist
lateral pressure.

If its functions of partition or enclosure are continued, together with
that of resisting vertical pressure, it remains as a wall veil between
the piers into which it has been partly gathered; but if it is required
only to resist the vertical or roof pressure, it is gathered up into
piers altogether, loses its wall character, and becomes a group or line
of piers.

On the other hand, if the lateral pressure be slight, it may retain its
character of a wall, being supported against the pressure by buttresses
at intervals; but if the lateral pressure be very great, it is supported
against such pressure by a continuous buttress, loses its wall
character, and becomes a dyke or rampart.

§ IV. We shall have therefore (A) first to get a general idea of a wall,
and of right construction of walls; then (B) to see how this wall is
gathered into piers; and to get a general idea of piers and the right
construction of piers; then (C) to see how a wall is supported by
buttresses, and to get a general idea of buttresses and the right
construction of buttresses. This is surely very simple, and it is all we
shall have to do with walls and their divisions.

[Illustration: Fig. I.]

§ V. 2. _Roofs._--A roof is the covering of a space, narrow or wide. It
will be most conveniently studied by first considering the forms in
which it may be carried over a narrow space, and then expanding these on
a wide plan; only there is some difficulty here in the nomenclature, for
an arched roof over a narrow space has (I believe) no name, except that
which belongs properly to the piece of stone or wood composing such a
roof, namely, lintel. But the reader will have no difficulty in
understanding that he is first to consider roofs on the section only,
thinking how best to construct a narrow bar or slice of them, of
whatever form; as, for instance, _x_, _y_, or _z_, over the plan or area
_a_, Fig. I. Having done this, let him imagine these several divisions,
first moved along (or set side by side) over a rectangle, _b_, Fig. I.,
and then revolved round a point (or crossed at it) over a polygon, _c_,
or circle, _d_, and he will have every form of simple roof: the arched
section giving successively the vaulted roof and dome, and the gabled
section giving the gabled roof and spire.

As we go farther into the subject, we shall only have to add one or two
forms to the sections here given, in order to embrace all the
_uncombined_ roofs in existence; and we shall not trouble the reader
with many questions respecting cross-vaulting, and other modes of their
combination.

§ VI. Now, it also happens, from its place in buildings, that the
sectional roof over a narrow space will need to be considered before we
come to the expanded roof over a broad one. For when a wall has been
gathered, as above explained, into piers, that it may better bear
vertical pressure, it is generally necessary that it should be expanded
again at the top into a continuous wall before it carries the true roof.
Arches or lintels are, therefore, thrown from pier to pier, and a level
preparation for carrying the real roof is made above them. After we have
examined the structure of piers, therefore, we shall have to see how
lintels or arches are thrown from pier to pier, and the whole prepared
for the superincumbent roof; this arrangement being universal in all
good architecture prepared for vertical pressures: and we shall then
examine the condition of the great roof itself. And because the
structure of the roof very often introduces certain lateral pressures
which have much to do with the placing of buttresses, it will be well to
do all this before we examine the nature of buttresses, and, therefore,
between parts (B) and (C) of the above plan, § IV. So now we shall have
to study: (A) the construction of walls; (B) that of piers; (C) that of
lintels or arches prepared for roofing; (D) that of roofs proper; and
(E) that of buttresses.

§ VII. 3. _Apertures._--There must either be intervals between the
piers, of which intervals the character will be determined by that of
the piers themselves, or else doors or windows in the walls proper. And,
respecting doors or windows, we have to determine three things: first,
the proper shape of the entire aperture; secondly, the way in which it
is to be filled with valves or glass; and thirdly, the modes of
protecting it on the outside, and fitting appliances of convenience to
it, as porches or balconies. And this will be our division F; and if the
reader will have the patience to go through these six heads, which
include every possible feature of protective architecture, and to
consider the simple necessities and fitnesses of each, I will answer for
it, he shall never confound good architecture with bad any more. For, as
to architecture of position, a great part of it involves necessities of
construction with which the spectator cannot become generally
acquainted, and of the compliance with which he is therefore never
expected to judge,--as in chimneys, light-houses, &c.: and the other
forms of it are so closely connected with those of protective
architecture, that a few words in Chap. XIX. respecting staircases and
towers, will contain all with which the reader need be troubled on the
subject.




CHAPTER IV.

  THE WALL BASE.


§ I. Our first business, then, is with Wall, and to find out wherein
lies the true excellence of the "Wittiest Partition." For it is rather
strange that, often as we speak of a "dead" wall, and that with
considerable disgust, we have not often, since Snout's time, heard of a
living one. But the common epithet of opprobrium is justly bestowed, and
marks a right feeling. A wall has no business to be dead. It ought to
have members in its make, and purposes in its existence, like an
organized creature, and to answer its ends in a living and energetic
way; and it is only when we do not choose to put any strength nor
organization into it, that it offends us by its deadness. Every wall
ought to be a "sweet and lovely wall." I do not care about its having
ears; but, for instruction and exhortation, I would often have it to
"hold up its fingers." What its necessary members and excellences are,
it is our present business to discover.

§ II. A wall has been defined to be an even and united fence of wood,
earth, stone, or metal. Metal fences, however, seldom, if ever, take the
form of walls, but of railings; and, like all other metal constructions,
must be left out of our present investigation; as may be also walls
composed merely of light planks or laths for purposes of partition or
inclosure. Substantial walls, whether of wood or earth (I use the word
earth as including clay, baked or unbaked, and stone), have, in their
perfect form, three distinct members;--the Foundation, Body or Veil, and
Cornice.

§ III. The foundation is to the wall what the paw is to an animal. It
is a long foot, wider than the wall, on which the wall is to stand, and
which keeps it from settling into the ground. It is most necessary that
this great element of security should be visible to the eye, and
therefore made a part of the structure above ground. Sometimes, indeed,
it becomes incorporated with the entire foundation of the building, a
vast table on which walls or piers are alike set: but even then, the
eye, taught by the reason, requires some additional preparation or foot
for the wall, and the building is felt to be imperfect without it. This
foundation we shall call the Base of the wall.

§ IV. The body of the wall is of course the principal mass of it, formed
of mud or clay, of bricks or stones, of logs or hewn timber; the
condition of structure being, that it is of equal thickness everywhere,
below and above. It may be half a foot thick, or six feet thick, or
fifty feet thick; but if of equal thickness everywhere, it is still a
wall proper: if to its fifty feet of proper thickness there be added so
much as an inch of thickness in particular parts, that added thickness
is to be considered as some form of buttress or pier, or other
appliance.[33]

In perfect architecture, however, the walls are generally kept of
moderate thickness, and strengthened by piers or buttresses; and the
part of the wall between these, being generally intended only to secure
privacy, or keep out the slighter forces of weather, may be properly
called a Wall Veil. I shall always use this word "Veil" to signify the
even portion of a wall, it being more expressive than the term Body.

§ V. When the materials with which this veil is built are very loose, or
of shapes which do not fit well together, it sometimes becomes
necessary, or at least adds to security, to introduce courses of more
solid material. Thus, bricks alternate with rolled pebbles in the old
walls of Verona, and hewn stones with brick in its Lombard churches. A
banded structure, almost a stratification of the wall, is thus produced;
and the courses of more solid material are sometimes decorated with
carving. Even when the wall is not thus banded through its whole height,
it frequently becomes expedient to lay a course of stone, or at least of
more carefully chosen materials, at regular heights; and such belts or
bands we may call String courses. These are a kind of epochs in the
wall's existence; something like periods of rest and reflection in human
life, before entering on a new career. Or else, in the building, they
correspond to the divisions of its stories within, express its internal
structure, and mark off some portion of the ends of its existence
already attained.

§ VI. Finally, on the top of the wall some protection from the weather
is necessary, or some preparation for the reception of superincumbent
weight, called a coping, or Cornice. I shall use the word Cornice for
both; for, in fact, a coping is a roof to the wall itself, and is
carried by a small cornice as the roof of the building by a large one.
In either case, the cornice, small or large, is the termination of the
wall's existence, the accomplishment of its work. When it is meant to
carry some superincumbent weight, the cornice may be considered as its
hand, opened to carry something above its head; as the base was
considered its foot: and the three parts should grow out of each other
and form one whole, like the root, stalk, and bell of a flower.

These three parts we shall examine in succession; and, first, the Base.

§ VII. It may be sometimes in our power, and it is always expedient, to
prepare for the whole building some settled foundation, level and firm,
out of sight. But this has not been done in some of the noblest
buildings in existence. It cannot always be done perfectly, except at
enormous expense; and, in reasoning upon the superstructure, we shall
never suppose it to be done. The mind of the spectator does not
conceive it; and he estimates the merits of the edifice on the
supposition of its being built upon the ground. Even if there be a vast
table land of foundation elevated for the whole of it, accessible by
steps all round, as at Pisa, the surface of this table is always
conceived as capable of yielding somewhat to superincumbent weight, and
generally is so; and we shall base all our arguments on the widest
possible supposition, that is to say, that the building stands on a
surface either of earth, or, at all events, capable of yielding in some
degree to its weight.

[Illustration: Fig. II.]

§ VIII. Now, let the reader simply ask himself how, on such a surface,
he would set about building a substantial wall, that should be able to
bear weight and to stand for ages. He would assuredly look about for the
largest stones he had at his disposal, and, rudely levelling the ground,
he would lay these well together over a considerably larger width than
he required the wall to be (suppose as at _a_, Fig. II.), in order to
equalise the pressure of the wall over a large surface, and form its
foot. On the top of these he would perhaps lay a second tier of large
stones, _b_, or even the third, _c_, making the breadth somewhat less
each time, so as to prepare for the pressure of the wall on the centre,
and, naturally or necessarily, using somewhat smaller stones above than
below (since we supposed him to look about for the largest first), and
cutting them more neatly. His third tier, if not his second, will
probably appear a sufficiently secure foundation for finer work; for if
the earth yield at all, it will probably yield pretty equally under the
great mass of masonry now knit together over it. So he will prepare for
the wall itself at once by sloping off the next tier of stones to the
right diameter, as at _d_. If there be any joints in this tier within
the wall, he may perhaps, for further security, lay a binding stone
across them, _e_, and then begin the work of the wall veil itself,
whether in bricks or stones.

§ IX. I have supposed the preparation here to be for a large wall,
because such a preparation will give us the best general type. But it is
evident that the essential features of the arrangement are only two,
that is to say, one tier of massy work for foundation, suppose _c_,
missing the first two; and the receding tier or real foot of the wall,
_d_. The reader will find these members, though only of brick, in most
of the considerable and independent walls in the suburbs of London.

§ X. It is evident, however, that the general type, Fig. II., will be
subject to many different modifications in different circumstances.
Sometimes the ledges of the tiers _a_ and _b_ may be of greater width;
and when the building is in a secure place, and of finished masonry,
these may be sloped off also like the main foot _d_. In Venetian
buildings these lower ledges are exposed to the sea, and therefore left
rough hewn; but in fine work and in important positions the lower ledges
may be bevelled and decorated like the upper, or another added above
_d_; and all these parts may be in different proportions, according to
the disposition of the building above them. But we have nothing to do
with any of these variations at present, they being all more or less
dependent upon decorative considerations, except only one of very great
importance, that is to say, the widening of the lower ledge into a stone
seat, which may be often done in buildings of great size with most
beautiful effect: it looks kind and hospitable, and preserves the work
above from violence. In St. Mark's at Venice, which is a small and low
church, and needing no great foundation for the wall veils of it, we
find only the three members, _b_, _c_, and _d_. Of these the first rises
about a foot above the pavement of St. Mark's Place, and forms an
elevated dais in some of the recesses of the porches, chequered red and
white; _c_ forms a seat which follows the line of the walls, while its
basic character is marked by its also carrying certain shafts with
which we have here no concern; _d_ is of white marble; and all are
enriched and decorated in the simplest and most perfect manner possible,
as we shall see in Chap. XXV. And thus much may serve to fix the type of
wall bases, a type oftener followed in real practice than any other we
shall hereafter be enabled to determine: for wall bases of necessity
must be solidly built, and the architect is therefore driven into the
adoption of the right form; or if he deviate from it, it is generally in
meeting some necessity of peculiar circumstances, as in obtaining
cellars and underground room, or in preparing for some grand features or
particular parts of the wall, or in some mistaken idea of
decoration,--into which errors we had better not pursue him until we
understand something more of the rest of the building: let us therefore
proceed to consider the wall veil.


FOOTNOTES:

  [33] Many walls are slightly sloped or curved towards their tops,
    and have buttresses added to them (that of the Queen's Bench Prison
    is a curious instance of the vertical buttress and inclined wall);
    but in all such instances the slope of the wall is properly to be
    considered a condition of incorporated buttress.




CHAPTER V.

  THE WALL VEIL.


§ I. The summer of the year 1849 was spent by the writer in researches
little bearing upon his present subject, and connected chiefly with
proposed illustrations of the mountain forms in the works of J. M. W.
Turner. But there are sometimes more valuable lessons to be learned in
the school of nature than in that of Vitruvius, and a fragment of
building among the Alps is singularly illustrative of the chief feature
which I have at present to develope as necessary to the perfection of
the wall veil.

It is a fragment of some size; a group of broken walls, one of them
overhanging; crowned with a cornice, nodding some hundred and fifty feet
over its massy flank, three thousand above its glacier base, and
fourteen thousand above the sea,--a wall truly of some majesty, at once
the most precipitous and the strongest mass in the whole chain of the
Alps, the Mont Cervin.

§ II. It has been falsely represented as a peak or tower. It is a vast
ridged promontory, connected at its western root with the Dent d'Erin,
and lifting itself like a rearing horse with its face to the east. All
the way along the flank of it, for half a day's journey on the Zmutt
glacier, the grim black terraces of its foundations range almost without
a break; and the clouds, when their day's work is done, and they are
weary, lay themselves down on those foundation steps, and rest till
dawn, each with his leagues of grey mantle stretched along the grisly
ledge, and the cornice of the mighty wall gleaming in the moonlight,
three thousand feet above.

§ III. The eastern face of the promontory is hewn down, as if by the
single sweep of a sword, from the crest of it to the base; hewn concave
and smooth, like the hollow of a wave: on each flank of it there is set
a buttress, both of about equal height, their heads sloped out from the
main wall about seven hundred feet below its summit. That on the north
is the most important; it is as sharp as the frontal angle of a bastion,
and sloped sheer away to the north-east, throwing out spur beyond spur,
until it terminates in a long low curve of russet precipice, at whose
foot a great bay of the glacier of the Col de Cervin lies as level as a
lake. This spur is one of the few points from which the mass of the Mont
Cervin is in anywise approachable. It is a continuation of the masonry
of the mountain itself, and affords us the means of examining the
character of its materials.

§ IV. Few architects would like to build with them. The slope of the
rocks to the north-west is covered two feet deep with their ruins, a
mass of loose and slaty shale, of a dull brick-red color, which yields
beneath the foot like ashes, so that, in running down, you step one
yard, and slide three. The rock is indeed hard beneath, but still
disposed in thin courses of these cloven shales, so finely laid that
they look in places more like a heap of crushed autumn leaves than a
rock; and the first sensation is one of unmitigated surprise, as if the
mountain were upheld by miracle; but surprise becomes more intelligent
reverence for the great builder, when we find, in the middle of the mass
of these dead leaves, a course of living rock, of quartz as white as the
snow that encircles it, and harder than a bed of steel.

§ V. It is one only of a thousand iron bands that knit the strength of
the mighty mountain. Through the buttress and the wall alike, the
courses of its varied masonry are seen in their successive order, smooth
and true as if laid by line and plummet,[34] but of thickness and
strength continually varying, and with silver cornices glittering along
the edge of each, laid by the snowy winds and carved by the
sunshine,--stainless ornaments of the eternal temple, by which "neither
the hammer nor the axe, nor any tool, was heard while it was in
building."

§ VI. I do not, however, bring this forward as an instance of any
universal law of natural building; there are solid as well as coursed
masses of precipice, but it is somewhat curious that the most noble
cliff in Europe, which this eastern front of the Cervin is, I believe,
without dispute, should be to us an example of the utmost possible
stability of precipitousness attained with materials of imperfect and
variable character; and, what is more, there are very few cliffs which
do not display alternations between compact and friable conditions of
their material, marked in their contours by bevelled slopes when the
bricks are soft, and vertical steps when they are harder. And, although
we are not hence to conclude that it is well to introduce courses of bad
materials when we can get perfect material, I believe we may conclude
with great certainty that it is better and easier to strengthen a wall
necessarily of imperfect substance, as of brick, by introducing
carefully laid courses of stone, than by adding to its thickness; and
the first impression we receive from the unbroken aspect of a wall veil,
unless it be of hewn stone throughout, is that it must be both thicker
and weaker than it would have been, had it been properly coursed. The
decorative reasons for adopting the coursed arrangement, which we shall
notice hereafter, are so weighty, that they would alone be almost
sufficient to enforce it; and the constructive ones will apply
universally, except in the rare cases in which the choice of perfect or
imperfect material is entirely open to us, or where the general system
of the decoration of the building requires absolute unity in its
surface.

[Illustration: Fig. III.]

§ VII. As regards the arrangement of the intermediate parts themselves,
it is regulated by certain conditions of bonding and fitting the stones
or bricks, which the reader need hardly be troubled to consider, and
which I wish that bricklayers themselves were always honest enough to
observe. But I hardly know whether to note under the head of æsthetic
or constructive law, this important principle, that masonry is always
bad which appears to have arrested the attention of the architect more
than absolute conditions of strength require. Nothing is more
contemptible in any work than an appearance of the slightest desire on
the part of the builder to _direct attention_ to the way its stones are
put together, or of any trouble taken either to show or to conceal it
more than was rigidly necessary: it may sometimes, on the one hand, be
necessary to conceal it as far as may be, by delicate and close fitting,
when the joints would interfere with lines of sculpture or of mouldings;
and it may often, on the other hand, be delightful to show it, as it is
delightful in places to show the anatomy even of the most delicate human
frame: but _studiously_ to conceal it is the error of vulgar painters,
who are afraid to show that their figures have bones; and studiously to
display it is the error of the base pupils of Michael Angelo, who turned
heroes' limbs into surgeons' diagrams,--but with less excuse than
theirs, for there is less interest in the anatomy displayed. Exhibited
masonry is in most cases the expedient of architects who do not know how
to fill up blank spaces, and many a building, which would have been
decent enough if let alone, has been scrawled over with straight lines,
as in Fig. III., on exactly the same principles, and with just the same
amount of intelligence as a boy's in scrawling his copy-book when he
cannot write. The device was thought ingenious at one period of
architectural history; St. Paul's and Whitehall are covered with it, and
it is in this I imagine that some of our modern architects suppose the
great merit of those buildings to consist. There is, however, no excuse
for errors in disposition of masonry, for there is but one law upon the
subject, and that easily complied with, to avoid all affectation and
all unnecessary expense, either in showing or concealing. Every one
knows a building is built of separate stones; nobody will ever object to
seeing that it is so, but nobody wants to count them. The divisions of a
church are much like the divisions of a sermon; they are always right so
long as they are necessary to edification, and always wrong when they
are thrust upon the attention as divisions only. There may be neatness
in carving when there is richness in feasting; but I have heard many a
discourse, and seen many a church wall, in which it was all carving and
no meat.


FOOTNOTES:

  [34] On the eastern side: violently contorted on the northern and
    western.




CHAPTER VI.

  THE WALL CORNICE.


§ I. We have lastly to consider the close of the wall's existence, or
its cornice. It was above stated, that a cornice has one of two offices:
if the wall have nothing to carry, the cornice is its roof, and defends
it from the weather; if there is weight to be carried above the wall,
the cornice is its hand, and is expanded to carry the said weight.

There are several ways of roofing or protecting independent walls,
according to the means nearest at hand: sometimes the wall has a true
roof all to itself; sometimes it terminates in a small gabled ridge,
made of bricks set slanting, as constantly in the suburbs of London; or
of hewn stone, in stronger work; or in a single sloping face, inclined
to the outside. We need not trouble ourselves at present about these
small roofings, which are merely the diminutions of large ones; but we
must examine the important and constant member of the wall structure,
which prepares it either for these small roofs or for weights above, and
is its true cornice.

§ II. The reader will, perhaps, as heretofore, be kind enough to think
for himself, how, having carried up his wall veil as high as it may be
needed, he will set about protecting it from weather, or preparing it
for weight. Let him imagine the top of the unfinished wall, as it would
be seen from above with all the joints, perhaps uncemented, or
imperfectly filled up with cement, open to the sky; and small broken
materials filling gaps between large ones, and leaving cavities ready
for the rain to soak into, and loosen and dissolve the cement, and
split, as it froze, the whole to pieces. I am much mistaken if his
first impulse would not be to take a great flat stone and lay it on the
top; or rather a series of such, side by side, projecting well over the
edge of the wall veil. If, also, he proposed to lay a weight (as, for
instance, the end of a beam) on the wall, he would feel at once that the
pressure of this beam on, or rather among, the small stones of the wall
veil, might very possibly dislodge or disarrange some of them; and the
first impulse would be, in this case, also to lay a large flat stone on
the top of all to receive the beam, or any other weight, and distribute
it equally among the small stones below, as at _a_, Fig. IV.

[Illustration: Fig. IV.]

§ III. We must therefore have our flat stone in either case; and let
_b_, Fig. IV., be the section or side of it, as it is set across the
wall. Now, evidently, if by any chance this weight happen to be thrown
more on the edges of this stone than the centre, there will be a chance
of these edges breaking off. Had we not better, therefore, put another
stone, sloped off to the wall, beneath the projecting one, as at _c_.
But now our cornice looks somewhat too heavy for the wall; and as the
upper stone is evidently of needless thickness, we will thin it
somewhat, and we have the form _d_. Now observe: the lower or bevelled
stone here at _d_ corresponds to _d_ in the base (Fig. II., page 59).
That was the foot of the wall; this is its hand. And the top stone here,
which is a constant member of cornices, corresponds to the under stone
_c_, in Fig. II., which is a constant member of bases. The reader has no
idea at present of the enormous importance of these members; but as we
shall have to refer to them perpetually, I must ask him to compare them,
and fix their relations well in his mind: and, for convenience, I shall
call the bevelled or sloping stone, X, and the upright edged stone, Y.
The reader may remember easily which is which; for X is an intersection
of two slopes, and may therefore properly mean either of the two sloping
stones; and Y is a figure with a perpendicular line and two slopes, and
may therefore fitly stand for the upright stone in relation to each of
the sloping ones; and as we shall have to say much more about cornices
than about bases, let X and Y stand for the stones of the cornice, and
Xb and Yb for those of the base, when distinction is needed.

[Illustration: Fig. V.]

§ IV. Now the form at _d_, Fig. IV., is the great root and primal type
of all cornices whatsoever. In order to see what forms may be developed
from it, let us take its profile a little larger--_a_, Fig. V., with X
and Y duly marked. Now this form, being the root of all cornices, may
either have to finish the wall and so keep off rain; or, as so often
stated, to carry weight. If the former, it is evident that, in its
present profile, the rain will run back down the slope of X; and if the
latter, that the sharp angle or edge of X, at _k_, may be a little too
weak for its work, and run a chance of giving way. To avoid the evil in
the first case, suppose we hollow the slope of X inwards, as at _b_; and
to avoid it in the second case, suppose we strengthen X by letting it
bulge outwards, as at c.

§ V. These (_b_ and _c_) are the profiles of two vast families of
cornices, springing from the same root, which, with a third arising
from their combination (owing its origin to æsthetic considerations, and
inclining sometimes to the one, sometimes to the other), have been
employed, each on its third part of the architecture of the whole world
throughout all ages, and must continue to be so employed through such
time as is yet to come. We do not at present speak of the third or
combined group; but the relation of the two main branches to each other,
and to the line of origin, is given at _e_, Fig. V.; where the dotted
lines are the representatives of the two families, and the straight line
of the root. The slope of this right line, as well as the nature of the
curves, here drawn as segments of circles, we leave undetermined: the
slope, as well as the proportion of the depths of X and Y to each other,
vary according to the weight to be carried, the strength of the stone,
the size of the cornice, and a thousand other accidents; and the nature
of the curves according to æsthetic laws. It is in these infinite fields
that the invention of the architect is permitted to expatiate, but not
in the alteration of primitive forms.

§ VI. But to proceed. It will doubtless appear to the reader, that, even
allowing for some of these permissible variations in the curve or slope
of X, neither the form at _b_, nor any approximation to that form, would
be sufficiently undercut to keep the rain from running back upon it.
This is true; but we have to consider that the cornice, as the close of
the wall's life, is of all its features that which is best fitted for
honor and ornament. It has been esteemed so by almost all builders, and
has been lavishly decorated in modes hereafter to be considered. But it
is evident that, as it is high above the eye, the fittest place to
receive the decoration is the slope of X, which is inclined towards the
spectator; and if we cut away or hollow out this slope more than we have
done at _b_, all decoration will be hid in the shadow. If, therefore,
the climate be fine, and rain of long continuance not to be dreaded, we
shall not hollow the stone X further, adopting the curve at _b_ merely
as the most protective in our power. But if the climate be one in which
rain is frequent and dangerous, as in alternations with frost, we may be
compelled to consider the cornice in a character distinctly protective,
and to hollow out X farther, so as to enable it thoroughly to accomplish
its purpose. A cornice thus treated loses its character as the crown or
honor of the wall, takes the office of its protector, and is called a
DRIPSTONE. The dripstone is naturally the attribute of Northern
buildings, and therefore especially of Gothic architecture; the true
cornice is the attribute of Southern buildings, and therefore of Greek
and Italian architecture; and it is one of their peculiar beauties, and
eminent features of superiority.

§ VII. Before passing to the dripstone, however, let us examine a little
farther into the nature of the true cornice. We cannot, indeed, render
either of the forms _b_ or _c_, Fig. V., perfectly protective from rain,
but we can help them a little in their duty by a slight advance of their
upper ledge. This, with the form _b_, we can best manage by cutting off
the sharp upper point of its curve, which is evidently weak and useless;
and we shall have the form _f_. By a slight advance of the upper stone
_c_, we shall have the parallel form _g_.

These two cornices, _f_ and _g_, are characteristic of early Byzantine
work, and are found on all the most lovely examples of it in Venice. The
type _a_ is rarer, but occurs pure in the most exquisite piece of
composition in Venice--the northern portico of St. Mark's; and will be
given in due time.

§ VIII. Now the reader has doubtless noticed that these forms of cornice
result, from considerations of fitness and necessity, far more neatly
and decisively than the forms of the base, which we left only very
generally determined. The reason is, that there are many ways of
building foundations, and many _good_ ways, dependent upon the peculiar
accidents of the ground and nature of accessible materials. There is
also room to spare in width, and a chance of a part of the arrangement
being concealed by the ground, so as to modify height. But we have no
room to spare in width on the top of a wall, and all that we do must be
thoroughly visible; and we can but have to deal with bricks, or stones
of a certain degree of fineness, and not with mere gravel, or sand, or
clay,--so that as the conditions are limited, the forms become
determined; and our steps will be more clear and certain the farther we
advance. The sources of a river are usually half lost among moss and
pebbles, and its first movements doubtful in direction; but, as the
current gathers force, its banks are determined, and its branches are
numbered.

§ IX. So far of the true cornice: we have still to determine the form of
the dripstone.

[Illustration: Fig. VI.]

We go back to our primal type or root of cornice, _a_ of Fig. V. We take
this at _a_ in Fig. VI., and we are to consider it entirely as a
protection against rain. Now the only way in which the rain can be kept
from running back on the slope of X is by a bold hollowing out of it
upwards, _b_. But clearly, by thus doing, we shall so weaken the
projecting part of it that the least shock would break it at the neck,
_c_; we must therefore cut the whole out of one stone, which will give
us the form _d_. That the water may not lodge on the upper ledge of
this, we had better round it off; and it will better protect the joint
at the bottom of the slope if we let the stone project over it in a
roll, cutting the recess deeper above. These two changes are made in
_e_: _e_ is the type of dripstones; the projecting part being, however,
more or less rounded into an approximation to the shape of a falcon's
beak, and often reaching it completely. But the essential part of the
arrangement is the up and under cutting of the curve. Wherever we find
this, we are sure that the climate is wet, or that the builders have
been _bred_ in a wet country, and that the rest of the building will be
prepared for rough weather. The up cutting of the curve is sometimes all
the distinction between the mouldings of far-distant countries and
utterly strange nations.

[Illustration: Fig. VII.]

Fig. VII. representing a moulding with an outer and inner curve, the
latter undercut. Take the outer line, and this moulding is one constant
in Venice, in architecture traceable to Arabian types, and chiefly to
the early mosques of Cairo. But take the inner line; it is a dripstone
at Salisbury. In that narrow interval between the curves there is, when
we read it rightly, an expression of another and mightier curve,--the
orbed sweep of the earth and sea, between the desert of the Pyramids,
and the green and level fields through which the clear streams of Sarum
wind so slowly.

[Illustration: Fig. VIII.]

And so delicate is the test, that though pure cornices are often found
in the north,--borrowed from classical models,--so surely as we find a
true dripstone moulding in the South, the influence of Northern builders
has been at work; and this will be one of the principal evidences which
I shall use in detecting Lombard influence on Arab work; for the true
Byzantine and Arab mouldings are all open to the sky and light, but the
Lombards brought with them from the North the fear of rain, and in all
the Lombardic Gothic we instantly recognize the shadowy dripstone: _a_,
Fig. VIII., is from a noble fragment at Milan, in the Piazza dei
Mercanti; _b_, from the Broletto of Como. Compare them with _c_ and
_d_; both from Salisbury; _e_ and _f_ from Lisieux, Normandy; _g_ and
_h_ from Wenlock Abbey, Shropshire.

§ X. The reader is now master of all that he need know about the
construction of the general wall cornice, fitted either to become a
crown of the wall, or to carry weight above. If, however, the weight
above become considerable, it may be necessary to support the cornice at
intervals with brackets; especially if it be required to project far, as
well as to carry weight; as, for instance, if there be a gallery on top
of the wall. This kind of bracket-cornice, deep or shallow, forms a
separate family, essentially connected with roofs and galleries; for if
there be no superincumbent weight, it is evidently absurd to put
brackets to a plain cornice or dripstone (though this is sometimes done
in carrying out a style); so that, as soon as we see a bracket put to a
cornice, it implies, or should imply, that there is a roof or gallery
above it. Hence this family of cornices I shall consider in connection
with roofing, calling them "roof cornices," while what we have hitherto
examined are proper "wall cornices." The roof cornice and wall cornice
are therefore treated in division D.

We are not, however, as yet nearly ready for our roof. We have only
obtained that which was to be the object of our first division (A); we
have got, that is to say, a general idea of a wall and of the three
essential parts of a wall; and we have next, it will be remembered, to
get an idea of a pier and the essential parts of a pier, which were to
be the subjects of our second division (B).




CHAPTER VII.

  THE PIER BASE.


§ I. In § III. of Chap. III., it was stated that when a wall had to
sustain an addition of vertical pressure, it was first fitted to sustain
it by some addition to its own thickness; but if the pressure became
very great, by being gathered up into PIERS.

I must first make the reader understand what I mean by a wall's being
gathered up. Take a piece of tolerably thick drawing-paper, or thin
Bristol board, five or six inches square. Set it on its edge on the
table, and put a small octavo book on the edge or top of it, and it will
bend instantly. Tear it into four strips all across, and roll up each
strip tightly. Set these rolls on end on the table, and they will carry
the small octavo perfectly well. Now the thickness or substance of the
paper employed to carry the weight is exactly the same as it was before,
only it is differently arranged, that is to say, "gathered up."[35] If
therefore a wall be gathered up like the Bristol board, it will bear
greater weight than it would if it remained a wall veil. The sticks into
which you gather it are called _Piers_. A pier is a coagulated wall.

§ II. Now you cannot quite treat the wall as you did the Bristol board,
and twist it up at once; but let us see how you _can_ treat it. Let A,
Fig. IX., be the plan of a wall which you have made inconveniently and
expensively thick, and which still appears to be slightly too weak for
what it must carry: divide it, as at B, into equal spaces, _a_, _b_,
_a_, _b_, &c. Cut out a thin slice of it at every _a_ on each side, and
put the slices you cut out on at every _b_ on each side, and you will
have the plan at B, with exactly the same quantity of bricks. But your
wall is now so much concentrated, that, if it was only slightly too weak
before, it will be stronger now than it need be; so you may spare some
of your space as well as your bricks by cutting off the corners of the
thicker parts, as suppose _c_, _c_, _c_, _c_, at C: and you have now a
series of square piers connected by a wall veil, which, on less space
and with less materials, will do the work of the wall at A perfectly
well.

[Illustration: Fig. IX.]

§ III. I do not say _how much_ may be cut away in the corners _c_,
_c_,--that is a mathematical question with which we need not trouble
ourselves: all that we need know is, that out of every slice we take
from the "_b_'s" and put on at the "_a_'s," we may keep a certain
percentage of room and bricks, until, supposing that we do not want the
wall veil for its own sake, this latter is thinned entirely away, like
the girdle of the Lady of Avenel, and finally breaks, and we have
nothing but a row of square piers, D.

§ IV. But have we yet arrived at the form which will spare most room,
and use fewest materials. No; and to get farther we must apply the
general principle to our wall, which is equally true in morals and
mathematics, that the strength of materials, or of men, or of minds, is
always most available when it is applied as closely as possible to a
single point.

Let the point to which we wish the strength of our square piers to be
applied, be chosen. Then we shall of course put them directly under it,
and the point will be in their centre. But now some of their materials
are not so near or close to this point as others. Those at the corners
are farther off than the rest.

Now, if every particle of the pier be brought as near as possible to the
centre of it, the form it assumes is the circle.

The circle must be, therefore, the best possible form of plan for a
pier, from the beginning of time to the end of it. A circular pier is
called a pillar or column, and all good architecture adapted to vertical
support is made up of pillars, has always been so, and must ever be so,
as long as the laws of the universe hold.

The final condition is represented at E, in its relation to that at D.
It will be observed that though each circle projects a little beyond the
side of the square out of which it is formed, the space cut off at the
angles is greater than that added at the sides; for, having our
materials in a more concentrated arrangement, we can afford to part with
some of them in this last transformation, as in all the rest.

§ V. And now, what have the base and the cornice of the wall been doing
while we have been cutting the veil to pieces and gathering it together?

The base is also cut to pieces, gathered together, and becomes the base
of the column.

The cornice is cut to pieces, gathered together, and becomes the capital
of the column. Do not be alarmed at the new word, it does not mean a new
thing; a capital is only the cornice of a column, and you may, if you
like, call a cornice the capital of a wall.

We have now, therefore, to examine these three concentrated forms of the
base, veil, and cornice: first, the concentrated base, still called the
BASE of the column; then the concentrated veil, called the SHAFT of the
column; then the concentrated cornice, called the CAPITAL of the column.

And first the Base:--

[Illustration: Fig. X.]

§ VI. Look back to the main type, Fig. II., page 55, and apply its
profiles in due proportion to the feet of the pillars at E in Fig. IX.
p. 72: If each step in Fig. II. were gathered accurately, the projection
of the entire circular base would be less in proportion to its height
than it is in Fig. II.; but the approximation to the result in Fig. X.
is quite accurate enough for our purposes. (I pray the reader to observe
that I have not made the smallest change, except this necessary
expression of a reduction in diameter, in Fig. II. as it is applied in
Fig. X., only I have not drawn the joints of the stones because these
would confuse the outlines of the bases; and I have not represented the
rounding of the shafts, because it does not bear at present on the
argument.) Now it would hardly be convenient, if we had to pass between
the pillars, to have to squeeze ourselves through one of those angular
gaps or brêches de Roland in Fig. X. Our first impulse would be to cut
them open; but we cannot do this, or our piers are unsafe. We have but
one other resource, to fill them up until we have a floor wide enough to
let us pass easily: this we may perhaps obtain at the first ledge, we
are nearly sure to get it at the second, and we may then obtain access
to the raised interval, either by raising the earth over the lower
courses of foundation, or by steps round the entire building.

Fig. XI. is the arrangement of Fig. X. so treated.

[Illustration: Fig. XI.]

§ VII. But suppose the pillars are so vast that the lowest chink in Fig.
X. would be quite wide enough to let us pass through it. Is there then
any reason for filling it up? Yes. It will be remembered that in Chap.
IV. § VIII. the chief reason for the wide foundation of the wall was
stated to be "that it might equalise its pressure over a large surface;"
but when the foundation is cut to pieces as in Fig. X., the pressure is
thrown on a succession of narrowed and detached spaces of that surface.
If the ground is in some places more disposed to yield than in others,
the piers in those places will sink more than the rest, and this
distortion of the system will be probably of more importance in pillars
than in a wall, because the adjustment of the weight above is more
delicate; we thus actually want the _weight_ of the stones between the
pillars, in order that the whole foundation may be bonded into one, and
sink together if it sink at all: and the more massy the pillars, the
more we shall need to fill the intervals of their foundations. In the
best form of Greek architecture, the intervals are filled up to the root
of the shaft, and the columns have no independent base; they stand on
the even floor of their foundation.

§ VIII. Such a structure is not only admissible, but, when the column is
of great thickness in proportion to its height, and the sufficient
firmness, either of the ground or prepared floor, is evident, it is the
best of all, having a strange dignity in its excessive simplicity. It
is, or ought to be, connected in our minds with the deep meaning of
primeval memorial. "And Jacob took the stone that he had put for his
pillow, and set it up for a pillar." I do not fancy that he put a base
for it first. If you try to put a base to the rock-piers of Stonehenge,
you will hardly find them improved; and two of the most perfect
buildings in the world, the Parthenon and Ducal palace of Venice, have
no bases to their pillars: the latter has them, indeed, to its upper
arcade shafts; and had once, it is said, a continuous raised base for
its lower ones: but successive elevations of St. Mark's Place have
covered this base, and parts of the shafts themselves, with an
inundation of paving stones; and yet the building is, I doubt not, as
grand as ever. Finally, the two most noble pillars in Venice, those
brought from Acre, stand on the smooth marble surface of the Piazzetta,
with no independent bases whatever. They are rather broken away beneath,
so that you may look under parts of them, and stand (not quite erect,
but leaning somewhat) safe by their own massy weight. Nor could any
bases possibly be devised that would not spoil them.

§ IX. But it is otherwise if the pillar be so slender as to look
doubtfully balanced. It would indeed stand quite as safely without an
independent base as it would with one (at least, unless the base be in
the form of a socket). But it will not appear so safe to the eye. And
here for the first time, I have to express and apply a principle, which
I believe the reader will at once grant,--that features necessary to
express security to the imagination, are often as essential parts of
good architecture as those required for security itself. It was said
that the wall base was the foot or paw of the wall. Exactly in the same
way, and with clearer analogy, the pier base is the foot or paw of the
pier. Let us, then, take a hint from nature. A foot has two offices, to
bear up, and to hold firm. As far as it has to bear up, it is uncloven,
with slight projection,--look at an elephant's (the Doric base of
animality);[36] but as far as it has to hold firm, it is divided and
clawed, with wide projections,--look at an eagle's.

§ X. Now observe. In proportion to the massiness of the column, we
require its foot to express merely the power of bearing up; in fact, it
can do without a foot, like the Squire in Chevy Chase, if the ground
only be hard enough. But if the column be slender, and look as if it
might lose its balance, we require it to look as if it had hold of the
ground, or the ground hold of it, it does not matter which,--some
expression of claw, prop, or socket. Now let us go back to Fig. XI., and
take up one of the bases there, in the state in which we left it. We may
leave out the two lower steps (with which we have nothing more to do, as
they have become the united floor or foundation of the whole), and, for
the sake of greater clearness, I shall not draw the bricks in the shaft,
nor the flat stone which carries them, though the reader is to suppose
them remaining as drawn in Fig. XI.; but I shall only draw the shaft and
its two essential members of base, Xb and Yb, as explained at p. 65,
above: and now, expressing the rounding of these numbers on _a_ somewhat
larger scale, we have the profile _a_, Fig. XII.; _b_, the perspective
appearance of such a base seen from above; and _c_, the plan of it.

§ XI. Now I am quite sure the reader is not satisfied of the stability
of this form as it is seen at _b_; nor would he ever be so with the main
contour of a circular base. Observe, we have taken some trouble to
reduce the member Yb into this round form, and all that we have gained
by so doing, is this unsatisfactory and unstable look of the base; of
which the chief reason is, that a circle, unless enclosed by right
lines, has never an appearance of fixture, or definite place,[37]--we
suspect it of motion, like an orb of heaven; and the second is, that the
whole base, considered as the foot of the shaft, has no grasp nor hold:
it is a club-foot, and looks too blunt for the limb,--it wants at least
expansion, if not division.

[Illustration: Fig. XII.]

§ XII. Suppose, then, instead of taking so much trouble with the member
Yb, we save time and labor, and leave it a square block. Xb must,
however, evidently follow the pillar, as its condition is that it slope
to the very base of the wall veil, and of whatever the wall veil
becomes. So the corners of Yb will project beyond the circle of Xb, and
we shall have (Fig. XII.) the profile _d_, the perspective appearance
_e_, and the plan _f_. I am quite sure the reader likes _e_ much better
than he did _b_. The circle is now placed, and we are not afraid of its
rolling away. The foot has greater expansion, and we have saved labor
besides, with little loss of space, for the interval between the bases
is just as great as it was before,--we have only filled up the corners
of the squares.

But is it not possible to mend the form still further? There is surely
still an appearance of separation between Xb and Yb, as if the one might
slip off the other. The foot is expanded enough; but it needs some
expression of grasp as well. It has no toes. Suppose we were to put a
spur or prop to Xb at each corner, so as to hold it fast in the centre
of Yb. We will do this in the simplest possible form. We will have the
spur, or small buttress, sloping straight from the corner of Yb up to
the top of Xb, and as seen from above, of the shape of a triangle.
Applying such spurs in Fig. XII., we have the diagonal profile at _g_,
the perspective _h_, and the plan _i_.

§ XIII. I am quite sure the reader likes this last base the best, and
feels as if it were the firmest. But he must carefully distinguish
between this feeling or imagination of the eye, and the real stability
of the structure. That this real stability has been slightly increased
by the changes between _b_ and _h_, in Fig. XII., is true. There is in
the base _h_ somewhat less chance of accidental dislocation, and
somewhat greater solidity and weight. But this very slight gain of
security is of no importance whatever when compared with the general
requirements of the structure. The pillar must be _perfectly_ secure,
and more than secure, with the base _b_, or the building will be unsafe,
whatever other base you put to the pillar. The changes are made, not for
the sake of the almost inappreciable increase of security they involve,
but in order to convince the eye of the real security which the base _b_
_appears_ to compromise. This is especially the case with regard to the
props or spurs, which are absolutely useless in reality, but are of the
highest importance as an expression of safety. And this will farther
appear when we observe that they have been above quite arbitrarily
supposed to be of a triangular form. Why triangular? Why should not the
spur be made wider and stronger, so as to occupy the whole width of the
angle of the square, and to become a complete expansion of Xb to the
edge of the square? Simply because, whatever its width, it has, in
reality, no supporting power whatever; and the _expression_ of support
is greatest where it assumes a form approximating to that of the spur or
claw of an animal. We shall, however, find hereafter, that it ought
indeed to be much wider than it is in Fig. XII., where it is narrowed in
order to make its structure clearly intelligible.

§ XIV. If the reader chooses to consider this spur as an æsthetic
feature altogether, he is at liberty to do so, and to transfer what we
have here said of it to the beginning of Chap. XXV. I think that its
true place is here, as an _expression_ of safety, and not a means of
beauty; but I will assume only, as established, the form _e_ of Fig.
XII., which is absolutely, as a construction, easier, stronger, and more
perfect than _b_. A word or two now of its materials. The wall base, it
will be remembered, was built of stones more neatly cut as they were
higher in place; and the members, Y and X, of the pier base, were the
highest members of the wall base gathered. But, exactly in proportion to
this gathering or concentration in form, should, if possible, be the
gathering or concentration of substance. For as the whole weight of the
building is now to rest upon few and limited spaces, it is of the
greater importance that it should be there received by solid masonry. Xb
and Yb are therefore, if possible, to be each of a single stone; or,
when the shaft is small, both cut out of one block, and especially if
spurs are to be added to Xb. The reader must not be angry with me for
stating things so self-evident, for these are all necessary steps in the
chain of argument which I must not break. Even this change from detached
stones to a single block is not without significance; for it is part of
the real service and value of the member Yb to provide for the reception
of the shaft a surface free from joints; and the eye always conceives it
as a firm covering over all inequalities or fissures in the smaller
masonry of the floor.

§ XV. I have said nothing yet of the proportion of the height of Yb to
its width, nor of that of Yb and Xb to each other. Both depend much on
the height of shaft, and are besides variable within certain limits, at
the architect's discretion. But the limits of the height of Yb may be
thus generally stated. If it looks so thin as that the weight of the
column above might break it, it is too low; and if it is higher than its
own width, it is too high. The utmost admissible height is that of a
cubic block; for if it ever become higher than it is wide, it becomes
itself a part of a pier, and not the base of one.

§ XVI. I have also supposed Yb, when expanded from beneath Xb, as always
expanded into a square, and four spurs only to be added at the angles.
But Yb may be expanded into a pentagon, hexagon, or polygon; and Xb then
may have five, six, or many spurs. In proportion, however, as the sides
increase in number, the spurs become shorter and less energetic in their
effect, and the square is in most cases the best form.

§ XVII. We have hitherto conducted the argument entirely on the
supposition of the pillars being numerous, and in a range. Suppose,
however, that we require only a single pillar: as we have free space
round it, there is no need to fill up the first ranges of its
foundations; nor need we do so in order to equalise pressure, since the
pressure to be met is its own alone. Under such circumstances, it is
well to exhibit the lower tiers of the foundation as well as Yb and Xb.
The noble bases of the two granite pillars of the Piazzetta at Venice
are formed by the entire series of members given in Fig. X., the lower
courses expanding into steps, with a superb breadth of proportion to the
shaft. The member Xb is of course circular, having its proper decorative
mouldings, not here considered; Yb is octagonal, but filled up into a
square by certain curious groups of figures representing the trades of
Venice. The three courses below are octagonal, with their sides set
across the angles of the innermost octagon, Yb. The shafts are 15 feet
in circumference, and the lowest octagons of the base 56 (7 feet each
side).

§ XVIII. Detached buildings, like our own Monument, are not pillars, but
towers built in imitation of Pillars. As towers they are barbarous,
being dark, inconvenient, and unsafe, besides lying, and pretending to
be what they are not. As shafts they are barbarous, because they were
designed at a time when the Renaissance architects had introduced and
forced into acceptance, as _de rigueur_, a kind of columnar high-heeled
shoe,--a thing which they called a pedestal, and which is to a true base
exactly what a Greek actor's cothurnus was to a Greek gentleman's
sandal. But the Greek actor knew better, I believe, than to exhibit or
to decorate his cork sole; and, with shafts as with heroes, it is rather
better to put the sandal off than the cothurnus on. There are, indeed,
occasions on which a pedestal may be necessary; it may be better to
raise a shaft from a sudden depression of plinth to a level with others,
its companions, by means of a pedestal, than to introduce a higher
shaft; or it may be better to place a shaft of alabaster, if otherwise
too short for our purpose, on a pedestal, than to use a larger shaft of
coarser material; but the pedestal is in each case a make-shift, not an
additional perfection. It may, in the like manner, be sometimes
convenient for men to walk on stilts, but not to keep their stilts on as
ornamental parts of dress. The bases of the Nelson Column, the Monument,
and the column of the Place Vendôme, are to the shafts, exactly what
highly ornamented wooden legs would be to human beings.

§ XIX. So far of bases of detached shafts. As we do not yet know in what
manner shafts are likely to be grouped, we can say nothing of those of
grouped shafts until we know more of what they are to support.

Lastly; we have throughout our reasoning upon the base supposed the pier
to be circular. But circumstances may occur to prevent its being
reduced to this form, and it may remain square or rectangular; its base
will then be simply the wall base following its contour, and we have no
spurs at the angles. Thus much may serve respecting pier bases; we have
next to examine the concentration of the Wall Veil, or the Shaft.


FOOTNOTES:

  [35] The experiment is not quite fair in this rude fashion; for the
    small rolls owe their increase of strength much more to their
    tubular form than their aggregation of material; but if the paper be
    cut up into small strips, and tied together firmly in three or four
    compact bundles, it will exhibit increase of strength enough to show
    the principle. Vide, however, Appendix 16, "Strength of Shafts."

  [36] Appendix 17, "Answer to Mr. Garbett."

  [37] Yet more so than any other figure enclosed by a curved line:
    for the circle, in its relations to its own centre, is the curve of
    greatest stability. Compare § XX. of Chap. XX.




CHAPTER VIII.

  THE SHAFT.


§ I. We have seen in the last Chapter how, in converting the wall into
the square or cylindrical shaft, we parted at every change of form with
some quantity of material. In proportion to the quantity thus
surrendered, is the necessity that what we retain should be good of its
kind, and well set together, since everything now depends on it.

It is clear also that the best material, and the closest concentration,
is that of the natural crystalline rocks; and that, by having reduced
our wall into the shape of shafts, we may be enabled to avail ourselves
of this better material, and to exchange cemented bricks for
crystallised blocks of stone. Therefore, the general idea of a perfect
shaft is that of a single stone hewn into a form more or less elongated
and cylindrical. Under this form, or at least under the ruder one of a
long stone set upright, the conception of true shafts appears first to
have occurred to the human mind; for the reader must note this
carefully, once for all, it does not in the least follow that the order
of architectural features which is most reasonable in their arrangement,
is most probable in their invention. I have theoretically deduced shafts
from walls, but shafts were never so reasoned out in architectural
practice. The man who first propped a thatched roof with poles was the
discoverer of their principle; and he who first hewed a long stone into
a cylinder, the perfecter of their practice.

§ II. It is clearly necessary that shafts of this kind (we will call
them, for convenience, _block_ shafts) should be composed of stone not
liable to flaws or fissures; and therefore that we must no longer
continue our argument as if it were always possible to do what is to be
done in the best way; for the style of a national architecture may
evidently depend, in great measure, upon the nature of the rocks of the
country.

Our own English rocks, which supply excellent building stone from their
thin and easily divisible beds, are for the most part entirely incapable
of being worked into shafts of any size, except only the granites and
whinstones, whose hardness renders them intractable for ordinary
purposes;--and English architecture therefore supplies no instances of
the block shaft applied on an extensive scale; while the facility of
obtaining large masses of marble has in Greece and Italy been partly the
cause of the adoption of certain noble types of architectural form
peculiar to those countries, or, when occurring elsewhere, derived from
them.

We have not, however, in reducing our walls to shafts, calculated on the
probabilities of our obtaining better materials than those of which the
walls were built; and we shall therefore first consider the form of
shaft which will be best when we have the best materials; and then
consider how far we can imitate, or how far it will be wise to imitate,
this form with any materials we can obtain.

§ III. Now as I gave the reader the ground, and the stones, that he
might for himself find out how to build his wall, I shall give him the
block of marble, and the chisel, that he may himself find out how to
shape his column. Let him suppose the elongated mass, so given him,
rudely hewn to the thickness which he has calculated will be
proportioned to the weight it has to carry. The conditions of stability
will require that some allowance be made in finishing it for any chance
of slight disturbance or subsidence of the ground below, and that, as
everything must depend on the uprightness of the shaft, as little chance
should be left as possible of its being thrown off its balance. It will
therefore be prudent to leave it slightly thicker at the base than at
the top. This excess of diameter at the base being determined, the
reader is to ask himself how most easily and simply to smooth the
column from one extremity to the other. To cut it into a true
straight-sided cone would be a matter of much trouble and nicety, and
would incur the continual risk of chipping into it too deep. Why not
leave some room for a chance stroke, work it slightly, _very_ slightly
convex, and smooth the curve by the eye between the two extremities? you
will save much trouble and time, and the shaft will be all the stronger.

[Illustration: Fig. XIII.]

This is accordingly the natural form of a detached block shaft. It is
the best. No other will ever be so agreeable to the mind or eye. I do
not mean that it is not capable of more refined execution, or of the
application of some of the laws of æsthetic beauty, but that it is the
best recipient of execution and subject of law; better in either case
than if you had taken more pains, and cut it straight.

§ IV. You will observe, however, that the convexity is to be very
slight, and that the shaft is not to _bulge_ in the centre, but to taper
from the root in a curved line; the peculiar character of the curve you
will discern better by exaggerating, in a diagram, the conditions of its
sculpture.

Let _a_, _a_, _b_, _b_, at A, Fig. XIII., be the rough block of the
shaft, laid on the ground; and as thick as you can by any chance require
it to be; you will leave it of this full thickness at its base at A, but
at the other end you will mark off upon it the diameter _c_, _d_, which
you intend it to have at the summit; you will then take your mallet and
chisel, and working from _c_ and _d_ you will roughly knock off the
corners, shaded in the figure, so as to reduce the shaft to the figure
described by the inside lines in A and the outside lines in B; you then
proceed to smooth it, you chisel away the shaded parts in B, and leave
your finished shaft of the form of the _inside_ lines _e_, _g_, _f_,
_h_.

The result of this operation will be of course that the shaft tapers
faster towards the top than it does near the ground. Observe this
carefully; it is a point of great future importance.

§ V. So far of the shape of detached or block shafts. We can carry the
type no farther on merely structural considerations: let us pass to the
shaft of inferior materials.

Unfortunately, in practice, this step must be soon made. It is alike
difficult to obtain, transport, and raise, block shafts more than ten or
twelve feet long, except in remarkable positions, and as pieces of
singular magnificence. Large pillars are therefore always composed of
more than one block of stone. Such pillars are either jointed like
basalt columns, and composed of solid pieces of stone set one above
another; or they are filled up _towers_, built of small stones cemented
into a mass, with more or less of regularity: Keep this distinction
carefully in mind, it is of great importance; for the jointed column,
every stone composing which, however thin, is (so to speak) a complete
_slice_ of the shaft, is just as strong as the block pillar of one
stone, so long as no forces are brought into action upon it which would
have a tendency to cause horizontal dislocation. But the pillar which is
built as a filled-up tower is of course liable to fissure in any
direction, if its cement give way.

But, in either case, it is evident that all constructive reason of the
curved contour is at once destroyed. Far from being an easy or natural
procedure, the fitting of each portion of the curve to its fellow, in
the separate stones, would require painful care and considerable masonic
skill; while, in the case of the filled-up tower, the curve outwards
would be even unsafe; for its greatest strength (and that the more in
proportion to its careless building) lies in its bark, or shell of
outside stone; and this, if curved outwards, would at once burst
outwards, if heavily loaded above.

If, therefore, the curved outline be ever retained in such shafts, it
must be in obedience to æsthetic laws only.

§ VI. But farther. Not only the curvature, but even the tapering by
straight lines, would be somewhat difficult of execution in the pieced
column. Where, indeed, the entire shaft is composed of four or five
blocks set one upon another, the diameters may be easily determined at
the successive joints, and the stones chiselled to the same slope. But
this becomes sufficiently troublesome when the joints are numerous, so
that the pillar is like a pile of cheeses; or when it is to be built of
small and irregular stones. We should be naturally led, in the one case,
to cut all the cheeses to the same diameter; in the other to build by
the plumb-line; and in both to give up the tapering altogether.

§ VII. Farther. Since the chance, in the one case, of horizontal
dislocation, in the other, of irregular fissure, is much increased by
the composition of the shaft out of joints or small stones, a larger
bulk of shaft is required to carry the given weight; and, _cæteris
paribus_, jointed and cemented shafts must be thicker in proportion to
the weight they carry than those which are of one block.

We have here evidently natural causes of a very marked division in
schools of architecture: one group composed of buildings whose shafts
are either of a single stone or of few joints; the shafts, therefore,
being gracefully tapered, and reduced by successive experiments to the
narrowest possible diameter proportioned to the weight they carry: and
the other group embracing those buildings whose shafts are of many
joints or of small stones; shafts which are therefore not tapered, and
rather thick and ponderous in proportion to the weight they carry; the
latter school being evidently somewhat imperfect and inelegant as
compared with the former.

It may perhaps appear, also, that this arrangement of the materials in
cylindrical shafts at all would hardly have suggested itself to a people
who possessed no large blocks out of which to hew them; and that the
shaft built of many pieces is probably derived from, and imitative of
the shaft hewn from few or from one.

§ VIII. If, therefore, you take a good geological map of Europe, and lay
your finger upon the spots where volcanic influences supply either
travertin or marble in accessible and available masses, you will
probably mark the points where the types of the first school have been
originated and developed. If, in the next place, you will mark the
districts where broken and rugged basalt or whinstone, or slaty
sandstone, supply materials on easier terms indeed, but fragmentary and
unmanageable, you will probably distinguish some of the birthplaces of
the derivative and less graceful school. You will, in the first case,
lay your finger on Pæstum, Agrigentum, and Athens; in the second, on
Durham and Lindisfarne.

The shafts of the great primal school are, indeed, in their first form,
as massy as those of the other, and the tendency of both is to continual
diminution of their diameters: but in the first school it is a true
diminution in the thickness of the independent pier; in the last, it is
an apparent diminution, obtained by giving it the appearance of a group
of minor piers. The distinction, however, with which we are concerned is
not that of slenderness, but of vertical or curved contour; and we may
note generally that while throughout the whole range of Northern work,
the perpendicular shaft appears in continually clearer development,
throughout every group which has inherited the spirit of the Greek, the
shaft retains its curved or tapered form; and the occurrence of the
vertical detached shaft may at all times, in European architecture, be
regarded as one of the most important collateral evidences of Northern
influence.

§ IX. It is necessary to limit this observation to European
architecture, because the Egyptian shaft is often untapered, like the
Northern. It appears that the Central Southern, or Greek shaft, was
tapered or curved on æsthetic rather than constructive principles; and
the Egyptian which precedes, and the Northern which follows it, are both
vertical, the one because the best form had not been discovered, the
other because it could not be attained. Both are in a certain degree
barbaric; and both possess in combination and in their ornaments a power
altogether different from that of the Greek shaft, and at least as
impressive if not as admirable.

§ X. We have hitherto spoken of shafts as if their number were fixed,
and only their diameter variable according to the weight to be borne.
But this supposition is evidently gratuitous; for the same weight may be
carried either by many and slender, or by few and massy shafts. If the
reader will look back to Fig. IX., he will find the number of shafts
into which the wall was reduced to be dependent altogether upon the
length of the spaces _a_, _b_, _a_, _b_, &c., a length which was
arbitrarily fixed. We are at liberty to make these spaces of what length
we choose, and, in so doing, to increase the number and diminish the
diameter of the shafts, or _vice versâ_.

§ XI. Supposing the materials are in each case to be of the same kind,
the choice is in great part at the architect's discretion, only there is
a limit on the one hand to the multiplication of the slender shaft, in
the inconvenience of the narrowed interval, and on the other, to the
enlargement of the massy shaft, in the loss of breadth to the
building.[38] That will be commonly the best proportion which is a
natural mean between the two limits; leaning to the side of grace or of
grandeur according to the expressional intention of the work. I say,
_commonly_ the best, because, in some cases, this expressional invention
may prevail over all other considerations, and a column of unnecessary
bulk or fantastic slightness be adopted in order to strike the spectator
with awe or with surprise.[39] The architect is, however, rarely in
practice compelled to use one kind of material only; and his choice
lies frequently between the employment of a larger number of solid and
perfect small shafts, or a less number of pieced and cemented large
ones. It is often possible to obtain from quarries near at hand, blocks
which might be cut into shafts eight or twelve feet long and four or
five feet round, when larger shafts can only be obtained in distant
localities; and the question then is between the perfection of smaller
features and the imperfection of larger. We shall find numberless
instances in Italy in which the first choice has been boldly, and I
think most wisely made; and magnificent buildings have been composed of
systems of small but perfect shafts, multiplied and superimposed. So
long as the idea of the symmetry of a perfect shaft remained in the
builder's mind, his choice could hardly be directed otherwise, and the
adoption of the built and tower-like shaft appears to have been the
result of a loss of this sense of symmetry consequent on the employment
of intractable materials.

§ XII. But farther: we have up to this point spoken of shafts as always
set in ranges, and at equal intervals from each other. But there is no
necessity for this; and material differences may be made in their
diameters if two or more be grouped so as to do together the work of one
large one, and that within, or nearly within, the space which the larger
one would have occupied.

§ XIII. Let A, B, C, Fig. XIV., be three surfaces, of which B and C
contain equal areas, and each of them double that of A: then supposing
them all loaded to the same height, B or C would receive twice as much
weight as A; therefore, to carry B or C loaded, we should need a shaft
of twice the strength needed to carry A. Let S be the shaft required to
carry A, and S_2 the shaft required to carry B or C; then S_3 may be
divided into two shafts, or S_2 into four shafts, as at S_3, all
equal in area or solid contents;[40] and the mass A might be carried
safely by two of them, and the masses B and C, each by four of them.

[Illustration: Fig. XIV.]

Now if we put the single shafts each under the centre of the mass they
have to bear, as represented by the shaded circles at _a_, _a2_, _a3_,
the masses A and C are both of them very ill supported, and even B
insufficiently; but apply the four and the two shafts as at _b_, _b2_,
_b3_, and they are supported satisfactorily. Let the weight on each of
the masses be doubled, and the shafts doubled in area, then we shall
have such arrangements as those at _c_, _c2_, _c3_; and if again the
shafts and weight be doubled, we shall have _d_, _d2_, _d3_.

§ XIV. Now it will at once be observed that the arrangement of the
shafts in the series of B and C is always exactly the same in their
relations to each other; only the group of B is set evenly, and the
group of C is set obliquely,--the one carrying a square, the other a
cross.

[Illustration: Fig. XV.]

You have in these two series the primal representations of shaft
arrangement in the Southern and Northern schools; while the group _b_,
of which _b2_ is the double, set evenly, and _c2_ the double, set
obliquely, is common to both. The reader will be surprised to find how
all the complex and varied forms of shaft arrangement will range
themselves into one or other of these groups; and still more surprised
to find the oblique or cross set system on the one hand, and the square
set system on the other, severally distinctive of Southern and Northern
work. The dome of St. Mark's, and the crossing of the nave and transepts
of Beauvais, are both carried by square piers; but the piers of St.
Mark's are set square to the walls of the church, and those of Beauvais
obliquely to them: and this difference is even a more essential one than
that between the smooth surface of the one and the reedy complication of
the other. The two squares here in the margin (Fig. XV.) are exactly of
the same size, but their expression is altogether different, and in that
difference lies one of the most subtle distinctions between the Gothic
and Greek spirit,--from the shaft, which bears the building, to the
smallest decoration. The Greek square is by preference set evenly, the
Gothic square obliquely; and that so constantly, that wherever we find
the level or even square occurring as a prevailing form, either in plan
or decoration, in early northern work, there we may at least suspect the
presence of a southern or Greek influence; and, on the other hand,
wherever the oblique square is prominent in the south, we may
confidently look for farther evidence of the influence of the Gothic
architects. The rule must not of course be pressed far when, in either
school, there has been determined search for every possible variety of
decorative figures; and accidental circumstances may reverse the usual
system in special cases; but the evidence drawn from this character is
collaterally of the highest value, and the tracing it out is a pursuit
of singular interest. Thus, the Pisan Romanesque might in an instant be
pronounced to have been formed under some measure of Lombardic
influence, from the oblique squares set under its arches; and in it we
have the spirit of northern Gothic affecting details of the
southern;--obliquity of square, in magnificently shafted Romanesque. At
Monza, on the other hand, the levelled square is the characteristic
figure of the entire decoration of the façade of the Duomo, eminently
giving it southern character; but the details are derived almost
entirely from the northern Gothic. Here then we have southern spirit and
northern detail. Of the cruciform outline of the load of the shaft, a
still more positive test of northern work, we shall have more to say in
the 28th Chapter; we must at present note certain farther changes in the
form of the grouped shaft, which open the way to every branch of its
endless combinations, southern or northern.

[Illustration: Fig. XVI.]

§ XV. 1. If the group at _d3_, Fig. XIV., be taken from under its
loading, and have its centre filled up, it will become a quatrefoil; and
it will represent, in their form of most frequent occurrence, a family
of shafts, whose plans are foiled figures, trefoils, quatrefoils,
cinquefoils, &c.; of which a trefoiled example, from the Frari at
Venice, is the third in Plate II., and a quatrefoil from Salisbury the
eighth. It is rare, however, to find in Gothic architecture shafts of
this family composed of a large number of foils, because multifoiled
shafts are seldom true grouped shafts, but are rather canaliculated
conditions of massy piers. The representatives of this family may be
considered as the quatrefoil on the Gothic side of the Alps; and the
Egyptian multifoiled shaft on the south, approximating to the general
type, _b_, Fig. XVI.

§ XVI. Exactly opposed to this great family is that of shafts which have
concave curves instead of convex on each of their sides; but these are
not, properly speaking, grouped shafts at all, and their proper place is
among decorated piers; only they must be named here in order to mark
their exact opposition to the foiled system. In their simplest form,
represented by _c_, Fig. XVI., they have no representatives in good
architecture, being evidently weak and meagre; but approximations to
them exist in late Gothic, as in the vile cathedral of Orleans, and in
modern cast-iron shafts. In their fully developed form they are the
Greek Doric, _a_, Fig. XVI., and occur in caprices of the Romanesque and
Italian Gothic: _d_, Fig. XVI., is from the Duomo of Monza.

§ XVII. 2. Between _c3_ and _d3_ of Fig. XIV. there may be evidently
another condition, represented at 6, Plate II., and formed by the
insertion of a central shaft within the four external ones. This central
shaft we may suppose to expand in proportion to the weight it has to
carry. If the external shafts expand in the same proportion, the entire
form remains unchanged; but if they do not expand, they may (1) be
pushed out by the expanding shaft, or (2) be gradually swallowed up in
its expansion, as at 4, Plate II. If they are pushed out, they are
removed farther from each other by every increase of the central shaft;
and others may then be introduced in the vacant spaces; giving, on the
plan, a central orb with an ever increasing host of satellites, 10,
Plate II.; the satellites themselves often varying in size, and perhaps
quitting contact with the central shaft. Suppose them in any of their
conditions fixed, while the inner shaft expands, and they will be
gradually buried in it, forming more complicated conditions of 4, Plate
II. The combinations are thus altogether infinite, even supposing the
central shaft to be circular only; but their infinity is multiplied by
many other infinities when the central shaft itself becomes square or
crosslet on the section, or itself multifoiled (8, Plate II.) with
satellite shafts eddying about its recesses and angles, in every
possible relation of attraction. Among these endless conditions of
change, the choice of the architect is free, this only being generally
noted: that, as the whole value of such piers depends, first, upon their
being wisely fitted to the weight above them, and, secondly, upon their
all working together: and one not failing the rest, perhaps to the ruin
of all, he must never multiply shafts without visible cause in the
disposition of members superimposed:[41] and in his multiplied group he
should, if possible, avoid a marked separation between the large central
shaft and its satellites; for if this exist, the satellites will either
appear useless altogether, or else, which is worse, they will look as if
they were meant to keep the central shaft together by wiring or caging
it in; like iron rods set round a supple cylinder,--a fatal fault in the
piers of Westminster Abbey, and, in a less degree, in the noble nave of
the cathedral of Bourges.

§ XVIII. While, however, we have been thus subdividing or assembling our
shafts, how far has it been possible to retain their curved or tapered
outline? So long as they remain distinct and equal, however close to
each other, the independent curvature may evidently be retained. But
when once they come in contact, it is equally evident that a column,
formed of shafts touching at the base and separate at the top, would
appear as if in the very act of splitting asunder. Hence, in all the
closely arranged groups, and especially those with a central shaft, the
tapering is sacrificed; and with less cause for regret, because it was a
provision against subsidence or distortion, which cannot now take place
with the separate members of the group. Evidently, the work, if safe at
all, must be executed with far greater accuracy and stability when its
supports are so delicately arranged, than would be implied by such
precaution. In grouping shafts, therefore, a true perpendicular line is,
in nearly all cases, given to the pier; and the reader will anticipate
that the two schools, which we have already found to be distinguished,
the one by its perpendicular and pieced shafts, and the other by its
curved and block shafts, will be found divided also in their employment
of grouped shafts;--it is likely that the idea of grouping, however
suggested, will be fully entertained and acted upon by the one, but
hesitatingly by the other; and that we shall find, on the one hand,
buildings displaying sometimes massy piers of small stones, sometimes
clustered piers of rich complexity, and on the other, more or less
regular succession of block shafts, each treated as entirely independent
of those around it.

§ XIX. Farther, the grouping of shafts once admitted, it is probable
that the complexity and richness of such arrangements would recommend
them to the eye, and induce their frequent, even their unnecessary
introduction; so that weight which might have been borne by a single
pillar, would be in preference supported by four or five. And if the
stone of the country, whose fragmentary character first occasioned the
building and piecing of the large pier, were yet in beds consistent
enough to supply shafts of very small diameter, the strength and
simplicity of such a construction might justify it, as well as its
grace. The fact, however, is that the charm which the multiplication of
line possesses for the eye has always been one of the chief ends of the
work in the grouped schools; and that, so far from employing the grouped
piers in order to the introduction of very slender block shafts, the
most common form in which such piers occur is that of a solid jointed
shaft, each joint being separately cut into the contour of the group
required.

§ XX. We have hitherto supposed that all grouped or clustered shafts
have been the result or the expression of an actual gathering and
binding together of detached shafts. This is not, however, always so:
for some clustered shafts are little more than solid piers channelled on
the surface, and their form appears to be merely the development of some
longitudinal furrowing or striation on the original single shaft. That
clustering or striation, whichever we choose to call it, is in this case
a decorative feature, and to be considered under the head of decoration.

§ XXI. It must be evident to the reader at a glance, that the real
serviceableness of any of these grouped arrangements must depend upon
the relative shortness of the shafts, and that, when the whole pier is
so lofty that its minor members become mere reeds or rods of stone,
those minor members can no longer be charged with any considerable
weight. And the fact is, that in the most complicated Gothic
arrangements, when the pier is tall and its satellites stand clear of
it, no real work is given them to do, and they might all be removed
without endangering the building. They are merely the _expression_ of a
great consistent system, and are in architecture what is often found in
animal anatomy,--a bone, or process of a bone, useless, under the
ordained circumstances of its life, to the particular animal in which it
is found, and slightly developed, but yet distinctly existent, and
representing, for the sake of absolute consistency, the same bone in its
appointed, and generally useful, place, either in skeletons of all
animals, or in the genus to which the animal itself belongs.

§ XXII. Farther: as it is not easy to obtain pieces of stone long enough
for these supplementary shafts (especially as it is always unsafe to lay
a stratified stone with its beds upright) they have been frequently
composed of two or more short shafts set upon each other, and to conceal
the unsightly junction, a flat stone has been interposed, carved into
certain mouldings, which have the appearance of a ring on the shaft. Now
observe: the whole pier was the gathering of the whole wall, the base
gathers into base, the veil into the shaft, and the string courses of
the veil gather into these rings; and when this is clearly expressed,
and the rings do indeed correspond with the string courses of the wall
veil, they are perfectly admissible and even beautiful; but otherwise,
and occurring, as they do in the shafts of Westminster, in the middle of
continuous lines, they are but sorry make-shifts, and of late since gas
has been invented, have become especially offensive from their unlucky
resemblance to the joints of gas-pipes, or common water-pipes. There are
two leaden ones, for instance, on the left hand as one enters the abbey
at Poet's Corner, with their solderings and funnels looking exactly like
rings and capitals, and most disrespectfully mimicking the shafts of
the abbey, inside.

Thus far we have traced the probable conditions of shaft structure in
pure theory; I shall now lay before the reader a brief statement of the
facts of the thing in time past and present.

§ XXIII. In the earliest and grandest shaft architecture which we know,
that of Egypt, we have no grouped arrangements, properly so called, but
either single and smooth shafts, or richly reeded and furrowed shafts,
which represent the extreme conditions of a complicated group bound
together to sustain a single mass; and are indeed, without doubt,
nothing else than imitations of bundles of reeds, or of clusters of
lotus:[42] but in these shafts there is merely the idea of a group, not
the actual function or structure of a group; they are just as much solid
and simple shafts as those which are smooth, and merely by the method of
their decoration present to the eye the image of a richly complex
arrangement.

§ XXIV. After these we have the Greek shaft, less in scale, and losing
all suggestion or purpose of suggestion of complexity, its so-called
flutings being, visibly as actually, an external decoration.

§ XXV. The idea of the shaft remains absolutely single in the Roman and
Byzantine mind; but true grouping begins in Christian architecture by
the placing of two or more separate shafts side by side, each having its
own work to do; then three or four, still with separate work; then, by
such steps as those above theoretically pursued, the number of the
members increases, while they coagulate into a single mass; and we have
finally a shaft apparently composed of thirty, forty, fifty, or more
distinct members; a shaft which, in the reality of its service, is as
much a single shaft as the old Egyptian one; but which differs from the
Egyptian in that all its members, how many soever, have each individual
work to do, and a separate rib of arch or roof to carry: and thus the
great Christian truth of distinct services of the individual soul is
typified in the Christian shaft; and the old Egyptian servitude of the
multitudes, the servitude inseparable from the children of Ham, is
typified also in that ancient shaft of the Egyptians, which in its
gathered strength of the river reeds, seems, as the sands of the desert
drift over its ruin, to be intended to remind us for ever of the end of
the association of the wicked. "Can the rush grow up without mire, or
the flag grow without water?--So are the paths of all that forget God;
and the hypocrite's hope shall perish."

§ XXVI. Let the reader then keep this distinction of the three systems
clearly in his mind: Egyptian system, an apparent cluster supporting a
simple capital and single weight; Greek and Roman system, single shaft,
single weight; Gothic system, divided shafts, divided weight: at first
actually and simply divided, at last apparently and infinitely divided;
so that the fully formed Gothic shaft is a return to the Egyptian, but
the weight is divided in the one and undivided in the other.

§ XXVII. The transition from the actual to the apparent cluster, in the
Gothic, is a question of the most curious interest; I have thrown
together the shaft sections in Plate II. to illustrate it, and exemplify
what has been generally stated above.[43]

[Illustration: Plate II.
               PLANS OF PIERS.]

1. The earliest, the most frequent, perhaps the most beautiful of all
the groups, is also the simplest; the two shafts arranged as at _b_ or
_c_, (Fig. XIV.) above, bearing an oblong mass, and substituted for the
still earlier structure _a_, Fig. XIV. In Plate XVII. (Chap. XXVII.) are
three examples of the transition: the one on the left, at the top, is
the earliest single-shafted arrangement, constant in the rough
Romanesque windows; a huge hammer-shaped capital being employed to
sustain the thickness of the wall. It was rapidly superseded by the
double shaft, as on the right of it; a very early example from the
cloisters of the Duomo, Verona. Beneath, is a most elaborate and perfect
one from St. Zeno of Verona, where the group is twice complicated, two
shafts being used, both with quatrefoil sections. The plain double
shaft, however, is by far the most frequent, both in the Northern and
Southern Gothic, but for the most part early; it is very frequent in
cloisters, and in the singular one of St. Michael's Mount, Normandy, a
small pseudo-arcade runs along between the pairs of shafts, a miniature
aisle. The group is employed on a magnificent scale, but ill
proportioned, for the main piers of the apse of the cathedral of
Coutances, its purpose being to conceal one shaft behind the other, and
make it appear to the spectator from the nave as if the apse were
sustained by single shafts, of inordinate slenderness. The attempt is
ill-judged, and the result unsatisfactory.

[Illustration: Fig. XVII.]

§ XXVIII. 2. When these pairs of shafts come near each other, as
frequently at the turnings of angles (Fig. XVII.), the quadruple group
results, _b_ 2, Fig. XIV., of which the Lombardic sculptors were
excessively fond, usually tying the shafts together in their centre, in
a lover's knot. They thus occur in Plate V., from the Broletto of Como;
at the angle of St. Michele of Lucca, Plate XXI.; and in the balustrade
of St. Mark's. This is a group, however, which I have never seen used on
a large scale.[44]

§ XXIX. 3. Such groups, consolidated by a small square in their centre,
form the shafts of St. Zeno, just spoken of, and figured in Plate XVII.,
which are among the most interesting pieces of work I know in Italy. I
give their entire arrangement in Fig. XVIII.: both shafts have the same
section, but one receives a half turn as it ascends, giving it an
exquisite spiral contour: the plan of their bases, with their plinth, is
given at 2, Plate II.; and note it carefully, for it is an epitome of
all that we observed above, respecting the oblique and even square. It
was asserted that the oblique belonged to the north, the even to the
south: we have here the northern Lombardic nation naturalised in Italy,
and, behold, the oblique and even quatrefoil linked together; not
confused, but actually linked by a bar of stone, as seen in Plate XVII.,
under the capitals.

[Illustration: Fig. XVIII.]

4. Next to these, observe the two groups of five shafts each, 5 and 6,
Plate II., one oblique, the other even. Both are from upper stories; the
oblique one from the triforium of Salisbury; the even one from the upper
range of shafts in the façade of St. Mark's at Venice.[45]

§ XXX. Around these central types are grouped, in Plate II., four simple
examples of the satellitic cluster, all of the Northern Gothic: 4, from
the Cathedral of Amiens; 7, from that of Lyons (nave pier); 8, the same
from Salisbury; 10, from the porch of Notre Dame, Dijon, having
satellites of three magnitudes: 9 is one of the piers between the doors
of the same church, with shafts of four magnitudes, and is an instance
of the confusion of mind of the Northern architects between piers proper
and jamb mouldings (noticed farther in the next chapter, § XXXI.): for
this fig. 9, which is an angle at the meeting of two jambs, is treated
like a rich independent shaft, and the figure below, 12, which is half
of a true shaft, is treated like a meeting of jambs.

All these four examples belonging to the oblique or Northern system, the
curious trefoil plan, 3, lies _between_ the two, as the double
quatrefoil next it _unites_ the two. The trefoil is from the Frari,
Venice, and has a richly worked capital in the Byzantine manner,--an
imitation, I think, of the Byzantine work by the Gothic builders: 1 is
to be compared with it, being one of the earliest conditions of the
cross shaft, from the atrium of St. Ambrogio at Milan. 13 is the nave
pier of St. Michele at Pavia, showing the same condition more fully
developed: and 11 another nave pier from Vienne, on the Rhone, of far
more distinct Roman derivation, for the flat pilaster is set to the
nave, and is fluted like an antique one. 12 is the grandest development
I have ever seen of the cross shaft, with satellite shafts in the nooks
of it: it is half of one of the great western piers of the cathedral of
Bourges, measuring eight feet each side, thirty-two round.[46] Then the
one below (15) is half of a nave pier of Rouen Cathedral, showing the
mode in which such conditions as that of Dijon (9) and that of Bourges
(12) were fused together into forms of inextricable complexity
(inextricable I mean in the irregularity of proportion and projection,
for all of them are easily resolvable into simple systems in connexion
with the roof ribs). This pier of Rouen is a type of the last condition
of the good Gothic; from this point the small shafts begin to lose
shape, and run into narrow fillets and ridges, projecting at the same
time farther and farther in weak tongue-like sections, as described in
the "Seven Lamps." I have only here given one example of this family, an
unimportant but sufficiently characteristic one (16) from St. Gervais of
Falaise. One side of the nave of that church is Norman, the other
Flamboyant, and the two piers 14 and 16 stand opposite each other. It
would be useless to endeavor to trace farther the fantasticism of the
later Gothic shafts; they become mere aggregations of mouldings very
sharply and finely cut, their bases at the same time running together in
strange complexity and their capitals diminishing and disappearing. Some
of their conditions, which, in their rich striation, resemble crystals
of beryl, are very massy and grand; others, meagre, harsh, or effeminate
in themselves, are redeemed by richness and boldness of decoration; and
I have long had it in my mind to reason out the entire harmony of this
French Flamboyant system, and fix its types and possible power. But
this inquiry is foreign altogether to our present purpose, and we shall
therefore turn back from the Flamboyant to the Norman side of the
Falaise aisle, resolute for the future that all shafts of which we may
have the ordering, shall be permitted, as with wisdom we may also permit
men or cities, to gather themselves into companies, or constellate
themselves into clusters, but not to fuse themselves into mere masses of
nebulous aggregation.


FOOTNOTES:

  [38] In saying this, it is assumed that the interval is one which is
    to be traversed by men; and that a certain relation of the shafts
    and intervals to the size of the human figure is therefore
    necessary. When shafts are used in the upper stories of buildings,
    or on a scale which ignores all relation to the human figure, no
    such relative limits exist either to slenderness or solidity.

  [39] Vide the interesting discussion of this point in Mr.
    Fergusson's account of the Temple of Karnak, "Principles of Beauty
    in Art," p. 219.

  [40] I have assumed that the strength of similar shafts of equal
    height is as the squares of their diameters; which, though not
    actually a correct expression, is sufficiently so for all our
    present purposes.

  [41] How far this condition limits the system of shaft grouping we
    shall see presently. The reader must remember, that we at present
    reason respecting shafts in the abstract only.

  [42] The capitals being formed by the flowers, or by a
    representation of the bulging out of the reeds at the top, under the
    weight of the architrave.

  [43] I have not been at the pains to draw the complicated piers in
    this plate with absolute exactitude to the scale of each: they are
    accurate enough for their purpose: those of them respecting which we
    shall have farther question will be given on a much larger scale.

  [44] The largest I remember support a monument in St. Zeno of
    Verona; they are of red marble, some ten or twelve feet high.

  [45] The effect of this last is given in Plate VI. of the folio
    series.

  [46] The entire development of this cross system in connexion with
    the vaulting ribs, has been most clearly explained by Professor
    Willis (Architecture of Mid. Ages, Chap. IV.); and I strongly
    recommend every reader who is inclined to take pains in the matter,
    to read that chapter. I have been contented, in my own text, to
    pursue the abstract idea of shaft form.




CHAPTER IX.

  THE CAPITAL.


§ I. The reader will remember that in Chap. VII. § V. it was said that
the cornice of the wall, being cut to pieces and gathered together,
formed the capital of the column. We have now to follow it in its
transformation.

We must, of course, take our simplest form or root of cornices (_a_, in
Fig. V., above). We will take X and Y there, and we must necessarily
gather them together as we did Xb and Yb in Chap. VII. Look back to the
tenth paragraph of Chap. VII., read or glance it over again, substitute
X and Y for Xb and Yb, read capital for base, and, as we said that the
capital was the hand of the pillar, while the base was its foot, read
also fingers for toes; and as you look to the plate, Fig. XII., turn it
upside down. Then _h_, in Fig. XII., becomes now your best general form
of block capital, as before of block base.

§ II. You will thus have a perfect idea of the analogies between base
and capital; our farther inquiry is into their differences. You cannot
but have noticed that when Fig. XII. is turned upside down, the square
stone (Y) looks too heavy for the supporting stone (X); and that in the
profile of cornice (_a_ of Fig. V.) the proportions are altogether
different. You will feel the fitness of this in an instant when you
consider that the principal function of the sloping part in Fig. XII. is
as a prop to the pillar to keep it from _slipping aside_; but the
function of the sloping stone in the cornice and capital is to _carry
weight above_. The thrust of the slope in the one case should therefore
be lateral, in the other upwards.

§ III. We will, therefore, take the two figures, _e_ and _h_ of Fig.
XII., and make this change in them as we reverse them, using now the
exact profile of the cornice _a_,--the father of cornices; and we shall
thus have _a_ and _b_, Fig. XIX.

[Illustration: Fig. XIX.]

Both of these are sufficiently ugly, the reader thinks; so do I; but we
will mend them before we have done with them: that at _a_ is assuredly
the ugliest,--like a tile on a flower-pot. It is, nevertheless, the
father of capitals; being the simplest condition of the gathered father
of cornices. But it is to be observed that the diameter of the shaft
here is arbitrarily assumed to be small, in order more clearly to show
the general relations of the sloping stone to the shaft and upper stone;
and this smallness of the shaft diameter is inconsistent with the
serviceableness and beauty of the arrangement at _a_, if it were to be
realised (as we shall see presently); but it is not inconsistent with
its central character, as the representative of every species of
possible capital; nor is its tile and flower-pot look to be regretted,
as it may remind the reader of the reported origin of the Corinthian
capital. The stones of the cornice, hitherto called X and Y, receive,
now that they form the capital, each a separate name; the sloping stone
is called the Bell of the capital, and that laid above it, the Abacus.
Abacus means a board or tile: I wish there were an English word for it,
but I fear there is no substitution possible, the term having been long
fixed, and the reader will find it convenient to familiarise himself
with the Latin one.

§ IV. The form of base, _e_ of Fig. XII., which corresponds to this
first form of capital, _a_, was said to be objectionable only because it
_looked_ insecure; and the spurs were added as a kind of pledge of
stability to the eye. But evidently the projecting corners of the abacus
at _a_, Fig. XIX., are _actually_ insecure; they may break off, if great
weight be laid upon them. This is the chief reason of the ugliness of
the form; and the spurs in _b_ are now no mere pledges of apparent
stability, but have very serious practical use in supporting the angle
of the abacus. If, even with the added spur, the support seems
insufficient, we may fill up the crannies between the spurs and the
bell, and we have the form _c_.

Thus _a_, though the germ and type of capitals, is itself (except under
some peculiar conditions) both ugly and insecure; _b_ is the first type
of capitals which carry light weight; _c_, of capitals which carry
excessive weight.

§ V. I fear, however, the reader may think he is going slightly too
fast, and may not like having the capital forced upon him out of the
cornice; but would prefer inventing a capital for the shaft itself,
without reference to the cornice at all. We will do so then; though we
shall come to the same result.

The shaft, it will be remembered, has to sustain the same weight as the
long piece of wall which was concentrated into the shaft; it is enabled
to do this both by its better form and better knit materials; and it can
carry a greater weight than the space at the top of it is adapted to
receive. The first point, therefore, is to expand this space as far as
possible, and that in a form more convenient than the circle for the
adjustment of the stones above. In general the square is a more
convenient form than any other; but the hexagon or octagon is sometimes
better fitted for masses of work which divide in six or eight
directions. Then our first impulse would be to put a square or hexagonal
stone on the top of the shaft, projecting as far beyond it as might be
safely ventured; as at _a_, Fig. XX. This is the abacus. Our next idea
would be to put a conical shaped stone beneath this abacus, to support
its outer edge, as at _b_. This is the bell.

[Illustration: Fig. XX.]

§ VI. Now the entire treatment of the capital depends simply on the
manner in which this bell-stone is prepared for fitting the shaft below
and the abacus above. Placed as at _a_, in Fig. XIX., it gives us the
simplest of possible forms; with the spurs added, as at _b_, it gives
the germ of the richest and most elaborate forms: but there are two
modes of treatment more dexterous than the one, and less elaborate than
the other, which are of the highest possible importance,--modes in which
the bell is brought to its proper form by truncation.

§ VII. Let _d_ and _f_, Fig. XIX., be two bell-stones; _d_ is part of a
cone (a sugar-loaf upside down, with its point cut off); _f_ part of a
four-sided pyramid. Then, assuming the abacus to be square, _d_ will
already fit the shaft, but has to be chiselled to fit the abacus; _f_
will already fit the abacus, but has to be chiselled to fit the shaft.

From the broad end of _d_ chop or chisel off, in four vertical planes,
as much as will leave its head an exact square. The vertical cuttings
will form curves on the sides of the cone (curves of a curious kind,
which the reader need not be troubled to examine), and we shall have the
form at _e_, which is the root of the greater number of Norman capitals.

From _f_ cut off the angles, beginning at the corners of the square and
widening the truncation downwards, so as to give the form at _g_, where
the base of the bell is an octagon, and its top remains a square. A
very slight rounding away of the angles of the octagon at the base of
_g_ will enable it to fit the circular shaft closely enough for all
practical purposes, and this form, at _g_, is the root of nearly all
Lombardic capitals.

If, instead of a square, the head of the bell were hexagonal or
octagonal, the operation of cutting would be the same on each angle; but
there would be produced, of course, six or eight curves on the sides of
_e_, and twelve or sixteen sides to the base of _g_.

[Illustration: Fig. XXI.]

§ VIII. The truncations in _e_ and _g_ may of course be executed on
concave or convex forms of _d_ and _f_; but _e_ is usually worked on a
straight-sided bell, and the truncation of _g_ often becomes concave
while the bell remains straight; for this simple reason,--that the sharp
points at the angles of _g_, being somewhat difficult to cut, and easily
broken off, are usually avoided by beginning the truncation a little way
down the side of the bell, and then recovering the lost ground by a
deeper cut inwards, as here, Fig. XXI. This is the actual form of the
capitals of the balustrades of St. Mark's: it is the root of all the
Byzantine Arab capitals, and of all the most beautiful capitals in the
world, whose function is to express lightness.

§ IX. We have hitherto proceeded entirely on the assumption that the
form of cornice which was gathered together to produce the capital was
the root of cornices, _a_ of Fig. V. But this, it will be remembered,
was said in § VI. of Chap. VI. to be especially characteristic of
southern work, and that in northern and wet climates it took the form of
a dripstone.

Accordingly, in the northern climates, the dripstone gathered together
forms a peculiar northern capital, commonly called the Early
English,[47] owing to its especial use in that style.

There would have been no absurdity in this if shafts were always to be
exposed to the weather; but in Gothic constructions the most important
shafts are in the inside of the building. The dripstone sections of
their capitals are therefore unnecessary and ridiculous.

§ X. They are, however, much worse than unnecessary.

[Illustration: Fig. XXII.]

The edge of the dripstone, being undercut, has no bearing power, and the
capital fails, therefore, in its own principal function; and besides
this, the undercut contour admits of no distinctly visible decoration;
it is, therefore, left utterly barren, and the capital looks as if it
had been turned in a lathe. The Early English capital has, therefore,
the three greatest faults that any design can have: (1) it fails in its
own proper purpose, that of support; (2) it is adapted to a purpose to
which it can never be put, that of keeping off rain; (3) it cannot be
decorated.

The Early English capital is, therefore, a barbarism of triple
grossness, and degrades the style in which it is found, otherwise very
noble, to one of second-rate order.

§ XI. Dismissing, therefore, the Early English capital, as deserving no
place in our system, let us reassemble in one view the forms which have
been legitimately developed, and which are to become hereafter subjects
of decoration. To the forms _a_, _b_, and _c_, Fig. XIX., we must add
the two simplest truncated forms _e_ and _g_, Fig. XIX., putting their
abaci on them (as we considered their contours in the bells only), and
we shall have the five forms now given in parallel perspective in Fig.
XXII., which are the roots of all good capitals existing, or capable of
existence, and whose variations, infinite and a thousand times infinite,
are all produced by introduction of various curvatures into their
contours, and the endless methods of decoration superinduced on such
curvatures.

§ XII. There is, however, a kind of variation, also infinite, which
takes place in these radical forms, before they receive either curvature
or decoration. This is the variety of proportion borne by the different
lines of the capital to each other, and to the shafts. This is a
structural question, at present to be considered as far as is possible.

[Illustration: Fig. XXIII.]

§ XIII. All the five capitals (which are indeed five orders with
legitimate distinction; very different, however, from the five orders as
commonly understood) may be represented by the same profile, a section
through the sides of _a_, _b_, _d_, and _e_, or through the angles of
_c_, Fig. XXII. This profile we will put on the top of a shaft, as at A,
Fig. XXIII., which shaft we will suppose of equal diameter above and
below for the sake of greater simplicity: in this simplest condition,
however, relations of proportion exist between five quantities, any one
or any two, or any three, or any four of which may change, irrespective
of the others. These five quantities are:

  1. The height of the shaft, _a b_;
  2. Its diameter, _b c_;
  3. The length of slope of bell, _b d_;
  4. The inclination of this slope, or angle _c b d_;
  5. The depth of abacus, _d e_.

For every change in any one of these quantities we have a new proportion
of capital: five infinities, supposing change only in one quantity at a
time: infinity of infinities in the sum of possible changes.

It is, therefore, only possible to note the general laws of change;
every scale of pillar, and every weight laid upon it admitting, within
certain limits, a variety out of which the architect has his choice; but
yet fixing limits which the proportion becomes ugly when it approaches,
and dangerous when it exceeds. But the inquiry into this subject is too
difficult for the general reader, and I shall content myself with
proving four laws, easily understood and generally applicable; for proof
of which if the said reader care not, he may miss the next four
paragraphs without harm.

§ XIV. 1. _The more slender the shaft, the greater, proportionally, may
be the projection of the abacus._ For, looking back to Fig. XXIII., let
the height _a b_ be fixed, the length _d b_, the angle _d b c_, and the
depth _d e_. Let the single quantity _b c_ be variable, let B be a
capital and shaft which are found to be perfectly safe in proportion to
the weight they bear, and let the weight be equally distributed over the
whole of the abacus. Then this weight may be represented by any number
of equal divisions, suppose four, as _l_, _m_, _n_, _r_, of brickwork
above, of which each division is one fourth of the whole weight; and let
this weight be placed in the most trying way on the abacus, that is to
say, let the masses _l_ and _r_ be detached from _m_ and _n_, and bear
with their full weight on the outside of the capital. We assume, in B,
that the width of abacus _e f_ is twice as great as that of the shaft,
_b c_, and on these conditions we assume the capital to be safe.

But _b c_ is allowed to be variable. Let it become _b2 c2_ at C, which
is a length representing about the diameter of a shaft containing half
the substance of the shaft B, and, therefore, able to sustain not more
than half the weight sustained by B. But the slope _b d_ and depth _d
e_ remaining unchanged, we have the capital of C, which we are to load
with only half the weight of _l_, _m_, _n_, _r_, i.e., with _l_ and _r_
alone. Therefore the weight of _l_ and _r_, now represented by the
masses _l2_, _r2_, is distributed over the whole of the capital. But the
weight _r_ was adequately supported by the projecting piece of the first
capital _h f c_: much more is it now adequately supported by _i h_, _f2
c2_. Therefore, if the capital of B was safe, that of C is more than
safe. Now in B the length _e f_ was only twice _b c_; but in C, _e2 f2_
will be found more than twice that of _b2_ _c2_. Therefore, the more
slender the shaft, the greater may be the proportional excess of the
abacus over its diameter.

[Illustration: Fig. XXIV.]

§ XV. 2. _The smaller the scale of the building, the greater may be the
excess of the abacus over the diameter of the shaft._ This principle
requires, I think, no very lengthy proof: the reader can understand at
once that the cohesion and strength of stone which can sustain a small
projecting mass, will not sustain a vast one overhanging in the same
proportion. A bank even of loose earth, six feet high, will sometimes
overhang its base a foot or two, as you may see any day in the gravelly
banks of the lanes of Hampstead: but make the bank of gravel, equally
loose, six hundred feet high, and see if you can get it to overhang a
hundred or two! much more if there be weight above it increased in the
same proportion. Hence, let any capital be given, whose projection is
just safe, and no more, on its existing scale; increase its proportions
every way equally, though ever so little, and it is unsafe; diminish
them equally, and it becomes safe in the exact degree of the diminution.

Let, then, the quantity _e d_, and angle _d b c_, at A of Fig. XXIII.,
be invariable, and let the length _d b_ vary: then we shall have such a
series of forms as may be represented by _a_, _b_, _c_, Fig. XXIV., of
which _a_ is a proportion for a colossal building, _b_ for a moderately
sized building, while _c_ could only be admitted on a very small scale
indeed.

§ XVI. 3. _The greater the excess of abacus, the steeper must be the
slope of the bell, the shaft diameter being constant._

This will evidently follow from the considerations in the last
paragraph; supposing only that, instead of the scale of shaft and
capital varying together, the scale of the capital varies alone. For it
will then still be true, that, if the projection of the capital be just
safe on a given scale, as its excess over the shaft diameter increases,
the projection will be unsafe, if the slope of the bell remain constant.
But it may be rendered safe by making this slope steeper, and so
increasing its supporting power.

[Illustration: Fig. XXV.]

Thus let the capital _a_, Fig. XXV., be just safe. Then the capital _b_,
in which the slope is the same but the excess greater, is unsafe. But
the capital _c_, in which, though the excess equals that of _b_, the
steepness of the supporting slope is increased, will be as safe as _b_,
and probably as strong as _a_.[48]

§ XVII. 4. _The steeper the slope of the bell, the thinner may be the
abacus._

The use of the abacus is eminently to equalise the pressure over the
surface of the bell, so that the weight may not by any accident be
directed exclusively upon its edges. In proportion to the strength of
these edges, this function of the abacus is superseded, and these edges
are strong in proportion to the steepness of the slope. Thus in Fig.
XXVI., the bell at _a_ would carry weight safely enough without any
abacus, but that at _c_ would not: it would probably have its edges
broken off. The abacus superimposed might be on _a_ very thin, little
more than formal, as at _b_; but on _c_ must be thick, as at _d_.

[Illustration: Fig. XXVI.]

§ XVIII. These four rules are all that are necessary for general
criticism; and observe that these are only semi-imperative,--rules of
permission, not of compulsion. Thus Law 1 asserts that the slender shaft
_may_ have greater excess of capital than the thick shaft; but it need
not, unless the architect chooses; his thick shafts _must_ have small
excess, but his slender ones need not have large. So Law 2 says, that as
the building is smaller, the excess _may_ be greater; but it need not,
for the excess which is safe in the large is still safer in the small.
So Law 3 says that capitals of great excess must have steep slopes; but
it does not say that capitals of small excess may not have steep slopes
also, if we choose. And lastly, Law 4 asserts the necessity of the thick
abacus for the shallow bell; but the steep bell may have a thick abacus
also.

§ XIX. It will be found, however, that in practice some confession of
these laws will always be useful, and especially of the two first. The
eye always requires, on a slender shaft, a more spreading capital than
it does on a massy one, and a bolder mass of capital on a small scale
than on a large. And, in the application of the first rule, it is to be
noted that a shaft becomes slender either by diminution of diameter or
increase of height; that either mode of change presupposes the weight
above it diminished, and requires an expansion of abacus. I know no mode
of spoiling a noble building more frequent in actual practice than the
imposition of flat and slightly expanded capitals on tall shafts.

§ XX. The reader must observe, also, that, in the demonstration of the
four laws, I always assumed the weight above to be given. By the
alteration of this weight, therefore, the architect has it in his power
to relieve, and therefore alter, the forms of his capitals. By its
various distribution on their centres or edges, the slope of their bells
and thickness of abaci will be affected also; so that he has countless
expedients at his command for the various treatment of his design. He
can divide his weights among more shafts; he can throw them in different
places and different directions on the abaci; he can alter slope of
bells or diameter of shafts; he can use spurred or plain bells, thin or
thick abaci; and all these changes admitting of infinity in their
degrees, and infinity a thousand times told in their relations: and all
this without reference to decoration, merely with the five forms of
block capital!

§ XXI. In the harmony of these arrangements, in their fitness, unity,
and accuracy, lies the true proportion of every building,--proportion
utterly endless in its infinities of change, with unchanged beauty. And
yet this connexion of the frame of their building into one harmony has,
I believe, never been so much as dreamed of by architects. It has been
instinctively done in some degree by many, empirically in some degree by
many more; thoughtfully and thoroughly, I believe, by none.

§ XXII. We have hitherto considered the abacus as necessarily a separate
stone from the bell: evidently, however, the strength of the capital
will be undiminished if both are cut out of one block. This is actually
the case in many capitals, especially those on a small scale; and in
others the detached upper stone is a mere representative of the abacus,
and is much thinner than the form of the capital requires, while the
true abacus is united with the bell, and concealed by its decoration, or
made part of it.

§ XXIII. Farther. We have hitherto considered bell and abacus as both
derived from the concentration of the cornice. But it must at once occur
to the reader, that the projection of the under stone and the thickness
of the upper, which are quite enough for the work of the continuous
cornice, may not be enough always, or rather are seldom likely to be so,
for the harder work of the capital. Both may have to be deepened and
expanded: but as this would cause a want of harmony in the parts, when
they occur on the same level, it is better in such case to let the
_entire_ cornice form the abacus of the capital, and put a deep capital
bell beneath it.

§ XXIV. The reader will understand both arrangements instantly by two
examples. Fig. XXVII. represents two windows, more than usually
beautiful examples of a very frequent Venetian form. Here the deep
cornice or string course which runs along the wall of the house is quite
strong enough for the work of the capitals of the slender shafts: its
own upper stone is therefore also theirs; its own lower stone, by its
revolution or concentration, forms their bells: but to mark the
increased importance of its function in so doing, it receives
decoration, as the bell of the capital, which it did not receive as the
under stone of the cornice.

[Illustration: Fig. XXVII.]

In Fig. XXVIII., a little bit of the church of Santa Fosca at Torcello,
the cornice or string course, which goes round every part of the church,
is not strong enough to form the capitals of the shafts. It therefore
forms their abaci only; and in order to mark the diminished importance
of its function, it ceases to receive, as the abacus of the capital, the
decoration which it received as the string course of the wall.

This last arrangement is of great frequency in Venice, occurring most
characteristically in St. Mark's: and in the Gothic of St. John and Paul
we find the two arrangements beautifully united, though in great
simplicity; the string courses of the walls form the capitals of the
shafts of the traceries; and the abaci of the vaulting shafts of the
apse.

[Illustration: Fig. XXVIII.]

§ XXV. We have hitherto spoken of capitals of circular shafts only:
those of square piers are more frequently formed by the cornice only;
otherwise they are like those of circular piers, without the difficulty
of reconciling the base of the bell with its head.

§ XXVI. When two or more shafts are grouped together, their capitals are
usually treated as separate, until they come into actual contact. If
there be any awkwardness in the junction, it is concealed by the
decoration, and one abacus serves, in most cases, for all. The double
group, Fig. XXVII., is the simplest possible type of the arrangement. In
the richer Northern Gothic groups of eighteen or twenty shafts cluster
together, and sometimes the smaller shafts crouch under the capitals of
the larger, and hide their heads in the crannies, with small nominal
abaci of their own, while the larger shafts carry the serviceable abacus
of the whole pier, as in the nave of Rouen. There is, however, evident
sacrifice of sound principle in this system, the smaller abaci being of
no use. They are the exact contrary of the rude early abacus at Milan,
given in Plate XVII. There one poor abacus stretched itself out to do
all the work: here there are idle abaci getting up into corners and
doing none.

§ XXVII. Finally, we have considered the capital hitherto entirely as an
expansion of the bearing power of the shaft, supposing the shaft
composed of a single stone. But, evidently, the capital has a function,
if possible, yet more important, when the shaft is composed of small
masonry. It enables all that masonry to act together, and to receive the
pressure from above collectively and with a single strength. And thus,
considered merely as a large stone set on the top of the shaft, it is a
feature of the highest architectural importance, irrespective of its
expansion, which indeed is, in some very noble capitals, exceedingly
small. And thus every large stone set at any important point to
reassemble the force of smaller masonry and prepare it for the
sustaining of weight, is a capital or "head" stone (the true meaning of
the word) whether it project or not. Thus at 6, in Plate IV., the stones
which support the thrust of the brickwork are capitals, which have no
projection at all; and the large stones in the window above are capitals
projecting in one direction only.

§ XXVIII. The reader is now master of all he need know respecting
construction of capitals; and from what has been laid before him, must
assuredly feel that there can never be any new system of architectural
forms invented; but that all vertical support must be, to the end of
time, best obtained by shafts and capitals. It has been so obtained by
nearly every nation of builders, with more or less refinement in the
management of the details; and the later Gothic builders of the North
stand almost alone in their effort to dispense with the natural
development of the shaft, and banish the capital from their
compositions.

They were gradually led into this error through a series of steps which
it is not here our business to trace. But they may be generalised in a
few words.

§ XXIX. All classical architecture, and the Romanesque which is
legitimately descended from it, is composed of bold independent shafts,
plain or fluted, with bold detached capitals, forming arcades or
colonnades where they are needed; and of walls whose apertures are
surrounded by courses of parallel lines called mouldings, which are
continuous round the apertures, and have neither shafts nor capitals.
The shaft system and moulding system are entirely separate.

The Gothic architects confounded the two. They clustered the shafts till
they looked like a group of mouldings. They shod and capitaled the
mouldings till they looked like a group of shafts. So that a pier became
merely the side of a door or window rolled up, and the side of the
window a pier unrolled (vide last Chapter, § XXX.), both being composed
of a series of small shafts, each with base and capital. The architect
seemed to have whole mats of shafts at his disposal, like the rush mats
which one puts under cream cheese. If he wanted a great pier he rolled
up the mat; if he wanted the side of a door he spread out the mat: and
now the reader has to add to the other distinctions between the Egyptian
and the Gothic shaft, already noted in § XXVI. of Chap. VIII., this one
more--the most important of all--that while the Egyptian rush cluster
has only one massive capital altogether, the Gothic rush mat has a
separate tiny capital to every several rush.

§ XXX. The mats were gradually made of finer rushes, until it became
troublesome to give each rush its capital. In fact, when the groups of
shafts became excessively complicated, the expansion of their small
abaci was of no use: it was dispensed with altogether, and the mouldings
of pier and jamb ran up continuously into the arches.

This condition, though in many respects faulty and false, is yet the
eminently characteristic state of Gothic: it is the definite formation
of it as a distinct style, owing no farther aid to classical models; and
its lightness and complexity render it, when well treated, and enriched
with Flamboyant decoration, a very glorious means of picturesque effect.
It is, in fact, this form of Gothic which commends itself most easily to
the general mind, and which has suggested the innumerable foolish
theories about the derivation of Gothic from tree trunks and avenues,
which have from time to time been brought forward by persons ignorant of
the history of architecture.

§ XXXI. When the sense of picturesqueness, as well as that of justness
and dignity, had been lost, the spring of the continuous mouldings was
replaced by what Professor Willis calls the Discontinuous impost; which,
being a barbarism of the basest and most painful kind, and being to
architecture what the setting of a saw is to music, I shall not trouble
the reader to examine. For it is not in my plan to note for him all the
various conditions of error, but only to guide him to the appreciation
of the right; and I only note even the true Continuous or Flamboyant
Gothic because this is redeemed by its beautiful decoration, afterwards
to be considered. For, as far as structure is concerned, the moment the
capital vanishes from the shaft, that moment we are in error: all good
Gothic has true capitals to the shafts of its jambs and traceries, and
all Gothic is debased the instant the shaft vanishes. It matters not how
slender, or how small, or how low, the shaft may be: wherever there is
indication of concentrated vertical support, then the capital is a
necessary termination. I know how much Gothic, otherwise beautiful, this
sweeping principle condemns; but it condemns not altogether. We may
still take delight in its lovely proportions, its rich decoration, or
its elastic and reedy moulding; but be assured, wherever shafts, or any
approximations to the forms of shafts, are employed, for whatever
office, or on whatever scale, be it in jambs or piers, or balustrades,
or traceries, without capitals, there is a defiance of the natural laws
of construction; and that, wherever such examples are found in ancient
buildings, they are either the experiments of barbarism, or the
commencements of decline.


FOOTNOTES:

  [47] Appendix 19, "Early English Capitals."

  [48] In this case the weight borne is supposed to increase as the
    abacus widens; the illustration would have been clearer if I had
    assumed the breadth of abacus to be constant, and that of the shaft
    to vary.




CHAPTER X.

  THE ARCH LINE.


§ I. We have seen in the last section how our means of vertical support
may, for the sake of economy both of space and material, be gathered
into piers or shafts, and directed to the sustaining of particular
points. The next question is how to connect these points or tops of
shafts with each other, so as to be able to lay on them a continuous
roof. This the reader, as before, is to favor me by finding out for
himself, under these following conditions.

Let _s_, _s_, Fig. XXIX. opposite, be two shafts, with their capitals
ready prepared for their work; and _a_, _b_, _b_, and _c_, _c_, _c_, be
six stones of different sizes, one very long and large, and two smaller,
and three smaller still, of which the reader is to choose which he likes
best, in order to connect the tops of the shafts.

I suppose he will first try if he can lift the great stone _a_, and if he
can, he will put it very simply on the tops of the two pillars, as at A.

Very well indeed: he has done already what a number of Greek architects
have been thought very clever for having done. But suppose he _cannot_
lift the great stone _a_, or suppose I will not give it to him, but only
the two smaller stones at _b_, _b_; he will doubtless try to put them
up, tilted against each other, as at _d_. Very awkward this; worse than
card-house building. But if he cuts off the corners of the stones, so as
to make each of them of the form _e_, they will stand up very securely,
as at B.

But suppose he cannot lift even these less stones, but can raise those
at _c_, _c_, _c_. Then, cutting each of them into the form at _e_, he
will doubtless set them up as at _f_.

[Illustration: Fig. XXIX.]

§ II. This last arrangement looks a little dangerous. Is there not a
chance of the stone in the middle pushing the others out, or tilting
them up and aside, and slipping down itself between them? There is such
a chance: and if by somewhat altering the form of the stones, we can
diminish this chance, all the better. I must say "we" now, for perhaps I
may have to help the reader a little.

The danger is, observe, that the midmost stone at _f_ pushes out the
side ones: then if we can give the side ones such a shape as that, left
to themselves, they would fall heavily forward, they will resist this
push _out_ by their weight, exactly in proportion to their own
particular inclination or desire to tumble _in_. Take one of them
separately, standing up as at _g_; it is just possible it may stand up
as it is, like the Tower of Pisa: but we want it to fall forward.
Suppose we cut away the parts that are shaded at _h_ and leave it as at
_i_, it is very certain it cannot stand alone now, but will fall forward
to our entire satisfaction.

Farther: the midmost stone at _f_ is likely to be troublesome chiefly by
its weight, pushing down between the others; the more we lighten it the
better: so we will cut it into exactly the same shape as the side ones,
chiselling away the shaded parts, as at _h_. We shall then have all the
three stones _k_, _l_, _m_, of the same shape; and now putting them
together, we have, at C, what the reader, I doubt not, will perceive at
once to be a much more satisfactory arrangement than that at _f_.

§ III. We have now got three arrangements; in one using only one piece
of stone, in the second two, and in the third three. The first
arrangement has no particular name, except the "horizontal:" but the
single stone (or beam, it may be,) is called a lintel; the second
arrangement is called a "Gable;" the third an "Arch."

We might have used pieces of wood instead of stone in all these
arrangements, with no difference in plan, so long as the beams were kept
loose, like the stones; but as beams can be securely nailed together at
the ends, we need not trouble ourselves so much about their shape or
balance, and therefore the plan at _f_ is a peculiarly wooden
construction (the reader will doubtless recognise in it the profile of
many a farm-house roof): and again, because beams are tough, and light,
and long, as compared with stones, they are admirably adapted for the
constructions at A and B, the plain lintel and gable, while that at C
is, for the most part, left to brick and stone.

§ IV. But farther. The constructions, A, B, and C, though very
conveniently to be first considered as composed of one, two, and three
pieces, are by no means necessarily so. When we have once cut the stones
of the arch into a shape like that of _k_, _l_, and _m_, they will hold
together, whatever their number, place, or size, as at _n_; and the
great value of the arch is, that it permits small stones to be used with
safety instead of large ones, which are not always to be had. Stones cut
into the shape of _k_, _l_, and _m_, whether they be short or long (I
have drawn them all sizes at _n_ on purpose), are called Voussoirs; this
is a hard, ugly French name; but the reader will perhaps be kind enough
to recollect it; it will save us both some trouble: and to make amends
for this infliction, I will relieve him of the term _keystone_. One
voussoir is as much a keystone as another; only people usually call the
stone which is last put in the keystone; and that one happens generally
to be at the top or middle of the arch.

§ V. Not only the arch, but even the lintel, may be built of many stones
or bricks. The reader may see lintels built in this way over most of the
windows of our brick London houses, and so also the gable: there are,
therefore, two distinct questions respecting each arrangement;--First,
what is the line or direction of it, which gives it its strength? and,
secondly, what is the manner of masonry of it, which gives it its
consistence? The first of these I shall consider in this Chapter under
the head of the Arch Line, using the term arch as including all manner
of construction (though we shall have no trouble except about curves);
and in the next Chapter I shall consider the second, under the head,
Arch Masonry.

§ VI. Now the arch line is the ghost or skeleton of the arch; or rather
it is the spinal marrow of the arch, and the voussoirs are the vertebræ,
which keep it safe and sound, and clothe it. This arch line the
architect has first to conceive and shape in his mind, as opposed to, or
having to bear, certain forces which will try to distort it this way and
that; and against which he is first to direct and bend the line itself
into as strong resistance as he may, and then, with his voussoirs and
what else he can, to guard it, and help it, and keep it to its duty and
in its shape. So the arch line is the moral character of the arch, and
the adverse forces are its temptations; and the voussoirs, and what else
we may help it with, are its armor and its motives to good conduct.

§ VII. This moral character of the arch is called by architects its
"Line of Resistance." There is a great deal of nicety in calculating it
with precision, just as there is sometimes in finding out very precisely
what is a man's true line of moral conduct; but this, in arch morality
and in man morality, is a very simple and easily to be understood
principle,--that if either arch or man expose themselves to their
special temptations or adverse forces, _outside_ of the voussoirs or
proper and appointed armor, both will fall. An arch whose line of
resistance is in the middle of its voussoirs is perfectly safe: in
proportion as the said line runs near the edge of its voussoirs, the
arch is in danger, as the man is who nears temptation; and the moment
the line of resistance emerges out of the voussoirs the arch falls.

§ VIII. There are, therefore, properly speaking, two arch lines. One is
the visible direction or curve of the arch, which may generally be
considered as the under edge of its voussoirs, and which has often no
more to do with the real stability of the arch, than a man's apparent
conduct has with his heart. The other line, which is the line of
resistance, or line of good behavior, may or may not be consistent with
the outward and apparent curves of the arch; but if not, then the
security of the arch depends simply upon this, whether the voussoirs
which assume or pretend to the one line are wide enough to include the
other.

§ IX. Now when the reader is told that the line of resistance varies
with every change either in place or quantity of the weight above the
arch, he will see at once that we have no chance of arranging arches by
their moral characters: we can only take the apparent arch line, or
visible direction, as a ground of arrangement. We shall consider the
possible or probable forms or contours of arches in the present Chapter,
and in the succeeding one the forms of voussoir and other help which
may best fortify these visible lines against every temptation to lose
their consistency.

[Illustration: Fig. XXX.]

§ X. Look back to Fig. XXIX. Evidently the abstract or ghost line of the
arrangement at A is a plain horizontal line, as here at _a_, Fig. XXX.
The abstract line of the arrangement at B, Fig. XXIX., is composed of
two straight lines, set against each other, as here at _b_. The abstract
line of C, Fig. XXIX., is a curve of some kind, not at present
determined, suppose _c_, Fig. XXX. Then, as _b_ is two of the straight
lines at _a_, set up against each other, we may conceive an arrangement,
_d_, made up of two of the curved lines at _c_, set against each other.
This is called a pointed arch, which is a contradiction in terms: it
ought to be called a curved gable; but it must keep the name it has got.

Now _a_, _b_, _c_, _d_, Fig. XXX., are the ghosts of the lintel, the
gable, the arch, and the pointed arch. With the poor lintel ghost we
need trouble ourselves no farther; there are no changes in him: but
there is much variety in the other three, and the method of their
variety will be best discerned by studying _b_ and _d_, as subordinate
to and connected with the simple arch at _c_.

§ XI. Many architects, especially the worst, have been very curious in
designing out of the way arches,--elliptical arches, and four-centred
arches, so called, and other singularities. The good architects have
generally been content, and we for the present will be so, with God's
arch, the arch of the rainbow and of the apparent heaven, and which the
sun shapes for us as it sets and rises. Let us watch the sun for a
moment as it climbs: when it is a quarter up, it will give us the arch
_a_, Fig. XXXI.; when it is half up, _b_, and when three quarters up,
_c_. There will be an infinite number of arches between these, but we
will take these as sufficient representatives of all. Then _a_ is the
low arch, _b_ the central or pure arch, _c_ the high arch, and the rays
of the sun would have drawn for us their voussoirs.

§ XII. We will take these several arches successively, and fixing the
top of each accurately, draw two right lines thence to its base, _d_,
_e_, _f_, Fig. XXXI. Then these lines give us the relative gables of
each of the arches; _d_ is the Italian or southern gable, _e_ the
central gable, _f_ the Gothic gable.

[Illustration: Fig. XXXI.]

§ XIII. We will again take the three arches with their gables in
succession, and on each of the sides of the gable, between it and the
arch, we will describe another arch, as at _g_, _h_, _i_. Then the
curves so described give the pointed arches belonging to each of the
round arches; _g_, the flat pointed arch, _h_, the central pointed arch,
and _i_, the lancet pointed arch.

§ XIV. If the radius with which these intermediate curves are drawn be
the base of _f_, the last is the equilateral pointed arch, one of great
importance in Gothic work. But between the gable and circle, in all the
three figures, there are an infinite number of pointed arches,
describable with different radii; and the three round arches, be it
remembered, are themselves representatives of an infinite number,
passing from the flattest conceivable curve, through the semicircle and
horseshoe, up to the full circle.

The central and the last group are the most important. The central
round, or semicircle, is the Roman, the Byzantine, and Norman arch; and
its relative pointed includes one wide branch of Gothic. The horseshoe
round is the Arabic and Moorish arch, and its relative pointed includes
the whole range of Arabic and lancet, or Early English and French
Gothics. I mean of course by the relative pointed, the entire group of
which the equilateral arch is the representative. Between it and the
outer horseshoe, as this latter rises higher, the reader will find, on
experiment, the great families of what may be called the horseshoe
pointed,--curves of the highest importance, but which are all included,
with English lancet, under the term, relative pointed of the horseshoe
arch.

[Illustration: Fig. XXXII.]

§ XV. The groups above described are all formed of circular arcs, and
include all truly useful and beautiful arches for ordinary work. I
believe that singular and complicated curves are made use of in modern
engineering, but with these the general reader can have no concern: the
Ponte della Trinita at Florence is the most graceful instance I know of
such structure; the arch made use of being very subtle, and
approximating to the low ellipse; for which, in common work, a barbarous
pointed arch, called four-centred, and composed of bits of circles, is
substituted by the English builders. The high ellipse, I believe, exists
in eastern architecture. I have never myself met with it on a large
scale; but it occurs in the niches of the later portions of the Ducal
palace at Venice, together with a singular hyperbolic arch, _a_ in Fig.
XXXIII., to be described hereafter: with such caprices we are not here
concerned.

§ XVI. We are, however, concerned to notice the absurdity of another
form of arch, which, with the four-centred, belongs to the English
perpendicular Gothic.

Taking the gable of any of the groups in Fig. XXXI. (suppose the
equilateral), here at _b_, in Fig. XXXIII., the dotted line representing
the relative pointed arch, we may evidently conceive an arch formed by
reversed curves on the inside of the gable, as here shown by the inner
curved lines. I imagine the reader by this time knows enough of the
nature of arches to understand that, whatever strength or stability was
gained by the curve on the _outside_ of the gable, exactly so much is
lost by curves on the _inside_. The natural tendency of such an arch to
dissolution by its own mere weight renders it a feature of detestable
ugliness, wherever it occurs on a large scale. It is eminently
characteristic of Tudor work, and it is the profile of the Chinese roof
(I say on a large scale, because this as well as all other capricious
arches, may be made secure by their masonry when small, but not
otherwise). Some allowable modifications of it will be noticed in the
chapter on Roofs.

[Illustration: Fig. XXXIII.]

§ XVII. There is only one more form of arch which we have to notice.
When the last described arch is used, not as the principal arrangement,
but as a mere heading to a common pointed arch, we have the form _c_,
Fig. XXXIII. Now this is better than the entirely reversed arch for two
reasons; first, less of the line is weakened by reversing; secondly, the
double curve has a very high æsthetic value, not existing in the mere
segments of circles. For these reasons arches of this kind are not only
admissible, but even of great desirableness, when their scale and
masonry render them secure, but above a certain scale they are
altogether barbarous; and, with the reversed Tudor arch, wantonly
employed, are the characteristics of the worst and meanest schools of
architecture, past or present.

This double curve is called the Ogee; it is the profile of many German
leaden roofs, of many Turkish domes (there more excusable, because
associated and in sympathy with exquisitely managed arches of the same
line in the walls below), of Tudor turrets, as in Henry the Seventh's
Chapel, and it is at the bottom or top of sundry other blunders all over
the world.

§ XVIII. The varieties of the ogee curve are infinite, as the reversed
portion of it may be engrafted on every other form of arch, horseshoe,
round, or pointed. Whatever is generally worthy of note in these
varieties, and in other arches of caprice, we shall best discover by
examining their masonry; for it is by their good masonry only that they
are rendered either stable or beautiful. To this question, then, let us
address ourselves.




CHAPTER XI.

  THE ARCH MASONRY.


§ I. On the subject of the stability of arches, volumes have been
written and volumes more are required. The reader will not, therefore,
expect from me any very complete explanation of its conditions within
the limits of a single chapter. But that which is necessary for him to
know is very simple and very easy; and yet, I believe, some part of it
is very little known, or noticed.

We must first have a clear idea of what is meant by an arch. It is a
curved _shell_ of firm materials, on whose back a burden is to be laid
of _loose_ materials. So far as the materials above it are _not loose_,
but themselves hold together, the opening below is not an arch, but an
_excavation_. Note this difference very carefully. If the King of
Sardinia tunnels through the Mont Cenis, as he proposes, he will not
require to build a brick arch under his tunnel to carry the weight of
the Mont Cenis: that would need scientific masonry indeed. The Mont
Cenis will carry itself, by its own cohesion, and a succession of
invisible granite arches, rather larger than the tunnel. But when Mr.
Brunel tunnelled the Thames bottom, he needed to build a brick arch to
carry the six or seven feet of mud and the weight of water above. That
is a type of all arches proper.

§ II. Now arches, in practice, partake of the nature of the two. So far
as their masonry above is Mont-Cenisian, that is to say, colossal in
comparison of them, and granitic, so that the arch is a mere hole in the
rock substance of it, the form of the arch is of no consequence
whatever: it may be rounded, or lozenged, or ogee'd, or anything else;
and in the noblest architecture there is always _some_ character of this
kind given to the masonry. It is independent enough not to care about
the holes cut in it, and does not subside into them like sand. But the
theory of arches does not presume on any such condition of things; it
allows itself only the shell of the arch proper; the vertebræ, carrying
their marrow of resistance; and, above this shell, it assumes the wall
to be in a state of flux, bearing down on the arch, like water or sand,
with its whole weight. And farther, the problem which is to be solved by
the arch builder is not merely to carry this weight, but to carry it
with the least thickness of shell. It is easy to carry it by continually
thickening your voussoirs: if you have six feet depth of sand or gravel
to carry, and you choose to employ granite voussoirs six feet thick, no
question but your arch is safe enough. But it is perhaps somewhat too
costly: the thing to be done is to carry the sand or gravel with brick
voussoirs, six inches thick, or, at any rate, with the least thickness
of voussoir which will be safe; and to do this requires peculiar
arrangement of the lines of the arch. There are many arrangements,
useful all in their way, but we have only to do, in the best
architecture, with the simplest and most easily understood. We have
first to note those which regard the actual shell of the arch, and then
we shall give a few examples of the superseding of such expedients by
Mont-Cenisian masonry.

§ III. What we have to say will apply to all arches, but the central
pointed arch is the best for general illustration. Let _a_, Plate III.,
be the shell of a pointed arch with loose loading above; and suppose you
find that shell not quite thick enough; and that the weight bears too
heavily on the top of the arch, and is likely to break it in: you
proceed to thicken your shell, but need you thicken it all equally? Not
so; you would only waste your good voussoirs. If you have any common
sense you will thicken it at the top, where a Mylodon's skull is
thickened for the same purpose (and some human skulls, I fancy), as at
_b_. The pebbles and gravel above will now shoot off it right and left,
as the bullets do off a cuirassier's breastplate, and will have no
chance of beating it in.

If still it be not strong enough, a farther addition may be made, as at
_c_, now thickening the voussoirs a little at the base also. But as this
may perhaps throw the arch inconveniently high, or occasion a waste of
voussoirs at the top, we may employ another expedient.

§ IV. I imagine the reader's common sense, if not his previous
knowledge, will enable him to understand that if the arch at _a_, Plate
III., burst _in_ at the top, it must burst _out_ at the sides. Set up
two pieces of pasteboard, edge to edge, and press them down with your
hand, and you will see them bend out at the sides. Therefore, if you can
keep the arch from starting out at the points _p_, _p_, it _cannot_
curve in at the top, put what weight on it you will, unless by sheer
crushing of the stones to fragments.

§ V. Now you may keep the arch from starting out at _p_ by loading it at
_p_, putting more weight upon it and against it at that point; and this,
in practice, is the way it is usually done. But we assume at present
that the weight above is sand or water, quite unmanageable, not to be
directed to the points we choose; and in practice, it may sometimes
happen that we cannot put weight upon the arch at _p_. We may perhaps
want an opening above it, or it may be at the side of the building, and
many other circumstances may occur to hinder us.

§ VI. But if we are not sure that we can put weight above it, we are
perfectly sure that we can hang weight under it. You may always thicken
your shell inside, and put the weight upon it as at _x x_, in _d_, Plate
III. Not much chance of its bursting out at _p_, now, is there?

§ VII. Whenever, therefore, an arch has to bear vertical pressure, it
will bear it better when its shell is shaped as at _b_ or _d_, than as
at _a_: _b_ and _d_ are, therefore, the types of arches built to resist
vertical pressure, all over the world, and from the beginning of
architecture to its end. None others can be compared with them: all are
imperfect except these.

[Illustration: Plate III.
               ARCH MASONRY.]

The added projections at _x x_, in _d_, are called CUSPS, and they are
the very soul and life of the best northern Gothic; yet never thoroughly
understood nor found in perfection, except in Italy, the northern
builders working often, even in the best times, with the vulgar form at
_a_.

The form at _b_ is rarely found in the north: its perfection is in the
Lombardic Gothic; and branches of it, good and bad according to their
use, occur in Saracenic work.

§ VIII. The true and perfect cusp is single only. But it was probably
invented (by the Arabs?) not as a constructive, but a decorative
feature, in pure fantasy; and in early northern work it is only the
application to the arch of the foliation, so called, of penetrated
spaces in stone surfaces, already enough explained in the "Seven Lamps,"
Chap. III., p. 85 _et seq._ It is degraded in dignity, and loses its
usefulness, exactly in proportion to its multiplication on the arch. In
later architecture, especially English Tudor, it is sunk into dotage,
and becomes a simple excrescence, a bit of stone pinched up out of the
arch, as a cook pinches the paste at the edge of a pie.

§ IX. The depth and place of the cusp, that is to say, its exact
application to the shoulder of the curve of the arch, varies with the
direction of the weight to be sustained. I have spent more than a month,
and that in hard work too, in merely trying to get the forms of cusps
into perfect order: whereby the reader may guess that I have not space
to go into the subject now; but I shall hereafter give a few of the
leading and most perfect examples, with their measures and masonry.

§ X. The reader now understands all that he need about the shell of the
arch, considered as an united piece of stone.

He has next to consider the shape of the voussoirs. This, as much as is
required, he will be able best to comprehend by a few examples; by which
I shall be able also to illustrate, or rather which will force me to
illustrate, some of the methods of Mont-Cenisian masonry, which were to
be the second part of our subject.

§ XI. 1 and 2, Plate IV., are two cornices; 1 from St. Antonio, Padua;
2, from the Cathedral of Sens. I want them for cornices; but I have put
them in this plate because, though their arches are filled up behind,
and are in fact mere blocks of stone with arches cut into their faces,
they illustrate the constant masonry of small arches, both in Italian
and Northern Romanesque, but especially Italian, each arch being cut out
of its own proper block of stone: this is Mont-Cenisian enough, on a
small scale.

3 is a window from Carnarvon Castle, and very primitive and interesting
in manner,--one of its arches being of one stone, the other of two. And
here we have an instance of a form of arch which would be barbarous
enough on a large scale, and of many pieces; but quaint and agreeable
thus massively built.

4 is from a little belfry in a Swiss village above Vevay; one fancies
the window of an absurd form, seen in the distance, but one is pleased
with it on seeing its masonry. It could hardly be stronger.

§ XII. These then are arches cut of one block. The next step is to form
them of two pieces, set together at the head of the arch. 6, from the
Eremitani, Padua, is very quaint and primitive in manner: it is a
curious church altogether, and has some strange traceries cut out of
single blocks. One is given in the "Seven Lamps," Plate VII., in the
left-hand corner at the bottom.

7, from the Frari, Venice, very firm and fine, and admirably decorated,
as we shall see hereafter. 5, the simple two-pieced construction,
wrought with the most exquisite proportion and precision of workmanship,
as is everything else in the glorious church to which it belongs, San
Fermo of Verona. The addition of the top piece, which completes the
circle, does not affect the plan of the beautiful arches, with their
simple and perfect cusps; but it is highly curious, and serves to show
how the idea of the cusp rose out of mere foliation. The whole of the
architecture of this church may be characterised as exhibiting the
maxima of simplicity in construction, and perfection in workmanship,--a
rare unison: for, in general, simple designs are rudely worked, and as
the builder perfects his execution, he complicates his plan. Nearly
all the arches of San Fermo are two-pieced.

[Illustration: Plate IV.
               ARCH MASONRY.]

§ XIII. We have seen the construction with one and two pieces: _a_ and
_b_, Fig. 8, Plate IV., are the general types of the construction with
three pieces, uncusped and cusped; _c_ and _d_ with five pieces,
uncusped and cusped. Of these the three-pieced construction is of
enormous importance, and must detain us some time. The five-pieced is
the three-pieced with a joint added on each side, and is also of great
importance. The four-pieced, which is the two-pieced with added joints,
rarely occurs, and need not detain us.

§ XIV. It will be remembered that in first working out the principle of
the arch, we composed the arch of three pieces. Three is the smallest
number which can exhibit the real _principle_ of arch masonry, and it
may be considered as representative of all arches built on that
principle; the one and two-pieced arches being microscopic
Mont-Cenisian, mere caves in blocks of stone, or gaps between two rocks
leaning together.

But the three-pieced arch is properly representative of all; and the
larger and more complicated constructions are merely produced by keeping
the central piece for what is called a keystone, and putting additional
joints at the sides. Now so long as an arch is pure circular or pointed,
it does not matter how many joints or voussoirs you have, nor where the
joints are; nay, you may joint your keystone itself, and make it
two-pieced. But if the arch be of any bizarre form, especially ogee, the
joints must be in particular places, and the masonry simple, or it will
not be thoroughly good and secure; and the fine schools of the ogee arch
have only arisen in countries where it was the custom to build arches of
few pieces.

§ XV. The typical pure pointed arch of Venice is a five-pieced arch,
with its stones in three orders of magnitude, the longest being the
lowest, as at _b2_, Plate III. If the arch be very large, a fourth order
of magnitude is added, as at _a2_. The portals of the palaces of Venice
have one or other of these masonries, almost without exception. Now, as
one piece is added to make a larger door, one piece is taken away to
make a smaller one, or a window, and the masonry type of the Venetian
Gothic window is consequently three-pieced, _c2_.

§ XVI. The reader knows already where a cusp is useful. It is wanted, he
will remember, to give weight to those side stones, and draw them
inwards against the thrust of the top stone. Take one of the side stones
of _c2_ out for a moment, as at _d_. Now the _proper_ place of the cusp
upon it varies with the weight which it bears or requires; but in
practice this nicety is rarely observed; the place of the cusp is almost
always determined by æsthetic considerations, and it is evident that the
variations in its place may be infinite. Consider the cusp as a wave
passing up the side stone from its bottom to its top; then you will have
the succession of forms from _e_ to _g_ (Plate III.), with infinite
degrees of transition from each to each; but of which you may take _e_,
_f_, and _g_, as representing three great families of cusped arches. Use
_e_ for your side stones, and you have an arch as that at _h_ below,
which may be called a down-cusped arch. Use _f_ for the side stone, and
you have _i_, which may be called a mid-cusped arch. Use _g_, and you
have _k_, an up-cusped arch.

§ XVII. The reader will observe that I call the arch mid-cusped, not
when the cusped point is in the middle of the curve of the arch, but
when it is in the middle of the _side piece_, and also that where the
side pieces join the keystone there will be a change, perhaps somewhat
abrupt, in the curvature.

I have preferred to call the arch mid-cusped with respect to its side
piece than with respect to its own curve, because the most beautiful
Gothic arches in the world, those of the Lombard Gothic, have, in all
the instances I have examined, a form more or less approximating to this
mid-cusped one at _i_ (Plate III.), but having the curvature of the cusp
carried up into the keystone, as we shall see presently: where, however,
the arch is built of many voussoirs, a mid-cusped arch will mean one
which has the point of the cusp midway between its own base and apex.

The Gothic arch of Venice is almost invariably up-cusped, as at _k_.
The reader may note that, in both down-cusped and up-cusped arches, the
piece of stone, added to form the cusp, is of the shape of a scymitar,
held down in the one case and up in the other.

§ XVIII. Now, in the arches _h_, _i_, _k_, a slight modification has
been made in the form of the central piece, in order that it may
continue the curve of the cusp. This modification is not to be given to
it in practice without considerable nicety of workmanship; and some
curious results took place in Venice from this difficulty.

At _l_ (Plate III.) is the shape of the Venetian side stone, with its
cusp detached from the arch. Nothing can possibly be better or more
graceful, or have the weight better disposed in order to cause it to nod
forwards against the keystone, as above explained, Ch. X. § II., where I
developed the whole system of the arch from three pieces, in order that
the reader might now clearly see the use of the weight of the cusp.

Now a Venetian Gothic palace has usually at least three stories; with
perhaps ten or twelve windows in each story, and this on two or three of
its sides, requiring altogether some hundred to a hundred and fifty side
pieces.

I have no doubt, from observation of the way the windows are set
together, that the side pieces were carved in pairs, like hooks, of
which the keystones were to be the eyes; that these side pieces were
ordered by the architect in the gross, and were used by him sometimes
for wider, sometimes for narrower windows; bevelling the two ends as
required, fitting in keystones as he best could, and now and then
varying the arrangement by turning the side pieces _upside down_.

There were various conveniences in this way of working, one of the
principal being that the side pieces with their cusps were always cut to
their complete form, and that no part of the cusp was carried out into
the keystone, which followed the curve of the outer arch itself. The
ornaments of the cusp might thus be worked without any troublesome
reference to the rest of the arch.

§ XIX. Now let us take a pair of side pieces, made to order, like that
at _l_, and see what we can make of them. We will try to fit them first
with a keystone which continues the curve of the outer arch, as at _m_.
This the reader assuredly thinks an ugly arch. There are a great many of
them in Venice, the ugliest things there, and the Venetian builders
quickly began to feel them so. What could they do to better them? The
arch at _m_ has a central piece of the form _r_. Substitute for it a
piece of the form _s_, and we have the arch at _n_.

§ XX. This arch at _n_ is not so strong as that at _m_; but, built of
good marble, and with its pieces of proper thickness, it is quite strong
enough for all practical purposes on a small scale. I have examined at
least two thousand windows of this kind and of the other Venetian ogees,
of which that at _y_ (in which the plain side-piece _d_ is used instead
of the cusped one) is the simplest; and I never found _one_, even in the
most ruinous palaces (in which they had had to sustain the distorted
weight of falling walls) in which the central piece was fissured; and
this is the only danger to which the window is exposed; in other
respects it is as strong an arch as can be built.

It is not to be supposed that the change from the _r_ keystone to the
_s_ keystone was instantaneous. It was a change wrought out by many
curious experiments, which we shall have to trace hereafter, and to
throw the resultant varieties of form into their proper groups.

§ XXI. One step more: I take a mid-cusped side piece in its block form
at _t_, with the bricks which load the back of it. Now, as these bricks
support it behind, and since, as far as the use of the cusp is
concerned, it matters not whether its weight be in marble or bricks,
there is nothing to hinder us from cutting out some of the marble, as at
_u_, and filling up the space with bricks. (_Why_ we should take a fancy
to do this, I do not pretend to guess at present; all I have to assert
is, that, if the fancy should strike us, there would be no harm in it).
Substituting this side piece for the other in the window _n_, we have
that at _w_, which may, perhaps, be of some service to us afterwards;
here we have nothing more to do with it than to note that, thus built,
and properly backed by brickwork, it is just as strong and safe a
form as that at _n_; but that this, as well as every variety of ogee
arch, depends entirely for its safety, fitness, and beauty, on the
masonry which we have just analysed; and that, built on a large scale,
and with many voussoirs, all such arches would be unsafe and absurd in
general architecture. Yet they may be used occasionally for the sake of
the exquisite beauty of which their rich and fantastic varieties admit,
and sometimes for the sake of another merit, exactly the opposite of the
constructional ones we are at present examining, that they seem to stand
by enchantment.

[Illustration: Plate V.
               Arch Masonry.
               BRULETTO OF COMO.]

§ XXII. In the above reasonings, the inclination of the joints of the
voussoirs to the curves of the arch has not been considered. It is a
question of much nicety, and which I have not been able as yet fully to
investigate: but the natural idea of the arrangement of these lines
(which in round arches are of course perpendicular to the curve) would
be that every voussoir should have the lengths of its outer and inner
arched surface in the same proportion to each other. Either this actual
law, or a close approximation to it, is assuredly enforced in the best
Gothic buildings.

§ XXIII. I may sum up all that it is necessary for the reader to keep in
mind of the general laws connected with this subject, by giving him an
example of each of the two forms of the perfect Gothic arch, uncusped
and cusped, treated with the most simple and magnificent masonry, and
partly, in both cases, Mont-Cenisian.

The first, Plate V., is a window from the Broletto of Como. It shows, in
its filling, first, the single-pieced arch, carried on groups of four
shafts, and a single slab of marble filling the space above, and pierced
with a quatrefoil (Mont-Cenisian, this), while the mouldings above are
each constructed with a separate system of voussoirs, all of them
shaped, I think, on the principle above stated, § XXII., in alternate
serpentine and marble; the outer arch being a noble example of the pure
uncusped Gothic construction, _b_ of Plate III.

[Illustration: Fig. XXXIV.]

§ XXIV. Fig. XXXIV. is the masonry of the side arch of, as far as I know
or am able to judge, the most perfect Gothic sepulchral monument in the
world, the foursquare canopy of the (nameless?)[49] tomb standing over
the small cemetery gate of the Church of St. Anastasia at Verona. I
shall have frequent occasion to recur to this monument, and, I believe,
shall be able sufficiently to justify the terms in which I speak of it:
meanwhile, I desire only that the reader should observe the severity
and simplicity of the arch lines, the exquisitely delicate suggestion of
the ogee curve in the apex, and chiefly the use of the cusp in giving
_inward_ weight to the great pieces of stone on the flanks of the arch,
and preventing their thrust outwards from being severely thrown on the
lowermost stones. The effect of this arrangement is, that the whole
massy canopy is sustained safely by four slender pillars (as will be
seen hereafter in the careful plate I hope to give of it), these pillars
being rather steadied than materially assisted against the thrust, by
iron bars, about an inch thick, connecting them at the heads of the
abaci; a feature of peculiar importance in this monument, inasmuch as we
know it to be part of the original construction, by a beautiful little
Gothic wreathed pattern, like one of the hems of garments of Fra
Angelico, running along the iron bar itself. So carefully, and so far,
is the system of decoration carried out in this pure and lovely
monument, my most beloved throughout all the length and breadth of
Italy;--chief, as I think, among all the sepulchral marbles of a land of
mourning.


FOOTNOTES:

  [49] At least I cannot find any account of it in Maffei's "Verona,"
    nor anywhere else, to be depended upon. It is, I doubt not, a work
    of the beginning of the thirteenth century. Vide Appendix 19, "Tombs
    at St. Anastasia."




CHAPTER XII.

  THE ARCH LOAD.


§ I. In the preceding enquiry we have always supposed either that the
load upon the arch was perfectly loose, as of gravel or sand, or that it
was Mont-Cenisian, and formed one mass with the arch voussoirs, of more
or less compactness.

[Illustration: Fig. XXXV.]

In practice, the state is usually something between the two. Over
bridges and tunnels it sometimes approaches to the condition of mere
dust or yielding earth; but in architecture it is mostly firm masonry,
not altogether acting with the voussoirs, yet by no means bearing on
them with perfectly dead weight, but locking itself together above them,
and capable of being thrown into forms which relieve them, in some
degree, from its pressure.

§ II. It is evident that if we are to place a continuous roof above the
line of arches, we must fill up the intervals between them on the tops
of the columns. We have at present nothing granted us but the bare
masonry, as here at _a_, Fig. XXXV., and we must fill up the intervals
between the semicircle so as to obtain a level line of support. We may
first do this simply as at _b_, with plain mass of wall; so laying the
roof on the top, which is the method of the pure Byzantine and Italian
Romanesque. But if we find too much stress is thus laid on the arches,
we may introduce small second shafts on the top of the great shaft, _a_,
Fig. XXXVI., which may assist in carrying the roof, conveying great part
of its weight at once to the heads of the main shafts, and relieving
from its pressure the centres of the arches.

[Illustration: Fig. XXXVI.]

§ III. The new shaft thus introduced may either remain lifted on the
head of the great shaft, or may be carried to the ground in front of it,
or through it, _b_, Fig. XXXVI.; in which latter case the main shaft
divides into two or more minor shafts, and forms a group with the shaft
brought down from above.

§ IV. When this shaft, brought from roof to ground, is subordinate to
the main pier, and either is carried down the face of it, or forms no
large part of the group, the principle is Romanesque or Gothic, _b_,
Fig. XXXVI. When it becomes a bold central shaft, and the main pier
splits into two minor shafts on its sides, the principle is Classical or
Palladian, _c_, Fig. XXXVI. Which latter arrangement becomes absurd or
unsatisfactory in proportion to the sufficiency of the main shaft to
carry the roof without the help of the minor shafts or arch, which in
many instances of Palladian work look as if they might be removed
without danger to the building.

§ V. The form _a_ is a more pure Northern Gothic type than even _b_,
which is the connecting link between it and the classical type. It is
found chiefly in English and other northern Gothic, and in early
Lombardic, and is, I doubt not, derived as above explained, Chap. I. §
XXVII. _b_ is a general French Gothic and French Romanesque form, as in
great purity at Valence.

The small shafts of the form _a_ and _b_, as being northern, are
generally connected with steep vaulted roofs, and receive for that
reason the name of vaulting shafts.

§ VI. Of these forms _b_, Fig. XXXV., is the purest and most sublime,
expressing the power of the arch most distinctly. All the others have
some appearance of dovetailing and morticing of timber rather than
stonework; nor have I ever yet seen a single instance, quite
satisfactory, of the management of the capital of the main shaft, when
it had either to sustain the base of the vaulting shaft, as in _a_, or
to suffer it to pass through it, as in _b_, Fig. XXXVI. Nor is the
bracket which frequently carries the vaulting shaft in English work a
fitting support for a portion of the fabric which is at all events
presumed to carry a considerable part of the weight of the roof.

§ VII. The triangular spaces on the flanks of the arch are called
Spandrils, and if the masonry of these should be found, in any of its
forms, too heavy for the arch, their weight may be diminished, while
their strength remains the same, by piercing them with circular holes or
lights. This is rarely necessary in ordinary architecture, though
sometimes of great use in bridges and iron roofs (a succession of such
circles may be seen, for instance, in the spandrils at the Euston Square
station); but, from its constructional value, it becomes the best form
in which to arrange spandril decorations, as we shall see hereafter.

§ VIII. The height of the load above the arch is determined by the needs
of the building and possible length of the shaft; but with this we have
at present nothing to do, for we have performed the task which was set
us. We have ascertained, as it was required that we should in § VI. of
Chap. III. (A), the construction of walls; (B), that of piers; (C), that
of piers with lintels or arches prepared for roofing. We have next,
therefore, to examine (D) the structure of the roof.




CHAPTER XIII.

  THE ROOF.


§ I. Hitherto our enquiry has been unembarrassed by any considerations
relating exclusively either to the exterior or interior of buildings.
But it can remain so no longer. As far as the architect is concerned,
one side of a wall is generally the same as another; but in the roof
there are usually two distinct divisions of the structure; one, a shell,
vault, or flat ceiling, internally visible, the other, an upper
structure, built of timber, to protect the lower; or of some different
form, to support it. Sometimes, indeed, the internally visible structure
is the real roof, and sometimes there are more than two divisions, as in
St. Paul's, where we have a central shell with a mask below and above.
Still it will be convenient to remember the distinction between the part
of the roof which is usually visible from within, and whose only
business is to stand strongly, and not fall in, which I shall call the
Roof Proper; and, secondly, the upper roof, which, being often partly
supported by the lower, is not so much concerned with its own stability
as with the weather, and is appointed to throw off snow, and get rid of
rain, as fast as possible, which I shall call the Roof Mask.

§ II. It is, however, needless for me to engage the reader in the
discussion of the various methods of construction of Roofs Proper, for
this simple reason, that no person without long experience can tell
whether a roof be wisely constructed or not; nor tell at all, even with
help of any amount of experience, without examination of the several
parts and bearings of it, very different from any observation possible
to the general critic: and more than this, the enquiry would be useless
to us in our Venetian studies, where the roofs are either not
contemporary with the buildings, or flat, or else vaults of the simplest
possible constructions, which have been admirably explained by Willis in
his "Architecture of the Middle Ages," Chap. VII., to which I may refer
the reader for all that it would be well for him to know respecting the
connexion of the different parts of the vault with the shafts. He would
also do well to read the passages on Tudor vaulting, pp. 185-193, in Mr.
Garbett's rudimentary Treatise on Design, before alluded to.[50] I shall
content myself therefore with noting one or two points on which neither
writer has had occasion to touch, respecting the Roof Mask.

§ III. It was said in § V. of Chapter III. that we should not have
occasion, in speaking of roof construction, to add materially to the
forms then suggested. The forms which we have to add are only those
resulting from the other curves of the arch developed in the last
chapter; that is to say, the various eastern domes and cupolas arising
out of the revolution of the horseshoe and ogee curves, together with
the well-known Chinese concave roof. All these forms are of course
purely decorative, the bulging outline, or concave surface, being of no
more use, or rather of less, in throwing off snow or rain, than the
ordinary spire and gable; and it is rather curious, therefore, that all
of them, on a small scale, should have obtained so extensive use in
Germany and Switzerland, their native climate being that of the east,
where their purpose seems rather to concentrate light upon their orbed
surfaces. I much doubt their applicability, on a large scale, to
architecture of any admirable dignity; their chief charm is, to the
European eye, that of strangeness; and it seems to me possible that in
the east the bulging form may be also delightful, from the idea of its
enclosing a volume of cool air. I enjoy them in St. Mark's, chiefly
because they increase the fantastic and unreal character of St. Mark's
Place; and because they appear to sympathise with an expression,
common, I think, to all the buildings of that group, of a natural
buoyancy, as if they floated in the air or on the surface of the sea.
But, assuredly, they are not features to be recommended for
imitation.[51]

§ IV. One form, closely connected with the Chinese concave, is, however,
often constructively right,--the gable with an inward angle, occurring
with exquisitely picturesque effect throughout the domestic architecture
of the north, especially Germany and Switzerland; the lower slope being
either an attached external penthouse roof, for protection of the wall,
as in Fig. XXXVII., or else a kind of buttress set on the angle of the
tower; and in either case the roof itself being a simple gable,
continuous beneath it.

[Illustration: Fig. XXXVII.]

§ V. The true gable, as it is the simplest and most natural, so I esteem
it the grandest of roofs; whether rising in ridgy darkness, like a grey
slope of slaty mountains, over the precipitous walls of the northern
cathedrals, or stretched in burning breadth above the white and
square-set groups of the southern architecture. But this difference
between its slope in the northern and southern structure is a matter of
far greater importance than is commonly supposed, and it is this to
which I would especially direct the reader's attention.

§ VI. One main cause of it, the necessity of throwing off snow in the
north, has been a thousand times alluded to: another I do not remember
having seen noticed, namely, that rooms in a roof are comfortably
habitable in the north, which are painful _sotto piombi_ in Italy; and
that there is in wet climates a natural tendency in all men to live as
high as possible, out of the damp and mist. These two causes, together
with accessible quantities of good timber, have induced in the north a
general steep pitch of gable, which, when rounded or squared above a
tower, becomes a spire or turret; and this feature, worked out with
elaborate decoration, is the key-note of the whole system of aspiration,
so called, which the German critics have so ingeniously and falsely
ascribed to a devotional sentiment pervading the Northern Gothic: I
entirely and boldly deny the whole theory; our cathedrals were for the
most part built by worldly people, who loved the world, and would have
gladly staid in it for ever; whose best hope was the escaping hell,
which they thought to do by building cathedrals, but who had very vague
conceptions of Heaven in general, and very feeble desires respecting
their entrance therein; and the form of the spired cathedral has no more
intentional reference to Heaven, as distinguished from the flattened
slope of the Greek pediment, than the steep gable of a Norman house has,
as distinguished from the flat roof of a Syrian one. We may now, with
ingenious pleasure, trace such symbolic characters in the form; we may
now use it with such definite meaning; but we only prevent ourselves
from all right understanding of history, by attributing much influence
to these poetical symbolisms in the formation of a national style. The
human race are, for the most part, not to be moved by such silken cords;
and the chances of damp in the cellar, or of loose tiles in the roof,
have, unhappily, much more to do with the fashions of a man's house
building than his ideas of celestial happiness or angelic virtue.
Associations of affection have far higher power, and forms which can be
no otherwise accounted for may often be explained by reference to the
natural features of the country, or to anything which habit must have
rendered familiar, and therefore delightful; but the direct
symbolisation of a sentiment is a weak motive with all men, and far
more so in the practical minds of the north than among the early
Christians, who were assuredly quite as heavenly-minded, when they built
basilicas, or cut conchas out of the catacombs, as were ever the Norman
barons or monks.

§ VII. There is, however, in the north an animal activity which
materially aided the system of building begun in mere utility,--an
animal life, naturally expressed in erect work, as the languor of the
south in reclining or level work. Imagine the difference between the
action of a man urging himself to his work in a snow storm, and the
inaction of one laid at his length on a sunny bank among cicadas and
fallen olives, and you will have the key to a whole group of sympathies
which were forcefully expressed in the architecture of both; remembering
always that sleep would be to the one luxury, to the other death.

§ VIII. And to the force of this vital instinct we have farther to add
the influence of natural scenery; and chiefly of the groups and
wildernesses of the tree which is to the German mind what the olive or
palm is to the southern, the spruce fir. The eye which has once been
habituated to the continual serration of the pine forest, and to the
multiplication of its infinite pinnacles, is not easily offended by the
repetition of similar forms, nor easily satisfied by the simplicity of
flat or massive outlines. Add to the influence of the pine, that of the
poplar, more especially in the valleys of France; but think of the
spruce chiefly, and meditate on the difference of feeling with which the
Northman would be inspired by the frostwork wreathed upon its glittering
point, and the Italian by the dark green depth of sunshine on the broad
table of the stone-pine[52] (and consider by the way whether the spruce
fir be a more heavenly-minded tree than those dark canopies of the
Mediterranean isles).

§ IX. Circumstance and sentiment, therefore, aiding each other, the
steep roof becomes generally adopted, and delighted in, throughout the
north; and then, with the gradual exaggeration with which every pleasant
idea is pursued by the human mind, it is raised into all manner of
peaks, and points, and ridges; and pinnacle after pinnacle is added on
its flanks, and the walls increased in height, in proportion, until we
get indeed a very sublime mass, but one which has no more principle of
religious aspiration in it than a child's tower of cards. What is more,
the desire to build high is complicated with the peculiar love of the
grotesque[53] which is characteristic of the north, together with
especial delight in multiplication of small forms, as well as in
exaggerated points of shade and energy, and a certain degree of
consequent insensibility to perfect grace and quiet truthfulness; so
that a northern architect could not feel the beauty of the Elgin
marbles, and there will always be (in those who have devoted themselves
to this particular school) a certain incapacity to taste the finer
characters of Greek art, or to understand Titian, Tintoret, or Raphael:
whereas among the Italian Gothic workmen, this capacity was never lost,
and Nino Pisano and Orcagna could have understood the Theseus in an
instant, and would have received from it new life. There can be no
question that theirs was the greatest school, and carried out by the
greatest men; and that while those who began with this school could
perfectly well feel Rouen Cathedral, those who study the Northern Gothic
remain in a narrowed field--one of small pinnacles, and dots, and
crockets, and twitched faces--and cannot comprehend the meaning of a
broad surface or a grand line. Nevertheless the northern school is an
admirable and delightful thing, but a lower thing than the southern. The
Gothic of the Ducal Palace of Venice is in harmony with all that is
grand in all the world: that of the north is in harmony with the
grotesque northern spirit only.

§ X. We are, however, beginning to lose sight of our roof structure in
its spirit, and must return to our text. As the height of the walls
increased, in sympathy with the rise of the roof, while their thickness
remained the same, it became more and more necessary to support them by
buttresses; but--and this is another point that the reader must
specially note--it is not the steep roof mask which requires the
buttress, but the vaulting beneath it; the roof mask being a mere wooden
frame tied together by cross timbers, and in small buildings often put
together on the ground, raised afterwards, and set on the walls like a
hat, bearing vertically upon them; and farther, I believe in most cases
the northern vaulting requires its great array of external buttress, not
so much from any peculiar boldness in its own forms, as from the greater
comparative thinness and height of the walls, and more determined
throwing of the whole weight of the roof on particular points. Now the
connexion of the interior frame-work (or true roof) with the buttress,
at such points, is not visible to the spectators from without; but the
relation of the roof mask to the top of the wall which it protects, or
from which it springs, is perfectly visible; and it is a point of so
great importance in the effect of the building, that it will be well to
make it a subject of distinct consideration in the following Chapter.


FOOTNOTES:

  [50] Appendix 17

  [51] I do not speak of the true dome, because I have not studied its
    construction enough to know at what largeness of scale it begins to
    be rather a _tour de force_ than a convenient or natural form of
    roof, and because the ordinary spectator's choice among its various
    outlines must always be dependent on æsthetic considerations only,
    and can in no wise be grounded on any conception of its infinitely
    complicated structural principles.

  [52] I shall not be thought to have overrated the effect of forest
    scenery on the _northern_ mind; but I was glad to hear a Spanish
    gentleman, the other day, describing, together with his own, the
    regret which the peasants in his neighborhood had testified for the
    loss of a noble stone-pine, one of the grandest in Spain, which its
    proprietor had suffered to be cut down for small gain. He said that
    the mere spot where it had grown was still popularly known as "El
    Pino."

  [53] Appendix 8.




CHAPTER XIV.

  THE ROOF CORNICE.


§ I. It will be remembered that in the Sixth Chapter we paused (§ X.) at
the point where the addition of brackets to the ordinary wall cornice
would have converted it into a structure proper for sustaining a roof.
Now the wall cornice was treated throughout our enquiry (compare Chapter
VII. § V.) as the capital of the wall, and as forming, by its
concentration, the capital of the shaft. But we must not reason _back_
from the capital to the cornice, and suppose that an extension of the
principles of the capital to the whole length of the wall, will serve
for the roof cornice; for all our conclusions respecting the capital
were based on the supposition of its being adapted to carry considerable
weight condensed on its abacus: but the roof cornice is, in most cases,
required rather to project boldly than to carry weight; and arrangements
are therefore to be adopted for it which will secure the projection of
large surfaces without being calculated to resist extraordinary
pressure. This object is obtained by the use of brackets at intervals,
which are the peculiar distinction of the roof cornice.

§ II. Roof cornices are generally to be divided into two great families:
the first and simplest, those which are composed merely by the
projection of the edge of the roof mask over the wall, sustained by such
brackets or spurs as may be necessary; the second, those which provide a
walk round the edge of the roof, and which require, therefore, some
stronger support, as well as a considerable mass of building above or
beside the roof mask, and a parapet. These two families we shall
consider in succession.

§ III. 1. The Eaved Cornice. We may give it this name, as represented in
the simplest form by cottage eaves. It is used, however, in bold
projection, both in north, and south, and east; its use being, in the
north, to throw the rain well away from the wall of the building; in the
south to give it shade; and it is ordinarily constructed of the ends of
the timbers of the roof mask (with their tiles or shingles continued to
the edge of the cornice), and sustained by spurs of timber. This is its
most picturesque and natural form; not inconsistent with great splendor
of architecture in the mediæval Italian domestic buildings, superb in
its mass of cast shadow, and giving rich effect to the streets of Swiss
towns, even when they have no other claim to interest. A farther value
is given to it by its waterspouts, for in order to avoid loading it with
weight of water in the gutter at the edge, where it would be a strain on
the fastenings of the pipe, it has spouts of discharge at intervals of
three or four feet,--rows of magnificent leaden or iron dragons' heads,
full of delightful character, except to any person passing along the
middle of the street in a heavy shower. I have had my share of their
kindness in my time, but owe them no grudge; on the contrary, much
gratitude for the delight of their fantastic outline on the calm blue
sky, when they had no work to do but to open their iron mouths and pant
in the sunshine.

§ IV. When, however, light is more valuable than shadow, or when the
architecture of the wall is too fair to be concealed, it becomes
necessary to draw the cornice into narrower limits; a change of
considerable importance, in that it permits the gutter, instead of being
of lead and hung to the edge of the cornice, to be of stone, and
supported by brackets in the wall, these brackets becoming proper
recipients of after decoration (and sometimes associated with the stone
channels of discharge, called gargoyles, which belong, however, more
properly to the other family of cornices). The most perfect and
beautiful example of this kind of cornice is the Venetian, in which the
rain from the tiles is received in a stone gutter supported by small
brackets, delicately moulded, and having its outer lower edge decorated
with the English dogtooth moulding, whose sharp zigzag mingles richly
with the curved edges of the tiling. I know no cornice more beautiful in
its extreme simplicity and serviceableness.

§ V. The cornice of the Greek Doric is a condition of the same kind, in
which, however, there are no brackets, but useless appendages hung to
the bottom of the gutter (giving, however, some impression of support as
seen from a distance), and decorated with stone symbolisms of raindrops.
The brackets are not allowed, because they would interfere with the
sculpture, which in this architecture is put beneath the cornice; and
the overhanging form of the gutter is nothing more than a vast dripstone
moulding, to keep the rain from such sculpture: its decoration of guttæ,
seen in silver points against the shadow, is pretty in feeling, with a
kind of continual refreshment and remembrance of rain in it; but the
whole arrangement is awkward and meagre, and is only endurable when the
eye is quickly drawn away from it to sculpture.

§ VI. In later cornices, invented for the Greek orders, and farther
developed by the Romans, the bracket appears in true importance, though
of barbarous and effeminate outline: and gorgeous decorations are
applied to it, and to the various horizontal mouldings which it carries,
some of them of great beauty, and of the highest value to the mediæval
architects who imitated them. But a singularly gross mistake was made in
the distribution of decoration on these rich cornices (I do not know
when first, nor does it matter to me or to the reader), namely, the
charging with ornament the under surface of the cornice between the
brackets, that is to say, the exact piece of the whole edifice, from top
to bottom, where ornament is least visible. I need hardly say much
respecting the wisdom of this procedure, excusable only if the whole
building were covered with ornament; but it is curious to see the way in
which modern architects have copied it, even when they had little enough
ornament to spare. For instance, I suppose few persons look at the
Athenæum Club-house without feeling vexed at the meagreness and
meanness of the windows of the ground floor: if, however, they look up
under the cornice, and have good eyes, they will perceive that the
architect has reserved his decorations to put between the brackets; and
by going up to the first floor, and out on the gallery, they may succeed
in obtaining some glimpses of the designs of the said decorations.

§ VII. Such as they are, or were, these cornices were soon considered
essential parts of the "order" to which they belonged; and the same
wisdom which endeavored to fix the proportions of the orders, appointed
also that no order should go without its cornice. The reader has
probably heard of the architectural division of superstructure into
architrave, frieze, and cornice; parts which have been appointed by
great architects to all their work, in the same spirit in which great
rhetoricians have ordained that every speech shall have an exordium, and
narration, and peroration. The reader will do well to consider that it
may be sometimes just as possible to carry a roof, and get rid of rain,
without such an arrangement, as it is to tell a plain fact without an
exordium or peroration; but he must very absolutely consider that the
architectural peroration or cornice is strictly and sternly limited to
the end of the wall's speech,--that is, to the edge of the roof; and
that it has nothing whatever to do with shafts nor the orders of them.
And he will then be able fully to enjoy the farther ordinance of the
late Roman and Renaissance architects, who, attaching it to the shaft as
if it were part of its shadow, and having to employ their shafts often
in places where they came not near the roof, forthwith cut the
roof-cornice to pieces and attached a bit of it to every column;
thenceforward to be carried by the unhappy shaft wherever it went, in
addition to any other work on which it might happen to be employed. I do
not recollect among any living beings, except Renaissance architects,
any instance of a parallel or comparable stupidity: but one can imagine
a savage getting hold of a piece of one of our iron wire ropes, with its
rings upon it at intervals to bind it together, and pulling the wires
asunder to apply them to separate purposes; but imagining there was
magic in the ring that bound them, and so cutting that to pieces also,
and fastening a little bit of it to every wire.

§ VIII. Thus much may serve us to know respecting the first family of
wall cornices. The second is immeasurably more important, and includes
the cornices of all the best buildings in the world. It has derived its
best form from mediæval military architecture, which imperatively
required two things; first, a parapet which should permit sight and
offence, and afford defence at the same time; and secondly, a projection
bold enough to enable the defenders to rake the bottom of the wall with
falling bodies; projection which, if the wall happened to slope inwards,
required not to be small. The thoroughly magnificent forms of cornice
thus developed by necessity in military buildings, were adopted, with
more or less of boldness or distinctness, in domestic architecture,
according to the temper of the times and the circumstances of the
individual--decisively in the baron's house, imperfectly in the
burgher's: gradually they found their way into ecclesiastical
architecture, under wise modifications in the early cathedrals, with
infinite absurdity in the imitations of them; diminishing in size as
their original purpose sank into a decorative one, until we find
battlements, two-and-a-quarter inches square, decorating the gates of
the Philanthropic Society.

§ IX. There are, therefore, two distinct features in all cornices of
this kind; first, the bracket, now become of enormous importance and of
most serious practical service; the second, the parapet: and these two
features we shall consider in succession, and in so doing, shall learn
all that is needful for us to know, not only respecting cornices, but
respecting brackets in general, and balconies.

§ X. 1. The Bracket. In the simplest form of military cornice, the
brackets are composed of two or more long stones, supporting each other
in gradually increasing projection, with roughly rounded ends, Fig.
XXXVIII., and the parapet is simply a low wall carried on the ends of
these, leaving, of course, behind, or within it, a hole between each
bracket for the convenient dejection of hot sand and lead. This form is
best seen, I think, in the old Scotch castles; it is very grand, but has
a giddy look, and one is afraid of the whole thing toppling off the
wall. The next step was to deepen the brackets, so as to get them
propped against a great depth of the main rampart, and to have the inner
ends of the stones held by a greater weight of that main wall above;
while small arches were thrown from bracket to bracket to carry the
parapet wall more securely. This is the most perfect form of cornice,
completely satisfying the eye of its security, giving full protection to
the wall, and applicable to all architecture, the interstices between
the brackets being filled up, when one does not want to throw boiling
lead on any body below, and the projection being always delightful, as
giving greater command and view of the building, from its angles, to
those walking on the rampart. And as, in military buildings, there were
usually towers at the angles (round which the battlements swept) in
order to flank the walls, so often in the translation into civil or
ecclesiastical architecture, a small turret remained at the angle, or a
more bold projection of balcony, to give larger prospect to those upon
the rampart. This cornice, perfect in all its parts, as arranged for
ecclesiastical architecture, and exquisitely decorated, is the one
employed in the duomo of Florence and campanile of Giotto, of which I
have already spoken as, I suppose, the most perfect architecture in the
world.

[Illustration: Fig. XXXVIII.]

§ XI. In less important positions and on smaller edifices, this cornice
diminishes in size, while it retains its arrangement, and at last we
find nothing but the spirit and form of it left; the real practical
purpose having ceased, and arch, brackets and all, being cut out of a
single stone. Thus we find it used in early buildings throughout the
whole of the north and south of Europe, in forms sufficiently
represented by the two examples in Plate IV.: 1, from St. Antonio,
Padua; 2, from Sens in France.

[Illustration: Fig. XXXIX.]

§ XII. I wish, however, at present to fix the reader's attention on the
form of the bracket itself; a most important feature in modern as well
as ancient architecture. The first idea of a bracket is that of a long
stone or piece of timber projecting from the wall, as _a_, Fig. XXXIX.,
of which the strength depends on the toughness of the stone or wood, and
the stability on the weight of wall above it (unless it be the end of a
main beam). But let it be supposed that the structure at _a_, being of
the required projection, is found too weak: then we may strengthen it in
one of three ways; (1) by putting a second or third stone beneath it, as
at _b_; (2) by giving it a spur, as at _c_; (3) by giving it a shaft and
another bracket below, _d_; the great use of this arrangement being that
the lowermost bracket has the help of the weight of the shaft-length of
wall above its insertion, which is, of course, greater than the weight
of the small shaft: and then the lower bracket may be farther helped by
the structure at _b_ or _c_.

[Illustration: Fig. XL.]

§ XIII. Of these structures, _a_ and _c_ are evidently adapted
especially for wooden buildings; _b_ and _d_ for stone ones; the last,
of course, susceptible of the richest decoration, and superbly employed
in the cornice of the cathedral of Monza: but all are beautiful in their
way, and are the means of, I think, nearly half the picturesqueness and
power of mediæval building; the forms _b_ and _c_ being, of course, the
most frequent; _a_, when it occurs, being usually rounded off, as at
_a_, Fig. XL.; _b_, also, as in Fig. XXXVIII., or else itself composed
of a single stone cut into the form of the group _b_ here, Fig. XL., or
plain, as at _c_, which is also the proper form of the brick bracket,
when stone is not to be had. The reader will at once perceive that the
form _d_ is a barbarism (unless when the scale is small and the weight
to be carried exceedingly light): it is of course, therefore, a
favorite form with the Renaissance architects; and its introduction is
one of the first corruptions of the Venetian architecture.

§ XIV. There is one point necessary to be noticed, though bearing on
decoration more than construction, before we leave the subject of the
bracket. The whole power of the construction depends upon the stones
being well _let into_ the wall; and the first function of the decoration
should be to give the idea of this insertion, if possible; at all
events, not to contradict this idea. If the reader will glance at any of
the brackets used in the ordinary architecture of London, he will find
them of some such character as Fig. XLI.; not a bad form in itself, but
exquisitely absurd in its curling lines, which give the idea of some
writhing suspended tendril, instead of a stiff support, and by their
careful avoidance of the wall make the bracket look pinned on, and in
constant danger of sliding down. This is, also, a Classical and
Renaissance decoration.

[Illustration: Fig. XLI.]

§ XV. 2. The Parapet. Its forms are fixed in military architecture by
the necessities of the art of war at the time of building, and are
always beautiful wherever they have been really thus fixed; delightful
in the variety of their setting, and in the quaint darkness of their
shot-holes, and fantastic changes of elevation and outline. Nothing is
more remarkable than the swiftly discerned difference between the
masculine irregularity of such true battlements, and the formal
pitifulness of those which are set on modern buildings to give them a
military air,--as on the jail at Edinburgh.

§ XVI. Respecting the Parapet for mere safeguard upon buildings not
military, there are just two fixed laws. It should be pierced, otherwise
it is not recognised from below for a parapet at all, and it should not
be in the form of a battlement, especially in church architecture.

The most comfortable heading of a true parapet is a plain level on which
the arm can be rested, and along which it can glide. Any jags or
elevations are disagreeable; the latter, as interrupting the view and
disturbing the eye, if they are higher than the arm, the former, as
opening some aspect of danger if they are much lower; and the
inconvenience, therefore, of the battlemented form, as well as the worse
than absurdity, the bad feeling, of the appliance of a military feature
to a church, ought long ago to have determined its rejection. Still (for
the question of its picturesque value is here so closely connected with
that of its practical use, that it is vain to endeavor to discuss it
separately) there is a certain agreeableness in the way in which the
jagged outline dovetails the shadow of the slated or leaded roof into
the top of the wall, which may make the use of the battlement excusable
where there is a difficulty in managing some unvaried line, and where
the expense of a pierced parapet cannot be encountered: but remember
always, that the value of the battlement consists in its letting shadow
into the light of the wall, or _vice versâ_, when it comes against light
sky, letting the light of the sky into the shade of the wall; but that
the actual outline of the parapet itself, if the eye be arrested upon
this, instead of upon the alternation of shadow, is as _ugly_ a
succession of line as can by any possibility be invented. Therefore, the
battlemented parapet may only be used where this alternation of shade is
certain to be shown, under nearly all conditions of effect; and where
the lines to be dealt with are on a scale which may admit battlements of
bold and manly size. The idea that a battlement is an ornament anywhere,
and that a miserable and diminutive imitation of castellated outline
will always serve to fill up blanks and Gothicise unmanageable spaces,
is one of the great idiocies of the present day. A battlement is in its
origin a piece of wall large enough to cover a man's body, and however
it may be decorated, or pierced, or finessed away into traceries, as
long as so much of its outline is retained as to suggest its origin, so
long its size must remain undiminished. To crown a turret six feet high
with chopped battlements three inches wide, is children's Gothic: it is
one of the paltry falsehoods for which there is no excuse, and part of
the system of using models of architecture to decorate architecture,
which we shall hereafter note as one of the chief and most destructive
follies of the Renaissance;[54] and in the present day the practice may
be classed as one which distinguishes the architects of whom there is no
hope, who have neither eye nor head for their work, and who must pass
their lives in vain struggles against the refractory lines of their own
buildings.

§ XVII. As the only excuse for the battlemented parapet is its
alternation of shadow, so the only fault of the natural or level parapet
is its monotony of line. This is, however, in practice, almost always
broken by the pinnacles of the buttresses, and if not, may be varied by
the tracery of its penetrations. The forms of these evidently admit
every kind of change; for a stone parapet, however pierced, is sure to
be strong enough for its purpose of protection, and, as regards the
strength of the building in general, the lighter it is the better. More
fantastic forms may, therefore, be admitted in a parapet than in any
other architectural feature, and for most services, the Flamboyant
parapets seem to me preferable to all others; especially when the leaden
roofs set off by points of darkness the lace-like intricacy of
penetration. These, however, as well as the forms usually given to
Renaissance balustrades (of which, by the bye, the best piece of
criticism I know is the sketch in "David Copperfield" of the personal
appearance of the man who stole Jip), and the other and finer forms
invented by Paul Veronese in his architectural backgrounds, together
with the pure columnar balustrade of Venice, must be considered as
altogether decorative features.

§ XVIII. So also are, of course, the jagged or crown-like finishings of
walls employed where no real parapet of protection is desired;
originating in the defences of outworks and single walls: these are used
much in the east on walls surrounding unroofed courts. The richest
examples of such decoration are Arabian; and from Cairo they seem to
have been brought to Venice. It is probable that few of my readers,
however familiar the general form of the Ducal Palace may have been
rendered to them by innumerable drawings, have any distinct idea of its
roof, owing to the staying of the eye on its superb parapet, of which we
shall give account hereafter. In most of the Venetian cases the parapets
which surround roofing are very sufficient for protection, except that
the stones of which they are composed appear loose and infirm: but their
purpose is entirely decorative; every wall, whether detached or roofed,
being indiscriminately fringed with Arabic forms of parapet, more or
less Gothicised, according to the lateness of their date.

I think there is no other point of importance requiring illustration
respecting the roof itself, or its cornice: but this Venetian form of
ornamental parapet connects itself curiously, at the angles of nearly
all the buildings on which it occurs, with the pinnacled system of the
north, founded on the structure of the buttress. This, it will be
remembered, is to be the subject of the fifth division of our inquiry.


FOOTNOTES:

  [54] Not of Renaissance alone: the practice of modelling buildings
    on a minute scale for niches and tabernacle-work has always been
    more or less admitted, and I suppose _authority_ for diminutive
    battlements might be gathered from the Gothic of almost every
    period, as well as for many other faults and mistakes: no Gothic
    school having ever been thoroughly systematised or perfected, even
    in its best times. But that a mistaken decoration sometimes occurs
    among a crowd of noble ones, is no more an excuse for the
    habitual--far less, the exclusive--use of such a decoration, than
    the accidental or seeming misconstructions of a Greek chorus are an
    excuse for a school boy's ungrammatical exercise.




CHAPTER XV.

  THE BUTTRESS.


§ I. We have hitherto supposed ourselves concerned with the support of
vertical pressure only; and the arch and roof have been considered as
forms of abstract strength, without reference to the means by which
their lateral pressure was to be resisted. Few readers will need now to
be reminded, that every arch or gable not tied at its base by beams or
bars, exercises a lateral pressure upon the walls which sustain
it,--pressure which may, indeed, be met and sustained by increasing the
thickness of the wall or vertical piers, and which is in reality thus
met in most Italian buildings, but may, with less expenditure of
material, and with (perhaps) more graceful effect, be met by some
particular application of the provisions against lateral pressure called
Buttresses. These, therefore, we are next to examine.

§ II. Buttresses are of many kinds, according to the character and
direction of the lateral forces they are intended to resist. But their
first broad division is into buttresses which meet and break the force
before it arrives at the wall, and buttresses which stand on the lee
side of the wall, and prop it against the force.

The lateral forces which walls have to sustain are of three distinct
kinds: dead weight, as of masonry or still water; moving weight, as of
wind or running water; and sudden concussion, as of earthquakes,
explosions, &c.

Clearly, dead weight can only be resisted by the buttress acting as a
prop; for a buttress on the side of, or towards the weight, would only
add to its effect. This, then, forms the first great class of buttressed
architecture; lateral thrusts, of roofing or arches, being met by props
of masonry outside--the thrust from within, the prop without; or the
crushing force of water on a ship's side met by its cross timbers--the
thrust here from without the wall, the prop within.

Moving weight may, of course, be resisted by the prop on the lee side of
the wall, but is often more effectually met, on the side which is
attacked, by buttresses of peculiar forms, cunning buttresses, which do
not attempt to sustain the weight, but _parry_ it, and throw it off in
directions clear of the wall.

Thirdly: concussions and vibratory motion, though in reality only
supported by the prop buttress, must be provided for by buttresses on
both sides of the wall, as their direction cannot be foreseen, and is
continually changing.

We shall briefly glance at these three systems of buttressing; but the
two latter being of small importance to our present purpose, may as well
be dismissed first.

§ III. 1. Buttresses for guard against moving weight and set towards the
weight they resist.

The most familiar instance of this kind of buttress we have in the sharp
piers of a bridge, in the centre of a powerful stream, which divide the
current on their edges, and throw it to each side under the arches. A
ship's bow is a buttress of the same kind, and so also the ridge of a
breastplate, both adding to the strength of it in resisting a cross
blow, and giving a better chance of a bullet glancing aside. In
Switzerland, projecting buttresses of this kind are often built round
churches, heading up hill, to divide and throw off the avalanches. The
various forms given to piers and harbor quays, and to the bases of
light-houses, in order to meet the force of the waves, are all
conditions of this kind of buttress. But in works of ornamental
architecture such buttresses are of rare occurrence; and I merely name
them in order to mark their place in our architectural system, since in
the investigation of our present subject we shall not meet with a single
example of them, unless sometimes the angle of the foundation of a
palace set against the sweep of the tide, or the wooden piers of some
canal bridge quivering in its current.

§ IV. 2. Buttresses for guard against vibratory motion.

The whole formation of this kind of buttress resolves itself into mere
expansion of the base of the wall, so as to make it stand steadier, as a
man stands with his feet apart when he is likely to lose his balance.
This approach to a pyramidal form is also of great use as a guard
against the action of artillery; that if a stone or tier of stones be
battered out of the lower portions of the wall, the whole upper part may
not topple over or crumble down at once. Various forms of this buttress,
sometimes applied to particular points of the wall, sometimes forming a
great sloping rampart along its base, are frequent in buildings of
countries exposed to earthquake. They give a peculiarly heavy outline to
much of the architecture of the kingdom of Naples, and they are of the
form in which strength and solidity are first naturally sought, in the
slope of the Egyptian wall. The base of Guy's Tower at Warwick is a
singularly bold example of their military use; and so, in general,
bastion and rampart profiles, where, however, the object of stability
against a shock is complicated with that of sustaining weight of earth
in the rampart behind.

§ V. 3. Prop buttresses against dead weight.

This is the group with which we have principally to do; and a buttress
of this kind acts in two ways, partly by its weight and partly by its
strength. It acts by its weight when its mass is so great that the
weight it sustains cannot stir it, but is lost upon it, buried in it,
and annihilated: neither the shape of such a buttress nor the cohesion
of its materials are of much consequence; a heap of stones or sandbags,
laid up against the wall, will answer as well as a built and cemented
mass.

But a buttress acting by its strength is not of mass sufficient to
resist the weight by mere inertia; but it conveys the weight through its
body to something else which is so capable; as, for instance, a man
leaning against a door with his hands, and propping himself against the
ground, conveys the force which would open or close the door against him
through his body to the ground. A buttress acting in this way must be of
perfectly coherent materials, and so strong that though the weight to
be borne could easily move it, it cannot break it: this kind of buttress
may be called a conducting buttress. Practically, however, the two modes
of action are always in some sort united. Again, the weight to be borne
may either act generally on the whole wall surface, or with excessive
energy on particular points: when it acts on the whole wall surface, the
whole wall is generally supported; and the arrangement becomes a
continuous rampart, as a dyke, or bank of reservoir.

§ VI. It is, however, very seldom that lateral force in architecture is
equally distributed. In most cases the weight of the roof, or the force
of any lateral thrust, are more or less confined to certain points and
directions. In an early state of architectural science this definiteness
of direction is not yet clear, and it is met by uncertain application of
mass or strength in the buttress, sometimes by mere thickening of the
wall into square piers, which are partly piers, partly buttresses, as in
Norman keeps and towers. But as science advances, the weight to be borne
is designedly and decisively thrown upon certain points; the direction
and degree of the forces which are then received are exactly calculated,
and met by conducting buttresses of the smallest possible dimensions;
themselves, in their turn, supported by vertical buttresses acting by
weight, and these perhaps, in their turn, by another set of conducting
buttresses: so that, in the best examples of such arrangements, the
weight to be borne may be considered as the shock of an electric fluid,
which, by a hundred different rods and channels, is divided and carried
away into the ground.

§ VII. In order to give greater weight to the vertical buttress piers
which sustain the conducting buttresses, they are loaded with pinnacles,
which, however, are, I believe, in all the buildings in which they
become very prominent, merely decorative: they are of some use, indeed,
by their weight; but if this were all for which they were put there, a
few cubic feet of lead would much more securely answer the purpose,
without any danger from exposure to wind. If the reader likes to ask any
Gothic architect with whom he may happen to be acquainted, to
substitute a lump of lead for his pinnacles, he will see by the
expression of his face how far he considers the pinnacles decorative
members. In the work which seems to me the great type of simple and
masculine buttress structure, the apse of Beauvais, the pinnacles are
altogether insignificant, and are evidently added just as exclusively to
entertain the eye and lighten the aspect of the buttress, as the slight
shafts which are set on its angles; while in other very noble Gothic
buildings the pinnacles are introduced as niches for statues, without
any reference to construction at all: and sometimes even, as in the tomb
of Can Signoria at Verona, on small piers detached from the main
building.

§ VIII. I believe, therefore, that the development of the pinnacle is
merely a part of the general erectness and picturesqueness of northern
work above alluded to: and that, if there had been no other place for
the pinnacles, the Gothic builders would have put them on the tops of
their arches (they often _did_ on the tops of gables and pediments),
rather than not have had them; but the natural position of the pinnacle
is, of course, where it adds to, rather than diminishes, the stability
of the building; that is to say, on its main wall piers and the vertical
piers at the buttresses. And thus the edifice is surrounded at last by a
complete company of detached piers and pinnacles, each sustaining an
inclined prop against the central wall, and looking something like a
band of giants holding it up with the butts of their lances. This
arrangement would imply the loss of an enormous space of ground, but the
intervals of the buttresses are usually walled in below, and form minor
chapels.

[Illustration: Fig. XLII.]

§ IX. The science of this arrangement has made it the subject of much
enthusiastic declamation among the Gothic architects, almost as
unreasonable, in some respects, as the declamation of the Renaissance
architects respecting Greek structure. The fact is, that the whole
northern buttress system is based on the grand requirement of tall
windows and vast masses of light at the end of the apse. In order to
gain this quantity of light, the piers between the windows are
diminished in thickness until they are far too weak to bear the roof,
and then sustained by external buttresses. In the Italian method the
light is rather dreaded than desired, and the wall is made wide enough
between the windows to bear the roof, and so left. In fact, the simplest
expression of the difference in the systems is, that a northern apse is
a southern one with its inter-fenestrial piers set edgeways. Thus, _a_,
Fig. XLII., is the general idea of the southern apse; take it to pieces,
and set all its piers edgeways, as at _b_, and you have the northern
one. You gain much light for the interior, but you cut the exterior to
pieces, and instead of a bold rounded or polygonal surface, ready for
any kind of decoration, you have a series of dark and damp cells, which
no device that I have yet seen has succeeded in decorating in a
perfectly satisfactory manner. If the system be farther carried, and a
second or third order of buttresses be added, the real fact is that we
have a building standing on two or three rows of concentric piers, with
the _roof off_ the whole of it except the central circle, and only ribs
left, to carry the weight of the bit of remaining roof in the middle;
and after the eye has been accustomed to the bold and simple rounding of
the Italian apse, the skeleton character of the disposition is painfully
felt. After spending some months in Venice, I thought Bourges Cathedral
looked exactly like a half-built ship on its shores. It is useless,
however, to dispute respecting the merits of the two systems: both are
noble in their place; the Northern decidedly the most scientific, or at
least involving the greatest display of science, the Italian the
calmest and purest, this having in it the sublimity of a calm heaven or
a windless noon, the other that of a mountain flank tormented by the
north wind, and withering into grisly furrows of alternate chasm and
crag.

§ X. If I have succeeded in making the reader understand the veritable
action of the buttress, he will have no difficulty in determining its
fittest form. He has to deal with two distinct kinds; one, a narrow
vertical pier, acting principally by its weight, and crowned by a
pinnacle; the other, commonly called a Flying buttress, a cross bar set
from such a pier (when detached from the building) against the main
wall. This latter, then, is to be considered as a mere prop or shore,
and its use by the Gothic architects might be illustrated by the
supposition that we were to build all our houses with walls too thin to
stand without wooden props outside, and then to substitute stone props
for wooden ones. I have some doubts of the real dignity of such a
proceeding, but at all events the merit of the form of the flying
buttress depends on its faithfully and visibly performing this somewhat
humble office; it is, therefore, in its purity, a mere sloping bar of
stone, with an arch beneath it to carry its weight, that is to say, to
prevent the action of gravity from in any wise deflecting it, or causing
it to break downwards under the lateral thrust; it is thus formed quite
simple in Notre Dame of Paris, and in the Cathedral of Beauvais, while
at Cologne the sloping bars are pierced with quatrefoils, and at Amiens
with traceried arches. Both seem to me effeminate and false in
principle; not, of course, that there is any occasion to make the flying
buttress heavy, if a light one will answer the purpose; but it seems as
if some security were sacrificed to ornament. At Amiens the arrangement
is now seen to great disadvantage, for the early traceries have been
replaced by base flamboyant ones, utterly weak and despicable. Of the
degradations of the original form which took place in after times, I
have spoken at p. 35 of the "Seven Lamps."

§ XI. The form of the common buttress must be familiar to the eye of
every reader, sloping if low, and thrown into successive steps if they
are to be carried to any considerable height. There is much dignity in
them when they are of essential service; but even in their best
examples, their awkward angles are among the least manageable features
of the Northern Gothic, and the whole organisation of its system was
destroyed by their unnecessary and lavish application on a diminished
scale; until the buttress became actually confused with the shaft, and
we find strangely crystallised masses of diminutive buttress applied,
for merely vertical support, in the northern tabernacle work; while in
some recent copies of it the principle has been so far distorted that
the tiny buttressings look as if they carried the superstructure on the
points of their pinnacles, as in the Cranmer memorial at Oxford. Indeed,
in most modern Gothic, the architects evidently consider buttresses as
convenient breaks of blank surface, and general apologies for deadness
of wall. They stand in the place of ideas, and I think are supposed also
to have something of the odor of sanctity about them; otherwise, one
hardly sees why a warehouse seventy feet high should have nothing of the
kind, and a chapel, which one can just get into with one's hat off,
should have a bunch of them at every corner; and worse than this, they
are even thought ornamental when they can be of no possible use; and
these stupid penthouse outlines are forced upon the eye in every species
of decoration: in St. Margaret's Chapel, West Street, there are actually
a couple of buttresses at the end of every pew.

§ XII. It is almost impossible, in consequence of these unwise
repetitions of it, to contemplate the buttress without some degree of
prejudice; and I look upon it as one of the most justifiable causes of
the unfortunate aversion with which many of our best architects regard
the whole Gothic school. It may, however, always be regarded with
respect when its form is simple and its service clear; but no treason to
Gothic can be greater than the use of it in indolence or vanity, to
enhance the intricacies of structure, or occupy the vacuities of design.




CHAPTER XVI.

  FORM OF APERTURE.


§ I. We have now, in order, examined the means of raising walls and
sustaining roofs, and we have finally to consider the structure of the
necessary apertures in the wall veil, the door and window; respecting
which there are three main points to be considered.

1. The form of the aperture, _i.e._, its outline, its size, and the
forms of its sides.

2. The filling of the aperture, _i.e._, valves and glass, and their
holdings.

3. The protection of the aperture, and its appliances, _i.e._, canopies,
porches, and balconies. We shall examine these in succession.

§ II. 1. The form of the aperture: and first of doors. We will, for the
present, leave out of the question doors and gates in unroofed walls,
the forms of these being very arbitrary, and confine ourselves to the
consideration of doors of entrance into roofed buildings. Such doors
will, for the most part, be at, or near, the base of the building;
except when raised for purposes of defence, as in the old Scotch border
towers, and our own Martello towers, or, as in Switzerland, to permit
access in deep snow, or when stairs are carried up outside the house for
convenience or magnificence. But in most cases, whether high or low, a
door may be assumed to be considerably lower than the apartments or
buildings into which it gives admission, and therefore to have some
height of wall above it, whose weight must be carried by the heading of
the door. It is clear, therefore, that the best heading must be an
arch, because the strongest, and that a square-headed door must be
wrong, unless under Mont-Cenisian masonry; or else, unless the top of
the door be the roof of the building, as in low cottages. And a
square-headed door is just so much more wrong and ugly than a connexion
of main shafts by lintels, as the weight of wall above the door is
likely to be greater than that above the main shafts. Thus, while I
admit the Greek general forms of temple to be admirable in their kind, I
think the Greek door always offensive and unmanageable.

§ III. We have it also determined by necessity, that the apertures shall
be at least above a man's height, with perpendicular sides (for sloping
sides are evidently unnecessary, and even inconvenient, therefore
absurd) and level threshold; and this aperture we at present suppose
simply cut through the wall without any bevelling of the jambs. Such a
door, wide enough for two persons to pass each other easily, and with
such fillings or valves as we may hereafter find expedient, may be fit
enough for any building into which entrance is required neither often,
nor by many persons at a time. But when entrance and egress are
constant, or required by crowds, certain further modifications must take
place.

[Illustration: Fig. XLIII.]

§ IV. When entrance and egress are constant, it may be supposed that the
valves will be absent or unfastened,--that people will be passing more
quickly than when the entrance and egress are unfrequent, and that the
square angles of the wall will be inconvenient to such quick passers
through. It is evident, therefore, that what would be done in time, for
themselves, by the passing multitude, should be done for them at once by
the architect; and that these angles, which would be worn away by
friction, should at once be bevelled off, or, as it is called, splayed,
and the most contracted part of the aperture made as short as possible,
so that the plan of the entrance should become as at _a_, Fig. XLIII.

§ V. Farther. As persons on the outside may often approach the door or
depart from it, _beside_ the building, so as to turn aside as they enter
or leave the door, and therefore touch its jamb, but, on the inside,
will in almost every case approach the door, or depart from it in the
direct line of the entrance (people generally walking _forward_ when
they enter a hall, court, or chamber of any kind, and being forced to do
so when they enter a passage), it is evident that the bevelling may be
very slight on the inside, but should be large on the outside, so that
the plan of the aperture should become as at _b_, Fig. XLIII. Farther,
as the bevelled wall cannot conveniently carry an unbevelled arch, the
door arch must be bevelled also, and the aperture, seen from the
outside, will have somewhat the aspect of a small cavern diminishing
towards the interior.

§ VI. If, however, beside frequent entrance, entrance is required for
multitudes at the same time, the size of the aperture either must be
increased, or other apertures must be introduced. It may, in some
buildings, be optional with the architect whether he shall give many
small doors, or few large ones; and in some, as theatres, amphitheatres,
and other places where the crowd are apt to be impatient, many doors are
by far the best arrangement of the two. Often, however, the purposes of
the building, as when it is to be entered by processions, or where the
crowd most usually enter in one direction, require the large single
entrance; and (for here again the æsthetic and structural laws cannot be
separated) the expression and harmony of the building require, in nearly
every case, an entrance of largeness proportioned to the multitude which
is to meet within. Nothing is more unseemly than that a great multitude
should find its way out and in, as ants and wasps do, through holes; and
nothing more undignified than the paltry doors of many of our English
cathedrals, which look as if they were made, not for the open egress,
but for the surreptitious drainage of a stagnant congregation. Besides,
the expression of the church door should lead us, as far as possible, to
desire at least the western entrance to be single, partly because no man
of right feeling would willingly lose the idea of unity and fellowship
in going up to worship, which is suggested by the vast single entrance;
partly because it is at the entrance that the most serious words of the
building are always addressed, by its sculptures or inscriptions, to the
worshipper; and it is well, that these words should be spoken to all at
once, as by one great voice, not broken up into weak repetitions over
minor doors.

In practice the matter has been, I suppose, regulated almost altogether
by convenience, the western doors being single in small churches, while
in the larger the entrances become three or five, the central door
remaining always principal, in consequence of the fine sense of
composition which the mediæval builders never lost. These arrangements
have formed the noblest buildings in the world. Yet it is worth
observing[55] how perfect in its simplicity the single entrance may
become, when it is treated as in the Duomo and St. Zeno of Verona, and
other such early Lombard churches, having noble porches, and rich
sculptures grouped around the entrance.

§ VII. However, whether the entrances be single, triple, or manifold, it
is a constant law that one shall be principal, and all shall be of size
in some degree proportioned to that of the building. And this size is,
of course, chiefly to be expressed in width, that being the only useful
dimension in a door (except for pageantry, chairing of bishops and
waving of banners, and other such vanities, not, I hope, after this
century, much to be regarded in the building of Christian temples); but
though the width is the only necessary dimension, it is well to increase
the height also in some proportion to it, in order that there may be
less weight of wall above, resting on the increased span of the arch.
This is, however, so much the necessary result of the broad curve of the
arch itself, that there is no structural necessity of elevating the
jamb; and I believe that beautiful entrances might be made of every span
of arch, retaining the jamb at a little more than a man's height, until
the sweep of the curves became so vast that the small vertical line
became a part of them, and one entered into the temple as under a great
rainbow.

§ VIII. On the other hand, the jamb _may_ be elevated indefinitely, so
that the increasing entrance retains _at least_ the proportion of width
it had originally; say 4 ft. by 7 ft. 5 in. But a less proportion of
width than this has always a meagre, inhospitable, and ungainly look
except in military architecture, where the narrowness of the entrance is
necessary, and its height adds to its grandeur, as between the entrance
towers of our British castles. This law however, observe, applies only
to true doors, not to the arches of porches, which may be of any
proportion, as of any number, being in fact intercolumniations, not
doors; as in the noble example of the west front of Peterborough, which,
in spite of the destructive absurdity of its central arch being the
narrowest, would still, if the paltry porter's lodge, or gatehouse, or
turnpike, or whatever it is, were knocked out of the middle of it, be
the noblest west front in England.

§ IX. Further, and finally. In proportion to the height and size of the
building, and therefore to the size of its doors, will be the thickness
of its walls, especially at the foundation, that is to say, beside the
doors; and also in proportion to the numbers of a crowd will be the
unruliness and pressure of it. Hence, partly in necessity and partly in
prudence, the splaying or chamfering of the jamb of the larger door will
be deepened, and, if possible, made at a larger angle for the large door
than for the small one; so that the large door will always be
encompassed by a visible breadth of jamb proportioned to its own
magnitude. The decorative value of this feature we shall see hereafter.

§ X. The second kind of apertures we have to examine are those of
windows.

Window apertures are mainly of two kinds; those for outlook, and those
for inlet of light, many being for both purposes, and either purpose, or
both, combined in military architecture with those of offence and
defence. But all window apertures, as compared with door apertures, have
almost infinite licence of form and size: they may be of any shape, from
the slit or cross slit to the circle;[56] of any size, from the loophole
of the castle to the pillars of light of the cathedral apse. Yet,
according to their place and purpose, one or two laws of fitness hold
respecting them, which let us examine in the two classes of windows
successively, but without reference to military architecture, which
here, as before, we may dismiss as a subject of separate science, only
noticing that windows, like all other features, are always delightful,
if not beautiful, when their position and shape have indeed been thus
necessarily determined, and that many of their most picturesque forms
have resulted from the requirements of war. We should also find in
military architecture the typical forms of the two classes of outlet and
inlet windows in their utmost development; the greatest sweep of sight
and range of shot on the one hand, and the fullest entry of light and
air on the other, being constantly required at the smallest possible
apertures. Our business, however, is to reason out the laws for
ourselves, not to take the examples as we find them.

§ XI. 1. Outlook apertures. For these no general outline is determinable
by the necessities or inconveniences of outlooking, except only that the
bottom or sill of the windows, at whatever height, should be horizontal,
for the convenience of leaning on it, or standing on it if the window
be to the ground. The form of the upper part of the window is quite
immaterial, for all windows allow a greater range of sight when they are
_approached_ than that of the eye itself: it is the approachability of
the window, that is to say, the annihilation of the thickness of the
wall, which is the real point to be attended to. If, therefore, the
aperture be inaccessible, or so small that the thickness of the wall
cannot be entered, the wall is to be bevelled[57] on the outside, so as
to increase the range of sight as far as possible; if the aperture can
be entered, then bevelled from the point to which entrance is possible.
The bevelling will, if possible, be in every direction, that is to say,
upwards at the top, outwards at the sides, and downwards at the bottom,
but essentially _downwards_; the earth and the doings upon it being the
chief object in outlook windows, except of observatories; and where the
object is a distinct and special view downwards, it will be of advantage
to shelter the eye as far as possible from the rays of light coming from
above, and the head of the window may be left horizontal, or even the
whole aperture sloped outwards, as the slit in a letter-box is inwards.

The best windows for outlook are, of course, oriels and bow windows, but
these are not to be considered under the head of apertures merely; they
are either balconies roofed and glazed, and to be considered under the
head of external appliances, or they are each a story of an external
semi-tower, having true aperture windows on each side of it.

§ XII. 2. Inlet windows. These windows may, of course, be of any shape and
size whatever, according to the other necessities of the building, and
the quantity and direction of light desired, their purpose being now to
throw it in streams on particular lines or spots; now to diffuse it
everywhere; sometimes to introduce it in broad masses, tempered in
strength, as in the cathedral colored window; sometimes in starry
showers of scattered brilliancy, like the apertures in the roof of an
Arabian bath; perhaps the most beautiful of all forms being the rose,
which has in it the unity of both characters, and sympathy with that of
the source of light itself. It is noticeable, however, that while both
the circle and pointed oval are beautiful window forms, it would be very
painful to cut either of them in half and connect them by vertical
lines, as in Fig. XLIV. The reason is, I believe, that so treated, the
upper arch is not considered as connected with the lower, and forming an
entire figure, but as the ordinary arch roof of the aperture, and the
lower arch as an arch _floor_, equally unnecessary and unnatural. Also,
the elliptical oval is generally an unsatisfactory form, because it
gives the idea of useless trouble in building it, though it occurs
quaintly and pleasantly in the former windows of France: I believe it is
also objectionable because it has an indeterminate, slippery look, like
that of a bubble rising through a fluid. It, and all elongated forms,
are still more objectionable placed horizontally, because this is the
weakest position they can structurally have; that is to say, less light
is admitted, with greater loss of strength to the building, than by any
other form. If admissible anywhere, it is for the sake of variety at the
top of the building, as the flat parallelogram sometimes not
ungracefully in Italian Renaissance.

[Illustration: Fig. XLIV.]

§ XIII. The question of bevelling becomes a little more complicated in
the inlet than the outlook window, because the mass or quantity of light
admitted is often of more consequence than its direction, and often
_vice versâ_; and the outlook window is supposed to be approachable,
which is far from being always the case with windows for light, so that
the bevelling which in the outlook window is chiefly to open range of
sight, is in the inlet a means not only of admitting the light in
greater quantity, but of directing it to the spot on which it is to
fall. But, in general, the bevelling of the one window will reverse that
of the other; for, first, no natural light will strike on the inlet
window from beneath, unless reflected light, which is (I believe)
injurious to the health and the sight; and thus, while in the outlook
window the outside bevel downwards is essential, in the inlet it would
be useless: and the sill is to be flat, if the window be on a level with
the spot it is to light; and sloped downwards within, if above it.
Again, as the brightest rays of light are the steepest, the outside
bevel upwards is as essential in the roof of the inlet as it was of
small importance in that of the outlook window.

§ XIV. On the horizontal section the aperture will expand internally, a
somewhat larger number of rays being thus reflected from the jambs; and
the aperture being thus the smallest possible outside, this is the
favorite military form of inlet window, always found in magnificent
development in the thick walls of mediæval castles and convents. Its
effect is tranquil, but cheerless and dungeon-like in its fullest
development, owing to the limitation of the range of sight in the
outlook, which, if the window be unapproachable, reduces it to a mere
point of light. A modified condition of it, with some combination of the
outlook form, is probably the best for domestic buildings in general
(which, however, in modern architecture, are unhappily so thin walled,
that the outline of the jambs becomes a matter almost of indifference),
it being generally noticeable that the depth of recess which I have
observed to be essential to nobility of external effect has also a
certain dignity of expression, as appearing to be intended rather to
admit light to persons quietly occupied in their homes, than to
stimulate or favor the curiosity of idleness.


FOOTNOTES:

  [55] And worth questioning, also, whether the triple porch has not
    been associated with Romanist views of mediatorship; the Redeemer
    being represented as presiding over the central door only, and the
    lateral entrances being under the protection of saints, while the
    Madonna almost always has one or both of the transepts. But it would
    be wrong to press this, for, in nine cases out of ten, the architect
    has been merely influenced in his placing of the statues by an
    artist's desire of variety in their forms and dress; and very
    naturally prefers putting a canonisation over one door, a martyrdom
    over another, and an assumption over a third, to repeating a
    crucifixion or a judgment above all. The architect's doctrine is
    only, therefore, to be noted with indisputable reprobation when the
    Madonna gets possession of the main door.

  [56] The arch heading is indeed the best where there is much
    incumbent weight, but a window frequently has very little weight
    above it, especially when placed high, and the arched form loses
    light in a low room: therefore the square-headed window is
    admissible where the square-headed door is not.

  [57] I do not like the sound of the word "splayed;" I always shall
    use "bevelled" instead.




CHAPTER XVII.

  FILLING OF APERTURE.


§ I. Thus far we have been concerned with the outline only of the
aperture: we were next, it will be remembered, to consider the necessary
modes of filling it with valves in the case of the door, or with glass
or tracery in that of the window.

1. Fillings of doors. We concluded, in the previous Chapter, that doors
in buildings of any importance or size should have headings in the form
of an arch. This is, however, the most inconvenient form we could
choose, as respects the fitting of the valves of the doorway; for the
arch-shaped head of the valves not only requires considerable nicety in
fitting to the arch, but adds largely to the weight of the door,--a
double disadvantage, straining the hinges and making it cumbersome in
opening. And this inconvenience is so much perceived by the eye, that a
door valve with a pointed head is always a disagreeable object. It
becomes, therefore, a matter of true necessity so to arrange the doorway
as to admit of its being fitted with rectangular valves.

§ II. Now, in determining the form of the aperture, we supposed the jamb
of the door to be of the utmost height required for entrance. The extra
height of the arch is unnecessary as an opening, the arch being required
for its strength only, not for its elevation. There is, therefore, no
reason why it should not be barred across by a horizontal lintel, into
which the valves may be fitted, and the triangular or semicircular
arched space above the lintel may then be permanently closed, as we
choose, either with bars, or glass, or stone.

This is the form of all good doors, without exception, over the whole
world and in all ages, and no other can ever be invented.

§ III. In the simplest doors the cross lintel is of wood only, and glass
or bars occupy the space above, a very frequent form in Venice. In more
elaborate doors the cross lintel is of stone, and the filling sometimes
of brick, sometimes of stone, very often a grand single stone being used
to close the entire space: the space thus filled is called the Tympanum.
In large doors the cross lintel is too long to bear the great incumbent
weight of this stone filling without support; it is, therefore, carried
by a pier in the centre; and two valves are used, fitted to the
rectangular spaces on each side of the pier. In the most elaborate
examples of this condition, each of these secondary doorways has an arch
heading, a cross lintel, and a triangular filling or tympanum of its
own, all subordinated to the main arch above.

§ IV. 2. Fillings of windows.

When windows are large, and to be filled with glass, the sheet of glass,
however constructed, whether of large panes or small fragments, requires
the support of bars of some kind, either of wood, metal, or stone. Wood
is inapplicable on a large scale, owing to its destructibility; very fit
for door-valves, which can be easily refitted, and in which weight would
be an inconvenience, but very unfit for window-bars, which, if they
decayed, might let the whole window be blown in before their decay was
observed, and in which weight would be an advantage, as offering more
resistance to the wind.

Iron is, however, fit for window-bars, and there seems no constructive
reason why we should not have iron traceries, as well as iron pillars,
iron churches, and iron steeples. But I have, in the "Seven Lamps,"
given reasons for not considering such structures as architecture at
all.

The window-bars must, therefore, be of stone, and of stone only.

§ V. The purpose of the window being always to let in as much light, and
command as much view, as possible, these bars of stone are to be made
as slender and as few as they can be, consistently with their due
strength.

[Illustration: Fig. XLV.]

Let it be required to support the breadth of glass, _a_, _b_, Fig. XLV.
The tendency of the glass sustaining any force, as of wind from without,
is to bend into an arch inwards, in the dotted line, and break in the
centre. It is to be supported, therefore, by the bar put in its centre,
_c_.

But this central bar, _c_, may not be enough, and the spaces _a c_, _c
b_, may still need support. The next step will be to put two bars
instead of one, and divide the window into three spaces as at _d_.

But this may still not be enough, and the window may need three bars.
Now the greatest stress is always on the centre of the window. If the
three bars are equal in strength, as at _e_, the central bar is either
too slight for its work, or the lateral bars too thick for theirs.
Therefore, we must slightly increase the thickness of the central bar,
and diminish that of the lateral ones, so as to obtain the arrangement
at _f h_. If the window enlarge farther, each of the spaces _f g_, _g
h_, is treated as the original space _a b_, and we have the groups of
bars _k_ and _l_.

So that, whatever the shape of the window, whatever the direction and
number of the bars, there are to be central or main bars; second bars
subordinated to them; third bars subordinated to the second, and so on
to the number required. This is called the subordination of tracery, a
system delightful to the eye and mind, owing to its anatomical framing
and unity, and to its expression of the laws of good government in all
fragile and unstable things. All tracery, therefore, which is not
subordinated, is barbarous, in so far as this part of its structure is
concerned.

§ VI. The next question will be the direction of the bars. The reader
will understand at once, without any laborious proof, that a given area
of glass, supported by its edges, is stronger in its resistance to
violence when it is arranged in a long strip or band than in a square;
and that, therefore, glass is generally to be arranged, especially in
windows on a large scale, in oblong areas: and if the bars so dividing
it be placed horizontally, they will have less power of supporting
themselves, and will need to be thicker in consequence, than if placed
vertically. As far, therefore, as the form of the window permits, they
are to be vertical.

§ VII. But even when so placed, they cannot be trusted to support
themselves beyond a certain height, but will need cross bars to steady
them. Cross bars of stone are, therefore, to be introduced at necessary
intervals, not to divide the glass, but to support the upright stone
bars. The glass is always to be divided longitudinally as far as
possible, and the upright bars which divide it supported at proper
intervals. However high the window, it is almost impossible that it
should require more than two cross bars.

§ VIII. It may sometimes happen that when tall windows are placed very
close to each other for the sake of more light, the masonry between them
may stand in need, or at least be the better of, some additional
support. The cross bars of the windows may then be thickened, in order
to bond the intermediate piers more strongly together, and if this
thickness appear ungainly, it may be modified by decoration.

§ IX. We have thus arrived at the idea of a vertical frame work of
subordinated bars, supported by cross bars at the necessary intervals,
and the only remaining question is the method of insertion into the
aperture. Whatever its form, if we merely let the ends of the bars into
the voussoirs of its heading, the least settlement of the masonry would
distort the arch, or push up some of its voussoirs, or break the window
bars, or push them aside. Evidently our object should be to connect the
window bars among themselves, so framing them together that they may
give the utmost possible degree of support to the whole window head in
case of any settlement. But we know how to do this already: our window
bars are nothing but small shafts. Capital them; throw small arches
across between the smaller bars, large arches over them between the
larger bars, one comprehensive arch over the whole, or else a horizontal
lintel, if the window have a flat head; and we have a complete system of
mutual support, independent of the aperture head, and yet assisting to
sustain it, if need be. But we want the spandrils of this arch system to
be themselves as light, and to let as much light through them, as
possible: and we know already how to pierce them (Chap. XII. § VII.). We
pierce them with circles; and we have, if the circles are small and the
stonework strong, the traceries of Giotto and the Pisan school; if the
circles are as large as possible and the bars slender, those which I
have already figured and described as the only perfect traceries of the
Northern Gothic.[58] The varieties of their design arise partly from the
different size of window and consequent number of bars; partly from the
different heights of their pointed arches, as well as the various
positions of the window head in relation to the roof, rendering one or
another arrangement better for dividing the light, and partly from
æsthetic and expressional requirements, which, within certain limits,
may be allowed a very important influence: for the strength of the bars
is ordinarily so much greater than is absolutely necessary, that some
portion of it may be gracefully sacrificed to the attainment of variety
in the plans of tracery--a variety which, even within its severest
limits, is perfectly endless; more especially in the pointed arch, the
proportion of the tracery being in the round arch necessarily more
fixed.

§ X. The circular window furnishes an exception to the common law, that
the bars shall be vertical through the greater part of their length: for
if they were so, they could neither have secure perpendicular footing,
nor secure heading, their thrust being perpendicular to the curve of the
voussoirs only in the centre of the window; therefore, a small circle,
like the axle of a wheel, is put into the centre of the window, large
enough to give footing to the necessary number of radiating bars; and
the bars are arranged as spokes, being all of course properly capitaled
and arch-headed. This is the best form of tracery for circular windows,
naturally enough called wheel windows when so filled.

§ XI. Now, I wish the reader especially to observe that we have arrived
at these forms of perfect Gothic tracery without the smallest reference
to any practice of any school, or to any law of authority whatever. They
are forms having essentially nothing whatever to do either with Goths or
Greeks. They are eternal forms, based on laws of gravity and cohesion;
and no better, nor any others so good, will ever be invented, so long as
the present laws of gravity and cohesion subsist.

§ XII. It does not at all follow that this group of forms owes its
origin to any such course of reasoning as that which has now led us to
it. On the contrary, there is not the smallest doubt that tracery began,
partly, in the grouping of windows together (subsequently enclosed
within a large arch[59]), and partly in the fantastic penetrations of a
single slab of stones under the arch, as the circle in Plate V. above.
The perfect form seems to have been accidentally struck in passing from
experiment on the one side, to affectation on the other; and it was so
far from ever becoming systematised, that I am aware of no type of
tracery for which a _less_ decided preference is shown in the buildings
in which it exists. The early pierced traceries are multitudinous and
perfect in their kind,--the late Flamboyant, luxuriant in detail, and
lavish in quantity,--but the perfect forms exist in comparatively few
churches, generally in portions of the church only, and are always
connected, and that closely, either with the massy forms out of which
they have emerged, or with the enervated types into which they are
instantly to degenerate.

§ XIII. Nor indeed are we to look upon them as in all points superior to
the more ancient examples. We have above conducted our reasoning
entirely on the supposition that a single aperture is given, which it is
the object to fill with glass, diminishing the power of the light as
little as possible. But there are many cases, as in triforium and
cloister lights, in which glazing is not required; in which, therefore,
the bars, if there be any, must have some more important function than
that of merely holding glass, and in which their actual use is to give
steadiness and _tone_, as it were, to the arches and walls above and
beside them; or to give the idea of protection to those who pass along
the triforium, and of seclusion to those who walk in the cloister. Much
thicker shafts, and more massy arches, may be properly employed in work
of this kind; and many groups of such tracery will be found resolvable
into true colonnades, with the arches in pairs, or in triple or
quadruple groups, and with small rosettes pierced above them for light.
All this is just as _right_ in its place, as the glass tracery is in its
own function, and often much more grand. But the same indulgence is not
to be shown to the affectations which succeeded the developed forms. Of
these there are three principal conditions: the Flamboyant of France,
the Stump tracery of Germany, and the Perpendicular of England.

§ XIV. Of these the first arose, by the most delicate and natural
transitions, out of the perfect school. It was an endeavor to introduce
more grace into its lines, and more change into its combinations; and
the æsthetic results are so beautiful, that for some time after the
right road had been left, the aberration was more to be admired than
regretted. The final conditions became fantastic and effeminate, but, in
the country where they had been invented, never lost their peculiar
grace until they were replaced by the Renaissance. The copies of the
school in England and Italy have all its faults and none of its
beauties; in France, whatever it lost in method or in majesty, it gained
in fantasy: literally Flamboyant, it breathed away its strength into
the air; but there is not more difference between the commonest doggrel
that ever broke prose into unintelligibility, and the burning mystery of
Coleridge, or spirituality of Elizabeth Barrett, than there is between
the dissolute dulness of English Flamboyant, and the flaming undulations
of the wreathed lines of delicate stone, that confuse themselves with
the clouds of every morning sky that brightens above the valley of the
Seine.

§ XV. The second group of traceries, the intersectional or German group,
may be considered as including the entire range of the absurd forms
which were invented in order to display dexterity in stone-cutting and
ingenuity in construction. They express the peculiar character of the
German mind, which cuts the frame of every truth joint from joint, in
order to prove the edge of its instruments; and, in all cases, prefers a
new or a strange thought to a good one, and a subtle thought to a useful
one. The point and value of the German tracery consists principally in
turning the features of good traceries upside down, and cutting them in
two where they are properly continuous. To destroy at once foundation
and membership, and suspend everything in the air, keeping out of sight,
as far as possible, the evidences of a beginning and the probabilities
of an end, are the main objects of German architecture, as of modern
German divinity.

§ XVI. This school has, however, at least the merit of ingenuity. Not so
the English Perpendicular, though a very curious school also in _its_
way. In the course of the reasoning which led us to the determination of
the perfect Gothic tracery, we were induced successively to reject
certain methods of arrangement as weak, dangerous, or disagreeable.
Collect all these together, and practise them at once, and you have the
English Perpendicular.

[Illustration: Fig. XLVI.]

As thus. You find, in the first place (§ V.), that your tracery bars are
to be subordinated, less to greater; so you take a group of, suppose,
eight, which you make all exactly equal, giving you nine equal spaces in
the window, as at A, Fig. XLVI. You found, in the second place (§ VII.),
that there was no occasion for more than two cross bars; so you take at
least four or five (also represented at A, Fig. XLVI.), also carefully
equalised, and set at equal spaces. You found, in the third place (§
VIII.), that these bars were to be strengthened, in order to support the
main piers; you will therefore cut the ends off the uppermost, and the
fourth into three pieces (as also at A). In the fourth place, you found
(§ IX.) that you were never to run a vertical bar into the arch head; so
you run them all into it (as at B, Fig. XLVI.); and this last
arrangement will be useful in two ways, for it will not only expose both
the bars and the archivolt to an apparent probability of every species
of dislocation at any moment, but it will provide you with two pleasing
interstices at the flanks, in the shape of carving-knives, _a_, _b_,
which, by throwing across the curves _c_, _d_, you may easily multiply
into four; and these, as you can put nothing into their sharp tops, will
afford you a more than usually rational excuse for a little bit of
Germanism, in filling them with arches upside down, _e_, _f_. You will
now have left at your disposal two and forty similar interstices, which,
for the sake of variety, you will proceed to fill with two and forty
similar arches: and, as you were told that the moment a bar received an
arch heading, it was to be treated as a shaft and capitalled, you will
take care to give your bars no capitals nor bases, but to run bars,
foliations and all, well into each other after the fashion of cast-iron,
as at C. You have still two triangular spaces occurring in an important
part of your window, _g g_, which, as they are very conspicuous, and you
cannot make them uglier than they are, you will do wisely to let
alone;--and you will now have the west window of the cathedral of
Winchester, a very perfect example of English Perpendicular. Nor do I
think that you can, on the whole, better the arrangement, unless,
perhaps, by adding buttresses to some of the bars, as is done in the
cathedral at Gloucester; these buttresses having the double advantage of
darkening the window when seen from within, and suggesting, when it is
seen from without, the idea of its being divided by two stout party
walls, with a heavy thrust against the glass.

§ XVII. Thus far we have considered the plan of the tracery only: we
have lastly to note the conditions under which the glass is to be
attached to the bars; and the sections of the bars themselves.

[Illustration: Fig. XLVII.]

These bars we have seen, in the perfect form, are to become shafts; but,
supposing the object to be the admission of as much light as possible,
it is clear that the thickness of the bar ought to be chiefly in the
depth of the window, and that by increasing the depth of the bar we may
diminish its breadth: clearly, therefore, we should employ the double
group of shafts, _b_, of Fig. XIV., setting it edgeways in the window:
but as the glass would then come between the two shafts, we must add a
member into which it is to be fitted, as at _a_, Fig. XLVII., and
uniting these three members together in the simplest way, with a curved
instead of a sharp recess behind the shafts, we have the section _b_,
the perfect, but simplest type of the main tracery bars in good Gothic.
In triforium and cloister tracery, which has no glass to hold, the
central member is omitted, and we have either the pure double shaft,
always the most graceful, or a single and more massy shaft, which is the
simpler and more usual form.

§ XVIII. Finally: there is an intermediate arrangement between the
glazed and the open tracery, that of the domestic traceries of Venice.
Peculiar conditions, hereafter to be described, require the shafts of
these traceries to become the main vertical supports of the floors and
walls. Their thickness is therefore enormous; and yet free egress is
required between them (into balconies) which is obtained by doors in
their lattice glazing. To prevent the inconvenience and ugliness of
driving the hinges and fastenings of them into the shafts, and having
the play of the doors in the intervals, the entire glazing is thrown
behind the pillars, and attached to their abaci and bases with iron. It
is thus securely sustained by their massy bulk, and leaves their
symmetry and shade undisturbed.

§ XIX. The depth at which the glass should be placed, in windows without
traceries, will generally be fixed by the forms of their bevelling, the
glass occupying the narrowest interval; but when its position is not
thus fixed, as in many London houses, it is to be remembered that the
deeper the glass is set (the wall being of given thickness), the more
light will enter, and the clearer the prospect will be to a person
sitting quietly in the centre of the room; on the contrary, the farther
out the glass is set, the more convenient the window will be for a
person rising and looking out of it. The one, therefore, is an
arrangement for the idle and curious, who care only about what is going
on upon the earth: the other for those who are willing to remain at
rest, so that they have free admission of the light of Heaven. This
might be noted as a curious expressional reason for the necessity (of
which no man of ordinary feeling would doubt for a moment) of a deep
recess in the window, on the outside, to all good or architectural
effect: still, as there is no reason why people should be made idle by
having it in their power to look out of window, and as the slight
increase of light or clearness of view in the centre of a room is more
than balanced by the loss of space, and the greater chill of the nearer
glass and outside air, we can, I fear, allege no other structural reason
for the picturesque external recess, than the expediency of a certain
degree of protection, for the glass, from the brightest glare of
sunshine, and heaviest rush of rain.


FOOTNOTES:

  [58] "Seven Lamps," p. 53.

  [59] On the north side of the nave of the cathedral of Lyons, there
    is an early French window, presenting one of the usual groups of
    foliated arches and circles, left, as it were, loose, without any
    enclosing curve. The effect is very painful. This remarkable window
    is associated with others of the common form.




CHAPTER XVIII.

  PROTECTION OF APERTURE.


§ I. We have hitherto considered the aperture as merely pierced in the
thickness of the walls; and when its masonry is simple and the fillings
of the aperture are unimportant, it may well remain so. But when the
fillings are delicate and of value, as in the case of colored glass,
finely wrought tracery, or sculpture, such as we shall often find
occupying the tympanum of doorways, some protection becomes necessary
against the run of the rain down the walls, and back by the bevel of the
aperture to the joints or surface of the fillings.

§ II. The first and simplest mode of obtaining this is by channelling
the jambs and arch head; and this is the chief practical service of
aperture mouldings, which are otherwise entirely decorative. But as this
very decorative character renders them unfit to be made channels for
rain water, it is well to add some external roofing to the aperture,
which may protect it from the run of all the rain, except that which
necessarily beats into its own area. This protection, in its most usual
form, is a mere dripstone moulding carried over or round the head of the
aperture. But this is, in reality, only a contracted form of a true
_roof_, projecting from the wall over the aperture; and all protections
of apertures whatsoever are to be conceived as portions of small roofs,
attached to the wall behind; and supported by it, so long as their scale
admits of their being so with safety, and afterwards in such manner as
may be most expedient. The proper forms of these, and modes of their
support, are to be the subject of our final enquiry.

[Illustration: Fig. XLVIII.]

§ III. Respecting their proper form we need not stay long in doubt. A
deep gable is evidently the best for throwing off rain; even a low gable
being better than a high arch. Flat roofs, therefore, may only be used
when the nature of the building renders the gable unsightly; as when
there is not room for it between the stories; or when the object is
rather shade than protection from rain, as often in verandahs and
balconies. But for general service the gable is the proper and natural
form, and may be taken as representative of the rest. Then this gable
may either project unsupported from the wall, _a_, Fig. XLVIII., or be
carried by brackets or spurs, _b_, or by walls or shafts, _c_, which
shafts or walls may themselves be, in windows, carried on a sill; and
this, in its turn, supported by brackets or spurs. We shall glance at
the applications of each of these forms in order.

§ IV. There is not much variety in the case of the first, _a_, Fig.
XLVIII. In the Cumberland and border cottages the door is generally
protected by two pieces of slate arranged in a gable, giving the purest
possible type of the first form. In elaborate architecture such a
projection hardly ever occurs, and in large architecture cannot with
safety occur, without brackets; but by cutting away the greater part of
the projection, we shall arrive at the idea of a plain gabled cornice,
of which a perfect example will be found in Plate VII. of the folio
series. With this first complete form we may associate the rude, single,
projecting, penthouse roof; imperfect, because either it must be level
and the water lodge lazily upon it, or throw off the drip upon the
persons entering.

§ V. 2. _b_, Fig. XLVIII. This is a most beautiful and natural type, and
is found in all good architecture, from the highest to the most humble:
it is a frequent form of cottage door, more especially when carried on
spurs, being of peculiarly easy construction in wood: as applied to
large architecture, it can evidently be built, in its boldest and
simplest form, either of wood only, or on a scale which will admit of
its sides being each a single slab of stone. If so large as to require
jointed masonry, the gabled sides will evidently require support, and an
arch must be thrown across under them, as in Fig. XLIX., from Fiesole.

[Illustration: Fig. XLIX.]

If we cut the projection gradually down, we arrive at the common Gothic
gable dripstone carried on small brackets, carved into bosses, heads, or
some other ornamental form; the sub-arch in such case being useless, is
removed or coincides with the arch head of the aperture.

§ VI. 3. _c_, Fig. XLVIII. Substituting walls or pillars for the
brackets, we may carry the projection as far out as we choose, and form
the perfect porch, either of the cottage or village church, or of the
cathedral. As we enlarge the structure, however, certain modifications
of form become necessary, owing to the increased boldness of the
required supporting arch. For, as the lower end of the gabled roof and
of the arch cannot coincide, we have necessarily above the shafts one of
the two forms _a_ or _b_, in Fig. L., of which the latter is clearly the
best, requiring less masonry and shorter roofing; and when the arch
becomes so large as to cause a heavy lateral thrust, it may become
necessary to provide for its farther safety by pinnacles, _c_.

This last is the perfect type of aperture protection. None other can
ever be invented so good. It is that once employed by Giotto in the
cathedral of Florence, and torn down by the proveditore, Benedetto
Uguccione, to erect a Renaissance front instead; and another such has
been destroyed, not long since, in Venice, the porch of the church of
St. Apollinare, also to put up some Renaissance upholstery: for
Renaissance, as if it were not nuisance enough in the mere fact of its
own existence, appears invariably as a beast of prey, and founds itself
on the ruin of all that is best and noblest. Many such porches, however,
happily still exist in Italy, and are among its principal glories.

[Illustration: Fig. L.]

§ VII. When porches of this kind, carried by walls, are placed close
together, as in cases where there are many and large entrances to a
cathedral front, they would, in their general form, leave deep and
uncomfortable intervals, in which damp would lodge and grass grow; and
there would be a painful feeling in approaching the door in the midst of
a crowd, as if some of them might miss the real doors, and be driven
into the intervals, and embayed there. Clearly it will be a natural and
right expedient, in such cases, to open the walls of the porch wider, so
that they may correspond in slope, or nearly so, with the bevel of the
doorway, and either meet each other in the intervals, or have the said
intervals closed up with an intermediate wall, so that nobody may get
embayed in them. The porches will thus be united, and form one range of
great open gulphs or caverns, ready to receive all comers, and direct
the current of the crowd into the narrower entrances. As the lateral
thrust of the arches is now met by each other, the pinnacles, if there
were any, must be removed, and waterspouts placed between each arch to
discharge the double drainage of the gables. This is the form of all the
noble northern porches, without exception, best represented by that of
Rheims.

§ VIII. Contracted conditions of the pinnacle porch are beautifully used
in the doors of the cathedral of Florence; and the entire arrangement,
in its most perfect form, as adapted to window protection and
decoration, is applied by Giotto with inconceivable exquisiteness in the
windows of the campanile; those of the cathedral itself being all of the
same type. Various singular and delightful conditions of it are applied
in Italian domestic architecture (in the Broletto of Monza very
quaintly), being associated with balconies for speaking to the people,
and passing into pulpits. In the north we glaze the sides of such
projections, and they become bow-windows, the shape of roofing being
then nearly immaterial and very fantastic, often a conical cap. All
these conditions of window protection, being for real service, are
endlessly delightful (and I believe the beauty of the balcony, protected
by an open canopy supported by light shafts, never yet to have been
properly worked out). But the Renaissance architects destroyed all of
them, and introduced the magnificent and witty Roman invention of a
model of a Greek pediment, with its cornices of monstrous thickness,
bracketed up above the window. The horizontal cornice of the pediment is
thus useless, and of course, therefore, retained; the protection to the
head of the window being constructed on the principle of a hat with its
crown sewn up. But the deep and dark triangular cavity thus obtained
affords farther opportunity for putting ornament out of sight, of which
the Renaissance architects are not slow to avail themselves.

A more rational condition is the complete pediment with a couple of
shafts, or pilasters, carried on a bracketed sill; and the windows of
this kind, which have been well designed, are perhaps the best things
which the Renaissance schools have produced: those of Whitehall are, in
their way, exceedingly beautiful; and those of the Palazzo Ricardi at
Florence, in their simplicity and sublimity, are scarcely unworthy of
their reputed designer, Michael Angelo.




CHAPTER XIX.

  SUPERIMPOSITION.


§ I. The reader has now some knowledge of every feature of all possible
architecture. Whatever the nature of the building which may be submitted
to his criticism, if it be an edifice at all, if it be anything else
than a mere heap of stones like a pyramid or breakwater, or than a large
stone hewn into shape, like an obelisk, it will be instantly and easily
resolvable into some of the parts which we have been hitherto
considering: its pinnacles will separate themselves into their small
shafts and roofs; its supporting members into shafts and arches, or
walls penetrated by apertures of various shape, and supported by various
kinds of buttresses. Respecting each of these several features I am
certain that the reader feels himself prepared, by understanding their
plain function, to form something like a reasonable and definite
judgment, whether they be good or bad; and this right judgment of parts
will, in most cases, lead him to just reverence or condemnation of the
whole.

§ II. The various modes in which these parts are capable of combination,
and the merits of buildings of different form and expression, are
evidently not reducible into lists, nor to be estimated by general laws.
The nobility of each building depends on its special fitness for its own
purposes; and these purposes vary with every climate, every soil, and
every national custom: nay, there were never, probably, two edifices
erected in which some accidental difference of condition did not require
some difference of plan or of structure; so that, respecting plan and
distribution of parts, I do not hope to collect any universal law of
right; but there are a few points necessary to be noticed respecting the
means by which height is attained in buildings of various plans, and
the expediency and methods of superimposition of one story or tier of
architecture above another.

§ III. For, in the preceding inquiry, I have always supposed either that
a single shaft would reach to the top of the building, or that the
farther height required might be added in plain wall above the heads of
the arches; whereas it may often be rather expedient to complete the
entire lower series of arches, or finish the lower wall, with a bold
string course or cornice, and build another series of shafts, or another
wall, on the top of it.

§ IV. This superimposition is seen in its simplest form in the interior
shafts of a Greek temple; and it has been largely used in nearly all
countries where buildings have been meant for real service. Outcry has
often been raised against it, but the thing is so sternly necessary that
it has always forced itself into acceptance; and it would, therefore, be
merely losing time to refute the arguments of those who have attempted
its disparagement. Thus far, however, they have reason on their side,
that if a building can be kept in one grand mass, without sacrificing
either its visible or real adaptation to its objects, it is not well to
divide it into stories until it has reached proportions too large to be
justly measured by the eye. It ought then to be divided in order to mark
its bulk; and decorative divisions are often possible, which rather
increase than destroy the expression of general unity.

§ V. Superimposition, wisely practised, is of two kinds, directly
contrary to each other, of weight on lightness, and of lightness on
weight; while the superimposition of weight on weight, or lightness on
lightness, is nearly always wrong.

1. Weight on lightness: I do not say weight on _weakness_. The
superimposition of the human body on its limbs I call weight on
lightness: the superimposition of the branches on a tree trunk I call
lightness on weight: in both cases the support is fully adequate to the
work, the form of support being regulated by the differences of
requirement. Nothing in architecture is half so painful as the apparent
want of sufficient support when the weight above is visibly passive:
for all buildings are not passive; some seem to rise by their own
strength, or float by their own buoyancy; a dome requires no visibility
of support, one fancies it supported by the air. But passive
architecture without help for its passiveness is unendurable. In a
lately built house, No. 86, in Oxford Street, three huge stone pillars
in the second story are carried apparently by the edges of three sheets
of plate glass in the first. I hardly know anything to match the
painfulness of this and some other of our shop structures, in which the
iron-work is concealed; nor, even when it is apparent, can the eye ever
feel satisfied of their security, when built, as at present, with fifty
or sixty feet of wall above a rod of iron not the width of this page.

§ VI. The proper forms of this superimposition of weight on lightness
have arisen, for the most part, from the necessity or desirableness, in
many situations, of elevating the inhabited portions of buildings
considerably above the ground level, especially those exposed to damp or
inundation, and the consequent abandonment of the ground story as
unserviceable, or else the surrender of it to public purposes. Thus, in
many market and town houses, the ground story is left open as a general
place of sheltered resort, and the enclosed apartments raised on
pillars. In almost all warm countries the luxury, almost the necessity,
of arcades to protect the passengers from the sun, and the desirableness
of large space in the rooms above, lead to the same construction.
Throughout the Venetian islet group, the houses seem to have been thus,
in the first instance, universally built, all the older palaces
appearing to have had the rez de chaussée perfectly open, the upper
parts of the palace being sustained on magnificent arches, and the
smaller houses sustained in the same manner on wooden piers, still
retained in many of the cortiles, and exhibited characteristically
throughout the main street of Murano. As ground became more valuable and
house-room more scarce, these ground-floors were enclosed with wall
veils between the original shafts, and so remain; but the type of the
structure of the entire city is given in the Ducal Palace.

§ VII. To this kind of superimposition we owe the most picturesque
street effects throughout the world, and the most graceful, as well as
the most grotesque, buildings, from the many-shafted fantasy of the
Alhambra (a building as beautiful in disposition as it is base in
ornamentation) to the four-legged stolidity of the Swiss Chalet:[60] nor
these only, but great part of the effect of our cathedrals, in which,
necessarily, the close triforium and clerestory walls are superimposed
on the nave piers; perhaps with most majesty where with greatest
simplicity, as in the old basilican types, and the noble cathedral of
Pisa.

§ VIII. In order to the delightfulness and security of all such
arrangements, this law must be observed:--that in proportion to the
height of wall above them, the shafts are to be short. You may take your
given height of wall, and turn any quantity of that wall into shaft that
you like; but you must not turn it all into tall shafts, and then put
more wall above. Thus, having a house five stories high, you may turn
the lower story into shafts, and leave the four stories in wall; or the
two lower stories into shafts, and leave three in wall; but, whatever
you add to the shaft, you must take from the wall. Then also, of course,
the shorter the shaft the thicker will be its _proportionate_, if not
its actual, diameter. In the Ducal Palace of Venice the shortest shafts
are always the thickest.[61]

§ IX. The second kind of superimposition, lightness on weight, is, in
its most necessary use, of stories of houses one upon another, where, of
course, wall veil is required in the lower ones, and has to support wall
veil above, aided by as much of shaft structure as is attainable within
the given limits. The greatest, if not the only, merit of the Roman and
Renaissance Venetian architects is their graceful management of this
kind of superimposition; sometimes of complete courses of external
arches and shafts one above the other; sometimes of apertures with
intermediate cornices at the levels of the floors, and large shafts from
top to bottom of the building; always observing that the upper stories
shall be at once lighter and richer than the lower ones. The entire
value of such buildings depends upon the perfect and easy expression of
the relative strength of the stories, and the unity obtained by the
varieties of their proportions, while yet the fact of superimposition
and separation by floors is frankly told.

§ X. In churches and other buildings in which there is no separation by
floors, another kind of pure shaft superimposition is often used, in
order to enable the builder to avail himself of short and slender
shafts. It has been noted that these are often easily attainable, and of
precious materials, when shafts large enough and strong enough to do the
work at once, could not be obtained except at unjustifiable expense, and
of coarse stone. The architect has then no choice but to arrange his
work in successive stories; either frankly completing the arch work and
cornice of each, and beginning a new story above it, which is the
honester and nobler way, or else tying the stories together by
supplementary shafts from floor to roof,--the general practice of the
Northern Gothic, and one which, unless most gracefully managed, gives
the look of a scaffolding, with cross-poles tied to its uprights, to the
whole clerestory wall. The best method is that which avoids all chance
of the upright shafts being supposed continuous, by increasing their
number and changing their places in the upper stories, so that the whole
work branches from the ground like a tree. This is the superimposition
of the Byzantine and the Pisan Romanesque; the most beautiful examples
of it being, I think, the Southern portico of St. Mark's, the church of
S. Giovanni at Pistoja, and the apse of the cathedral of Pisa. In
Renaissance work the two principles are equally distinct, though the
shafts are (I think) always one above the other. The reader may see one
of the best examples of the separately superimposed story in Whitehall
(and another far inferior in St. Paul's), and by turning himself round
at Whitehall may compare with it the system of connecting shafts in the
Treasury; though this is a singularly bad example, the window cornices
of the first floor being like shelves in a cupboard, and cutting the
mass of the building in two, in spite of the pillars.

§ XI. But this superimposition of lightness on weight is still more
distinctly the system of many buildings of the kind which I have above
called Architecture of Position, that is to say, architecture of which
the greater part is intended merely to keep something in a peculiar
position; as in light-houses, and many towers and belfries. The subject
of spire and tower architecture, however, is so interesting and
extensive, that I have thoughts of writing a detached essay upon it,
and, at all events, cannot enter upon it here: but this much is enough
for the reader to note for our present purpose, that, although many
towers do in reality stand on piers or shafts, as the central towers of
cathedrals, yet the expression of all of them, and the real structure of
the best and strongest, are the elevation of gradually diminishing
weight on massy or even solid foundation. Nevertheless, since the tower
is in its origin a building for strength of defence, and faithfulness of
watch, rather than splendor of aspect, its true expression is of just so
much diminution of weight upwards as may be necessary to its fully
balanced strength, not a jot more. There must be no light-headedness in
your noble tower: impregnable foundation, wrathful crest, with the vizor
down, and the dark vigilance seen through the clefts of it; not the
filigree crown or embroidered cap. No towers are so grand as the
square-browed ones, with massy cornices and rent battlements: next to
these come the fantastic towers, with their various forms of steep roof;
the best, not the cone, but the plain gable thrown very high; last of
all in my mind (of good towers), those with spires or crowns, though
these, of course, are fittest for ecclesiastical purposes, and capable
of the richest ornament. The paltry four or eight pinnacled things we
call towers in England (as in York Minster), are mere confectioner's
Gothic, and not worth classing.

§ XII. But, in all of them, this I believe to be a point of chief
necessity,--that they shall seem to stand, and shall verily stand, in
their own strength; not by help of buttresses nor artful balancings on
this side and on that. Your noble tower must need no help, must be
sustained by no crutches, must give place to no suspicion of
decrepitude. Its office may be to withstand war, look forth for tidings,
or to point to heaven: but it must have in its own walls the strength to
do this; it is to be itself a bulwark, not to be sustained by other
bulwarks; to rise and look forth, "the tower of Lebanon that looketh
toward Damascus," like a stern sentinel, not like a child held up in its
nurse's arms. A tower may, indeed, have a kind of buttress, a
projection, or subordinate tower at each of its angles; but these are to
its main body like the satellites to a shaft, joined with its strength,
and associated in its uprightness, part of the tower itself: exactly in
the proportion in which they lose their massive unity with its body and
assume the form of true buttress walls set on its angles, the tower
loses its dignity.

§ XIII. These two characters, then, are common to all noble towers,
however otherwise different in purpose or feature,--the first, that they
rise from massy foundation to lighter summits, frowning with battlements
perhaps, but yet evidently more pierced and thinner in wall than
beneath, and, in most ecclesiastical examples, divided into rich open
work: the second, that whatever the form of the tower, it shall not
appear to stand by help of buttresses. It follows from the first
condition, as indeed it would have followed from ordinary æsthetic
requirements, that we shall have continual variation in the arrangements
of the stories, and the larger number of apertures towards the top,--a
condition exquisitely carried out in the old Lombardic towers, in which,
however small they may be, the number of apertures is always regularly
increased towards the summit; generally one window in the lowest
stories, two in the second, then three, five, and six; often, also,
one, two, four, and six, with beautiful symmetries of placing, not at
present to our purpose. We may sufficiently exemplify the general laws
of tower building by placing side by side, drawn to the same scale, a
mediæval tower, in which most of them are simply and unaffectedly
observed, and one of our own modern towers, in which every one of them
is violated, in small space, convenient for comparison. (Plate VI.)

[Illustration: Plate VI.
               TYPES OF TOWERS.
               BRITISH VENETIAN.]

§ XIV. The old tower is that of St. Mark's at Venice, not a very perfect
example, for its top is Renaissance, but as good Renaissance as there is
in Venice; and it is fit for our present purpose, because it owes none
of its effect to ornament. It is built as simply as it well can be to
answer its purpose: no buttresses; no external features whatever, except
some huts at the base, and the loggia, afterwards built, which, on
purpose, I have not drawn; one bold square mass of brickwork; double
walls, with an ascending inclined plane between them, with apertures as
small as possible, and these only in necessary places, giving just the
light required for ascending the stair or slope, not a ray more; and the
weight of the whole relieved only by the double pilasters on the sides,
sustaining small arches at the top of the mass, each decorated with the
scallop or cockle shell, presently to be noticed as frequent in
Renaissance ornament, and here, for once, thoroughly well applied. Then,
when the necessary height is reached, the belfry is left open, as in the
ordinary Romanesque campanile, only the shafts more slender, but severe
and simple, and the whole crowned by as much spire as the tower would
carry, to render it more serviceable as a landmark. The arrangement is
repeated in numberless campaniles throughout Italy.

§ XV. The one beside it is one of those of the lately built college at
Edinburgh. I have not taken it as worse than many others (just as I have
not taken the St. Mark's tower as better than many others); but it
happens to compress our British system of tower building into small
space. The Venetian tower rises 350 feet,[62] and has no buttresses,
though built of brick; the British tower rises 121 feet, and is built
of stone, but is supposed to be incapable of standing without two huge
buttresses on each angle. The St. Mark's tower has a high sloping roof,
but carries it simply, requiring no pinnacles at its angles; the British
tower has no visible roof, but has four pinnacles for mere ornament. The
Venetian tower has its lightest part at the top, and is massy at the
base; the British tower has its lightest part at the base, and shuts up
its windows into a mere arrowslit at the top. What the tower was built
for at all must therefore, it seems to me, remain a mystery to every
beholder; for surely no studious inhabitant of its upper chambers will
be conceived to be pursuing his employments by the light of the single
chink on each side; and, had it been intended for a belfry, the sound of
its bells would have been as effectually prevented from getting out as
the light from getting in.

§ XVI. In connexion with the subject of towers and of superimposition,
one other feature, not conveniently to be omitted from our
house-building, requires a moment's notice,--the staircase.

In modern houses it can hardly be considered an architectural feature,
and is nearly always an ugly one, from its being apparently without
support. And here I may not unfitly note the important distinction,
which perhaps ought to have been dwelt upon in some places before now,
between the _marvellous_ and the _perilous_ in apparent construction.
There are many edifices which are awful or admirable in their height,
and lightness, and boldness of form, respecting which, nevertheless, we
have no fear that they should fall. Many a mighty dome and aërial aisle
and arch may seem to stand, as I said, by miracle, but by steadfast
miracle notwithstanding; there is no fear that the miracle should cease.
We have a sense of inherent power in them, or, at all events, of
concealed and mysterious provision for their safety. But in leaning
towers, as of Pisa or Bologna, and in much minor architecture, passive
architecture, of modern times, we feel that there is but a chance
between the building and destruction; that there is no miraculous life
in it, which animates it into security, but an obstinate, perhaps vain,
resistance to immediate danger. The appearance of this is often as
strong in small things as in large; in the sounding-boards of pulpits,
for instance, when sustained by a single pillar behind them, so that one
is in dread, during the whole sermon, of the preacher being crushed if a
single nail should give way; and again, the modern geometrical
unsupported staircase. There is great disadvantage, also, in the
arrangement of this latter, when room is of value; and excessive
ungracefulness in its awkward divisions of the passage walls, or
windows. In mediæval architecture, where there was need of room, the
staircase was spiral, and enclosed generally in an exterior tower, which
added infinitely to the picturesque effect of the building; nor was the
stair itself steeper nor less commodious than the ordinary compressed
straight staircase of a modern dwelling-house. Many of the richest
towers of domestic architecture owe their origin to this arrangement. In
Italy the staircase is often in the open air, surrounding the interior
court of the house, and giving access to its various galleries or
loggias: in this case it is almost always supported by bold shafts and
arches, and forms a most interesting additional feature of the cortile,
but presents no peculiarity of construction requiring our present
examination.

We may here, therefore, close our inquiries into the subject of
construction; nor must the reader be dissatisfied with the simplicity or
apparent barrenness of their present results. He will find, when he
begins to apply them, that they are of more value than they now seem;
but I have studiously avoided letting myself be drawn into any intricate
question, because I wished to ask from the reader only so much attention
as it seemed that even the most indifferent would not be unwilling to
pay to a subject which is hourly becoming of greater practical interest.
Evidently it would have been altogether beside the purpose of this essay
to have entered deeply into the abstract science, or closely into the
mechanical detail, of construction: both have been illustrated by
writers far more capable of doing so than I, and may be studied at the
reader's discretion; all that has been here endeavored was the leading
him to appeal to something like definite principle, and refer to the
easily intelligible laws of convenience and necessity, whenever he found
his judgment likely to be overborne by authority on the one hand, or
dazzled by novelty on the other. If he has time to do more, and to
follow out in all their brilliancy the mechanical inventions of the
great engineers and architects of the day, I, in some sort, envy him,
but must part company with him: for my way lies not along the viaduct,
but down the quiet valley which its arches cross, nor through the
tunnel, but up the hill-side which its cavern darkens, to see what gifts
Nature will give us, and with what imagery she will fill our thoughts,
that the stones we have ranged in rude order may now be touched with
life; nor lose for ever, in their hewn nakedness, the voices they had of
old, when the valley streamlet eddied round them in palpitating light,
and the winds of the hill-side shook over them the shadows of the fern.


FOOTNOTES:

  [60] I have spent much of my life among the Alps; but I never pass,
    without some feeling of new surprise, the Chalet, standing on its
    four pegs (each topped with a flat stone), balanced in the fury of
    Alpine winds. It is not, perhaps, generally known that the chief use
    of the arrangement is not so much to raise the building above the
    snow, as to get a draught of wind beneath it, which may prevent the
    drift from rising against its sides.

  [61] Appendix 20, "Shafts of the Ducal Palace."

  [62] I have taken Professor Willis's estimate; there being discrepancy
    among various statements. I did not take the trouble to measure the
    height myself, the building being one which does not come within the
    range of our future inquiries; and its exact dimensions, even here,
    are of no importance as respects the question at issue.




CHAPTER XX.

  THE MATERIAL OF ORNAMENT.


§ I. We enter now on the second division of our subject. We have no more
to do with heavy stones and hard lines; we are going to be happy: to
look round in the world and discover (in a serious manner always,
however, and under a sense of responsibility) what we like best in it,
and to enjoy the same at our leisure: to gather it, examine it, fasten
all we can of it into imperishable forms, and put it where we may see it
for ever.

This is to decorate architecture.

§ II. There are, therefore, three steps in the process: first, to find
out in a grave manner what we like best; secondly, to put as much of
this as we can (which is little enough) into form; thirdly, to put this
formed abstraction into a proper place.

And we have now, therefore, to make these three inquiries in succession:
first, what we like, or what is the right material of ornament; then how
we are to present it, or its right treatment; then, where we are to put
it, or its right place. I think I can answer that first inquiry in this
Chapter, the second inquiry in the next Chapter, and the third I shall
answer in a more diffusive manner, by taking up in succession the
several parts of architecture above distinguished, and rapidly noting
the kind of ornament fittest for each.

§ III. I said in chapter II. § XIV., that all noble ornamentation was
the expression of man's delight in God's work. This implied that there
was an _ig_noble ornamentation, which was the expression of man's
delight in his _own_. There is such a school, chiefly degraded classic
and Renaissance, in which the ornament is composed of imitations of
tilings made by man. I think, before inquiring what we like best of
God's work, we had better get rid of all this imitation of man's, and be
quite sure we do not like _that_.

§ IV. We shall rapidly glance, then, at the material of decoration hence
derived. And now I cannot, as I before have done respecting
construction, _convince_ the reader of one thing being wrong, and
another right. I have confessed as much again and again; I am now only
to make appeal to him, and cross-question him, whether he really does
like things or not. If he likes the ornament on the base of the column
of the Place Vendôme, composed of Wellington boots and laced frock
coats, I cannot help it; I can only say I differ from him, and don't
like it. And if, therefore, I speak dictatorially, and say this is base,
or degraded, or ugly, I mean, only that I believe men of the longest
experience in the matter would either think it so, or would be prevented
from thinking it so only by some morbid condition of their minds; and I
believe that the reader, if he examine himself candidly, will usually
agree in my statements.

§ V. The subjects of ornament found in man's work may properly fall into
four heads: 1. Instruments of art, agriculture, and war; armor, and
dress; 2. Drapery; 3. Shipping; 4. Architecture itself.

1. Instruments, armor, and dress.

The custom of raising trophies on pillars, and of dedicating arms in
temples, appears to have first suggested the idea of employing them as
the subjects of sculptural ornament: thenceforward, this abuse has been
chiefly characteristic of classical architecture, whether true or
Renaissance. Armor is a noble thing in its proper service and
subordination to the body; so is an animal's hide on its back; but a
heap of cast skins, or of shed armor, is alike unworthy of all regard or
imitation. We owe much true sublimity, and more of delightful
picturesqueness, to the introduction of armor both in painting and
sculpture: in poetry it is better still,--Homer's undressed Achilles is
less grand than his crested and shielded Achilles, though Phidias would
rather have had him naked; in all mediæval painting, arms, like all
other parts of costume, are treated with exquisite care and delight; in
the designs of Leonardo, Raffaelle, and Perugino, the armor sometimes
becomes almost too conspicuous from the rich and endless invention
bestowed upon it; while Titian and Rubens seek in its flash what the
Milanese and Perugian sought in its form, sometimes subordinating
heroism to the light of the steel, while the great designers wearied
themselves in its elaborate fancy.

But all this labor was given to the living, not the dead armor; to the
shell with its animal in it, not the cast shell of the beach; and even
so, it was introduced more sparingly by the good sculptors than the good
painters; for the former felt, and with justice, that the painter had
the power of conquering the over prominence of costume by the expression
and color of the countenance, and that by the darkness of the eye, and
glow of the cheek, he could always conquer the gloom and the flash of
the mail; but they could hardly, by any boldness or energy of the marble
features, conquer the forwardness and conspicuousness of the sharp
armorial forms. Their armed figures were therefore almost always
subordinate, their principal figures draped or naked, and their choice
of subject was much influenced by this feeling of necessity. But the
Renaissance sculptors displayed the love of a Camilla for the mere crest
and plume. Paltry and false alike in every feeling of their narrowed
minds, they attached themselves, not only to costume without the person,
but to the pettiest details of the costume itself. They could not
describe Achilles, but they could describe his shield; a shield like
those of dedicated spoil, without a handle, never to be waved in the
face of war. And then we have helmets and lances, banners and swords,
sometimes with men to hold them, sometimes without; but always chiselled
with a tailor-like love of the chasing or the embroidery,--show helmets
of the stage, no Vulcan work on them, no heavy hammer strokes, no Etna
fire in the metal of them, nothing but pasteboard crests and high
feathers. And these, cast together in disorderly heaps, or grinning
vacantly over keystones, form one of the leading decorations of
Renaissance architecture, and that one of the best; for helmets and
lances, however loosely laid, are better than violins, and pipes, and
books of music, which were another of the Palladian and Sansovinian
sources of ornament. Supported by ancient authority, the abuse soon
became a matter of pride, and since it was easy to copy a heap of cast
clothes, but difficult to manage an arranged design of human figures,
the indolence of architects came to the aid of their affectation, until
by the moderns we find the practice carried out to its most interesting
results, and, as above noted, a large pair of boots occupying the
principal place in the bas-reliefs on the base of the Colonne Vendôme.

§ VI. A less offensive, because singularly grotesque, example of the
abuse at its height, occurs in the Hôtel des Invalides, where the dormer
windows are suits of armor down to the bottom of the corselet, crowned
by the helmet, and with the window in the middle of the breast.

Instruments of agriculture and the arts are of less frequent occurrence,
except in hieroglyphics, and other work, where they are not employed as
ornaments, but represented for the sake of accurate knowledge, or as
symbols. Wherever they have purpose of this kind, they are of course
perfectly right; but they are then part of the building's conversation,
not conducive to its beauty. The French have managed, with great
dexterity, the representation of the machinery for the elevation of
their Luxor obelisk, now sculptured on its base.

§ VII. 2. Drapery. I have already spoken of the error of introducing
drapery, as such, for ornament, in the "Seven Lamps." I may here note a
curious instance of the abuse in the church of the Jesuiti at Venice
(Renaissance). On first entering you suppose that the church, being in a
poor quarter of the city, has been somewhat meanly decorated by heavy
green and white curtains of an ordinary upholsterer's pattern: on
looking closer, they are discovered to be of marble, with the green
pattern inlaid. Another remarkable instance is in a piece of not
altogether unworthy architecture at Paris (Rue Rivoli), where the
columns are supposed to be decorated with images of handkerchiefs tied
in a stout knot round the middle of them. This shrewd invention bids
fair to become a new order. Multitudes of massy curtains and various
upholstery, more or less in imitation of that of the drawing-room, are
carved and gilt, in wood or stone, about the altars and other theatrical
portions of Romanist churches; but from these coarse and senseless
vulgarities we may well turn, in all haste, to note, with respect as
well as regret, one of the errors of the great school of Niccolo
Pisano,--an error so full of feeling as to be sometimes all but
redeemed, and altogether forgiven,--the sculpture, namely, of curtains
around the recumbent statues upon tombs, curtains which angels are
represented as withdrawing, to gaze upon the faces of those who are at
rest. For some time the idea was simply and slightly expressed, and
though there was always a painfulness in finding the shafts of stone,
which were felt to be the real supporters of the canopy, represented as
of yielding drapery, yet the beauty of the angelic figures, and the
tenderness of the thought, disarmed all animadversion. But the scholars
of the Pisani, as usual, caricatured when they were unable to invent;
and the quiet curtained canopy became a huge marble tent, with a pole in
the centre of it. Thus vulgarised, the idea itself soon disappeared, to
make room for urns, torches, and weepers, and the other modern
paraphernalia of the churchyard.

§ VIII. 3. Shipping. I have allowed this kind of subject to form a
separate head, owing to the importance of rostra in Roman decoration,
and to the continual occurrence of naval subjects in modern monumental
bas-relief. Mr. Fergusson says, somewhat doubtfully, that he perceives a
"_kind_ of beauty" in a ship: I say, without any manner of doubt, that a
ship is one of the loveliest things man ever made, and one of the
noblest; nor do I know any lines, out of divine work, so lovely as those
of the head of a ship, or even as the sweep of the timbers of a small
boat, not a race boat, a mere floating chisel, but a broad, strong, sea
boat, able to breast a wave and break it: and yet, with all this beauty,
ships cannot be made subjects of sculpture. No one pauses in particular
delight beneath the pediments of the Admiralty; nor does scenery of
shipping ever become prominent in bas-relief without destroying it:
witness the base of the Nelson pillar. It may be, and must be sometimes,
introduced in severe subordination to the figure subject, but just
enough to indicate the scene; sketched in the lightest lines on the
background; never with any attempt at realisation, never with any
equality to the force of the figures, unless the whole purpose of the
subject be picturesque. I shall explain this exception presently, in
speaking of imitative architecture.

§ IX. There is one piece of a ship's fittings, however, which may be
thought to have obtained acceptance as a constant element of
architectural ornament,--the cable: it is not, however, the cable
itself, but its abstract form, a group of twisted lines (which a cable
only exhibits in common with many natural objects), which is indeed
beautiful as an ornament. Make the resemblance complete, give to the
stone the threads and character of the cable, and you may, perhaps,
regard the sculpture with curiosity, but never more with admiration.
Consider the effect of the base of the statue of King William IV. at the
end of London Bridge.

§ X. 4. Architecture itself. The erroneous use of armor, or dress, or
instruments, or shipping, as decorative subject, is almost exclusively
confined to bad architecture--Roman or Renaissance. But the false use of
architecture itself, as an ornament of architecture, is conspicuous even
in the mediæval work of the best times, and is a grievous fault in some
of its noblest examples.

It is, therefore, of great importance to note exactly at what point this
abuse begins, and in what it consists.

§ XI. In all bas-relief, architecture may be introduced as an
explanation of the scene in which the figures act; but with more or less
prominence in the _inverse ratio of the importance of the figures_.

The metaphysical reason of this is, that where the figures are of great
value and beauty, the mind is supposed to be engaged wholly with them;
and it is an impertinence to disturb its contemplation of them by any
minor features whatever. As the figures become of less value, and are
regarded with less intensity, accessory subjects may be introduced, such
as the thoughts may have leisure for.

Thus, if the figures be as large as life, and complete statues, it is
gross vulgarity to carve a temple above them, or distribute them over
sculptured rocks, or lead them up steps into pyramids: I need hardly
instance Canova's works,[63] and the Dutch pulpit groups, with
fishermen, boats, and nets, in the midst of church naves.

If the figures be in bas-relief, though as large as life, the scene may
be explained by lightly traced outlines: this is admirably done in the
Ninevite marbles.

If the figures be in bas-relief, or even alto-relievo, but less than
life, and if their purpose is rather to enrich a space and produce
picturesque shadows, than to draw the thoughts entirely to themselves,
the scenery in which they act may become prominent. The most exquisite
examples of this treatment are the gates of Ghiberti. What would that
Madonna of the Annunciation be, without the little shrine into which she
shrinks back? But all mediæval work is full of delightful examples of
the same kind of treatment: the gates of hell and of paradise are
important pieces, both of explanation and effect, in all early
representations of the last judgment, or of the descent into Hades. The
keys of St. Peter, and the crushing flat of the devil under his own
door, when it is beaten in, would hardly be understood without the
respective gate-ways above. The best of all the later capitals of the
Ducal Palace of Venice depends for great part of its value on the
richness of a small campanile, which is pointed to proudly by a small
emperor in a turned-up hat, who, the legend informs us, is "Numa
Pompilio, imperador, edifichador di tempi e chiese."

§ XII. Shipping may be introduced, or rich fancy of vestments, crowns,
and ornaments, exactly on the same conditions as architecture; and if
the reader will look back to my definition of the picturesque in the
"Seven Lamps," he will see why I said, above, that they might only be
prominent when the purpose of the subject was partly picturesque; that
is to say, when the mind is intended to derive part of its enjoyment
from the parasitical qualities and accidents of the thing, not from the
heart of the thing itself.

And thus, while we must regret the flapping sails in the death of Nelson
in Trafalgar Square, we may yet most heartily enjoy the sculpture of a
storm in one of the bas-reliefs of the tomb of St. Pietro Martire in the
church of St. Eustorgio at Milan, where the grouping of the figures is
most fancifully complicated by the undercut cordage of the vessel.

§ XIII. In all these instances, however, observe that the permission to
represent the human work as an ornament, is conditional on its being
necessary to the representation of a scene, or explanation of an action.
On no terms whatever could any such subject be independently admissible.

Observe, therefore, the use of manufacture as ornament is--

  1. With heroic figure sculpture, not admissible at all.
  2. With picturesque figure sculpture, admissible in the degree of its
       picturesqueness.
  3. Without figure sculpture, not admissible at all.

So also in painting: Michael Angelo, in the Sistine Chapel, would not
have willingly painted a dress of figured damask or of watered satin;
his was heroic painting, not admitting accessories.

Tintoret, Titian, Veronese, Rubens, and Vandyck, would be very sorry to
part with their figured stuffs and lustrous silks; and sorry, observe,
exactly in the degree of their picturesque feeling. Should not _we_ also
be sorry to have Bishop Ambrose without his vest, in that picture of the
National Gallery?

But I think Vandyck would not have liked, on the other hand, the vest
without the bishop. I much doubt if Titian or Veronese would have
enjoyed going into Waterloo House, and making studies of dresses upon
the counter.

§ XIV. So, therefore, finally, neither architecture nor any other human
work is admissible as an ornament, except in subordination to figure
subject. And this law is grossly and painfully violated by those curious
examples of Gothic, both early and late, in the north, (but late, I
think, exclusively, in Italy,) in which the minor features of the
architecture were composed of _small models_ of the larger: examples
which led the way to a series of abuses materially affecting the life,
strength, and nobleness of the Northern Gothic,--abuses which no
Ninevite, nor Egyptian, nor Greek, nor Byzantine, nor Italian of the
earlier ages would have endured for an instant, and which strike me with
renewed surprise whenever I pass beneath a portal of thirteenth century
Northern Gothic, associated as they are with manifestations of exquisite
feeling and power in other directions. The porches of Bourges, Amiens,
Notre Dame of Paris, and Notre Dame of Dijon, may be noted as
conspicuous in error: small models of feudal towers with diminutive
windows and battlements, of cathedral spires with scaly pinnacles, mixed
with temple pediments and nondescript edifices of every kind, are
crowded together over the recess of the niche into a confused fool's cap
for the saint below. Italian Gothic is almost entirely free from the
taint of this barbarism until the Renaissance period, when it becomes
rampant in the cathedral of Como and Certosa of Pavia; and at Venice we
find the Renaissance churches decorated with models of fortifications
like those in the Repository at Woolwich, or inlaid with mock arcades in
pseudo-perspective, copied from gardeners' paintings at the ends of
conservatories.

§ XV. I conclude, then, with the reader's leave, that all ornament is
base which takes for its subject human work, that it is utterly
base,--painful to every rightly-toned mind, without perhaps immediate
sense of the reason, but for a reason palpable enough when we _do_ think
of it. For to carve our own work, and set it up for admiration, is a
miserable self-complacency, a contentment in our own wretched doings,
when we might have been looking at God's doings. And all noble ornament
is the exact reverse of this. It is the expression of man's delight in
God's work.

§ XVI. For observe, the function of ornament is to make you happy. Now
in what are you rightly happy? Not in thinking of what you have done
yourself; not in your own pride, not your own birth; not in your own
being, or your own will, but in looking at God; watching what He does,
what He is; and obeying His law, and yielding yourself to His will.

You are to be made happy by ornaments; therefore they must be the
expression of all this. Not copies of your own handiwork; not boastings
of your own grandeur; not heraldries; not king's arms, nor any
creature's arms, but God's arm, seen in His work. Not manifestation of
your delight in your own laws, or your own liberties, or your own
inventions; but in divine laws, constant, daily, common laws;--not
Composite laws, nor Doric laws, nor laws of the five orders, but of the
Ten Commandments.

§ XVII. Then the proper material of ornament will be whatever God has
created; and its proper treatment, that which seems in accordance with
or symbolical of His laws. And, for material, we shall therefore have,
first, the abstract lines which are most frequent in nature; and then,
from lower to higher, the whole range of systematised inorganic and
organic forms. We shall rapidly glance in order at their kinds; and,
however absurd the elemental division of inorganic matter by the
ancients may seem to the modern chemist, it is one so grand and simple
for arrangements of external appearances, that I shall here follow it;
noticing first, after abstract lines, the imitable forms of the four
elements, of Earth, Water, Fire, and Air, and then those of animal
organisms. It may be convenient to the reader to have the order stated
in a clear succession at first, thus:--

   1. Abstract lines.
   2. Forms of Earth (Crystals).
   3. Forms of Water (Waves).
   4. Forms of Fire (Flames and Rays).
   5. Forms of Air (Clouds).
   6. (Organic forms.) Shells.
   7. Fish.
   8. Reptiles and insects.
   9. Vegetation (A.) Stems and Trunks.
  10. Vegetation (B.) Foliage.
  11. Birds.
  12. Mammalian animals and Man.

It may be objected that clouds are a form of moisture, not of air. They
are, however, a perfect expression of aërial states and currents, and
may sufficiently well stand for the element they move in. And I have put
vegetation apparently somewhat out of its place, owing to its vast
importance as a means of decoration, and its constant association with
birds and men.

§ XVIII. 1. Abstract lines. I have not with lines named also shades and
colors, for this evident reason, that there are no such things as
abstract shadows, irrespective of the forms which exhibit them, and
distinguished in their own nature from each other; and that the
arrangement of shadows, in greater or less quantity, or in certain
harmonical successions, is an affair of treatment, not of selection. And
when we use abstract colors, we are in fact using a part of nature
herself,--using a quality of her light, correspondent with that of the
air, to carry sound; and the arrangement of color in harmonious masses
is again a matter of treatment, not selection. Yet even in this separate
art of coloring, as referred to architecture, it is very notable that
the best tints are always those of natural stones. These can hardly be
wrong; I think I never yet saw an offensive introduction of the natural
colors of marble and precious stones, unless in small mosaics, and in
one or two glaring instances of the resolute determination to produce
something ugly at any cost. On the other hand, I have most assuredly
never yet seen a painted building, ancient or modern, which seemed to me
quite right.

§ XIX. Our first constituents of ornament will therefore be abstract
lines, that is to say, the most frequent contours of natural objects,
transferred to architectural forms when it is not right or possible to
render such forms distinctly imitative. For instance, the line or curve
of the edge of a leaf may be accurately given to the edge of a stone,
without rendering the stone in the least _like_ a leaf, or suggestive of
a leaf; and this the more fully, because the lines of nature are alike
in all her works; simpler or richer in combination, but the same in
character; and when they are taken out of their combinations it is
impossible to say from which of her works they have been borrowed, their
universal property being that of ever-varying curvature in the most
subtle and subdued transitions, with peculiar expressions of motion,
elasticity, or dependence, which I have already insisted upon at some
length in the chapters on typical beauty in "Modern Painters." But, that
the reader may here be able to compare them for himself as deduced from
different sources, I have drawn, as accurately as I can, on the opposite
plate, some ten or eleven lines from natural forms of very different
substances and scale: the first, _a b_, is in the original, I think, the
most beautiful simple curve I have ever seen in my life; it is a curve
about three quarters of a mile long, formed by the surface of a small
glacier of the second order, on a spur of the Aiguille de Blaitière
(Chamouni). I have merely outlined the crags on the right of it, to show
their sympathy and united action with the curve of the glacier, which is
of course entirely dependent on their opposition to its descent;
softened, however, into unity by the snow, which rarely melts on this
high glacier surface.

The line _d c_ is some mile and a half or two miles long; it is part of
the flank of the chain of the Dent d'Oche above the lake of Geneva, one
or two of the lines of the higher and more distant ranges being given in
combination with it.

[Illustration: Plate VII.
               ABSTRACT LINES.]

_h_ is a line about four feet long, a branch of spruce fir. I have taken
this tree because it is commonly supposed to be stiff and ungraceful;
its outer sprays are, however, more noble in their sweep than almost any
that I know: but this fragment is seen at great disadvantage, because
placed upside down, in order that the reader may compare its curvatures
with _c d_, _e g_, and _i k_, which are all mountain lines; _e g_, about
five hundred feet of the southern edge of the Matterhorn; _i k_, the
entire slope of the Aiguille Bouchard, from its summit into the valley
of Chamouni, a line some three miles long; _l m_ is the line of the side
of a willow leaf traced by laying the leaf on the paper; _n o_, one of
the innumerable groups of curves at the lip of a paper Nautilus; _p_, a
spiral, traced on the paper round a Serpula; _q r_, the leaf of the
Alisma Plantago with its interior ribs, real size; _s t_, the side of a
bay-leaf; _u w_, of a salvia leaf; and it is to be carefully noted that
these last curves, being never intended by nature to be seen singly, are
more heavy and less agreeable than any of the others which would be seen
as independent lines. But all agree in their character of changeful
curvature, the mountain and glacier lines only excelling the rest in
delicacy and richness of transition.

§ XX. Why lines of this kind are beautiful, I endeavored to show in the
"Modern Painters;" but one point, there omitted, may be mentioned
here,--that almost all these lines are expressive of action of _force_
of some kind, while the circle is a line of limitation or support. In
leafage they mark the forces of its growth and expansion, but some among
the most beautiful of them are described by bodies variously in motion,
or subjected to force; as by projectiles in the air, by the particles of
water in a gentle current, by planets in motion in an orbit, by their
satellites, if the actual path of the satellite in space be considered
instead of its relation to the planet; by boats, or birds, turning in
the water or air, by clouds in various action upon the wind, by sails in
the curvatures they assume under its force, and by thousands of other
objects moving or bearing force. In the Alisma leaf, _q r_, the lines
through its body, which are of peculiar beauty, mark the different
expansions of its fibres, and are, I think, exactly the same as those
which would be traced by the currents of a river entering a lake of the
shape of the leaf, at the end where the stalk is, and passing out at its
point. Circular curves, on the contrary, are always, I think, curves of
limitation or support; that is to say, curves of perfect rest. The
cylindrical curve round the stem of a plant binds its fibres together;
while the _ascent_ of the stem is in lines of various curvature: so the
curve of the horizon and of the apparent heaven, of the rainbow, etc.:
and though the reader might imagine that the circular orbit of any
moving body, or the curve described by a sling, was a curve of motion,
he should observe that the circular character is given to the curve not
by the motion, but by the confinement: the circle is the consequence not
of the energy of the body, but of its being forbidden to leave the
centre; and whenever the whirling or circular motion can be fully
impressed on it we obtain instant balance and rest with respect to the
centre of the circle.

Hence the peculiar fitness of the circular curve as a sign of rest, and
security of support, in arches; while the other curves, belonging
especially to action, are to be used in the more active architectural
features--the hand and foot (the capital and base), and in all minor
ornaments; more freely in proportion to their independence of structural
conditions.

§ XXI. We need not, however, hope to be able to imitate, in general
work, any of the subtly combined curvatures of nature's highest
designing: on the contrary, their extreme refinement renders them unfit
for coarse service or material. Lines which are lovely in the pearly
film of the Nautilus shell, are lost in the grey roughness of stone; and
those which are sublime in the blue of far away hills, are weak in the
substance of incumbent marble. Of all the graceful lines assembled on
Plate VII., we shall do well to be content with two of the simplest. We
shall take one mountain line (_e g_) and one leaf line (_u w_), or
rather fragments of them, for we shall perhaps not want them all. I will
mark off from _u w_ the little bit _x y_, and from _e g_ the piece _e
f_; both which appear to me likely to be serviceable: and if hereafter
we need the help of any abstract lines, we will see what we can do with
these only.

§ XXII. 2. Forms of Earth (Crystals). It may be asked why I do not say
rocks or mountains? Simply, because the nobility of these depends,
first, on their scale, and, secondly, on accident. Their scale cannot be
represented, nor their accident systematised. No sculptor can in the
least imitate the peculiar character of accidental fracture: he can obey
or exhibit the laws of nature, but he cannot copy the felicity of her
fancies, nor follow the steps of her fury. The very glory of a mountain
is in the revolutions which raised it into power, and the forces which
are striking it into ruin. But we want no cold and careful imitation of
catastrophe; no calculated mockery of convulsion; no delicate
recommendation of ruin. We are to follow the labor of Nature, but not
her disturbance; to imitate what she has deliberately ordained,[64] not
what she has violently suffered, or strangely permitted. The only uses,
therefore, of rock form which are wise in the architect, are its actual
introduction (by leaving untouched such blocks as are meant for rough
service), and that noble use of the general examples of mountain
structure of which I have often heretofore spoken. Imitations of rock
form have, for the most part, been confined to periods of degraded
feeling and to architectural toys or pieces of dramatic effect,--the
Calvaries and holy sepulchres of Romanism, or the grottoes and fountains
of English gardens. They were, however, not unfrequent in mediæval
bas-reliefs; very curiously and elaborately treated by Ghiberti on the
doors of Florence, and in religious sculpture necessarily introduced
wherever the life of the anchorite was to be expressed. They were rarely
introduced as of ornamental character, but for particular service and
expression; we shall see an interesting example in the Ducal Palace at
Venice.

§ XXIII. But against crystalline form, which is the completely
systematised natural structure of the earth, none of these objections
hold good, and, accordingly, it is an endless element of decoration,
where higher conditions of structure cannot be represented. The
four-sided pyramid, perhaps the most frequent of all natural crystals,
is called in architecture a dogtooth; its use is quite limitless, and
always beautiful: the cube and rhomb are almost equally frequent in
chequers and dentils: and all mouldings of the middle Gothic are little
more than representations of the canaliculated crystals of the beryl,
and such other minerals:

§ XXIV. Not knowingly. I do not suppose a single hint was ever actually
taken from mineral form; not even by the Arabs in their stalactite
pendants and vaults: all that I mean to allege is, that beautiful
ornament, wherever found, or however invented, is always either an
intentional or unintentional copy of some constant natural form; and
that in this particular instance, the pleasure we have in these
geometrical figures of our own invention, is dependent for all its
acuteness on the natural tendency impressed on us by our Creator to love
the forms into which the earth He gave us to tread, and out of which He
formed our bodies, knit itself as it was separated from the deep.

§ XXV. 3. Forms of Water (Waves).

The reasons which prevent rocks from being used for ornament repress
still more forcibly the portraiture of the sea. Yet the constant
necessity of introducing some representation of water in order to
explain the scene of events, or as a sacred symbol, has forced the
sculptors of all ages to the invention of some type or letter for it, if
not an actual imitation. We find every degree of conventionalism or of
naturalism in these types, the earlier being, for the most part,
thoughtful symbols; the latter, awkward attempts at portraiture.[65] The
most conventional of all types is the Egyptian zigzag, preserved in the
astronomical sign of Aquarius; but every nation, with any capacities of
thought, has given, in some of its work, the same great definition of
open water, as "an undulatory thing with fish in it." I say _open_
water, because inland nations have a totally different conception of the
element. Imagine for an instant the different feelings of an husbandman
whose hut is built by the Rhine or the Po, and who sees, day by day,
the same giddy succession of silent power, the same opaque, thick,
whirling, irresistible labyrinth of rushing lines and twisted eddies,
coiling themselves into serpentine race by the reedy banks, in omne
volubilis ævum,--and the image of the sea in the mind of the fisher upon
the rocks of Ithaca, or by the Straits of Sicily, who sees how, day by
day, the morning winds come coursing to the shore, every breath of them
with a green wave rearing before it; clear, crisp, ringing, merry-minded
waves, that fall over and over each other, laughing like children as
they near the beach, and at last clash themselves all into dust of
crystal over the dazzling sweeps of sand. Fancy the difference of the
image of water in those two minds, and then compare the sculpture of the
coiling eddies of the Tigris and its reedy branches in those slabs of
Nineveh, with the crested curls of the Greek sea on the coins of
Camerina or Tarentum. But both agree in the undulatory lines, either of
the currents or the surface, and in the introduction of fish as
explanatory of the meaning of those lines (so also the Egyptians in
their frescoes, with most elaborate realisation of the fish). There is a
very curious instance on a Greek mirror in the British Museum,
representing Orion on the Sea; and multitudes of examples with dolphins
on the Greek vases: the type is preserved without alteration in mediæval
painting and sculpture. The sea in that Greek mirror (at least 400
B.C.), in the mosaics of Torcello and St. Mark's, on the font of St.
Frediano at Lucca, on the gate of the fortress of St. Michael's Mount in
Normandy, on the Bayeux tapestry, and on the capitals of the Ducal
Palace at Venice (under Arion on his Dolphin), is represented in a
manner absolutely identical. Giotto, in the frescoes of Avignon, has,
with his usual strong feeling for naturalism, given the best example I
remember, in painting, of the unity of the conventional system with
direct imitation, and that both in sea and river; giving in pure blue
color the coiling whirlpool of the stream, and the curled crest of the
breaker. But in all early sculptural examples, both imitation and
decorative effect are subordinate to easily understood symbolical
language; the undulatory lines are often valuable as an enrichment of
surface, but are rarely of any studied gracefulness. One of the best
examples I know of their expressive arrangement is around some figures
in a spandril at Bourges, representing figures sinking in deep sea (the
deluge): the waved lines yield beneath the bodies and wildly lave the
edge of the moulding, two birds, as if to mark the reverse of all order
of nature, lowest of all sunk in the depth of them. In later times of
debasement, water began to be represented with its waves, foam, etc., as
on the Vendramin tomb at Venice, above cited; but even there, without
any definite ornamental purpose, the sculptor meant partly to explain a
story, partly to display dexterity of chiselling, but not to produce
beautiful forms pleasant to the eye. The imitation is vapid and joyless,
and it has often been matter of surprise to me that sculptors, so fond
of exhibiting their skill, should have suffered this imitation to fall
so short, and remain so cold,--should not have taken more pains to curl
the waves clearly, to edge them sharply, and to express, by drill-holes
or other artifices, the character of foam. I think in one of the Antwerp
churches something of this kind is done in wood, but in general it is
rare.

§ XXVI. 4. Forms of Fire (Flames and Rays). If neither the sea nor the
rock can be imagined, still less the devouring fire. It has been
symbolised by radiation both in painting and sculpture, for the most
part in the latter very unsuccessfully. It was suggested to me, not long
ago,[66] that zigzag decorations of Norman architects were typical of
light springing from the half-set orb of the sun; the resemblance to the
ordinary sun type is indeed remarkable, but I believe accidental. I
shall give you, in my large plates, two curious instances of radiation
in brick ornament above arches, but I think these also without any very
luminous intention. The imitations of fire in the torches of Cupids and
genii, and burning in tops of urns, which attest and represent the
mephitic inspirations of the seventeenth century in most London
churches, and in monuments all over civilised Europe, together with the
gilded rays of Romanist altars, may be left to such mercy as the reader
is inclined to show them.

§ XXVII. 5. Forms of Air (Clouds). Hardly more manageable than flames,
and of no ornamental use, their majesty being in scale and color, and
inimitable in marble. They are lightly traced in much of the cinque
cento sculpture; very boldly and grandly in the strange Last Judgment in
the porch of St. Maclou at Rouen, described in the "Seven Lamps." But
the most elaborate imitations are altogether of recent date, arranged in
concretions like flattened sacks, forty or fifty feet above the altars
of continental churches, mixed with the gilded truncheons intended for
sunbeams above alluded to.

§ XXVIII. 6. Shells. I place these lowest in the scale (after inorganic
forms) as being moulds or coats of organism; not themselves organic. The
sense of this, and of their being mere emptiness and deserted houses,
must always prevent them, however beautiful in their lines, from being
largely used in ornamentation. It is better to take the line and leave
the shell. One form, indeed, that of the cockle, has been in all ages
used as the decoration of half domes, which were named conchas from
their shell form: and I believe the wrinkled lip of the cockle, so used,
to have been the origin, in some parts of Europe at least, of the
exuberant foliation of the round arch. The scallop also is a pretty
radiant form, and mingles well with other symbols when it is needed. The
crab is always as delightful as a grotesque, for here we suppose the
beast inside the shell; and he sustains his part in a lively manner
among the other signs of the zodiac, with the scorpion; or scattered
upon sculptured shores, as beside the Bronze Boar of Florence. We shall
find him in a basket at Venice, at the base of one of the Piazzetta
shafts.

§ XXIX. 7. Fish. These, as beautiful in their forms as they are familiar
to our sight, while their interest is increased by their symbolic
meaning, are of great value as material of ornament. Love of the
picturesque has generally induced a choice of some supple form with
scaly body and lashing tail, but the simplest fish form is largely
employed in mediæval work. We shall find the plain oval body and sharp
head of the Thunny constantly at Venice; and the fish used in the
expression of sea-water, or water generally, are always plain bodied
creatures in the best mediæval sculpture. The Greek type of the dolphin,
however, sometimes but slightly exaggerated from the real outline of the
Delphinus Delphis,[67] is one of the most picturesque of animal forms;
and the action of its slow revolving plunge is admirably caught upon the
surface sea represented in Greek vases.

§ XXX. 8. Reptiles and Insects. The forms of the serpent and lizard
exhibit almost every element of beauty and horror in strange
combination; the horror, which in an imitation is felt only as a
pleasurable excitement, has rendered them favorite subjects in all
periods of art; and the unity of both lizard and serpent in the ideal
dragon, the most picturesque and powerful of all animal forms, and of
peculiar symbolical interest to the Christian mind, is perhaps the
principal of all the materials of mediæval picturesque sculpture. By the
best sculptors it is always used with this symbolic meaning, by the
cinque cento sculptors as an ornament merely. The best and most natural
representations of mere viper or snake are to be found interlaced among
their confused groups of meaningless objects. The real power and horror
of the snake-head has, however, been rarely reached. I shall give one
example from Verona of the twelfth century.

Other less powerful reptile forms are not unfrequent. Small frogs,
lizards, and snails almost always enliven the foregrounds and leafage of
good sculpture. The tortoise is less usually employed in groups. Beetles
are chiefly mystic and colossal. Various insects, like everything else
in the world, occur in cinque cento work; grasshoppers most frequently.
We shall see on the Ducal Palace at Venice an interesting use of the
bee.

§ XXXI. 9. Branches and stems of Trees. I arrange these under a separate
head; because, while the forms of leafage belong to all architecture,
and ought to be employed in it always, those of the branch and stem
belong to a peculiar imitative and luxuriant architecture, and are only
applicable at times. Pagan sculptors seem to have perceived little
beauty in the stems of trees; they were little else than timber to them;
and they preferred the rigid and monstrous triglyph, or the fluted
column, to a broken bough or gnarled trunk. But with Christian knowledge
came a peculiar regard for the forms of vegetation, from the root
upwards. The actual representation of the entire trees required in many
scripture subjects,--as in the most frequent of Old Testament subjects,
the Fall; and again in the Drunkenness of Noah, the Garden Agony, and
many others, familiarised the sculptors of bas-relief to the beauty of
forms before unknown; while the symbolical name given to Christ by the
Prophets, "the Branch," and the frequent expressions referring to this
image throughout every scriptural description of conversion, gave an
especial interest to the Christian mind to this portion of vegetative
structure. For some time, nevertheless, the sculpture of trees was
confined to bas-relief; but it at last affected even the treatment of
the main shafts in Lombard Gothic buildings,--as in the western façade
of Genoa, where two of the shafts are represented as gnarled trunks: and
as bas-relief itself became more boldly introduced, so did tree
sculpture, until we find the writhed and knotted stems of the vine and
fig used for angle shafts on the Doge's Palace, and entire oaks and
appletrees forming, roots and all, the principal decorative sculptures
of the Scala tombs at Verona. It was then discovered to be more easy to
carve branches than leaves and, much helped by the frequent employment
in later Gothic of the "Tree of Jesse," for traceries and other
purposes, the system reached full developement in a perfect thicket of
twigs, which form the richest portion of the decoration of the porches
of Beauvais. It had now been carried to its richest extreme: men
wearied of it and abandoned it, and like all other natural and beautiful
things, it was ostracised by the mob of Renaissance architects. But it
is interesting to observe how the human mind, in its acceptance of this
feature of ornament, proceeded from the ground, and followed, as it
were, the natural growth of the tree. It began with the rude and solid
trunk, as at Genoa; then the branches shot out, and became loaded
leaves; autumn came, the leaves were shed, and the eye was directed to
the extremities of the delicate branches;--the Renaissance frosts came,
and all perished.

§ XXXII. 10. Foliage, Flowers, and Fruit. It is necessary to consider
these as separated from the stems; not only, as above noted, because
their separate use marks another school of architecture, but because
they are the only organic structures which are capable of being so
treated, and intended to be so, without strong effort of imagination. To
pull animals to pieces, and use their paws for feet of furniture, or
their heads for terminations of rods and shafts, is _usually_ the
characteristic of feelingless schools; the greatest men like their
animals whole. The head may, indeed, be so managed as to look emergent
from the stone, rather than fastened to it; and wherever there is
throughout the architecture any expression of sternness or severity
(severity in its literal sense, as in Romans, XI. 22), such divisions of
the living form may be permitted; still, you cannot cut an animal to
pieces as you can gather a flower or a leaf. These were intended for our
gathering, and for our constant delight: wherever men exist in a
perfectly civilised and healthy state, they have vegetation around them;
wherever their state approaches that of innocence or perfectness, it
approaches that of Paradise,--it is a dressing of garden. And,
therefore, where nothing else can be used for ornament, vegetation may;
vegetation in any form, however fragmentary, however abstracted. A
single leaf laid upon the angle of a stone, or the mere form or
frame-work of the leaf drawn upon it, or the mere shadow and ghost of
the leaf,--the hollow "foil" cut out of it,--possesses a charm which
nothing else can replace; a charm not exciting, nor demanding laborious
thought or sympathy, but perfectly simple, peaceful, and satisfying.

§ XXXIII. The full recognition of leaf forms, as the general source of
subordinate decoration, is one of the chief characteristics of Christian
architecture; but the two _roots_ of leaf ornament are the Greek
acanthus, and the Egyptian lotus.[68] The dry land and the river thus
each contributed their part; and all the florid capitals of the richest
Northern Gothic on the one hand, and the arrowy lines of the severe
Lombardic capitals on the other, are founded on these two gifts of the
dust of Greece and the waves of the Nile. The leaf which is, I believe,
called the Persepolitan water-leaf, is to be associated with the lotus
flower and stem, as the origin of our noblest types of simple capital;
and it is to be noted that the florid leaves of the dry land are used
most by the Northern architects, while the water leaves are gathered for
their ornaments by the parched builders of the Desert.

§ XXXIV. Fruit is, for the most part, more valuable in color than form;
nothing is more beautiful as a subject of sculpture on a tree; but,
gathered and put in baskets, it is quite possible to have too much of
it. We shall find it so used very dextrously on the Ducal Palace of
Venice, there with a meaning which rendered it right necessary; but the
Renaissance architects address themselves to spectators who care for
nothing but feasting, and suppose that clusters of pears and pineapples
are visions of which their imagination can never weary, and above which
it will never care to rise. I am no advocate for image worship, as I
believe the reader will elsewhere sufficiently find; but I am very sure
that the Protestantism of London would have found itself quite as secure
in a cathedral decorated with statues of good men, as in one hung round
with bunches of ribston pippins.

§ XXXV. 11. Birds. The perfect and simple grace of bird form, in
general, has rendered it a favorite subject with early sculptors, and
with those schools which loved form more than action; but the difficulty
of expressing action, where the muscular markings are concealed, has
limited the use of it in later art. Half the ornament, at least, in
Byzantine architecture, and a third of that of Lombardic, is composed of
birds, either pecking at fruit or flowers, or standing on either side of
a flower or vase, or alone, as generally the symbolical peacock. But how
much of our general sense of grace or power of motion, of serenity,
peacefulness, and spirituality, we owe to these creatures, it is
impossible to conceive; their wings supplying us with almost the only
means of representation of spiritual motion which we possess, and with
an ornamental form of which the eye is never weary, however
meaninglessly or endlessly repeated; whether in utter isolation, or
associated with the bodies of the lizard, the horse, the lion, or the
man. The heads of the birds of prey are always beautiful, and used as
the richest ornaments in all ages.

§ XXXVI. 12. Quadrupeds and Men. Of quadrupeds the horse has received an
elevation into the primal rank of sculptural subject, owing to his
association with men. The full value of other quadruped forms has hardly
been perceived, or worked for, in late sculpture; and the want of
science is more felt in these subjects than in any other branches of
early work. The greatest richness of quadruped ornament is found in the
hunting sculpture of the Lombards; but rudely treated (the most noble
examples of treatment being the lions of Egypt, the Ninevite bulls, and
the mediæval griffins). Quadrupeds of course form the noblest subjects
of ornament next to the human form; this latter, the chief subject of
sculpture, being sometimes the end of architecture rather than its
decoration.

We have thus completed the list of the materials of architectural
decoration, and the reader may be assured that no effort has ever been
successful to draw elements of beauty from any other sources than
these. Such an effort was once resolutely made. It was contrary to the
religion of the Arab to introduce any animal form into his ornament; but
although all the radiance of color, all the refinements of proportion,
and all the intricacies of geometrical design were open to him, he could
not produce any noble work without an _abstraction_ of the forms of
leafage, to be used in his capitals, and made the ground plan of his
chased ornament. But I have above noted that coloring is an entirely
distinct and independent art; and in the "Seven Lamps" we saw that this
art had most power when practised in arrangements of simple geometrical
form: the Arab, therefore, lay under no disadvantage in coloring, and he
had all the noble elements of constructive and proportional beauty at
his command: he might not imitate the sea-shell, but he could build the
dome. The imitation of radiance by the variegated voussoir, the
expression of the sweep of the desert by the barred red lines upon the
wall, the starred inshedding of light through his vaulted roof, and all
the endless fantasy of abstract line,[69] were still in the power of his
ardent and fantastic spirit. Much he achieved; and yet in the effort of
his overtaxed invention, restrained from its proper food, he made his
architecture a glittering vacillation of undisciplined enchantment, and
left the lustre of its edifices to wither like a startling dream, whose
beauty we may indeed feel, and whose instruction we may receive, but
must smile at its inconsistency, and mourn over its evanescence.


FOOTNOTES:

  [63] The admiration of Canova I hold to be one of the most deadly
    symptoms in the civilisation of the upper classes in the present
    century.

  [64] Thus above, I adduced for the architect's imitation the
    appointed stories and beds of the Matterhorn, not its irregular
    forms of crag or fissure.

  [65] Appendix 21, "Ancient Representations of Water."

  [66] By the friend to whom I owe Appendix 21.

  [67] One is glad to hear from Cuvier, that though dolphins in general
    are "les plus carnassiers, et proportion gardée avec leur taille,
    les plus cruels de l'ordre;" yet that in the Delphinus Delphis,
    "tout l'organisation de son cerveau annonce _qu'il ne doit pas être
    dépourvu de la docilité_ qu'ils (les anciens) lui attribuaient."

  [68] Vide Wilkinson, vol. v., woodcut No. 478, fig. 8. The tamarisk
    appears afterwards to have given the idea of a subdivision of leaf
    more pure and quaint than that of the acanthus. Of late our
    botanists have discovered, in the "Victoria regia" (supposing its
    blossom reversed), another strangely beautiful type of what we may
    perhaps hereafter find it convenient to call _Lily_ capitals.

  [69] Appendix 22, "Arabian Ornamentation."




CHAPTER XXI.

  TREATMENT OF ORNAMENT.


§ I. We now know where we are to look for subjects of decoration. The
next question is, as the reader must remember, how to treat or express
these subjects.

There are evidently two branches of treatment: the first being the
expression, or rendering to the eye and mind, of the thing itself; and
the second, the arrangement of the thing so expressed: both of these
being quite distinct from the placing of the ornament in proper parts of
the building. For instance, suppose we take a vine-leaf for our subject.
The first question is, how to cut the vine-leaf? Shall we cut its ribs
and notches on the edge, or only its general outline? and so on. Then,
how to arrange the vine-leaves when we have them; whether symmetrically,
or at random; or unsymmetrically, yet within certain limits? All these I
call questions of treatment. Then, whether the vine-leaves so arranged
are to be set on the capital of a pillar or on its shaft, I call a
question of place.

§ II. So, then, the questions of mere treatment are twofold, how to
express, and how to arrange. And expression is to the mind or the sight.
Therefore, the inquiry becomes really threefold:--

  1. How ornament is to be expressed with reference to the mind.

  2. How ornament is to be arranged with reference to the sight.

  3. How ornament is to be arranged with reference to both.


§ III. (1.) How is ornament to be treated with reference to the mind?

If, to produce a good or beautiful ornament, it were only necessary to
produce a perfect piece of sculpture, and if a well cut group of flowers
or animals were indeed an ornament wherever it might be placed, the work
of the architect would be comparatively easy. Sculpture and architecture
would become separate arts; and the architect would order so many pieces
of such subject and size as he needed, without troubling himself with
any questions but those of disposition and proportion. But this is not
so. _No perfect piece either of painting or sculpture is an
architectural ornament at all_, except in that vague sense in which any
beautiful thing is said to ornament the place it is in. Thus we say that
pictures ornament a room; but we should not thank an architect who told
us that his design, to be complete, required a Titian to be put in one
corner of it, and a Velasquez in the other; and it is just as
unreasonable to call perfect sculpture, niched in, or encrusted on a
building, a portion of the ornament of that building, as it would be to
hang pictures by the way of ornament on the outside of it. It is very
possible that the sculptured work may be harmoniously associated with
the building, or the building executed with reference to it; but in this
latter case the architecture is subordinate to the sculpture, as in the
Medicean chapel, and I believe also in the Parthenon. And so far from
the perfection of the work conducing to its ornamental purpose, we may
say, with entire security, that its perfection, in some degree, unfits
it for its purpose, and that no absolutely complete sculpture can be
decoratively right. We have a familiar instance in the flower-work of
St. Paul's, which is probably, in the abstract, as perfect flower
sculpture as could be produced at the time; and which is just as
rational an ornament of the building as so many valuable Van Huysums,
framed and glazed and hung up over each window.

§ IV. The especial condition of true ornament is, that it be beautiful
in its place, and nowhere else, and that it aid the effect of every
portion of the building over which it has influence; that it does not,
by its richness, make other parts bald, or, by its delicacy, make other
parts coarse. Every one of its qualities has reference to its place and
use: _and it is fitted for its service by what would be faults and
deficiencies if it had no especial duty_. Ornament, the servant, is
often formal, where sculpture, the master, would have been free; the
servant is often silent where the master would have been eloquent; or
hurried, where the master would have been serene.

§ V. How far this subordination is in different situations to be
expressed, or how far it may be surrendered, and ornament, the servant,
be permitted to have independent will; and by what means the
subordination is best to be expressed when it is required, are by far
the most difficult questions I have ever tried to work out respecting
any branch of art; for, in many of the examples to which I look as
authoritative in their majesty of effect, it is almost impossible to say
whether the abstraction or imperfection of the sculpture was owing to
the choice, or the incapacity of the workman; and, if to the latter, how
far the result of fortunate incapacity can be imitated by prudent
self-restraint. The reader, I think, will understand this at once by
considering the effect of the illuminations of an old missal. In their
bold rejection of all principles of perspective, light and shade, and
drawing, they are infinitely more ornamental to the page, owing to the
vivid opposition of their bright colors and quaint lines, than if they
had been drawn by Da Vinci himself: and so the Arena chapel is far more
brightly _decorated_ by the archaic frescoes of Giotti, than the Stanze
of the Vatican are by those of Raffaelle. But how far it is possible to
recur to such archaicism, or to make up for it by any voluntary
abandonment of power, I cannot as yet venture in any wise to determine.

§ VI. So, on the other hand, in many instances of finished work in which
I find most to regret or to reprobate, I can hardly distinguish what is
erroneous in principle from what is vulgar in execution. For instance,
in most Romanesque churches of Italy, the porches are guarded by
gigantic animals, lions or griffins, of admirable severity of design;
yet, in many cases, of so rude workmanship, that it can hardly be
determined how much of this severity was intentional,--how much
involuntary: in the cathedral of Genoa two modern lions have, in
imitation of this ancient custom, been placed on the steps of its west
front; and the Italian sculptor, thinking himself a marvellous great man
because he knew what lions were really like, has copied them, in the
menagerie, with great success, and produced two hairy and well-whiskered
beasts, as like to real lions as he could possibly cut them. One wishes
them back in the menagerie for his pains; but it is impossible to say
how far the offence of their presence is owing to the mere stupidity and
vulgarity of the sculpture, and how far we might have been delighted
with a realisation, carried to nearly the same length by Ghiberti or
Michael Angelo. (I say _nearly_, because neither Ghiberti nor Michael
Angelo would ever have attempted, or permitted, entire realisation, even
in independent sculpture.)

§ VII. In spite of these embarrassments, however, some few certainties
may be marked in the treatment of past architecture, and secure
conclusions deduced for future practice. There is first, for instance,
the assuredly intended and resolute abstraction of the Ninevite and
Egyptian sculptors. The men who cut those granite lions in the Egyptian
room of the British Museum, and who carved the calm faces of those
Ninevite kings, knew much more, both of lions and kings, than they chose
to express. Then there is the Greek system, in which the human sculpture
is perfect, the architecture and animal sculpture is subordinate to it,
and the architectural ornament severely subordinated to this again, so
as to be composed of little more than abstract lines: and, finally,
there is the peculiarly mediæval system, in which the inferior details
are carried to as great or greater imitative perfection as the higher
sculpture; and the subordination is chiefly effected by symmetries of
arrangement, and quaintnesses of treatment, respecting which it is
difficult to say how far they resulted from intention, and how far from
incapacity.

§ VIII. Now of these systems, the Ninevite and Egyptian are altogether
opposed to modern habits of thought and action; they are sculptures
evidently executed under absolute authorities, physical and mental, such
as cannot at present exist. The Greek system presupposes the possession
of a Phidias; it is ridiculous to talk of building in the Greek manner;
you may build a Greek shell or box, such as the Greek intended to
contain sculpture, but you have not the sculpture to put in it. Find
your Phidias first, and your new Phidias will very soon settle all your
architectural difficulties in very unexpected ways indeed; but until you
find him, do not think yourselves architects while you go on copying
those poor subordinations, and secondary and tertiary orders of
ornament, which the Greek put on the shell of his sculpture. Some of
them, beads, and dentils, and such like, are as good as they can be for
their work, and you may use them for subordinate work still; but they
are nothing to be proud of, especially when you did not invent them: and
others of them are mistakes and impertinences in the Greek himself, such
as his so-called honeysuckle ornaments and others, in which there is a
starched and dull suggestion of vegetable form, and yet no real
resemblance nor life, for the conditions of them result from his own
conceit of himself, and ignorance of the physical sciences, and want of
relish for common nature, and vain fancy that he could improve
everything he touched, and that he honored it by taking it into his
service: by freedom from which conceits the true Christian architecture
is distinguished--not by points to its arches.

§ IX. There remains, therefore, only the mediæval system, in which I
think, generally, more completion is permitted (though this often
because more was possible) in the inferior than in the higher portions
of ornamental subject. Leaves, and birds, and lizards are realised, or
nearly so; men and quadrupeds formalised. For observe, the smaller and
inferior subject remains subordinate, however richly finished; but the
human sculpture can only be subordinate by being imperfect. The
realisation is, however, in all cases, dangerous except under most
skilful management, and the abstraction, if true and noble, is almost
always more delightful.[70]

[Illustration: Plate VIII.
               DECORATION BY DISKS.
               PALAZZO DEI BADOARI PARTECIPAZZI.]

§ X. What, then, is noble abstraction? It is taking first the essential
elements of the thing to be represented, then the rest in the order of
importance (so that wherever we pause we shall always have obtained more
than we leave behind), and using any expedient to impress what we want
upon the mind, without caring about the mere literal accuracy of such
expedient. Suppose, for instance, we have to represent a peacock: now a
peacock has a graceful neck, so has a swan; it has a high crest, so has
a cockatoo; it has a long tail, so has a bird of Paradise. But the whole
spirit and power of peacock is in those eyes of the tail. It is true,
the argus pheasant, and one or two more birds, have something like them,
but nothing for a moment comparable to them in brilliancy: express the
gleaming of the blue eyes through the plumage, and you have nearly all
you want of peacock, but without this, nothing; and yet those eyes are
not in relief; a rigidly _true_ sculpture of a peacock's form could have
no eyes,--nothing but feathers. Here, then, enters the stratagem of
sculpture; you _must_ cut the eyes in relief, somehow or another; see
how it is done in the peacock on the opposite page; it is so done by
nearly all the Byzantine sculptors: this particular peacock is meant to
be seen at some distance (how far off I know not, for it is an
interpolation in the building where it occurs, of which more hereafter),
but at all events at a distance of thirty or forty feet; I have put it
close to you that you may see plainly the rude rings and rods which
stand for the eyes and quills, but at the just distance their effect is
perfect.

§ XI. And the simplicity of the means here employed may help us, both to
some clear understanding of the spirit of Ninevite and Egyptian work,
and to some perception of the kind of enfantillage or archaicism to
which it may be possible, even in days of advanced science, legitimately
to return. The architect has no right, as we said before, to require of
us a picture of Titian's in order to complete his design; neither has he
the right to calculate on the co-operation of perfect sculptors, in
subordinate capacities. Far from this; his business is to dispense with
such aid altogether, and to devise such a system of ornament as shall be
capable of execution by uninventive and even unintelligent workmen; for
supposing that he required noble sculpture for his ornament, how far
would this at once limit the number and the scale of possible buildings?
Architecture is the work of nations; but we cannot have nations of great
sculptors. Every house in every street of every city ought to be good
architecture, but we cannot have Flaxman or Thorwaldsen at work upon it:
nor, even if we chose only to devote ourselves to our public buildings,
could the mass and majesty of them be great, if we required all to be
executed by great men; greatness is not to be had in the required
quantity. Giotto may design a campanile, but he cannot carve it; he can
only carve one or two of the bas-reliefs at the base of it. And with
every increase of your fastidiousness in the execution of your ornament,
you diminish the possible number and grandeur of your buildings. Do not
think you can educate your workmen, or that the demand for perfection
will increase the supply: educated imbecility and finessed foolishness
are the worst of all imbecilities and foolishnesses; and there is no
free-trade measure, which will ever lower the price of brains,--there is
no California of common sense. Exactly in the degree in which you
require your decoration to be wrought by thoughtful men, you diminish
the extent and number of architectural works. Your business as an
architect, is to calculate only on the co-operation of inferior men, to
think for them, and to indicate for them such expressions of your
thoughts as the weakest capacity can comprehend and the feeblest hand
can execute. This is the definition of the purest architectural
abstractions. They are the deep and laborious thoughts of the greatest
men, put into such easy letters that they can be written by the
simplest. _They are expressions of the mind of manhood by the hands of
childhood._

§ XII. And now suppose one of those old Ninevite or Egyptian builders,
with a couple of thousand men--mud-bred, onion-eating creatures--under
him, to be set to work, like so many ants, on his temple sculptures.
What is he to do with them? He can put them through a granitic exercise
of current hand; he can teach them all how to curl hair thoroughly into
croche-coeurs, as you teach a bench of school-boys how to shape
pothooks; he can teach them all how to draw long eyes and straight
noses, and how to copy accurately certain well-defined lines. Then he
fits his own great design to their capacities; he takes out of king, or
lion, or god, as much as was expressible by croche-coeurs and granitic
pothooks; he throws this into noble forms of his own imagining, and
having mapped out their lines so that there can be no possibility of
error, sets his two thousand men to work upon them, with a will, and so
many onions a day.

§ XIII. I said those times cannot now return. We have, with
Christianity, recognised the individual value of every soul; and there
is no intelligence so feeble but that its single ray may in some sort
contribute to the general light. This is the glory of Gothic
architecture, that every jot and tittle, every point and niche of it,
affords room, fuel, and focus for individual fire. But you cease to
acknowledge this, and you refuse to accept the help of the lesser mind,
if you require the work to be all executed in a great manner. Your
business is to think out all of it nobly, to dictate the expression of
it as far as your dictation can assist the less elevated intelligence:
then to leave this, aided and taught as far as may be, to its own simple
act and effort; and to rejoice in its simplicity if not in its power,
and in its vitality if not in its science.

§ XIV. We have, then, three orders of ornament, classed according to the
degrees of correspondence of the executive and conceptive minds. We have
the servile ornament, in which the executive is absolutely subjected to
the inventive,--the ornament of the great Eastern nations, more
especially Hamite, and all pre-Christian, yet thoroughly noble in its
submissiveness. Then we have the mediæval system, in which the mind of
the inferior workman is recognised, and has full room for action, but is
guided and ennobled by the ruling mind. This is the truly Christian and
only perfect system. Finally, we have ornaments expressing the endeavor
to equalise the executive and inventive,--endeavor which is Renaissance
and revolutionary, and destructive of all noble architecture.

§ XV. Thus far, then, of the incompleteness or simplicity of execution
necessary in architectural ornament, as referred to the mind. Next we
have to consider that which is required when it is referred to the
sight, and the various modifications of treatment which are rendered
necessary by the variation of its distance from the eye. I say
necessary: not merely expedient or economical. It is foolish to carve
what is to be seen forty feet off with the delicacy which the eye
demands within two yards; not merely because such delicacy is lost in
the distance, but because it is a great deal worse than lost:--the
delicate work has actually worse effect in the distance than rough work.
This is a fact well known to painters, and, for the most part,
acknowledged by the critics of painters, namely, that there is a certain
distance for which a picture is painted; and that the finish, which is
delightful if that distance be small, is actually injurious if the
distance be great: and, moreover, that there is a particular method of
handling which none but consummate artists reach, which has its effects
at the intended distance, and is altogether hieroglyphical and
unintelligible at any other. This, I say, is acknowledged in painting,
but it is not practically acknowledged in architecture; nor until my
attention was especially directed to it, had I myself any idea of the
care with which this great question was studied by the mediæval
architects. On my first careful examination of the capitals of the upper
arcade of the Ducal Palace at Venice, I was induced, by their singular
inferiority of workmanship, to suppose them posterior to those of the
lower arcade. It was not till I discovered that some of those which I
thought the worst above, were the best when seen from below, that I
obtained the key to this marvellous system of adaptation; a system
which I afterwards found carried out in every building of the great
times which I had opportunity of examining.

§ XVI. There are two distinct modes in which this adaptation is
effected. In the first, the same designs which are delicately worked
when near the eye, are rudely cut, and have far fewer details when they
are removed from it. In this method it is not always easy to distinguish
economy from skill, or slovenliness from science. But, in the second
method, a different design is adopted, composed of fewer parts and of
simpler lines, and this is cut with exquisite precision. This is of
course the higher method, and the more satisfactory proof of purpose;
but an equal degree of imperfection is found in both kinds when they are
seen close; in the first, a bald execution of a perfect design; the
second, a baldness of design with perfect execution. And in these very
imperfections lies the admirableness of the ornament.

§ XVII. It may be asked whether, in advocating this adaptation to the
distance of the eye, I obey my adopted rule of observance of natural
law. Are not all natural things, it may be asked, as lovely near as far
away? Nay, not so. Look at the clouds, and watch the delicate sculpture
of their alabaster sides, and the rounded lustre of their magnificent
rolling. They are meant to be beheld far away; they were shaped for
their place, high above your head; approach them, and they fuse into
vague mists, or whirl away in fierce fragments of thunderous vapor. Look
at the crest of the Alp, from the far-away plains over which its light
is cast, whence human souls have communion with it by their myriads. The
child looks up to it in the dawn, and the husbandman in the burden and
heat of the day, and the old man in the going down of the sun, and it is
to them all as the celestial city on the world's horizon; dyed with the
depth of heaven, and clothed with the calm of eternity. There was it
set, for holy dominion, by Him who marked for the sun his journey, and
bade the moon know her going down. It was built for its place in the
far-off sky; approach it, and as the sound of the voice of man dies away
about its foundations, and the tide of human life, shallowed upon the
vast aërial shore, is at last met by the Eternal "Here shall thy waves
be stayed," the glory of its aspect fades into blanched fearfulness; its
purple walls are rent into grisly rocks, its silver fretwork saddened
into wasting snow, the storm-brands of ages are on its breast, the ashes
of its own ruin lie solemnly on its white raiment.

Nor in such instances as these alone, though strangely enough, the
discrepancy between apparent and actual beauty is greater in proportion
to the unapproachableness of the object, is the law observed. For every
distance from the eye there is a peculiar kind of beauty, or a different
system of lines of form; the sight of that beauty is reserved for that
distance, and for that alone. If you approach nearer, that kind of
beauty is lost, and another succeeds, to be disorganised and reduced to
strange and incomprehensible means and appliances in its turn. If you
desire to perceive the great harmonies of the form of a rocky mountain,
you must not ascend upon its sides. All is there disorder and accident,
or seems so; sudden starts of its shattered beds hither and thither;
ugly struggles of unexpected strength from under the ground; fallen
fragments, toppling one over another into more helpless fall. Retire
from it, and, as your eye commands it more and more, as you see the
ruined mountain world with a wider glance, behold! dim sympathies begin
to busy themselves in the disjointed mass; line binds itself into
stealthy fellowship with line; group by group, the helpless fragments
gather themselves into ordered companies; new captains of hosts and
masses of battalions become visible, one by one, and far away answers of
foot to foot, and of bone to bone, until the powerless chaos is seen
risen up with girded loins, and not one piece of all the unregarded heap
could now be spared from the mystic whole.

§ XVIII. Now it is indeed true that where nature loses one kind of
beauty, as you approach it, she substitutes another; this is worthy of
her infinite power: and, as we shall see, art can sometimes follow her
even in doing this; but all I insist upon at present is, that the
several effects of nature are each worked with means referred to a
particular distance, and producing their effect at that distance only.
Take a singular and marked instance: When the sun rises behind a ridge
of pines, and those pines are seen from a distance of a mile or two,
against his light, the whole form of the tree, trunk, branches, and all,
becomes one frostwork of intensely brilliant silver, which is relieved
against the clear sky like a burning fringe, for some distance on either
side of the sun.[71] Now suppose that a person who had never seen pines
were, for the first time in his life, to see them under this strange
aspect, and, reasoning as to the means by which such effect could be
produced, laboriously to approach the eastern ridge, how would he be
amazed to find that the fiery spectres had been produced by trees with
swarthy and grey trunks, and dark green leaves! We, in our simplicity,
if we had been required to produce such an appearance, should have built
up trees of chased silver, with trunks of glass, and then been
grievously amazed to find that, at two miles off, neither silver nor
glass were any more visible; but nature knew better, and prepared for
her fairy work with the strong branches and dark leaves, in her own
mysterious way.

§ XIX. Now this is exactly what you have to do with your good ornament.
It may be that it is capable of being approached, as well as likely to
be seen far away, and then it ought to have microscopic qualities, as
the pine leaves have, which will bear approach. But your calculation of
its purpose is for a glory to be produced at a given distance; it may be
here, or may be there, but it is a _given_ distance; and the excellence
of the ornament depends upon its fitting that distance, and being seen
better there than anywhere else, and having a particular function and
form which it can only discharge and assume there. You are never to say
that ornament has great merit because "you cannot see the beauty of it
here;" but, it has great merit because "you _can_ see its beauty _here
only_." And to give it this merit is just about as difficult a task as I
could well set you. I have above noted the two ways in which it is done:
the one, being merely rough cutting, may be passed over; the other,
which is scientific alteration of design, falls, itself, into two great
branches, Simplification and Emphasis.

A word or two is necessary on each of these heads.

§ XX. When an ornamental work is intended to be seen near, if its
composition be indeed fine, the subdued and delicate portions of the
design lead to, and unite, the energetic parts, and those energetic
parts form with the rest a whole, in which their own immediate relations
to each other are not perceived. Remove this design to a distance, and
the connecting delicacies vanish, the energies alone remain, now either
disconnected altogether, or assuming with each other new relations,
which, not having been intended by the designer, will probably be
painful. There is a like, and a more palpable, effect, in the retirement
of a band of music in which the instruments are of very unequal powers;
the fluting and fifeing expire, the drumming remains, and that in a
painful arrangement, as demanding something which is unheard. In like
manner, as the designer at arm's length removes or elevates his work,
fine gradations, and roundings, and incidents, vanish, and a totally
unexpected arrangement is established between the remainder of the
markings, certainly confused, and in all probability painful.

§ XXI. The art of architectural design is therefore, first, the
preparation for this beforehand, the rejection of all the delicate
passages as worse than useless, and the fixing the thought upon the
arrangement of the features which will remain visible far away. Nor does
this always imply a diminution of resource; for, while it may be assumed
as a law that fine modulation of surface in light becomes quickly
invisible as the object retires, there are a softness and mystery given
to the harder markings, which enable them to be safely used as media of
expression. There is an exquisite example of this use, in the head of
the Adam of the Ducal Palace. It is only at the height of 17 or 18 feet
above the eye; nevertheless, the sculptor felt it was no use to trouble
himself about drawing the corners of the mouth, or the lines of the
lips, delicately, at that distance; his object has been to mark them
clearly, and to prevent accidental shadows from concealing them, or
altering their expression. The lips are cut thin and sharp, so that
their line cannot be mistaken, and a good deep drill-hole struck into
the angle of the mouth; the eye is anxious and questioning, and one is
surprised, from below, to perceive a kind of darkness in the iris of it,
neither like color, nor like a circular furrow. The expedient can only
be discovered by ascending to the level of the head; it is one which
would have been quite inadmissible except in distant work, six
drill-holes cut into the iris, round a central one for the pupil.

§ XXII. By just calculation, like this, of the means at our disposal, by
beautiful arrangement of the prominent features, and by choice of
different subjects for different places, choosing the broadest forms for
the farthest distance, it is possible to give the impression, not only
of perfection, but of an exquisite delicacy, to the most distant
ornament. And this is the true sign of the right having been done, and
the utmost possible power attained:--The spectator should be satisfied
to stay in his place, feeling the decoration, wherever it may be,
equally rich, full, and lovely: not desiring to climb the steeples in
order to examine it, but sure that he has it all, where he is. Perhaps
the capitals of the cathedral of Genoa are the best instances of
absolute perfection in this kind: seen from below, they appear as rich
as the frosted silver of the Strada degli Orefici; and the nearer you
approach them, the less delicate they seem.

§ XXIII. This is, however, not the only mode, though the best, in which
ornament is adapted for distance. The other is emphasis,--the unnatural
insisting upon explanatory lines, where the subject would otherwise
become unintelligible. It is to be remembered that, by a deep and narrow
incision, an architect has the power, at least in sunshine, of drawing a
black line on stone, just as vigorously as it can be drawn with chalk on
grey paper; and that he may thus, wherever and in the degree that he
chooses, substitute _chalk sketching_ for sculpture. They are curiously
mingled by the Romans. The bas-reliefs of the Arc d'Orange are small,
and would be confused, though in bold relief, if they depended for
intelligibility on the relief only; but each figure is outlined by a
strong _incision_ at its edge into the background, and all the ornaments
on the armor are simply drawn with incised lines, and not cut out at
all. A similar use of lines is made by the Gothic nations in all their
early sculpture, and with delicious effect. Now, to draw a mere
pattern--as, for instance, the bearings of a shield--with these simple
incisions, would, I suppose, occupy an able sculptor twenty minutes or
half an hour; and the pattern is then clearly seen, under all
circumstances of light and shade; there can be no mistake about it, and
no missing it. To carve out the bearings in due and finished relief
would occupy a long summer's day, and the results would be feeble and
indecipherable in the best lights, and in some lights totally and
hopelessly invisible, ignored, non-existant. Now the Renaissance
architects, and our modern ones, despise the simple expedient of the
rough Roman or barbarian. They do not care to be understood. They care
only to speak finely, and be thought great orators, if one could only
hear them. So I leave you to choose between the old men, who took
minutes to tell things plainly, and the modern men, who take days to
tell them unintelligibly.

§ XXIV. All expedients of this kind, both of simplification and energy,
for the expression of details at a distance where their actual forms
would have been invisible, but more especially this linear method, I
shall call Proutism; for the greatest master of the art in modern times
has been Samuel Prout. He actually takes up buildings of the later times
in which the ornament has been too refined for its place, and
translates it into the energised linear ornament of earlier art: and to
this power of taking the life and essence of decoration, and putting it
into a perfectly intelligible form, when its own fulness would have been
confused, is owing the especial power of his drawings. Nothing can be
more closely analogous than the method with which an old Lombard uses
his chisel, and that with which Prout uses the reed-pen; and we shall
see presently farther correspondence in their feeling about the
enrichment of luminous surfaces.

§ XXV. Now, all that has been hitherto said refers to ornament whose
distance is fixed, or nearly so; as when it is at any considerable
height from the ground, supposing the spectator to desire to see it, and
to get as near it as he can. But the distance of ornament is never fixed
to the _general_ spectator. The tower of a cathedral is bound to look
well, ten miles off, or five miles, or half a mile, or within fifty
yards. The ornaments of its top have fixed distances, compared with
those of its base; but quite unfixed distances in their relation to the
great world: and the ornaments of the base have no fixed distance at
all. They are bound to look well from the other side of the cathedral
close, and to look equally well, or better, as we enter the cathedral
door. How are we to manage this?

§ XXVI. As nature manages it. I said above, § XVII., that for every
distance from the eye there was a different system of form in all
natural objects: this is to be so then in architecture. The lesser
ornament is to be grafted on the greater, and third or fourth orders of
ornaments upon this again, as need may be, until we reach the limits of
possible sight; each order of ornament being adapted for a different
distance: first, for example, the great masses,--the buttresses and
stories and black windows and broad cornices of the tower, which give it
make, and organism, as it rises over the horizon, half a score of miles
away: then the traceries and shafts and pinnacles, which give it
richness as we approach: then the niches and statues and knobs and
flowers, which we can only see when we stand beneath it. At this third
order of ornament, we may pause, in the upper portions; but on the
roofs of the niches, and the robes of the statues, and the rolls of the
mouldings, comes a fourth order of ornament, as delicate as the eye can
follow, when any of these features may be approached.

§ XXVII. All good ornamentation is thus arborescent, as it were, one
class of it branching out of another and sustained by it; and its
nobility consists in this, that whatever order or class of it we may be
contemplating, we shall find it subordinated to a greater, simpler, and
more powerful; and if we then contemplate the greater order, we shall
find it again subordinated to a greater still; until the greatest can
only be quite grasped by retiring to the limits of distance commanding
it.

And if this subordination be not complete, the ornament is bad: if the
figurings and chasings and borderings of a dress be not subordinated to
the folds of it,--if the folds are not subordinate to the action and
mass of the figure,--if this action and mass not to the divisions of the
recesses and shafts among which it stands,--if these not to the shadows
of the great arches and buttresses of the whole building, in each case
there is error; much more if all be contending with each other and
striving for attention at the same time.

§ XXVIII. It is nevertheless evident, that, however perfect this
distribution, there cannot be orders adapted to _every_ distance of the
spectator. Between the ranks of ornament there must always be a bold
separation; and there must be many intermediate distances, where we are
too far off to see the lesser rank clearly, and yet too near to grasp
the next higher rank wholly: and at all these distances the spectator
will feel himself ill-placed, and will desire to go nearer or farther
away. This must be the case in all noble work, natural or artificial. It
is exactly the same with respect to Rouen cathedral or the Mont Blanc.
We like to see them from the other side of the Seine, or of the lake of
Geneva; from the Marché aux Fleurs, or the Valley of Chamouni; from the
parapets of the apse, or the crags of the Montagne de la Côte: but there
are intermediate distances which dissatisfy us in either case, and from
which one is in haste either to advance or to retire.

§ XXIX. Directly opposed to this ordered, disciplined, well officered
and variously ranked ornament, this type of divine, and therefore of all
good human government, is the democratic ornament, in which all is
equally influential, and has equal office and authority; that is to say,
none of it any office nor authority, but a life of continual struggle
for independence and notoriety, or of gambling for chance regards. The
English perpendicular work is by far the worst of this kind that I know;
its main idea, or decimal fraction of an idea, being to cover its walls
with dull, successive, eternity of reticulation, to fill with equal
foils the equal interstices between the equal bars, and charge the
interminable blanks with statues and rosettes, invisible at a distance,
and uninteresting near.

The early Lombardic, Veronese, and Norman work is the exact reverse of
this; being divided first into large masses, and these masses covered
with minute chasing and surface work, which fill them with interest, and
yet do not disturb nor divide their greatness. The lights are kept broad
and bright, and yet are found on near approach to be charged with
intricate design. This, again, is a part of the great system of
treatment which I shall hereafter call "Proutism;" much of what is
thought mannerism and imperfection in Prout's work, being the result of
his determined resolution that minor details shall never break up his
large masses of light.

§ XXX. Such are the main principles to be observed in the adaptation of
ornament to the sight. We have lastly to inquire by what method, and in
what quantities, the ornament, thus adapted to mental contemplation, and
prepared for its physical position, may most wisely be arranged. I think
the method ought first to be considered, and the quantity last; for the
advisable quantity depends upon the method.

§ XXXI. It was said above, that the proper treatment or arrangement of
ornament was that which expressed the laws and ways of Deity. Now, the
subordination of visible orders to each other, just noted, is one
expression of these. But there may also--must also--be a subordination
and obedience of the parts of each order to some visible law, out of
itself, but having reference to itself only (not to any upper order):
some law which shall not oppress, but guide, limit, and sustain.

In the tenth chapter of the second volume of "Modern Painters," the
reader will find that I traced one part of the beauty of God's creation
to the expression of a _self_-restrained liberty: that is to say, the
image of that perfection of _divine_ action, which, though free to work
in arbitrary methods, works always in consistent methods, called by us
Laws.

Now, correspondingly, we find that when these natural objects are to
become subjects of the art of man, their perfect treatment is an image
of the perfection of _human_ action: a voluntary submission to divine
law.

It was suggested to me but lately by the friend to whose originality of
thought I have before expressed my obligations, Mr. Newton, that the
Greek pediment, with its enclosed sculptures, represented to the Greek
mind the law of Fate, confining human action within limits not to be
overpassed. I do not believe the Greeks ever distinctly thought of this;
but the instinct of all the human race, since the world began, agrees in
some expression of such limitation as one of the first necessities of
good ornament.[72] And this expression is heightened, rather than
diminished, when some portion of the design slightly breaks the law to
which the rest is subjected; it is like expressing the use of miracles
in the divine government; or, perhaps, in slighter degrees, the relaxing
of a law, generally imperative, in compliance with some more imperative
need--the hungering of David. How eagerly this special infringement of a
general law was sometimes sought by the mediæval workmen, I shall be
frequently able to point out to the reader; but I remember just now a
most curious instance, in an archivolt of a house in the Corte del Remer
close to the Rialto at Venice. It is composed of a wreath of
flower-work--a constant Byzantine design--with an animal in each coil;
the whole enclosed between two fillets. Each animal, leaping or eating,
scratching or biting, is kept nevertheless strictly within its coil, and
between the fillets. Not the shake of an ear, not the tip of a tail,
overpasses this appointed line, through a series of some five-and-twenty
or thirty animals; until, on a sudden, and by mutual consent, two little
beasts (not looking, for the rest, more rampant than the others), one on
each side, lay their small paws across the enclosing fillet at exactly
the same point of its course, and thus break the continuity of its line.
Two ears of corn, or leaves, do the same thing in the mouldings round
the northern door of the Baptistery at Florence.

§ XXXII. Observe, however, and this is of the utmost possible
importance, that the value of this type does not consist in the mere
shutting of the ornament into a certain space, but in the acknowledgment
_by_ the ornament of the fitness of the limitation--of its own perfect
willingness to submit to it; nay, of a predisposition in itself to fall
into the ordained form, without any direct expression of the command to
do so; an anticipation of the authority, and an instant and willing
submission to it, in every fibre and spray: not merely _willing_, but
_happy_ submission, as being pleased rather than vexed to have so
beautiful a law suggested to it, and one which to follow is so justly in
accordance with its own nature. You must not cut out a branch of
hawthorn as it grows, and rule a triangle round it, and suppose that it
is then submitted to law. Not a bit of it. It is only put in a cage, and
will look as if it must get out, for its life, or wither in the
confinement. But the spirit of triangle must be put into the hawthorn.
It must suck in isoscelesism with its sap. Thorn and blossom, leaf and
spray, must grow with an awful sense of triangular necessity upon them,
for the guidance of which they are to be thankful, and to grow all the
stronger and more gloriously. And though there may be a transgression
here and there, and an adaptation to some other need, or a reaching
forth to some other end greater even than the triangle, yet this liberty
is to be always accepted under a solemn sense of special permission; and
when the full form is reached and the entire submission expressed, and
every blossom has a thrilling sense of its responsibility down into its
tiniest stamen, you may take your terminal line away if you will. No
need for it any more. The commandment is written on the heart of the
thing.

§ XXXIII. Then, besides this obedience to external law, there is the
obedience to internal headship, which constitutes the unity of ornament,
of which I think enough has been said for my present purpose in the
chapter on Unity in the second vol. of "Modern Painters." But I hardly
know whether to arrange as an expression of a divine law, or a
representation of a physical fact, the alternation of shade with light
which, in equal succession, forms one of the chief elements of
_continuous_ ornament, and in some peculiar ones, such as dentils and
billet mouldings, is the source of their only charm. The opposition of
good and evil, the antagonism of the entire human system (so ably worked
out by Lord Lindsay), the alternation of labor with rest, the mingling
of life with death, or the actual physical fact of the division of light
from darkness, and of the falling and rising of night and day, are all
typified or represented by these chains of shade and light of which the
eye never wearies, though their true meaning may never occur to the
thoughts.

§ XXXIV. The next question respecting the arrangement of ornament is one
closely connected also with its quantity. The system of creation is one
in which "God's creatures leap not, but express a feast, where all the
guests sit close, and nothing wants." It is also a feast, where there is
nothing redundant. So, then, in distributing our ornament, there must
never be any sense of gap or blank, neither any sense of there being a
single member, or fragment of a member, which could be spared. Whatever
has nothing to do, whatever could go without being missed, is not
ornament; it is deformity and encumbrance. Away with it. And, on the
other hand, care must be taken either to diffuse the ornament which we
permit, in due relation over the whole building, or so to concentrate
it, as never to leave a sense of its having got into knots, and curdled
upon some points, and left the rest of the building whey. It is very
difficult to give the rules, or analyse the feelings, which should
direct us in this matter: for some shafts may be carved and others left
unfinished, and that with advantage; some windows may be jewelled like
Aladdin's, and one left plain, and still with advantage; the door or
doors, or a single turret, or the whole western façade of a church, or
the apse or transept, may be made special subjects of decoration, and
the rest left plain, and still sometimes with advantage. But in all such
cases there is either sign of that feeling which I advocated in the
First Chapter of the "Seven Lamps," the desire of rather doing some
portion of the building as we would have it, and leaving the rest plain,
than doing the whole imperfectly; or else there is choice made of some
important feature, to which, as more honorable than the rest, the
decoration is confined. The evil is when, without system, and without
preference of the nobler members, the ornament alternates between sickly
luxuriance and sudden blankness. In many of our Scotch and English
abbeys, especially Melrose, this is painfully felt; but the worst
instance I have ever seen is the window in the side of the arch under
the Wellington statue, next St. George's Hospital. In the first place, a
window has no business there at all; in the second, the bars of the
window are not the proper place for decoration, especially _wavy_
decoration, which one instantly fancies of cast iron; in the third, the
richness of the ornament is a mere patch and eruption upon the wall, and
one hardly knows whether to be most irritated at the affectation of
severity in the rest, or at the vain luxuriance of the dissolute
parallelogram.

§ XXXV. Finally, as regards quantity of ornament I have already said,
again and again, you cannot have too much if it be good; that is, if it
be thoroughly united and harmonised by the laws hitherto insisted upon.
But you may easily have too much if you have more than you have sense to
manage. For with every added order of ornament increases the difficulty
of discipline. It is exactly the same as in war: you cannot, as an
abstract law, have too many soldiers, but you may easily have more than
the country is able to sustain, or than your generalship is competent
to command. And every regiment which you cannot manage will, on the day
of battle, be in your way, and encumber the movements it is not in
disposition to sustain.

§ XXXVI. As an architect, therefore, you are modestly to measure your
capacity of governing ornament. Remember, its essence,--its being
ornament at all, consists in its being governed. Lose your authority
over it, let it command you, or lead you, or dictate to you in any wise,
and it is an offence, an incumbrance, and a dishonor. And it is always
ready to do this; wild to get the bit in its teeth, and rush forth on
its own devices. Measure, therefore, your strength; and as long as there
is no chance of mutiny, add soldier to soldier, battalion to battalion;
but be assured that all are heartily in the cause, and that there is not
one of whose position you are ignorant, or whose service you could
spare.


FOOTNOTES:

  [70] Vide "Seven Lamps," Chap. IV. § 34.

  [71] Shakspeare and Wordsworth (I think they only) have noticed this,
    Shakspeare, in Richard II.:--

      "But when, from under this terrestrial ball,
       He fires the proud tops of the eastern pines."

    And Wordsworth, in one of his minor poems, on leaving Italy:

      "My thoughts become bright like yon edging of pines
       On the steep's lofty verge--how it blackened the air!
       But, touched from behind by the sun, it now shines
       With threads that seem part of his own silver hair."

  [72] Some valuable remarks on this subject will be found in a notice
    of the "Seven Lamps" in the British Quarterly for August, 1849. I
    think, however, the writer attaches too great importance to one out
    of many ornamental necessities.




CHAPTER XXII.

  THE ANGLE.


§ I. We have now examined the treatment and specific kinds of ornament
at our command. We have lastly to note the fittest places for their
disposal. Not but that all kinds of ornament are used in all places; but
there are some parts of the building, which, without ornament, are more
painful than others, and some which wear ornament more gracefully than
others; so that, although an able architect will always be finding out
some new and unexpected modes of decoration, and fitting his ornament
into wonderful places where it is least expected, there are,
nevertheless, one or two general laws which may be noted respecting
every one of the parts of a building, laws not (except a few) imperative
like those of construction, but yet generally expedient, and good to be
understood, if it were only that we might enjoy the brilliant methods in
which they are sometimes broken. I shall note, however, only a few of
the simplest; to trace them into their ramifications, and class in due
order the known or possible methods of decoration for each part of a
building, would alone require a large volume, and be, I think, a
somewhat useless work; for there is often a high pleasure in the very
unexpectedness of the ornament, which would be destroyed by too
elaborate an arrangement of its kinds.

§ II. I think that the reader must, by this time, so thoroughly
understand the connection of the parts of a building, that I may class
together, in treating of decoration, several parts which I kept separate
in speaking of construction. Thus I shall put under one head (A) the
base of the wall and of the shaft; then (B) the wall veil and shaft
itself; then (C) the cornice and capital; then (D) the jamb and
archivolt, including the arches both over shafts and apertures, and the
jambs of apertures, which are closely connected with their archivolts;
finally (E) the roof, including the real roof, and the minor roofs or
gables of pinnacles and arches. I think, under these divisions, all may
be arranged which is necessary to be generally stated; for tracery
decorations or aperture fillings are but smaller forms of application of
the arch, and the cusps are merely smaller spandrils, while buttresses
have, as far as I know, no specific ornament. The best are those which
have least; and the little they have resolves itself into pinnacles,
which are common to other portions of the building, or into small
shafts, arches, and niches, of still more general applicability. We
shall therefore have only five divisions to examine in succession, from
foundation to roof.

[Illustration: Fig. LI.]

§ III. But in the decoration of these several parts, certain minor
conditions of ornament occur which are of perfectly general application.
For instance, whether, in archivolts, jambs, or buttresses, or in square
piers, or at the extremity of the entire building, we necessarily have
the awkward (moral or architectural) feature, the _corner_. How to turn
a corner gracefully becomes, therefore, a perfectly general question; to
be examined without reference to any particular part of the edifice.

§ IV. Again, the furrows and ridges by which bars of parallel light and
shade are obtained, whether these are employed in arches, or jambs, or
bases, or cornices, must of necessity present one or more of six forms:
square projection, _a_ (Fig. LI.), or square recess, _b_, sharp
projection, _c_, or sharp recess, _d_, curved projection, _e_, or curved
recess, _f_. What odd curves the projection or recess may assume, or how
these different conditions may be mixed and run into one another, is
not our present business. We note only the six distinct kinds or types.

Now, when these ridges or furrows are on a small scale they often
themselves constitute all the ornament required for larger features, and
are left smooth cut; but on a very large scale they are apt to become
insipid, and they require a sub-ornament of their own, the consideration
of which is, of course, in great part, general, and irrespective of the
place held by the mouldings in the building itself: which consideration
I think we had better undertake first of all.

§ V. But before we come to particular examination of these minor forms,
let us see how far we can simplify it. Look back to Fig. LI., above.
There are distinguished in it six forms of moulding. Of these, _c_ is
nothing but a small corner; but, for convenience sake, it is better to
call it an edge, and to consider its decoration together with that of
the member _a_, which is called a fillet; while _e_, which I shall call
a roll (because I do not choose to assume that it shall be only of the
semicircular section here given), is also best considered together with
its relative recess, _f_; and because the shape of a recess is of no
great consequence, I shall class all the three recesses together, and we
shall thus have only three subjects for separate consideration:--

  1. The Angle.
  2. The Edge and Fillet.
  3. The Roll and Recess.

§ VI. There are two other general forms which may probably occur to the
reader's mind, namely, the ridge (as of a roof), which is a corner laid
on its back, or sloping,--a supine corner, decorated in a very different
manner from a stiff upright corner: and the point, which is a
concentrated corner, and has wonderfully elaborate decorations all to
its insignificant self, finials, and spikes, and I know not what more.
But both these conditions are so closely connected with roofs (even the
cusp finial being a kind of pendant to a small roof), that I think it
better to class them and their ornament under the head of roof
decoration, together with the whole tribe of crockets and bosses; so
that we shall be here concerned only with the three subjects above
distinguished: and, first, the corner or Angle.

§ VII. The mathematician knows there are many kinds of angles; but the
one we have principally to deal with now, is that which the reader may
very easily conceive as the corner of a square house, or square
anything. It is of course the one of most frequent occurrence; and its
treatment, once understood, may, with slight modification, be referred
to other corners, sharper or blunter, or with curved sides.

§ VIII. Evidently the first and roughest idea which would occur to any
one who found a corner troublesome, would be to cut it off. This is a
very summary and tyrannical proceeding, somewhat barbarous, yet
advisable if nothing else can be done: an amputated corner is said to be
chamfered. It can, however, evidently be cut off in three ways: 1. with
a concave cut, _a_; 2. with a straight cut, _b_; 3. with a convex cut,
_c_, Fig. LII.

[Illustration: Fig. LII.]

The first two methods, the most violent and summary, have the apparent
disadvantage that we get by them,--two corners instead of one; much
milder corners, however, and with a different light and shade between
them; so that both methods are often very expedient. You may see the
straight chamfer (_b_) on most lamp posts, and pillars at railway
stations, it being the easiest to cut: the concave chamfer requires more
care, and occurs generally in well-finished but simple architecture--very
beautifully in the small arches of the Broletto of Como, Plate V.; and
the straight chamfer in architecture of every kind, very constantly in
Norman cornices and arches, as in Fig. 2, Plate IV., at Sens.

§ IX. The third, or convex chamfer, as it is the gentlest mode of
treatment, so (as in medicine and morals) it is very generally the best.
For while the two other methods produce two corners instead of one, this
gentle chamfer does verily get rid of the corner altogether, and
substitutes a soft curve in its place.

[Illustration: Fig. LIII.]

But it has, in the form above given, this grave disadvantage, that it
looks as if the corner had been rubbed or worn off, blunted by time and
weather, and in want of sharpening again. A great deal often depends,
and in such a case as this, everything depends, on the _Voluntariness_
of the ornament. The work of time is beautiful on surfaces, but not on
edges intended to be sharp. Even if we needed them blunt, we should not
like them blunt on compulsion; so, to show that the bluntness is our own
ordaining, we will put a slight incised line to mark off the rounding,
and show that it goes no farther than we choose. We shall thus have the
section _a_, Fig. LIII.; and this mode of turning an angle is one of the
very best ever invented. By enlarging and deepening the incision, we get
in succession the forms _b_, _c_, _d_; and by describing a small equal
arc on each of the sloping lines of these figures, we get _e_, _f_, _g_,
_h_.

§ X. I do not know whether these mouldings are called by architects
chamfers or beads; but I think _bead_ a bad word for a continuous
moulding, and the proper sense of the word chamfer is fixed by Spenser
as descriptive not merely of truncation, but of trench or furrow:--

  "Tho gin you, fond flies, the cold to scorn,
   And, crowing in pipes made of green corn,
   You thinken to be lords of the year;
   But eft when ye count you freed from fear,
   Comes the breme winter with chamfred brows,
   Full of wrinkles and frosty furrows."

So I shall call the above mouldings beaded chamfers, when there is any
chance of confusion with the plain chamfer, _a_, or _b_, of Fig. LII.:
and when there is no such chance, I shall use the word chamfer only.

§ XI. Of those above given, _b_ is the constant chamfer of Venice, and
_a_ of Verona: _a_ being the grandest and best, and having a peculiar
precision and quaintness of effect about it. I found it twice in Venice,
used on the sharp angle, as at _a_ and _b_, Fig. LIV., _a_ being from
the angle of a house on the Rio San Zulian, and _b_ from the windows of
the church of San Stefano.

[Illustration: Fig. LIV.]

§ XII. There is, however, evidently another variety of the chamfers, _f_
and _g_, Fig. LIII., formed by an unbroken curve instead of two curves,
as _c_, Fig. LIV.; and when this, or the chamfer _d_, Fig. LIII., is
large, it is impossible to say whether they have been devised from the
incised angle, or from small shafts set in a nook, as at _e_, Fig. LIV.,
or in the hollow of the curved chamfer, as _d_, Fig. LIV. In general,
however, the shallow chamfers, _a_, _b_, _e_, and _f_, Fig. LIII., are
peculiar to southern work; and may be assumed to have been derived from
the incised angle, while the deep chamfers, _c_, _d_, _g_, _h_, are
characteristic of northern work, and may be partly derived or imitated
from the angle shaft; while, with the usual extravagance of the northern
architects, they are cut deeper and deeper until we arrive at the
condition _f_, Fig. LIV., which is the favorite chamfer at Bourges and
Bayeux, and in other good French work.

I have placed in the Appendix[73] a figure belonging to this subject,
but which cannot interest the general reader, showing the number of
possible chamfers with a roll moulding of given size.

§ XIII. If we take the plain chamfer, _b_, of Fig. LII., on a large
scale, as at _a_, Fig. LV., and bead both its edges, cutting away the
parts there shaded, we shall have a form much used in richly decorated
Gothic, both in England and Italy. It might be more simply described as
the chamfer _a_ of Fig. LII., with an incision on each edge; but the
part here shaded is often worked into ornamental forms, not being
entirely cut away.

[Illustration: Fig. LV.]

§ XIV. Many other mouldings, which at first sight appear very elaborate,
are nothing more than a chamfer, with a series of small echoes of it on
each side, dying away with a ripple on the surface of the wall, as in
_b_, Fig. LV., from Coutances (observe, here the white part is the solid
stone, the shade is cut away).

Chamfers of this kind are used on a small scale and in delicate work:
the coarse chamfers are found on all scales: _f_ and _g_, Fig. LIII., in
Venice, form the great angles of almost every Gothic palace; the roll
being a foot or a foot and a half round, and treated as a shaft, with a
capital and fresh base at every story, while the stones of which it is
composed form alternate quoins in the brickwork beyond the chamfer
curve. I need hardly say how much nobler this arrangement is than a
common quoined angle; it gives a finish to the aspect of the whole pile
attainable in no other way. And thus much may serve concerning angle
decoration by chamfer.


FOOTNOTES:

  [73] Appendix 23: "Varieties of Chamfer."




CHAPTER XXIII.

  THE EDGE AND FILLET.


§ I. The decoration of the angle by various forms of chamfer and bead,
as above described, is the quietest method we can employ; too quiet,
when great energy is to be given to the moulding, and impossible, when,
instead of a bold angle, we have to deal with a small projecting edge,
like _c_ in Fig. LI. In such cases we may employ a decoration, far ruder
and easier in its simplest conditions than the bead, far more effective
when not used in too great profusion; and of which the complete
developments are the source of mouldings at once the most picturesque
and most serviceable which the Gothic builders invented.

§ II. The gunwales of the Venetian heavy barges being liable to somewhat
rough collision with each other, and with the walls of the streets, are
generally protected by a piece of timber, which projects in the form of
the fillet, _a_, Fig. LI.; but which, like all other fillets, may, if we
so choose, be considered as composed of two angles or edges, which the
natural and most wholesome love of the Venetian boatmen for ornament,
otherwise strikingly evidenced by their painted sails and glittering
flag-vanes, will not suffer to remain wholly undecorated. The rough
service of these timbers, however, will not admit of rich ornament, and
the boatbuilder usually contents himself with cutting a series of
notches in each edge, one series alternating with the other, as
represented at 1, Plate IX.

§ III. In that simple ornament, not as confined to Venetian boats, but
as representative of a general human instinct to hack at an edge,
demonstrated by all school-boys and all idle possessors of penknives or
other cutting instruments on both sides of the Atlantic;--in that rude
Venetian gunwale, I say, is the germ of all the ornament which has
touched, with its rich successions of angular shadow, the portals and
archivolts of nearly every early building of importance, from the North
Cape to the Straits of Messina. Nor are the modifications of the first
suggestion intricate. All that is generic in their character may be seen
on Plate IX. at a glance.

[Illustration: Plate IX.
               EDGE DECORATION.]

§ IV. Taking a piece of stone instead of timber, and enlarging the
notches, until they meet each other, we have the condition 2, which is a
moulding from the tomb of the Doge Andrea Dandolo, in St. Mark's. Now,
considering this moulding as composed of two decorated edges, each edge
will be reduced, by the meeting of the notches, to a series of
four-sided pyramids (as marked off by the dotted lines), which, the
notches here being shallow, will be shallow pyramids; but by deepening
the notches, we get them as at 3, with a profile _a_, more or less
steep. This moulding I shall always call "the plain dogtooth;" it is
used in profusion in the Venetian and Veronese Gothic, generally set
with its front to the spectator, as here at 3; but its effect may be
much varied by placing it obliquely (4, and profile as at _b_); or with
one side horizontal (5, and profile _c_). Of these three conditions, 3
and 5 are exactly the same in reality, only differently placed; but in 4
the pyramid is obtuse, and the inclination of its base variable, the
upper side of it being always kept vertical. It is comparatively rare.
Of the three, the last, 5, is far the most brilliant in effect, giving
in the distance a zigzag form to the high light on it, and a full sharp
shadow below. The use of this shadow is sufficiently seen by fig. 7 in
this plate (the arch on the left, the number beneath it), in which these
levelled dogteeth, with a small interval between each, are employed to
set off by their vigor the delicacy of floral ornament above. This arch
is the side of a niche from the tomb of Can Signorio della Scala, at
Verona; and the value, as well as the distant expression of its
dogtooth, may be seen by referring to Prout's beautiful drawing of this
tomb in his "Sketches in France and Italy." I have before observed
that this artist never fails of seizing the true and leading expression
of whatever he touches: he has made this ornament the leading feature of
the niche, expressing it, as in distance it is only expressible, by a
zigzag.

§ V. The reader may perhaps be surprised at my speaking so highly of
this drawing, if he take the pains to compare Prout's symbolism of the
work on the niche with the facts as they stand here in Plate IX. But the
truth is that Prout has rendered the effect of the monument on the mind
of the passer-by;--the effect it was intended to have on every man who
turned the corner of the street beneath it: and in this sense there is
actually more truth and likeness[74] in Prout's translation than in my
fac-simile, made diligently by peering into the details from a ladder. I
do not say that all the symbolism in Prout's Sketch is the best
possible; but it is the best which any architectural draughtsman has yet
invented; and in its application to special subjects it always shows
curious internal evidence that the sketch has been made on the spot, and
that the artist tried to draw what he saw, not to invent an attractive
subject. I shall notice other instances of this hereafter.

§ VI. The dogtooth, employed in this simple form, is, however, rather a
foil for other ornament, than itself a satisfactory or generally
available decoration. It is, however, easy to enrich it as we choose:
taking up its simple form at 3, and describing the arcs marked by the
dotted lines upon its sides, and cutting a small triangular cavity
between them, we shall leave its ridges somewhat rudely representative
of four leaves, as at 8, which is the section and front view of one of
the Venetian stone cornices described above, Chap. XIV., § IV., the
figure 8 being here put in the hollow of the gutter. The dogtooth is put
on the outer lower truncation, and is actually in position as fig. 5;
but being always looked up to, is to the spectator as 3, and always
rich and effective. The dogteeth are perhaps most frequently expanded
to the width of fig. 9.

§ VII. As in nearly all other ornaments previously described, so in
this,--we have only to deepen the Italian cutting, and we shall get the
Northern type. If we make the original pyramid somewhat steeper, and
instead of lightly incising, cut it through, so as to have the leaves
held only by their points to the base, we shall have the English
dogtooth; somewhat vulgar in its piquancy, when compared with French
mouldings of a similar kind.[75] It occurs, I think, on one house in
Venice, in the Campo St. Polo; but the ordinary moulding, with light
incisions, is frequent in archivolts and architraves, as well as in the
roof cornices.

§ VIII. This being the simplest treatment of the pyramid, fig. 10, from
the refectory of Wenlock Abbey, is an example of the simplest decoration
of the recesses or inward angles between the pyramids; that is to say,
of a simple hacked edge like one of those in fig. 2, the _cuts_ being
taken up and decorated instead of the _points_. Each is worked into a
small trefoiled arch, with an incision round it to mark its outline, and
another slight incision above, expressing the angle of the first
cutting. I said that the teeth in fig. 7 had in distance the effect of a
zigzag: in fig. 10 this zigzag effect is seized upon and developed, but
with the easiest and roughest work; the angular incision being a mere
limiting line, like that described in § IX. of the last chapter. But
hence the farther steps to every condition of Norman ornament are self
evident. I do not say that all of them arose from development of the
dogtooth in this manner, many being quite independent inventions and
uses of zigzag lines; still, they may all be referred to this simple
type as their root and representative, that is to say, the mere hack of
the Venetian gunwale, with a limiting line following the resultant
zigzag.

§ IX. Fig. 11 is a singular and much more artificial condition, cast in
brick, from the church of the Frari, and given here only for future
reference. Fig. 12, resulting from a fillet with the cuts on each of its
edges interrupted by a bar, is a frequent Venetian moulding, and of
great value; but the plain or leaved dogteeth have been the favorites,
and that to such a degree, that even the Renaissance architects took
them up; and the best bit of Renaissance design in Venice, the side of
the Ducal Palace next the Bridge of Sighs, owes great part of its
splendor to its foundation, faced with large flat dogteeth, each about a
foot wide in the base, with their points truncated, and alternating with
cavities which are their own negatives or casts.

§ X. One other form of the dogtooth is of great importance in northern
architecture, that produced by oblique cuts slightly curved, as in the
margin, Fig. LVI. It is susceptible of the most fantastic and endless
decoration; each of the resulting leaves being, in the early porches of
Rouen and Lisieux, hollowed out and worked into branching tracery: and
at Bourges, for distant effect, worked into plain leaves, or bold bony
processes with knobs at the points, and near the spectator, into
crouching demons and broad winged owls, and other fancies and
intricacies, innumerable and inexpressible.

[Illustration: Fig. LVI.]

§ XI. Thus much is enough to be noted respecting edge decoration. We
were next to consider the fillet. Professor Willis has noticed an
ornament, which he has called the Venetian dentil, "as the most
universal ornament in its own district that ever I met with;" but has
not noticed the reason for its frequency. It is nevertheless highly
interesting.

The whole early architecture of Venice is architecture of incrustation:
this has not been enough noticed in its peculiar relation to that of the
rest of Italy. There is, indeed, much incrusted architecture throughout
Italy, in elaborate ecclesiastical work, but there is more which is
frankly of brick, or thoroughly of stone. But the Venetian habitually
incrusted his work with nacre; he built his houses, even the meanest, as
if he had been a shell-fish,--roughly inside, mother-of-pearl on the
surface: he was content, perforce, to gather the clay of the Brenta
banks, and bake it into brick for his substance of wall; but he overlaid
it with the wealth of ocean, with the most precious foreign marbles. You
might fancy early Venice one wilderness of brick, which a petrifying sea
had beaten upon till it coated it with marble: at first a dark
city--washed white by the sea foam. And I told you before that it was
also a city of shafts and arches, and that its dwellings were raised
upon continuous arcades, among which the sea waves wandered. Hence the
thoughts of its builders were early and constantly directed to the
incrustation of arches.

[Illustration: Fig. LVII.]

§ XII. In Fig. LVII. I have given two of these Byzantine stilted arches:
the one on the right, _a_, as they now too often appear, in its bare
brickwork; that on the left, with its alabaster covering, literally
marble defensive armor, riveted together in pieces, which follow the
contours of the building. Now, on the wall, these pieces are mere flat
slabs cut to the arch outline; but under the soffit of the arch the
marble mail is curved, often cut singularly thin, like bent tiles, and
fitted together so that the pieces would sustain each other even without
rivets. It is of course desirable that this thin sub-arch of marble
should project enough to sustain the facing of the wall; and the reader
will see, in Fig. LVII., that its edge forms a kind of narrow band round
the arch (_b_), a band which the least enrichment would render a
valuable decorative feature. Now this band is, of course, if the
soffit-pieces project a little beyond the face of the wall-pieces, a
mere fillet, like the wooden gunwale in Plate IX.; and the question is,
how to enrich it most wisely. It might easily have been dogtoothed, but
the Byzantine architects had not invented the dogtooth, and would not
have used it here, if they had; for the dogtooth cannot be employed
alone, especially on so principal an angle as this of the main arches,
without giving to the whole building a peculiar look, which I can not
otherwise describe than as being to the eye, exactly what untempered
acid is to the tongue. The mere dogtooth is an _acid_ moulding, and can
only be used in certain mingling with others, to give them piquancy;
never alone. What, then, will be the next easiest method of giving
interest to the fillet?

[Illustration: Fig. LVIII.]

§ XIII. Simply to make the incisions square instead of sharp, and to
leave equal intervals of the square edge between them. Fig. LVIII. is
one of the curved pieces of arch armor, with its edge thus treated; one
side only being done at the bottom, to show the simplicity and ease of
the work. This ornament gives force and interest to the edge of the
arch, without in the least diminishing its quietness. Nothing was ever,
nor could be ever invented, fitter for its purpose, or more easily cut.
From the arch it therefore found its way into every position where the
edge of a piece of stone projected, and became, from its constancy of
occurrence in the latest Gothic as well as the earliest Byzantine, most
truly deserving of the name of the "Venetian Dentil." Its complete
intention is now, however, only to be seen in the pictures of Gentile
Bellini and Vittor Carpaccio; for, like most of the rest of the
mouldings of Venetian buildings, it was always either gilded or
painted--often both, gold being laid on the faces of the dentils, and
their recesses colored alternately red and blue.

§ XIV. Observe, however, that the reason above given for the
_universality_ of this ornament was by no means the reason of its
_invention_. The Venetian dentil is a particular application (consequent
on the incrusted character of Venetian architecture) of the general idea
of dentil, which had been originally given by the Greeks, and realised
both by them and by the Byzantines in many laborious forms, long before
there was need of them for arch armor; and the lower half of Plate IX.
will give some idea of the conditions which occur in the Romanesque of
Venice, distinctly derived from the classical dentil; and of the gradual
transition to the more convenient and simple type, the running-hand
dentil, which afterwards became the characteristic of Venetian Gothic.
No. 13[76] is the common dentiled cornice, which occurs repeatedly in
St. Mark's; and, as late as the thirteenth century, a reduplication of
it, forming the abaci of the capitals of the Piazzetta shafts. Fig. 15
is perhaps an earlier type; perhaps only one of more careless
workmanship, from a Byzantine ruin in the Rio di Ca' Foscari: and it is
interesting to compare it with fig. 14 from the Cathedral of Vienne, in
South France. Fig. 17, from St. Mark's, and 18, from the apse of Murano,
are two very early examples in which the future true Venetian dentil is
already developed in method of execution, though the object is still
only to imitate the classical one; and a rude imitation of the bead is
joined with it in fig. 17. No. 16 indicates two examples of experimental
forms: the uppermost from the tomb of Mastino della Scala, at Verona;
the lower from a door in Venice, I believe, of the thirteenth century:
19 is a more frequent arrangement, chiefly found in cast brick, and
connecting the dentils with the dogteeth: 20 is a form introduced richly
in the later Gothic, but of rare occurrence until the latter half of the
thirteenth century. I shall call it the _gabled_ dentil. It is found in
the greatest profusion in sepulchral Gothic, associated with several
slight variations from the usual dentil type, of which No. 21, from the
tomb of Pietro Cornaro, may serve as an example.

§ XV. All the forms given in Plate IX. are of not unfrequent occurrence:
varying much in size and depth, according to the expression of the work
in which they occur; generally increasing in size in late work (the
earliest dentils are seldom more than an inch or an inch and a half
long: the fully developed dentil of the later Gothic is often as much as
four or five in length, by one and a half in breadth); but they are all
somewhat rare, compared to the true or armor dentil, above described. On
the other hand, there are one or two unique conditions, which will be
noted in the buildings where they occur.[77] The Ducal Palace furnishes
three anomalies in the arch, dogtooth, and dentil: it has a hyperbolic
arch, as noted above, Chap. X., § XV.; it has a double-fanged dogtooth
in the rings of the spiral shafts on its angles; and, finally, it has a
dentil with concave sides, of which the section and two of the blocks,
real size, are given in Plate XIV. The labor of obtaining this difficult
profile has, however, been thrown away; for the effect of the dentil at
ten feet distance is exactly the same as that of the usual form: and the
reader may consider the dogtooth and dentil in that plate as fairly
representing the common use of them in the Venetian Gothic.

§ XVI. I am aware of no other form of fillet decoration requiring
notice: in the Northern Gothic, the fillet is employed chiefly to give
severity or flatness to mouldings supposed to be too much rounded, and
is therefore generally plain. It is itself an ugly moulding, and, when
thus employed, is merely a foil for others, of which, however, it at
last usurped the place, and became one of the most painful features in
the debased Gothic both of Italy and the North.


FOOTNOTES:

  [74] I do not here speak of artistical merits, but the play of the
    light among the lower shafts is also singularly beautiful in this
    sketch of Prout's, and the character of the wild and broken leaves,
    half dead, on the stone of the foreground.

  [75] Vide the "Seven Lamps," p. 122.

  [76] The sections of all the mouldings are given on the right of
    each; the part which is constantly solid being shaded, and that
    which is cut into dentils left.

  [77] As, however, we shall not probably be led either to Bergamo or
    Bologna, I may mention here a curiously rich use of the dentil,
    entirely covering the foliation and tracery of a niche on the
    outside of the duomo of Bergamo; and a roll, entirely incrusted, as
    the handle of a mace often is with nails, with massy dogteeth or
    nail-heads, on the door of the Pepoli palace of Bologna.




CHAPTER XXIV.

  THE ROLL AND RECESS.


§ I. I have classed these two means of architectural effect together,
because the one is in most cases the negative of the other, and is used
to relieve it exactly as shadow relieves light; recess alternating with
roll, not only in lateral, but in successive order; not merely side by
side with each other, but interrupted the one by the other in their own
lines. A recess itself has properly no decoration; but its depth gives
value to the decoration which flanks, encloses, or interrupts it, and
the form which interrupts it best is the roll.

§ II. I use the word roll generally for any mouldings which present to
the eye somewhat the appearance of being cylindrical, and look like
round rods. When upright, they are in appearance, if not in fact, small
shafts; and are a kind of bent shaft, even when used in archivolts and
traceries;--when horizontal, they confuse themselves with cornices, and
are, in fact, generally to be considered as the best means of drawing an
architectural line in any direction, the soft curve of their side
obtaining some shadow at nearly all times of the day, and that more
tender and grateful to the eye than can be obtained either by an
incision or by any other form of projection.

§ III. Their decorative power is, however, too slight for rich work, and
they frequently require, like the angle and the fillet, to be rendered
interesting by subdivision or minor ornament of their own. When the roll
is small, this is effected, exactly as in the case of the fillet, by
cutting pieces out of it; giving in the simplest results what is called
the Norman billet moulding: and when the cuts are given in couples, and
the pieces rounded into spheres and almonds, we have the ordinary Greek
bead, both of them too well known to require illustration. The Norman
billet we shall not meet with in Venice; the bead constantly occurs in
Byzantine, and of course in Renaissance work. In Plate IX., Fig. 17,
there is a remarkable example of its early treatment, where the cuts in
it are left sharp.

§ IV. But the roll, if it be of any size, deserves better treatment. Its
rounded surface is too beautiful to be cut away in notches; and it is
rather to be covered with flat chasing or inlaid patterns. Thus
ornamented, it gradually blends itself with the true shaft, both in the
Romanesque work of the North, and in the Italian connected schools; and
the patterns used for it are those used for shaft decoration in general.

§ V. But, as alternating with the recess, it has a decoration peculiar
to itself. We have often, in the preceding chapters, noted the fondness
of the Northern builders for deep shade and hollowness in their
mouldings; and in the second chapter of the "Seven Lamps," the changes
are described which reduced the massive roll mouldings of the early
Gothic to a series of recesses, separated by bars of light. The shape of
these recesses is at present a matter of no importance to us: it was,
indeed, endlessly varied; but needlessly, for the value of a recess is
in its darkness, and its darkness disguises its form. But it was not in
mere wanton indulgence of their love of shade that the Flamboyant
builders deepened the furrows of their mouldings: they had found a means
of decorating those furrows as rich as it was expressive, and the entire
frame-work of their architecture was designed with a view to the effect
of this decoration; where the ornament ceases, the frame-work is meagre
and mean: but the ornament is, in the best examples of the style,
unceasing.

§ VI. It is, in fact, an ornament formed by the ghosts or anatomies of
the old shafts, left in the furrows which had taken their place. Every
here and there, a fragment of a roll or shaft is left in the recess or
furrow: a billet-moulding on a huge scale, but a billet-moulding reduced
to a skeleton; for the fragments of roll are cut hollow, and worked into
mere entanglement of stony fibres, with the gloom of the recess shown
through them. These ghost rolls, forming sometimes pedestals, sometimes
canopies, sometimes covering the whole recess with an arch of tracery,
beneath which it runs like a tunnel, are the peculiar decorations of the
Flamboyant Gothic.

§ VII. Now observe, in all kinds of decoration, we must keep carefully
under separate heads, the consideration of the changes wrought in the
mere physical form, and in the intellectual purpose of ornament. The
relations of the canopy to the statue it shelters, are to be considered
altogether distinctly from those of the canopy to the building which it
decorates. In its earliest conditions the canopy is partly confused with
representations of miniature architecture: it is sometimes a small
temple or gateway, sometimes a honorary addition to the pomp of a saint,
a covering to his throne, or to his shrine; and this canopy is often
expressed in bas-relief (as in painting), without much reference to the
great requirements of the building. At other times it is a real
protection to the statue, and is enlarged into a complete pinnacle,
carried on proper shafts, and boldly roofed. But in the late northern
system the canopies are neither expressive nor protective. They are a
kind of stone lace-work, required for the ornamentation of the building,
for which the statues are often little more than an excuse, and of which
the physical character is, as above described, that of ghosts of
departed shafts.

§ VIII. There is, of course, much rich tabernacle work which will not
come literally under this head, much which is straggling or flat in its
plan, connecting itself gradually with the ordinary forms of independent
shrines and tombs; but the general idea of all tabernacle work is marked
in the common phrase of a "niche," that is to say a hollow intended for
a statue, and crowned by a canopy; and this niche decoration only
reaches its full development when the Flamboyant hollows are cut
deepest, and when the manner and spirit of sculpture had so much lost
their purity and intensity that it became desirable to draw the eye away
from the statue to its covering, so that at last the canopy became the
more important of the two, and is itself so beautiful that we are often
contented with architecture from which profanity has struck the statues,
if only the canopies are left; and consequently, in our modern
ingenuity, even set up canopies where we have no intention of setting
statues.

§ IX. It is a pity that thus we have no really noble example of the
effect of the statue in the recesses of architecture: for the Flamboyant
recess was not so much a preparation for it as a gulf which swallowed it
up. When statues were most earnestly designed, they were thrust forward
in all kinds of places, often in front of the pillars, as at Amiens,
awkwardly enough, but with manly respect to the purpose of the figures.
The Flamboyant hollows yawned at their sides, the statues fell back into
them, and nearly disappeared, and a flash of flame in the shape of a
canopy rose as they expired.

§ X. I do not feel myself capable at present of speaking with perfect
justice of this niche ornament of the north, my late studies in Italy
having somewhat destroyed my sympathies with it. But I once loved it
intensely, and will not say anything to depreciate it now, save only
this, that while I have studied long at Abbeville, without in the least
finding that it made me care less for Verona, I never remained long in
Verona without feeling some doubt of the nobility of Abbeville.

§ XI. Recess decoration by leaf mouldings is constantly and beautifully
associated in the north with niche decoration, but requires no special
notice, the recess in such cases being used merely to give value to the
leafage by its gloom, and the difference between such conditions and
those of the south being merely that in the one the leaves are laid
across a hollow, and in the other over a solid surface; but in neither
of the schools exclusively so, each in some degree intermingling the
method of the other.

§ XII. Finally the recess decoration by the ball flower is very definite
and characteristic, found, I believe, chiefly in English work. It
consists merely in leaving a small boss or sphere, fixed, as it were, at
intervals in the hollows; such bosses being afterwards carved into
roses, or other ornamental forms, and sometimes lifted quite up out of
the hollow, on projecting processes, like vertebræ, so as to make them
more conspicuous, as throughout the decoration of the cathedral of
Bourges.

The value of this ornament is chiefly in the _spotted_ character which
it gives to the lines of mouldings seen from a distance. It is very rich
and delightful when not used in excess; but it would satiate and weary
the eye if it were ever used in general architecture. The spire of
Salisbury, and of St. Mary's at Oxford, are agreeable as isolated
masses; but if an entire street were built with this spotty decoration
at every casement, we could not traverse it to the end without disgust.
It is only another example of the constant aim at piquancy of effect
which characterised the northern builders; an ingenious but somewhat
vulgar effort to give interest to their grey masses of coarse stone,
without overtaking their powers either of invention or execution. We
will thank them for it without blame or praise, and pass on.




CHAPTER XXV.

  THE BASE.


§ I. We know now as much as is needful respecting the methods of minor
and universal decorations, which were distinguished in Chapter XXII., §
III., from the ornament which has special relation to particular parts.
This local ornament, which, it will be remembered, we arranged in § II.
of the same chapter under five heads, we have next, under those heads,
to consider. And, first, the ornament of the bases, both of walls and
shafts.

It was noticed in our account of the divisions of a wall, that there are
something in those divisions like the beginning, the several courses,
and the close of a human life. And as, in all well-conducted lives, the
hard work, and roughing, and gaining of strength come first, the honor
or decoration in certain intervals during their course, but most of all
in their close, so, in general, the base of the wall, which is its
beginning of labor, will bear least decoration, its body more,
especially those epochs of rest called its string courses; but its crown
or cornice most of all. Still, in some buildings, all these are
decorated richly, though the last most; and in others, when the base is
well protected and yet conspicuous, it may probably receive even more
decoration than other parts.

§ II. Now, the main things to be expressed in a base are its levelness
and evenness. We cannot do better than construct the several members of
the base, as developed in Fig. II., p. 55, each of a different colored
marble, so as to produce marked level bars of color all along the
foundation. This is exquisitely done in all the Italian elaborate wall
bases; that of St. Anastasia at Verona is one of the most perfect
existing, for play of color; that of Giotto's campanile is on the whole
the most beautifully finished. Then, on the vertical portions, _a_, _b_,
_c_, we may put what patterns in mosaic we please, so that they be not
too rich; but if we choose rather to have sculpture (or _must_ have it
for want of stones to inlay), then observe that all sculpture on bases
must be in panels, or it will soon be worn away, and that a plain
panelling is often good without any other ornament. The member _b_,
which in St. Mark's is subordinate, and _c_, which is expanded into a
seat, are both of them decorated with simple but exquisitely-finished
panelling, in red and white or green and white marble; and the member
_e_ is in bases of this kind very valuable, as an expression of a firm
beginning of the substance of the wall itself. This member has been of
no service to us hitherto, and was unnoticed in the chapters on
construction; but it was expressed in the figure of the wall base, on
account of its great value when the foundation is of stone and the wall
of brick (coated or not). In such cases it is always better to add the
course _e_, above the slope of the base, than abruptly to begin the
common masonry of the wall.

§ III. It is, however, with the member _d_, or Xb, that we are most
seriously concerned; for this being the essential feature of all bases,
and the true preparation for the wall or shaft, it is most necessary
that here, if anywhere, we should have full expression of levelness and
precision; and farther, that, if possible, the eye should not be
suffered to rest on the points of junction of the stones, which would
give an effect of instability. Both these objects are accomplished by
attracting the eye to two rolls, separated by a deep hollow, in the
member _d_ itself. The bold projections of their mouldings entirely
prevent the attention from being drawn to the joints of the masonry, and
besides form a simple but beautifully connected group of bars of shadow,
which express, in their perfect parallelism, the absolute levelness of
the foundation.

§ IV. I need hardly give any perspective drawing of an arrangement which
must be perfectly familiar to the reader, as occurring under nearly
every column of the too numerous classical buildings all over Europe.
But I may name the base of the Bank of England as furnishing a very
simple instance of the group, with a square instead of a rounded hollow,
both forming the base of the wall, and gathering into that of the shafts
as they occur; while the bases of the pillars of the façade of the
British Museum are as good examples as the reader can study on a larger
scale.

[Illustration: Plate X.
               PROFILES OF BASES.]

§ V. I believe this group of mouldings was first invented by the Greeks,
and it has never been materially improved, as far as its peculiar
purpose is concerned;[78] the classical attempts at its variation being
the ugliest: one, the using a single roll of larger size, as may be seen
in the Duke of York's column, which therefore looks as if it stood on a
large sausage (the Monument has the same base, but more concealed by
pedestal decoration): another, the using two rolls without the
intermediate cavetto,--a condition hardly less awkward, and which may be
studied to advantage in the wall and shaftbases of the Athenæum
Club-house: and another, the introduction of what are called fillets
between the rolls, as may be seen in the pillars of Hanover Chapel,
Regent Street, which look, in consequence, as if they were standing upon
a pile of pewter collection plates. But the only successful changes have
been mediæval; and their nature will be at once understood by a glance
at the varieties given on the opposite page. It will be well first to
give the buildings in which they occur, in order.

  1. Santa Fosca, Torcello.          | 14. Ca' Giustiniani, Venice.
  2. North transept, St. Mark's,     | 15. Byzantine fragment, Venice.
       Venice.                       | 16. St. Mark's, upper Colonnade.
  3. Nave, Torcello.                 | 17. Ducal Palace, Venice (windows.)
  4. Nave, Torcello.                 | 18. Ca' Falier, Venice.
  5. South transept, St. Mark's.     | 19. St. Zeno, Verona.
  6. Northern portico, upper shafts, | 20. San Stefano, Venice.
      St. Mark's.                    | 21. Ducal Palace, Venice (windows.)
  7. Another of the same group.      | 22. Nave, Salisbury.
  8. Cortile of St. Ambrogio, Milan. | 23. Santa Fosca, Torcello.
  9. Nave shafts, St. Michele, Pavia.| 24. Nave, Lyons Cathedral.
 10. Outside wall base, St. Mark's,  | 25. Notre Dame, Dijon.
        Venice.                      | 26. Nave, Bourges Cathedral.
 11. Fondaco de' Turchi, Venice.     | 27. Nave, Mortain (Normandy).
 12. Nave, Vienne, France.           | 28. Nave, Rouen Cathedral.
 13. Fondaco de' Turchi, Venice.     |

§ VI. Eighteen out of the twenty eight varieties are Venetian, being
bases to which I shall have need of future reference; but the
interspersed examples, 8, 9, 12, and 19, from Milan, Pavia, Vienne
(France), and Verona, show the exactly correspondent conditions of the
Romanesque base at the period, throughout the centre of Europe. The last
five examples show the changes effected by the French Gothic architects:
the Salisbury base (22) I have only introduced to show its dulness and
vulgarity beside them; and 23, from Torcello, for a special reason, in
that place.

§ VII. The reader will observe that the two bases, 8 and 9, from the two
most important Lombardic churches of Italy, St. Ambrogio of Milan and
St. Michele of Pavia, mark the character of the barbaric base founded on
pure Roman models, sometimes approximating to such models very closely;
and the varieties 10, 11, 13, 16 are Byzantine types, also founded on
Roman models. But in the bases 1 to 7 inclusive, and, still more
characteristically, in 23 below, there is evidently an original element,
a tendency to use the fillet and hollow instead of the roll, which is
eminently Gothic; which in the base 3 reminds one even of Flamboyant
conditions, and is excessively remarkable as occurring in Italian work
certainly not later than the tenth century, taking even the date of the
last rebuilding of the Duomo of Torcello, though I am strongly inclined
to consider these bases portions of the original church. And I have
therefore put the base 23 among the Gothic group to which it has so
strong relationship, though, on the last supposition, five centuries
older than the earliest of the five terminal examples; and it is still
more remarkable because it reverses the usual treatment of the lower
roll, which is in general a tolerably accurate test of the age of a
base, in the degree of its projection. Thus, in the examples 2, 3, 4, 5,
9, 10, 12, the lower roll is hardly rounded at all, and diametrically
opposed to the late Gothic conditions, 24 to 28, in which it advances
gradually, like a wave preparing to break, and at last is actually seen
curling over with the long-backed rush of surf upon the shore. Yet the
Torcello base resembles these Gothic ones both in expansion beneath and
in depth of cavetto above.

§ VIII. There can be no question of the ineffable superiority of these
Gothic bases, in grace of profile, to any ever invented by the ancients.
But they have all two great faults: They seem, in the first place, to
have been designed without sufficient reference to the necessity of
their being usually seen from above; their grace of profile cannot be
estimated when so seen, and their excessive expansion gives them an
appearance of flatness and separation from the shaft, as if they had
splashed out under its pressure: in the second place their cavetto is so
deeply cut that it has the appearance of a black fissure between the
members of the base; and in the Lyons and Bourges shafts, 24 and 26, it
is impossible to conquer the idea suggested by it, that the two stones
above and below have been intended to join close, but that some pebbles
have got in and kept them from fitting; one is always expecting the
pebbles to be crushed, and the shaft to settle into its place with a
thunder-clap.

§ IX. For these reasons, I said that the profile of the pure classic
base had hardly been materially improved; but the various conditions of
it are beautiful or commonplace, in proportion to the variety of
proportion among their lines and the delicacy of their curvatures; that
is to say, the expression of characters like those of the abstract lines
in Plate VII.

The five best profiles in Plate X. are 10, 17, 19, 20, 21; 10 is
peculiarly beautiful in the opposition between the bold projection of
its upper roll, and the delicate leafy curvature of its lower; and this
and 21 may be taken as nearly perfect types, the one of the steep, the
other of the expansive basic profiles. The characters of all, however,
are so dependent upon their place and expression, that it is unfair to
judge them thus separately; and the precision of curvature is a matter
of so small consequence in general effect, that we need not here pursue
the subject farther.

[Illustration: Fig. LIX.]

§ X. We have thus far, however, considered only the lines of moulding in
the member X b, whether of wall or shaft base. But the reader will
remember that in our best shaft base, in Fig. XII. (p. 78), certain
props or spurs were applied to the slope of X b; but now that X b is
divided into these delicate mouldings, we cannot conveniently apply the
spur to its irregular profile; we must be content to set it against the
lower roll. Let the upper edge of this lower roll be the curved line
here, _a_, _d_, _e_, _b_, Fig. LIX., and _c_ the angle of the square
plinth projecting beneath it. Then the spur, applied as we saw in Chap.
VII., will be of some such form as the triangle _c e d_, Fig. LIX.

§ XI. Now it has just been stated that it is of small importance whether
the abstract lines of the profile of a base moulding be fine or not,
because we rarely stoop down to look at them. But this triangular spur
is nearly always seen from above, and the eye is drawn to it as one of
the most important features of the whole base; therefore it is a point
of immediate necessity to substitute for its harsh right lines (_c d_,
_c e_) some curve of noble abstract character.

§ XII. I mentioned, in speaking of the line of the salvia leaf at p.
224, that I had marked off the portion of it, _x y_, because I thought
it likely to be generally useful to us afterwards; and I promised the
reader that as he had built, so he should decorate his edifice at his
own free will. If, therefore, he likes the above triangular spur, _c d
e_, by all means let him keep it; but if he be on the whole dissatisfied
with it, I may be permitted, perhaps, to advise him to set to work like
a tapestry bee, to cut off the little bit of line of salvia leaf _x y_,
and try how he can best substitute it for the awkward lines _c d c e_.
He may try it any way that he likes; but if he puts the salvia curvature
inside the present lines, he will find the spur looks weak, and I think
he will determine at last on placing it as I have done at _c d_, _c e_,
Fig. LX. (If the reader will be at the pains to transfer the salvia leaf
line with tracing paper, he will find it accurately used in this
figure.) Then I merely add an outer circular line to represent the outer
swell of the roll against which the spur is set, and I put another such
spur to the opposite corner of the square, and we have the half base,
Fig. LX., which is a general type of the best Gothic bases in existence,
being very nearly that of the upper shafts of the Ducal Palace of
Venice. In those shafts the quadrant _a b_, or the upper edge of the
lower roll, is 2 feet 1-3/8 inches round, and the base of the spur _d
e_, is 10 inches; the line _d e_ being therefore to _a b_ as 10 to
25-3/8. In Fig. LX. it is as 10 to 24, the measurement being easier and
the type somewhat more generally representative of the best, _i.e._
broadest, spurs of Italian Gothic.

[Illustration: Fig. LX.]

§ XIII. Now, the reader is to remember, there is nothing magical in
salvia leaves: the line I take from them happened merely to fall
conveniently on the page, and might as well have been taken from
anything else; it is simply its character of gradated curvature which
fits it for our use. On Plate XI., opposite, I have given plans of the
spurs and quadrants of twelve Italian and three Northern bases; these
latter (13), from Bourges, (14) from Lyons, (15) from Rouen, are given
merely to show the Northern disposition to break up bounding lines, and
lose breadth in picturesqueness. These Northern bases look the prettiest
in this plate, because this variation of the outline is nearly all the
ornament they have, being cut very rudely; but the Italian bases above
them are merely prepared by their simple outlines for far richer
decoration at the next step, as we shall see presently. The Northern
bases are to be noted also for another grand error: the projection of
the roll beyond the square plinth, of which the corner is seen, in
various degrees of advancement, in the three examples. 13 is the base
whose profile is No. 26 in Plate X.; 14 is 24 in the same plate; and 15
is 28.

[Illustration: Plate XI.
               PLANS OF BASES.]

§ XIV. The Italian bases are the following; all, except 7 and 10, being
Venetian: 1 and 2, upper colonnade, St. Mark's; 3, Ca' Falier; 4, lower
colonnade, and 5, transept, St. Mark's; 6, from the Church of St. John
and Paul; 7, from the tomb near St. Anastasia, Verona, described above
(p. 142); 8 and 9, Fon daco de' Turchi, Venice; 10, tomb of Can Mastino
della Scala, Verona; 11, San Stefano, Venice; 12, Ducal Palace, Venice,
upper colonnade. The Nos. 3, 8, 9, 11 are the bases whose profiles are
respectively Nos. 18, 11, 13, and 20 in Plate X. The flat surfaces of
the basic plinths are here shaded; and in the lower corner of the square
occupied by each quadrant is put, also shaded, the central profile of
each spur, from its root at the roll of the base to its point; those of
Nos. 1 and 2 being conjectural, for their spurs were so rude and ugly,
that I took no note of their profiles; but they would probably be as
here given. As these bases, though here, for the sake of comparison,
reduced within squares of equal size, in reality belong to shafts of
very different size, 9 being some six or seven inches in diameter,
and 6, three or four feet, the proportionate size of the roll varies
accordingly, being largest, as in 9, where the base is smallest, and in
6 and 12 the leaf profile is given on a larger scale than the plan, or
its character could not have been exhibited.

[Illustration: Plate XII.
               DECORATION OF BASES.]

§ XV. Now, in all these spurs, the reader will observe that the
narrowest are for the most part the earliest. No. 2, from the upper
colonnade of St. Mark's, is the only instance I ever saw of the double
spur, as transitive between the square and octagon plinth; the truncated
form, 1, is also rare and very ugly. Nos. 3, 4, 5, 7 and 9 are the
general conditions of the Byzantine spur; 8 is a very rare form of plan
in Byzantine work, but proved to be so by its rude level profile; while
7, on the contrary, Byzantine in plan, is eminently Gothic in the
profile. 9 to 12 are from formed Gothic buildings, equally refined in
their profile and plan.

§ XVI. The character of the profile is indeed much altered by the
accidental nature of the surface decoration; but the importance of the
broad difference between the raised and flat profile will be felt on
glancing at the examples 1 to 6 in Plate XII. The three upper examples
are the Romanesque types, which occur as parallels with the Byzantine
types, 1 to 3 of Plate XI. Their plans would be nearly the same; but
instead of resembling flat leaves, they are literally spurs, or claws,
as high as they are broad; and the third, from St. Michele of Pavia,
appears to be intended to have its resemblance to a claw enforced by the
transverse fillet. 1 is from St. Ambrogio, Milan; 2 from Vienne, France.
The 4th type, Plate XII., almost like the extremity of a man's foot, is
a Byzantine form (perhaps worn on the edges), from the nave of St.
Mark's; and the two next show the unity of the two principles, forming
the perfect Italian Gothic types,--5, from tomb of Can Signorio della
Scala, Verona; 6, from San Stefano, Venice (the base 11 of Plate XI., in
perspective). The two other bases, 10 and 12 of Plate XI., are
conditions of the same kind, showing the varieties of rise and fall in
exquisite modulation; the 10th, a type more frequent at Verona than
Venice, in which the spur profile overlaps the roll, instead of rising
out of it, and seems to hold it down, as if it were a ring held by
sockets. This is a character found both in early and late work; a kind
of band, or fillet, appears to hold, and even compress, the _centre_ of
the roll in the base of one of the crypt shafts of St. Peter's, Oxford,
which has also spurs at its angles; and long bands flow over the base of
the angle shaft of the Ducal Palace of Venice, next the Porta della
Carta.

§ XVII. When the main contours of the base are once determined, its
decoration is as easy as it is infinite. I have merely given, in Plate
XII., three examples to which I shall need to refer, hereafter. No. 9 is
a very early and curious one; the decoration of the base 6 in Plate XI.,
representing a leaf turned over and flattened down; or, rather, the idea
of the turned leaf, worked as well as could be imagined on the flat
contour of the spur. Then 10 is the perfect, but simplest possible
development of the same idea, from the earliest bases of the upper
colonnade of the Ducal Palace, that is to say, the bases of the sea
façade; and 7 and 8 are its lateral profile and transverse section.
Finally, 11 and 12 are two of the spurs of the later shafts of the same
colonnade on the Piazzetta side (No. 12 of Plate XI.). No. 11 occurs on
one of these shafts only, and is singularly beautiful. I suspect it to
be earlier than the other, which is the characteristic base of the rest
of the series, and already shows the loose, sensual, ungoverned
character of fifteenth century ornament in the dissoluteness of its
rolling.

§ XVIII. I merely give these as examples ready to my hand, and necessary
for future reference; not as in anywise representative of the variety of
the Italian treatment of the general contour, far less of the endless
caprices of the North. The most beautiful base I ever saw, on the whole,
is a Byzantine one in the Baptistery of St. Mark's, in which the spur
profile approximates to that of No. 10 in Plate XI.; but it is formed by
a cherub, who sweeps downwards on the wing. His two wings, as they half
close, form the upper part of the spur, and the rise of it in the front
is formed by exactly the action of Alichino, swooping on the pitch lake:
"quei drizzo, volando, suso il petto." But it requires noble management
to confine such a fancy within such limits. The greater number of the
best bases are formed of leaves; and the reader may amuse himself as he
will by endless inventions of them, from types which he may gather among
the weeds at the nearest roadside. The value of the vegetable form is
especially here, as above noted, Chap. XX., § XXXII., its capability of
unity with the mass of the base, and of being suggested by few lines;
none but the Northern Gothic architects are able to introduce entire
animal forms in this position with perfect success. There is a beautiful
instance at the north door of the west front of Rouen; a lizard pausing
and curling himself round a little in the angle; one expects him the
next instant to lash round the shaft and vanish: and we may with
advantage compare this base with those of Renaissance Scuola di San
Rocca[79] at Venice, in which the architect, imitating the mediæval
bases, which he did not understand, has put an elephant, four inches
higher, in the same position.

§ XIX. I have not in this chapter spoken at all of the profiles which
are given in Northern architecture to the projections of the lower
members of the base, _b_ and _c_ in Fig. II., nor of the methods in
which both these, and the rolls of the mouldings in Plate X., are
decorated, especially in Roman architecture, with superadded chain work
or chasing of various patterns. Of the first I have not spoken, because
I shall have no occasion to allude to them in the following essay; nor
of the second, because I consider them barbarisms. Decorated rolls and
decorated ogee profiles, such, for instance, as the base of the Arc de
l'Etoile at Paris, are among the richest and farthest refinements of
decorative appliances; and they ought always to be reserved for jambs,
cornices, and archivolts: if you begin with them in the base, you have
no power of refining your decorations as you ascend, and, which is still
worse, you put your most delicate work on the jutting portions of the
foundation,--the very portions which are most exposed to abrasion. The
best expression of a base is that of stern endurance,--the look of being
able to bear roughing; or, if the whole building is so delicate that no
one can be expected to treat even its base with unkindness,[80] then at
least the expression of quiet, prefatory simplicity. The angle spur may
receive such decoration as we have seen, because it is one of the most
important features in the whole building; and the eye is always so
attracted to it that it cannot be in rich architecture left altogether
blank; the eye is stayed upon it by its position, but glides, and ought
to glide, along the basic rolls to take measurement of their length: and
even with all this added fitness, the ornament of the basic spur is
best, in the long run, when it is boldest and simplest. The base above
described, § XVIII., as the most beautiful I ever saw, was not for that
reason the best I ever saw: beautiful in its place, in a quiet corner of
a Baptistery sheeted with jasper and alabaster, it would have been
utterly wrong, nay, even offensive, if used in sterner work, or repeated
along a whole colonnade. The base No. 10 of Plate XII. is the richest
with which I was ever perfectly satisfied for general service; and the
basic spurs of the building which I have named as the best Gothic
monument in the world (p. 141), have no ornament upon them whatever. The
adaptation, therefore, of rich cornice and roll mouldings to the level
and ordinary lines of bases, whether of walls or shafts, I hold to be
one of the worst barbarisms which the Roman and Renaissance architects
ever committed; and that nothing can afterwards redeem the effeminacy
and vulgarity of the buildings in which it prominently takes place.

§ XX. I have also passed over, without present notice, the fantastic
bases formed by couchant animals, which sustain many Lombardic shafts.
The pillars they support have independent bases of the ordinary kind;
and the animal form beneath is less to be considered as a true base
(though often exquisitely combined with it, as in the shaft on the
south-west angle of the cathedral of Genoa) than as a piece of
sculpture, otherwise necessary to the nobility of the building, and
deriving its value from its special positive fulfilment of expressional
purposes, with which we have here no concern. As the embodiment of a
wild superstition, and the representation of supernatural powers, their
appeal to the imagination sets at utter defiance all judgment based on
ordinary canons of law; and the magnificence of their treatment atones,
in nearly every case, for the extravagance of their conception. I should
not admit this appeal to the imagination, if it had been made by a
nation in whom the powers of body and mind had been languid; but by the
Lombard, strong in all the realities of human life, we need not fear
being led astray: the visions of a distempered fancy are not indeed
permitted to replace the truth, or set aside the laws of science: but
the imagination which is thoroughly under the command of the intelligent
will,[81] has a dominion indiscernible by science, and illimitable by
law; and we may acknowledge the authority of the Lombardic gryphons in
the mere splendor of their presence, without thinking idolatry an excuse
for mechanical misconstruction, or dreading to be called upon, in other
cases, to admire a systemless architecture, because it may happen to
have sprung from an irrational religion.


FOOTNOTES:

  [78] Another most important reason for the peculiar sufficiency and
    value of this base, especially as opposed to the bulging forms of
    the single or double roll, without the cavetto, has been suggested
    by the writer of the Essay on the Æsthetics of Gothic Architecture
    in the British Quarterly for August, 1849:--"The Attic base
    _recedes_ at the point where, if it suffered from superincumbent
    weight, it would bulge out."

  [79] I have put in Appendix 24, "Renaissance Bases," my memorandum
    written respecting this building on the spot. But the reader had
    better delay referring to it, until we have completed our
    examination of ornaments in shafts and capitals.

  [80] Appendix 25, "Romanist Decoration of Bases."

  [81] In all the wildness of the Lombardic fancy (described in
    Appendix 8), this command of the will over its action is as distinct
    as it is stern. The fancy is, in the early work of the nation,
    visibly diseased; but never the will, nor the reason.




CHAPTER XXVI.

  THE WALL VEIL AND SHAFT.


§ I. No subject has been more open ground of dispute among architects
than the decoration of the wall veil, because no decoration appeared
naturally to grow out of its construction; nor could any curvatures be
given to its surface large enough to produce much impression on the eye.
It has become, therefore, a kind of general field for experiments of
various effects of surface ornament, or has been altogether abandoned to
the mosaicist and fresco painter. But we may perhaps conclude, from what
was advanced in the Fifth Chapter, that there is one kind of decoration
which will, indeed, naturally follow on its construction. For it is
perfectly natural that the different kinds of stone used in its
successive courses should be of different colors; and there are many
associations and analogies which metaphysically justify the introduction
of horizontal bands of color, or of light and shade. They are, in the
first place, a kind of expression of the growth or age of the wall, like
the rings in the wood of a tree; then they are a farther symbol of the
alternation of light and darkness, which was above noted as the source
of the charm of many inferior mouldings: again, they are valuable as an
expression of horizontal space to the imagination, space of which the
conception is opposed, and gives more effect by its opposition, to the
enclosing power of the wall itself (this I spoke of as probably the
great charm of these horizontal bars to the Arabian mind): and again
they are valuable in their suggestion of the natural courses of rocks,
and beds of the earth itself. And to all these powerful imaginative
reasons we have to add the merely ocular charm of interlineal opposition
of color; a charm so great, that all the best colorists, without a
single exception, depend upon it for the most piquant of their pictorial
effects, some vigorous mass of alternate stripes or bars of color being
made central in all their richest arrangements. The whole system of
Tintoret's great picture of the Miracle of St. Mark is poised on the
bars of blue, which cross the white turban of the executioner.

[Illustration: Plate XIII.
               WALL VEIL DECORATIONS.]

§ II. There are, therefore, no ornaments more deeply suggestive in their
simplicity than these alternate bars of horizontal colors; nor do I know
any buildings more noble than those of the Pisan Romanesque, in which
they are habitually employed; and certainly none so graceful, so
attractive, so enduringly delightful in their nobleness. Yet, of this
pure and graceful ornamentation, Professor Willis says, "a practice more
destructive of architectural grandeur can hardly be conceived:" and
modern architects have substituted for it the ingenious ornament of
which the reader has had one specimen above, Fig. III., p. 61, and with
which half the large buildings in London are disfigured, or else
traversed by mere straight lines, as, for instance, the back of the
Bank. The lines on the Bank may, perhaps, be considered typical of
accounts; but in general the walls, if left destitute of them, would
have been as much fairer than the walls charged with them, as a sheet of
white paper is than the leaf of a ledger. But that the reader may have
free liberty of judgment in this matter, I place two examples of the old
and the Renaissance ornament side by side on the opposite page. That on
the right is Romanesque, from St. Pietro of Pistoja; that on the left,
modern English, from the Arthur Club-house, St. James's Street.

§ III. But why, it will be asked, should the lines which mark the
division of the stones be wrong when they are chiselled, and right when
they are marked by color? First, because the color separation is a
natural one. You build with different kinds of stone, of which,
probably, one is more costly than another; which latter, as you cannot
construct your building of it entirely, you arrange in conspicuous bars.
But the chiselling of the stones is a wilful throwing away of time and
labor in defacing the building: it costs much to hew one of those
monstrous blocks into shape; and, when it is done, the building is
_weaker_ than it was before, by just as much stone as has been cut away
from its joints. And, secondly, because, as I have repeatedly urged,
straight lines are ugly things as _lines_, but admirable as limits of
colored spaces; and the joints of the stones, which are painful in
proportion to their regularity, if drawn as lines, are perfectly
agreeable when marked by variations of hue.

§ IV. What is true of the divisions of stone by chiselling, is equally
true of divisions of bricks by pointing. Nor, of course, is the mere
horizontal bar the only arrangement in which the colors of brickwork or
masonry can be gracefully disposed. It is rather one which can only be
employed with advantage when the courses of stone are deep and bold.
When the masonry is small, it is better to throw its colors into
chequered patterns. We shall have several interesting examples to study
in Venice besides the well-known one of the Ducal Palace. The town of
Moulins, in France, is one of the most remarkable on this side the Alps
for its chequered patterns in bricks. The church of Christchurch,
Streatham, lately built, though spoiled by many grievous errors (the
iron work in the campanile being the grossest), yet affords the
inhabitants of the district a means of obtaining some idea of the
variety of effects which are possible with no other material than brick.

§ V. We have yet to notice another effort of the Renaissance architects
to adorn the blank spaces of their walls by what is called Rustication.
There is sometimes an obscure trace of the remains of the imitation of
something organic in this kind of work. In some of the better French
eighteenth century buildings it has a distinctly floral character, like
a final degradation of Flamboyant leafage; and some of our modern
English architects appear to have taken the decayed teeth of elephants
for their type; but, for the most part, it resembles nothing so much as
worm casts; nor these with any precision. If it did, it would not bring
it within the sphere of our properly imitative ornamentation. I thought
it unnecessary to warn the reader that he was not to copy forms of
refuse or corruption; and that, while he might legitimately take the
worm or the reptile for a subject of imitation, he was not to study the
worm cast or coprolite.

§ VI. It is, however, I believe, sometimes supposed that rustication
gives an appearance of solidity to foundation stones. Not so; at least
to any one who knows the look of a hard stone. You may, by rustication,
make your good marble or granite look like wet slime, honeycombed by
sand-eels, or like half-baked tufo covered with slow exudation of
stalactite, or like rotten claystone coated with concretions of its own
mud; but not like the stones of which the hard world is built. Do not
think that nature rusticates her foundations. Smooth sheets of rock,
glistening like sea waves, and that ring under the hammer like a brazen
bell,--that is her preparation for first stories. She does rusticate
sometimes: crumbly sand-stones, with their ripple-marks filled with red
mud; dusty lime-stones, which the rains wash into labyrinthine cavities;
spongy lavas, which the volcano blast drags hither and thither into ropy
coils and bubbling hollows;--these she rusticates, indeed, when she
wants to make oyster-shells and magnesia of them; but not when she needs
to lay foundations with them. Then she seeks the polished surface and
iron heart, not rough looks and incoherent substance.

§ VII. Of the richer modes of wall decoration it is impossible to
institute any general comparison; they are quite infinite, from mere
inlaid geometrical figures up to incrustations of elaborate bas-relief.
The architect has perhaps more license in them, and more power of
producing good effect with rude design than in any other features of the
building; the chequer and hatchet work of the Normans and the rude
bas-reliefs of the Lombards being almost as satisfactory as the delicate
panelling and mosaic of the Duomo of Florence. But this is to be noted
of all good wall ornament, that it retains the expression of firm and
massive substance, and of broad surface, and that architecture instantly
declined when linear design was substituted for massive, and the sense
of weight of wall was lost in a wilderness of upright or undulating
rods. Of the richest and most delicate wall veil decoration by inlaid
work, as practised in Italy from the twelfth to the fifteenth century, I
have given the reader two characteristic examples in Plates XX. and XXI.

[Illustration: Fig. LXI.]

§ VIII. There are, however, three spaces in which the wall veil,
peculiarly limited in shape, was always felt to be fitted for surface
decoration of the most elaborate kind; and in these spaces are found the
most majestic instances of its treatment, even to late periods. One of
these is the spandril space, or the filling between any two arches,
commonly of the shape _a_, Fig. LXI.; the half of which, or the flank
filling of any arch, is called a spandril. In Chapter XVII., on Filling
of Apertures, the reader will find another of these spaces noted, called
the tympanum, and commonly of the form _b_, Fig. LXI.: and finally, in
Chapter XVIII., he will find the third space described, that between an
arch and its protecting gable, approximating generally to the form _c_,
Fig. LXI.

§ IX. The methods of treating these spaces might alone furnish subject
for three very interesting essays; but I shall only note the most
essential points respecting them.

(1.) The Spandril. It was observed in Chapter XII., that this portion of
the arch load might frequently be lightened with great advantage by
piercing it with a circle, or with a group of circles; and the roof of
the Euston Square railroad station was adduced as an example. One of the
spandril decorations of Bayeux Cathedral is given in the "Seven Lamps,"
Plate VII. fig. 4. It is little more than one of these Euston Square
spandrils, with its circles foliated.

[Illustration: Plate XIV.
               SPANDRIL DECORATION
               THE DUCAL PALACE.]

Sometimes the circle is entirely pierced; at other times it is merely
suggested by a mosaic or light tracery on the wall surface, as in the
plate opposite, which is one of the spandrils of the Ducal Palace at
Venice. It was evidently intended that all the spandrils of this
building should be decorated in this manner, but only two of them seem
to have been completed.[82]

§ X. The other modes of spandril filling may be broadly reduced to four
heads. 1. Free figure sculpture, as in the Chapter-house of Salisbury,
and very superbly along the west front of Bourges, the best Gothic
spandrils I know. 2. Radiated foliage, more or less referred to the
centre, or to the bottom of the spandril for its origin; single figures
with expanded wings often answering the same purpose. 3. Trefoils; and
4, ordinary wall decoration continued into the spandril space, as in
Plate XIII., above, from St. Pietro at Pistoja, and in Westminster
Abbey. The Renaissance architects introduced spandril fillings composed
of colossal human figures reclining on the sides of the arch, in
precarious lassitude; but these cannot come under the head of wall veil
decoration.

§ XI. (2.) The Tympanum. It was noted that, in Gothic architecture, this
is for the most part a detached slab of stone, having no constructional
relation to the rest of the building. The plan of its sculpture is
therefore quite arbitrary; and, as it is generally in a conspicuous
position, near the eye, and above the entrance, it is almost always
charged with a series of rich figure sculptures, solemn in feeling and
consecutive in subject. It occupies in Christian sacred edifices very
nearly the position of the pediment in Greek sculpture. This latter is
itself a kind of tympanum, and charged with sculpture in the same
manner.

§ XII. (3.) The Gable. The same principles apply to it which have been
noted respecting the spandril, with one more of some importance. The
chief difficulty in treating a gable lies in the excessive sharpness of
its upper point. It may, indeed, on its outside apex, receive a finial;
but the meeting of the inside lines of its terminal mouldings is
necessarily both harsh and conspicuous, unless artificially concealed.
The most beautiful victory I have ever seen obtained over this
difficulty was by placing a sharp shield, its point, as usual,
downwards, at the apex of the gable, which exactly reversed the
offensive lines, yet without actually breaking them; the gable being
completed behind the shield. The same thing is done in the Northern and
Southern Gothic: in the porches of Abbeville and the tombs of Verona.

§ XIII. I believe there is little else to be noted of general laws of
ornament respecting the wall veil. We have next to consider its
concentration in the shaft.

Now the principal beauty of a shaft is its perfect proportion to its
work,--its exact expression of necessary strength. If this has been
truly attained, it will hardly need, in some cases hardly bear, more
decoration than is given to it by its own rounding and taper curvatures;
for, if we cut ornaments in intaglio on its surface, we weaken it; if we
leave them in relief, we overcharge it, and the sweep of the line from
its base to its summit, though deduced in Chapter VIII., from
necessities of construction, is already one of gradated curvature, and
of high decorative value.

§ XIV. It is, however, carefully to be noted, that decorations are
admissible on colossal and on diminutive shafts, which are wrong upon
those of middle size. For, when the shaft is enormous, incisions or
sculpture on its sides (unless colossal also), do not materially
interfere with the sweep of its curve, nor diminish the efficiency of
its sustaining mass. And if it be diminutive, its sustaining function is
comparatively of so small importance, the injurious results of failure
so much less, and the relative strength and cohesion of its mass so much
greater, that it may be suffered in the extravagance of ornament or
outline which would be unendurable in a shaft of middle size, and
impossible in one of colossal. Thus, the shafts drawn in Plate XIII., of
the "Seven Lamps," though given as examples of extravagance, are yet
pleasing in the general effect of the arcade they support; being each
some six or seven feet high. But they would have been monstrous, as
well as unsafe, if they had been sixty or seventy.

§ XV. Therefore, to determine the general rule for shaft decoration, we
must ascertain the proportions representative of the mean bulk of
shafts: they might easily be calculated from a sufficient number of
examples, but it may perhaps be assumed, for our present general
purpose, that the mean standard would be of some twenty feet in height,
by eight or nine in circumference: then this will be the size on which
decoration is most difficult and dangerous: and shafts become more and
more fit subjects for decoration, as they rise farther above, or fall
farther beneath it, until very small and very vast shafts will both be
found to look blank unless they receive some chasing or imagery; blank,
whether they support a chair or table on the one side, or sustain a
village on the ridge of an Egyptian architrave on the other.

§ XVI. Of the various ornamentation of colossal shafts, there are no
examples so noble as the Egyptian; these the reader can study in Mr.
Roberts' work on Egypt nearly as well, I imagine, as if he were beneath
their shadow, one of their chief merits, as examples of method, being
the perfect decision and visibility of their designs at the necessary
distance: contrast with these the incrustations of bas-relief on the
Trajan pillar, much interfering with the smooth lines of the shaft, and
yet themselves untraceable, if not invisible.

§ XVII. On shafts of middle size, the only ornament which has ever been
accepted as right, is the Doric fluting, which, indeed, gave the effect
of a succession of unequal lines of shade, but lost much of the repose
of the cylindrical gradation. The Corinthian fluting, which is a mean
multiplication and deepening of the Doric, with a square instead of a
sharp ridge between each hollow, destroyed the serenity of the shaft
altogether, and is always rigid and meagre. Both are, in fact, wrong in
principle; they are an elaborate weakening[83] of the shaft, exactly
opposed (as above shown) to the ribbed form, which is the result of a
group of shafts bound together, and which is especially beautiful when
special service is given to each member.

[Illustration: Fig. LXII.]

§ XVIII. On shafts of inferior size, every species of decoration may be
wisely lavished, and in any quantity, so only that the form of the shaft
be clearly visible. This I hold to be absolutely essential, and that
barbarism begins wherever the sculpture is either so bossy, or so deeply
cut, as to break the contour of the shaft, or compromise its solidity.
Thus, in Plate XXI. (Appendix 8), the richly sculptured shaft of the
lower story has lost its dignity and definite function, and become a
shapeless mass, injurious to the symmetry of the building, though of
some value as adding to its imaginative and fantastic character. Had all
the shafts been like it, the façade would have been entirely spoiled;
the inlaid pattern, on the contrary, which is used on the shortest shaft
of the upper story, adds to its preciousness without interfering with
its purpose, and is every way delightful, as are all the inlaid shaft
ornaments of this noble church (another example of them is given in
Plate XII. of the "Seven Lamps"). The same rule would condemn the
Caryatid; which I entirely agree with Mr. Fergusson in thinking (both
for this and other reasons) one of the chief errors of the Greek
schools; and, more decisively still, the Renaissance inventions of shaft
ornament, almost too absurd and too monstrous to be seriously noticed,
which consist in leaving square blocks between the cylinder joints, as
in the portico of No. 1, Regent Street, and many other buildings in
London; or in rusticating portions of the shafts, or wrapping fleeces
about them, as at the entrance of Burlington House, in Piccadilly; or
tying drapery round them in knots, as in the new buildings above noticed
(Chap. 20, § VII.), at Paris. But, within the limits thus defined, there
is no feature capable of richer decoration than the shaft; the most
beautiful examples of all I have seen, are the slender pillars,
encrusted with arabesques, which flank the portals of the Baptistery and
Duomo at Pisa, and some others of the Pisan and Lucchese churches; but
the varieties of sculpture and inlaying, with which the small
Romanesque shafts, whether Italian or Northern, are adorned when they
occupy important positions, are quite endless, and nearly all admirable.
Mr. Digby Wyatt has given a beautiful example of inlaid work so
employed, from the cloisters of the Lateran, in his work on early
mosaic; an example which unites the surface decoration of the shaft with
the adoption of the spiral contour. This latter is often all the
decoration which is needed, and none can be more beautiful; it has been
spoken against, like many other good and lovely things, because it has
been too often used in extravagant degrees, like the well-known twisting
of the pillars in Raffaelle's "Beautiful gate." But that extravagant
condition was a Renaissance barbarism: the old Romanesque builders kept
their spirals slight and pure; often, as in the example from St. Zeno,
in Plate XVII. below, giving only half a turn from the base of the shaft
to its head, and nearly always observing what I hold to be an imperative
law, that no twisted shaft shall be single, but composed of at least two
distinct members, twined with each other. I suppose they followed their
own right feeling in doing this, and had never studied natural shafts;
but the type they _might_ have followed was caught by one of the few
great painters who were not affected by the evil influence of the
fifteenth century, Benozzo Gozzoli, who, in the frescoes of the Ricardi
Palace, among stems of trees for the most part as vertical as stone
shafts, has suddenly introduced one of the shape given in Fig. LXII.
Many forest trees present, in their accidental contortions, types of
most complicated spiral shafts, the plan being originally of a grouped
shaft rising from several roots; nor, indeed, will the reader ever find
models for every kind of shaft decoration, so graceful or so gorgeous,
as he will find in the great forest aisle, where the strength of the
earth itself seems to rise from the roots into the vaulting; but the
shaft surface, barred as it expands with rings of ebony and silver, is
fretted with traceries of ivy, marbled with purple moss, veined with
grey lichen, and tesselated, by the rays of the rolling heaven, with
flitting fancies of blue shadow and burning gold.


FOOTNOTES:

  [82] Vide end of Appendix 20.

  [83] Vide, however, their defence in the Essay above quoted, p. 251.




CHAPTER XXVII.

  THE CORNICE AND CAPITAL.


§ I. There are no features to which the attention of architects has been
more laboriously directed, in all ages, than these crowning members of
the wall and shaft; and it would be vain to endeavor, within any
moderate limits, to give the reader any idea of the various kinds of
admirable decoration which have been invented for them. But, in
proportion to the effort and straining of the fancy, have been the
extravagances into which it has occasionally fallen; and while it is
utterly impossible severally to enumerate the instances either of its
success or its error, it is very possible to note the limits of the one
and the causes of the other. This is all that we shall attempt in the
present chapter, tracing first for ourselves, as in previous instances,
the natural channels by which invention is here to be directed or
confined, and afterwards remarking the places where, in real practice,
it has broken bounds.

§ II. The reader remembers, I hope, the main points respecting the
cornice and capital, established above in the Chapters on Construction.
Of these I must, however, recapitulate thus much:--

1. That both the cornice and capital are, with reference to the _slope_
of their profile or bell, to be divided into two great orders; in one of
which the ornament is convex, and in the other concave. (Ch. VI., § V.)

2. That the capital, with reference to the method of twisting the
cornice round to construct it, and to unite the circular shaft with the
square abacus, falls into five general forms, represented in Fig. XXII.,
p. 119.

3. That the most elaborate capitals were formed by true or simple
capitals with a common cornice added above their abacus. (Ch. IX., §
XXIV.)

We have then, in considering decoration, first to observe the treatment
of the two great orders of the cornice; then their gathering into the
five of the capital; then the addition of the secondary cornice to the
capital when formed.

§ III. The two great orders or families of cornice were above
distinguished in Fig. V., p. 69.; and it was mentioned in the same place
that a third family arose from their combination. We must deal with the
two great opposed groups first.

They were distinguished in Fig. V. by circular curves drawn on opposite
sides of the same line. But we now know that in these smaller features
the circle is usually the least interesting curve that we can use; and
that it will be well, since the capital and cornice are both active in
their expression, to use some of the more abstract natural lines. We
will go back, therefore, to our old friend the salvia leaf; and taking
the same piece of it we had before, _x y_, Plate VII., we will apply it
to the cornice line; first within it, giving the concave cornice, then
without, giving the convex cornice. In all the figures, _a_, _b_, _c_,
_d_, Plate XV., the dotted line is at the same slope, and represents an
average profile of the root of cornices (_a_, Fig. V., p. 69); the curve
of the salvia leaf is applied to it in each case, first with its
roundest curvature up, then with its roundest curvature down; and we
have thus the two varieties, _a_ and _b_, of the concave family, and _c_
and _d_, of the convex family.

[Illustration: Plate XV.
               CORNICE PROFILES.]

§ IV. These four profiles will represent all the simple cornices in the
world; represent them, I mean, as central types: for in any of the
profiles an infinite number of slopes may be given to the dotted line of
the root (which in these four figures is always at the same angle); and
on each of these innumerable slopes an innumerable variety of curves may
be fitted, from every leaf in the forest, and every shell on the shore,
and every movement of the human fingers and fancy; therefore, if the
reader wishes to obtain something like a numerical representation of the
number of possible and beautiful cornices which may be based upon these
four types or roots, and among which the architect has leave to
choose according to the circumstances of his building and the method of
its composition, let him set down a figure 1 to begin with, and write
ciphers after it as fast as he can, without stopping, for an hour.

§ V. None of the types are, however, found in perfection of curvature,
except in the best work. Very often cornices are worked with circular
segments (with a noble, massive effect, for instance, in St. Michele of
Lucca), or with rude approximation to finer curvature, especially _a_,
Plate XV., which occurs often so small as to render it useless to take
much pains upon its curve. It occurs perfectly pure in the condition
represented by 1 of the series 1-6, in Plate XV., on many of the
Byzantine and early Gothic buildings of Venice; in more developed form
it becomes the profile of the bell of the capital in the later Venetian
Gothic, and in much of the best Northern Gothic. It also represents the
Corinthian capital, in which the curvature is taken from the bell to be
added in some excess to the nodding leaves. It is the most graceful of
all simple profiles of cornice and capital.

§ VI. _b_ is a much rarer and less manageable type: for this evident
reason, that while _a_ is the natural condition of a line rooted and
strong beneath, but bent out by superincumbent weight, or nodding over
in freedom, _b_ is yielding at the base and rigid at the summit. It has,
however, some exquisite uses, especially in combination, as the reader
may see by glancing in advance at the inner line of the profile 14 in
Plate XV.

§ VII. _c_ is the leading convex or Doric type, as _a_ is the leading
concave or Corinthian. Its relation to the best Greek Doric is exactly
what the relation of _a_ is to the Corinthian; that is to say, the
curvature must be taken from the straighter limb of the curve and added
to the bolder bend, giving it a sudden turn inwards (as in the
Corinthian a nod outwards), as the reader may see in the capital of the
Parthenon in the British Museum, where the lower limb of the curve is
_all but_ a right line.[84] But these Doric and Corinthian lines are
mere varieties of the great families which are represented by the
central lines _a_ and _c_, including not only the Doric capital, but all
the small cornices formed by a slight increase of the curve of _c_,
which are of so frequent occurrence in Greek ornaments.

§ VIII. _d_ is the Christian Doric, which I said (Chap. I., § XX.) was
invented to replace the antique: it is the representative of the great
Byzantine and Norman families of convex cornice and capital, and, next
to the profile _a_, the most important of the four, being the best
profile for the convex capital, as _a_ is for the concave; _a_ being the
best expression of an elastic line inserted vertically in the shaft, and
_d_ of an elastic line inserted horizontally and rising to meet vertical
pressure.

If the reader will glance at the arrangements of boughs of trees, he
will find them commonly dividing into these two families, _a_ and _d_:
they rise out of the trunk and nod from it as _a_, or they spring with
sudden curvature out from it, and rise into sympathy with it, as at _d_;
but they only accidentally display tendencies to the lines _b_ or _c_.
Boughs which fall as they spring from the tree also describe the curve
_d_ in the plurality of instances, but reversed in arrangement; their
junction with the stem being at the top of it, their sprays bending out
into rounder curvature.

§ IX. These then being the two primal groups, we have next to note the
combined group, formed by the concave and convex lines joined in various
proportions of curvature, so as to form together the reversed or ogee
curve, represented in one of its most beautiful states by the glacier
line _a_, on Plate VII. I would rather have taken this line than any
other to have formed my third group of cornices by, but as it is too
large, and almost too delicate, we will take instead that of the
Matterhorn side, _e f_, Plate VII. For uniformity's sake I keep the
slope of the dotted line the same as in the primal forms; and applying
this Matterhorn curve in its four relative positions to that line, I
have the types of the four cornices or capitals of the third family,
_e_, _f_, _g_, _h_, on Plate XV.

These are, however, general types only thus far, that their line is
composed of one short and one long curve, and that they represent the
four conditions of treatment of every such line; namely, the longest
curve concave in _e_ and _f_, and convex in _g_ and _h_; and the point
of contrary flexure set high in _e_ and _g_, and low in _f_ and _h_. The
relative depth of the arcs, or nature of their curvature, cannot be
taken into consideration without a complexity of system which my space
does not admit.

Of the four types thus constituted, _e_ and _f_ are of great importance;
the other two are rarely used, having an appearance of weakness in
consequence of the shortest curve being concave: the profiles _e_ and
_f_, when used for cornices, have usually a fuller sweep and somewhat
greater equality between the branches of the curve; but those here given
are better representatives of the structure applicable to capitals and
cornices indifferently.

§ X. Very often, in the farther treatment of the profiles _e_ or _f_,
another limb is added to their curve in order to join it to the upper or
lower members of the cornice or capital. I do not consider this addition
as forming another family of cornices, because the leading and effective
part of the curve is in these, as in the others, the single ogee; and
the added bend is merely a less abrupt termination of it above or below:
still this group is of so great importance in the richer kinds of
ornamentation that we must have it sufficiently represented. We shall
obtain a type of it by merely continuing the line of the Matterhorn
side, of which before we took only a fragment. The entire line _e_ to
_g_ on Plate VII., is evidently composed of three curves of unequal
lengths, which if we call the shortest 1, the intermediate one 2, and
the longest 3, are there arranged in the order 1, 3, 2, counting
upwards. But evidently we might also have had the arrangements 1, 2, 3,
and 2, 1, 3, giving us three distinct lines, altogether independent of
position, which being applied to one general dotted slope will each give
four cornices, or twelve altogether. Of these the six most important are
those which have the shortest curve convex: they are given in light
relief from _k_ to _p_, Plate XV., and, by turning the page upside down,
the other six will be seen in dark relief, only the little upright bits
of shadow at the bottom are not to be considered as parts of them, being
only admitted in order to give the complete profile of the more
important cornices in light.

§ XI. In these types, as in _e_ and _f_, the only general condition is,
that their line shall be composed of three curves of different lengths
and different arrangements (the depth of arcs and radius of curvatures
being unconsidered). They are arranged in three couples, each couple
being two positions of the same entire line; so that numbering the
component curves in order of magnitude and counting upwards, they will
read--

  _k_ 1, 2, 3,
  _l_ 3, 2, 1,
  _m_ 1, 3, 2,
  _n_ 2, 3, 1,
  _o_ 2, 1, 3,
  _p_ 3, 1, 2.

_m_ and _n_, which are the _Matterhorn line_, are the most beautiful and
important of all the twelve; _k_ and _l_ the next; _o_ and _p_ are used
only for certain conditions of flower carving on the surface. The
reverses (dark) of _k_ and _l_ are also of considerable service; the
other four hardly ever used in good work.

§ XII. If we were to add a fourth curve to the component series, we
should have forty-eight more cornices: but there is no use in pursuing
the system further, as such arrangements are very rare and easily
resolved into the simpler types with certain arbitrary additions fitted
to their special place; and, in most cases, distinctly separate from the
main curve, as in the inner line of No. 14, which is a form of the type
_e_, the longest curve, _i.e._, the lowest, having deepest curvature,
and each limb opposed by a short contrary curve at its extremities, the
convex limb by a concave, the concave by a convex.

§ XIII. Such, then, are the great families of profile lines into
which all cornices and capitals may be divided; but their best examples
unite two such profiles in a mode which we cannot understand till we
consider the further ornament with which the profiles are charged. And
in doing this we must, for the sake of clearness, consider, first the
nature of the designs themselves, and next the mode of cutting them.

[Illustration: Plate XVI.
               CORNICE DECORATION.]

§ XIV. In Plate XVI., opposite, I have thrown together a few of the most
characteristic mediæval examples of the treatment of the simplest
cornice profiles: the uppermost, _a_, is the pure root of cornices from
St. Mark's. The second, _d_, is the Christian Doric cornice, here
lettered _d_ in order to avoid confusion, its profile being _d_ of Plate
XV. in bold development, and here seen on the left-hand side, truly
drawn, though filled up with the ornament to show the mode in which the
angle is turned. This is also from St. Mark's. The third, _b_, is _b_ of
Plate XV., the pattern being inlaid in black because its office was in
the interior of St. Mark's, where it was too dark to see sculptured
ornament at the required distance. (The other two simple profiles, _a_
and _c_ of Plate XV., would be decorated in the same manner, but require
no example here, for the profile _a_ is of so frequent occurrence that
it will have a page to itself alone in the next volume; and c may be
seen over nearly every shop in London, being that of the common Greek
egg cornice.) The fourth, _e_ in Plate XVI., is a transitional cornice,
passing from Byzantine into Venetian Gothic: _f_ is a fully developed
Venetian Gothic cornice founded on Byzantine traditions; and _g_ the
perfect Lombardic-Gothic cornice, founded on the Pisan Romanesque
traditions, and strongly marked with the noblest Northern element, the
Lombardic vitality restrained by classical models. I consider it a
perfect cornice, and of the highest order.

§ XV. Now in the design of this series of ornaments there are two main
points to be noted; the first, that they all, except _b_, are distinctly
rooted in the lower part of the cornice, and spring to the top. This
arrangement is constant in all the best cornices and capitals; and it is
essential to the expression of the supporting power of both. It is
exactly opposed to the system of _running_ cornices and _banded_[85]
capitals, in which the ornament flows along them horizontally, or is
twined round them, as the mouldings are in the early English capital,
and the foliage in many decorated ones. Such cornices have arisen from a
mistaken appliance of the running ornaments, which are proper to
archivolts, jambs, &c., to the features which have definite functions of
support. A tendril may nobly follow the outline of an arch, but must not
creep along a cornice, nor swathe or bandage a capital; it is essential
to the expression of these features that their ornament should have an
elastic and upward spring; and as the proper profile for the curve is
that of a tree bough, as we saw above, so the proper arrangement of its
farther ornament is that which best expresses rooted and ascendant
strength like that of foliage.

There are certain very interesting exceptions to the rule (we shall see
a curious one presently); and in the carrying out of the rule itself, we
may see constant licenses taken by the great designers, and momentary
violations of it, like those above spoken of, respecting other
ornamental laws--violations which are for our refreshment, and for
increase of delight in the general observance; and this is one of the
peculiar beauties of the cornice _g_, which, rooting itself in strong
central clusters, suffers some of its leaves to fall languidly aside, as
the drooping outer leaves of a natural cluster do so often; but at the
very instant that it does this, in order that it may not lose any of its
expression of strength, a fruit-stalk is thrown up above the languid
leaves, absolutely vertical, as much stiffer and stronger than the rest
of the plant as the falling leaves are weaker. Cover this with your
finger, and the cornice falls to pieces, like a bouquet which has been
untied.

§ XVI. There are some instances in which, though the real arrangement is
that of a running stem, throwing off leaves up and down, the positions
of the leaves give nearly as much elasticity and organisation to the
cornice, as if they had been rightly rooted; and others, like _b_, where
the reversed portion of the ornament is lost in the shade, and the
general expression of strength is got by the lower member. This cornice
will, nevertheless, be felt at once to be inferior to the rest; and
though we may often be called upon to admire designs of these kinds,
which would have been exquisite if not thus misplaced, the reader will
find that they are both of rare occurrence, and significative of
declining style; while the greater mass of the banded capitals are heavy
and valueless, mere aggregations of confused sculpture, swathed round
the extremity of the shaft, as if she had dipped it into a mass of
melted ornament, as the glass-blower does his blow-pipe into the metal,
and brought up a quantity adhering glutinously to its extremity. We have
many capitals of this kind in England: some of the worst and heaviest in
the choir of York. The later capitals of the Italian Gothic have the
same kind of effect, but owing to another cause: for their structure is
quite pure, and based on the Corinthian type: and it is the branching
form of the heads of the leaves which destroys the effect of their
organisation. On the other hand, some of the Italian cornices which are
actually composed by running tendrils, throwing off leaves into oval
interstices, are so massive in their treatment, and so marked and firm
in their vertical and arched lines, that they are nearly as suggestive
of support as if they had been arranged on the rooted system. A cornice
of this kind is used in St. Michele of Lucca (Plate VI. in the "Seven
Lamps," and XXI. here), and with exquisite propriety; for that cornice
is at once a crown to the story beneath it and a foundation to that
which is above it, and therefore unites the strength and elasticity of
the lines proper to the cornice with the submission and prostration of
those proper to the foundation.

§ XVII. This, then, is the first point needing general notice in the
designs in Plate XVI. The second is the difference between the freedom
of the Northern and the sophistication of the classical cornices, in
connection with what has been advanced in Appendix 8. The cornices, _a_,
_d_, and _b_, are of the same date, but they show a singular difference
in the workman's temper: that at _b_ is a single copy of a classical
mosaic; and many carved cornices occur, associated with it, which are,
in like manner, mere copies of the Greek and Roman egg and arrow
mouldings. But the cornices _a_ and _d_ are copies of nothing of the
kind: the idea of them has indeed been taken from the Greek honeysuckle
ornament, but the chiselling of them is in no wise either Greek, or
Byzantine, in temper. The Byzantines were languid copyists: this work is
as energetic as its original; energetic, not in the quantity of work,
but in the spirit of it: an indolent man, forced into toil, may cover
large spaces with evidence of his feeble action, or accumulate his
dulness into rich aggregation of trouble, but it is gathered weariness
still. The man who cut those two uppermost cornices had no time to
spare: did as much cornice as he could in half an hour; but would not
endure the slightest trace of error in a curve, or of bluntness in an
edge. His work is absolutely unreproveable; keen, and true, as Nature's
own; his entire force is in it, and fixed on seeing that every line of
it shall be sharp and right: the faithful energy is in him: we shall see
something come of that cornice: The fellow who inlaid the other (_b_),
will stay where he is for ever; and when he has inlaid one leaf up, will
inlay another down,--and so undulate up and down to all eternity: but
the man of _a_ and _d_ will cut his way forward, or there is no truth in
handicrafts, nor stubbornness in stone.

§ XVIII. But there is something else noticeable in those two cornices,
besides the energy of them: as opposed either to _b_, or the Greek
honeysuckle or egg patterns, they are _natural_ designs. The Greek egg
and arrow cornice is a nonsense cornice, very noble in its lines, but
utterly absurd in meaning. Arrows have had nothing to do with eggs (at
least since Leda's time), neither are the so-called arrows like arrows,
nor the eggs like eggs, nor the honeysuckles like honeysuckles; they are
all conventionalised into a monotonous successiveness of
nothing,--pleasant to the eye, useless to the thought. But those
Christian cornices are, as far as may be, suggestive; there is not the
tenth of the work in them that there is in the Greek arrows, but, as far
as that work will go, it has consistent intention; with the fewest
possible incisions, and those of the easiest shape, they suggest the
true image, of clusters of leaves, each leaf with its central depression
from root to point, and that distinctly visible at almost any distance
from the eye, and in almost any light.

§ XIX. Here, then, are two great new elements visible; energy and
naturalism:--Life, with submission to the laws of God, and love of his
works; this is Christianity, dealing with her classical models. Now look
back to what I said in Chap. 1. § XX. of this dealing of hers, and
invention of the new Doric line; then to what is above stated (§ VIII.)
respecting that new Doric, and the boughs of trees; and now to the
evidence in the cutting of the leaves on the same Doric section, and see
how the whole is beginning to come together.

§ XX. We said that something would come of these two cornices, _a_ and
_d_. In _e_ and _f_ we see that something _has_ come of them: _e_ is
also from St. Mark's, and one of the earliest examples in Venice of the
transition from the Byzantine to the Gothic cornice. It is already
singularly developed; flowers have been added between the clusters of
leaves, and the leaves themselves curled over: and observe the
well-directed thought of the sculptor in this curling;--the old
incisions are retained below, and their excessive rigidity is one of the
proofs of the earliness of the cornice; but those incisions now stand
for the _under_ surface of the leaf; and behold, when it turns over, on
the top of it you see true _ribs_. Look at the upper and under surface
of a cabbage-leaf, and see what quick steps we are making.

§ XXI. The fifth example (_f_) was cut in 1347; it is from the tomb of
Marco Giustiniani, in the church of St. John and Paul, and it exhibits
the character of the central Venetian Gothic fully developed. The lines
are all now soft and undulatory, though elastic; the sharp incisions
have become deeply-gathered folds; the hollow of the leaf is expressed
completely beneath, and its edges are touched with light, and incised
into several lobes, and their ribs delicately drawn above. (The flower
between is only accidentally absent; it occurs in most cornices of the
time.)

But in both these cornices the reader will notice that while the
naturalism of the sculpture is steadily on the increase, the classical
formalism is still retained. The leaves are accurately numbered, and
sternly set in their places; they are leaves in office, and dare not
stir nor wave. They have the shapes of leaves, but not the functions,
"having the form of knowledge, but denying the power thereof." What is
the meaning of this?

§ XXII. Look back to the XXXIIIrd paragraph of the first chapter, and
you will see the meaning of it. These cornices are the Venetian
Ecclesiastical Gothic; the Christian element struggling with the
Formalism of the Papacy,--the Papacy being entirely heathen in all its
principles. That officialism of the leaves and their ribs means
Apostolic succession, and I don't know how much more, and is already
preparing for the transition to old Heathenism again, and the
Renaissance.[86]

§ XXIII. Now look to the last cornice (_g_). That is Protestantism,--a
slight touch of Dissent, hardly amounting to schism, in those falling
leaves, but true life in the whole of it. The forms all broken through,
and sent heaven knows where, but the root held fast; and the strong sap
in the branches; and, best of all, good fruit ripening and opening
straight towards heaven, and in the face of it, even though some of the
leaves lie in the dust.

Now, observe. The cornice _f_ represents Heathenism and Papistry,
animated by the mingling of Christianity and nature. The good in it, the
life of it, the veracity and liberty of it, such as it has, are
Protestantism in its heart; the rigidity and saplessness are the
Romanism of it. It is the mind of Fra Angelico in the monk's
dress,--Christianity before the Reformation. The cornice _g_ has the
Lombardic life element in its fulness, with only some color and shape of
Classicalism mingled with it--the good of classicalism; as much method
and Formalism as are consistent with life, and fitting for it: The
continence within certain border lines, the unity at the root, the
simplicity of the great profile,--all these are the healthy classical
elements retained: the rest is reformation, new strength, and recovered
liberty.

§ XXIV. There is one more point about it especially noticeable. The
leaves are thoroughly natural in their general character, but they are
of no particular species: and after being something like cabbage-leaves
in the beginning, one of them suddenly becomes an ivy-leaf in the end.
Now I don't know what to say of this. I know it, indeed, to be a
classical character;--it is eminently characteristic of Southern work;
and markedly distinctive of it from the Northern ornament, which would
have been oak, or ivy, or apple, but not anything, nor two things in
one. It is, I repeat, a clearly classical element; but whether a good or
bad element, I am not sure;--whether it is the last trace of Centaurism
and other monstrosity dying away; or whether it has a figurative
purpose, legitimate in architecture (though never in painting), and has
been rightly retained by the Christian sculptor, to express the working
of that spirit which grafts one nature upon another, and discerns a law
in its members warring against the law of its mind.

§ XXV. These, then, being the points most noticeable in the spirit both
of the designs and the chiselling, we have now to return to the question
proposed in § XIII., and observe the modifications of form of profile
which resulted from the changing contours of the leafage; for up to §
XIII., we had, as usual, considered the possible conditions of form in
the abstract;--the modes in which they have been derived from each other
in actual practice require to be followed in their turn. How the Greek
Doric or Greek ogee cornices were invented is not easy to determine,
and, fortunately, is little to our present purpose; for the mediæval
ogee cornices have an independent development of their own, from the
first type of the concave cornice _a_ in Plate XV.

[Illustration: Fig. LXIII.]

§ XXVI. That cornice occurs, in the simplest work, perfectly pure, but
in finished work it was quickly felt that there was a meagreness in its
junction with the wall beneath it, where it was set as here at _a_, Fig.
LXIII., which could only be conquered by concealing such junction in a
bar of shadow. There were two ways of getting this bar: one by a
projecting roll at the foot of the cornice (_b_, Fig. LXIII.), the other
by slipping the whole cornice a little forward (_c_. Fig. LXIII.). From
these two methods arise two groups of cornices and capitals, which we
shall pursue in succession.

§ XXVII. First group. With the roll at the base (_b_, Fig. LXIII.). The
chain of its succession is represented from 1 to 6, in Plate XV.: 1 and
2 are the steps already gained, as in Fig. LXIII.; and in them the
profile of cornice used is _a_ of Plate XV., or a refined condition of
_b_ of Fig. V., p. 69, above. Now, keeping the same refined profile,
substitute the condition of it, _f_ of Fig. V. (and there accounted
for), above the roll here, and you have 3, Plate XV. This superadded
abacus was instantly felt to be harsh in its projecting angle; but you
know what to do with an angle when it is harsh. Use your simplest
chamfer on it (_a_ or _b_, Fig. LIII., page 287, above), but on the
visible side only, and you have fig. 4, Plate XV. (the top stone being
made deeper that you may have room to chamfer it). Now this fig. 4 is
the profile of Lombardic and Venetian early capitals and cornices, by
tens of thousands; and it continues into the late Venetian Gothic, with
this only difference, that as times advances, the vertical line at the
top of the original cornice begins to slope outwards, and through a
series of years rises like the hazel wand in the hand of a diviner:--but
how slowly! a stone dial which marches but 45 degrees in three
centuries, and through the intermediate condition 5 arrives at 6, and so
stays.

In tracing this chain I have kept all the profiles of the same height in
order to make the comparison more easy; the depth chosen is about
intermediate between that which is customary in cornices on the one
hand, which are often a little shorter, and capitals on the other, which
are often a little deeper.[87] And it is to be noted that the profiles 5
and 6 establish themselves in capitals chiefly, while 4 is retained in
cornices to the latest times.

[Illustration: Fig. LXIV.]

§ XXVIII. Second group (c, Fig. LXIII.). If the lower angle, which was
quickly felt to be hard, be rounded off, we have the form _a_, Fig.
LXIV. The front of the curved line is then decorated, as we have seen;
and the termination of the decorated surface marked by an incision, as
in an ordinary chamfer, as at _b_ here. This I believe to have been the
simple origin of most of the Venetian ogee cornices; but they are
farther complicated by the curves given to the leafage which flows over
them. In the ordinary Greek cornices, and in _a_ and _d_ of Plate XVI.,
the decoration is _incised_ from the outside profile, without any
suggestion of an interior surface of a different contour. But in the
leaf cornices which follow, the decoration is represented as _overlaid_
on one of the early profiles, and has another outside contour of its
own; which is, indeed, the true profile of the cornice, but beneath
which, more or less, the simpler profile is seen or suggested, which
terminates all the incisions of the chisel. This under profile will
often be found to be some condition of the type _a_ or _b_, Fig. LXIV.;
and the leaf profile to be another ogee with its fullest curve up
instead of down, lapping over the cornice edge above, so that the entire
profile might be considered as made up of two ogee curves laid, like
packed herrings, head to tail. Figures 8 and 9 of Plate XV. exemplify
this arrangement. Fig. 7 is a heavier contour, doubtless composed in the
same manner, but of which I had not marked the innermost profile, and
which I have given here only to complete the series which, from 7 to 12
inclusive, exemplifies the gradual restriction of the leaf outline, from
its boldest projection in the cornice to its most modest service in the
capital. This change, however, is not one which indicates difference of
age, but merely of office and position: the cornice 7 is from the tomb
of the Doge Andrea Dandolo (1350) in St. Mark's, 8 from a canopy over a
door of about the same period, 9 from the tomb of the Dogaressa Agnese
Venier (1411), 10 from that of Pietro Cornaro (1361),[88] and 11 from
that of Andrea Morosini (1347), all in the church of San Giov. and
Paola, all these being cornice profiles; and, finally, 12 from a capital
of the Ducal Palace, of fourteen century work.

§ XXIX. Now the reader will doubtless notice that in the three examples,
10 to 12, the leaf has a different contour from that of 7, 8, or 9. This
difference is peculiarly significant. I have always desired that the
reader should theoretically consider the capital as a concentration of
the cornice; but in practice it often happens that the cornice is, on
the contrary, an unrolled capital; and one of the richest early forms of
the Byzantine cornice (not given in Plate XV., because its separate
character and importance require examination apart) is nothing more than
an unrolled continuation of the lower range of acanthus leaves on the
Corinthian capital. From this cornice others appear to have been
derived, like _e_ in Plate XVI., in which the acanthus outline has
become confused with that of the honeysuckle, and the rosette of the
centre of the Corinthian capital introduced between them; and thus their
forms approach more and more to those derived from the cornice itself.
Now if the leaf has the contour of 10, 11, or 12, Plate XV., the profile
is either actually of a capital, or of a cornice derived from a capital;
while, if the leaf have the contour of 7 or 8, the profile is either
actually of a cornice or of a capital derived from a cornice. Where the
Byzantines use the acanthus, the Lombards use the Persepolitan
water-leaf; but the connection of the cornices and capitals is exactly
the same.

§ XXX. Thus far, however, we have considered the characters of profile
which are common to the cornice and capital both. We have now to note
what farther decorative features or peculiarities belong to the capital
itself, or result from the theoretical gathering of the one into the
other.

Look back to Fig. XXII., p. 110. The five types there given, represented
the five different methods of concentration of the root of cornices, _a_
of Fig. V. Now, as many profiles of cornices as were developed in Plate
XV. from this cornice root, there represented by the dotted slope, so
many may be applied to each of the five types in Fig. XXII.,--applied
simply in _a_ and _b_, but with farther modifications, necessitated by
their truncations or spurs, in _c_, _d_, and _e_.

Then, these cornice profiles having been so applied in such length and
slope as is proper for capitals, the farther condition comes into effect
described in Chapter IX. § XXIV., and any one of the cornices in Plate
XV. may become the _abacus_ of a capital formed out of any other, or
out of itself. The infinity of forms thus resultant cannot, as may well
be supposed, be exhibited or catalogued in the space at present
permitted to us: but the reader, once master of the principle, will
easily be able to investigate for himself the syntax of all examples
that may occur to him, and I shall only here, as a kind of exercise, put
before him a few of those which he will meet with most frequently in his
Venetian inquiries, or which illustrate points, not hitherto touched
upon, in the disposition of the abacus.

§ XXXI. In Plate XVII. the capital at the top, on the left hand, is the
rudest possible gathering of the plain Christian Doric cornice, _d_ of
Plate XV. The shaft is octagonal, and the capital is not cut to fit it,
but is square at the base; and the curve of its profile projects on two
of its sides more than on the other two, so as to make the abacus
oblong, in order to carry an oblong mass of brickwork, dividing one of
the upper lights of a Lombard campanile at Milan. The awkward stretching
of the brickwork, to do what the capital ought to have done, is very
remarkable. There is here no second superimposed abacus.

§ XXXII. The figure on the right hand, at the top, shows the simple but
perfect fulfilment of all the requirements in which the first example
fails. The mass of brickwork to be carried is exactly the same in size
and shape; but instead of being trusted to a single shaft, it has two of
smaller area (compare Chap. VIII., § XIII.), and all the expansion
necessary is now gracefully attained by their united capitals, hewn out
of one stone. Take the section of these capitals through their angle,
and nothing can be simpler or purer; it is composed of 2, in Plate XV.,
used for the capital itself, with _c_ of Fig. LXIII. used for the
abacus; the reader could hardly have a neater little bit of syntax for a
first lesson. If the section be taken through the side of the bell, the
capital profile is the root of cornices, _a_ of Fig. V., with the added
roll. This capital is somewhat remarkable in having its sides perfectly
straight, some slight curvature being usual on so bold a scale; but it
is all the better as a first example, the method of reduction being
of order _d_, in Fig. XXII., p. 110, and with a concave cut, as in
Fig. XXI., p. 109. These two capitals are from the cloister of the duomo
of Verona.

[Illustration: Plate XVII.
               CAPITALS CONCAVE GROUP.]

[Illustration: Fig. LXV.]

§ XXXIII. The lowermost figure in Plate XVII. represents an exquisitely
finished example of the same type, from St. Zeno of Verona. Above, at 2,
in Plate II., the plan of the shafts was given, but I inadvertently
reversed their position: in comparing that plan with Plate XVII., Plate
II. must be held upside down. The capitals, with the band connecting
them, are all cut out of one block; their profile is an adaptation of 4
of Plate XV., with a plain headstone superimposed. This method of
reduction is that of order _d_ in Fig. XXII., but the peculiarity of
treatment of their truncation is highly interesting. Fig. LXV.
represents the plans of the capitals at the base, the shaded parts being
the bells: the open line, the roll with its connecting band. The bell of
the one, it will be seen, is the exact reverse of that of the other: the
angle truncations are, in both, curved horizontally as well as
uprightly; but their curve is convex in the one, and in the other
concave. Plate XVII. will show the effect of both, with the farther
incisions, to the same depth, on the flank of the one with the concave
truncation, which join with the rest of its singularly bold and keen
execution in giving the impression of its rather having been cloven
into its form by the sweeps of a sword, than by the dull travail of a
chisel. Its workman was proud of it, as well he might be: he has written
his name upon its front (I would that more of his fellows had been as
kindly vain), and the goodly stone proclaims for ever, ADAMINUS DE
SANCTO GIORGIO ME FECIT.

§ XXXIV. The reader will easily understand that the gracefulness of this
kind of truncation, as he sees it in Plate XVII., soon suggested the
idea of reducing it to a vegetable outline, and laying four healing
leaves, as it were, upon the wounds which the sword had made. These four
leaves, on the truncations of the capital, correspond to the four leaves
which we saw, in like manner, extend themselves over the spurs of the
base, and, as they increase in delicacy of execution, form one of the
most lovely groups of capitals which the Gothic workmen ever invented;
represented by two perfect types in the capitals of the Piazzetta
columns of Venice. But this pure group is an isolated one; it remains in
the first simplicity of its conception far into the thirteenth century,
while around it rise up a crowd of other forms, imitative of the old
Corinthian, and in which other and younger leaves spring up in luxuriant
growth among the primal four. The varieties of their grouping we shall
enumerate hereafter: one general characteristic of them all must be
noted here.

§ XXXV. The reader has been told repeatedly[89] that there are two, and
only two, real orders of capitals, originally represented by the
Corinthian and the Doric; and distinguished by the concave or convex
contours of their bells, as shown by the dotted lines at _e_, Fig. V.,
p. 65. And hitherto, respecting the capital, we have been exclusively
concerned with the methods in which these two families of simple
contours have gathered themselves together, and obtained reconciliation
to the abacus above, and the shaft below. But the last paragraph
introduces us to the surface ornament disposed upon these, in the
chiselling of which the characters described above, § XXVIII., which
are but feebly marked in the cornice, boldly distinguish and divide the
families of the capital.

§ XXXVI. Whatever the nature of the ornament be, it must clearly have
relief of some kind, and must present projecting surfaces separated by
incisions. But it is a very material question whether the contour,
hitherto broadly considered as that of the entire bell, shall be that of
the _outside_ of the projecting and relieved ornaments, or of the
_bottoms of the incisions_ which divide them; whether, that is to say,
we shall first cut out the bell of our capital quite smooth, and then
cut farther into it, with incisions, which shall leave ornamental forms
in relief, or whether, in originally cutting the contour of the bell, we
shall leave projecting bits of stone, which we may afterwards work into
the relieved ornament.

§ XXXVII. Now, look back to Fig. V., p. 65. Clearly, if to ornament the
already hollowed profile, _b_, we cut deep incisions into it, we shall
so far weaken it at the top, that it will nearly lose all its supporting
power. Clearly, also, if to ornament the already bulging profile _c_ we
were to leave projecting pieces of stone outside of it, we should nearly
destroy all its relation to the original sloping line X, and produce an
unseemly and ponderous mass, hardly recognizable as a cornice profile.
It is evident, on the other hand, that we can afford to cut into this
profile without fear of destroying its strength, and that we can afford
to leave projections outside of the other, without fear of destroying
its lightness. Such is, accordingly, the natural disposition of the
sculpture, and the two great families of capitals are therefore
distinguished, not merely by their concave and convex contours, but by
the ornamentation being left outside the bell of the one, and cut into
the bell of the other; so that, in either case, the ornamental portions
will fall _between the dotted lines_ at _e_, Fig. V., and the pointed
oval, or vesica piscis, which is traced by them, may be called the Limit
of ornamentation.

§ XXXVIII. Several distinctions in the quantity and style of the
ornament must instantly follow from this great distinction in its
position. First, in its quantity. For, observe: since in the Doric
profile, _c_ of Fig. V., the contour itself is to be composed of the
surface of the ornamentation, this ornamentation must be close and
united enough to form, or at least suggest, a continuous surface; it
must, therefore, be rich in quantity and close in aggregation; otherwise
it will destroy the massy character of the profile it adorns, and
approximate it to its opposite, the concave. On the other hand, the
ornament left projecting from the concave, must be sparing enough, and
dispersed enough, to allow the concave bell to be clearly seen beneath
it; otherwise it will choke up the concave profile, and approximate it
to its opposite, the convex.

§ XXXIX. And, secondly, in its style. For, clearly, as the sculptor of
the concave profile must leave masses of rough stone prepared for his
outer ornament, and cannot finish them at once, but must complete the
cutting of the smooth bell beneath first, and then return to the
projecting masses (for if he were to finish these latter first, they
would assuredly, if delicate or sharp, be broken as he worked on; since,
I say, he must work in this foreseeing and predetermined method, he is
sure to reduce the system of his ornaments to some definite symmetrical
order before he begins); and the habit of conceiving beforehand all that
he has to do, will probably render him not only more orderly in its
arrangement, but more skilful and accurate in its execution, than if he
could finish all as he worked on. On the other hand, the sculptor of the
convex profile has its smooth surface laid before him, as a piece of
paper on which he can sketch at his pleasure; the incisions he makes in
it are like touches of a dark pencil; and he is at liberty to roam over
the surface in perfect freedom, with light incisions or with deep;
finishing here, suggesting there, or perhaps in places leaving the
surface altogether smooth. It is ten to one, therefore, but that, if he
yield to the temptation, he becomes irregular in design, and rude in
handling; and we shall assuredly find the two families of capitals
distinguished, the one by its symmetrical, thoroughly organised, and
exquisitely executed ornament, the other by its rambling, confused, and
rudely chiselled ornament: But, on the other hand, while we shall
often have to admire the disciplined precision of the one, and as often
to regret the irregular rudeness of the other, we shall not fail to find
balancing qualities in both. The severity of the disciplinarian capital
represses the power of the imagination; it gradually degenerates into
Formalism; and the indolence which cannot escape from its stern demand
of accurate workmanship, seeks refuge in copyism of established forms,
and loses itself at last in lifeless mechanism. The license of the
other, though often abused, permits full exercise to the imagination:
the mind of the sculptor, unshackled by the niceties of chiselling,
wanders over its orbed field in endless fantasy; and, when generous as
well as powerful, repays the liberty which has been granted to it with
interest, by developing through the utmost wildness and fulness of its
thoughts, an order as much more noble than the mechanical symmetry of
the opponent school, as the domain which it regulates is vaster.

[Illustration: Plate XVIII.
               CAPITALS CONVEX GROUP.]

§ XL. And now the reader shall judge whether I had not reason to cast
aside the so-called Five orders of the Renaissance architects, with
their volutes and fillets, and to tell him that there were only two real
orders, and that there could never be more.[90] For we now find that
these two great and real orders are representative of the two great
influences which must for ever divide the heart of man: the one of
Lawful Discipline, with its perfection and order, but its danger of
degeneracy into Formalism; the other of Lawful Freedom, with its vigor
and variety, but its danger of degeneracy into Licentiousness.

§ XLI. I shall not attempt to give any illustrations here of the most
elaborate developments of either order; they will be better given on a
larger scale: but the examples in Plate XVII. and XVIII. represent the
two methods of ornament in their earliest appliance. The two lower
capitals in Plate XVII. are a pure type of the concave school; the two
in the centre of Plate XVIII., of the convex. At the top of Plate XVIII.
are two Lombardic capitals; that on the left from Sta. Sofia at Padua,
that on the right from the cortile of St. Ambrogio at Milan. They both
have the concave angle truncation; but being of date prior to the time
when the idea of the concave bell was developed, they are otherwise left
square, and decorated with the surface ornament characteristic of the
convex school. The relation of the designs to each other is interesting;
the cross being prominent in the centre of each, but more richly
relieved in that from St. Ambrogio. The two beneath are from the
southern portico of St. Mark's; the shafts having been of different
lengths, and neither, in all probability, originally intended for their
present place, they have double abaci, of which the uppermost is the
cornice running round the whole façade. The zigzagged capital is highly
curious, and in its place very effective and beautiful, although one of
the exceptions which it was above noticed that we should sometimes find
to the law stated in § XV. above.

[Illustration: Fig. LXVI.]

§ XLII. The lower capital, which is also of the true convex school,
exhibits one of the conditions of the spurred type, _e_ of Fig. XXII.,
respecting which one or two points must be noticed.

If we were to take up the plan of the simple spur, represented at _e_ in
Fig. XXII., p. 110, and treat it, with the salvia leaf, as we did the
spur of the base, we should have for the head of our capital a plan like
Fig. LXVI., which is actually that of one of the capitals of the Fondaco
de' Turchi at Venice; with this only difference, that the intermediate
curves between the spurs would have been circular: the reason they are
not so, here, is that the decoration, instead of being confined to the
spur, is now spread over the whole mass, and contours are therefore
given to the intermediate curves which fit them for this ornament; the
inside shaded space being the head of the shaft, and the outer, the
abacus. The reader has in Fig. LXVI. a characteristic type of the plans
of the spurred capitals, generally preferred by the sculptors of the
convex school, but treated with infinite variety, the spurs often being
cut into animal forms, or the incisions between them multiplied, for
richer effect; and in our own Norman capital the type _c_ of Fig. XXII.
is variously subdivided by incisions on its slope, approximating in
general effect to many conditions of the real spurred type, _e_, but
totally differing from them in principle.

[Illustration: Fig. LXVII.]

[Illustration: Fig. LXVIII.]

§ XLIII. The treatment of the spur in the concave school is far more
complicated, being borrowed in nearly every case from the original
Corinthian. Its plan may be generally represented by Fig. LXVII. The
spur itself is carved into a curling tendril or concave leaf, which
supports the projecting angle of a four-sided abacus, whose hollow sides
fall back behind the bell, and have generally a rosette or other
ornament in their centres. The mediæval architects often put another
square abacus above all, as represented by the shaded portion of Fig.
LXVII., and some massy conditions of this form, elaborately ornamented,
are very beautiful; but it is apt to become rigid and effeminate, as
assuredly it is in the original Corinthian, which is thoroughly mean and
meagre in its upper tendrils and abacus.

§ XLIV. The lowest capital in Plate XVIII. is from St. Mark's, and
singular in having double spurs; it is therefore to be compared with
the doubly spurred base, also from St Mark's, in Plate XI. In other
respects it is a good example of the union of breadth of mass with
subtlety of curvature, which characterises nearly all the spurred
capitals of the convex school. Its plan is given in Fig. LXVIII.: the
inner shaded circle is the head of the shaft; the white cross, the
bottom of the capital, which expands itself into the external shaded
portions at the top. Each spur, thus formed, is cut like a ship's bow,
with the Doric profile; the surfaces so obtained are then charged with
arborescent ornament.

§ XLV. I shall not here farther exemplify the conditions of the
treatment of the spur, because I am afraid of confusing the reader's
mind, and diminishing the distinctness of his conception of the
differences between the two great orders, which it has been my principal
object to develope throughout this chapter. If all my readers lived in
London, I could at once fix this difference in their minds by a simple,
yet somewhat curious illustration. In many parts of the west end of
London, as, for instance, at the corners of Belgrave Square, and the
north side of Grosvenor Square, the Corinthian capitals of newly-built
houses are put into cages of wire. The wire cage is the exact form of
the typical capital of the convex school; the Corinthian capital,
within, is a finished and highly decorated example of the concave. The
space between the cage and capital is the limit of ornamentation.

§ XLVI. Those of my readers, however, to whom this illustration is
inaccessible, must be content with the two profiles, 13 and 14, on Plate
XV. If they will glance along the line of sections from 1 to 6, they
will see that the profile 13 is their final development, with a
superadded cornice for its abacus. It is taken from a capital in a very
important ruin of a palace, near the Rialto of Venice, and hereafter to
be described; the projection, outside of its principal curve, is the
profile of its _superadded_ leaf ornamentation; it may be taken as one
of the simplest, yet a perfect type of the concave group.

§ XLVII. The profile 14 is that of the capital of the main shaft of the
northern portico of St. Mark's, the most finished example I ever met
with of the convex family, to which, in spite of the central inward bend
of its profile, it is marked as distinctly belonging, by the bold convex
curve at its root, springing from the shaft in the line of the Christian
Doric cornice, and exactly reversing the structure of the other profile,
which rises from the shaft, like a palm leaf from its stem. Farther, in
the profile 13, the innermost line is that of the bell; but in the
profile 14, the outermost line is that of the bell, and the inner line
is the limit of the incisions of the chisel, in undercutting a
reticulated veil of ornament, surrounding a flower like a lily; most
ingeniously, and, I hope, justly, conjectured by the Marchese Selvatico
to have been intended for an imitation of the capitals of the temple of
Solomon, which Hiram made, with "nets of checker work, and wreaths of
chain work for the chapiters that were on the top of the pillars ... and
the chapiters that were upon the top of the pillars were of lily work in
the porch." (1 Kings, vii. 17, 19.)

§ XLVIII. On this exquisite capital there is imposed an abacus of the
profile with which we began our investigation long ago, the profile _a_
of Fig. V. This abacus is formed by the cornice already given, _a_, of
Plate XVI.: and therefore we have, in this lovely Venetian capital, the
summary of the results of our investigation, from its beginning to its
close: the type of the first cornice; the decoration of it, in its
emergence from the classical models; the gathering into the capital; the
superimposition of the secondary cornice, and the refinement of the bell
of the capital by triple curvature in the two limits of chiselling. I
cannot express the exquisite refinements of the curves on the small
scale of Plate XV.; I will give them more accurately in a larger
engraving; but the scale on which they are here given will not prevent
the reader from perceiving, and let him note it thoughtfully, that the
outer curve of the noble capital is the one which was our first example
of associated curves; that I have had no need, throughout the whole of
our inquiry, to refer to any other ornamental line than the three which
I at first chose, the simplest of those which Nature set by chance
before me; and that this lily, of the delicate Venetian marble, has but
been wrought, by the highest human art, into the same line which the
clouds disclose, when they break from the rough rocks of the flank of
the Matterhorn.


FOOTNOTES:

  [84] In very early Doric it was an absolute right line; and that
    capital is therefore derived from the pure cornice root, represented
    by the dotted line.

  [85] The word banded is used by Professor Willis in a different
    sense; which I would respect, by applying it in his sense always to
    the Impost, and in mine to the capital itself. (This note is not for
    the general reader, who need not trouble himself about the matter.)

  [86] The Renaissance period being one of return to formalism on the
    one side, of utter licentiousness on the other, so that sometimes,
    as here, I have to declare its lifelessness, at other times (Chap.
    XXV., § XVII.) its lasciviousness. There is, of course, no
    contradiction in this: but the reader might well ask how I knew the
    change from the base 11 to the base 12, in Plate XII., to be one
    from temperance to luxury; and from the cornice _f_ to the cornice
    _g_, in Plate XVI., to be one from formalism to vitality. I know it,
    both by certain internal evidences, on which I shall have to dwell
    at length hereafter, and by the context of the works of the time.
    But the outward signs might in both ornaments be the same,
    distinguishable only as signs of opposite tendencies by the event of
    both. The blush of shame cannot always be told from the blush of
    indignation.

  [87] The reader must always remember that a cornice, in becoming a
    capital, must, if not originally bold and deep, have depth added to
    its profile, in order to reach the just proportion of the lower
    member of the shaft head; and that therefore the small Greek egg
    cornices are utterly incapable of becoming capitals till they have
    totally changed their form and depth. The Renaissance architects,
    who never obtained hold of a right principle but they made it worse
    than a wrong one by misapplication, caught the idea of turning the
    cornice into a capital, but did not comprehend the necessity of the
    accompanying change of depth. Hence we have pilaster heads formed of
    small egg cornices, and that meanest of all mean heads of shafts,
    the coarse Roman Doric profile chopped into a small egg and arrow
    moulding, both which may be seen disfiguring half the buildings in
    London.

  [88] I have taken these dates roughly from Selvatico; their absolute
    accuracy to within a year or two, is here of no importance.

  [89] Chap. I. § XIX., Appendix 7: and Chap. VI. § V.

  [90] Chap. I., § XIX.




CHAPTER XXVIII.

  THE ARCHIVOLT AND APERTURE.


[Illustration: Plate XIX.
               ARCHIVOLT DECORATION.
               AT VERONA.]

§ I. If the windows and doors of some of our best northern Gothic
buildings were built up, and the ornament of their archivolts concealed,
there would often remain little but masses of dead wall and unsightly
buttress; the whole vitality of the building consisting in the graceful
proportions or rich mouldings of its apertures. It is not so in the
south, where, frequently, the aperture is a mere dark spot on the
variegated wall; but there the column, with its horizontal or curved
architrave, assumes an importance of another kind, equally dependent
upon the methods of lintel and archivolt decoration. These, though in
their richness of minor variety they defy all exemplification, may be
very broadly generalized.

Of the mere lintel, indeed, there is no specific decoration, nor can be;
it has no organism to direct its ornament, and therefore may receive any
kind and degree of ornament, according to its position. In a Greek
temple, it has meagre horizontal lines; in a Romanesque church, it
becomes a row of upright niches, with an apostle in each; and may become
anything else at the architect's will. But the arch head has a natural
organism, which separates its ornament into distinct families, broadly
definable.

§ II. In speaking of the arch-line and arch masonry, we considered the
arch to be cut straight through the wall; so that, if half built, it
would have the appearance at _a_, Fig. LXIX. But in the chapter on Form
of Apertures, we found that the side of the arch, or jamb of the
aperture, might often require to be bevelled, so as to give the section
_b_, Fig. LXIX. It is easily conceivable that when two ranges of
voussoirs were used, one over another, it would be easier to leave
those beneath, of a smaller diameter, than to bevel them to accurate
junction with those outside. Whether influenced by this facility, or by
decorative instinct, the early northern builders often substitute for
the bevel the third condition, _c_, of Fig. LXIX.; so that, of the three
forms in that figure, _a_ belongs principally to the south, _c_ to the
north, and _b_ indifferently to both.

[Illustration: Fig. LXIX.]

§ III. If the arch in the northern building be very deep, its depth will
probably be attained by a succession of steps, like that in _c_; and the
richest results of northern archivolt decoration are entirely based on
the aggregation of the ornament of these several steps; while those of
the south are only the complete finish and perfection of the ornament of
one. In this ornament of the single arch, the points for general note
are very few.

§ IV. It was, in the first instance, derived from the classical
architrave,[91] and the early Romanesque arches are nothing but such an
architrave, bent round. The horizontal lines of the latter become
semicircular, but their importance and value remain exactly the same;
their continuity is preserved across all the voussoirs, and the joints
and functions of the latter are studiously concealed. As the builders
get accustomed to the arch, and love it better, they cease to be ashamed
of its structure: the voussoirs begin to show themselves confidently,
and fight for precedence with the architrave lines; and there is an
entanglement of the two structures, in consequence, like the circular
and radiating lines of a cobweb, until at last the architrave lines get
worsted, and driven away outside of the voussoirs; being permitted to
stay at all only on condition of their dressing themselves in mediæval
costume, as in the plate opposite.

§ V. In other cases, however, before the entire discomfiture of the
architrave, a treaty of peace is signed between the adverse parties on
these terms: That the architrave shall entirely dismiss its inner three
meagre lines, and leave the space of them to the voussoirs, to display
themselves after their manner; but that, in return for this concession,
the architrave shall have leave to expand the small cornice which
usually terminates it (the reader had better look at the original form
in that of the Erechtheum, in the middle of the Elgin room of the
British Museum) into bolder prominence, and even to put brackets under
it, as if it were a roof cornice, and thus mark with a bold shadow the
terminal line of the voussoirs. This condition is seen in the arch from
St. Pietro of Pistoja, Plate XIII., above.

§ VI. If the Gothic spirit of the building be thoroughly determined, and
victorious, the architrave cornice is compelled to relinquish its
classical form, and take the profile of a Gothic cornice or dripstone;
while, in other cases, as in much of the Gothic of Verona, it is forced
to disappear altogether. But the voussoirs then concede, on the other
hand, so much of their dignity as to receive a running ornament of
foliage or animals, like a classical frieze, and continuous round the
arch. In fact, the contest between the adversaries may be seen running
through all the early architecture of Italy: success inclining sometimes
to the one, sometimes to the other, and various kinds of truce or
reconciliation being effected between them: sometimes merely formal,
sometimes honest and affectionate, but with no regular succession in
time. The greatest victory of the voussoir is to annihilate the cornice,
and receive an ornament of its own outline, and entirely limited by its
own joints: and yet this may be seen in the very early apse of Murano.

§ VII. The most usual condition, however, is that unity of the two
members above described, § V., and which may be generally represented by
the archivolt section _a_, Fig. LXX.; and from this descend a family of
Gothic archivolts of the highest importance. For the cornice, thus
attached to the arch, suffers exactly the same changes as the level
cornice, or capital; receives, in due time, its elaborate ogee profile
and leaf ornaments, like Fig. 8 or 9 of Plate XV.; and, when the shaft
loses its shape, and is lost in the later Gothic jamb, the archivolt has
influence enough to introduce this ogee profile in the jamb also,
through the banded impost: and we immediately find ourselves involved in
deep successions of ogee mouldings in sides of doors and windows, which
never would have been thought of, but for the obstinate resistance of
the classical architrave to the attempts of the voussoir at its
degradation or banishment.

[Illustration: Fig. LXX.]

§ VIII. This, then, will be the first great head under which we shall in
future find it convenient to arrange a large number of archivolt
decorations. It is the distinctively Southern and Byzantine form, and
typically represented by the section _a_, of Fig. LXX.; and it is
susceptible of almost every species of surface ornament, respecting
which only this general law may be asserted: that, while the outside or
vertical surface may properly be decorated, and yet the soffit or under
surface left plain, the soffit is never to be decorated, and the outer
surface left plain. Much beautiful sculpture is, in the best Byzantine
buildings, half lost by being put under soffits; but the eye is led to
discover it, and even to demand it, by the rich chasing of the outside
of the voussoirs. It would have been an hypocrisy to carve them
externally only. But there is not the smallest excuse for carving the
soffit, and not the outside; for, in that case, we approach the building
under the idea of its being perfectly plain; we do not look for the
soffit decoration, and, of course, do not see it: or, if we do, it is
merely to regret that it should not be in a better place. In the
Renaissance architects, it may, perhaps, for once, be considered a
merit, that they put their bad decoration systematically in the places
where we should least expect it, and can seldomest see it:--Approaching
the Scuola di San Rocco, you probably will regret the extreme plainness
and barrenness of the window traceries; but, if you will go very close
to the wall beneath the windows, you may, on sunny days, discover a
quantity of panel decorations which the ingenious architect has
concealed under the soffits.

The custom of decorating the arch soffit with panelling is a Roman
application of the Greek roof ornament, which, whatever its intrinsic
merit (compare Chap. XXIX. § IV.), may rationally be applied to waggon
vaults, as of St. Peter's, and to arch soffits under which one walks.
But the Renaissance architects had not wit enough to reflect that people
usually do not walk through windows.

§ IX. So far, then, of the Southern archivolt: In Fig. LXIX., above, it
will be remembered that _c_ represents the simplest form of the
Northern. In the farther development of this, which we have next to
consider, the voussoirs, in consequence of their own negligence or
over-confidence, sustain a total and irrecoverable defeat. That
archivolt is in its earliest conditions perfectly pure and
undecorated,--the simplest and rudest of Gothic forms. Necessarily, when
it falls on the pier, and meets that of the opposite arch, the entire
section of masonry is in the shape of a cross, and is carried by the
crosslet shaft, which we above stated to be distinctive of Northern
design. I am more at a loss to account for the sudden and fixed
development of this type of archivolt than for any other architectural
transition with which I am acquainted. But there it is, pure and firmly
established, as early as the building of St. Michele of Pavia; and we
have thenceforward only to observe what comes of it.

§ X. We find it first, as I said, perfectly barren; cornice and
architrave altogether ignored, the existence of such things practically
denied, and a plain, deep-cut recess with a single mighty shadow
occupying their place. The voussoirs, thinking their great adversary
utterly defeated, are at no trouble to show themselves; visible enough
in both the upper and under archivolts, they are content to wait the
time when, as might have been hoped, they should receive a new
decoration peculiar to themselves.

§ XI. In this state of paralysis, or expectation, their flank is turned
by an insidious chamfer. The edges of the two great blank archivolts are
felt to be painfully conspicuous; all the four are at once beaded or
chamfered, as at _b_, Fig. LXX.; a rich group of deep lines, running
concentrically with the arch, is the result on the instant, and the fate
of the voussoirs is sealed. They surrender at once without a struggle,
and unconditionally; the chamfers deepen and multiply themselves, cover
the soffit, ally themselves with other forms resulting from grouped
shafts or traceries, and settle into the inextricable richness of the
fully developed Gothic jamb and arch; farther complicated in the end by
the addition of niches to their recesses, as above described.

§ XII. The voussoirs, in despair, go over to the classical camp, in hope
of receiving some help or tolerance from their former enemies. They
receive it indeed: but as traitors should, to their own eternal
dishonor. They are sharply chiselled at the joints, or rusticated, or
cut into masks and satyrs' heads, and so set forth and pilloried in the
various detestable forms of which the simplest is given above in Plate
XIII. (on the left); and others may be seen in nearly every large
building in London, more especially in the bridges; and, as if in pure
spite at the treatment they had received from the archivolt, they are
now not content with vigorously showing their lateral joints, but shape
themselves into right-angled steps at their heads, cutting to pieces
their limiting line, which otherwise would have had sympathy with that
of the arch, and fitting themselves to their new friend, the Renaissance
Ruled Copy-book wall. It had been better they had died ten times over,
in their own ancient cause, than thus prolonged their existence.

§ XIII. We bid them farewell in their dishonor, to return to our
victorious chamfer. It had not, we said, obtained so easy a conquest,
unless by the help of certain forms of the grouped shaft. The chamfer
was quite enough to decorate the archivolts, if there were no more than
two; but if, as above noticed in § III., the archivolt was very deep,
and composed of a succession of such steps, the multitude of chamferings
were felt to be weak and insipid, and instead of dealing with the
outside edges of the archivolts, the group was softened by introducing
solid shafts in their dark inner angles. This, the manliest and best
condition of the early northern jamb and archivolt, is represented in
section at fig. 12 of Plate II.; and its simplest aspect in Plate V.,
from the Broletto of Como,--an interesting example, because there the
voussoirs being in the midst of their above-described southern contest
with the architrave, were better prepared for the flank attack upon them
by the shaft and chamfer, and make a noble resistance, with the help of
color, in which even the shaft itself gets slightly worsted, and cut
across in several places, like General Zach's column at Marengo.

§ XIV. The shaft, however, rapidly rallies, and brings up its own
peculiar decorations to its aid; and the intermediate archivolts receive
running or panelled ornaments, also, until we reach the exquisitely rich
conditions of our own Norman archivolts, and of the parallel Lombardic
designs, such as the entrance of the Duomo, and of San Fermo, at Verona.
This change, however, occupies little time, and takes place principally
in doorways, owing to the greater thickness of wall, and depth of
archivolt; so that we find the rich shafted succession of ornament, in
the doorway and window aperture, associated with the earliest and rudest
double archivolt, in the nave arches, at St. Michele of Pavia. The nave
arches, therefore, are most usually treated by the chamfer, and the
voussoirs are there defeated much sooner than by the shafted
arrangements, which they resist, as we saw, in the south by color; and
even in the north, though forced out of their own shape, they take that
of birds' or monsters' heads, which for some time peck and pinch the
rolls of the archivolt to their hearts' content; while the Norman zigzag
ornament allies itself with them, each zigzag often restraining itself
amicably between the joints of each voussoir in the ruder work, and even
in the highly finished arches, distinctly presenting a concentric or
sunlike arrangement of lines; so much so, as to prompt the conjecture,
above stated, Chap. XX. § XXVI., that all such ornaments were intended
to be typical of light issuing from the orb of the arch. I doubt the
intention, but acknowledge the resemblance; which perhaps goes far to
account for the never-failing delightfulness of this zigzag decoration.
The diminution of the zigzag, as it gradually shares the defeat of the
voussoir, and is at last overwhelmed by the complicated, railroad-like
fluency of the later Gothic mouldings, is to me one of the saddest
sights in the drama of architecture.

§ XV. One farther circumstance is deserving of especial note in Plate
V., the greater depth of the voussoirs at the top of the arch. This has
been above alluded to as a feature of good construction, Chap. XI., §
III.; it is to be noted now as one still more valuable in decoration:
for when we arrive at the deep succession of concentric archivolts, with
which northern portals, and many of the associated windows, are headed,
we immediately find a difficulty in reconciling the outer curve with the
inner. If, as is sometimes the case, the width of the group of
archivolts be twice or three times that of the inner aperture, the inner
arch may be distinctly pointed, and the outer one, if drawn with
concentric arcs, approximate very nearly to a round arch. This is
actually the case in the later Gothic of Verona; the outer line of the
archivolt having a hardly perceptible point, and every inner arch of
course forming the point more distinctly, till the innermost becomes a
lancet. By far the nobler method, however, is that of the pure early
Italian Gothic; to make every outer arch a _magnified fac-simile_ of the
innermost one, every arc including the same number of degrees, but
degrees of a larger circle. The result is the condition represented in
Plate V., often found in far bolder development; exquisitely springy and
elastic in its expression, and entirely free from the heaviness and
monotony of the deep northern archivolts.

§ XVI. We have not spoken of the intermediate form, _b_, of Fig. LXIX.
(which its convenience for admission of light has rendered common in
nearly all architectures), because it has no transitions peculiar to
itself: in the north it sometimes shares the fate of the outer
architrave, and is channelled into longitudinal mouldings; sometimes
remains smooth and massy, as in military architecture, or in the simpler
forms of domestic and ecclesiastical. In Italy it receives surface
decoration like the architrave, but has, perhaps, something of peculiar
expression in being placed between the tracery of the window within, and
its shafts and tabernacle work without, as in the Duomo of Florence: in
this position it is always kept smooth in surface, and inlaid (or
painted) with delicate arabesques; while the tracery and the tabernacle
work are richly sculptured. The example of its treatment by colored
voussoirs, given in Plate XIX., may be useful to the reader as a kind of
central expression of the aperture decoration of the pure Italian
Gothic;--aperture decoration proper; applying no shaft work to the
jambs, but leaving the bevelled opening unenriched; using on the outer
archivolt the voussoirs and concentric architrave in reconcilement (the
latter having, however, some connection with the Norman zigzag); and
beneath them, the pure Italian two-pieced and mid-cusped arch, with rich
cusp decoration. It is a Veronese arch, probably of the thirteenth
century, and finished with extreme care; the red portions are all in
brick, delicately cast: and the most remarkable feature of the whole is
the small piece of brick inlaid on the angle of each stone voussoir,
with a most just feeling, which every artist will at once understand,
that the color ought not to be let go all at once.

§ XVII. We have traced the various conditions of treatment in the
archivolt alone; but, except in what has been said of the peculiar
expression of the voussoirs, we might throughout have spoken in the same
terms of the jamb. Even a parallel to the expression of the voussoir may
be found in the Lombardic and Norman divisions of the shafts, by zigzags
and other transverse ornamentation, which in the end are all swept away
by the canaliculated mouldings. Then, in the recesses of these and of
the archivolts alike, the niche and statue decoration develops itself;
and the vaulted and cavernous apertures are covered with incrustations
of fretwork, and with every various application of foliage to their
fantastic mouldings.

§ XVIII. I have kept the inquiry into the proper ornament of the
archivolt wholly free from all confusion with the questions of beauty in
tracery; for, in fact, all tracery is a mere multiplication and
entanglement of small archivolts, and its cusp ornament is a minor
condition of that proper to the spandril. It does not reach its
completely defined form until the jamb and archivolt have been divided
into longitudinal mouldings; and then the tracery is formed by the
innermost group of the shafts or fillets, bent into whatever forms or
foliations the designer may choose; but this with a delicacy of
adaptation which I rather choose to illustrate by particular examples,
of which we shall meet with many in the course of our inquiry, than to
delay the reader by specifying here. As for the conditions of beauty in
the disposition of the tracery bars, I see no hope of dealing with the
subject fairly but by devoting, if I can find time, a separate essay to
it--which, in itself, need not be long, but would involve, before it
could be completed, the examination of the whole mass of materials
lately collected by the indefatigable industry of the English architects
who have devoted their special attention to this subject, and which are
of the highest value as illustrating the chronological succession or
mechanical structure of tracery, but which, in most cases, touch on
their æsthetic merits incidentally only. Of works of this kind, by far
the best I have met with is Mr. Edmund Sharpe's, on Decorated Windows,
which seems to me, as far as a cursory glance can enable me to judge, to
exhaust the subject as respects English Gothic; and which may be
recommended to the readers who are interested in the subject, as
containing a clear and masterly enunciation of the general principles by
which the design of tracery has been regulated, from its first
development to its final degradation.


FOOTNOTES:

  [91] The architrave is properly the horizontal piece of stone laid
    across the tops of the pillars in Greek buildings, and commonly
    marked with horizontal lines, obtained by slight projections of its
    surface, while it is protected above in the richer orders, by a
    small cornice.




CHAPTER XXIX.

  THE ROOF.


§ I. The modes of decoration hitherto considered, have been common to
the exteriors and interiors of all noble buildings; and we have taken no
notice of the various kinds of ornament which require protection from
weather, and are necessarily confined to interior work. But in the case
of the roof, the exterior and interior treatments become, as we saw in
construction, so also in decoration, separated by broad and bold
distinctions. One side of a wall is, in most cases, the same as another,
and if its structure be concealed, it is mostly on the inside; but, in
the roof, the anatomical structure, out of which decoration should
naturally spring, is visible, if at all, in the interior only: so that
the subject of internal ornament becomes both wide and important, and
that of external, comparatively subordinate.

§ II. Now, so long as we were concerned principally with the outside of
buildings, we might with safety leave expressional character out of the
question for the time, because it is not to be expected that all persons
who pass the building, or see it from a distance, shall be in the temper
which the building is properly intended to induce; so that ornaments
somewhat at variance with this temper may often be employed externally
without painful effect. But these ornaments would be inadmissible in the
interior, for those who enter will for the most part either be in the
proper temper which the building requires, or desirous of acquiring it.
(The distinction is not rigidly observed by the mediæval builders, and
grotesques, or profane subjects, occur in the interior of churches, in
bosses, crockets, capitals, brackets, and such other portions of minor
ornament: but we do not find the interior wall covered with hunting and
battle pieces, as often the Lombardic exteriors.) And thus the interior
expression of the roof or ceiling becomes necessarily so various, and
the kind and degree of fitting decoration so dependent upon particular
circumstances, that it is nearly impossible to classify its methods, or
limit its application.

§ III. I have little, therefore, to say here, and that touching rather
the omission than the selection of decoration, as far as regards
interior roofing. Whether of timber or stone, roofs are necessarily
divided into surfaces, and ribs or beams;--surfaces, flat or carved;
ribs, traversing these in the directions where main strength is
required; or beams, filling the hollow of the dark gable with the
intricate roof-tree, or supporting the flat ceiling. Wherever the ribs
and beams are simply and unaffectedly arranged, there is no difficulty
about decoration; the beams may be carved, the ribs moulded, and the eye
is satisfied at once; but when the vaulting is unribbed, as in plain
waggon vaults and much excellent early Gothic, or when the ceiling is
flat, it becomes a difficult question how far their services may receive
ornamentation independent of their structure. I have never myself seen a
flat ceiling satisfactorily decorated, except by painting: there is much
good and fanciful panelling in old English domestic architecture, but it
always is in some degree meaningless and mean. The flat ceilings of
Venice, as in the Scuola di San Rocco and Ducal Palace, have in their
vast panellings some of the noblest paintings (on stretched canvas)
which the world possesses: and this is all very well for the ceiling;
but one would rather have the painting in a better place, especially
when the rain soaks through its canvas, as I have seen it doing through
many a noble Tintoret. On the whole, flat ceilings are as much to be
avoided as possible; and, when necessary, perhaps a panelled
ornamentation with rich colored patterns is the most satisfying, and
loses least of valuable labor. But I leave the question to the reader's
thought, being myself exceedingly undecided respecting it: except only
touching one point--that a blank ceiling is not to be redeemed by a
decorated ventilator.

§ IV. I have a more confirmed opinion, however, respecting the
decoration of curved surfaces. The majesty of a roof is never, I think,
so great, as when the eye can pass undisturbed over the course of all
its curvatures, and trace the dying of the shadows along its smooth and
sweeping vaults. And I would rather, myself, have a plain ridged Gothic
vault, with all its rough stones visible, to keep the sleet and wind out
of a cathedral aisle, than all the fanning and pendanting and foliation
that ever bewildered Tudor weight. But mosaic or fresco may of course be
used as far as we can afford or obtain them; for these do not break the
curvature. Perhaps the most solemn roofs in the world are the apse
conchas of the Romanesque basilicas, with their golden ground and severe
figures. Exactly opposed to these are the decorations which disturb the
serenity of the curve without giving it interest, like the vulgar
panelling of St. Peter's and the Pantheon; both, I think, in the last
degree detestable.

§ V. As roofs internally may be divided into surfaces and ribs,
externally they may be divided into surfaces, and points, or ridges;
these latter often receiving very bold and distinctive ornament. The
outside surface is of small importance in central Europe, being almost
universally low in slope, and tiled throughout Spain, South France, and
North Italy: of still less importance where it is flat, as a terrace; as
often in South Italy and the East, mingled with low domes: but the
larger Eastern and Arabian domes become elaborate in ornamentation: I
cannot speak of them with confidence; to the mind of an inhabitant of
the north, a roof is a guard against wild weather; not a surface which
is forever to bask in serene heat, and gleam across deserts like a
rising moon. I can only say, that I have never seen any drawing of a
richly decorated Eastern dome that made me desire to see the original.

§ VI. Our own northern roof decoration is necessarily simple. Colored
tiles are used in some cases with quaint effect; but I believe the
dignity of the building is always greater when the roof is kept in an
undisturbed mass, opposing itself to the variegation and richness of the
walls. The Italian round tile is itself decoration enough, a deep and
rich fluting, which all artists delight in; this, however, is fitted
exclusively for low pitch of roofs. On steep domestic roofs, there is no
ornament better than may be obtained by merely rounding, or cutting to
an angle, the lower extremities of the flat tiles or shingles, as in
Switzerland: thus the whole surface is covered with an appearance of
scales, a fish-like defence against water, at once perfectly simple,
natural, and effective at any distance; and the best decoration of
sloping stone roofs, as of spires, is a mere copy of this scale armor;
it enriches every one of the spires and pinnacles of the cathedral of
Coutances, and of many Norman and early Gothic buildings. Roofs covered
or edged with lead have often patterns designed upon the lead, gilded
and relieved with some dark color, as on the house of Jaques Coeur at
Bourges; and I imagine the effect of this must have been singularly
delicate and beautiful, but only traces of it now remain. The northern
roofs, however, generally stand in little need of surface decoration,
the eye being drawn to the fantastic ranges of their dormer windows, and
to the finials and fringes on their points and ridges.

§ VII. Whether dormer windows are legitimately to be classed as
decorative features, seems to me to admit of doubt. The northern spire
system is evidently a mere elevation and exaggeration of the domestic
turret with its look-out windows, and one can hardly part with the
grotesque lines of the projections, though nobody is to be expected to
live in the spire: but, at all events, such windows are never to be
allowed in places visibly inaccessible, or on less than a natural and
serviceable scale.

§ VIII. Under the general head of roof-ridge and point decoration, we
may include, as above noted, the entire race of fringes, finials, and
crockets. As there is no use in any of these things, and as they are
visible additions and parasitical portions of the structure, more
caution is required in their use than in any other features of ornament,
and the architect and spectator must both be in felicitous humor before
they can be well designed or thoroughly enjoyed. They are generally
most admirable where the grotesque Northern spirit has most power; and I
think there is almost always a certain spirit of playfulness in them,
adverse to the grandest architectural effects, or at least to be kept in
severe subordination to the serener character of the prevalent lines.
But as they are opposed to the seriousness of majesty on the one hand,
so they are to the weight of dulness on the other; and I know not any
features which make the contrast between continental domestic
architecture, and our own, more humiliatingly felt, or which give so
sudden a feeling of new life and delight, when we pass from the streets
of London to those of Abbeville or Rouen, as the quaint points and
pinnacles of the roof gables and turrets. The commonest and heaviest
roof may be redeemed by a spike at the end of it, if it is set on with
any spirit; but the foreign builders have (or had, at least) a peculiar
feeling in this, and gave animation to the whole roof by the fringe of
its back, and the spike on its forehead, so that all goes together, like
the dorsal fins and spines of a fish: but our spikes have a dull,
screwed on, look; a far-off relationship to the nuts of machinery; and
our roof fringes are sure to look like fenders, as if they were meant to
catch ashes out of the London smoke-clouds.

§ IX. Stone finials and crockets are, I think, to be considered in
architecture, what points and flashes of light are in the color of
painting, or of nature. There are some landscapes whose best character
is sparkling, and there is a possibility of repose in the midst of
brilliancy, or embracing it,--as on the fields of summer sea, or summer
land:

  "Calm, and deep peace, on this high wold,
   And on the dews that drench the furze,
   And on the silvery gossamers,
   _That twinkle into green and gold_."

And there are colorists who can keep their quiet in the midst of a
jewellery of light; but, for the most part, it is better to avoid
breaking up either lines or masses by too many points, and to make the
few points used exceedingly precious. So the best crockets and finials
are set, like stars, along the lines, and at the points, which they
adorn, with considerable intervals between them, and exquisite delicacy
and fancy of sculpture in their own designs; if very small, they may
become more frequent, and describe lines by a chain of points; but their
whole value is lost if they are gathered into bunches or clustered into
tassels and knots; and an over-indulgence in them always marks lowness
of school. In Venice, the addition of the finial to the arch-head is the
first sign of degradation; all her best architecture is entirely without
either crockets or finials; and her ecclesiastical architecture may be
classed, with fearless accuracy, as better or worse, in proportion to
the diminution or expansion of the crocket. The absolutely perfect use
of the crocket is found, I think, in the tower of Giotto, and in some
other buildings of the Pisan school. In the North they generally err on
one side or other, and are either florid and huge, or mean in outline,
looking as if they had been pinched out of the stonework, as throughout
the entire cathedral of Amiens; and are besides connected with the
generally spotty system which has been spoken of under the head of
archivolt decoration.

§ X. Employed, however, in moderation, they are among the most
delightful means of delicate expression; and the architect has more
liberty in their individual treatment than in any other feature of the
building. Separated entirely from the structural system, they are
subjected to no shadow of any other laws than those of grace and
chastity; and the fancy may range without rebuke, for materials of their
design, through the whole field of the visible or imaginable creation.




CHAPTER XXX.

  THE VESTIBULE.


§ I. I have hardly kept my promise. The reader has decorated but little
for himself as yet; but I have not, at least, attempted to bias his
judgment. Of the simple forms of decoration which have been set before
him, he has always been left free to choose; and the stated restrictions
in the methods of applying them have been only those which followed on
the necessities of construction previously determined. These having been
now defined, I do indeed leave my reader free to build; and with what a
freedom! All the lovely forms of the universe set before him, whence to
choose, and all the lovely lines that bound their substance or guide
their motion; and of all these lines,--and there are myriads of myriads
in every bank of grass and every tuft of forest; and groups of them
divinely harmonized, in the bell of every flower, and in every several
member of bird and beast,--of all these lines, for the principal forms
of the most important members of architecture, I have used but Three!
What, therefore, must be the infinity of the treasure in them all! There
is material enough in a single flower for the ornament of a score of
cathedrals, but suppose we were satisfied with less exhaustive
appliance, and built a score of cathedrals, each to illustrate a single
flower? that would be better than trying to invent new styles, I think.
There is quite difference of style enough, between a violet and a
harebell, for all reasonable purposes.

§ II. Perhaps, however, even more strange than the struggle of our
architects to invent new styles, is the way they commonly speak of this
treasure of natural infinity. Let us take our patience to us for an
instant, and hear one of them, not among the least intelligent:--

  "It is not true that all natural forms are beautiful. We may hardly
  be able to detect this in Nature herself; but when the forms are
  separated from the things, and exhibited alone (by sculpture or
  carving), we then see that they are not all fitted for ornamental
  purposes; and indeed that very few, perhaps none, are so fitted
  without correction. Yes, I say _correction_, for though it is the
  highest aim of every art to imitate nature, this is not to be done by
  imitating any natural form, but by _criticising_ and _correcting_
  it,--criticising it by Nature's rules gathered from all her works,
  but never completely carried out by her in any one work; correcting
  it, by rendering it more natural, _i.e._ more conformable to the
  general tendency of Nature, according to that noble maxim recorded of
  Raffaelle, 'that the artist's object was to make things not as Nature
  makes them, but as she WOULD make them;' as she ever tries to make
  them, but never succeeds, though her aim may be deduced from a
  comparison of her efforts; just as if a number of archers had aimed
  unsuccessfully at a mark upon a wall, and this mark were then
  removed, we could by the examination of their arrow marks point out
  the most probable position of the spot aimed at, with a certainty of
  being nearer to it than any of their shots."[92]

§ III. I had thought that, by this time, we had done with that stale,
second-hand, one-sided, and misunderstood saying of Raffaelle's; or that
at least, in these days of purer Christian light, men might have begun
to get some insight into the meaning of it: Raffaelle was a painter of
humanity, and assuredly there is something the matter with humanity, a
few _dovrebbe's_, more or less, wanting in it. We have most of us heard
of original sin, and may perhaps, in our modest moments, conjecture that
we are not quite what God, or nature, would have us to be. Raffaelle
_had_ something to mend in Humanity: I should have liked to have seen
him mending a daisy!--or a pease-blossom, or a moth, or a mustard seed,
or any other of God's slightest works. If he had accomplished that, one
might have found for him more respectable employment,--to set the stars
in better order, perhaps (they seem grievously scattered as they are,
and to be of all manner of shapes and sizes,--except the ideal shape,
and the proper size); or to give us a corrected view of the ocean; that,
at least, seems a very irregular and improveable thing; the very
fishermen do not know, this day, how far it will reach, driven up before
the west wind:--perhaps Some One else does, but that is not our
business. Let us go down and stand by the beach of it,--of the great
irregular sea, and count whether the thunder of it is not out of time.
One,--two:--here comes a well-formed wave at last, trembling a little at
the top, but, on the whole, orderly. So, crash among the shingle, and up
as far as this grey pebble; now stand by and watch! Another:--Ah,
careless wave! why couldn't you have kept your crest on? it is all gone
away into spray, striking up against the cliffs there--I thought as
much--missed the mark by a couple of feet! Another:--How now, impatient
one! couldn't you have waited till your friend's reflux was done with,
instead of rolling yourself up with it in that unseemly manner? You go
for nothing. A fourth, and a goodly one at last. What think we of yonder
slow rise, and crystalline hollow, without a flaw? Steady, good wave;
not so fast; not so fast; where are you coming to?--By our architectural
word, this is too bad; two yards over the mark, and ever so much of you
in our face besides; and a wave which we had some hope of, behind there,
broken all to pieces out at sea, and laying a great white table-cloth of
foam all the way to the shore, as if the marine gods were to dine off
it! Alas, for these unhappy arrow shots of Nature; she will never hit
her mark with those unruly waves of hers, nor get one of them, into the
ideal shape, if we wait for a thousand years. Let us send for a Greek
architect to do it for her. He comes--the great Greek architect, with
measure and rule. Will he not also make the weight for the winds? and
weigh out the waters by measure? and make a decree for the rain, and a
way for the lightning of the thunder? He sets himself orderly to his
work, and behold! this is the mark of nature, and this is the thing into
which the great Greek architect improves the sea--

[Illustration]

[Greek: Thalatta, thalatta]: Was it this, then, that they wept to see
from the sacred mountain--those wearied ones?

§ IV. But the sea was meant to be irregular! Yes, and were not also the
leaves, and the blades of grass; and, in a sort, as far as may be
without mark of sin, even the countenance of man? Or would it be
pleasanter and better to have us all alike, and numbered on our
foreheads, that we might be known one from the other?

§ V. Is there, then, nothing to be done by man's art? Have we only to
copy, and again copy, for ever, the imagery of the universe? Not so. We
have work to do upon it; there is not any one of us so simple, nor so
feeble, but he has work to do upon it. But the work is not to improve,
but to explain. This infinite universe is unfathomable, inconceivable,
in its whole; every human creature must slowly spell out, and long
contemplate, such part of it as may be possible for him to reach; then
set forth what he has learned of it for those beneath him; extricating
it from infinity, as one gathers a violet out of grass; one does not
improve either violet or grass in gathering it, but one makes the flower
visible; and then the human being has to make its power upon his own
heart visible also, and to give it the honor of the good thoughts it has
raised up in him, and to write upon it the history of his own soul. And
sometimes he may be able to do more than this, and to set it in strange
lights, and display it in a thousand ways before unknown: ways specially
directed to necessary and noble purposes, for which he had to choose
instruments out of the wide armory of God. All this he may do: and in
this he is only doing what every Christian has to do with the written,
as well as the created word, "rightly _dividing_ the word of truth." Out
of the infinity of the written word, he has also to gather and set forth
things new and old, to choose them for the season and the work that are
before him, to explain and manifest them to others, with such
illustration and enforcement as may be in his power, and to crown them
with the history of what, by them, God has done for his soul. And, in
doing this, is he improving the Word of God? Just such difference as
there is between the sense in which a minister may be said to improve a
text, to the people's comfort, and the sense in which an atheist might
declare that he could improve the Book, which, if any man shall add
unto, there shall be added unto him the plagues that are written
therein; just such difference is there between that which, with respect
to Nature, man is, in his humbleness, called upon to do, and that which,
in his insolence, he imagines himself capable of doing.

§ VI. Have no fear, therefore, reader, in judging between nature and
art, so only that you love both. If you can love one only, then let it
be Nature; you are safe with her: but do not then attempt to judge the
art, to which you do not care to give thought, or time. But if you love
both, you may judge between them fearlessly; you may estimate the last,
by its making you remember the first, and giving you the same kind of
joy. If, in the square of the city, you can find a delight, finite,
indeed, but pure and intense, like that which you have in a valley among
the hills, then its art and architecture are right; but if, after fair
trial, you can find no delight in them, nor any instruction like that of
nature, I call on you fearlessly to condemn them.

We are forced, for the sake of accumulating our power and knowledge, to
live in cities; but such advantage as we have in association with each
other is in great part counterbalanced by our loss of fellowship with
nature. We cannot all have our gardens now, nor our pleasant fields to
meditate in at eventide. Then the function of our architecture is, as
far as may be, to replace these; to tell us about nature; to possess us
with memories of her quietness; to be solemn and full of tenderness,
like her, and rich in portraitures of her; full of delicate imagery of
the flowers we can no more gather, and of the living creatures now far
away from us in their own solitude. If ever you felt or found this in a
London Street,--if ever it furnished you with one serious thought, or
one ray of true and gentle pleasure,--if there is in your heart a true
delight in its grim railings and dark casements, and wasteful finery of
shops, and feeble coxcombry of club-houses,--it is well: promote the
building of more like them. But if they never taught you anything, and
never made you happier as you passed beneath them, do not think they
have any mysterious goodness nor occult sublimity. Have done with the
wretched affectation, the futile barbarism, of pretending to enjoy: for,
as surely as you know that the meadow grass, meshed with fairy rings, is
better than the wood pavement, cut into hexagons; and as surely as you
know the fresh winds and sunshine of the upland are better than the
choke-damp of the vault, or the gas-light of the ball-room, you may
know, as I told you that you should, that the good architecture, which
has life, and truth, and joy in it, is better than the bad architecture,
which has death, dishonesty, and vexation of heart in it, from the
beginning to the end of time.

§ VII. And now come with me, for I have kept you too long from your
gondola: come with me, on an autumnal morning, through the dark gates of
Padua, and let us take the broad road leading towards the East.

It lies level, for a league or two, between its elms, and vine festoons
full laden, their thin leaves veined into scarlet hectic, and their
clusters deepened into gloomy blue; then mounts an embankment above the
Brenta, and runs between the river and the broad plain, which stretches
to the north in endless lines of mulberry and maize. The Brenta flows
slowly, but strongly; a muddy volume of yellowish-grey water, that
neither hastens nor slackens, but glides heavily between its monotonous
banks, with here and there a short, babbling eddy twisted for an instant
into its opaque surface, and vanishing, as if something had been dragged
into it and gone down. Dusty and shadeless, the road fares along the
dyke on its northern side; and the tall white tower of Dolo is seen
trembling in the heat mist far away, and never seems nearer than it did
at first. Presently you pass one of the much vaunted "villas on the
Brenta:" a glaring, spectral shell of brick and stucco, its windows with
painted architraves like picture-frames, and a court-yard paved with
pebbles in front of it, all burning in the thick glow of the feverish
sunshine, but fenced from the high road, for magnificence sake, with
goodly posts and chains; then another, of Kew Gothic, with Chinese
variations, painted red and green; a third composed for the greater
part of dead-wall, with fictitious windows painted upon it, each with a
pea-green blind, and a classical architrave in bad perspective; and a
fourth, with stucco figures set on the top of its garden-wall: some
antique, like the kind to be seen at the corner of the New Road, and
some of clumsy grotesque dwarfs, with fat bodies and large boots. This
is the architecture to which her studies of the Renaissance have
conducted modern Italy.

§ VIII. The sun climbs steadily, and warms into intense white the walls
of the little piazza of Dolo, where we change horses. Another dreary
stage among the now divided branches of the Brenta, forming irregular
and half-stagnant canals; with one or two more villas on the other side
of them, but these of the old Venetian type, which we may have
recognised before at Padua, and sinking fast into utter ruin, black, and
rent, and lonely, set close to the edge of the dull water, with what
were once small gardens beside them, kneaded into mud, and with blighted
fragments of gnarled hedges and broken stakes for their fencing; and
here and there a few fragments of marble steps, which have once given
them graceful access from the water's edge, now settling into the mud in
broken joints, all aslope, and slippery with green weed. At last the
road turns sharply to the north, and there is an open space, covered
with bent grass, on the right of it: but do not look that way.

§ IX. Five minutes more, and we are in the upper room of the little inn
at Mestre, glad of a moment's rest in shade. The table is (always, I
think) covered with a cloth of nominal white and perennial grey, with
plates and glasses at due intervals, and small loaves of a peculiar
white bread, made with oil, and more like knots of flour than bread. The
view from its balcony is not cheerful: a narrow street, with a solitary
brick church and barren campanile on the other side of it; and some
coventual buildings, with a few crimson remnants of fresco about their
windows; and, between them and the street, a ditch with some slow
current in it, and one or two small houses beside it, one with an arbor
of roses at its door, as in an English tea-garden; the air, however,
about us having in it nothing of roses, but a close smell of garlic and
crabs, warmed by the smoke of various stands of hot chestnuts. There is
much vociferation also going on beneath the window respecting certain
wheelbarrows which are in rivalry for our baggage: we appease their
rivalry with our best patience, and follow them down the narrow street.

§ X. We have but walked some two hundred yards when we come to a low
wharf or quay, at the extremity of a canal, with long steps on each side
down to the water, which latter we fancy for an instant has become black
with stagnation; another glance undeceives us,--it is covered with the
black boats of Venice. We enter one of them, rather to try if they be
real boats or not, than with any definite purpose, and glide away; at
first feeling as if the water were yielding continually beneath the boat
and letting her sink into soft vacancy. It is something clearer than any
water we have seen lately, and of a pale green; the banks only two or
three feet above it, of mud and rank grass, with here and there a
stunted tree; gliding swiftly past the small casement of the gondola, as
if they were dragged by upon a painted scene.

Stroke by stroke we count the plunges of the oar, each heaving up the
side of the boat slightly as her silver beak shoots forward. We lose
patience, and extricate ourselves from the cushions: the sea air blows
keenly by, as we stand leaning on the roof of the floating cell. In
front, nothing to be seen but long canal and level bank; to the west,
the tower of Mestre is lowering fast, and behind it there have risen
purple shapes, of the color of dead rose-leaves, all round the horizon,
feebly defined against the afternoon sky,--the Alps of Bassano. Forward
still: the endless canal bends at last, and then breaks into intricate
angles about some low bastions, now torn to pieces and staggering in
ugly rents towards the water,--the bastions of the fort of Malghera.
Another turn, and another perspective of canal; but not interminable.
The silver beak cleaves it fast,--it widens: the rank grass of the
banks sinks lower, and lower, and at last dies in tawny knots along an
expanse of weedy shore. Over it, on the right, but a few years back, we
might have seen the lagoon stretching to the horizon, and the warm
southern sky bending over Malamocco to the sea. Now we can see nothing
but what seems a low and monotonous dock-yard wall, with flat arches to
let the tide through it;--this is the railroad bridge, conspicuous above
all things. But at the end of those dismal arches, there rises, out of
the wide water, a straggling line of low and confused brick buildings,
which, but for the many towers which are mingled among them, might be
the suburbs of an English manufacturing town. Four or five domes, pale,
and apparently at a greater distance, rise over the centre of the line;
but the object which first catches the eye is a sullen cloud of black
smoke brooding over the northern half of it, and which issues from the
belfry of a church.

It is Venice.


FOOTNOTES:

  [92] Garbett on Design, p. 74.




APPENDIX.


  1. FOUNDATION OF VENICE.

I find the chroniclers agree in fixing the year 421, if any: the
following sentence from De Monaci may perhaps interest the reader.

"God, who punishes the sins of men by war sorrows, and whose ways are
past finding out, willing both to save the innocent blood, and that a
great power, beneficial to the whole world, should arise in a spot
strange beyond belief, moved the chief men of the cities of the Venetian
province (which from the border of Pannonia, extended as far as the
Adda, a river of Lombardy), both in memory of past, and in dread of
future distress, to establish states upon the nearer islands of the
inner gulphs of the Adriatic, to which, in the last necessity, they
might retreat for refuge. And first Galienus de Fontana, Simon de
Glauconibus, and Antonius Calvus, or, as others have it, Adalburtus
Falerius, Thomas Candiano, Comes Daulus, Consuls of Padua, by the
command of their King and the desire of the citizens, laid the
foundations of the new commonwealth, under good auspices, on the island
of the Rialto, the highest and nearest to the mouth of the deep river
now called the Brenta, in the year of Our Lord, as many writers assure
us, four hundred and twenty-one, on the 25th day of March."[93]

It is matter also of very great satisfaction to know that Venice was
founded by good Christians: "La qual citade è stada hedificada da veri e
boni Christiani:" which information I found in the MS. copy of the
Zancarol Chronicle, in the library of St. Mark's.

Finally the conjecture as to the origin of her name, recorded by
Sansovino, will be accepted willingly by all who love Venice: "Fu
interpretato da alcuni, che questa voce VENETIA voglia dire _VENI
ETIAM_, cioè, vieni ancora, e ancora, percioche quante volte verrai,
sempre vedrai nuove cose, enuove bellezze."


  2. POWER OF THE DOGES.

The best authorities agree in giving the year 697 as that of the
election of the first doge, Paul Luke Anafeste. He was elected in a
general meeting of the commonalty, tribunes, and clergy, at Heraclea,
"divinis rebus procuratis," as usual, in all serious work, in those
times. His authority is thus defined by Sabellico, who was not likely to
have exaggerated it:--"Penes quem decus omne imperii ac majestas esset:
cui jus concilium cogendi quoties de republica aliquid referri
oporteret; qui tribunos annuos in singulas insulas legeret, a quibus ad
Ducem esset provocatio. Cæterum, si quis dignitatem, ecclesiam,
sacerdotumve cleri populique suffragio esset adeptus, ita demum id ratum
haberetur si dux ipse auctor factus esset." (Lib. I.) The last clause is
very important, indicating the subjection of the ecclesiastical to the
popular and ducal (or patrician) powers, which, throughout her career,
was one of the most remarkable features in the policy of Venice. The
appeal from the tribunes to the doge is also important; and the
expression "decus omne imperii," if of somewhat doubtful force, is at
least as energetic as could have been expected from an historian under
the influence of the Council of Ten.


  3. SERRAR DEL CONSIGLIO.

The date of the decree which made the right of sitting in the grand
council hereditary, is variously given; the Venetian historians
themselves saying as little as they can about it. The thing was
evidently not accomplished at once, several decrees following in
successive years: the Council of Ten was established without any doubt
in 1310, in consequence of the conspiracy of Tiepolo. The Venetian
verse, quoted by Mutinelli (Annali Urbani di Venezia, p. 153), is worth
remembering.

  "Del mille tresento e diese
   A mezzo el mese delle ceriese
   Bagiamonte passò el ponte
   E per esso fo fatto el Consegio di diese."

The reader cannot do better than take 1297 as the date of the beginning
of the change of government, and this will enable him exactly to divide
the 1100 years from the election of the first doge into 600 of monarchy
and 500 of aristocracy. The coincidence of the numbers is somewhat
curious; 697 the date of the establishment of the government, 1297 of
its change, and 1797 of its fall.


  4. S. PIETRO DI CASTELLO.

It is credibly reported to have been founded in the seventh century, and
(with somewhat less of credibility) in a place where the Trojans,
conducted by Antenor, had, after the destruction of Troy, built "un
castello, chiamato prima Troja, poscia Olivolo, interpretato, luogo
pieno." It seems that St. Peter appeared in person to the Bishop of
Heraclea, and commanded him to found in his honor, a church in that spot
of the rising city on the Rialto: "ove avesse veduto una mandra di buoi
e di pecore pascolare unitamente. Questa fu la prodigiosa origine della
Chiesa di San Pietro, che poscia, o rinovata, o ristaurata, da Orso
Participazio IV Vescovo Olivolense, divenne la Cattedrale della Nuova
citta." (Notizie Storiche delle Chiese e Monasteri di Venezia. Padua,
1758.) What there was so prodigious in oxen and sheep feeding together,
we need St. Peter, I think, to tell us. The title of Bishop of Castello
was first taken in 1091: St. Mark's was not made the cathedral church
till 1807. It may be thought hardly fair to conclude the small
importance of the old St. Pietro di Castello from the appearance of the
wretched modernisations of 1620. But these modernisations are spoken of
as improvements; and I find no notice of peculiar beauties in the older
building, either in the work above quoted, or by Sansovino; who only
says that when it was destroyed by fire (as everything in Venice was, I
think, about three times in a century), in the reign of Vital Michele,
it was rebuilt "with good thick walls, maintaining, _for all that_, the
order of its arrangement taken from the Greek mode of building." This
does not seem the description of a very enthusiastic effort to rebuild a
highly ornate cathedral. The present church is among the least
interesting in Venice; a wooden bridge, something like that of Battersea
on a small scale, connects its island, now almost deserted, with a
wretched suburb of the city behind the arsenal; and a blank level of
lifeless grass, rotted away in places rather than trodden, is extended
before its mildewed façade and solitary tower.


  5. PAPAL POWER IN VENICE.

I may refer the reader to the eleventh chapter of the twenty-eighth book
of Daru for some account of the restraints to which the Venetian clergy
were subjected. I have not myself been able to devote any time to the
examination of the original documents bearing on this matter, but the
following extract from a letter of a friend, who will not at present
permit me to give his name, but who is certainly better conversant
with the records of the Venetian State than any other Englishman, will
be of great value to the general reader:--

"In the year 1410, or perhaps at the close of the thirteenth century,
churchmen were excluded from the Grand Council and declared ineligible
to civil employment; and in the same year, 1410, the Council of Ten,
with the Giunta, decreed that whenever in the state's councils matters
concerning ecclesiastical affairs were being treated, all the kinsfolk
of Venetian beneficed clergymen were to be expelled; and, in the year
1434, the RELATIONS of churchmen were declared ineligible to the post of
ambassador at Rome.

"The Venetians never gave possession of any see in their territories to
bishops unless they had been proposed to the pope by the senate, which
elected the patriarch, who was supposed, at the end of the sixteenth
century, to be liable to examination by his Holiness, as an act of
confirmation of installation; but of course, everything depended on the
relative power at any given time of Rome and Venice: for instance, a few
days after the accession of Julius II., in 1503, he requests the
Signory, cap in hand, to ALLOW him to confer the archbishopric of Zara
on a dependant of his, one Cipico the Bishop of Famagosta. Six years
later, when Venice was overwhelmed by the leaguers of Cambrai, that
furious pope would assuredly have conferred Zara on Cipico WITHOUT
asking leave. In 1608, the rich Camaldolite Abbey of Vangadizza, in the
Polesine, fell vacant through the death of Lionardo Loredano, in whose
family it had been since some while. The Venetian ambassador at Rome
received the news on the night of the 28th December; and, on the morrow,
requested Paul IV. not to dispose of this preferment until he heard from
the senate. The pope talked of 'poor cardinals' and of his nephew, but
made no positive reply; and, as Francesco Contarini was withdrawing,
said to him: 'My Lord ambassador, with this opportunity we will inform
you that, to our very great regret, we understand that the chiefs of the
Ten mean to turn sacristans; for they order the parish priests to close
the church doors at the Ave Maria, and not to ring the bells at certain
hours. This is precisely the sacristan's office; we don't know why their
lordships, by printed edicts, which we have seen, choose to interfere in
this matter. This is pure and mere ecclesiastical jurisdiction; and
even, in case of any inconvenience arising, is there not the patriarch,
who is at any rate your own; why not apply to him, who could remedy
these irregularities? These are matters which cause us very notable
displeasure; we say so that they may be written and known: it is decided
by the councils and canons, and not uttered by us, that whosoever forms
any resolve against the ecclesiastical liberty, cannot do so without
incurring censure: and in order that Father Paul [Bacon's correspondent]
may not say hereafter, as he did in his past writings, that our
predecessors assented either tacitly or by permission, we declare that
we do not give our assent, nor do we approve it; nay, we blame it, and
let this be announced in Venice, so that, for the rest, every one may
take care of his own conscience. St. Thomas à Becket, whose festival is
celebrated this very day, suffered martyrdom for the ecclesiastical
liberty; it is our duty likewise to support and defend it.' Contarini
says: 'This remonstrance was delivered with some marks of anger, which
induced me to tell him how the tribunal of the most excellent the Lords
chiefs of the Ten is in our country supreme; that it does not do its
business unadvisedly, or condescend to unworthy matters; and that,
therefore, should those Lords have come to any public declaration of
their will, it must be attributed to orders anterior, and to immemorial
custom and authority, recollecting that, on former occasions likewise,
similar commissions were given to prevent divers incongruities;
wherefore an upright intention, such as this, ought not to be taken in
any other sense than its own, especially as the parishes of Venice were
in her own gift,' &c. &c. The pope persisted in bestowing the abbacy on
his nephew, but the republic would not give possession, and a compromise
was effected by its being conferred on the Venetian Matteo Priuli, who
allowed the cardinal five thousand ducats per annum out of its revenues.
A few years before this, this very same pope excommunicated the State,
because she had imprisoned two churchmen for heinous crimes; the strife
lasted for more than a year, and ended through the mediation of Henry
IV., at whose suit the prisoners were delivered to the French
ambassador, who made them over to a papal commissioner.

"In January, 1484, a tournament was in preparation on St. Mark's Square:
some murmurs had been heard about the distribution of the prizes having
been pre-arranged, without regard to the 'best man.' One of the chiefs
of the Ten was walking along Rialto on the 28th January, when a young
priest, twenty-two years old, a sword-cutlers son, and a Bolognese, and
one of Perugia, both men-at-arms under Robert Sansoverino, fell upon a
clothier with drawn weapons. The chief of the Ten desired they might be
seized, but at the moment the priest escaped; he was, however,
subsequently retaken, and in that very evening hanged by torch-light
between the columns with the two soldiers. Innocent VIII. was less
powerful than Paul IV.; Venice weaker in 1605 than in 1484.

"* * * The exclusion from the Grand Council, whether at the end of the
fourteenth or commencement of the following century, of the Venetian
ecclesiastics, (as induced either by the republic's acquisitions on the
main land then made, and which, through the rich benefices they
embraced, might have rendered an ambitious churchman as dangerous in the
Grand Council as a victorious condottiere; or from dread of their
allegiance being divided between the church and their country, it being
acknowledged that no man can serve two masters,) did not render them
hostile to their fatherland, whose interests were, with very few
exceptions, eagerly fathered by the Venetian prelates at Rome, who, in
their turn, received all honor at Venice, where state receptions given
to cardinals of the houses of Correr, Grimani, Cornaro, Pisani,
Contarini, Zeno, Delfino, and others, vouch for the good understanding
that existed between the 'Papalists' and their countrymen. The Cardinal
Grimani was instrumental in detaching Julius II. from the league of
Cambrai; the Cardinal Cornaro always aided the state to obtain anything
required of Leo X.; and, both before and after their times, all
Venetians that had a seat in the Sacred College were patriots rather
than pluralists: I mean that they cared more for Venice than for their
benefices, admitting thus the soundness of that policy which denied them
admission into the Grand Council."

To this interesting statement, I shall add, from the twenty-eighth book
of Daru, two passages, well deserving consideration by us English in
present days:

"Pour être parfaitement assurée contre les envahissements de la
puissance ecclésiastique, Venise commença par lui ôter tout prétexte
d'intervenir dans les affaires de l'Etat; elle resta invariablement
fidèle au dogme. Jamais aucune des opinions nouvelles n'y prit la
moindre faveur; jamais aucun hérésiarque ne sortit de Venise. Les
conciles, les disputes, les guerres de religion, se passèrent sans
qu'elle y prit jamais la moindre part. Inébranlable dans sa foi, elle ne
fut pas moins invariable dans son système de tolérance. Non seulement
ses sujets de la religion grecque conservèrent l'exercise de leur culte,
leurs évêques et leurs prêtres; mais les Protestantes, les Arméniens,
les Mahomitans, les Juifs, toutes les religions, toutes les sectes qui
se trouvaient dans Venise, avaient des temples, et la sépulture dans les
églises n'était point refusé aux hérétiques. Une police vigilante
s'appliquait avec le même soin à éteindre les discordes, et à empêcher
les fanatiques et les novateurs de troubler l'Etat."

       *       *       *       *       *

"Si on considère que c'est dans un temps où presque toutes les nations
tremblaient devant la puissance pontificale, que les Vénitiens surent
tenir leur clergé dans la dépendance, et braver souvent les censures
ecclésiastiques et les interdits, sans encourir jamais aucun reproche
sur la pureté de leur foi, on sera forcé de reconnaître que cette
république avait dévancé de loin les autres peuples dans cette partie de
la science du gouvernement. La fameuse maxime, 'Siamo veneziani, poi
christiani,' n'était qu'une formule énergique qui ne prouvait point
quils voulussent placer l'intérêt de la religion après celui de l'Etat,
mais qui annonçait leur invariable résolution de ne pas souffrir qu'un
pouvoir étranger portât atteinte aux droits de la république.

"Dans toute la durée de son existence, an milieu des revers comme dans
la prospérité cet inébranlable gouvernement ne fit qu'une seule fois des
concessions à la cour de Borne, et ce fut pour détacher le Pape Jules
II. de la ligue de Cambrai.

"Jamais il ne se relâcha du soin de tenir le clergé dans une nullité
absolue relativement aux affaires politiques; on peut en juger par la
conduite qu'il tint avec l'ordre religieux le plus redoutable et le plus
accoutumé à s'immiscer dans les secrets de l'Etat et dans les intérêts
temporels."

The main points, next stated, respecting the Jesuits are, that the
decree which permitted their establishment in Venice required formal
renewal every three years; that no Jesuit could stay in Venice more than
three years; that the slightest disobedience to the authority of the
government was instantly punished by imprisonment; that no Venetian
could enter the order without express permission from the government;
that the notaries were forbidden to sanction any testamentary disposal
of property to the Jesuits; finally, that the heads of noble families
were forbidden to permit their children to be educated in the Jesuits'
colleges, on pain of degradation from their rank.

Now, let it be observed that the enforcement of absolute exclusion of
the clergy from the councils of the state, dates exactly from the period
which I have marked for the commencement of the decline of the Venetian
power. The Romanist is welcome to his advantage in this fact, if
advantage it be; for I do not bring forward the conduct of the senate of
Venice, as Daru does, by way of an example of the general science of
government. The Venetians accomplished therein what we ridiculously call
a separation of "Church and State" (as if the State were not, in all
Christendom, necessarily also the Church[94]), but _ought_ to call a
separation of lay and clerical officers. I do not point out this
separation as subject of praise, but as the witness borne by the
Venetians against the principles of the Papacy. If they were to blame,
in yielding to their fear of the ambitious spirit of Rome so far as to
deprive their councils of all religious element, what excuse are we to
offer for the state, which, with Lords Spiritual of her own faith
already in her senate, permits the polity of Rome to be represented by
lay members? To have sacrificed religion to mistaken policy, or
purchased security with ignominy, would have been no new thing in the
world's history; but to be at once impious and impolitic, and seek for
danger through dishonor, was reserved for the English parliament of
1829.

I am glad to have this opportunity of referring to, and farther
enforcing, the note on this subject which, not without deliberation, I
appended to the "Seven Lamps;" and of adding to it the following
passage, written by my father in the year 1839, and published in one of
the journals of that year:--a passage remarkable as much for its
intrinsic value, as for having stated, twelve years ago, truths to which
the mind of England seems but now, and that slowly, awakening.

"We hear it said, that it cannot be merely the Roman religion that
causes the difficulty [respecting Ireland], for we were once all Roman
Catholics, and nations abroad of this faith are not as the Irish. It is
totally overlooked, that when we were so, our government was despotic,
and fit to cope with this dangerous religion, as most of the Continental
governments yet are. In what Roman Catholic state, or in what age of
Roman Catholic England, did we ever hear of such agitation as now exists
in Ireland by evil men taking advantage of an anomalous state of
things--Roman Catholic ignorance in the people, Protestant toleration in
the government? We have yet to feel the tremendous difficulty in which
Roman Catholic emancipation has involved us. Too late we discover that a
Roman Catholic is wholly incapable of being safely connected with the
British constitution, as it now exists, _in any near relation_. The
present constitution is no longer fit for Catholics. It is a creature
essentially Protestant, growing with the growth, and strengthening with
the strength, of Protestantism. So entirely is Protestantism interwoven
with the whole frame of our constitution and laws, that I take my stand
on this, against all agitators in existence, that the Roman religion is
totally incompatible with the British constitution. We have, in trying
to combine them, got into a maze of difficulties; we are the worse, and
Ireland none the better. It is idle to talk of municipal reform or
popular Lords Lieutenant. The mild sway of a constitutional monarchy is
not strong enough for a Roman Catholic population. The stern soul of a
Republican would not shrink from sending half the misguided population
and all the priests into exile, and planting in their place an
industrious Protestant people. But you cannot do this, and you cannot
convert the Irish, nor by other means make them fit to wear the mild
restraints of a Protestant Government. It was, moreover, a strange logic
that begot the idea of admitting Catholics to administer any part of our
laws or constitution. It was admitted by all that, by the very act of
abandoning the Roman religion, we became a free and enlightened people.
It was only by throwing off the yoke of that slavish religion that we
attained to the freedom of thought which has advanced us in the scale of
society. We are so much advanced by adopting and adhering to a reformed
religion, that to prove our liberal and unprejudiced views, we throw
down the barriers betwixt the two religions, of which the one is the
acknowledged cause of light and knowledge, the other the cause of
darkness and ignorance. We are so much altered to the better by leaving
this people entirely, and giving them neither part nor lot amongst us,
that it becomes proper to mingle again with them. We have found so much
good in leaving them, that we deem it the best possible reason for
returning to be among them. No fear of their Church again shaking us,
with all our light and knowledge. It is true, the most enlightened
nations fell under the spell of her enchantments, fell into total
darkness and superstition; but no fear of us--we are too well informed!
What miserable reasoning! infatuated presumption! I fear me, when the
Roman religion rolled her clouds of darkness over the earlier ages, that
she quenched as much light, and knowledge, and judgment as our modern
Liberals have ever displayed. I do not expect a statesman to discuss the
point of Transubstantiation betwixt Protestant and Catholic, nor to
trace the narrow lines which divide Protestant sectarians from each
other; but can any statesman that shall have taken even a cursory
glance at the face of Europe, hesitate a moment on the choice of the
Protestant religion? If he unfortunately knew nothing of its being the
true one in regard to our eternal interests, he is at least bound to see
whether it be not the best for the worldly prosperity of a people. He
may be but moderately imbued with pious zeal for the salvation of a
kingdom, but at least he will be expected to weigh the comparative
merits of religion, as of law or government; and blind, indeed, must he
be if he does not discern that, in neglecting to cherish the Protestant
faith, or in too easily yielding to any encroachments on it, he is
foregoing the use of a state engine more powerful than all the laws
which the uninspired legislators of the earth have ever promulgated, in
promoting the happiness, the peace, prosperity, and the order, the
industry, and the wealth, of a people; in forming every quality valuable
or desirable in a subject or a citizen; in sustaining the public mind at
that point of education and information that forms the best security for
the state, and the best preservative for the freedom of a people,
whether religious or political."

[Illustration: Plate XX.
               WALL VEIL DECORATION.
               CA' TREVISAN.]


  6. RENAISSANCE ORNAMENTS.

There having been three principal styles of architecture in Venice,--the
Greek or Byzantine, the Gothic, and the Renaissance, it will be shown,
in the sequel, that the Renaissance itself is divided into three
correspondent families: Renaissance engrafted on Byzantine, which is
earliest and best; Renaissance engrafted on Gothic, which is second, and
second best; Renaissance on Renaissance, which is double darkness, and
worst of all. The palaces in which Renaissance is engrafted on Byzantine
are those noticed by Commynes: they are characterized by an
ornamentation very closely resembling, and in some cases identical with,
early Byzantine work; namely, groups of colored marble circles inclosed
in interlacing bands. I have put on the opposite page one of these
ornaments, from the Ca' Trevisan, in which a most curious and delicate
piece of inlaid design is introduced into a band which is almost exactly
copied from the church of Theotocos at Constantinople, and correspondent
with others in St. Mark's. There is also much Byzantine feeling in the
treatment of the animals, especially in the two birds of the lower
compartment, while the peculiar curves of the cinque cento leafage are
visible in the leaves above. The dove, alighted, with the olive-branch
plucked off, is opposed to the raven with restless expanded wings.
Beneath are evidently the two sacrifices "of every clean fowl and of
every clean beast." The color is given with green and white marbles, the
dove relieved on a ground of greyish green, and all is exquisitely
finished.

In Plate I., p. 13, the upper figure is from the same palace (Ca'
Trevisan), and it is very interesting in its proportions. If we take
five circles in geometrical proportion, each diameter being two-thirds
of the diameter next above it, and arrange the circles so proportioned,
in contact with each other, in the manner shown in the plate, we shall
find that an increase quite imperceptible in the diameter of the circles
in the angles, will enable us to inscribe the whole in a square. The
lines so described will then run in the centre of the white bands. I
cannot be certain that this is the actual construction of the Trevisan
design, because it is on a high wall surface, where I could not get at
its measurements; but I found this construction exactly coincide with
the lines of my eye sketch. The lower figure in Plate I. is from the
front of the Ca' Dario, and probably struck the eye of Commynes in its
first brightness. Salvatico, indeed, considers both the Ca' Trevisan
(which once belonged to Bianca Cappello) and the Ca' Dario, as buildings
of the sixteenth century. I defer the discussion of the question at
present, but have, I believe, sufficient reason for assuming the Ca'
Dario to have been built about 1486, and the Ca' Trevisan not much
later.


  7. VARIETIES OF THE ORDERS.

Of these phantasms and grotesques, one of some general importance is
that commonly called Ionic, of which the idea was taken (Vitruvius says)
from a woman's hair, curled; but its lateral processes look more like
rams' horns: be that as it may, it is a mere piece of agreeable
extravagance, and if, instead of rams' horns, you put ibex horns, or
cows' horns, or an ass's head at once, you will have ibex orders, or ass
orders, or any number of other orders, one for every head or horn. You
may have heard of another order, the Composite, which is Ionic and
Corinthian mixed, and is one of the worst of ten thousand forms
referable to the Corinthian as their head: it may be described as a
spoiled Corinthian. And you may have also heard of another order, called
Tuscan (which is no order at all, but a spoiled Doric): and of another
called Roman Doric, which is Doric more spoiled, both which are simply
among the most stupid variations ever invented upon forms already known.
I find also in a French pamphlet upon architecture,[95] as applied to
shops and dwelling houses, a sixth order, the "Ordre Français," at least
as good as any of the three last, and to be hailed with acclamation,
considering whence it comes, there being usually more tendency on the
other side of the channel to the confusion of "orders" than their
multiplication: but the reader will find in the end that there are in
very deed only two orders, of which the Greek, Doric, and Corinthian are
the first examples, and _they_ not perfect, nor in anywise sufficiently
representative of the vast families to which they belong; but being the
first and the best known, they may properly be considered as the types
of the rest. The essential distinctions of the two great orders he will
find explained in §§ XXXV. and XXXVI. of Chap. XXVII., and in the
passages there referred to; but I should rather desire that these
passages might be read in the order in which they occur.


  8. THE NORTHERN ENERGY.

I have sketched above, in the First Chapter, the great events of
architectural history in the simplest and fewest words I could; but this
indraught of the Lombard energies upon the Byzantine rest, like a wild
north wind descending into a space of rarified atmosphere, and
encountered by an Arab simoom from the south, may well require from us
some farther attention; for the differences in all these schools are
more in the degrees of their impetuosity and refinement (these
qualities being, in most cases, in inverse ratio, yet much united by the
Arabs) than in the style of the ornaments they employ. The same leaves,
the same animals, the same arrangement, are used by Scandinavians,
ancient Britons, Saxons, Normans, Lombards, Romans, Byzantines, and
Arabians; all being alike descended through classic Greece from Egypt
and Assyria, and some from Phoenicia. The belts which encompass the
Assyrian bulls, in the hall of the British Museum, are the same as the
belts of the ornaments found in Scandinavian tumuli; their method of
ornamentation is the same as that of the gate of Mycenæ, and of the
Lombard pulpit of St. Ambrogio of Milan, and of the church of Theotocos
at Constantinople; the essential differences among the great schools are
their differences of temper and treatment, and science of expression; it
is absurd to talk of Norman ornaments, and Lombard ornaments, and
Byzantine ornaments, as formally distinguished; but there is
irreconcileable separation between Arab temper, and Lombard temper, and
Byzantine temper.

Now, as far as I have been able to compare the three schools, it appears
to me that the Arab and Lombard are both distinguished from the
Byzantine by their energy and love of excitement, but the Lombard stands
alone in his love of jest: Neither an Arab nor Byzantine ever jests in
his architecture; the Lombard has great difficulty in ever being
thoroughly serious; thus they represent three conditions of humanity,
one in perfect rest, the Byzantine, with exquisite perception of grace
and dignity; the Arab, with the same perception of grace, but with a
restless fever in his blood; the Lombard, equally energetic, but not
burning himself away, capable of submitting to law, and of enjoying
jest. But the Arabian feverishness infects even the Lombard in the
South, showing itself, however, in endless invention, with a refreshing
firmness and order directing the whole of it. The excitement is greatest
in the earliest times, most of all shown in St. Michele of Pavia; and I
am strongly disposed to connect much of its peculiar manifestations with
the Lombard's habits of eating and drinking, especially his
carnivorousness. The Lombard of early times seems to have been exactly
what a tiger would be, if you could give him love of a joke, vigorous
imagination, strong sense of justice, fear of hell, knowledge of
northern mythology, a stone den, and a mallet and chisel; fancy him
pacing up and down in the said den to digest his dinner, and striking on
the wall, with a new fancy in his head, at every turn, and you have the
Lombardic sculptor. As civilisation increases the supply of vegetables,
and shortens that of wild beasts, the excitement diminishes; it is still
strong in the thirteenth century at Lyons and Rouen; it dies away
gradually in the later Gothic, and is quite extinct in the fifteenth
century.

I think I shall best illustrate this general idea by simply copying the
entries in my diary which were written when, after six months' close
study of Byzantine work in Venice, I came again to the Lombard work of
Verona and Pavia. There are some other points alluded to in these
entries not pertaining to the matter immediately in hand; but I have
left them, as they will be of use hereafter.

"(Verona.) Comparing the arabesque and sculpture of the Duomo here with
St. Mark's, the first thing that strikes one is the low relief, the
second, the greater motion and spirit, with infinitely less grace and
science. With the Byzantine, however rude the cutting, every line is
lovely, and the animals or men are placed in any attitudes which secure
ornamental effect, sometimes impossible ones, always severe, restrained,
or languid. With the Romanesque workmen all the figures show the effort
(often successful) to express energetic action; hunting chiefly, much
fighting, and both spirited; some of the dogs running capitally,
straining to it, and the knights hitting hard, while yet the faces and
drawing are in the last degree barbarous. At Venice all is graceful,
fixed, or languid; the eastern torpor is in every line,--the mark of a
school formed on severe traditions, and keeping to them, and never
likely or desirous to rise beyond them, but with an exquisite sense of
beauty, and much solemn religious faith.

"If the Greek outer archivolt of St. Mark's is Byzantine, the law is
somewhat broken by its busy domesticity; figures engaged in every trade,
and in the preparation of viands of all kinds; a crowded kind of London
Christmas scene, interleaved (literally) by the superb balls of leafage,
unique in sculpture; but even this is strongly opposed to the wild war
and chase passion of the Lombard. Farther, the Lombard building is as
sharp, precise, and accurate, as that of St. Mark's is careless. The
Byzantines seem to have been too lazy to put their stones together; and,
in general, my first impression on coming to Verona, after four months
in Venice, is of the exquisitely neat masonry and perfect _feeling_
here; a style of Gothic formed by a combination of Lombard surface
ornament with Pisan Gothic, than which nothing can possibly be more
chaste, pure, or solemn."

I have said much of the shafts of the entrance to the crypt of St.
Zeno;[96] the following note of the sculptures on the archivolt above
them is to our present purpose:

"It is covered by very light but most effective bas-reliefs of jesting
subject:--two cocks carrying on their shoulders a long staff to which a
fox (?) is tied by the legs, hanging down between them: the strut of the
foremost cock, lifting one leg at right angles to the other, is
delicious. Then a stag hunt, with a centaur horseman drawing a bow; the
arrow has gone clear through the stag's throat, and is sticking there.
Several capital hunts with dogs, with fruit trees between, and birds in
them; the leaves, considering the early time, singularly well set, with
the edges outwards, sharp, and deep cut: snails and frogs filling up the
intervals, as if suspended in the air, with some saucy puppies on their
hind legs, two or three nondescript beasts; and, finally, on the centre
of one of the arches on the south side, an elephant and castle,--a very
strange elephant, yet cut as if the carver had seen one."

Observe this elephant and castle; we shall meet with him farther north.

"These sculptures of St. Zeno are, however, quite quiet and tame
compared with those of St. Michele of Pavia, which are designed also in
a somewhat gloomier mood; significative, as I think, of indigestion.
(Note that they are much earlier than St. Zeno; of the seventh century
at latest. There is more of nightmare, and less of wit in them.) Lord
Lindsay has described them admirably, but has not said half enough; the
state of mind represented by the west front is more that of a feverish
dream, than resultant from any determined architectural purpose, or even
from any definite love and delight in the grotesque. One capital is
covered with a mass of grinning heads, other heads grow out of two
bodies, or out of and under feet; the creatures are all fighting, or
devouring, or struggling which shall be uppermost, and yet in an
ineffectual way, as if they would fight for ever, and come to no
decision. Neither sphinxes nor centaurs did I notice, nor a single
peacock (I believe peacocks to be purely Byzantine), but mermaids with
_two_ tails (the sculptor having perhaps seen double at the time),
strange, large fish, apes, stags (bulls?), dogs, wolves, and horses,
griffins, eagles, long-tailed birds (cocks?), hawks, and dragons,
without end, or with a dozen of ends, as the case may be; smaller birds,
with rabbits, and small nondescripts, filling the friezes. The actual
leaf, which is used in the best Byzantine mouldings at Venice, occurs in
parts of these Pavian designs. But the Lombard animals are all _alive_,
and fiercely alive too, all impatience and spring: the Byzantine birds
peck idly at the fruit, and the animals hardly touch it with their
noses. The cinque cento birds in Venice hold it up daintily, like
train-bearers; the birds in the earlier Gothic peck at it hungrily and
naturally; but the Lombard beasts gripe at it like tigers, and tear it
off with writhing lips and glaring eyes. They are exactly like Jip with
the bit of geranium, worrying imaginary cats in it."

The notice of the leaf in the above extract is important,--it is the
vine-leaf; used constantly both by Byzantines and Lombards, but by the
latter with especial frequency, though at this time they were hardly
able to indicate what they meant. It forms the most remarkable
generality of the St. Michele decoration; though, had it not luckily
been carved on the façade, twining round a stake, and with grapes, I
should never have known what it was meant for, its general form being a
succession of sharp lobes, with incised furrows to the point of each.
But it is thrown about in endless change; four or five varieties of it
might be found on every cluster of capitals: and not content with this,
the Lombards hint the same form even in their griffin wings. They love
the vine very heartily.

In St. Michele of Lucca we have perhaps the noblest instance in Italy of
the Lombard spirit in its later refinement. It is some four centuries
later than St. Michele of Pavia, and the method of workmanship is
altogether different. In the Pavian church, nearly all the ornament is
cut in a coarse sandstone, in bold relief: a darker and harder stone (I
think, not serpentine, but its surface is so disguised by the lustre of
ages that I could not be certain) is used for the capitals of the
western door, which are especially elaborate in their sculpture;--two
devilish apes, or apish devils, I know not which, with bristly
moustaches and edgy teeth, half-crouching, with their hands
impertinently on their knees, ready for a spit or a spring if one goes
near them; but all is pure bossy sculpture; there is no inlaying, except
of some variegated tiles in the shape of saucers set concave (an
ornament used also very gracefully in St. Jacopo of Bologna): and the
whole surface of the church is enriched with the massy reliefs, well
preserved everywhere above the reach of human animals, but utterly
destroyed to some five or six feet from the ground; worn away into large
cellular hollows and caverns, some almost deep enough to render the
walls unsafe, entirely owing to the uses to which the recesses of the
church are dedicated by the refined and high-minded Italians. But St.
Michele of Lucca is wrought entirely in white marble and green
serpentine; there is hardly any relieved sculpture except in the
capitals of the shafts and cornices, and all the designs of wall
ornament are inlaid with exquisite precision--white on dark ground; the
ground being cut out and filled with serpentine, the figures left in
solid marble. The designs of the Pavian church are encrusted on the
walls; of the Lucchese, incorporated with them; small portions of real
sculpture being introduced exactly where the eye, after its rest on the
flatness of the wall, will take most delight in the piece of substantial
form. The entire arrangement is perfect beyond all praise, and the
morbid restlessness of the old designs is now appeased. Geometry seems
to have acted as a febrifuge, for beautiful geometrical designs are
introduced amidst the tumult of the hunt; and there is no more seeing
double, nor ghastly monstrosity of conception; no more ending of
everything in something else; no more disputing for spare legs among
bewildered bodies; no more setting on of heads wrong side foremost. The
fragments have come together: we are out of the Inferno with its weeping
down the spine; we are in the fair hunting-fields of the Lucchese
mountains (though they had their tears also),--with horse, and hound,
and hawk; and merry blast of the trumpet.--Very strange creatures to be
hunted, in all truth; but still creatures with a single head, and that
on their shoulders, which is exactly the last place in the Pavian church
where a head is to be looked for.

My good friend Mr. Cockerell wonders, in one of his lectures, why I give
so much praise to this "crazy front of Lucca." But it is not crazy; not
by any means. Altogether sober, in comparison with the early Lombard
work, or with our Norman. Crazy in one sense it is: utterly neglected,
to the breaking of its old stout heart; the venomous nights and salt
frosts of the Maremma winters have their way with it--"Poor Tom's a
cold!" The weeds that feed on the marsh air, have twisted themselves
into its crannies; the polished fragments of serpentine are spit and
rent out of their cells, and lie in green ruins along its ledges; the
salt sea winds have eaten away the fair shafting of its star window into
a skeleton of crumbling rays. It cannot stand much longer; may Heaven
only, in its benignity, preserve it from restoration, and the sands of
the Serchio give it honorable grave.

In the "Seven Lamps," Plate VI., I gave a faithful drawing of one of its
upper arches, to which I must refer the reader; for there is a marked
piece of character in the figure of the horseman on the left of it. And
in making this reference, I would say a few words about those much
abused plates of the "Seven Lamps." They are black, they are overbitten,
they are hastily drawn, they are coarse and disagreeable; how
disagreeable to many readers I venture not to conceive. But their truth
is carried to an extent never before attempted in architectural drawing.
It does not in the least follow that because a drawing is delicate, or
looks careful, it has been carefully drawn from the thing represented;
in nine instances out of ten, careful and delicate drawings are made at
home. It is not so easy as the reader, perhaps, imagines, to finish a
drawing altogether on the spot, especially of details seventy feet from
the ground; and any one who will try the position in which I have had to
do some of my work--standing, namely, on a cornice or window sill,
holding by one arm round a shaft, and hanging over the street (or canal,
at Venice), with my sketch-book supported against the wall from which I
was drawing, by my breast, so as to leave my right hand free--will not
thenceforward wonder that shadows should be occasionally carelessly
laid in, or lines drawn with some unsteadiness. But, steady, or infirm,
the sketches of which those plates in the "Seven Lamps" are fac-similes,
were made from the architecture itself, and represent that architecture
with its actual shadows at the time of day at which it was drawn, and
with every fissure and line of it as they now exist; so that when I am
speaking of some new point, which perhaps the drawing was not intended
to illustrate, I can yet turn back to it with perfect certainty that if
anything be found in it bearing on matters now in hand, I may depend
upon it just as securely as if I had gone back to look again at the
building.

It is necessary that my readers should understand this thoroughly, and I
did not before sufficiently explain it; but I believe I can show them
the use of this kind of truth, now that we are again concerned with this
front of Lucca. They will find a drawing of the entire front in Gally
Knight's "Architecture of Italy." It may serve to give them an idea of
its general disposition, and it looks very careful and accurate; but
every bit of the ornament on it is _drawn out of the artist's head_.
There is not _one line_ of it that exists on the building. The reader
will therefore, perhaps, think my ugly black plate of somewhat more
value, upon the whole, in its rough veracity, than the other in its
delicate fiction.[97]

[Illustration: Plate XXI.
               WALL VEIL DECORATION.]

As, however, I made a drawing of another part of the church somewhat
more delicately, and as I do not choose that my favorite church should
suffer in honor by my coarse work, I have had this, as far as might be,
fac-similied by line engraving (Plate XXI.). It represents the southern
side of the lower arcade of the west front; and may convey some idea of
the exquisite finish and grace of the whole; but the old plate, in the
"Seven Lamps," gives a nearer view of one of the upper arches, and a
more faithful impression of the present aspect of the work, and
especially of the seats of the horsemen; the limb straight, and well
down on the stirrup (the warrior's seat, observe, not the jockey's),
with a single pointed spur on the heel. The bit of the lower cornice
under this arch I could not see, and therefore had not drawn; it was
supplied from beneath another arch. I am afraid, however, the reader has
lost the thread of my story while I have been recommending my veracity
to him. I was insisting upon the healthy tone of this Lucca work as
compared with the old spectral Lombard friezes. The apes of the Pavian
church ride without stirrups, but all is in good order and harness here:
civilisation had done its work; there was reaping of corn in the Val
d'Arno, though rough hunting still upon its hills. But in the north,
though a century or two later, we find the forests of the Rhone, and its
rude limestone cotes, haunted by phantasms still (more meat-eating,
then, I think). I do not know a more interesting group of cathedrals
than that of Lyons, Vienne, and Valencia: a more interesting indeed,
generally, than beautiful; but there is a row of niches on the west
front of Lyons, and a course of panelled decoration about its doors,
which is, without exception, the most exquisite piece of Northern Gothic
I ever beheld, and with which I know nothing that is even comparable,
except the work of the north transept of Rouen, described in the "Seven
Lamps," p. 159; work of about the same date, and exactly the same plan;
quatrefoils filled with grotesques, but somewhat less finished in
execution, and somewhat less wild in imagination. I wrote down hastily,
and in their own course, the subjects of some of the quatrefoils of
Lyons; of which I here give the reader the sequence:--

   1. Elephant and castle; less graphic than the St. Zeno one.

   2. A huge head walking on two legs, turned backwards, hoofed; the
        head has a horn behind, with drapery over it, which ends in
        another head.

   3. A boar hunt; the boar under a tree, very spirited.

   4. A bird putting its head between its legs to bite its own tail,
        which ends in a head.

   5. A dragon with a human head set on the wrong way.

   6. St. Peter awakened by the angel in prison; full of spirit, the
        prison picturesque, with a trefoiled arch, the angel eager, St.
        Peter startled, and full of motion.

   7. St. Peter led out by the angel.

   8. The miraculous draught of fishes; fish and all, in the small
        space.

   9. A large leaf, with two snails rampant, coming out of nautilus
        shells, with grotesque faces, and eyes at the ends of their
        horns.

  10. A man with an axe striking at a dog's head, which comes out of
        a nautilus shell: the rim of the shell branches into a stem
        with two large leaves.

  11. Martyrdom of St. Sebastian; his body very full of arrows.

  12. Beasts coming to ark; Noah opening a kind of wicker cage.

  13. Noah building the ark on shores.

  14. A vine leaf with a dragon's head and tail, the one biting the
        other.

  15. A man riding a goat, catching a flying devil.

  16. An eel or muraena growing into a bunch of flowers, which turns
        into two wings.

  17. A sprig of hazel, with nuts, thrown all around the quatrefoils
        with a squirrel in centre, apparently attached to the tree only
        by its enormous tail, richly furrowed into hair, and nobly
        sweeping.

  18. Four hares fastened together by the ears, galloping in a circle.
        Mingled with these grotesques are many _sword_ and _buckler_
        combats, the bucklers being round and conical like a hat; I
        thought the first I noticed, carried by a man at full gallop on
        horseback, had been a small umbrella.

This list of subjects may sufficiently illustrate the feverish character
of the Northern Energy; but influencing the treatment of the whole there
is also the Northern love of what is called the Grotesque, a feeling
which I find myself, for the present, quite incapable either of
analysing or defining, though we all have a distinct idea attached to
the word: I shall try, however, in the next volume.


  9. WOODEN CHURCHES OF THE NORTH.

I cannot pledge myself to this theory of the origin of the vaulting
shaft, but the reader will find some interesting confirmations of it in
Dahl's work on the wooden churches of Norway. The inside view of the
church of Borgund shows the timber construction of one shaft run up
through a crossing architrave, and continued into the clerestory; while
the church of Urnes is in the exact form of a basilica; but the wall
above the arches is formed of planks, with a strong upright above each
capital. The passage quoted from Stephen Eddy's Life of Bishop Wilfrid,
at p. 86 of Churton's "Early English Church," gives us one of the
transformations or petrifactions of the wooden Saxon churches. "At Ripon
he built a new church of _polished stone_, with columns variously
ornamented, and porches." Mr. Churton adds: "It was perhaps in bad
imitation of the marble buildings he had seen in Italy, that he washed
the walls of this original York Minster, and made them 'whiter than
snow.'"


  10. CHURCH OF ALEXANDRIA.

The very cause which enabled the Venetians to possess themselves of the
body of St. Mark, was the destruction of the church by the caliph for
the _sake of its marbles_: the Arabs and Venetians, though bitter
enemies, thus building on the same models; these in reverence for the
destroyed church, and those with the very pieces of it. In the somewhat
prolix account of the matter given in the Notizie Storiche (above
quoted) the main points are, that "il Califa de' Saraceni, per
fabbricarsi un Palazzo presse di Babilonia, aveva ordinato che dalle
Chiese d' Cristiani si togliessero i più scelti marmi;" and that the
Venetians, "videro sotto i loro occhi flagellarsi crudelmente un
Cristiano per aver infranto un marmo." I heartily wish that the same
kind of punishment were enforced to this day, for the same sin.


  11. RENAISSANCE LANDSCAPE.

I am glad here to re-assert opinions which it has grieved me to be
suspected of having changed. The calmer tone of the second volume of
"Modern Painters," as compared with the first, induced, I believe, this
suspicion, very justifiably, in the minds of many of its readers. The
difference resulted, however, from the simple fact, that the first was
written in great haste and indignation, for a special purpose and
time;--the second, after I had got engaged, almost unawares, in
inquiries which could not be hastily nor indignantly pursued; my
opinions remaining then, and remaining now, altogether unchanged on the
subject which led me into the discussion. And that no farther doubt of
them may be entertained by any who may think them worth questioning, I
shall here, once for all, express them in the plainest and fewest words
I can. I think that J. M. W. Turner is not only the greatest (professed)
landscape painter who ever lived, but that he has in him as much as
would have furnished all the rest with such power as they had; and that
if we put Nicolo Poussin, Salvator, and our own Gainsborough out of the
group, he would cut up into Claudes, Cuyps, Ruysdaels, and such others,
by uncounted bunches. I hope this is plainly and strongly enough stated.
And farther, I like his later pictures, up to the year 1845, the best;
and believe that those persons who only like his early pictures do not,
in fact, like him at all. They do _not_ like that which is essentially
_his_. They like that in which he resembles other men; which he had
learned from Loutherbourg, Claude, or Wilson; that which is indeed his
own, they do not care for. Not that there is not much of his own in his
early works; they are all invaluable in their way; but those persons who
can find no beauty in his strangest fantasy on the Academy walls, cannot
distinguish the peculiarly Turneresque characters of the earlier
pictures. And, therefore, I again state here, that I think his pictures
painted between the years 1830 and 1845 his greatest; and that his
entire power is best represented by such pictures as the Temeraire, the
Sun of Venice going to Sea, and others, painted exactly at the time when
the public and the press were together loudest in abuse of him.

  Turner. Tintoret.
  Massaccio.
  John Bellini.
  Albert Durer.
  Giorgione.
  Paul Veronese.
  Titian.
  Rubens.
  Correggio.
  Orcagna.
  Benozzo Gozzoli.
  Giotto.
  Raffaelle.
  Perugino.

I desire, however, the reader to observe that I said, above, _professed_
landscape painters, among whom, perhaps, I should hardly have put
Gainsborough. The landscape of the great figure painters is often
majestic in the highest degree, and Tintoret's especially shows exactly
the same power and feeling as Turner's. If with Turner I were to rank
the historical painters as landscapists, estimating rather the power
they show, than the actual value of the landscape they produced, I
should class those, whose landscapes I have studied, in some such order
as this at the side of the page:--associating with the landscape of
Perugino that of Francia and Angelico, and the other severe painters of
religious subjects. I have put Turner and Tintoret side by side, not
knowing which is, in landscape, the greater; I had nearly associated in
the same manner the noble names of John Bellini and Albert Durer; but
Bellini must be put first, for his profound religious peace yet not
separated from the other, if but that we might remember his kindness to
him in Venice; and it is well we should take note of it here, for it
furnishes us with a most interesting confirmation of what was said in
the text respecting the position of Bellini as the last of the religious
painters of Venice. The following passage is quoted in Jackson's "Essay
on Wood-engraving," from Albert Durer's Diary:

"I have many good friends among the Italians who warn me not to eat or
drink with their painters, of whom several are my enemies, and copy my
picture in the church, and others of mine, wherever they can find them,
and yet they blame them, _and say they are not according to ancient art,
and therefore not good_. Giovanni Bellini, however, has praised me
highly to several gentlemen, and wishes to have something of my doing:
he called on me himself, and requested that I would paint a picture for
him, for which, he said, he would pay me well. People are all surprised
that I should be so much thought of by a person of his reputation: he is
very old, but is still the best painter of them all."

A choice little piece of description this, of the Renaissance painters,
side by side with the good old Venetian, who was soon to leave them to
their own ways. The Renaissance men are seen in perfection, envying,
stealing, and lying, but without wit enough to lie to purpose.


  12. ROMANIST MODERN ART.

It is of the highest importance, in these days, that Romanism should be
deprived of the miserable influence which its pomp and picturesqueness
have given it over the weak sentimentalism of the English people; I call
it a miserable influence, for of all motives to sympathy with the Church
of Rome, this I unhesitatingly class as the basest: I can, in some
measure, respect the other feelings which have been the beginnings of
apostasy; I can respect the desire for unity which would reclaim the
Romanist by love, and the distrust of his own heart which subjects the
proselyte to priestly power; I say I can respect these feelings, though
I cannot pardon unprincipled submission to them, nor enough wonder at
the infinite fatuity of the unhappy persons whom they have
betrayed:--Fatuity, self-inflicted, and stubborn in resistance to God's
Word and man's reason!--to talk of the authority of the Church, as if
the Church were anything else than the whole company of Christian men,
or were ever spoken of in Scripture[98] as other than a company to be
taught and fed, not to teach and feed.--Fatuity! to talk of a separation
of Church and State, as if a Christian state, and every officer therein,
were not necessarily a part of the Church,[99] and as if any state
officer could do his duty without endeavoring to aid and promote
religion, or any clerical officer do his duty without seeking for such
aid and accepting it:--Fatuity! to seek for the unity of a living body
of truth and trust in God, with a dead body of lies and trust in wood,
and thence to expect anything else than plague, and consumption by worms
undying, for both. Blasphemy as well as fatuity! to ask for any better
interpreter of God's Word than God, or to expect knowledge of it in any
other way than the plainly ordered way: if _any_ man will do he shall
know. But of all these fatuities, the basest is the being lured into the
Romanist Church by the glitter of it, like larks into a trap by broken
glass; to be blown into a change of religion by the whine of an
organ-pipe; stitched into a new creed by gold threads on priests'
petticoats; jangled into a change of conscience by the chimes of a
belfry. I know nothing in the shape of error so dark as this, no
imbecility so absolute, no treachery so contemptible. I had hardly
believed that it was a thing possible, though vague stories had been
told me of the effect, on some minds, of mere scarlet and candles, until
I came on this passage in Pugin's "Remarks on articles in the
Rambler":--

"Those who have lived in want and privation are the best qualified to
appreciate the blessings of plenty; thus, those who have been devout and
sincere members of the separated portion of the English Church; who have
prayed, and hoped, and loved, through all the poverty of the maimed
rites which it has retained--to them does the realisation of all their
longing desires appear truly ravishing. * * * Oh! then, what delight!
what joy unspeakable! when one of the solemn piles is presented to them,
in all its pristine life and glory!--the stoups are filled to the brim;
the rood is raised on high; the screen glows with sacred imagery and
rich device; the niches are filled; the altar is replaced, sustained by
sculptured shafts, the relics of the saints repose beneath, the body of
Our Lord is enshrined on its consecrated stone; the lamps of the
sanctuary burn bright; the saintly portraitures in the glass windows
shine all gloriously; and the albs hang in the oaken ambries, and the
cope chests are filled with orphreyed baudekins; and pix and pax, and
chrismatory are there, and thurible, and cross."

One might have put this man under a pix, and left him, one should have
thought; but he has been brought forward, and partly received, as an
example of the effect of ceremonial splendor on the mind of a great
architect. It is very necessary, therefore, that all those who have felt
sorrow at this should know at once that he is not a great architect,
but one of the smallest possible or conceivable architects; and that by
his own account and setting forth of himself. Hear him:--

"I believe, as regards architecture, few men have been so unfortunate as
myself. I have passed my life in thinking of fine things, studying fine
things, designing fine things, and realising very poor ones. I have
never had the chance of producing a single fine ecclesiastical building,
except my own church, where I am both paymaster and architect; but
everything else, either for want of adequate funds or injudicious
interference and control, or some other contingency, is more or less a
failure. * * *

"St. George's was spoilt by the very instructions laid down by the
committee, that it was to hold 3000 people on the floor at a limited
price; in consequence, height, proportion, everything, was sacrificed to
meet these conditions. Nottingham was spoilt by the style being
restricted to lancet,--a period well suited to a Cistercian abbey in a
secluded vale, but very unsuitable for the centre of a crowded
town. * * *

"Kirkham was spoilt through several hundred pounds being reduced on the
original estimate; to effect this, which was a great sum in proportion
to the entire cost, the area of the church was contracted, the walls
lowered, tower and spire reduced, the thickness of walls diminished, and
stone arches omitted." (Remarks, &c., by A. Welby Pugin: Dolman, 1850.)

Is that so? Phidias can niche himself into the corner of a pediment, and
Raffaelle expatiate within the circumference of a clay platter; but
Pugin is inexpressible in less than a cathedral? Let his ineffableness
be assured of this, once for all, that no difficulty or restraint ever
happened to a man of real power, but his power was the more manifested
in the contending with, or conquering it; and that there is no field so
small, no cranny so contracted, but that a great spirit can house and
manifest itself therein. The thunder that smites the Alp into dust, can
gather itself into the width of a golden wire. Whatever greatness there
was in you, had it been Buonarroti's own, you had room enough for it in
a single niche: you might have put the whole power of it into two feet
cube of Caen stone. St. George's was not high enough for want of money?
But was it want of money that made you put that blunt, overloaded,
laborious ogee door into the side of it? Was it for lack of funds that
you sunk the tracery of the parapet in its clumsy zigzags? Was it in
parsimony that you buried its paltry pinnacles in that eruption of
diseased crockets? or in pecuniary embarrassment that you set up the
belfry foolscaps, with the mimicry of dormer windows, which nobody can
ever reach nor look out of? Not so, but in mere incapability of better
things.

I am sorry to have to speak thus of any living architect; and there is
much in this man, if he were rightly estimated, which one might both
regard and profit by. He has a most sincere love for his profession, a
heartily honest enthusiasm for pixes and piscinas; and though he will
never design so much as a pix or a piscina thoroughly well, yet better
than most of the experimental architects of the day. Employ him by all
means, but on small work. Expect no cathedrals from him; but no one, at
present, can design a better finial. That is an exceedingly beautiful
one over the western door of St. George's; and there is some spirited
impishness and switching of tails in the supporting figures at the
imposts. Only do not allow his good designing of finials to be employed
as an evidence in matters of divinity, nor thence deduce the
incompatibility of Protestantism and art. I should have said all that I
have said above, of artistical apostasy, if Giotto had been now living
in Florence, and if art were still doing all that it did once for Rome.
But the grossness of the error becomes incomprehensible as well as
unpardonable, when we look to what level of degradation the human
intellect has sunk at this instant in Italy. So far from Romanism now
producing anything greater in art, it cannot even preserve what has been
given to its keeping. I know no abuses of precious inheritance half so
grievous, as the abuse of all that is best in art wherever the Romanist
priesthood gets possession of it. It amounts to absolute infatuation.
The noblest pieces of mediæval sculpture in North Italy, the two
griffins at the central (west) door of the cathedral of Verona, were
daily permitted to be brought into service, when I was there in the
autumn of 1849, by a washerwoman living in the Piazza, who tied her
clothes-lines to their beaks: and the shafts of St. Mark's at Venice
were used by a salesman of common caricatures to fasten his prints upon
(Compare Appendix 25); and this in the face of the continually passing
priests: while the quantity of noble art annually destroyed in
altarpieces by candle-droppings, or perishing by pure brutality of
neglect, passes all estimate. I do not know, as I have repeatedly
stated, how far the splendor of architecture, or other art, is
compatible with the honesty and usefulness of religious service. The
longer I live, the more I incline to severe judgment in this matter, and
the less I can trust the sentiments excited by painted glass and colored
tiles. But if there be indeed value in such things, our plain duty is to
direct our strength against the superstition which has dishonored them;
there are thousands who might possibly be benefited by them, to whom
they are now merely an offence, owing to their association with
idolatrous ceremonies. I have but this exhortation for all who love
them,--not to regulate their creeds by their taste in colors, but to
hold calmly to the right, at whatever present cost to their imaginative
enjoyment; sure that they will one day find in heavenly truth a brighter
charm than in earthly imagery, and striving to gather stones for the
eternal building, whose walls shall be salvation, and whose gates shall
be praise.


  13. MR. FERGUSSON'S SYSTEM.

The reader may at first suppose this division of the attributes of
buildings into action, voice, and beauty, to be the same division as Mr.
Fergusson's, now well known, of their merits, into technic, æsthetic and
phonetic.

But there is no connection between the two systems; mine, indeed, does
not profess to be a system, it is a mere arrangement of my subject, for
the sake of order and convenience in its treatment: but, as far as it
goes, it differs altogether from Mr. Fergusson's in these two following
respects:--

The action of a building, that is to say its standing or consistence,
depends on its good construction; and the first part of the foregoing
volume has been entirely occupied with the consideration of the
constructive merit of buildings: but construction is not their only
technical merit. There is as much of technical merit in their
expression, or in their beauty, as in their construction. There is no
more mechanical or technical admirableness in the stroke of the painter
who covers them with fresco, than in the dexterity of the mason who
cements their stones: there is just as much of what is technical in
their beauty, therefore, as in their construction; and, on the other
hand, there is often just as much intellect shown in their construction
as there is in either their expression or decoration. Now Mr. Fergusson
means by his "Phonetic" division, whatever expresses intellect: my
constructive division, therefore, includes part of his phonetic: and my
expressive and decorative divisions include part of his technical.

Secondly, Mr. Fergusson tries to make the same divisions fit the
_subjects_ of art, and art itself; and therefore talks of technic,
æsthetic, and phonetic, _arts_, (or, translating the Greek,) of artful
arts, sensitive arts, and talkative arts; but I have nothing to do with
any division of the arts, I have to deal only with the merits of
_buildings_. As, however, I have been led into reference to Mr.
Fergusson's system, I would fain say a word or two to effect Mr.
Fergusson's extrication from it. I hope to find in him a noble ally,
ready to join with me in war upon affectation, falsehood, and prejudice,
of every kind: I have derived much instruction from his most interesting
work, and I hope for much more from its continuation; but he must
disentangle himself from his system, or he will be strangled by it;
never was anything so ingeniously and hopelessly wrong throughout; the
whole of it is founded on a confusion of the instruments of man with his
capacities.

Mr. Fergusson would have us take--

  "First, man's muscular action or power." (Technics.)

  "Secondly, those developments of sense _by_ which _he does!!_ as much
    as by his muscles." (Æsthetics.)

  "Lastly, his intellect, or to confine this more correctly to its
    external action, _his power of speech!!!_" (Phonetics.)

Granting this division of humanity correct, or sufficient, the writer
then most curiously supposes that he may arrange the arts as if there
were some belonging to each division of man,--never observing that every
art must be governed by, and addressed to, one division, and executed by
another; executed by the muscular, addressed to the sensitive or
intellectual; and that, to be an art at all, it must have in it work of
the one, and guidance from the other. If, by any lucky accident, he had
been led to arrange the arts, either by their objects, and the things to
which they are addressed, or by their means, and the things by which
they are executed, he would have discovered his mistake in an instant.
As thus:--

  These arts are addressed to the,--Muscles!!
                                    Senses,
                                    Intellect;
                   or executed by,--Muscles,
                                    Senses!!
                                    Intellect.

Indeed it is true that some of the arts are in a sort addressed to the
muscles, surgery for instance; but this is not among Mr. Fergusson's
technic, but his politic, arts! and all the arts may, in a sort, be said
to be performed by the senses, as the senses guide both muscles and
intellect in their work: but they guide them as they receive
information, or are standards of accuracy, but not as in themselves
capable of action. Mr. Fergusson is, I believe, the first person who has
told us of senses that act or do, they having been hitherto supposed
only to sustain or perceive. The weight of error, however, rests just as
much in the original division of man, as in the endeavor to fit the arts
to it. The slight omission of the soul makes a considerable difference
when it begins to influence the final results of the arrangement.

Mr. Fergusson calls morals and religion "Politick arts" (as if religion
were an art at all! or as if both were not as necessary to individuals
as to societies); and therefore, forming these into a body of arts by
themselves, leaves the best of the arts to do without the soul and the
moral feeling as rest they may. Hence "expression," or "phonetics," is
of intellect only (as if men never expressed their _feelings!_); and
then, strangest and worst of all, intellect is entirely resolved into
talking! There can be no intellect but it must talk, and all talking
must be intellectual. I believe people do sometimes talk without
understanding; and I think the world would fare ill if they never
understood without talking. The intellect is an entirely silent faculty,
and has nothing to do with parts of speech any more than the moral part
has. A man may feel and know things without expressing either the
feeling or knowledge; and the talking is a _muscular_ mode of
communicating the workings of the intellect or heart--muscular, whether
it be by tongue or by sign, or by carving or writing, or by expression
of feature; so that to divide a man into muscular and talking parts, is
to divide him into body in general, and tongue in particular, the
endless confusion resulting from which arrangement is only less
marvellous in itself, than the resolution with which Mr. Fergusson has
worked through it, and in spite of it, up to some very interesting and
suggestive truths; although starting with a division of humanity which
does not in the least raise it above the brute, for a rattlesnake has
his muscular, æsthetic, and talking part as much as man, only he talks
with his tail, and says, "I am angry with you, and should like to bite
you," more laconically and effectively than any phonetic biped could,
were he so minded. And, in fact, the real difference between the brute
and man is not so much that the one has fewer means of expression than
the other, as that it has fewer thoughts to express, and that we do not
understand its expressions. Animals can talk to one another intelligibly
enough when they have anything to say, and their captains have words of
command just as clear as ours, and better obeyed. We have indeed, in
watching the efforts of an intelligent animal to talk to a human being,
a melancholy sense of its dumbness; but the fault is still in its
intelligence, more than in its tongue. It has not wit enough to
systematise its cries or signs, and form them into language.

But there is no end to the fallacies and confusions of Mr. Fergusson's
arrangement. It is a perfect entanglement of gun-cotton, and explodes
into vacuity wherever one holds a light to it. I shall leave him to do
so with the rest of it for himself, and should perhaps have left it to
his own handling altogether, but for the intemperateness of the spirit
with which he has spoken on a subject perhaps of all others demanding
gentleness and caution. No man could more earnestly have desired the
changes lately introduced into the system of the University of Oxford
than I did myself: no man can be more deeply sensible than I of grievous
failures in the practical working even of the present system: but I
believe that these failures may be almost without exception traced to
one source, the want of evangelical, and the excess of rubrical religion
among the tutors; together with such rustinesses and stiffnesses as
necessarily attend the continual operation of any intellectual machine.
The fault is, at any rate, far less in the system than in the
imperfection of its administration; and had it been otherwise, the terms
in which Mr. Fergusson speaks of it are hardly decorous in one who can
but be imperfectly acquainted with its working. They are sufficiently
answered by the structure of the essay in which they occur; for if the
high powers of mind which its author possesses had been subjected to the
discipline of the schools, he could not have wasted his time on the
development of a system which their simplest formulæ of logic would have
shown him to be untenable.

Mr. Fergusson will, however, find it easier to overthrow his system than
to replace it. Every man of science knows the difficulty of arranging a
_reasonable_ system of classification, in any subject, by any one group
of characters; and that the best classifications are, in many of their
branches, convenient rather than reasonable: so that, to any person who
is really master of his subject, many different modes of classification
will occur at different times; one of which he will use rather than
another, according to the point which he has to investigate. I need only
instance the three arrangements of minerals, by their external
characters, and their positive or negative bases, of which the first is
the most useful, the second the most natural, the third the most simple;
and all in several ways unsatisfactory.

But when the subject becomes one which no single mind can grasp, and
which embraces the whole range of human occupation and enquiry, the
difficulties become as great, and the methods as various, as the uses to
which the classification might be put; and Mr. Fergusson has entirely
forgotten to inform us what is the object to which his arrangements are
addressed. For observe: there is one kind of arrangement which is based
on the rational connection of the sciences or arts with one another; an
arrangement which maps them out like the rivers of some great country,
and marks the points of their junction, and the direction and force of
their united currents; and this without assigning to any one of them a
superiority above another, but considering them all as necessary members
of the noble unity of human science and effort. There is another kind of
classification which contemplates the order of succession in which they
might most usefully be presented to a single mind, so that the given
mind should obtain the most effective and available knowledge of them
all: and, finally, the most usual classification contemplates the powers
of mind which they each require for their pursuit, the objects to which
they are addressed, or with which they are concerned; and assigns to
each of them a rank superior or inferior, according to the nobility of
the powers they require, or the grandeur of the subjects they
contemplate.

Now, not only would it be necessary to adopt a different classification
with respect to each of these great intentions, but it might be found so
even to vary the order of the succession of sciences in the case of
every several mind to which they were addressed; and that their rank
would also vary with the power and specific character of the mind
engaged upon them. I once heard a very profound mathematician
remonstrate against the impropriety of Wordsworth's receiving a pension
from government, on the ground that he was "only a poet." If the study
of mathematics had always this narrowing effect upon the sympathies, the
science itself would need to be deprived of the rank usually assigned to
it; and there could be no doubt that, in the effect it had on the mind
of this man, and of such others, it was a very contemptible science
indeed. Hence, in estimating the real rank of any art or science, it is
necessary for us to conceive it as it would be grasped by minds of every
order. There are some arts and sciences which we underrate, because no
one has risen to show us with what majesty they may be invested; and
others which we overrate, because we are blinded to their general
meanness by the magnificence which some one man has thrown around them:
thus, philology, evidently the most contemptible of all the sciences,
has been raised to unjust dignity by Johnson.[100] And the subject is
farther complicated by the question of usefulness; for many of the arts
and sciences require considerable intellectual power for their pursuit,
and yet become contemptible by the slightness of what they accomplish:
metaphysics, for instance, exercising intelligence of a high order, yet
useless to the mass of mankind, and, to its own masters, dangerous. Yet,
as it has become so by the want of the true intelligence which its
inquiries need, and by substitution of vain subtleties in its stead, it
may in future vindicate for itself a higher rank than a man of common
sense usually concedes to it.

Nevertheless, the mere attempt at arrangement must be useful, even where
it does nothing more than develop difficulties. Perhaps the greatest
fault of men of learning is their so often supposing all other branches
of science dependent upon or inferior to their own best beloved branch;
and the greatest deficiency of men comparatively unlearned, their want
of perception of the connection of the branches with each other. He who
holds the tree only by the extremities, can perceive nothing but the
separation of its sprays. It must always be desirable to prove to those
the equality of rank, to these the closeness of sequence, of what they
had falsely supposed subordinate or separate. And, after such candid
admission of the co-equal dignity of the truly noble arts and sciences,
we may be enabled more justly to estimate the inferiority of those which
indeed seem intended for the occupation of inferior powers and narrower
capacities. In Appendix 14, following, some suggestions will be found as
to the principles on which classification might be based; but the
arrangement of all the arts is certainly not a work which could with
discretion be attempted in the Appendix to an essay on a branch of one
of them.


  14. DIVISIONS OF HUMANITY.

The reader will probably understand this part of the subject better if
he will take the trouble briefly to consider the actions of the mind and
body of man in the sciences and arts, which give these latter the
relations of rank usually attributed to them.

It was above observed (Appendix 13) that the arts were generally ranked
according to the nobility of the powers they require, that is to say,
the quantity of the being of man which they engaged or addressed. Now
their rank is not a very important matter as regards each other, for
there are few disputes more futile than that concerning the respective
dignity of arts, all of which are necessary and honorable. But it is a
very important matter as regards themselves; very important whether
they are practised with the devotion and regarded with the respect
which are necessary or due to their perfection. It does not at all
matter whether architecture or sculpture be the nobler art; but it
matters much whether the thought is bestowed upon buildings, or the
feeling is expressed in statues, which make either deserving of our
admiration. It is foolish and insolent to imagine that the art which we
ourselves practise is greater than any other; but it is wise to take
care that in our own hands it is as noble as we can make it. Let us take
some notice, therefore, in what degrees the faculties of man may be
engaged in his several arts: we may consider the entire man as made up
of body, soul, and intellect (Lord Lindsay, meaning the same thing, says
inaccurately--sense, intellect, and spirit--forgetting that there is a
moral sense as well as a bodily sense, and a spiritual body as well as a
natural body, and so gets into some awkward confusion, though right in
the main points). Then, taking the word soul as a short expression of
the moral and responsible part of being, each of these three parts has a
passive and active power. The body has senses and muscles; the soul,
feeling and resolution; the intellect, understanding and imagination.
The scheme may be put into tabular form, thus:--

              Passive or Receptive Part.    Active or Motive Part.
  Body                  Senses.                  Muscles.
  Soul                  Feeling.                 Resolution.
  Intellect             Understanding.           Imagination.

In this scheme I consider memory a part of understanding, and conscience
I leave out, as being the voice of God in the heart, inseparable from
the system, yet not an essential part of it. The sense of beauty I
consider a mixture of the Senses of the body and soul.

Now all these parts of the human system have a reciprocal action on one
another, so that the true perfection of any of them is not possible
without some relative perfection of the others, and yet any one of the
parts of the system may be brought into a morbid development,
inconsistent with the perfection of the others. Thus, in a healthy
state, the acuteness of the senses quickens that of the feelings, and
these latter quicken the understanding, and then all the three quicken
the imagination, and then all the four strengthen the resolution; while
yet there is a danger, on the other hand, that the encouraged and morbid
feeling may weaken or bias the understanding, or that the over shrewd
and keen understanding may shorten the imagination, or that the
understanding and imagination together may take place of, or undermine,
the resolution, as in Hamlet. So in the mere bodily frame there is a
delightful perfection of the senses, consistent with the utmost health
of the muscular system, as in the quick sight and hearing of an active
savage: another false delicacy of the senses, in the Sybarite,
consequent on their over indulgence, until the doubled rose-leaf is
painful; and this inconsistent with muscular perfection. Again; there is
a perfection of muscular action consistent with exquisite sense, as in
that of the fingers of a musician or of a painter, in which the muscles
are guided by the slightest feeling of the strings, or of the pencil:
another perfection of muscular action inconsistent with acuteness of
sense, as in the effort of battle, in which a soldier does not perceive
his wounds. So that it is never so much the question, what is the
solitary perfection of a given part of the man, as what is its balanced
perfection in relation to the whole of him: and again, the perfection of
any single power is not merely to be valued by the mere rank of the
power itself, but by the harmony which it indicates among the other
powers. Thus, for instance, in an archer's glance along his arrow, or a
hunter's raising of his rifle, there is a certain perfection of sense
and finger which is the result of mere practice, of a simple bodily
perfection; but there is a farther value in the habit which results from
the resolution and intellect necessary to the forming of it: in the
hunter's raising of his rifle there is a quietness implying far more
than mere practice,--implying courage, and habitual meeting of danger,
and presence of mind, and many other such noble characters. So also in a
musician's way of laying finger on his instrument, or a painter's
handling of his pencil, there are many qualities expressive of the
special sensibilities of each, operating on the production of the habit,
besides the sensibility operating at the moment of action. So that there
are three distinct stages of merit in what is commonly called mere
bodily dexterity: the first, the dexterity given by practice, called
command of tools or of weapons; the second stage, the dexterity or
grace given by character, as the gentleness of hand proceeding from
modesty or tenderness of spirit, and the steadiness of it resulting from
habitual patience coupled with decision, and the thousand other
characters partially discernible, even in a man's writing, much more in
his general handiwork; and, thirdly, there is the perfection of action
produced by the operation of _present_ strength, feeling, or
intelligence on instruments thus _previously_ perfected, as the handling
of a great painter is rendered more beautiful by his immediate care and
feeling and love of his subject, or knowledge of it, and as physical
strength is increased by strength of will and greatness of heart.
Imagine, for instance, the difference in manner of fighting, and in
actual muscular strength and endurance, between a common soldier, and a
man in the circumstances of the Horatii, or of the temper of Leonidas.

Mere physical skill, therefore, the mere perfection and power of the
body as an instrument, is manifested in three stages:

  First, Bodily power by practice;
  Secondly, Bodily power by moral habit;
  Thirdly, Bodily power by immediate energy;

and the arts will be greater or less, cæteris paribus, according to the
degrees of these dexterities which they admit. A smith's work at his
anvil admits little but the first; fencing, shooting, and riding, admit
something of the second; while the fine arts admit (merely through the
channel of the bodily dexterities) an expression almost of the whole
man.

Nevertheless, though the higher arts _admit_ this higher bodily
perfection, they do not all _require_ it in equal degrees, but can
dispense with it more and more in proportion to their dignity. The arts
whose chief element is bodily dexterity, may be classed together as arts
of the third order, of which the highest will be those which admit most
of the power of moral habit and energy, such as riding and the
management of weapons; and the rest may be thrown together under the
general title of handicrafts, of which it does not much matter which are
the most honorable, but rather, which are the most necessary and least
injurious to health, which it is not our present business to examine.
Men engaged in the practice of these are called artizans, as opposed to
artists, who are concerned with the fine arts.

The next step in elevation of art is the addition of the intelligences
which have no connection with bodily dexterity; as, for instance, in
hunting, the knowledge of the habits of animals and their places of
abode; in architecture, of mathematics; in painting, of harmonies of
color; in music, of those of sound; all this pure science being joined
with readiness of expedient in applying it, and with shrewdness in
apprehension of difficulties, either present or probable.

It will often happen that intelligence of this kind is possessed without
bodily dexterity, or the need of it; one man directing and another
executing, as for the most part in architecture, war, and seamanship.
And it is to be observed, also, that in proportion to the dignity of the
art, the bodily dexterities needed even in its subordinate agents become
less important, and are more and more replaced by intelligence; as in
the steering of a ship, the bodily dexterity required is less than in
shooting or fencing, but the intelligence far greater: and so in war,
the mere swordsmanship and marksmanship of the troops are of small
importance in comparison with their disposition, and right choice of the
moment of action. So that arts of this second order must be estimated,
not by the quantity of bodily dexterity they require, but by the
quantity and dignity of the knowledge needed in their practice, and by
the degree of subtlety needed in bringing such knowledge into play. War
certainly stands first in the general mind, not only as the greatest of
the arts which I have called of the second order, but as the greatest of
all arts. It is not, however, easy to distinguish the respect paid to
the Power, from that rendered to the Art of the soldier; the honor of
victory being more dependent, in the vulgar mind, on its results, than
its difficulties. I believe, however, that taking into consideration the
greatness of the anxieties under which this art must be practised, the
multitude of circumstances to be known and regarded in it, and the
subtleties both of apprehension and stratagem constantly demanded by it,
as well as the multiplicity of disturbing accidents and doubtful
contingencies against which it must make provision on the instant, it
must indeed rank as far the first of the arts of the second order; and
next to this great art of killing, medicine being much like war in its
stratagems and watchings against its dark and subtle death-enemy.

Then the arts of the first order will be those in which the Imaginative
part of the intellect and the Sensitive part of the soul are joined: as
poetry, architecture, and painting; these forming a kind of cross, in
their part of the scheme of the human being, with those of the second
order, which wed the Intelligent part of the intellect and Resolute part
of the soul. But the reader must feel more and more, at every step, the
impossibility of classing the arts themselves, independently of the men
by whom they are practised; and how an art, low in itself, may be made
noble by the quantity of human strength and being which a great man will
pour into it; and an art, great in itself, be made mean by the meanness
of the mind occupied in it. I do not intend, when I call painting an art
of the first, and war an art of the second, order, to class Dutch
landscape painters with good soldiers; but I mean, that if from such a
man as Napoleon we were to take away the honor of all that he had done
in law and civil government, and to give him the reputation of his
soldiership only, his name would be less, if justly weighed, than that
of Buonarroti, himself a good soldier also, when need was. But I will
not endeavor to pursue the inquiry, for I believe that of all the arts
of the first order it would be found that all that a man has, or is, or
can be, he can fully express in them, and give to any of them, and find
it not enough.


  15. INSTINCTIVE JUDGMENTS.

The same rapid judgment which I wish to enable the reader to form of
architecture, may in some sort also be formed of painting, owing to the
close connection between execution and expression in the latter; as
between structure and expression in the former. We ought to be able to
tell good painting by a side glance as we pass along a gallery; and,
until we can do so, we are not fit to pronounce judgment at all: not
that I class this easily visible excellence of painting with the great
expressional qualities which time and watchfulness only unfold. I have
again and again insisted on the supremacy of these last and shall
always continue to do so. But I perceive a tendency among some of the
more thoughtful critics of the day to forget that the business of a
painter is to _paint_, and so altogether to despise those men, Veronese
and Rubens for instance, who were painters, par excellence, and in whom
the expressional qualities are subordinate. Now it is well, when we have
strong moral or poetical feeling manifested in painting, to mark this as
the best part of the work; but it is not well to consider as a thing of
small account, the painter's language in which that feeling is conveyed,
for if that language be not good and lovely, the man may indeed be a
just moralist or a great poet, but he is not a _painter_, and it was
wrong of him to paint. He had much better put his morality into sermons,
and his poetry into verse, than into a language of which he was not
master. And this mastery of the language is that of which we should be
cognizant by a glance of the eye; and if that be not found, it is wasted
time to look farther: the man has mistaken his vocation, and his
expression of himself will be cramped by his awkward efforts to do what
he was not fit to do. On the other hand, if the man be a painter indeed,
and have the gift of colors and lines, what is in him will come from his
hand freely and faithfully; and the language itself is so difficult and
so vast, that the mere possession of it argues the man is great, and
that his works are worth reading. So that I have never yet seen the case
in which this true artistical excellence, visible by the eye-glance, was
not the index of some true expressional worth in the work. Neither have
I ever seen a good expressional work without high artistical merit: and
that this is ever denied is only owing to the narrow view which men are
apt to take both of expression and of art; a narrowness consequent on
their own especial practice and habits of thought. A man long trained to
love the monk's visions of Fra Angelico, turns in proud and ineffable
disgust from the first work of Rubens which he encounters on his return
across the Alps. But is he right in his indignation? He has forgotten,
that while Angelico prayed and wept in his _olive shade_, there was
different work doing in the dank fields of Flanders;--wild seas to be
banked out; endless canals to be dug, and boundless marshes to be
drained; hard ploughing and harrowing of the frosty clay; careful
breeding of stout horses and fat cattle; close setting of brick walls
against cold winds and snow; much hardening of hands and gross
stoutening of bodies in all this; gross jovialities of harvest homes and
Christmas feasts, which were to be the reward of it; rough affections,
and sluggish imagination; fleshy, substantial, ironshod humanities, but
humanities still; humanities which God had his eye upon, and which won,
perhaps, here and there, as much favor in his sight as the wasted
aspects of the whispering monks of Florence (Heaven forbid it should not
be so, since the most of us cannot be monks, but must be ploughmen and
reapers still). And are we to suppose there is no nobility in Rubens'
masculine and universal sympathy with all this, and with his large human
rendering of it, Gentleman though he was, by birth, and feeling, and
education, and place; and, when he chose, lordly in conception also? He
had his faults, perhaps great and lamentable faults, though more those
of his time and his country than his own; he has neither cloister
breeding nor boudoir breeding, and is very unfit to paint either in
missals or annuals; but he has an open sky and wide-world breeding in
him, that we may not be offended with, fit alike for king's court,
knight's camp, or peasant's cottage. On the other hand, a man trained
here in England, in our Sir Joshua school, will not and cannot allow
that there is any art at all in the technical work of Angelico. But he
is just as wrong as the other. Fra Angelico is as true a master of the
art necessary to his purposes, as Rubens was of that necessary for his.
We have been taught in England to think there can be no virtue but in a
loaded brush and rapid hand; but if we can shake our common sense free
of such teaching, we shall understand that there is art also in the
delicate point and in the hand which trembles as it moves; not because
it is more liable to err, but because there is more danger in its error,
and more at stake upon its precision. The art of Angelico, both as a
colorist and a draughtsman, is consummate; so perfect and beautiful,
that his work may be recognised at any distance by the rainbow-play and
brilliancy of it: However closely it may be surrounded by other works of
the same school, glowing with enamel and gold, Angelico's may be told
from them at a glance, like so many huge pieces of opal lying among
common marbles. So again with Giotto; the Arena chapel is not only the
most perfect expressional work, it is the prettiest piece of wall
decoration and fair color, in North Italy.

Now there is a correspondence of the same kind between the technical and
expressional parts of architecture;--not a true or entire
correspondence, so that when the expression is best, the building must
be also best; but so much of correspondence as that good building is
necessary to good expression, comes before it, and is to be primarily
looked for: and the more, because the manner of building is capable of
being determinately estimated and classed; but the expressional
character not so: we can at once determine the true value of technical
qualities, we can only approximate to the value of expressional
qualities: and besides this, the looking for the technical qualities
first will enable us to cast a large quantity of rubbish aside at once,
and so to narrow the difficult field of inquiry into expression: we
shall get rid of Chinese pagodas and Indian temples, and Renaissance
Palladianisms, and Alhambra stucco and filigree, in one great rubbish
heap; and shall not need to trouble ourselves about their expression, or
anything else concerning them. Then taking the buildings which have been
rightly put together, and which show common sense in their structure, we
may look for their farther and higher excellences; but on those which
are absurd in their first steps we need waste no time.


  16. STRENGTH OF SHAFTS.

I could have wished, before writing this chapter, to have given more
study to the difficult subject of the strength of shafts of different
materials and structure; but I cannot enter into every inquiry which
general criticism might suggest, and this I believe to be one which
would have occupied the reader with less profit than many others: all
that is necessary for him to note is, that the great increase of
strength gained by a tubular form in iron shafts, of given solid
contents, is no contradiction to the general principle stated in the
text, that the strength of materials is most available when they are
most concentrated. The strength of the tube is owing to certain
properties of the arch formed by its sides, not to the dispersion of its
materials: and the principle is altogether inapplicable to stone shafts.
No one would think of building a pillar of a succession of sandstone
rings; however strong it might be, it would be still stronger filled up,
and the substitution of such a pillar for a solid one of the same
contents would lose too much space; for a stone pillar, even when solid,
must be quite as thick as is either graceful or convenient, and in
modern churches is often too thick as it is, hindering sight of the
preacher, and checking the sound of his voice.


  17. ANSWER TO MR. GARBETT.

Some three months ago, and long after the writing of this passage, I met
accidentally with Mr. Garbett's elementary Treatise on Design. (Weale,
1850.) If I had cared about the reputation of originality, I should have
been annoyed--and was so, at first, on finding Mr. Garbett's
illustrations of the subject exactly the same as mine, even to the
choice of the elephant's foot for the parallel of the Doric pillar: I
even thought of omitting, or rewriting, great part of the chapter, but
determined at last to let it stand. I am striving to speak plain truths
on many simple and trite subjects, and I hope, therefore, that much of
what I say has been said before, and am quite willing to give up all
claim to originality in any reasoning or assertion whatsoever, if any
one cares to dispute it. I desire the reader to accept what I say, not
as mine, but as the truth, which may be all the world's, if they look
for it. If I remember rightly, Mr. Frank Howard promised at some
discussion respecting the "Seven Lamps," reported in the "Builder," to
pluck all my borrowed feathers off me; but I did not see the end of the
discussion, and do not know to this day how many feathers I have left:
at all events the elephant's foot must belong to Mr. Garbett, though,
strictly speaking, neither he nor I can be quite justified in using it,
for an elephant in reality stands on tiptoe; and this is by no means the
expression of a Doric shaft. As, however, I have been obliged to speak
of this treatise of Mr. Garbett's, and desire also to recommend it as of
much interest and utility in its statements of fact, it is impossible
for me to pass altogether without notice, as if unanswerable, several
passages in which the writer has objected to views stated in the "Seven
Lamps." I should at any rate have noticed the passage quoted above,
(Chap. 30th,) which runs counter to the spirit of all I have ever
written, though without referring to me; but the references to the
"Seven Lamps" I should not have answered, unless I had desired,
generally, to recommend the book, and partly also, because they may
serve as examples of the kind of animadversion which the "Seven Lamps"
had to sustain from architects, very generally; which examples being
once answered, there will be little occasion for my referring in future
to other criticisms of the kind.

The first reference to the "Seven Lamps" is in the second page, where
Mr. Garbett asks a question, "Why are not convenience and stability
enough to constitute a fine building?"--which I should have answered
shortly by asking another, "Why we have been made men, and not bees nor
termites:" but Mr. Garbett has given a very pretty, though partial,
answer to it himself, in his 4th to 9th pages,--an answer which I
heartily beg the reader to consider. But, in page 12, it is made a grave
charge against me, that I use the words beauty and ornament
interchangeably. I do so, and ever shall; and so, I believe, one day,
will Mr. Garbett himself; but not while he continues to head his pages
thus:--"Beauty not dependent on ornament, _or superfluous_ features."
What right has he to assume that ornament, rightly so called, ever was,
or can be, superfluous? I have said before, and repeatedly in other
places, that the most beautiful things are the most useless; I never
said superfluous. I said useless in the well-understood and usual sense,
as meaning, inapplicable to the service of the body. Thus I called
peacocks and lilies useless; meaning, that roast peacock was unwholesome
(taking Juvenal's word for it), and that dried lilies made bad hay: but
I do not think peacocks superfluous birds, nor that the world could get
on well without its lilies. Or, to look closer, I suppose the peacock's
blue eyes to be very useless to him; not dangerous indeed, as to their
first master, but of small service, yet I do not think there is a
superfluous eye in all his tail; and for lilies, though the great King
of Israel was not "arrayed" like one of them, can Mr. Garbett tell us
which are their superfluous leaves? Is there no Diogenes among lilies?
none to be found content to drink dew, but out of silver? The fact is, I
never met with the architect yet who did not think ornament meant a
thing to be bought in a shop and pinned on, or left off, at
architectural toilets, as the fancy seized them, thinking little more
than many women do of the other kind of ornament--the only true
kind,--St. Peter's kind,--"Not that outward adorning, but the inner--of
the heart." I do not mean that architects cannot conceive this better
ornament, but they do not understand that it is the _only_ ornament;
that _all_ architectural ornament is this, and nothing but this; that a
noble building never has any extraneous or superfluous ornament; that
all its parts are necessary to its loveliness, and that no single atom
of them could be removed without harm to its life. You do not build a
temple and then dress it.[101] You create it in its loveliness, and
leave it, as her Maker left Eve. Not unadorned, I believe, but so well
adorned as to need no feather crowns. And I use the words ornament and
beauty interchangeably, in order that architects may understand this: I
assume that their building is to be a perfect creature capable of
nothing less than it has, and needing nothing more. It may, indeed,
receive additional decoration afterwards, exactly as a woman may
gracefully put a bracelet on her arm, or set a flower in her hair: but
that additional decoration is _not_ the _architecture_. It is of
curtains, pictures, statues, things that may be taken away from the
building, and not hurt it. What has the architect to do with these? He
has only to do with what is part of the building itself, that is to say,
its own inherent beauty. And because Mr. Garbett does not understand or
acknowledge this, he is led on from error to error; for we next find him
endeavoring to define beauty as distinct from ornament, and saying that
"Positive beauty may be produced by a studious collation of whatever
will display design, order, and congruity." (p. 14.) Is that so? There
is a highly studious collation of whatever will display design, order,
and congruity, in a skull, is there not?--yet small beauty. The nose is
a decorative feature,--yet slightly necessary to beauty, it seems to me;
now, at least, for I once thought I must be wrong in considering a skull
disagreeable. I gave it fair trial: put one on my bed-room
chimney-piece, and looked at it by sunrise every morning, and by
moonlight every night, and by all the best lights I could think of, for
a month, in vain. I found it as ugly at last as I did at first. So,
also, the hair is a decoration, and its natural curl is of little use;
but can Mr. Garbett conceive a bald beauty; or does he prefer a wig,
because that is a "_studious_ collation" of whatever will produce
design, order, and congruity? So the flush of the cheek is a
decoration,--God's painting of the temple of his spirit,--and the
redness of the lip; and yet poor Viola thought it beauty truly blent;
and I hold with her.

I have answered enough to this count.

The second point questioned is my assertion, "Ornament cannot be
overcharged if it is good, and is always overcharged when it is bad." To
which Mr. Garbett objects in these terms: "I must contend, on the
contrary, that the very best ornament may be overcharged by being
misplaced."

A short sentence with two mistakes in it.

First. Mr. Garbett cannot get rid of his unfortunate notion that
ornament is a thing to be manufactured separately, and fastened on. He
supposes that an ornament may be called good in itself, in the
stonemason's yard or in the ironmonger's shop: Once for all, let him put
this idea out of his head. We may say of a thing, considered separately,
that it is a pretty thing; but before we can say it is a good ornament,
we must know what it is to adorn, and how. As, for instance, a ring of
gold is a pretty thing; it is a good ornament on a woman's finger; not a
good ornament hung through her under lip. A hollyhock, seven feet high,
would be a good ornament for a cottage-garden; not a good ornament for a
lady's head-dress. Might not Mr. Garbett have seen this without my
showing? and that, therefore, when I said "_good_" ornament, I said
"well-placed" ornament, in one word, and that, also, when Mr. Garbett
says "it may be overcharged by being misplaced," he merely says it may
be overcharged by being _bad_.

Secondly. But, granted that ornament _were_ independent of its position,
and might be pronounced good in a separate form, as books are good, or
men are good.--Suppose I had written to a student in Oxford, "You cannot
have too many books, if they be good books;" and he had answered me,
"Yes, for if I have many, I have no place to put them in but the
coal-cellar." Would that in anywise affect the general principle that
he could not have too many books?

Or suppose he had written, "I must not have too many, they confuse my
head." I should have written back to him: "Don't buy books to put in the
coal-hole, nor read them if they confuse your head; you cannot have too
many, if they be good: but if you are too lazy to take care of them, or
too dull to profit by them, you are better without them."

Exactly in the same tone, I repeat to Mr. Garbett, "You cannot have too
much ornament, if it be good: but if you are too indolent to arrange it,
or too dull to take advantage of it, assuredly you are better without
it."

The other points bearing on this question have already been stated in
the close of the 21st chapter.

The third reference I have to answer, is to my repeated assertion, that
the evidence of manual labor is one of the chief sources of value in
ornament, ("Seven Lamps," p. 49, "Modern Painters," § 1, Chap. III.,) to
which objection is made in these terms: "We must here warn the reader
against a remarkable error of Ruskin. The value of ornaments in
architecture depends _not in the slightest degree_ on the _manual labor_
they contain. If it did, the finest ornaments ever executed would be the
stone chains that hang before certain Indian rock-temples." Is that so?
Hear a parallel argument. "The value of the Cornish mines depends not in
the slightest degree on the quantity of copper they contain. If it did,
the most valuable things ever produced would be copper saucepans." It is
hardly worth my while to answer this; but, lest any of my readers should
be confused by the objection, and as I hold the fact to be of great
importance, I may re-state it for them with some explanation.

Observe, then, the appearance of labor, that is to say, the evidence of
the past industry of man, is always, in the abstract, intensely
delightful: man being meant to labor, it is delightful to see that he
_has_ labored, and to read the record of his active and worthy
existence.

The evidence of labor becomes painful only when it is a _sign of Evil
greater, as Evil, than the labor is great, as Good_. As, for instance,
if a man has labored for an hour at what might have been done by another
man in a moment, this evidence of his labor is also evidence of his
weakness; and this weakness is greater in rank of evil, than his
industry is great in rank of good.

Again, if a man have labored at what was not worth accomplishing, the
signs of his labor are the signs of his folly, and his folly dishonors
his industry; we had rather he had been a wise man in rest than a fool
in labor.

Again, if a man have labored without accomplishing anything, the signs
of his labor are the signs of his disappointment; and we have more
sorrow in sympathy with his failure, than pleasure in sympathy with his
work.

Now, therefore, in ornament, whenever labor replaces what was better
than labor, that is to say, skill and thought; wherever it substitutes
itself for these, or _negatives these by its existence_, then it is
positive evil. Copper is an evil when it alloys gold, or poisons food:
not an evil, as copper; good in the form of pence, seriously
objectionable when it occupies the room of guineas. Let Danaë cast it
out of her lap, when the gold comes from heaven; but let the poor man
gather it up carefully from the earth.

Farther, the evidence of labor is not only a good when added to other
good, but the utter absence of it destroys good in human work. It is
only good for God to create without toil; that which man can create
without toil is worthless: machine ornaments are no ornaments at all.
Consider this carefully, reader: I could illustrate it for you
endlessly; but you feel it yourself every hour of your existence. And if
you do not know that you feel it, take up, for a little time, the trade
which of all manual trades has been most honored: be for once a
carpenter. Make for yourself a table or a chair, and see if you ever
thought any table or chair so delightful, and what strange beauty there
will be in their crooked limbs.

I have not noticed any other animadversions on the "Seven Lamps" in Mr.
Garbett's volume; but if there be more, I must now leave it to his own
consideration, whether he may not, as in the above instances, have made
them incautiously: I may, perhaps, also be permitted to request other
architects, who may happen to glance at the preceding pages, not
immediately to condemn what may appear to them false in general
principle. I must often be found deficient in technical knowledge; I
may often err in my statements respecting matters of practice or of
special law. But I do not write thoughtlessly respecting principles; and
my statements of these will generally be found worth reconnoitring
before attacking. Architects, no doubt, fancy they have strong grounds
for supposing me wrong when they seek to invalidate my assertions. Let
me assure them, at least, that I mean to be their friend, although they
may not immediately recognise me as such. If I could obtain the public
ear, and the principles I have advocated were carried into general
practice, porphyry and serpentine would be given to them instead of
limestone and brick; instead of tavern and shop-fronts they would have
to build goodly churches and noble dwelling-houses; and for every
stunted Grecism and stucco Romanism, into which they are now forced to
shape their palsied thoughts, and to whose crumbling plagiarisms they
must trust their doubtful fame, they would be asked to raise whole
streets of bold, and rich, and living architecture, with the certainty
in their hearts of doing what was honorable to themselves, and good for
all men.

Before I altogether leave the question of the influence of labor on
architectural effect, the reader may expect from me a word or two
respecting the subject which this year must be interesting to all--the
applicability, namely, of glass and iron to architecture in general, as
in some sort exemplified by the Crystal Palace.

It is thought by many that we shall forthwith have great part of our
architecture in glass and iron, and that new forms of beauty will result
from the studied employment of these materials.

It may be told in a few words how far this is possible; how far
eternally impossible.

There are two means of delight in all productions of art--color and
form.

The most vivid conditions of color attainable by human art are those of
works in glass and enamel, but not the most perfect. The best and
noblest coloring possible to art is that attained by the touch of the
human hand on an opaque surface, upon which it can command any tint
required, without subjection to alteration by fire or other mechanical
means. No color is so noble as the color of a good painting on canvas or
gesso.

This kind of color being, however, impossible, for the most part, in
architecture, the next best is the scientific disposition of the natural
colors of stones, which are far nobler than any abstract hues producible
by human art.

The delight which we receive from glass painting is one altogether
inferior, and in which we should degrade ourselves by over indulgence.
Nevertheless, it is possible that we may raise some palaces like
Aladdin's with colored glass for jewels, which shall be new in the annals
of human splendor, and good in their place; but not if they superseded
nobler edifices.

Now, color is producible either on opaque or in transparent bodies: but
form is only expressible, in its perfection, on opaque bodies, without
lustre.

This law is imperative, universal, irrevocable. No perfect or refined
form can be expressed except in opaque and lustreless matter. You cannot
see the form of a jewel, nor, in any perfection, even of a cameo or
bronze. You cannot perfectly see the form of a humming-bird, on account
of its burnishing; but you can see the form of a swan perfectly. No noble
work in form can ever, therefore, be produced in transparent or lustrous
glass or enamel. All noble architecture depends for its majesty on its
form: therefore you can never have any noble architecture in transparent
or lustrous glass or enamel. Iron is, however, opaque; and both it and
opaque enamel may, perhaps, be rendered quite lustreless; and, therefore,
fit to receive noble form.

Let this be thoroughly done, and both the iron and enamel made fine in
paste or grain, and you may have an architecture as noble as cast or
struck architecture even can be: as noble, therefore, as coins can be, or
common cast bronzes, and such other multiplicable things;[102]--eternally
separated from all good and great things by a gulph which not all the
tubular bridges nor engineering of ten thousand nineteenth centuries cast
into one great bronze-foreheaded century, will ever overpass one inch of.
All art which is worth its room in this world, all art which is not a
piece of blundering refuse, occupying the foot or two of earth which, if
unencumbered by it, would have grown corn or violets, or some better
thing, is _art which proceeds from an individual mind, working through
instruments which assist, but do not supersede, the muscular action of
the human hand, upon the materials which most tenderly receive, and most
securely retain, the impressions of such human labor_.

And the value of every work of art is exactly in the ratio of the
quantity of humanity which has been put into it, and legibly expressed
upon it for ever:--

First, of thought and moral purpose;

Secondly, of technical skill;

Thirdly, of bodily industry.

The quantity of bodily industry which that Crystal Palace expresses is
very great. So far it is good.

The quantity of thought it expresses is, I suppose, a single and very
admirable thought of Mr. Paxton's, probably not a bit brighter than
thousands of thoughts which pass through his active and intelligent
brain every hour,--that it might be possible to build a greenhouse
larger than ever greenhouse was built before. This thought, and some
very ordinary algebra, are as much as all that glass can represent of
human intellect. "But one poor half-pennyworth of bread to all this
intolerable deal of sack." Alas!

  "The earth hath bubbles as the water hath:
   And this is of them."


  18. EARLY ENGLISH CAPITALS.

The depth of the cutting in some of the early English capitals is,
indeed, part of a general system of attempts at exaggerated force of
effect, like the "_black_ touches" of second-rate draughtsmen, which I
have noticed as characteristic of nearly all northern work, associated
with the love of the grotesque: but the main section of the capital is
indeed a dripstone rolled round, as above described; and dripstone
sections are continually found in northern work, where not only they
cannot increase force of effect, but are entirely invisible except on
close examination; as, for instance, under the uppermost range of stones
of the foundation of Whitehall, or under the slope of the restored base
of All Souls College, Oxford, under the level of the eye. I much doubt
if any of the Fellows be aware of its existence.

Many readers will be surprised and displeased by the disparagement of
the early English capital. That capital has, indeed, one character of
considerable value; namely, the boldness with which it stops the
mouldings which fall upon it, and severs them from the shaft,
contrasting itself with the multiplicity of their vertical lines.
Sparingly used, or seldom seen, it is thus, in its place, not
unpleasing; and we English love it from association, it being always
found in connection with our purest and loveliest Gothic arches, and
never in multitudes large enough to satiate the eye with its form. The
reader who sits in the Temple church every Sunday, and sees no
architecture during the week but that of Chancery Lane, may most
justifiably quarrel with me for what I have said of it. But if every
house in Fleet Street or Chancery Lane were Gothic, and all had early
English capitals, I would answer for his making peace with me in a
fortnight.


  19. TOMBS NEAR ST. ANASTASIA.

Whose they are, is of little consequence to the reader or to me, and I
have taken no pains to discover; their value being not in any evidence
they bear respecting dates, but in their intrinsic merit as examples of
composition. Two of them are within the gate, one on the top of it, and
this latter is on the whole the best, though all are beautiful; uniting
the intense northern energy in their figure sculpture with the most
serene classical restraint in their outlines, and unaffected, but
masculine simplicity of construction.

I have not put letters to the diagram of the lateral arch at page 154,
in order not to interfere with the clearness of the curves, but I shall
always express the same points by the same letters, whenever I have to
give measures of arches of this simple kind, so that the reader need
never have the diagrams lettered at all. The base or span of the centre
arch will always be _a b_; its vertex will always be V; the points of
the cusps will be _c c_; _p p_ will be the bases of perpendiculars let
fall from V and _c_ on _a b_; and _d_ the base of a perpendicular from
the point of the cusp to the arch line. Then _a b_ will always be a span
of the arch, V _p_ its perpendicular height, V _a_ the chord of its side
arcs, _d c_ the depth of its cusps, _c c_ the horizontal interval
between the cusps, _a c_ the length of the chord of the lower arc of the
cusp, V _c_ the length of the chord of the upper arc of the cusp,
(whether continuous or not,) and _c p_ the length of a perpendicular
from the point of the cusp on _a b_.

Of course we do not want all these measures for a single arch, but it
often happens that some of them are attainable more easily than others;
some are often unattainable altogether, and it is necessary therefore to
have expressions for whichever we may be able to determine.

V _p_ or V _a_, _a b_, and _d c_ are always essential; then either _a c_
and V _c_ or _c c_ and _c p_: when I have my choice, I always take _a
b_, V _p_, _d c_, _c c_, and _c p_, but _c p_ is not to be generally
obtained so accurately as the cusp arcs.

The measures of the present arch are:

           Ft.  In.
  _a b_,    3 ,, 8
  V _p_,    4 ,, 0
  V _c_,    2 ,, 4-1/2
  _a c_,    2 ,, 0-1/4
  _d c_,    0 ,, 3-1/2


                   20. SHAFTS OF DUCAL PALACE.

The shortness of the thicker ones at the angles is induced by the
greater depth of the enlarged capitals: thus the 36th shaft is 10 ft.
4-1/3 in. in circumference at its base, and 10 ,, 0-1/2[103] in
circumference under the fillet of its capital; but it is only 6 ,,
1-3/4 high, while the minor intermediate shafts, of which the thickest
is 7 ,, 8 round at the base, and 7 ,, 4 under capital, are yet on the
average 7 ,, 7 high. The angle shaft towards the sea (the 18th) is
nearly of the proportions of the 36th, and there are three others, the
15th, 24th, and 26th, which are thicker than the rest, though not so
thick as the angle ones. The 24th and 26th have both party walls to
bear, and I imagine the 15th must in old time have carried another,
reaching across what is now the Sala del Gran Consiglio.

They measure respectively round at the base,

  The 15th, 8 ,, 2
      24th, 9 ,, 6-1/2
      26th, 8 ,, 0-1/2

The other pillars towards the sea, and those to the 27th inclusive of
the Piazzetta, are all seven feet round at the base, and then there is a
most curious and delicate crescendo of circumference to the 36th, thus:

  The 28th, 7 ,, 3   The 33rd, 7 ,, 6
      29th, 7 ,, 4       34th, 7 ,, 8
      30th, 7 ,, 6       35th, 7 ,, 8
      31st, 7 ,, 7       36th, 10 ,, 4-1/3
      32nd, 7 ,, 5

The shafts of the upper arcade, which are above these thicker columns,
are also thicker than their companions, measuring on the average, 4 ,,
8-1/2 in circumference, while those of the sea façade, except the 29th,
average 4 ,, 7-1/2 in circumference. The 29th, which is of course above
the 15th of the lower story, is 5 ,, 5 in circumference, which little
piece of evidence will be of no small value to us by-and-by. The 35th
carries the angle of the palace, and is 6 ,, 0 round. The 47th, which
comes above the 24th and carries the party wall of the Sala del Gran
Consiglio, is strengthened by a pilaster; and the 51st, which comes over
the 26th, is 5 ,, 4-1/2 round, or nearly the same as the 29th; it
carries the party wall of the Sala del Scrutinio; a small room
containing part of St. Mark's library, coming between the two saloons;
a room which, in remembrances of the help I have received in all my
inquiries from the kindness and intelligence of its usual occupant, I
shall never easily distinguish otherwise than as "Mr. Lorenzi's."[104]

I may as well connect with these notes respecting the arcades of the
Ducal Palace, those which refer to Plate XIV., which represents one of
its spandrils. Every spandril of the lower arcade was intended to have
been occupied by an ornament resembling the one given in that plate. The
mass of the building being of Istrian stone, a depth of about two inches
is left within the mouldings of the arches, rough hewn, to receive the
slabs of fine marble composing the patterns. I cannot say whether the
design was ever completed, or the marbles have been since removed, but
there are now only two spandrils retaining their fillings, and vestiges
of them in a third. The two complete spandrils are on the sea façade,
above the 3rd and 10th capitals (_vide_ method of numbering, Chap. I.,
page 30); that is to say, connecting the 2nd arch with the 3rd, and the
9th with the 10th. The latter is the one given in Plate XIV. The white
portions of it are all white marble, the dental band surrounding the
circle is in coarse sugary marble, which I believe to be Greek, and
never found in Venice to my recollection, except in work at least
anterior to the fifteenth century. The shaded fields charged with the
three white triangles are of red Verona marble; the inner disc is green
serpentine, and the dark pieces of the radiating leaves are grey marble.
The three triangles are equilateral. The two uppermost are 1 ,, 5 each
side, and the lower 1 ,, 2.

The extreme diameter of the circle is 3 ,, 10-1/2; its field is slightly
raised above the red marbles, as shown in the section at A, on the left.
A _a_ is part of the red marble field; _a b_ the section of the dentil
moulding let into it; _b c_ the entire breadth of the rayed zone,
represented on the other side of the spandril by the line C _f_; _c d_
is the white marble band let in, with the dogtooth on the face of it;
_b c_ is 7-3/4 inches across; _c d_ 3-3/4; and at B are given two joints
of the dentil (mentioned above, in the chapter on dentils, as unique in
Venice) of their actual size. At C is given one of the inlaid leaves;
its measure being (in inches) C _f_ 7-3/4; C _h_ 3/4; _f g_ 3/4; _f e_
4-3/4, the base of the smaller leaves being of course _f e_ - _f g_ = 4.
The pattern which occupies the other spandril is similar, except that
the field _b c_, instead of the intersecting arcs, has only triangles of
grey marble, arranged like rays, with their bases towards the centre.
There being twenty round the circle, the reader can of course draw them
for himself; they being isosceles, touching the dentil with their
points, and being in contact at their bases: it has lost its central
boss. The marbles are, in both, covered with a rusty coating, through
which it is excessively difficult to distinguish the colors (another
proof of the age of the ornament). But the white marbles are certainly,
in places (except only the sugary dentil), veined with purple, and the
grey seem warmed with green.

A trace of another of these ornaments may be seen over the 21st capital;
but I doubt if the marbles have ever been inserted in the other
spandrils, and their want of ornament occasions the slight meagreness in
the effect of the lower story, which is almost the only fault of the
building.

This decoration by discs, or shield-like ornaments, is a marked
characteristic of Venetian architecture in its earlier ages, and is
carried into later times by the Byzantine Renaissance, already
distinguished from the more corrupt forms of Renaissance, in Appendix 6.
Of the disc decoration, so borrowed, we have already an example in Plate
I. In Plate VII. we have an earlier condition of it, one of the discs
being there sculptured, the others surrounded by sculptured bands: here
we have, on the Ducal Palace, the most characteristic of all, because
likest to the shield, which was probably the origin of the same ornament
among the Arabs, and assuredly among the Greeks. In Mr. Donaldson's
restoration of the gate of the treasury of Atreus, this ornament is
conjecturally employed, and it occurs constantly on the Arabian
buildings of Cairo.


  21. ANCIENT REPRESENTATIONS OF WATER.

I have long been desirous of devoting some time to an enquiry into the
effect of natural scenery upon the pagan, and especially the Greek,
mind, and knowing that my friend, Mr. C. Newton, had devoted much
thought to the elucidation of the figurative and symbolic language of
ancient art, I asked him to draw up for me a few notes of the facts
which he considered most interesting, as illustrative of its methods of
representing nature. I suggested to him, for an initiative subject, the
representation of water; because this is one of the natural objects
whose portraiture may most easily be made a test of treatment, for it is
one of universal interest, and of more closely similar aspect in all
parts of the world than any other. Waves, currents, and eddies are much
liker each other, everywhere, than either land or vegetation. Rivers and
lakes, indeed, differ widely from the sea, and the clear Pacific from
the angry Northern ocean; but the Nile is liker the Danube than a knot
of Nubian palms is to a glade of the Black Forest; and the Mediterranean
is liker the Atlantic than the Campo Felice is like Solway moss.

Mr. Newton has accordingly most kindly furnished me with the following
data. One or two of the types which he describes have been already
noticed in the main text; but it is well that the reader should again
contemplate them in the position which they here occupy in a general
system. I recommend his special attention to Mr. Newton's definitions of
the terms "figurative" and "symbolic," as applied to art, in the
beginning of the paper.

       *       *       *       *       *

In ancient art, that is to say, in the art of the Egyptian, Assyrian,
Greek, and Roman races, water is, for the most part, represented
conventionally rather than naturally.

By natural representation is here meant as just and perfect an imitation
of nature as the technical means of art will allow: on the other hand,
representation is said to be conventional, either when a confessedly
inadequate imitation is accepted in default of a better, or when
imitation is not attempted at all, and it is agreed that other modes of
representation, those by figures or by symbols, shall be its substitute
and equivalent.

In figurative representation there is always _impersonation_; the
sensible form, borrowed by the artist from organic life, is conceived to
be actuated by a will, and invested with such mental attributes as
constitute personality.

The sensible _symbol_, whether borrowed from organic or from inorganic
nature, is not a personification at all, but the conventional sign or
equivalent of some object or notion, to which it may perhaps bear no
visible resemblance, but with which the intellect or the imagination has
in some way associated it.

For instance, a city may be figuratively represented as a woman crowned
with towers; here the artist has selected for the expression of his idea
a human form animated with a will and motives of action analogous to
those of humanity generally. Or, again, as in Greek art, a bull may be a
figurative representation of a river, and, in the conception of the
artist, this animal form may contain, and be ennobled by, a human mind.

This is still impersonation; the form only in which personality is
embodied is changed.

Again, a dolphin may be used as a symbol of the sea; a man ploughing
with two oxen is a well-known symbol of a Roman colony. In neither of
these instances is there impersonation. The dolphin is not invested,
like the figure of Neptune, with any of the attributes of the human
mind; it has animal instincts, but no will; it represents to us its
native element, only as a part may be taken for a whole.

Again, the man ploughing does not, like the turreted female figure,
_personify_, but rather _typifies_ the town, standing as the visible
representation of a real event, its first foundation. To our mental
perceptions, as to our bodily senses, this figure seems no more than
man; there is no blending of his personal nature with the impersonal
nature of the colony, no transfer of attributes from the one to the
other.

Though the conventionally imitative, the figurative, and the symbolic,
are three distinct kinds of representation, they are constantly combined
in one composition, as we shall see in the following examples, cited
from the art of successive races in chronological order.

In Egyptian art the general representation of water is the
conventionally imitative. In the British Museum are two frescoes from
tombs at Thebes, Nos. 177 and 170: the subject of the first of these is
an oblong pond, ground-plan and elevation being strangely confused in
the design. In this pond water is represented by parallel zigzag lines,
in which fish are swimming about. On the surface are birds and lotos
flowers; the herbage at the edge of the pond is represented by a border
of symmetrical fan-shaped flowers; the field beyond by rows of trees,
arranged round the sides of the pond at right angles to each other, and
in defiance of all laws of perspective.

[Illustration: Fig. LXXI.]

In the fresco, No. 170, we have the representation of a river with
papyrus on its bank. Here the water is rendered by zigzag lines arranged
vertically and in parallel lines, so as to resemble herring-bone
masonry, thus. There are fish in this fresco as in the preceding, and in
both each fish is drawn very distinctly, not as it would appear to the
eye viewed through water. The mode of representing this element in
Egyptian painting is further abbreviated in their hieroglyphic writing,
where the sign of water is a zigzag line; this line is, so to speak, a
picture of water written in short hand. In the Egyptian Pantheon there
was but one aquatic deity, the god of the Nile; his type is, therefore,
the only figurative representation of water in Egyptian art. (Birch,
"Gallery of British Museum Antiquities," Pl. 13.) In Assyrian sculpture
we have very curious conventionally imitative representations of water.
On several of the friezes from Nimroud and Khorsabad, men are seen
crossing a river in boats, or in skins, accompanied by horses swimming
(see Layard, ii. p. 381). In these scenes water is represented by masses
of wavy lines somewhat resembling tresses of hair, and terminating in
curls or volutes; these wavy lines express the general character of a
deep and rapid current, like that of the Tigris. Fish are but sparingly
introduced, the idea of surface being sufficiently expressed by the
floating figures and boats. In the representation of these there is the
same want of perspective as in the Egyptian fresco which we have just
cited.

In the Assyrian Pantheon one aquatic deity has been discovered, the god
Dagon, whose human form terminates in a fish's tail. Of the character
and attributes of this deity we know but little.

The more abbreviated mode of representing water, the zigzag line, occurs
on the large silver coins with the type of a city or a war galley (see
Layard, ii. p. 386). These coins were probably struck in Assyria, not
long after the conquest of it by the Persians.

In Greek art the modes of representing water are far more varied. Two
conventional imitations, the wave moulding and the Mæander, are well
known. Both are probably of the most remote antiquity; both have been
largely employed as an architectural ornament, and subordinately as a
decoration of vases, costume, furniture and implements. In the wave
moulding we have a conventional representation of the small crisping
waves which break upon the shore of the Mediterranean, the sea of the
Greeks.

Their regular succession, and equality of force and volume, are
generalised in this moulding, while the minuter varieties which
distinguish one wave from another are merged in the general type. The
character of ocean waves is to be "for ever changing, yet the same for
ever;" it is this eternity of recurrence which the early artist has
expressed in this hieroglyphic.

With this profile representation of water may be compared the sculptured
waves out of which the head and arms of Hyperion are rising in the
pediment of the Parthenon (Elgin Room, No. (65) 91, Museum Marbles, vi.
pl. 1). Phidias has represented these waves like a mass of overlapping
tiles, thus generalising their rippling movement. In the Mæander pattern
the graceful curves of nature are represented by angles, as in the
Egyptian hieroglyphic of water: so again the earliest representation of
the labyrinth on the coins of the Cnossus is rectangular; on later coins
we find the curvilinear form introduced.

In the language of Greek mythography, the wave pattern and the Mæander
are sometimes used singly for the idea of water, but more frequently
combined with figurative representation. The number of aquatic deities
in the Greek Pantheon led to the invention of a great variety of
beautiful types. Some of these are very well known. Everybody is
familiar with the general form of Poseidon (Neptune), the Nereids, the
Nymphs and River Gods; but the modes in which these types were combined
with conventional imitation and with accessory symbols deserve careful
study, if we would appreciate the surpassing richness and beauty of the
language of art formed out of these elements.

This class of representations may be divided into two principal groups,
those relating to the sea, and those relating to fresh water.

The power of the ocean and the great features of marine scenery are
embodied in such types as Poseidon, Nereus and the Nereids, that is to
say, in human forms moving through the liquid element in chariots, or on
the back of dolphins, or who combine the human form with that of the
fish-like Tritons. The sea-monsters who draw these chariots are called
Hippocamps, being composed of the tail of a fish and the fore-part of a
horse, the legs terminating in web-feet: this union seems to express
speed and power under perfect control, such as would characterise the
movements of sea deities. A few examples have been here selected to show
how these types were combined with symbols and conventional imitation.

In the British Museum is a vase, No. 1257, engraved (Lenormant et De
Witte, Mon. Céram., i. pl. 27), of which the subject is, Europa crossing
the sea on the back of the bull. In this design the sea is represented
by a variety of expedients. First, the swimming action of the bull
suggests the idea of the liquid medium through which he moves. Behind
him stands Nereus, his staff held perpendicularly in his hand; the top
of his staff comes nearly to the level of the bull's back, and is
probably meant as the measure of the whole depth of the sea. Towards the
surface line thus indicated a dolphin is rising; in the middle depth is
another dolphin; below a shrimp and a cuttle-fish, and the bottom is
indicated by a jagged line of rocks, on which are two echini.

On a mosaic found at Oudnah in Algeria (Revue Archéol., iii. pl. 50), we
have a representation of the sea, remarkable for the fulness of details
with which it is made out.

This, though of the Roman period, is so thoroughly Greek in feeling,
that it may be cited as an example of the class of mythography now under
consideration. The mosaic lines the floor and sides of a bath, and, as
was commonly the case in the baths of the ancients, serves as a
figurative representation of the water it contained.

On the sides are hippocamps, figures riding on dolphins, and islands on
which fishermen stand; on the floor are fish, crabs, and shrimps.

These, as in the vase with Europa, indicate the bottom of the sea: the
same symbols of the submarine world appear on many other ancient
designs. Thus in vase pictures, when Poseidon upheaves the island of Cos
to overwhelm the Giant Polydotes, the island is represented as an
immense mass of rock; the parts which have been under water are
indicated by a dolphin, a shrimp, and a sepia, the parts above the water
by a goat and a serpent (Lenormant et De Witte, i., tav. 5).

Sometimes these symbols occur singly in Greek art, as the types, for
instance, of coins. In such cases they cannot be interpreted without
being viewed in relation to the whole context of mythography to which
they belong. If we find, for example, on one coin of Tarentum a shell,
on another a dolphin, on a third a figure of Tarus, the mythic founder
of the town, riding on a dolphin in the midst of the waves, and this
latter group expresses the idea of the town itself and its position on
the coast, then we know the two former types to be but portions of the
greater design, having been detached from it, as we may detach words
from sentences.

The study of the fuller and clearer examples, such as we have cited
above, enables us to explain many more compendious forms of expression.
We have, for instance, on coins several representations of ancient
harbors.

Of these, the earliest occurs on the coins of Zancle, the modern Messina
in Sicily. The ancients likened the form of this harbor to a sickle, and
on the coins of the town we find a curved object, within the area of
which is a dolphin. On this curve are four square elevations placed at
equal distances. It has been conjectured that these projections are
either towers or the large stones to which galleys were moored still to
be seen in ancient harbors (see Burgon, Numismatic Chronicle, iii. p.
40). With this archaic representation of a harbor may be compared some
examples of the Roman period. On a coin of Sept. Severus struck at
Corinth (Millingen, Sylloge of Uned. Coins, 1837, p. 57, Pl. II., No.
30) we have a female figure standing on a rock between two recumbent
male figures holding rudders. From an arch at the foot of the rock a
stream is flowing: this is a representation of the rock of the Acropolis
of Corinth: the female figure is a statue of Aphrodite, whose temple
surmounted the rock. The stream is the fountain Pirene. The two
recumbent figures are impersonations of the two harbors, Lechreum and
Cenchreia, between which Corinth was situated. Philostratus (Icon. ii.,
c. 16) describes a similar picture of the Isthmus between the two
harbors, one of which was in the form of a youth, the other of a nymph.

On another coin of Corinth we have one of the harbors in a semicircular
form, the whole arc being marked with small equal divisions, to denote
the archways under which the ancient galleys were drawn, _subductæ_; at
the either horn or extremity of the harbor is a temple; in the centre of
the mouth, a statue of Neptune. (Millingen, Médailles Inéd., Pl. II.,
No. 19. Compare also Millingen, Ancient Coins of Cities and Kings, 1831,
pp. 50-61, Pl. IV., No. 15; Mionnet, Suppl. vii. p. 79, No. 246; and the
harbor of Ostium, on the large brass coins of Nero, in which there is a
representation of the Roman fleet and a reclining figure of Neptune.)

In vase pictures we have occasionally an attempt to represent water
naturally. On a vase in the British Museum (No. 785), of which the
subject is Ulysses and the Sirens, the Sea is rendered by wavy lines
drawn in black on a red ground, and something like the effect of light
playing on the surface of the water is given. On each side of the ship
are shapeless masses of rock on which the Sirens stand.

One of the most beautiful of the figurative representations of the sea
is the well-known type of Scylla. She has a beautiful body, terminating
in two barking dogs and two serpent tails. Sometimes drowning men, the
_rari nantes in gurgite vasto_, appear caught up in the coils of these
tails. Below are dolphins. Scylla generally brandishes a rudder to show
the manner in which she twists the course of ships. For varieties of her
type see Monum. dell'Inst. Archeol. Rom., iii. Tavv. 52-3.

The representations of fresh water may be arranged under the following
heads--rivers, lakes, fountains.

There are several figurative modes of representing rivers very
frequently employed in ancient mythography.

In the type which occurs earliest we have the human form combined with
that of the bull in several ways. On an archaic coin of Metapontum in
Lucania, (see frontispiece to Millingen, Ancient Coins of Greek Cities
and Kings,) the river Achelous is represented with the figure of a man
with a shaggy beard and bull's horns and ears. On a vase of the best
period of Greek art (Brit. Mus. No. 789; Birch, Trans. Roy. Soc. of
Lit., New Series, Lond. 1843, i. p. 100) the same river is represented
with a satyr's head and long bull's horns on the forehead; his form,
human to the waist, terminates in a fish's tail; his hair falls down his
back; his beard is long and shaggy. In this type we see a combination of
the three forms separately enumerated by Sophocles, in the commencement
of the Trachiniæ.

                  [Greek: Achelôon legô,
  os m' en trisin morphaisin exêtei patros,
  phoitôn enargês auros allot' aiolos,
  drakôn heliktos, allot' andreiô kytei
  bouprôros, ek de daskiou geneiados
  krounoi dierrhainonto krênaiou potou].

In a third variety of this type the human-headed body is united at the
waist with the shoulders of a bull's body, in which it terminates. This
occurs on an early vase. (Brit. Mus., No. 452.) On the coins of Oeniadæ
in Acarnia, and on those of Ambracia, all of the period after Alexander
the Great, the Achelous has a bull's body, and head with a human face.
In this variety of the type the human element is almost absorbed, as in
the first variety cited above, the coin of Metapontum, the bull portion
of the type is only indicated by the addition of the horns and ears to
the human head. On the analogy between these, varieties in the type of
the Achelous and those under which the metamorphoses of the marine
goddess Thetis are represented, see Gerhard, Auserl. Vasenb. ii. pp.
106-113. It is probable that, in the type of Thetis, of Proteus, and
also of the Achelous, the singular combinations and transformations are
intended to express the changeful nature of the element water.

Numerous other examples may be cited, where rivers are represented by
this combination of the bull and human form, which maybe called, for
convenience, the Androtauric type. On the coins of Sicily, of the
archaic and also of the finest period of art, rivers are most usually
represented by a youthful male figure, with small budding horns; the
hair has the lank and matted form which characterises aquatic deities in
Greek mythography. The name of the river is often inscribed round the
head. When the whole figure occurs on the coin, it is always represented
standing, never reclining.

The type of the bull on the coins of Sybaris and Thurium, in Magna
Græcia, has been considered, with great probability, a representation of
this kind. On the coins of Sybaris, which are of a very early period,
the head of the bull is turned round; on those of Thurium, he stoops his
head, butting: the first of these actions has been thought to symbolise
the winding course of the river, the second, its headlong current. On
the coins of Thurium, the idea of water is further suggested by the
adjunct of dolphins and other fish in the exergue of the coin. The
ground on which the bull stands is indicated by herbage or pebbles. This
probably represents the river bank. Two bulls' head occur on the coins
of Sardis, and it has been ingeniously conjectured by Mr. Burgon that
the two rivers of the place are expressed under this type.

The representation of river-gods as human figures in a reclining
position, though probably not so much employed in earlier Greek art as
the Androtauric type, is very much more familiar to us, from its
subsequent adoption in Roman mythography. The earliest example we have
of a reclining river-god is in the figure in the Elgin Room commonly
called the Ilissus, but more probably the Cephissus. This occupied one
angle in the western pediment of the Parthenon; the other Athenian
river, the Ilissus, and the fountain Callirrhoe being represented by a
male and female figure in the opposite angle; this group, now destroyed,
is visible in the drawing made by Carrey in 1678.

It is probable that the necessities of pedimental composition first led
the artist to place the river-god in a reclining position. The head of
the Ilissus being broken off, we are not sure whether he had bull's
horns, like the Sicilian figures already described. His form is
youthful, in the folds of the drapery behind him there is a flow like
that of waves, but the idea of water is not suggested by any other
symbol. When we compare this figure with that of the Nile (Visconti,
Mus. Pio Clem., i., Pl. 38), and the figure of the Tiber in the Louvre,
both of which are of the Roman period, we see how in these later types
the artist multiplied symbols and accessories, ingrafting them on the
original simple type of the river-god, as it was conceived by Phidias in
the figure of the Ilissus. The Nile is represented as a colossal bearded
figure reclining. At his side is a cornucopia, full of the vegetable
produce of the Egyptian soil. Round his body are sixteen naked boys, who
represent the sixteen cubits, the height to which the river rose in a
favorable year. The statue is placed on a basement divided into three
compartments, one above another. In the uppermost of these, waves are
flowing over in one great sheet from the side of the river-god. In the
other two compartments are the animals and plants of the river; the
bas-reliefs on this basement are, in fact, a kind of abbreviated
symbolic panorama of the Nile.

The Tiber is represented in a very similar manner. On the base are, in
two compartments, scenes taken from the early Roman myths; flocks,
herds, and other objects on the banks of the river. (Visconti, Mus. P.
Cl. i., Pl. 39; Millin, Galerie Mythol., i. p. 77, Pl. 74, Nos. 304,
308.)

In the types of the Greek coins of Camarina, we find two interesting
representations of Lakes. On the obverse of one of these we have, within
a circle of the wave pattern, a male head, full face, with dishevelled
hair, and with a dolphin on either side; on the reverse a female figure
sailing on a swan, below which a wave moulding, and above, a dolphin.

On another coin the swan type of the reverse is associated with the
youthful head of a river-god, inscribed "Hipparis" on the obverse. On
some smaller coins we have the swan flying over the rippling waves,
which are represented by the wave moulding. When we examine the chart of
Sicily, made by the Admiralty survey, we find marked down at Camarina, a
lake through which the river Hipparis flows.

We can hardly doubt that the inhabitants of Camarina represented both
their river and their lakes on their coins. The swan flying over the
waves would represent a lake; the figure associated with it being no
doubt the Aphrodite worshipped at that place: the head, in a circle of
wave pattern, may express that part of the river which flows through the
lake.

Fountains are usually represented by a stream of water issuing from a
lion's head in the rock: see a vase (Gerhard, Auserl. Vasenb., taf.
CXXXIV.), where Hercules stands, receiving a shower-bath from a hot
spring at Thermæ in Sicily. On the coins of Syracuse the fountain
Arethusa is represented by a female head seen to the front; the flowing
lines of her dishevelled hair suggest, though they do not directly
imitate, the bubbling action of the fresh-water spring; the sea in which
it rises is symbolized by the dolphins round the head. This type
presents a striking analogy with that of the Camarina head in the circle
of wave pattern described above.

These are the principal modes of representing water in Greek
mythography. In the art of the Roman period, the same kind of figurative
and symbolic language is employed, but there is a constant tendency to
multiply accessories and details, as we have shown in the later
representations of harbors and river-gods cited above. In these crowded
compositions the eye is fatigued and distracted by the quantity it has
to examine; the language of art becomes more copious but less terse and
emphatic, and addresses itself to minds far less intelligent than the
refined critics who were the contemporaries of Phidias.

Rivers in Roman art are usually represented by reclining male figures,
generally bearded, holding reeds or other plants in their hands, and
leaning on urns from which water is flowing. On the coins of many Syrian
cities, struck in imperial times, the city is represented by a turreted
female figure seated on rocks, and resting her feet on the shoulder of a
youthful male figure, who looks up in her face, stretching out his arms,
and who is sunk in the ground as high as the waist. See Müller
(Denkmäler d. A. Kunst, i., taf. 49, No. 220) for a group of this kind
in the Vatican, and several similar designs on coins.

On the column of Trajan there occur many rude representations of the
Danube, and other rivers crossed by the Romans in their military
expeditions. The water is imitated by sculptured wavy lines, in which
boats are placed. In one scene (Bartoli, Colonna Trajana, Tav. 4) this
rude conventional imitation is combined with a figure. In a recess in
the river bank is a reclining river-god, terminating at the waist. This
is either meant for a statue which was really placed on the bank of the
river, and which therefore marks some particular locality, or we have
here figurative representation blended with conventional imitation.

On the column of Antoninus (Bartoli, Colon. Anton., Tav. 15) a storm of
rain is represented by the head of Jupiter Pluvius, who has a vast
outspread beard flowing in long tresses. In the Townley collection, in
the British Museum, is a Roman helmet found at Ribchester in Lancashire,
with a mask or vizor attached. The helmet is richly embossed with
figures in a battle scene; round the brow is a row of turrets; the hair
in the forehead is so treated as to give the idea of waves washing the
base of the turrets. This head is perhaps a figurative representation of
a town girt with fortifications and a moat, near which some great battle
was fought. It is engraved (Vetusta Monum. of Soc. Ant. London, iv., Pl.
1-4).

In the Galeria at Florence is a group in alto relievo (Gori, Inscript.
Ant. Flor. 1727, p. 76, Tab. 14) of three female figures, one of whom is
certainly Demeter Kourotrophos, or the earth; another, Thetis, or the
sea; the centre of the three seems to represent Aphrodite associated, as
on the coins of Camarina, with the element of fresh water.

This figure is seated on a swan, and holds over her head an arched veil.
Her hair is bound with reeds; above her veil grows a tall water plant,
and below the swan other water plants, and a stork seated on a _hydria_,
or pitcher, from which water is flowing. The swan, the stork, the water
plants, and the _hydria_ must all be regarded as symbols of fresh water,
the latter emblem being introduced to show that the element is fit for
the use of man.

Fountains in Roman art are generally personified as figures of nymphs
reclining with urns, or standing holding before them a large shell.

One of the latest representations of water in ancient art is the mosaic
of Palestrina (Barthélemy, in Bartoli, Peint. Antiques) which may be
described as a kind of rude panorama of some district of Upper Egypt, a
bird's-eye view, half man, half picture, in which the details are
neither adjusted to a scale, nor drawn according to perspective, but
crowded together, as they would be in an ancient bas-relief.


  22. ARABIAN ORNAMENTATION.

I do not mean what I have here said of the Inventive power of the Arab
to be understood as in the least applying to the detestable
ornamentation of the Alhambra.[105] The Alhambra is no more
characteristic of Arab work, than Milan Cathedral is of Gothic: it is a
late building, a work of the Spanish dynasty in its last decline, and
its ornamentation is fit for nothing but to be transferred to patterns
of carpets or bindings of books, together with their marbling, and
mottling, and other mechanical recommendations. The Alhambra ornament
has of late been largely used in shop-fronts, to the no small detriment
of Regent Street and Oxford Street.


  23. VARIETIES OF CHAMFER.

Let B A C, Fig. LXXII., be the original angle of the wall. Inscribe
within it a circle, _p_ Q N _p_, of the size of the bead required,
touching A B, A C, in _p_, _p_; join _p_, _p_, and draw B C parallel to
it, touching the circle.

Then the lines B C, _p p_ are the limits of the possible chamfers
constructed with curves struck either from centre A, as the line Q _q_,
N _d_, _r u_, _g c_, &c., or from any other point chosen as a centre in
the direction Q A produced: and also of all chamfers in straight lines,
as _a b_, _e f_. There are, of course, an infinite number of chamfers to
be struck between B C and _p p_, from every point in Q A produced to
infinity; thus we have infinity multiplied into infinity to express the
number of possible chamfers of this species, which are peculiarly
Italian chamfers; together with another singly infinite group of the
straight chamfers, _a b_, _e f_, &c., of which the one formed by the
line _a b_, passing through the centre of the circle, is the universal
early Gothic chamfer of Venice.

Again. Either on the line A C, or on any other lines A _l_ or A _m_,
radiating from A, any number of centres may be taken, from which, with
any radii not greater than the distance between such points and Q, an
infinite number of curves may be struck, such as _t u_, _r s_, N _n_
(all which are here struck from centres on the line A C). These lines
represent the great class of the northern chamfers, of which the number
is infinity raised to its fourth power, but of which the curve N _n_
(for northern) represents the average condition; the shallower chamfers
of the same group, _r s_, _t u_, &c., occurring often in Italy. The
lines _r u_, _t u_, and _a b_ may be taken approximating to the most
frequent conditions of the southern chamfer.

[Illustration: Fig. LXXII.]

It is evident that the chords of any of these curves will give a
relative group of rectilinear chamfers, occurring both in the North and
South; but the rectilinear chamfers, I think, invariably fall within the
line Q C, and are either parallel with it, or inclined to A C at an
angle greater than A C Q, and often perpendicular to it; but never
inclined to it at an angle less than A C Q.


  24. RENAISSANCE BASES.

The following extract from my note-book refers also to some features of
late decoration of shafts.

"The Scuola di San Rocco is one of the most interesting examples of
Renaissance work in Venice. Its fluted pillars are surrounded each by a
wreath, one of vine, another of laurel, another of oak, not indeed
arranged with the fantasticism of early Gothic; but, especially the
laurel, reminding one strongly of the laurel sprays, powerful as well as
beautiful, of Veronese and Tintoret. Their stems are curiously and
richly interlaced--the last vestige of the Byzantine wreathed work--and
the vine-leaves are ribbed on the surfaces, I think, nearly as finely as
those of the Noah,[106] though more injured by time. The capitals are
far the richest Renaissance in Venice, less corrupt and more masculine
in plan, than any other, and truly suggestive of support, though of
course showing the tendency to error in this respect; and finally, at
the angles of the pure Attic bases, on the square plinth, are set
couchant animals; one, an elephant four inches high, very curiously and
cleverly cut, and all these details worked with a spirit, finish, fancy,
and affection quite worthy of the middle ages. But they have all the
marked fault of being utterly detached from the architecture. The
wreaths round the columns look as if they would drop off the next
moment, and the animals at the bases produce exactly the effect of mice
who had got there by accident: one feels them ridiculously diminutive,
and utterly useless."

The effect of diminutiveness is, I think, chiefly owing to there being
no other groups of figures near them, to accustom the eye to the
proportion, and to the needless choice of the largest animals,
elephants, bears, and lions, to occupy a position so completely
insignificant, and to be expressed on so contemptible a scale,--not in a
bas-relief or pictorial piece of sculpture, but as independent figures.
The whole building is a most curious illustration of the appointed fate
of the Renaissance architects,--to caricature whatever they imitated,
and misapply whatever they learned.


  25. ROMANIST DECORATION OF BASES.

I have spoken above (Appendix 12) of the way in which the Roman Catholic
priests everywhere suffer their churches to be desecrated. But the worst
instances I ever saw of sacrilege and brutality, daily permitted in the
face of all men, were the uses to which the noble base of St. Mark's was
put, when I was last in Venice. Portions of nearly all cathedrals may be
found abandoned to neglect; but this base of St. Mark's is in no obscure
position. Full fronting the western sun--crossing the whole breadth of
St. Mark's Place--the termination of the most noble square in the
world--the centre of the most noble city--its purple marbles were, in
the winter of 1849, the customary _gambling tables_ of the idle children
of Venice; and the parts which flank the Great Entrance, that very
entrance where "Barbarossa flung his mantle off," were the counters of a
common bazaar for children's toys, carts, dolls, and small pewter spoons
and dishes, German caricatures and books of the Opera, mixed with those
of the offices of religion; the caricatures being fastened with twine
round the porphyry shafts of the church. One Sunday, the 24th of
February, 1850, the book-stall being somewhat more richly laid out than
usual, I noted down the titles of a few of the books in the order in
which they lay, and I give them below. The irony conveyed by the
juxtaposition of the three in Italics appears too shrewd to be
accidental; but the fact was actually so.

Along the edge of the white plinth were a row of two kinds of books,

  Officium Beatæ Virg. M.; and Officium Hebdomadæ sanctæ, juxta Formam
    Missalis et Breviarii Romani sub Urbano VIII. correcti.

Behind these lay, side by side, the following:

  Don Desiderio. Dramma Giocoso per Musica.
  Breve Esposizione della Carattere di vera Religione.

On the top of this latter, keeping its leaves open,

  La Figlia del Reggimento. Melodramma comica.
  _Carteggio di Madama la Marchesa di Pompadour, ossia
     raccolta di Lettere scritte della Medesima._
  _Istruzioni di morale Condotta per le Figlie._
  _Francesca di Rimini. Dramma per Musica._

Then, a little farther on, after a mass of plays:--

  Orazioni a Gesu Nazareno e a Maria addolorata.
  Semiramide; Melodramma tragico da rappresentarsi nel Gran Teatro
    il Fenice.
  Modo di orare per l'Acquisto del S. Giubileo, conceduto a tutto il
    Mondo Cattolico da S. S. Gregorio XVI.
  Le due illustre Rivali, Melodramma in Tre Atti, da rappresentarsi
    nel nuovo Gran Teatro il Fenice.
  Il Cristiano secondo il Cuore di Gesu, per la Pratica delle sue
    Virtu.
  Traduzione dell'Idioma Italiana.
  La chiava Chinese; Commedia del Sig. Abate Pietro Chiari.
  La Pelarina; Intermezzo de Tre Parti per Musica.
  Il Cavaliero e la Dama; Commedia in Tre Atti in Prosa.

I leave these facts without comment. But this being the last piece of
Appendix I have to add to the present volume, I would desire to close
its pages with a question to my readers--a statistical question, which,
I doubt not, is being accurately determined for us all elsewhere, and
which, therefore, it seems to me, our time would not be wasted in
determining for ourselves.

There has now been peace between England and the continental powers
about thirty-five years, and during that period the English have visited
the continent at the rate of many thousands a year, staying there, I
suppose, on the average, each two or three months; nor these an inferior
kind of English, but the kind which ought to be the best--the noblest
born, the best taught, the richest in time and money, having more
leisure, knowledge, and power than any other portion of the nation.
These, we might suppose, beholding, as they travelled, the condition of
the states in which the Papal religion is professed, and being, at the
same time, the most enlightened section of a great Protestant nation,
would have been animated with some desire to dissipate the Romanist
errors, and to communicate to others the better knowledge which they
possessed themselves. I doubt not but that He who gave peace upon the
earth, and gave it by the hand of England, expected this much of her,
and has watched every one of the millions of her travellers as they
crossed the sea, and kept count for him of his travelling expenses, and
of their distribution, in a manner of which neither the traveller nor
his courier were at all informed. I doubt not, I say, but that such
accounts have been literally kept for all of us, and that a day will
come when they will be made clearly legible to us, and when we shall see
added together, on one side of the account book, a great sum, the
certain portion, whatever it may be, of this thirty-five years'
spendings of the rich English, accounted for in this manner:--

To wooden spoons, nut-crackers, and jewellery, bought at Geneva, and
elsewhere among the Alps, so much; to shell cameos and bits of mosaic
bought at Rome, so much; to coral horns and lava brooches bought at
Naples, so much; to glass beads at Venice, and gold filigree at Genoa,
so much; to pictures, and statues, and ornaments, everywhere, so much;
to avant-couriers and extra post-horses, for show and magnificence, so
much; to great entertainments and good places for seeing sights, so
much; to ball-dresses and general vanities, so much. This, I say, will
be the sum on one side of the book; and on the other will be written:

To the struggling Protestant Churches of France, Switzerland, and
Piedmont, so much.

Had we not better do this piece of statistics for ourselves, in time?


FOOTNOTES:

  [93] Ed. Venetis, 1758, Lib. I.

  [94] Compare Appendix 12.

  [95] L'Artiste en Bâtiments, par Louis Berteaux: Dijon, 1848. My
    printer writes at the side of the page a note, which I insert with
    thanks:--"This is not the first attempt at a French order. The
    writer has a Treatise by Sebastian Le Clerc, a great man in his
    generation, which contains a Roman order, a Spanish order, which the
    inventor appears to think very grand, and a _new_ French order
    nationalised by the Gallic cock crowing and clapping its wings in
    the capital."

  [96] The lower group in Plate XVII.

  [97] One of the upper stories is also in Gally Knight's plate
    represented as merely banded, and otherwise plain: it is, in
    reality, covered with as delicate inlaying as the rest. The whole
    front is besides out of proportion, and out of perspective, at once;
    and yet this work is referred to as of authority, by our architects.
    Well may our architecture fall from its place among the fine arts,
    as it is doing rapidly; nearly all our works of value being devoted
    to the Greek architecture, which is _utterly useless_ to us--or
    worse. _One_ most noble book, however, has been dedicated to our
    English abbeys,--Mr. E. Sharpe's "Architectural Parallels"--almost a
    model of what I should like to see done for the Gothic of all
    Europe.

  [98] Except in the single passage "tell it unto the Church," which
    is simply the _extension_ of what had been commanded before, i.e.,
    tell the fault first "between thee and him," then taking "with thee
    one or two more," then, to all Christian men capable of hearing the
    cause: if he refuse to hear their common voice, "let him be unto
    thee as a heathen man and publican:" (But consider how Christ
    treated both.)

  [99] One or two remarks on this subject, some of which I had
    intended to have inserted here, and others in Appendix 5, I have
    arranged in more consistent order, and published in a separate
    pamphlet, "Notes on the Construction of Sheep-folds," for the
    convenience of readers interested in other architecture than that of
    Venetian palaces.

  [100] Not, however, by Johnson's _testimony_: Vide Adventurer, No.
    39. "Such operations as required neither celerity nor strength,--the
    low drudgery of collating copies, comparing authorities, _digesting
    dictionaries_, or accumulating compilations."

  [101] We have done so--theoretically; just as one would reason on
    the human form from the bones outwards: but the Architect of human
    form frames all at once--bone and flesh.

  [102] Of course mere multiplicability, as of an engraving, does not
    diminish the intrinsic value of the work; and if the casts of
    sculpture could be as sharp as the sculpture itself, they would hold
    to it the relation of value which engravings hold to paintings. And,
    if we choose to have our churches all alike, we might cast them all
    in bronze--we might actually coin churches, and have mints of
    Cathedrals. It would be worthy of the spirit of the century to put
    milled edges for mouldings, and have a popular currency of religious
    subjects: a new cast of nativities every Christmas. I have not heard
    this contemplated, however, and I speak, therefore, only of the
    results which I believe are contemplated, as attainable by mere
    mechanical applications of glass and iron.

  [103] I shall often have occasion to write measures in the current
    text, therefore the reader will kindly understand that whenever they
    are thus written, 2 ,, 2, with double commas between, the first
    figures stand for English feet, the second for English inches.

  [104] I cannot suffer this volume to close without also thanking my
    kind friend, Mr. Rawdon Brown, for help given me in a thousand ways
    during my stay in Venice: but chiefly for his direction to passages
    elucidatory of my subject in the MSS. of St. Mark's library.

  [105] I have not seen the building itself, but Mr. Owen Jones's work
    may, I suppose, be considered as sufficiently representing it for
    all purposes of criticism.

  [106] The sculpture of the Drunkenness of Noah on the Ducal Palace,
    of which we shall have much to say hereafter.





       *       *       *       *       *




                   THE COMPLETE WORKS

                           OF

                       JOHN RUSKIN

                       VOLUME XXIV



                 OUR FATHERS HAVE TOLD US

          STORM-CLOUD OF THE NINETEENTH CENTURY

                      HORTUS INCLUSUS

----------------------------------------------------------------------

                THE STORM-CLOUD OF THE
                  NINETEENTH CENTURY.

                     TWO LECTURES

          DELIVERED AT THE LONDON INSTITUTION

             FEBRUARY 4TH AND 11TH, 1884.

----------------------------------------------------------------------

CONTENTS.

                                                  PAGE

PREFACE                                            iii

LECTURE I. (FEBRUARY 4)                              1

LECTURE II. (FEBRUARY 11)                           31

----------------------------------------------------------------------




PREFACE.


The following lectures, drawn up under the pressure of more
imperative and quite otherwise directed work, contain many passages
which stand in need of support, and some, I do not doubt, more or
less of correction, which I always prefer to receive openly from
the better knowledge of friends, after setting down my own
impressions of the matter in clearness as far as they reach, than
to guard myself against by submitting my manuscript, before
publication, to annotators whose stricture or suggestion I might
often feel pain in refusing, yet hesitation in admitting.

But though thus hastily, and to some extent incautiously, thrown
into form, the statements in the text are founded on patient and,
in all essential particulars, accurately recorded observations of
the sky, during fifty years of a life of solitude and leisure; and
in all they contain of what may seem to the reader questionable, or
astonishing, are guardedly and absolutely true.

In many of the reports given by the daily press, my assertion of
radical change, during recent years, in weather aspect was scouted
as imaginary, or insane. I am indeed, every day of my yet spared
life, more and more grateful that my mind is capable of imaginative
vision, and liable to the noble dangers of delusion which separate
the speculative intellect of humanity from the dreamless instinct
of brutes: but I have been able, during all active work, to use or
refuse my power of contemplative imagination, with as easy command
of it as a physicist's of his telescope: the times of morbid are
just as easily distinguished by me from those of healthy vision, as
by men of ordinary faculty, dream from waking; nor is there a
single fact stated in the following pages which I have not
verified with a chemist's analysis, and a geometer's precision.

The first lecture is printed, with only addition here and there of
an elucidatory word or phrase, precisely as it was given on the 4th
February. In repeating it on the 11th, I amplified several
passages, and substituted for the concluding one, which had been
printed with accuracy in most of the leading journals, some
observations which I thought calculated to be of more general
interest. To these, with the additions in the first text, I have
now prefixed a few explanatory notes, to which numeral references
are given in the pages they explain, and have arranged the
fragments in connection clear enough to allow of their being read
with ease as a second Lecture.

                         HERNE HILL, _12th March, 1884_.

----------------------------------------------------------------------

THE STORM-CLOUD OF THE NINETEENTH CENTURY.

----------------------------------------------------------------------




THE STORM-CLOUD OF THE NINETEENTH CENTURY.


Let me first assure my audience that I have no _arrière pensée_ in
the title chosen for this lecture. I might, indeed, have meant, and
it would have been only too like me to mean, any number of things
by such a title;--but, to-night, I mean simply what I have said,
and propose to bring to your notice a series of cloud phenomena,
which, so far as I can weigh existing evidence, are peculiar to our
own times; yet which have not hitherto received any special notice
or description from meteorologists.

So far as the existing evidence, I say, of former literature can be
interpreted, the storm-cloud--or more accurately plague-cloud, for
it is not always stormy--which I am about to describe to you, never
was seen but by now living, or _lately_ living eyes. It is not yet
twenty years that this--I may well call it, wonderful, cloud has
been, in its essence, recognizable. There is no description of it,
so far as I have read, by any ancient observer. Neither Homer nor
Virgil, neither Aristophanes nor Horace, acknowledge any such
clouds among those compelled by Jove. Chaucer has no word of them,
nor Dante;[1] Milton none, nor Thomson. In modern times, Scott,
Wordsworth and Byron are alike unconscious of them; and the most
observant and descriptive of scientific men, De Saussure, is
utterly silent concerning them. Taking up the traditions of air
from the year before Scott's death, I am able, by my own constant
and close observation, to certify you that in the forty following
years (1831 to 1871 approximately--for the phenomena in question
came on gradually)--no such clouds as these are, and are now often
for months without intermission, were ever seen in the skies of
England, France, or Italy.

In those old days, when weather was fine, it was luxuriously fine;
when it was bad--it was often abominably bad, but it had its fit of
temper and was done with it--it didn't sulk for three months
without letting you see the sun,--nor send you one cyclone inside
out, every Saturday afternoon, and another outside in, every Monday
morning.

In fine weather the sky was either blue or clear in its light; the
clouds, either white or golden, adding to, not abating, the luster
of the sky. In wet weather, there were two different species of
clouds,--those of beneficent rain, which for distinction's sake I
will call the non-electric rain-cloud, and those of storm, usually
charged highly with electricity. The beneficent rain-cloud was
indeed often extremely dull and gray for days together, but
gracious nevertheless, felt to be doing good, and often to be
delightful after drought; capable also of the most exquisite
coloring, under certain conditions;[2] and continually traversed in
clearing by the rainbow:--and, secondly, the storm-cloud, always
majestic, often dazzlingly beautiful, and felt also to be
beneficent in its own way, affecting the mass of the air with vital
agitation, and purging it from the impurity of all morbific
elements.

In the entire system of the Firmament, thus seen and understood,
there appeared to be, to all the thinkers of those ages, the
incontrovertible and unmistakable evidence of a Divine Power in
creation, which had fitted, as the air for human breath, so the
clouds for human sight and nourishment;--the Father who was in
heaven feeding day by day the souls of His children with marvels,
and satisfying them with bread, and so filling their hearts with
food and gladness.

Their _hearts_, you will observe, it is said, not merely their
bellies,--or indeed not at all, in this sense, their bellies--but
the heart itself, with its blood for this life, and its faith for
the next. The opposition between this idea and the notions of our
own time may be more accurately expressed by modification of the
Greek than of the English sentence. The old Greek is--

          [Greek: empiplôn trophês kai euphrosynês
          tas kardias hêmôn.]

filling with meat, and cheerfulness, our hearts. The modern Greek
should be--

          [Greek: empiplôn anemou kai aphrosynês
          tas gasteras hêmôn.]

filling with wind, and foolishness, our stomachs.

You will not think I waste your time in giving you two cardinal
examples of the sort of evidence which the higher forms of
literature furnish respecting the cloud-phenomena of former times.

When, in the close of my lecture on landscape last year at Oxford,
I spoke of stationary clouds as distinguished from passing ones,
some blockheads wrote to the papers to say that clouds never were
stationary. Those foolish letters were so far useful in causing a
friend to write me the pretty one I am about to read to you,
quoting a passage about clouds in Homer which I had myself never
noticed, though perhaps the most beautiful of its kind in the
Iliad. In the fifth book, after the truce is broken, and the
aggressor Trojans are rushing to the onset in a tumult of clamor
and charge, Homer says that the Greeks, abiding them "stood like
clouds." My correspondent, giving the passage, writes as follows:--

"SIR,--Last winter when I was at Ajaccio, I was one day reading
Homer by the open window, and came upon the lines--

          [Greek: All' emenon, nephelêsin eoikotes has te Kroniôn
          Nênemiês estêsen ep' akropoloisin oressin,
          Atremas, ophr' heudêsi menos Boreao kai allôn
          Zachreiôn anemôn, hoite nephea skioenta
          Pnoiêsin lygyrêsi diaskidnasin aentes;
          Hôs Danaoi Trôas menon empedon, oud' ephebonto.]


'But they stood, like the clouds which the Son of Kronos stablishes
in calm upon the mountains, motionless, when the rage of the North
and of all the fiery winds is asleep.' As I finished these lines, I
raised my eyes, and looking across the gulf, saw a long line of
clouds resting on the top of its hills. The day was windless, and
there they stayed, hour after hour, without any stir or motion. I
remember how I was delighted at the time, and have often since that
day thought on the beauty and the truthfulness of Homer's simile.

"Perhaps this little fact may interest you, at a time when you are
attacked for your description of clouds.

                         "I am, sir, yours faithfully,
                                      G. B. HILL."

With this bit of noonday from Homer, I will read you a sunset and a
sunrise from Byron. That will enough express to you the scope and
sweep of all glorious literature, from the orient of Greece herself
to the death of the last Englishman who loved her.[3] I will read
you from 'Sardanapalus' the address of the Chaldean priest Beleses
to the sunset, and of the Greek slave, Myrrha, to the morning.

    "The sun goes down: methinks he sets more slowly,
     Taking his last look of Assyria's empire.
     How red he glares amongst those deepening clouds,[4]
     Like the blood he predicts.[5] If not in vain,
     Thou sun that sinkest, and ye stars which rise,
     I have outwatch'd ye, reading ray by ray
     The edicts of your orbs, which make Time tremble
     For what he brings the nations, 't is the furthest
     Hour of Assyria's years. And yet how calm!
     An earthquake should announce so great a fall--
     A summer's sun discloses it. Yon disk
     To the star-read Chaldean, bears upon
     Its everlasting page the end of what
     Seem'd everlasting; but oh! thou TRUE sun!
     _The burning oracle of all that live_,
     _As fountain of all life_, and _symbol of
     Him who bestows it_, wherefore dost thou limit
     Thy lore unto calamity?[6] Why not
     Unfold the rise of days more worthy thine
     All-glorious burst from ocean? why not dart
     A beam of hope athwart the future years,
     As of wrath to its days? Hear me! oh, hear me!
     I am thy worshiper, thy priest, thy servant--
     I have gazed on thee at thy rise and fall,
     And bow'd my head beneath thy mid-day beams,
     When my eye dared not meet thee. I have watch'd
     For thee, and after thee, and pray'd to thee,
     And sacrificed to thee, and read, and fear'd thee,
     And ask'd of thee, and thou hast answer'd--but
     Only to thus much. While I speak, he sinks--
     Is gone--and leaves his beauty, not his knowledge,
     To the delighted west, which revels in
     Its hues of dying glory. Yet what is
     Death, so it be but glorious? 'T is a sunset;
     And mortals may be happy to resemble
     The gods but in decay."

Thus the Chaldean priest, to the brightness of the setting sun.
Hear now the Greek girl, Myrrha, of his rising.

    "The day at last has broken. What a night
     Hath usher'd it! How beautiful in heaven!
     Though varied with a transitory storm,
     More beautiful in that variety:[7]
     How hideous upon earth! where peace, and hope,
     And love, and revel, in an hour were trampled
     By human passions to a human chaos,
     Not yet resolved to separate elements:--
     'T is warring still! And can the sun so rise,
     So bright, so rolling back the clouds into
     _Vapors more lovely than the unclouded sky_,
     With golden pinnacles, and snowy mountains,
     And billows purpler than the ocean's, making
     In heaven a glorious mockery of the earth,
     So like,--we almost deem it permanent;
     So fleeting,--we can scarcely call it aught
     Beyond a vision, 't is so transiently
     Scatter'd along the eternal vault: and yet
     It dwells upon the soul, and soothes the soul,
     And blends itself into the soul, until
     Sunrise and sunset form the haunted epoch
     Of sorrow and of love."

How often _now_--young maids of London,--do you make _sunrise_ the
'haunted epoch' of either?

Thus much, then, of the skies that used to be, and clouds "more
lovely than the unclouded sky," and of the temper of their
observers. I pass to the account of clouds that _are_, and--I say
it with sorrow--of the _dis_temper of _their_ observers.

But the general division which I have instituted between
bad-weather and fair-weather clouds must be more carefully carried
out in the sub-species, before we can reason of it farther: and
before we begin talk either of the sub-genera and sub-species, or
super-genera and super-species of cloud, perhaps we had better
define what _every_ cloud is, and must be, to begin with.

Every cloud that can be, is thus primarily definable: "Visible
vapor of water floating at a certain height in the air." The second
clause of this definition, you see, at once implies that there is
such a thing as visible vapor of water which does _not_ float at a
certain height in the air. You are all familiar with one extremely
cognizable variety of that sort of vapor--London Particular; but
that especial blessing of metropolitan society is only a
strongly-developed and highly-seasoned condition of a form of
watery vapor which exists just as generally and widely at the
bottom of the air, as the clouds do--on what, for convenience'
sake, we may call the top of it;--only as yet, thanks to the
sagacity of scientific men, we have got no general name for the
bottom cloud, though the whole question of cloud nature begins in
this broad fact, that you have one kind of vapor that lies to a
certain depth on the ground, and another that floats at a certain
height in the sky. Perfectly definite, in both cases, the surface
level of the earthly vapor, and the roof level of the heavenly
vapor, are each of them drawn within the depth of a fathom. Under
_their_ line, drawn for the day and for the hour, the clouds will
not stoop, and above _theirs,_ the mists will not rise. Each in
their own region, high or deep, may expatiate at their pleasure;
within that, they climb, or decline,--within that they congeal or
melt away; but below their assigned horizon the surges of the cloud
sea may not sink, and the floods of the mist lagoon may not be
swollen.

That is the first idea you have to get well into your minds
concerning the abodes of this visible vapor; next, you have to
consider the manner of its visibility. Is it, you have to ask, with
cloud vapor, as with most other things, that they are seen when
they are there, and not seen when they are not there? or has cloud
vapor so much of the ghost in it, that it can be visible or
invisible as it likes, and may perhaps be all unpleasantly and
malignantly there, just as much when we don't see it, as when we
do? To which I answer, comfortably and generally, that, on the
whole, a cloud is where you see it, and isn't where you don't;
that, when there's an evident and honest thundercloud in the
northeast, you needn't suppose there's a surreptitious and slinking
one in the northwest;--when there's a visible fog at Bermondsey, it
doesn't follow there's a spiritual one, more than usual, at the
West End: and when you get up to the clouds, and can walk into them
or out of them, as you like, you find when you're in them they wet
your whiskers, or take out your curls, and when you're out of them,
they don't; and therefore you may with probability assume--not with
certainty, observe, but with probability--that there's more water
in the air where it damps your curls than where it doesn't. If it
gets much denser than that, it will begin to rain; and then you
may assert, certainly with safety, that there is a shower in one
place, and not in another; and not allow the scientific people to
tell you that the rain is everywhere, but palpable in Tooley
Street, and impalpable in Grosvenor Square.

That, I say, is broadly and comfortably so on the whole,--and yet
with this kind of qualification and farther condition in the
matter. If you watch the steam coming strongly out of an
engine-funnel,[8]--at the top of the funnel it is transparent,--you
can't see it, though it is more densely and intensely there
than anywhere else. Six inches out of the funnel it becomes
snow-white,--you see it, and you see it, observe, exactly where it
is,--it is then a real and proper cloud. Twenty yards off the
funnel it scatters and melts away; a little of it sprinkles you
with rain if you are underneath it, but the rest disappears; yet it
is still there;--the surrounding air does not absorb it all into
space in a moment; there is a gradually diffusing current of
invisible moisture at the end of the visible stream--an invisible,
yet quite substantial, vapor; but not, according to our definition,
a cloud, for a cloud is vapor _visible_.

Then the next bit of the question, of course, is, What makes the
vapor visible, when it is so? Why is the compressed steam
transparent, the loose steam white, the dissolved steam transparent
again?

The scientific people tell you that the vapor becomes visible, and
chilled, as it expands. Many thanks to them; but can they show us
any reason why particles of water should be more opaque when they
are separated than when they are close together, or give us any
idea of the difference of the state of a particle of water, which
won't _sink_ in the air, from that of one that won't _rise_ in
it?[9]

And here I must parenthetically give you a little word of, I will
venture to say, extremely useful, advice about scientific people in
general. Their first business is, of course, to tell you things
that are so, and do happen,--as that, if you warm water, it will
boil; if you cool it, it will freeze; and if you put a candle to a
cask of gunpowder, it will blow you up. Their second, and far more
important business, is to tell you what you had best do under the
circumstances,--put the kettle on in time for tea; powder your ice
and salt, if you have a mind for ices; and obviate the chance of
explosion by not making the gunpowder. But if, beyond this safe and
beneficial business, they ever try to _explain_ anything to you,
you may be confident of one of two things,--either that they know
nothing (to speak of) about it, or that they have only seen one
side of it--and not only haven't seen, but usually have no mind to
see, the other. When, for instance, Professor Tyndall explains the
twisted beds of the Jungfrau to you by intimating that the
Matterhorn is growing flat;[10] or the clouds on the lee side of
the Matterhorn by the wind's rubbing against the windward side of
it,[11]--you may be pretty sure the scientific people don't know
much (to speak of) yet, either about rock-beds, or cloud-beds. And
even if the explanation, so to call it, be sound on one side,
windward or lee, you may, as I said, be nearly certain it won't do
on the other. Take the very top and center of scientific
interpretation by the greatest of its masters: Newton explained to
you--or at least was once supposed to have explained--why an apple
fell; but he never thought of explaining the exactly correlative,
but infinitely more difficult question, how the apple got up there!

You will not, therefore, so please you, expect me to explain
anything to you,--I have come solely and simply to put before you a
few facts, which you can't see by candlelight, or in railroad
tunnels, but which are making themselves now so very distinctly
felt as well as seen, that you may perhaps have to roof, if not
wall, half London afresh before we are many years older.

I go back to my point--the way in which clouds, as a matter of
fact, become visible. I have defined the floating or sky cloud, and
defined the falling, or earth cloud. But there's a sort of thing
between the two, which needs a third definition: namely, Mist. In
the 22d page of his 'Glaciers of the Alps,' Professor Tyndall says
that "the marvelous blueness of the sky in the earlier part of the
day indicated that the air was charged, almost to saturation, with
transparent aqueous vapor." Well, in certain weather that is true.
You all know the peculiar clearness which precedes rain,--when the
distant hills are looking nigh. I take it on trust from the
scientific people that there is then a quantity--almost to
saturation--of aqueous vapor in the air, but it is aqueous vapor in
a state which makes the air more transparent than it would be
without it. What state of aqueous molecule is that, absolutely
unreflective[12] of light--perfectly transmissive of light, and
showing at once the color of blue water and blue air on the distant
hills?

I put the question--and pass round to the other side. Such a
clearness, though a certain forerunner of rain, is not always its
forerunner. Far the contrary. Thick air is a much more frequent
forerunner of rain than clear air. In cool weather, you will often
get the transparent prophecy: but in hot weather, or in certain not
hitherto defined states of atmosphere, the forerunner of rain is
mist. In a general way, after you have had two or three days of
rain, the air and sky are healthily clear, and the sun bright. If
it is hot also, the next day is a little mistier--the next misty
and sultry,--and the next and the next, getting thicker and
thicker--end in another storm, or period of rain.

I suppose the thick air, as well as the transparent, is in both
cases saturated with aqueous vapor;--but also in both, observe,
vapor that floats everywhere, as if you mixed mud with the sea; and
it takes no shape anywhere: you may have it with calm, or with
wind, it makes no difference to it. You have a nasty haze with a
bitter east wind, or a nasty haze with not a leaf stirring, and you
may have the clear blue vapor with a fresh rainy breeze, or the
clear blue vapor as still as the sky above. What difference is
there between _these_ aqueous molecules that are clear, and those
that are muddy, _these_ that must sink or rise, and those that must
stay where they are, _these_ that have form and stature, that are
bellied like whales and backed like weasels, and those that have
neither backs nor fronts, nor feet nor faces, but are a mist--and
no more--over two or three thousand square miles?

I again leave the questions with you, and pass on.

Hitherto I have spoken of all aqueous vapor as if it were either
transparent or white--visible by becoming opaque like snow, but not
by any accession of color. But even those of us who are least
observant of skies, know that, irrespective of all supervening
colors from the sun, there are white clouds, brown clouds, gray
clouds, and black clouds. Are these indeed--what they appear to
be--entirely distinct monastic disciplines of cloud: Black Friars,
and White Friars, and Friars of Orders Gray? Or is it only their
various nearness to us, their denseness, and the failing of the
light upon them, that makes some clouds look black[13] and others
snowy?

I can only give you qualified and cautious answer. There are, by
differences in their own character, Dominican clouds, and there are
Franciscan;--there are the Black Hussars of the Bandiera della
Morte, and there are the Scots Grays whose horses can run upon the
rock. But if you ask me, as I would have you ask me, why argent and
why sable, how baptized in white like a bride or a novice, and how
hooded with blackness like a Judge of the Vehmgericht Tribunal,--I
leave these questions with you, and pass on.

Admitting degrees of darkness, we have next to ask what color, from
sunshine can the white cloud receive, and what the black?

You won't expect me to tell you all that, or even the little that
is accurately known about that, in a quarter of an hour; yet note
these main facts on the matter.

On any pure white, and practically opaque, cloud, or thing like a
cloud, as an Alp, or Milan Cathedral, you can have cast by rising
or setting sunlight, any tints of amber, orange, or moderately deep
rose--you can't have lemon yellows, or any kind of green except in
negative hue by opposition; and though by stormlight you may
sometimes get the reds cast very deep, beyond a certain limit you
cannot go,--the Alps are never vermilion color, nor flamingo
color, nor canary color; nor did you ever see a full scarlet
cumulus of thundercloud.

On opaque white vapor, then, remember, you can get a glow or a
blush of color, never a flame of it.

But when the cloud is transparent as well as pure, and can be
filled with light through all the body of it, you then can have by
the light reflected[14] from its atoms any force conceivable by
human mind of the entire group of the golden and ruby colors, from
intensely burnished gold color, through a scarlet for whose
brightness there are no words, into any depth and any hue of Tyrian
crimson and Byzantine purple. These with full blue breathed between
them at the zenith, and green blue nearer the horizon, form the
scales and chords of color possible to the morning and evening sky
in pure and fine weather; the keynote of the opposition being
vermilion against green blue, both of equal tone, and at such a
height and acme of brilliancy that you cannot see the line where
their edges pass into each other.

No colors that can be fixed in earth can ever represent to you the
luster of these cloudy ones. But the actual tints may be shown you
in a lower key, and to a certain extent their power and relation to
each other.

I have painted the diagram here shown you with colors prepared for
me lately by Messrs. Newman, which I find brilliant to the height
that pigments can be; and the ready kindness of Mr. Wilson Barrett
enables me to show you their effect by a white light as pure as
that of the day. The diagram is enlarged from my careful sketch of
the sunset of 1st October, 1868, at Abbeville, which was a
beautiful example of what, in fine weather about to pass into
storm, a sunset could then be, in the districts of Kent and Picardy
unaffected by smoke. In reality, the ruby and vermilion clouds
were, by myriads, more numerous than I have had time to paint: but
the general character of their grouping is well enough expressed.
All the illumined clouds are high in the air, and nearly
motionless; beneath them, electric storm-cloud rises in a
threatening cumulus on the right, and drifts in dark flakes across
the horizon, casting from its broken masses radiating shadows on
the upper clouds. These shadows are traced, in the first place by
making the misty blue of the open sky more transparent, and
therefore darker; and secondly, by entirely intercepting the
sunbeams on the bars of cloud, which, within the shadowed spaces,
show dark on the blue instead of light.

But, mind, all that is done by reflected light--and in that light
you never get a _green_ ray from the reflecting cloud; there is no
such thing in nature as a green lighted cloud relieved from a red
sky,--the cloud is always red, and the sky green, and green,
observe, by transmitted, not reflected light.

But now note, there is another kind of cloud, pure white, and
exquisitely delicate; which acts not by reflecting, nor by
refracting, but, as it is now called, _dif_fracting, the sun's
rays. The particles of this cloud are said--with what truth I know
not[15]--to send the sunbeams round them instead of through them;
somehow or other, at any rate, they resolve them into their
prismatic elements; and then you have literally a kaleidoscope in
the sky, with every color of the prism in absolute purity; but
above all in force, now, the ruby red and the _green_,--with
purple, and violet-blue, in a virtual equality, more definite than
that of the rainbow. The red in the rainbow is mostly brick red,
the violet, though beautiful, often lost at the edge; but in the
prismatic cloud the violet, the green, and the ruby are all more
lovely than in any precious stones, and they are varied as in a
bird's breast, changing their places, depths, and extent at every
instant.

The main cause of this change being, that the prismatic cloud
itself is always in rapid, and generally in fluctuating motion. "A
light veil of clouds had drawn itself," says Professor Tyndall, in
describing his solitary ascent of Monte Rosa, "between me and the
sun, and this was flooded with the most brilliant dyes. Orange,
red, green, blue--all the hues produced by diffraction--were
exhibited in the utmost splendor.

"Three times during my ascent (the short ascent of the last peak)
similar veils drew themselves across the sun, and at each passage
the splendid phenomena were renewed. There seemed a tendency to
form circular zones of color round the sun; but the clouds were not
sufficiently uniform to permit of this, and they were consequently
broken into spaces, each steeped with the color due to the
condition of the cloud at the place."

Three times, you observe, the veil passed, and three times another
came, or the first faded and another formed; and so it is always,
as far as I have registered prismatic cloud: and the most beautiful
colors I ever saw were on those that flew fastest.

This second diagram is enlarged admirably by Mr. Arthur Severn from
my sketch of the sky in the afternoon of the 6th of August, 1880,
at Brantwood, two hours before sunset. You are looking west by
north, straight towards the sun, and nearly straight towards the
wind. From the west the wind blows fiercely towards you out of the
blue sky. Under the blue space is a flattened dome of earth-cloud
clinging to, and altogether masking the form of, the mountain,
known as the Old Man of Coniston.

The top of that dome of cloud is two thousand eight hundred feet
above the sea, the mountain two thousand six hundred, the cloud
lying two hundred feet deep on it. Behind it, westward and seaward,
all's clear; but when the wind out of that blue clearness comes
over the ridge of the earth-cloud, at that moment and that line, its
own moisture congeals into these white--I believe, _ice_-clouds;
threads, and meshes, and tresses, and tapestries, flying, failing,
melting, reappearing; spinning and unspinning themselves, coiling and
uncoiling, winding and unwinding, faster than eye or thought can
follow: and through all their dazzling maze of frosty filaments shines
a painted window in palpitation; its pulses of color interwoven in
motion, intermittent in fire,--emerald and ruby and pale purple and
violet melting into a blue that is not of the sky, but of the
sunbeam;--purer than the crystal, softer than the rainbow, and
brighter than the snow.

But you must please here observe that while my first diagram did
with some adequateness represent to you the color facts there
spoken of, the present diagram can only _explain_, not reproduce
them. The bright reflected colors of clouds _can_ be represented in
painting, because they are relieved against darker colors, or, in
many cases, _are_ dark colors, the vermilion and ruby clouds being
often much darker than the green or blue sky beyond them. But in
the case of the phenomena now under your attention, the colors are
all _brighter than pure white_,--the entire body of the cloud in
which they show themselves being white by transmitted light, so
that I can only show you what the colors are, and where they
are,--but leaving them dark on the white ground. Only artificial,
and very high illumination would give the real effect of
them,--painting cannot.

Enough, however, is here done to fix in your minds the distinction
between those two species of cloud,--one, either stationary,[16] or
slow in motion, _reflecting unresolved_ light; the other,
fast-flying, and _transmitting resolved_ light. What difference is
there in the nature of the atoms, between those two kinds of
clouds? I leave the question with you for to-day, merely hinting to
you my suspicion that the prismatic cloud is of finely-comminuted
water, or ice,[17] instead of aqueous vapor; but the only clue I
have to this idea is in the purity of the rainbow formed in frost
mist, lying close to water surfaces. Such mist, however, only
becomes prismatic as common rain does, when the sun is behind the
spectator, while prismatic clouds are, on the contrary, always
between the spectator and the sun.

The main reason, however, why I can tell you nothing yet about
these colors of diffraction or interference, is that, whenever I
try to find anything firm for you to depend on, I am stopped by the
quite frightful inaccuracy of the scientific people's terms, which
is the consequence of their always trying to write mixed Latin and
English, so losing the grace of the one and the sense of the other.
And, in this point of the diffraction of light I am stopped dead by
their confusion of idea also, in using the words undulation and
vibration as synonyms. "When," says Professor Tyndall, "you are
told that the atoms of the sun _vibrate_ at different rates, and
produce _waves_ of different sizes,--your experience of water-waves
will enable you to form a tolerably clear notion of what is meant."

'Tolerably clear'!--your toleration must be considerable, then. Do
you suppose a water-wave is like a harp-string? Vibration is the
movement of a body in a state of tension,--undulation, that of a
body absolutely lax. In vibration, not an atom of the body changes
its place in relation to another,--in undulation, not an atom of
the body remains in the same place with regard to another. In
vibration, every particle of the body ignores gravitation, or
defies it,--in undulation, every particle of the body is slavishly
submitted to it. In undulation, not one wave is like another; in
vibration, every pulse is alike. And of undulation itself, there
are all manner of visible conditions, which are not true
conditions. A flag ripples in the wind, but it does not undulate as
the sea does,--for in the sea, the water is taken from the trough
to put on to the ridge, but in the flag, though the motion is
progressive, the bits of bunting keep their place. You see a field
of corn undulating as if it was water,--it is different from the
flag, for the ears of corn bow out of their places and return to
them,--and yet, it is no more like the undulation of the sea, than
the shaking of an aspen leaf in a storm, or the lowering of the
lances in a battle.

And the best of the jest is, that after mixing up these two notions
in their heads inextricably, the scientific people apply both when
neither will fit; and when all undulation known to us presumes
weight, and all vibration, impact,--the undulating theory of light
is proposed to you concerning a medium which you can neither weigh
nor touch!

All _communicable_ vibration--of course I mean--and in dead matter:
_You_ may fall a shivering on your own account, if you like, but
you can't get a billiard-ball to fall a shivering on _its_ own
account.[18]

Yet observe that in thus signalizing the inaccuracy of the terms in
which they are taught, I neither accept, nor assail, the
conclusions respecting the oscillatory states of light, heat, and
sound, which have resulted from the postulate of an elastic, though
impalpable and imponderable ether, possessing the elasticity of
air. This only I desire you to mark with attention,--that both
light and sound are _sensations_ of the animal frame, which remain,
and must remain, wholly inexplicable, whatever manner of force,
pulse, or palpitation may be instrumental in producing them: nor
does any such force _become_ light or sound, except in its
rencontre with an animal. The leaf hears no murmur in the wind to
which it wavers on the branches, nor can the clay discern the
vibration by which it is thrilled into a ruby. The Eye and the Ear
are the creators alike of the ray and the tone; and the conclusion
follows logically from the right conception of their living
power,--"He that planted the Ear, shall He not hear? He that formed
the Eye, shall not He see?"

For security, therefore, and simplicity of definition of light, you
will find no possibility of advancing beyond Plato's "the power
that through the eye manifests color," but on that definition, you
will find, alike by Plato and all great subsequent thinkers, a
_moral_ Science of Light founded, far and away more important to
you than all the physical laws ever learned by vitreous revelation.
Concerning which I will refer you to the sixth lecture which I gave
at Oxford in 1872, on the relation of Art to the Science of Light
('The Eagle's Nest'), reading now only the sentence introducing its
subject:--"The 'Fiat lux' of creation is therefore, in the deep
sense, 'fiat anima,' and is as much, when you understand it, the
ordering of Intelligence as the ordering of Vision. It is the
appointment of change of what had been else only a mechanical
effluence from things unseen to things unseeing,--from Stars, that
did not shine, to Earth, that did not perceive,--the change, I say,
of that blind vibration into the glory of the Sun and Moon for
human eyes: so making possible the communication out of the
unfathomable truth of that portion of truth which is good for us,
and animating to us, and is set to rule over the day and over the
night of our joy and our sorrow."

Returning now to our subject at the point from which I permitted
myself, I trust not without your pardon, to diverge; you may
incidentally, but carefully, observe, that the effect of such a sky
as that represented in the second diagram, so far as it can be
abstracted or conveyed by painting at all, implies the total
absence of any pervading warmth of tint, such as artists usually
call 'tone.' Every tint must be the purest possible, and above all
the white. Partly, lest you should think, from my treatment of
these two phases of effect, that I am insensible to the quality of
tone,--and partly to complete the representation of states of
weather undefiled by plague-cloud, yet capable of the most solemn
dignity in saddening color, I show you, Diagram 3, the record of an
autumn twilight of the year 1845,--sketched while I was changing
horses between Verona and Brescia. The distant sky in this drawing
is in the glowing calm which is always taken by the great Italian
painters for the background of their sacred pictures; a broad field
of cloud is advancing upon it overhead, and meeting others
enlarging in the distance; these are rain-clouds, which will
certainly close over the clear sky, and bring on rain before
midnight: but there is no power in them to pollute the sky beyond
and above them: they do not darken the air, nor defile it, nor in
any way mingle with it; their edges are burnished by the sun like
the edges of golden shields, and their advancing march is as
deliberate and majestic as the fading of the twilight itself into a
darkness full of stars.

These three instances are all I have time to give of the former
conditions of serene weather, and of non-electric rain-cloud. But I
must yet, to complete the sequence of my subject, show you one
example of a good, old-fashioned, healthy, and mighty, storm.

In Diagram 4, Mr. Severn has beautifully enlarged my sketch of a
July thundercloud of the year 1858, on the Alps of the Val
d'Aosta, seen from Turin, that is to say, some twenty-five or
thirty miles distant. You see that no mistake is possible here
about what is good weather and what bad, or which is cloud and
which is sky; but I show you this sketch especially to give you the
scale of heights for such clouds in the atmosphere. These thunder
cumuli entirely _hide_ the higher Alps. It does not, however,
follow that they have buried them, for most of their own aspect of
height is owing to the approach of their nearer masses; but at all
events, you have cumulus there rising from its base, at about three
thousand feet above the plain, to a good ten thousand in the air.

White cirri, in reality parallel, but by perspective radiating,
catch the sunshine above, at a height of from fifteen to twenty
thousand feet; but the storm on the mountains gathers itself into a
full mile's depth of massy cloud, every fold of it involved with
thunder, but every form of it, every action, every color,
magnificent:--doing its mighty work in its own hour and its own
dominion, nor snatching from you for an instant, nor defiling with
a stain, the abiding blue of the transcendent sky, or the fretted
silver of its passionless clouds.

We so rarely now see cumulus cloud of this grand kind, that I will
yet delay you by reading the description of its nearer aspect, in
the 'Eagle's Nest.'

"The rain which flooded our fields the Sunday before last, was
followed, as you will remember, by bright days, of which Tuesday
the 20th (February, 1872) was, in London, notable for the splendor,
towards the afternoon, of its white cumulus clouds. There has been
so much black east wind lately, and so much fog and artificial
gloom, besides, that I find it is actually some two years since I
last saw a noble cumulus cloud under full light. I chanced to be
standing under the Victoria Tower at Westminster, when the largest
mass of them floated past, that day, from the northwest; and I was
more impressed than ever yet by the awfulness of the cloud-form,
and its unaccountableness, in the present state of our knowledge.
The Victoria Tower, seen against it, had no magnitude: it was like
looking at Mont Blanc over a lamp-post. The domes of cloud-snow
were heaped as definitely: their broken flanks were as gray and
firm as rocks, and the whole mountain, of a compass and height in
heaven which only became more and more inconceivable as the eye
strove to ascend it, was passing behind the tower with a steady
march, whose swiftness must in reality have been that of a tempest:
yet, along all the ravines of vapor, precipice kept pace with
precipice, and not one thrust another.

"What is it that hews them out? Why is the blue sky pure
there,--the cloud solid here; and edged like marble: and why does
the state of the blue sky pass into the state of cloud, in that
calm advance?

"It is true that you can more or less imitate the forms of cloud
with explosive vapor or steam; but the steam melts instantly, and
the explosive vapor dissipates itself. The cloud, of perfect form,
proceeds unchanged. It is not an explosion, but an enduring and
advancing presence. The more you think of it, the less explicable
it will become to you."

Thus far then of clouds that were once familiar; now at last,
entering on my immediate subject, I shall best introduce it to you
by reading an entry in my diary which gives progressive description
of the most gentle aspect of the modern plague-cloud.

                                   "_Bolton Abbey, 4th July, 1875._

Half-past eight, morning; the first bright morning for the last
fortnight.

At half-past five it was entirely clear, and entirely calm; the
moorlands glowing, and the Wharfe glittering in sacred light, and
even the thin-stemmed field-flowers quiet as stars, in the peace in
which--

    'All trees and simples, great and small,
       That balmy leaf do bear,
     Than they were painted on a wall,
       No more do move, nor steir.'


But, an hour ago, the leaves at my window first shook slightly.
They are now trembling _continuously_, as those of all the trees,
under a gradually rising wind, of which the tremulous action
scarcely permits the direction to be defined,--but which falls and
returns in fits of varying force, like those which precede a
thunderstorm--never wholly ceasing: the direction of its upper
current is shown by a few ragged white clouds, moving fast from the
north, which rose, at the time of the first leaf-shaking, behind
the edge of the moors in the east.

This wind is the plague-wind of the eighth decade of years in the
nineteenth century; a period which will assuredly be recognized in
future meteorological history as one of phenomena hitherto unrecorded
in the courses of nature, and characterized pre-eminently by the
almost ceaseless action of this calamitous wind. While I have been
writing these sentences, the white clouds above specified have
increased to twice the size they had when I began to write; and in
about two hours from this time--say by eleven o'clock, if the wind
continue,--the whole sky will be dark with them, as it was yesterday,
and has been through prolonged periods during the last five years. I
first noticed the definite character of this wind, and of the clouds
it brings with it, in the year 1871, describing it then in the July
number of 'Fors Clavigera'; but little, at that time, apprehending
either its universality, or any probability of its annual continuance.
I am able now to state positively that its range of power extends from
the North of England to Sicily; and that it blows more or less during
the whole of the year, except the early autumn. This autumnal
abdication is, I hope, beginning: it blew but feebly yesterday, though
without intermission, from the north, making every shady place cold,
while the sun was burning; its effect on the sky being only to dim the
blue of it between masses of ragged cumulus. To-day it has entirely
fallen; and there seems hope of bright weather, the first for me since
the end of May, when I had two fine days at Aylesbury; the third,
May 28th, being black again from morning to evening. There seems to be
some reference to the blackness caused by the prevalence of this wind
in the old French name of Bise, '_gray_ wind'; and, indeed, one of the
darkest and bitterest days of it I ever saw was at Vevay in 1872."

       *       *       *       *       *

The first time I recognized the clouds brought by the plague-wind
as distinct in character was in walking back from Oxford, after a
hard day's work, to Abingdon, in the early spring of 1871: it would
take too long to give you any account this evening of the
particulars which drew my attention to them; but during the
following months I had too frequent opportunities of verifying my
first thoughts of them, and on the first of July in that year wrote
the description of them which begins the 'Fors Clavigera' of
August, thus:--

"It is the first of July, and I sit down to write by the dismalest
light that ever yet I wrote by; namely, the light of this midsummer
morning, in mid-England, (Matlock, Derbyshire), in the year 1871.

"For the sky is covered with gray cloud;--not rain-cloud, but a dry
black veil, which no ray of sunshine can pierce; partly diffused in
mist, feeble mist, enough to make distant objects unintelligible,
yet without any substance, or wreathing, or color of its own. And
everywhere the leaves of the trees are shaking fitfully, as they do
before a thunder-storm; only not violently, but enough to show the
passing to and fro of a strange, bitter, blighting wind. Dismal
enough, had it been the first morning of its kind that summer had
sent. But during all this spring, in London, and at Oxford, through
meager March, through changelessly sullen April, through
despondent May, and darkened June, morning after morning has
come gray-shrouded thus.

"And it is a new thing to me, and a very dreadful one. I am fifty
years old, and more; and since I was five, have gleaned the best
hours of my life in the sun of spring and summer mornings; and I
never saw such as these, till now.

"And the scientific men are busy as ants, examining the sun, and
the moon, and the seven stars, and can tell me all about _them_, I
believe, by this time; and how they move, and what they are made
of.

"And I do not care, for my part, two copper spangles how they move,
nor what they are made of. I can't move them any other way than
they go, nor make them of anything else, better than they are made.
But I would care much and give much, if I could be told where this
bitter wind comes from, and what _it_ is made of.

"For, perhaps, with forethought, and fine laboratory science, one
might make it of something else.

"It looks partly as if it were made of poisonous smoke; very
possibly it may be: there are at least two hundred furnace chimneys
in a square of two miles on every side of me. But mere smoke would
not blow to and fro in that wild way. It looks more to me as if it
were made of dead men's souls--such of them as are not gone yet
where they have to go, and may be flitting hither and thither,
doubting, themselves, of the fittest place for them.

"You know, if there _are_ such things as souls, and if ever any of
them haunt places where they have been hurt, there must be many
about us, just now, displeased enough!"

The last sentence refers of course to the battles of the
Franco-German campaign, which was especially horrible to me, in its
digging, as the Germans should have known, a moat flooded with
waters of death between the two nations for a century to come.

Since that Midsummer day, my attention, however otherwise occupied,
has never relaxed in its record of the phenomena characteristic of
the plague-wind; and I now define for you, as briefly as possible,
the essential signs of it.

1. It is a wind of darkness,--all the former conditions of
tormenting winds, whether from the north or east were more or less
capable of co-existing with sunlight, and often with steady and
bright sunlight; but whenever, and wherever the plague-wind blows,
be it but for ten minutes, the sky is darkened instantly.

2. It is a malignant _quality_ of wind, unconnected with any one
quarter of the compass; it blows indifferently from all, attaching
its own bitterness and malice to the worst characters of the proper
winds of each quarter. It will blow either with drenching rain, or
dry rage, from the south,--with ruinous blasts from the west,--with
bitterest chills from the north,--and with venomous blight from the
east.

Its own favorite quarter, however, is the southwest, so that it is
distinguished in its malignity equally from the Bise of Provence,
which is a north wind always, and from our own old friend, the
east.

3. It always blows _tremulously_, making the leaves of the trees
shudder as if they were all aspens, but with a peculiar fitfulness
which gives them--and I watch them this moment as I write--an
expression of anger as well as of fear and distress. You may see
the kind of quivering, and hear the ominous whimpering, in the
gusts that precede a great thunderstorm; but plague-wind is more
panic-struck, and feverish; and its sound is a hiss instead of a
wail.

When I was last at Avallon, in South France, I went to see 'Faust'
played at the little country theater: it was done with scarcely any
means of pictorial effect, except a few old curtains, and a blue
light or two. But the night on the Brocken was nevertheless
extremely appalling to me,--a strange ghastliness being obtained in
some of the witch scenes merely by fine management of gesture and
drapery; and in the phantom scenes, by the half-palsied,
half-furious, faltering or fluttering past of phantoms stumbling as
into graves; as if of not only soulless, but senseless, Dead,
moving with the very action, the rage, the decrepitude, and the
trembling of the plague-wind.

4. Not only tremulous at every moment, it is also _intermittent_
with a rapidity quite unexampled in former weather. There are,
indeed, days--and weeks, on which it blows without cessation, and
is as inevitable as the Gulf Stream; but also there are days when
it is contending with healthy weather, and on such days it will
remit for half an hour, and the sun will begin to show itself, and
then the wind will come back and cover the whole sky with clouds
in ten minutes; and so on, every half-hour, through the whole day;
so that it is often impossible to go on with any kind of drawing in
color, the light being never for two seconds the same from morning
till evening.

5. It degrades, while it intensifies, ordinary storm; but before I
read you any description of its efforts in this kind, I must
correct an impression which has got abroad through the papers, that
I speak as if the plague-wind blew now always, and there were no
more any natural weather. On the contrary, the winter of 1878-9 was
one of the most healthy and lovely I ever saw ice in;--Coniston
lake shone under the calm clear frost in one marble field, as
strong as the floor of Milan Cathedral, half a mile across and four
miles down; and the first entries in my diary which I read you
shall be from the 22d to 26th June, 1876, of perfectly lovely and
natural weather.

                                   "_Sunday, 25th June, 1876._

Yesterday, an entirely glorious sunset, unmatched in beauty since
that at Abbeville,--deep scarlet, and purest rose, on purple gray,
in bars; and stationary, plumy, sweeping filaments above in upper
sky, like '_using up the brush_,' said Joanie; remaining in glory,
every moment best, changing from one good into another, (but only
in color or light--_form steady_,) for half an hour full, and the
clouds afterwards fading into the gray against amber twilight,
_stationary in the same form for about two hours_, at least. The
darkening rose tint remained till half-past ten, the grand time
being at nine.

The day had been fine,--exquisite green light on afternoon hills.

                                   _Monday, 26th June, 1876._

Yesterday an entirely perfect summer light on the Old Man;
Lancaster Bay all clear; Ingleborough and the great Pennine fault
as on a map. Divine beauty of western color on thyme and
rose,--then twilight of clearest _warm_ amber far into night, of
_pale_ amber all night long; hills dark-clear against it.

And so it continued, only growing more intense in blue and
sunlight, all day. After breakfast, I came in from the well under
strawberry bed, to say I had never seen anything like it, so pure
or intense, in Italy; and so it went glowing on, cloudless, with
soft north wind, all day.

                                   _16th July._

The sunset almost too bright _through the blinds_ for me to read
Humboldt at tea by,--finally, new moon like a lime-light, reflected
on breeze-struck water; traces, across dark calm, of reflected
hills."

These extracts are, I hope, enough to guard you against the
absurdity of supposing that it all only means that I am myself
soured, or doting, in my old age, and always in an ill humor.
Depend upon it, when old men are worth anything, they are better
humored than young ones; and have learned to see what good there
is, and pleasantness, in the world they are likely so soon to have
orders to quit.

Now then--take the following sequences of accurate description of
thunderstorm, _with_ plague-wind.

                                   _"22d June, 1876._

Thunderstorm; pitch dark, with no _blackness_,--but deep, high,
_filthiness_ of lurid, yet not sublimely lurid, smoke-cloud; dense
manufacturing mist; fearful squalls of shivery wind, making Mr.
Severn's sail quiver like a man in a fever fit--all about four,
afternoon--but only two or three claps of thunder, and feeble,
though near, flashes. I never saw such a dirty, weak, foul storm.
It cleared suddenly, after raining all afternoon, at half-past
eight to nine, into pure, natural weather,--low rain-clouds on
quite clear, green, wet hills.

                                   _Brantwood, 13th August, 1879._

The most terrific and horrible thunderstorm, this morning, I ever
remember. It waked me at six, or a little before--then rolling
incessantly, like railway luggage trains, quite ghastly in its
mockery of them--the air one loathsome mass of sultry and foul fog,
like smoke; scarcely raining at all, but increasing to heavier
rollings, with flashes quivering vaguely through all the air, and
at last terrific double streams of reddish-violet fire, not forked
or zigzag, but rippled rivulets--two at the same instant some
twenty to thirty degrees apart, and lasting on the eye at least
half a second, with grand artillery-peals following; not rattling
crashes, or irregular cracklings, but delivered volleys. It lasted
an hour, then passed off, clearing a little, without rain to speak
of,--not a glimpse of blue,--and now, half-past seven, seems
settling down again into Manchester devil's darkness.

Quarter to eight, morning.--Thunder returned, all the air collapsed
into one black fog, the hills invisible, and scarcely visible the
opposite shore; heavy rain in short fits, and frequent, though less
formidable, flashes, and shorter thunder. While I have written this
sentence the cloud has again dissolved itself, like a nasty
solution in a bottle, with miraculous and unnatural rapidity, and
the hills are in sight again; a double-forked flash--rippled, I
mean, like the others--starts into its frightful ladder of light
between me and Wetherlam, as I raise my eyes. All black above, a
rugged spray cloud on the Eaglet. (The 'Eaglet' is my own name for
the bold and elevated crag to the west of the little lake above
Coniston mines. It had no name among the country people, and is one
of the most conspicuous features of the mountain chain, as seen
from Brantwood.)

Half-past eight.--Three times light and three times dark since last
I wrote, and the darkness seeming each time as it settles more
loathsome, at last stopping my reading in mere blindness. One lurid
gleam of white cumulus in upper lead-blue sky, seen for half a
minute through the sulphurous chimney-pot vomit of blackguardly
cloud beneath, where its rags were thinnest.

                                   _Thursday, 22d Feb. 1883._

Yesterday a fearfully dark mist all afternoon, with steady, south
plague-wind of the bitterest, nastiest, poisonous blight, and
fretful flutter. I could scarcely stay in the wood for the horror
of it. To-day, really rather bright blue, and bright semi-cumuli,
with the frantic Old Man blowing sheaves of lancets and chisels
across the lake--not in strength enough, or whirl enough, to raise
it in spray, but tracing every squall's outline in black on the
silver gray waves, and whistling meanly, and as if on a flute made
of a file.

                                   _Sunday, 17th August, 1879._

Raining in foul drizzle, slow and steady; sky pitch-dark, and I
just get a little light by sitting in the bow-window; diabolic
clouds over everything: and looking over my kitchen garden
yesterday, I found it one miserable mass of weeds gone to seed, the
roses in the higher garden putrefied into brown sponges, feeling
like dead snails; and the half-ripe strawberries all rotten at the
stalks."

6. And now I come to the most important sign of the plague-wind and
the plague-cloud: that in bringing on their peculiar darkness, they
_blanch_ the sun instead of reddening it. And here I must note
briefly to you the uselessness of observation by instruments, or
machines, instead of eyes. In the first year when I had begun to
notice the specialty of the plague-wind, I went of course to the
Oxford observatory to consult its registrars. They have their
anemometer always on the twirl, and can tell you the force, or at
least the pace, of a gale,[19] by day or night. But the anemometer
can only record for you how often it has been driven round, not at
all whether it went round _steadily_, or went round _trembling_.
And on that point depends the entire question whether it is a
plague breeze or a healthy one: and what's the use of telling you
whether the wind's strong or not, when it can't tell you whether
it's a strong medicine, or a strong poison?

But again--you have your _sun_-measure, and can tell exactly at any
moment how strong, or how weak, or how wanting, the sun is. But the
sun-measurer can't tell you whether the rays are stopped by a dense
_shallow_ cloud, or a thin _deep_ one. In healthy weather, the sun
is hidden behind a cloud, as it is behind a tree; and, when the
cloud is past, it comes out again, as bright as before. But in
plague-wind, the sun is choked out of the whole heaven, all day
long, by a cloud which may be a thousand miles square and five
miles deep.

And yet observe: that thin, scraggy, filthy, mangy, miserable
cloud, for all the depth of it, can't turn the sun red, as a good,
business-like fog does with a hundred feet or so of itself. By the
plague-wind every breath of air you draw is polluted, half round
the world; in a London fog the air itself is pure, though you
choose to mix up dirt with it, and choke yourself with your own
nastiness.

Now I'm going to show you a diagram of a sunset in entirely pure
weather, above London smoke. I saw it and sketched it from my old
post of observation--the top garret of my father's house at Herne
Hill. There, when the wind is south, we are outside of the smoke
and above it; and this diagram, admirably enlarged from my own
drawing by my, now in all things best aide-de-camp, Mr.
Collingwood, shows you an old-fashioned sunset--the sort of thing
Turner and I used to have to look at,--(nobody else ever would)
constantly. Every sunset and every dawn, in fine weather, had
something of the sort to show us. This is one of the last pure
sunsets I ever saw, about the year 1876,--and the point I want you
to note in it is, that the air being pure, the smoke on the
horizon, though at last it hides the sun, yet hides it through gold
and vermilion. Now, don't go away fancying there's any exaggeration
in that study. The _prismatic_ colors, I told you, were simply
impossible to paint; these, which are transmitted colors, can
indeed be suggested, but no more. The brightest pigment we have
would look dim beside the truth.

I should have liked to have blotted down for you a bit of
plague-cloud to put beside this; but Heaven knows, you can see
enough of it now-a-days without any trouble of mine; and if you
want, in a hurry, to see what the sun looks like through it, you've
only to throw a bad half-crown into a basin of soap and water.

Blanched Sun,--blighted grass,--blinded man.--If, in conclusion,
you ask me for any conceivable cause or meaning of these things--I
can tell you none, according to your modern beliefs; but I can tell
you what meaning it would have borne to the men of old time.
Remember, for the last twenty years, England, and all foreign
nations, either tempting her, or following her, have blasphemed[20]
the name of God deliberately and openly; and have done iniquity by
proclamation, every man doing as much injustice to his brother as
it is in his power to do. Of states in such moral gloom every seer
of old predicted the physical gloom, saying, "The light shall be
darkened in the heavens thereof, and the stars shall withdraw their
shining." All Greek, all Christian, all Jewish prophecy insists on
the same truth through a thousand myths; but of all the chief, to
former thought, was the fable of the Jewish warrior and prophet,
for whom the sun hasted not to go down, with which I leave you to
compare at leisure the physical result of your own wars and
prophecies, as declared by your own elect journal not fourteen days
ago,--that the Empire of England, on which formerly the sun never
set, has become one on which he never rises.

What is best to be done, do you ask me? The answer is plain.
Whether you can affect the signs of the sky or not, you _can_ the
signs of the times. Whether you can bring the _sun_ back or not,
you can assuredly bring back your own cheerfulness, and your own
honesty. You may not be able to say to the winds, "Peace; be
still," but you can cease from the insolence of your own lips, and
the troubling of your own passions. And all _that_ it would be
extremely well to do, even though the day _were_ coming when the
sun should be as darkness, and the moon as blood. But, the paths of
rectitude and piety once regained, who shall say that the promise
of old time would not be found to hold for us also?--"Bring ye all
the tithes into my storehouse, and prove me now herewith, saith the
Lord God, if I will not open you the windows of heaven, and pour
you out a blessing, that there shall not be room enough to receive
it."




LECTURE II.

                                   _March 11th, 1884._


It was impossible for me, this spring, to prepare, as I wished to
have done, two lectures for the London Institution: but finding its
members more interested in the subject chosen than I had
anticipated, I enlarged my lecture at its second reading by some
explanations and parentheses, partly represented, and partly
farther developed, in the following notes; which led me on,
however, as I arranged them, into branches of the subject untouched
in the former lecture, and it seems to me of no inferior interest.

[Footnote 1: The vapor over the pool of Anger in the 'Inferno,' the
clogging stench which rises from Caina, and the fog of the circle
of Anger in the 'Purgatorio' resemble, indeed, the cloud of the
Plague-wind very closely,--but are conceived only as supernatural.
The reader will no doubt observe, throughout the following lecture,
my own habit of speaking of beautiful things as 'natural,' and of
ugly ones as 'unnatural.' In the conception of recent philosophy,
the world is one Kosmos in which diphtheria is held to be as
natural as song, and cholera as digestion. To my own mind, and the
more distinctly the more I see, know, and feel, the Earth, as
prepared for the abode of man, appears distinctly ruled by agencies
of health and disease, of which the first may be aided by his
industry, prudence, and piety; while the destroying laws are
allowed to prevail against him, in the degree in which he allows
himself in idleness, folly, and vice. Had the point been distinctly
indicated where the degrees of adversity necessary for his
discipline pass into those intended for his punishment, the world
would have been put under a manifest theocracy; but the declaration
of the principle is at least distinct enough to have convinced all
sensitive and earnest persons, from the beginning of speculation in
the eyes and mind of Man: and it has been put in my power by one
of the singular chances which have always helped me in my work when
it was in the right direction, to present to the University
of Oxford the most distinct expression of this first principle
of mediæval Theology which, so far as I know, exists in
fifteenth-century art. It is one of the drawings of the Florentine
book which I bought for a thousand pounds, against the British
Museum, some ten or twelve years since; being a compendium of
classic and mediæval religious symbolism. In the two pages of it,
forming one picture, given to Oxford, the delivery of the Law on
Sinai is represented on the left hand, (_contrary to the Scriptural
narrative_, but in deeper expression of the benediction of the
Sacred Law to all nations,) as in the midst of bright and calm
light, the figure of the Deity being supported by luminous and
level clouds, and attended by happy angels: while opposite, on the
right hand, the worship of the Golden Calf is symbolized by a
single decorated pillar, with the calf on its summit, surrounded by
the clouds and darkness of a furious storm, issuing from the mouths
of fiends;--uprooting the trees, and throwing down the rocks, above
the broken tables of the Law, of which the fragments lie in the
foreground.]

[Footnote 2: These conditions are mainly in the arrangement of the
lower rain-clouds in flakes thin and detached enough to be
illuminated by early or late sunbeams: their textures are then more
softly blended than those of the upper cirri, and have the
qualities of painted, instead of burnished or inflamed, color.

They were thus described in the 4th chapter of the 7th part of
'Modern Painters':--

"Often in our English mornings, the rain-clouds in the dawn form
soft level fields, which melt imperceptibly into the blue; or when
of less extent, gather into apparent bars, crossing the sheets of
broader cloud above; and all these bathed throughout in an
unspeakable light of pure rose-color, and purple, and amber, and
blue, not shining, but misty-soft, the barred masses, when seen
nearer, found to be woven in tresses of cloud, like floss silk,
looking as if each knot were a little swathe or sheaf of lighted
rain.

"No clouds form such skies, none are so tender, various,
inimitable; Turner himself never caught them. Correggio, putting
out his whole strength, could have painted them,--no other man."]

[Footnote 3: I did not, in writing this sentence, forget Mr.
Gladstone's finely scholastic enthusiasm for Homer; nor Mr.
Newton's for Athenian--(I wish it had not been also for
Halicarnassian) sculpture. But Byron loved Greece herself--through
her death--and _to_ his own; while the subsequent refusal of
England to give Greece one of our own princes for a king, has
always been held by me the most ignoble, cowardly, and lamentable,
of all our base commercial _im_policies.]

[Footnote 4: 'Deepening' clouds.--Byron never uses an epithet
vainly,--he is the most accurate, and therefore the most powerful,
of all modern describers. The deepening of the cloud is essentially
necessary to the redness of the orb. Ordinary observers are
continually unaware of this fact, and imagine that a red sun can be
darker than the sky round it! Thus Mr. Gould, though a professed
naturalist, and passing most of his life in the open air, over and
over again, in his 'British Birds,' draws the setting sun dark on
the sky!]

[Footnote 5: 'Like the blood he predicts.'--The astrological power
of the planet Mars was of course ascribed to it in the same
connection with its red color. The reader may be interested to see
the notice, in 'Modern Painters,' of Turner's constant use of the
same symbol; partly an expression of his own personal feeling,
partly, the employment of a symbolic language known to all careful
readers of solar and stellar tradition.

"He was very definitely in the habit of indicating the association
of any subject with circumstances of death, especially the death of
multitudes, by placing it under one of his most deeply _crimsoned_
sunset skies.

"The color of blood is thus plainly taken for the leading tone in
the storm-clouds above the 'Slave-ship.' It occurs with similar
distinctness in the much earlier picture of 'Ulysses and
Polypheme,' in that of 'Napoleon at St. Helena,' and, subdued by
softer hues, in the 'Old Téméraire.'

"The sky of this Goldau is, in its scarlet and crimson, the deepest
in tone of all that I know in Turner's drawings.

"Another feeling, traceable in several of his former works, is an
acute sense of the contrast between the careless interests and idle
pleasures of daily life, and the state of those whose time for
labor, or knowledge, or delight, is passed forever. There is
evidence of this feeling in the introduction of the boys at play in
the churchyard of Kirkby Lonsdale, and the boy climbing for his
kite among the thickets above the little mountain churchyard of
Brignal-bank; it is in the same tone of thought that he has placed
here the two figures fishing, leaning against these shattered
flanks of rock,--the sepulchral stones of the great mountain Field
of Death."]

[Footnote 6: 'Thy lore unto calamity.'--It is, I believe,
recognized by all who have in any degree become interested in the
traditions of Chaldean astrology, that its warnings were
distinct,--its promises deceitful. Horace thus warns Leuconoe
against reading the Babylonian numbers to learn the time of her
death,--he does not imply their promise of previous happiness; and
the continually deceptive character of the Delphic oracle itself,
tempted always rather to fatal than to fortunate conduct, unless
the inquirer were more than wise in his reading. Byron gathers into
the bitter question all the sorrow of former superstition, while in
the lines italicized, just above, he sums in the briefest and
plainest English, all that we yet know, or may wisely think, about
the Sun. It is the '_Burning_ oracle' (other oracles there are by
sound, or feeling, but this by fire) of all that lives; the only
means of our accurate knowledge of the things round us, and that
affect our lives: it is the _fountain_ of all life,--Byron does not
say the _origin_;--the origin of life would be the origin of the
sun itself; but it is the visible _source_ of vital energy, as the
spring is of a stream, though the origin is the sea. "And symbol of
Him who bestows it."--This the sun has always been, to every one
who believes there is a bestower; and a symbol so perfect and
beautiful that it may also be thought of as partly an apocalypse.]

[Footnote 7: 'More beautiful in that variety.'--This line, with the
one italicized beneath, expresses in Myrrha's mind, the feeling
which I said, in the outset, every thoughtful watcher of heaven
necessarily had in those old days; whereas now, the variety is for
the most part, only in modes of disagreeableness; and the vapor,
instead of adding light to the unclouded sky, takes away the aspect
and destroys the functions of sky altogether.]

[Footnote 8: 'Steam out of an engine funnel.'--Compare the sixth
paragraph of Professor Tyndall's 'Forms of Water,' and the
following seventh one, in which the phenomenon of transparent steam
becoming opaque is thus explained. "Every bit of steam shrinks,
when chilled, to a much more minute particle of water. The liquid
particles thus produced form a kind of water dust of exceeding
fineness, which floats in the air, and is called a cloud."

But the author does not tell us, in the first place, what is the
shape or nature of a 'bit of steam,' nor, in the second place, how
the contraction of the individual bits of steam is effected without
any diminution of the whole mass of them, but on the contrary,
during its steady _expansion_; in the third place he assumes that
the particles of water dust are solid, not vesicular, which is not
yet ascertained; in the fourth place, he does not tell us how their
number and size are related to the quantity of invisible moisture
in the air; in the fifth place, he does not tell us how cool
invisible moisture differs from hot invisible moisture; and in the
sixth, he does not tell us why the cool visible moisture stays
while the hot visible moisture melts away. So much for the present
state of 'scientific' information, or at least communicativeness,
on the first and simplest conditions of the problem before us!

In its wider range that problem embraces the total mystery of
volatile power in substance; and of the visible states consequent
on sudden--and presumably, therefore, imperfect--vaporization; as
the smoke of frankincense, or the sacred fume of modern devotion
which now fills the inhabited world, as that of the rose and violet
its deserts. What,--it would be useful to know, is the actual bulk
of an atom of orange perfume?--what of one of vaporized tobacco, or
gunpowder?--and where do _these_ artificial vapors fall back in
beneficent rain? or through what areas of atmosphere exist, as
invisible, though perhaps not innocuous, cloud?

All these questions were put, closely and precisely,
four-and-twenty years ago, in the 1st chapter of the 7th part of
'Modern Painters,' paragraphs 4 to 9, of which I can here allow
space only for the last, which expresses the final difficulties of
the matter better than anything said in this lecture:--

"But farther: these questions of volatility, and visibility, and
hue, are all complicated with those of shape. How is a cloud
outlined? Granted whatever you choose to ask, concerning its
material, or its aspect, its loftiness and luminousness,--how of
its limitation? What hews it into a heap, or spins it into a web?
Cold is usually shapeless, I suppose, extending over large spaces
equally, or with gradual diminution. You cannot have in the open
air, angles, and wedges, and coils, and cliffs, of cold. Yet the
vapor stops suddenly, sharp and steep as a rock, or thrusts itself
across the gates of heaven in likeness of a brazen bar; or braids
itself in and out, and across and across, like a tissue of
tapestry; or falls into ripples, like sand; or into waving shreds
and tongues, as fire. On what anvils and wheels is the vapor
pointed, twisted, hammered, whirled, as the potter's clay? By what
hands is the incense of the sea built up into domes of marble?"]

[Footnote 9: The opposed conditions of the higher and lower orders
of cloud, with the balanced intermediate one, are beautifully seen
on mountain summits of rock or earth. On snowy ones they are far
more complex: but on rock summits there are three distinct forms of
attached cloud in serene weather; the first that of cloud veil
laid over them, and _falling_ in folds through their ravines,
(the obliquely descending clouds of the entering chorus in
Aristophanes); secondly, the ascending cloud, which develops itself
loosely and independently as it rises, and does not attach itself
to the hill-side, while the falling veil cloud clings to it close
all the way down;--and lastly the throned cloud, which rests indeed
on the mountain summit, with its base, but rises high above into
the sky, continually changing its outlines, but holding its seat
perhaps all day long.

These three forms of cloud belong exclusively to calm weather;
attached drift cloud, (see Note 11) can only be formed in the
wind.]

[Footnote 10: 'Glaciers of the Alps,' page 10.--"Let a pound weight
be placed upon a cube of granite" (size of supposed cube not
mentioned), "the cube is flattened, though in an infinitesimal
degree. Let the weight be removed, the cube remains a little
flattened. Let us call the cube thus flattened No. 1. Starting with
No. 1 as a new mass, let the pound weight be laid upon it. We have
a more flattened mass, No. 2.... Apply this to squeezed rocks, to
those, for example, which form the base of an obelisk like the
Matterhorn,--the conclusion seems inevitable _that the mountain is
sinking by its own weight_," etc., etc. Similarly the Nelson statue
must be gradually flattening the Nelson column, and in time
Cleopatra's needle will be as flat as her pincushion?]

[Footnote 11: 'Glaciers of the Alps,' page 146.--"The sun was near
the western horizon, and I remained alone upon the Grat to see his
last beams illuminate the mountains, which, with one exception,
were without a trace of cloud.

"This exception was the Matterhorn, the appearance of which was
extremely instructive. The obelisk appeared to be divided in two
halves by a vertical line, drawn from its summit half-way down, to
the windward of which we had the bare cliffs of the mountain; and
to the left of it a cloud which appeared to cling tenaciously to
the rocks.

"In reality, however, there was no clinging; the condensed vapor
incessantly got away, but it was ever renewed, and thus a river of
cloud had been sent from the mountain over the valley of Aosta. The
wind, in fact, blew lightly up the valley of St. Nicholas, charged
with moisture, and when the air that held it _rubbed against the
cold cone_ of the Matterhorn, the vapor was chilled and
precipitated in his lee."

It is not explained, why the wind was not chilled by rubbing
against any of the neighboring mountains, nor why the cone of the
Matterhorn, mostly of rock, should be colder than cones of snow.
The phenomenon was first described by De Saussure, who gives the
same explanation as Tyndall; and from whom, in the first volume of
'Modern Painters,' I adopted it without sufficient examination.
Afterwards I re-examined it, and showed its fallacy, with respect
to the cap or helmet cloud, in the fifth volume of 'Modern
Painters,' page 124, in the terms given in the subjoined note,[A]
but I still retained the explanation of Saussure for the lee-side
cloud, engraving in plate 69 the modes of its occurrence on the
Aiguille Dru, of which the most ordinary one was afterwards
represented by Tyndall in his 'Glaciers of the Alps,' under the
title of 'Banner-cloud.' Its less imaginative title, in 'Modern
Painters,' of 'Lee-side cloud,' is more comprehensive, for this
cloud forms often under the brows of far-terraced precipices, where
it has no resemblance to a banner. No true explanation of it has
ever yet been given; for the first condition of the problem has
hitherto been unobserved,--namely, that such cloud is constant in
certain states of weather, under precipitous rocks;--but never
developed with distinctness by domes of snow.

[Illustration]

But my former expansion of Saussure's theory is at least closer to
the facts than Professor Tyndall's "rubbing against the rocks," and
I therefore allow room for it here, with its illustrative wood-cut.

"When a moist wind blows in clear weather over a cold summit, it
has not time to get chilled as it approaches the rock, and
therefore the air remains clear, and the sky bright on the windward
side; but under the lee of the peak, there is partly a back eddy,
and partly still air; and in that lull and eddy the wind gets time
to be chilled by the rock, and the cloud appears, as a boiling mass
of white vapor, rising continually with the return current to the
upper edge of the mountain, where it is caught by the straight wind
and partly torn, partly melted away in broken fragments.

"In the accompanying figure, the dark mass represents the mountain
peak, the arrow the main direction of the wind, the curved lines
show the directions of such current and its concentration, and the
dotted line encloses the space in which cloud forms densely,
floating away beyond and above in irregular tongues and flakes."

[Footnote A: "But both Saussure and I ought to have known,--we did
know, but did not think of it,--that the covering or cap-cloud
forms on hot summits as well as cold ones;--that the red and bare
rocks of Mont Pilate, hotter, certainly, after a day's sunshine
than the cold storm-wind which sweeps to them from the Alps,
nevertheless have been renowned for their helmet of cloud, ever
since the Romans watched the cloven summit, gray against the south,
from the ramparts of Vindonissa, giving it the name from which the
good Catholics of Lucerne have warped out their favorite piece of
terrific sacred biography. And both my master and I should also
have reflected that if our theory about its formation had been
generally true, the helmet cloud ought to form on every cold
summit, at the approach of rain, in approximating proportions to
the bulk of the glaciers; which is so far from being the case that
not only (A) the cap-cloud may often be seen on lower summits of
grass or rock, while the higher ones are splendidly clear (which
may be accounted for by supposing the wind containing the moisture
not to have risen so high); but (B) the cap-cloud always shows a
preference for hills of a conical form, such as the Mole or Niesen,
which can have very little power in chilling the air, even
supposing they were cold themselves; while it will entirely refuse
to form huge masses of mountain, which, supposing them of chilly
temperament, must have discomforted the atmosphere in their
neighborhood for leagues."]]

[Footnote 12: See below, on the different uses of the word
'reflection,' note 14, and note that throughout this lecture I use
the words 'aqueous molecules,' alike of water liquid or vaporized,
not knowing under what conditions or at what temperatures
water-dust becomes water-gas; and still less, supposing pure
water-gas blue, and pure air blue, what are the changes in either
which make them what sailors call "dirty "; but it is one of the
worst omissions of the previous lecture, that I have not stated
among the characters of the plague-cloud that it is _always_
dirty,[A] and _never blue under any conditions_, neither when deep
in the distance, nor when in the electric states which produce
sulphurous blues in natural cloud. But see the next note.

[Footnote A: In my final collation of the lectures given at Oxford
last year on the Art of England, I shall have occasion to take
notice of the effect of this character of plague-cloud on our
younger painters, who have perhaps never in their lives seen a
_clean_ sky!]]

[Footnote 13: Black clouds.--For the sudden and extreme local
blackness of thundercloud, see Turner's drawing of Winchelsea,
(England series), and compare Homer, of the Ajaces, in the 4th book
of the Iliad,--(I came on the passage in verifying Mr. Hill's
quotation from the 5th.)

                    "[Greek: hama de nephos eipeto pezôn.
     Hôs d' hot' apo skopiês eiden nephos aipolos anêr
     Erchomenon kata ponton hypo Zephyroio iôês,
     Tô de t', aneuthen eonti, melanteron, êute pissa
     Phainet', ion kata ponton, agei de te lailapa pollên;
     Rhigêsen te idôn, hypo te speos êlase mêla;
     Toiai ham Aiantessin arêithoôn aizêôn
     Dêion es polemon pykinai kinynto phalanges
     Kyaneai,]"

I give Chapman's version--noting only that his _breath_ of
Zephyrus, ought to have been 'cry' or 'roar' of Zephyrus, the
blackness of the cloud being as much connected with the wildness of
the wind as, in the formerly quoted passage, its brightness with
calm of air.

                            "Behind them hid the ground
    A cloud of foot, that seemed to smoke. And as a Goatherd spies
    On some hill top, out of the sea a rainy vapor rise,
    Driven by the breath of Zephyrus, which though far off he rests,
    Comes on as black as pitch, and brings a tempest in his breast
    Whereat he, frighted, drives his herds apace into a den;
    So, darkening earth, with swords and shields, showed these with
        all their men."

I add here Chapman's version of the other passage, which is
extremely beautiful and close to the text, while Pope's is
hopelessly erroneous.

                            "Their ground they still made good,
    And in their silence and set powers, like fair still clouds they stood,
    With which Jove crowns the tops of hills in any quiet day
    When Boreas, and the ruder winds that use to drive away
    Air's _dusky vapors_, being _loose_, in many a whistling gale,
    Are pleasingly bound up and calm, and not a breath exhale."]

[Footnote 14: 'Reflected.'--The reader must be warned in this place
of the difference implied by my use of the word 'cast' in page 11,
and 'reflected' here: that is to say, between light or color which
an object possesses, whatever the angle it is seen at, and the
light which it reverberates at one angle only. The Alps, under the
rose[A] of sunset, are exactly of the same color whether you see
them from Berne or Schaffhausen. But the gilding to our eyes of a
burnished cloud depends, I believe, at least for a measure of its
luster, upon the angle at which the rays incident upon it are
reflected to the eye, just as much as the glittering of the sea
beneath it--or the sparkling of the windows of the houses on the
shore.

Previously, at page 10, in calling the molecules of transparent
atmospheric 'absolutely' unreflective of light, I mean, in like
manner, unreflective from their _surfaces_. Their blue color seen
against a dark ground is indeed a kind of reflection, but one of
which I do not understand the nature. It is seen most simply in
wood smoke, blue against trees, brown against clear light; but in
both cases the color is communicated to (or left in) the
_transmitted_ rays.

So also the green of the sky (p. 13) is said to be given by
transmitted light, yellow rays passing through blue air: much yet
remains to be known respecting translucent colors of this kind;
only let them always be clearly distinguished in our minds from the
firmly possessed color of opaque substances, like grass or
malachite.

[Footnote A: In speaking, at p. 11 of the first lecture, of the
limits of depth in the rose-color cast on snow, I ought to have
noted the greater strength of the tint possible under the light of
the tropics. The following passage, in Mr. Cunningham's 'Natural
History of the Strait of Magellan,' is to me of the greatest
interest, because of the beautiful effect described as seen on the
occasion of his visit to "the small town of Santa Rosa," (near
Valparaiso.) "The day, though clear, had not been sunny, so that,
although the snowy heights of the Andes had been distinctly visible
throughout the greater part of our journey, they had not been
illuminated by the rays of the sun. But now, as we turned the
corner of a street, the chain of the Cordillera suddenly burst on
our gaze in such a blaze of splendor that it almost seemed as if
the windows of heaven had been opened for a moment, permitting a
flood of _crimson_ light to stream forth upon the snow. The sight
was so unexpected, and so transcendently magnificent, that a
breathless silence fell upon us for a few moments, while even the
driver stopped his horses. This deep red glow lasted for three or
four minutes, and then rapidly faded into that lovely rosy hue so
characteristic of snow at sunset among the Alps."]]

[Footnote 15: Diffraction.--Since these passages were written, I
have been led, in conversation with a scientific friend, to doubt
my statement that the colored portions of the lighted clouds were
brighter than the white ones. He was convinced that the resolution
of the rays would diminish their power, and in _thinking_ over the
matter, I am disposed to agree with him, although my impression at
the time has been always that the diffracted colors rose out of the
white, as a rainbow does out of the gray. But whatever the facts
may be, in this respect the statement in the text of the
impossibility of representing diffracted color in painting is
equally true. It may be that the resolved hues are darker than the
white, as colored panes in a window are darker than the colorless
glass, but all are alike in a key which no artifice of painting can
approach.

For the rest, the phenomena of diffraction are not yet arranged
systematically enough to be usefully discussed; some of them
involving the resolution of the light, and others merely its
intensification. My attention was first drawn to them near St.
Laurent, on the Jura mountains, by the vivid reflection, (so it
seemed), of the image of the sun from a particular point of a cloud
in the west, after the sun itself was beneath the horizon: but in
this image there were no prismatic colors, neither is the
constantly seen metamorphosis of pine forests into silver filigree
on ridges behind which the sun is rising or setting, accompanied
with any prismatic hue; the trees become luminous, but not
iridescent: on the other hand, in his great account of his ascent
of Mont Blanc with Mr. Huxley, Professor Tyndall thus describes the
sun's remarkable behavior on that occasion:--"As we attained the
brow which forms the entrance to the Grand Plateau, he _hung his
disk upon a spike of rock_ to our left, and, surrounded by a glory
of interference spectra of the most gorgeous colors, blazed down
upon us." ('Glaciers of the Alps,' p. 76.)

Nothing irritates me more, myself, than having the color of my own
descriptions of phenomena in anywise attributed by the reader to
accidental states either of my mind or body;--but I cannot, for
once, forbear at least the innocent question to Professor Tyndall,
whether the extreme beauty of these 'interference spectra' may not
have been partly owing to the extreme _sobriety_ of the observer?
no refreshment, it appears, having been attainable the night before
at the Grands Mulets, except the beverage diluted with dirty snow,
of which I have elsewhere quoted the Professor's pensive
report,--"my memory of that tea is not pleasant."]

[Footnote 16: 'Either stationary or slow in motion, reflecting
unresolved light.'

The rate of motion is of course not essentially connected with the
method of illumination; their connection, in this instance, needs
explanation of some points which could not be dealt with in the
time of a single lecture.

It is before said, with reserve only, that "a cloud is where it is
seen, and is not where it is not seen." But thirty years ago, in
'Modern Painters,' I pointed out (see the paragraph quoted in note
8th), the extreme difficulty of arriving at the cause of cloud
outline, or explaining how, if we admitted at any given moment the
atmospheric moisture to be generally diffused, it could be chilled
by formal _chills_ into formal clouds. How, for instance, in the
upper cirri, a thousand little chills, alternating with a thousand
little warmths, could stand still as a thousand little feathers.

But the first step to any elucidation of the matter is in the
firmly fixing in our minds the difference between windless clouds,
unaffected by any conceivable local accident, and windy clouds,
affected by some change in their circumstances as they move.

In the sunset at Abbeville, represented in my first diagram, the
air is absolutely calm at the ground surface, and the motion of its
upper currents extremely slow. There is no local reason assignable
for the presence of the cirri above, or of the thundercloud below.
There is no conceivable cause either in the geology, or the moral
character, of the two sides of the town of Abbeville, to explain
why there should be decorative fresco on the sky over the southern
suburb, and a muttering heap of gloom and danger over the northern.
The electric cloud is as calm in motion as the harmless one; it
changes its forms, indeed; but imperceptibly; and, so far as can
be discerned, only at its own will is exalted, and with its own
consent abased.

But in my second diagram are shown forms of vapor sustaining at
every instant all kinds of varying local influences; beneath,
fastened down by mountain attraction, above, flung afar by
distracting winds; here, spread abroad into blanched sheets beneath
the sunshine, and presently gathered into strands of coiled cordage
in the shade. Their total existence is in metamorphosis, and their
every aspect a surprise, or a deceit.]

[Footnote 17: 'Finely comminuted water or _ice_.'

My impression that these clouds were glacial was at once confirmed
by a member of my audience, Dr. John Rae, in conversation after the
lecture, in which he communicated to me the perfectly definite
observations which he has had the kindness to set down with their
dates for me, in the following letter:--

                    "4, ADDISON GARDENS, KENSINGTON, _4th Feb., 1884._

DEAR SIR,--I have looked up my old journal of thirty years ago,
written in pencil because it was impossible to keep ink unfrozen in
the snow-hut in which I passed the winter of 1853-4, at Repulse
Bay, on the Arctic Circle.[A]

On the 1st of February, 1854, I find the following:--

'A beautiful appearance of some cirrus clouds near the sun, the
central part of the cloud being of a fine pink or red, then green,
and pink fringe. This continued for about a quarter of an hour. The
same was observed on the 27th of the month, but not so bright.
Distance of clouds from sun, from 3° to 6°.'

On the 1st February the temperature was 38° below zero, and on the
27th February 26° below.

'On the 23d and 30th (of March) the same splendid appearance of
clouds as mentioned in last month's journal was observed. On the
first of these days, about 10.30 a.m., it was extremely beautiful.
The clouds were about 8° or 10° from the sun, below him and
slightly to the eastward,--having a green fringe all round, then
pink; the center part at first green, and then pink or red.'

The temperature was 21° below zero, Fahrenheit.

There may have been other colors--blue, perhaps--but I merely noted
the most prominent; and what I call green may have been bluish,
although I do not mention this last color in my notes.

From the lowness of the temperature at the time, the clouds _must_
have been frozen moisture.

The phenomenon is by no means common, even in the Arctic zone.

The second beautiful cloud-picture shown this afternoon brought so
visibly to my memory the appearance seen by me as above described,
that I could not avoid remarking upon it.

                         Believe me very truly yours,
                         JOHN RAE." (M.D., F.R.S.)

Now this letter enables me to leave the elements of your problem
for you in very clear terms.

Your sky--altogether--may be composed of one or more of four
things:--

     Molecules of water in warm weather.
     Molecules of ice in cold weather.
     Molecules of water-vapor in warm weather.
     Molecules of ice-vapor in cold weather.

But of the size, distances, or modes of attraction between these
different kinds of particles, I find no definite information
anywhere, except the somewhat vague statement by Sir William
Thomson, that "if a drop of water could be magnified so as to be as
large as the earth, and have a diameter of eight thousand miles,
then a molecule of this water in it would appear _somewhat larger
than a shot_." (What kind of shot?) "_and somewhat smaller than a
cricket-ball_"!

And as I finally review the common accounts given of cloud
formation, I find it quite hopeless for the general reader to deal
with the quantity of points which have to be kept in mind and
severally valued, before he can account for any given phenomena. I
have myself, in many of the passages of 'Modern Painters' before
referred to, conceived of cloud too narrowly as always produced by
_cold_, whereas the temperature of a cloud must continually, like
that of our visible breath in frosty weather, or of the visible
current of steam, or the smoking of a warm lake surface under
sudden frost, be above that of the surrounding atmosphere; and yet
I never remember entering a cloud without being chilled by it, and
the darkness of the plague-wind, unless in electric states of the
air, is always accompanied by deadly chill.

Nor, so far as I can read, has any proper account yet been given of
the balance, in serene air, of the warm air under the cold, in
which the warm air is at once compressed by weight, and expanded by
heat, and the cold air is thinned by its elevation, yet contracted
by its cold. There is indeed no possibility of embracing the
conditions in a single sentence, any more than in a single thought.
But the practical balance is effected in calm air, so that its
lower strata have no tendency to rise, like the air in a fire
balloon, nor its higher strata to fall, unless they congeal into
rain or snow.

I believe it will be an extreme benefit to my younger readers if I
write for them a little 'Grammar of Ice and Air,' collecting the
known facts on all these matters, and I am much minded to put by my
ecclesiastical history for a while, in order to relate what is
legible of the history of the visible Heaven.

[Footnote A: I trust that Dr. Rae will forgive my making the reader
better aware of the real value of this communication by allowing
him to see also the following passage from the kind private letter
by which it was supplemented:--

"Many years in the Hudson's Bay Company's service, I and my men
became educated for Arctic work, in which I was five different
times employed, in two of which expeditions we lived wholly by our
own hunting and fishing for twelve months, once in a stone house
(very disagreeable), and another winter in a snow hut (better),
_without fire of any kind to warm us_. On the first of these
expeditions, 1846-7, my little party, there being no officer but
myself, surveyed seven hundred miles of coast of Arctic America by
a sledge journey, which Parry, Ross, Bach, and Lyon had failed to
accomplish, costing the country about £70,000 or £80,000 at the
lowest computation. The total expense of my little party, including
my own pay, was under fourteen hundred pounds sterling.

"My Arctic work has been recognized by the award of the founder's
gold medal of the Royal Geographical Society (before the completion
of the whole of it)."]]

[Footnote 18: 'You can't get a billiard ball to fall a shivering on
its own account.'--I am under correction in this statement by the
Lucasian professor of Cambridge, with respect to the molecules of
bodies capable of 'epipolizing' light. "Nothing seems more natural
than to suppose that the incident vibrations of the luminiferous
ether produce vibratory movements among the ultimate molecules of
sensitive substances, and that the molecules in return, _swinging
on their own account_, produce vibrations in the luminous ether,
and thus cause the sensation of light. The periodic times of these
vibrations depend upon the periods in which the molecules are
_disposed to swing_." ('On the Changes of Refrangibility of Light,'
p. 549.)

It seems to me a pleasant conclusion, this, of recent science, and
suggestive of a perfectly regenerate theology. The 'Let there be
light' of the former Creation is first expanded into 'Let there be
a disposition of the molecules to swing,' and the destinies of
mankind, no less than the vitality of the universe, depend
thereafter upon this amiable, but perhaps capricious, and at all
events not easily influenced or anticipated, disposition!

Is it not also strange that in a treatise entering into so high
mathematical analysis as that from which I quote, the false word
'swing,' expressing the action of a body liable to continuous
arrest by gravitation, should be employed to signify the
oscillation, wholly unaffected by gravity, of substance in which
the motion once originated, may cease only with the essence of the
body?

It is true that in men of high scientific caliber, such as the
writer in this instance, carelessness in expression does not affect
the security of their conclusions. But in men of lower rank, mental
defects in language indicate fatal flaws in thought. And although
the constant habit to which I owe my (often foolishly praised)
"command of language"--of never allowing a sentence to pass proof
in which I have not considered whether, for the vital word in it, a
better could be found in the dictionary, makes me somewhat morbidly
intolerant of careless diction, it may be taken for an extremely
useful and practical rule, that if a man can think clearly he will
write well, and that no good science was ever written in bad
English. So that, before you consider whether a scientific author
says a true or a false thing, you had better first look if he is
able properly to say _any_thing,--and secondly, whether his conceit
permits him to say anything properly.

Thus, when Professor Tyndall, endeavoring to write poetically of
the sun, tells you that "The Lilies of the field are his
workmanship," you may observe, first, that since the sun is not a
man, nothing that he does is workmanship; while even the figurative
statement that he rejoices _as_ a strong man to run his course, is
one which Professor Tyndall has no intention whatever of admitting.
And you may then observe, in the second place, that, if even in
that figurative sense, the lilies of the field are the sun's
workmanship, in the same sense the lilies of the hothouse are the
stove's workmanship,--and in perfectly logical parallel, you, who
are alive here to listen to me, because you have been warmed and
fed through the winter, are the workmanship of your own
coal-scuttles.

Again, when Mr. Balfour Stewart begins a treatise on the
'Conservation of Energy,' which is to conclude, as we shall see
presently, with the prophecy of its total extinction as far as the
present world is concerned,--by clothing in a "properly scientific
garb," our innocent impression that there is some difference
between the blow of a rifle stock and a rifle ball; he prepares for
the scientific toilet by telling us in italics that "the something
which the rifle ball possesses in contradistinction to the rifle
stock is clearly the power of overcoming resistance," since "it can
penetrate through oak-wood or through water--or (alas! that it
should be so often tried) through the human body; and _this power
of penetration_" (italics now mine) "_is the distinguishing
characteristic of a substance moving with very great velocity_. Let
us define by the term 'Energy,' this power which the rifle ball
possesses of overcoming obstacles, or of doing work."

Now, had Mr. Stewart been a better scholar, he would have felt,
even if he had not known, that the Greek word 'energy' could only
be applied to the living--and of living, with perfect propriety
only to the _mental_, action of animals, and that it could no more
be applied as a 'scientific garb,' to the flight of a rifle ball,
than to the fall of a dead body. And, if he had attained thus much,
even of the science of language, it is just possible that the small
forte and faculty of thought he himself possesses might have been
energized so far as to perceive that the force of all inertly
moving bodies, whether rifle stock, rifle ball, or rolling world,
is under precisely one and the same relation to their weights and
velocities; that the effect of their impact depends--not merely on
their pace, but their constitution; and on the relative forms and
stability of the substances they encounter, and that there is no
more quality of Energy, though much less quality of Art, in the
swiftly penetrating shot, or crushing ball, than in the
deliberately contemplative and administrative puncture by a gnat's
proboscis, or a seamstress' needle.

Mistakes of this kind, beginning with affectations of diction, do
not always invalidate general statements or conclusions,--for a bad
writer often equivocates out of a blunder as he equivocates into
one,--but I have been strict in pointing out the confusions of idea
admitted in scientific books between the movement of a swing, that
of a sounding violin chord, and that of an agitated liquid, because
these confusions have actually enabled Professor Tyndall to keep
the scientific world in darkness as to the real nature of glacier
motion for the last twenty years; and to induce a resultant
quantity of aberration in the scientific mind concerning glacial
erosion, of which another twenty years will scarcely undo the
damage.]

[Footnote 19: 'Force and pace.'--Among the nearer questions which
the careless terminology on which I have dwelt in the above note
has left unsettled, I believe the reader will be surprised, as much
as I am myself, to find that of the mode of impulse in a common
gust of wind! Whence is its strength communicated to it, and how
gathered in it? and what is the difference of manner in the impulse
between compressible gas and incompressible fluid? For instance:
The water at the head of a weir is passing every instant from
slower into quicker motion; but (until broken in the air) the fast
flowing water is just as dense as the slowly flowing water. But a
fan alternately compresses and rarefies the air between it and the
cheek, and the violence of a destructive gust in a gale of wind
means a momentary increase in velocity and density of which I
cannot myself in the least explain,--and find in no book on
dynamics explained,--the mechanical causation.

The following letter, from a friend whose observations on natural
history for the last seven or eight years have been consistently
valuable and instructive to me, will be found, with that subjoined
in the note, in various ways interesting; but especially in its
notice of the inefficiency of ordinary instrumental registry in
such matters:--

                    "6, MOIRA PLACE, SOUTHAMPTON, _Feb. 8th, 1884_.

DEAR MR. RUSKIN,--Some time since I troubled you with a note or two
about sea-birds, etc.... but perhaps I should never have ventured
to trouble you again, had not your lecture on the 'Storm Clouds'
touched a subject which has deeply interested me for years past. I
had, of course, no idea that you had noticed this thing, though I
might have known that, living the life you do, you must have done
so. As for me, it has been a source of perplexity for years: so
much so, that I began to wonder at times whether I was not under
some mental delusion about it, until the strange theatrical
displays, of the last few months, for which I was more or less
prepared, led so many to use their eyes, unmuzzled by brass or
glass, for a time. I know you do not bother, or care much to read
newspapers, but I have taken the liberty of cutting out and
sending a letter of mine, sent on the 1st January to an evening
paper,[A] upon this subject, thinking you might like to know that
one person, at any rate, has seen that strange, bleared look about
the sun, shining so seldom except through a ghastly glare of pale,
persistent haze. May it be that the singular coloring of the
sunsets marks an end of this long period of plague-cloud, and that
in them we have promise of steadier weather? (No: those sunsets
were entirely distinct phenomena, and promised, if anything, only
evil.--R.)

I was glad to see that in your lecture you gave the dependants upon
the instrument-makers a warning. On the 26th I had a heavy
sailing-boat lifted and blown, from where she lay hauled up, a
distance of four feet, which, as the boat has four hundred-weight
of iron upon her keel, gives a wind-gust, or force, not easily
measured by instruments.

                         Believe me, dear Mr. Ruskin,
                                   Yours sincerely,
                                   ROBT. C. LESLIE."

I am especially delighted, in this letter, by my friend's
vigorously accurate expression, eyes "unmuzzled by brass or glass."
I have had occasion continually, in my art-lectures, to dwell on
the great law of human perception and power, that the beauty which
is good for us is prepared for the natural focus of the sight, and
the sounds which are delightful to us for the natural power of the
nerves of the ear; and the art which is admirable in us, is the
exercise of our own bodily powers, and not carving by sand-blast,
nor oratorizing through a speaking trumpet, nor dancing with spring
heels. But more recently, I have become convinced that even in
matters of science, although every added mechanical power has its
proper use and sphere, yet the things which are vital to our
happiness and prosperity can only be known by the rational use and
subtle skill of our natural powers. We may trust the instrument
with the prophecy of storm, or registry of rainfall; but the
conditions of atmospheric change, on which depend the health of
animals and fruitfulness of seeds, can only be discerned by the eye
and the bodily sense.

Take, for simplest and nearest example, this question of the stress
of wind. It is not the actual _power_ that is immeasurable, if only
it would stand to be measured! Instruments could easily now be
invented which would register not only a blast that could lift a
sailing boat, but one that would sink a ship of the line. But,
lucklessly--the blast won't pose to the instrument! nor can the
instrument be adjusted to the blast. In the gale of which my friend
speaks in his next letter, 26th January, a gust came down the hill
above Coniston village upon two old oaks, which were well rooted in
the slate rock, and some fifty or sixty feet high--the one, some
twenty yards below the other. The blast tore the highest out of the
ground, peeling its roots from the rock as one peels an
orange--swept the head of the lower tree away with it in one ruin,
and snapped the two leader branches of the upper one over the
other's stump, as one would break one's cane over some people's
heads, if one got the chance. In wind action of this kind the
amount of actual force used is the least part of the business;--it
is the suddenness of its concentration, and the lifting and
twisting strength, as of a wrestler, which make the blast fatal;
none of which elements of storm-power can be recognized by
mechanical tests. In my friend's next letter, however, he gives us
some evidence of the _consistent_ strength of this same gale, and
of the electric conditions which attended it:--the prefatory notice
of his pet bird I had meant for 'Love's Meinie,' but it will help
us through the grimness of our studies here.

                                   "_March 3d, 1884._

My small blackheaded gull Jack is still flourishing, and the time
is coming when I look for that singularly sudden change in the
plumage of his head which took place last March. I have asked all
my ocean-going friends to note whether these little birds are not
the gulls _par excellence_ of the sea; and so far all I have heard
from them confirms this. It seems almost incredible; but my son, a
sailor, who met that hurricane of the 26th of January, writes to me
to say that out in the Bay of Biscay on the morning after the gale,
'though it was blowing like blazes, I observed some little gulls of
Jacky's species, and they followed us half way across the Bay,
seeming to find shelter under the lee of our ship. Some alighted
now and then, and rested upon the water as if tired.' When one
considers that these birds must have been at sea all that night
somewhere, it gives one a great idea of their strength and
endurance. My son's ship, though a powerful ocean steamer, was for
two whole hours battling head to sea off the Eddystone that night,
and for that time the lead gave no increase of soundings, so that
she could have made no headway during those two hours; while all
the time her yards had the St. Elmo's fire at their ends, looking
as though a blue light was burning at each yard-arm, and this was
about all they could see.

                         Yours sincerely,
                         ROBT. C. LESLIE."

The next letter, from a correspondent with whom I have the most
complete sympathy in some expressions of his postscript which are
yet, I consider, more for my own private ear than for the public
eye, describes one of the more malignant phases of the plague-wind,
which I forgot to notice in my lecture.

                         "BURNHAM, SOMERSET, _February 7th, 1884_.

DEAR SIR,--I read with great interest your first lecture at Oxford
on cloud and wind (very indifferently reported in 'The Times'). You
have given a name to a wind I've known for years. You call it the
plague--I call it the devil-wind: _e. g._, on April 29th, 1882,
morning warmer, then rain storms from east; afternoon, rain
squalls; wind, west by south, rough; barometer falling awfully;
4.30 p.m., tremendous wind.--April 30th, all the leaves of the
trees, all plants black and dead, as if a fiery blast had swept
over them. _All the hedges on windward side black as black tea._

Another devil-wind came towards the end of last summer. The next
day, all the leaves were falling sere and yellow, as if it were
late autumn.

                         I am, dear sir,
                                   Yours faithfully,
                                     A. H. BIRKETT."

I remember both these blights well; they were entirely terrific;
but only sudden maxima of the constant morbific power of this
wind;--which, if Mr. Birkett saw my _personal_ notices of,
intercalated among the scientific ones, he would find alluded to in
terms quite as vigorously damning as he could desire: and the
actual effect of it upon my thoughts and work has been precisely
that which would have resulted from the visible phantom of an evil
spirit, the absolute opponent of the Queen of the Air,--Typhon
against Athena,--in a sense of which I had neither the experience
nor the conception when I wrote the illustrations of the myth of
Perseus in 'Modern Painters.' Not a word of all those explanations
of Homer and Pindar could have been written in weather like that
of the last twelve years; and I am most thankful to have got them
written, before the shadow came, and I could still see what Homer
and Pindar saw. I quote one passage only--Vol. v., p. 141--for the
sake of a similitude which reminds me of one more thing I have to
say here--and a bit of its note--which I think is a precious little
piece, not of word-painting, but of simply told feeling--(_that_,
if people knew it, is my real power).

"On the Yorkshire and Derbyshire hills, when the rain-cloud is low
and much broken, and the steady west wind fills all space with its
strength,[B] the sun-gleams fly like golden vultures; they are
flashes rather than shinings; the dark spaces and the dazzling race
and skim along the acclivities, and dart and _dip from crag to
dell, swallow-like_."

The dipping of the shadows here described of course is caused only
by that of the dingles they cross; but I have not in any of my
books yet dwelt enough on the difference of character between the
dipping and the mounting winds. Our wildest phase of the west wind
here at Coniston is 'swallow-like' with a vengeance, coming down on
the lake in swirls which spurn the spray under them as a fiery
horse does the dust. On the other hand, the softly ascending winds
express themselves in the grace of their cloud motion, as if set to
the continuous music of a distant song.[C]

The reader will please note also that whenever, either in 'Modern
Painters' or elsewhere, I speak of rate of flight in clouds, I am
thinking of it as measured by the horizontal distance overpast in
given time, and not as apparent only, owing to the nearness of the
spectator. All low clouds appear to move faster than high ones, the
pace being supposed equal in both: but when I speak of quick or
slow cloud, it is always with respect to a given altitude. In a
fine summer morning, a cloud will wait for you among the pines,
folded to and fro among their stems, with a branch or two coming
out here, and a spire or two there: you walk through it, and look
back to it. At another time, on the same spot, the fury of
cloud-flood drifts past you like the Rhine at Schaffhausen.

The space even of the doubled lecture does not admit of my entering
into any general statement of the action of the plague-cloud in
Switzerland and Italy; but I must not omit the following notes of
its aspect in the high Alps.

                              "SALLENCHES, _11th September, 1882_.

This morning, at half-past five, the Mont Blanc summit was clear,
and the greater part of the Aiguilles du Plan and Midi clear
dark--all, against pure cirri, lighted beneath by sunrise; the sun
of course not visible yet from the valley.

By seven o'clock, the plague-clouds had formed in _brown_ flakes,
down to the base of the Aiguille de Bionassay; entirely covering
the snowy ranges; the sun, as it rose to us here, shone only for
about ten minutes--gilding in its old glory the range of the
Dorons,--before one had time to look from peak to peak of it, the
plague-cloud formed from the west, hid Mont Joli, and steadily
choked the valley with advancing streaks of dun-colored mist.
Now--twenty minutes to nine--there is not _one ray_ of sunshine on
the whole valley, or on its mountains, from the Forclaz down to
Cluse.

These phenomena are only the sequel of a series of still more
strange and sad conditions of the air, which have continued among
the Savoy Alps for the last eight days, (themselves the sequel of
others yet more general, prolonged, and harmful). But the weather
was perfectly fine at Dijon, and I doubt not at Chamouni, on the
1st of this month. On the 2d, in the evening, I saw, from the Jura,
heavy thunderclouds in the west; on the 3d, the weather broke at
Morez, in hot thunder-showers, with intervals of scorching sun; on
the 4th, 5th, and 6th there was nearly continuous rain at St.
Cergues, the Alps being totally invisible all the time. The sky
cleared on the night of the 6th, and on the 7th I saw from the top
of the Dole all the western plateaux of Jura quite clearly; but
_the entire range of the Alps_, from the Moleson to the Salève, and
all beyond,--snow, crag and hill-side,--were wrapped and buried in
one unbroken gray-brown winding-sheet, of such cloud _as I had
never seen till that day touch an Alpine summit_.

The wind, from the east, (so that it blew _up_ over the edge of the
Dole cliff, and admitted of perfect shelter on the slope to the
west,) was bitter cold, and extremely violent: the sun overhead,
bright enough, and remained so during the afternoon; the
plague-cloud reaching from the Alps only about as far as the
southern shore of the lake of Geneva; but we could not see the
Salève; nor even the north shore, farther than to Morges! I reached
the Col de la Faucille at sunset, when, for a few minutes, the Mont
Blanc and Aiguille Verte showed themselves in dull red light, but
were buried again, before the sun was quite down, in the rising
deluge of cloud-poison. I saw no farther than the Voirons and
Brezon--and scarcely those, during the electric heat of the 9th at
Geneva; and last Saturday and Sunday have been mere whirls and
drifts of indecisive, but always sullen, storm. This morning I saw
the snows clear for the first time, having been, during the whole
past week, on steady watch for them.

I have written that the clouds of the 7th were such as I never
before saw on the Alps. Often, during the past ten years, I have
seen them on my own hills, and in Italy in 1874; but it has always
chanced to be fine weather, or common rain and cold, when I have
been among the snowy chains; and now from the Dole for the first
time I saw the plague-cloud on _them_."

[Footnote A: 'THE LOOK OF THE SKY.

'_To the_ EDITOR _of the_ ST. JAMES'S GAZETTE.

'SIR,--I have been a very constant though not a scientific observer
of the sky for a period of forty years; and I confess to a certain
feeling of astonishment at the way in which the "recent celestial
phenomena" seem to have taken the whole body of scientific
observers by surprise. It would even appear that something like
these extraordinary sunsets was necessary to call the attention of
such observers to what has long been a source of perplexity to a
variety of common folk, like sailors, farmers, and fishermen. But
to such people the look of the weather, and what comes of that
look, is of far more consequence than the exact amount of ozone or
the depth or width of a band of the spectrum.

'Now, to all such observers, including myself, it has been plain
that of late neither the look of the sky nor the character of the
weather has been, as we should say, what it used to be; and those
whose eyes were strong enough to look now and then toward the sun
have noticed a very marked increase of what some would call a
watery look about him, which might perhaps be better expressed as a
white sheen or glare, at times developing into solar halo or mock
suns, as noted in your paper of the 2d of October last year. A
fisherman would describe it as "white and davery-like." So far as
my observation goes, this appearance was only absent here for a
limited period during the present summer, when we had a week or two
of nearly normal weather; the summer before it was seldom absent.

'Again, those whose business or pleasure has depended on the use of
wind-power have all remarked the strange persistence of hard
westerly and easterly winds, the westerly ones at times partaking
of an almost trade-wind-like force and character. The summer of
1882 was especially remarkable for these winds, while each stormy
November has been followed by a period about mid-winter of mild
calm weather with dense fog. During these strong winds in summer
and early autumn the weather would remain bright and sunny, and to
a landsman would be not remarkable in any way, while the barometer
has been little affected by them; but it has been often observed by
those employed on the water that when it ceased blowing half a gale
the sky at once became overcast, with damp weather or rain. This
may all seem common enough to most people; but to those accustomed
to gauge the wind by the number of reefs wanted in a mainsail or
foresail it was not so; and the number of consecutive days when two
or more reefs have been kept tied down during the last few summers
has been remarkable--alternating at times with equally persistent
spells of calm and fog such as we are now passing through. Again,
we have had an unusually early appearance of ice in the Atlantic,
and most abnormal weather over Central Europe; while in a letter I
have just received from an old hand on board a large Australian
clipper, he speaks of heavy gales and big seas off that coast in
almost the height of their summer.

'Now, upon all this, in our season of long twilights, we have
bursting upon us some clear weather; with a display of cloud-forms
or vapor at such an elevation that, looking at them one day through
an opening in the nearer clouds, they seemed so distant as to
resemble nothing but the delicate grain of ivory upon a
billiard-ball. And yet with the fact that two-thirds of this earth
is covered with water, and bearing in mind the effect which a very
small increase of sun-power would have in producing cloud and
lifting it above its normal level for a time, we are asked to
believe that this sheen is all dust of some kind or other, in order
to explain what are now known as the "recent sunsets": though I
venture to think that we shall see more of them yet when the sun
comes our way again.

'At first sight, increased sun-power would seem to mean more
sunshine; but a little reflection would show us that this would not
be for long, while any considerable addition to the sun's power
would be followed by such a vast increase of vapor that we should
only see him, in our latitudes, at very short intervals. I am aware
that all this is most unscientific; but I have read column after
column of explanation written by those who are supposed to know all
about such things, and find myself not a jot the wiser for it. Do
you know anybody who is?--I am, Sir, your obedient servant,

                              'AN UNSCIENTIFIC OBSERVER. (R. LESLIE.)
                              _January 1_.']

[Footnote B: "I have been often at great heights on the Alps in
rough weather, and have seen strong gusts of storm in the plains of
the south. But, to get full expression of the very heart and
meaning of wind, there is no place like a Yorkshire moor. I think
Scottish breezes are thinner, very bleak and piercing, but not
substantial. If you lean on them they will let you fall, but one
may rest against a Yorkshire breeze as one would on a quickset
hedge. I shall not soon forget,--having had the good fortune to
meet a vigorous one on an April morning, between Hawes and Settle,
just on the flat under Wharnside,--the vague sense of wonder _with
which I watched Ingleborough stand without rocking_."]

[Footnote C: Compare Wordsworth's

    "Oh beauteous birds, methinks ye measure
     Your movements to some heavenly tune."

And again--

                         "While the mists,
    Flying and rainy vapors, call out shapes,
    And phantoms from the crags and solid earth,
    As fast as a musician scatters sounds
    Out of an instrument."

And again--

    "The Knight had ridden down from Wensley moor,
     With the slow motion of a summer cloud."]]

[Footnote 20: 'Blasphemy.'--If the reader can refer to my papers on
Fiction in the 'Nineteenth Century,' he will find this word
carefully defined in its Scriptural, and evermore necessary,
meaning,--'Harmful speaking'--not against God only, but against
man, and against all the good works and purposes of Nature. The
word is accurately opposed to 'Euphemy,' the right or well-speaking
of God and His world; and the two modes of speech are those which
going out of the mouth sanctify or defile the man.

Going out of the mouth, that is to say, deliberately and of
purpose. A French postilion's 'Sacr-r-ré'--loud, with the low 'Nom
de Dieu' following between his teeth, is not blasphemy, unless
against his horse;--but Mr. Thackeray's close of his Waterloo
chapter in 'Vanity Fair,' "And all the night long Amelia was
praying for George, who was lying on his face dead with a bullet
through his heart," is blasphemy of the most fatal and subtle kind.

And the universal instinct of blasphemy in the modern vulgar
scientific mind is above all manifested in its love of what is
ugly, and natural inthrallment by the abominable;--so that it is
ten to one if, in the description of a new bird, you learn much
more of it than the enumerated species of vermin that stick to its
feathers; and in the natural history museum of Oxford, humanity has
been hitherto taught, not by portraits of great men, but by the
skulls of cretins.

But the _deliberate_ blasphemy of science, the assertion of its own
virtue and dignity against the always implied, and often asserted,
vileness of all men and--Gods,--heretofore, is the most wonderful
phenomenon, so far as I can read or perceive, that hitherto has
arisen in the always marvelous course of the world's mental
history.

Take, for brief general type, the following 92d paragraph of the
'Forms of Water':--

"But while we thus acknowledge our limits, there is also reason for
wonder at the extent to which Science has mastered the system of
nature. From age to age and from generation to generation, fact has
been added to fact and law to law, the true method and order of the
Universe being thereby more and more revealed. In doing this,
Science has encountered and overthrown various forms of
superstition and deceit, of credulity and imposture. But the world
continually produces weak persons and wicked persons, and as long
as they continue to exist side by side, as they do in this our day,
very debasing beliefs will also continue to infest the world."

The debasing beliefs meant being simply those of Homer, David, and
St. John[A]--as against a modern French gamin's. And what the
results of the intended education of English gamins of every degree
in that new higher theology will be, England is I suppose by this
time beginning to discern.

In the last 'Fors'[B] which I have written, on education of a safer
kind, still possible, one practical point is insisted on
chiefly,--that learning by heart, and repetition with perfect
accent and cultivated voice, should be made quite principal
branches of school discipline up to the time of going to the
university.

And of writings to be learned by heart, among other passages of
indisputable philosophy and perfect poetry, I include certain
chapters of the--now for the most part forgotten--wisdom of
Solomon; and of these, there is one selected portion which I
should recommend not only school-boys and girls, but persons of
every age, if they don't know it, to learn forthwith, as the
shortest summary of Solomon's wisdom;--namely, the seventeenth
chapter of Proverbs, which being only twenty-eight verses long, may
be fastened in the dullest memory at the rate of a verse a day in
the shortest month of the year. Out of the twenty-eight verses, I
will read you seven, for example of their tenor,--the last of the
seven I will with your good leave dwell somewhat upon. You have
heard the verses often before, but probably without remembering
that they are all in this concentrated chapter.

1. Verse 1.--Better is a dry morsel, and quietness therewith, than
a house full of good eating, with strife.

(Remember, in reading this verse, that though England has chosen
the strife, and set every man's hand against his neighbor, her
house is not yet so full of good eating as she expected, even
though she gets half of her victuals from America.)

2. Verse 3.--The fining pot is for silver, the furnace for gold,
but the Lord tries the heart.

(Notice the increasing strength of trial for the more precious
thing: only the melting-pot for the silver--the fierce furnace for
the gold--but the Fire of the Lord for the heart.)

3. Verse 4.--A wicked doer giveth heed to false lips.

(That means, for _you_, that, intending to live by usury and
swindling, you read Mr. Adam Smith and Mr. Stuart Mill, and other
such political economists.)

4. Verse 5.--Whoso mocketh the poor, reproacheth his Maker.

(Mocketh,--by saying that his poverty is his fault, no less than
his misfortune,--England's favorite theory now-a-days.)

5. Verse 12.--Let a bear robbed of her whelps meet a man, rather
than a fool in his folly.

(Carlyle is often now accused of false scorn in his calling the
passengers over London Bridge, "mostly fools,"--on the ground that
men are only to be justly held foolish if their intellect is under,
as only wise when it is above, the average. But the reader will
please observe that the essential function of modern education is
to develop what capacity of mistake a man has. Leave him at his
forge and plow,--and those tutors teach him his true value, indulge
him in no error, and provoke him to no vice. But take him up to
London,--give him her papers to read, and her talk to hear,--and it
is fifty to one you send him presently on a fool's errand over
London Bridge.)

6. Now listen, for this verse is the question you have mainly to
ask yourselves about your beautiful all-over-England system of
competitive examination:--

Verse 16. Wherefore is there a price in the hand of a fool to get
wisdom, seeing he hath no heart to it?

(You know perfectly well it isn't the wisdom you want, but the
"station in life,"--and the money!)

7. Lastly, Verse 7.--Wisdom is before him that hath understanding,
but the eyes of a fool are in the ends of the earth.

"And in the beginnings of it"! Solomon would have written, had he
lived in our day; but we will be content with the ends at present.
No scientific people, as I told you at first, have taken any notice
of the more or less temporary phenomena of which I have to-night
given you register. But, from the constant arrangements of the
universe, the same respecting which the thinkers of former time
came to the conclusion that they were essentially good, and to end
in good, the modern speculator arrives at the quite opposite and
extremely uncomfortable conclusion that they are essentially evil,
and to end--in nothing.

And I have here a volume,[C] before quoted, by a very foolish and
very lugubrious author, who in his concluding chapter gives
us,--founded, you will observe, on a series of 'ifs,'--the latest
scientific views concerning the order of creation. "We have spoken
already about a medium pervading space"--this is the Scientific
God, you observe, differing from the unscientific one, in that the
purest in heart cannot see--nor the softest in heart feel--this
spacious Deity--a _Medium_, pervading space--"the office of which"
(italics all mine) "appears to be to _degrade_ and ultimately
_extinguish_, all differential motion. It has been well pointed out
by Thomson, that, looked at _in this light_, the universe is a
system that had a beginning and must have an end, for a process of
degradation cannot be eternal. If we could view the Universe as a
candle not lit, then it is perhaps conceivable to regard it as
having been always in existence; but if we regard it rather as a
candle that has been lit, we become absolutely certain that it
cannot have been burning from eternity, and that a time will come
when it will cease to burn. We are led to look to a beginning in
which the particles of matter were in a diffuse chaotic state, but
endowed with the power of gravitation; and we are led to look to an
end in which the whole Universe will be one equally heated inert
mass, _and from which everything like life, or motion, or beauty,
will have utterly gone away_."

Do you wish me to congratulate you on this extremely cheerful
result of telescopic and microscopic observation, and so at once
close my lecture? or may I venture yet to trespass on your time by
stating to you any of the more comfortable views held by persons
who did not regard the universe in what my author humorously calls
"this _light_"?

In the peculiarly characteristic notice with which the 'Daily News'
honored my last week's lecture, that courteous journal charged me,
in the metaphorical term now classical on Exchange, with "hedging,"
to conceal my own opinions. The charge was not prudently chosen,
since, of all men now obtaining any portion of popular regard, I am
pretty well known to be precisely the one who cares least either
for hedge or ditch, when he chooses to go across country. It is
certainly true that I have not the least mind to pin my heart on my
sleeve, for the daily daw, or nightly owl, to peck at; but the
essential reason for my not telling you my own opinions on this
matter is--that I do not consider them of material consequence to
you.

It _might_ possibly be of some advantage for you to know what--were
he now living, Orpheus would have thought, or Æschylus, or a Daniel
come to judgment, or John the Baptist, or John the Son of Thunder;
but what either you, or I, or any other Jack or Tom of us all,
think,--even if we knew what to think,--is of extremely small
moment either to the Gods, the clouds, or ourselves.

Of myself, however, if you care to hear it, I will tell you thus
much: that had the weather when I was young been such as it is now,
no book such as 'Modern Painters' ever would or _could_ have been
written; for every argument, and every sentiment in that book, was
founded on the personal experience of the beauty and blessing of
nature, all spring and summer long; and on the then demonstrable
fact that over a great portion of the world's surface the air and
the earth were fitted to the education of the spirit of man as
closely as a school-boy's primer is to his labor, and as gloriously
as a lover's mistress is to his eyes.

That harmony is now broken, and broken the world round: fragments,
indeed, of what existed still exist, and hours of what is past
still return; but month by month the darkness gains upon the day,
and the ashes of the Antipodes glare through the night.[D]

What consolation, or what courage, through plague, danger, or
darkness, you can find in the conviction that you are nothing more
than brute beasts driven by brute forces, your other tutors can
tell you--not I: but _this_ I can tell you--and with the authority
of all the masters of thought since time was time,--that, while by
no manner of vivisection you can learn what a _Beast_ is, by only
looking into your own hearts you may know what a _Man_ is,--and
know that his only true happiness is to live in Hope of something
to be won by him, in Reverence of something to be worshiped by him,
and in Love of something to be cherished by him, and cherished--forever.

Having these instincts, his only rational conclusion is that the
objects which can fulfill them may be by his effort gained, and by
his faith discerned; and his only earthly wisdom is to accept the
united testimony of the men who have sought these things in the way
they were commanded. Of whom no single one has ever said that his
obedience or his faith had been vain, or found himself cast out
from the choir of the living souls, whether here, or departed, for
whom the song was written:--

    God be merciful unto us, and bless us, and cause His face to shine
        upon us;
    That Thy way may be known upon earth, Thy saving health among all
        nations.

    Oh let the nations rejoice and sing for joy, for Thou shalt judge
        the people righteously and govern the nations upon earth.
    _Then_ shall the earth yield her increase, and God, even our own God,
        shall bless us.
    God shall bless us, and all the ends of the earth shall fear Him.

[Footnote A: With all who died in Faith, not having received the
Promises, nor--according to your modern teachers--ever to receive.]

[Footnote B: Hence to the end the text is that read in termination
of the lecture on its second delivery, only with an added word or
two of comment on Proverbs xvii.]

[Footnote C: 'The Conservation of Energy.' King and Co., 1873.]

[Footnote D: Written under the impression that the lurid and
prolonged sunsets of last autumn had been proved to be connected
with the flight of volcanic ashes. This has been since, I hear,
disproved again. Whatever their cause, those sunsets were, in the
sense in which I myself use the word, altogether 'unnatural' and
terrific: but they have no connection with the far more fearful,
because protracted and increasing, power of the Plague-wind. The
letter from White's 'History of Selborne,' quoted by the Rev. W. R.
Andrews in his letter to the 'Times,' (dated January 8th) seems to
describe aspects of the sky like these of 1883, just a hundred
years before, in 1783: and also some of the circumstances noted,
especially the variation of the wind to all quarters without
alteration in the air, correspond with the character of the
plague-wind; but the fog of 1783 made the sun dark, with
iron-colored rays--not pale, with blanching rays. I subjoin Mr.
Andrews' letter, extremely valuable in its collation of the records
of simultaneous volcanic phenomena; praying the reader also to
observe the instantaneous acknowledgment, by the true 'Naturalist,'
of horror in the violation of beneficent natural law.

"THE RECENT SUNSETS AND VOLCANIC ERUPTIONS.

"SIR,--It may, perhaps, be interesting at the present time, when so
much attention has been given to the late brilliant sunsets and
sunrises, to be reminded that almost identically the same
appearances were observed just a hundred years ago.

Gilbert White writes in the year 1783, in his 109th letter,
published in his 'Natural History of Selborne':--

'The summer of the year 1783 was an amazing and portentous one, and
full of horrible phenomena; for besides the alarming meteors and
tremendous thunderstorms that affrighted and distressed the
different counties of this kingdom, the peculiar haze or smoky fog
that prevailed for many weeks in this island and in every part of
Europe, and even beyond its limits, was a most extraordinary
appearance, unlike anything known within the memory of man. By my
journal I find that I had noticed this strange occurrence from June
23d to July 20th inclusive, during which period the wind varied to
every quarter without making any alteration in the air. The sun at
noon looked as black as a clouded moon, and shed a ferruginous
light on the ground and floors of rooms, but was particularly lurid
and blood-colored at rising and setting. The country people began
to look with a superstitious awe at the red lowering aspect of the
sun; and, indeed, there was reason for the most enlightened person
to be apprehensive, for all the while Calabria and part of the Isle
of Sicily were torn and convulsed with earthquakes, and about that
juncture a volcano sprang out of the sea on the coast of Norway.'

Other writers also mention volcanic disturbances in this same year,
1783. We are told by Lyell and Geikie, that there were great
volcanic eruptions in and near Iceland. A submarine volcano burst
forth in the sea, thirty miles southwest of Iceland, which ejected
so much pumice that the ocean was covered with this substance, to
the distance of 150 miles, and ships were considerably impeded in
their course; and a new island was formed, from which fire and
smoke and pumice were emitted.

Besides this submarine eruption, the volcano Skaptar-Jökull, on the
mainland, on June 11th, 1783, threw out a torrent of lava, so
immense as to surpass in magnitude the bulk of Mont Blanc, and
ejected so vast an amount of fine dust, that the atmosphere over
Iceland continued loaded with it for months afterwards. It fell in
such quantities over parts of Caithness--a distance of 600
miles--as to destroy the crops, and that year is still spoken of by
the inhabitants as the year of 'the ashie.'

These particulars are gathered from the text-books of Lyell and
Geikie.

I am not aware whether the coincidence in time of the Icelandic
eruptions, and of the peculiar appearance of the sun, described by
Gilbert White, has yet been noticed; but this coincidence may very
well be taken as some little evidence towards explaining the
connection between the recent beautiful sunsets and the tremendous
volcanic explosion of the Isle of Krakatoa in August last.

               W. R. ANDREWS, F. G. S.
               Teffont Ewyas Rectory, Salisbury, January 8th."]]




THE TWO PATHS

By John Ruskin, M.A.




CONTENTS.


THE TWO PATHS.


LECTURE I.
THE DETERIORATIVE POWER OF CONVENTIONAL ART OVER NATIONS

LECTURE II.
THE UNITY OF ART

LECTURE III.
MODERN MANUFACTURE AND DESIGN

LECTURE IV.
THE INFLUENCE OF IMAGINATION IN ARCHITECTURE

LECTURE V.
THE WORK OF IRON, IN NATURE, ART, AND POLICY

APPENDICES





LIST OF ILLUSTRATIONS.


THE TWO PATHS.

THE IDEAL OF AN ANGEL
THE SERPENT BEGUILING EVE
CONTRAST
SYMMETRY
ORNAMENT
CLASSICAL ARCHITECTURE
CENTREPIECE OF BALCONY
GENERAL EFFECT OF MASSES
PROFILE
TEETH OF THE BORDER
BORDER AT THE SIDE OF BALCONY
OUTLINE OF RETRACTED LEAVES




PREFACE.


The following addresses, though spoken at different times, are
intentionally connected in subject; their aim being to set one or two
main principles of art in simple light before the general student, and
to indicate their practical bearing on modern design. The law which it
has been my effort chiefly to illustrate is the dependence of all noble
design, in any kind, on the sculpture or painting of Organic Form.

This is the vital law; lying at the root of all that I have ever tried
to teach respecting architecture or any other art. It is also the law
most generally disallowed.

I believe this must be so in every subject. We are all of us willing
enough to accept dead truths or blunt ones; which can be fitted
harmlessly into spare niches, or shrouded and coffined at once out of
the way, we holding complacently the cemetery keys, and supposing we
have learned something. But a sapling truth, with earth at its root and
blossom on its branches; or a trenchant truth, that can cut its way
through bars and sods; most men, it seems to me, dislike the sight or
entertainment of, if by any means such guest or vision may be avoided.
And, indeed, this is no wonder; for one such truth, thoroughly
accepted, connects itself strangely with others, and there is no saying
what it may lead us to.

And thus the gist of what I have tried to teach about architecture has
been throughout denied by my architect readers, even when they thought
what I said suggestive in other particulars. "Anything but that. Study
Italian Gothic?--perhaps it would be as well: build with pointed
arches?--there is no objection: use solid stone and well-burnt brick?--
by all means: but--learn to carve or paint organic form ourselves! How
can such a thing be asked? We are above all that. The carvers and painters
are our servants--quite subordinate people. They ought to be glad if we
leave room for them."

Well: on that it all turns. For those who will not learn to carve or
paint, and think themselves greater men because they cannot, it is
wholly wasted time to read any words of mine; in the truest and
sternest sense they can read no words of mine; for the most familiar I
can use--"form," "proportion," "beauty," "curvature," "colour"--are
used in a sense which by no effort I can communicate to such readers;
and in no building that I praise, is the thing that I praise it for,
visible to them.

And it is the more necessary for me to state this fully; because so-
called Gothic or Romanesque buildings are now rising every day around
us, which might be supposed by the public more or less to embody the
principles of those styles, but which embody not one of them, nor any
shadow or fragment of them; but merely serve to caricature the noble
buildings of past ages, and to bring their form into dishonour by
leaving out their soul.

The following addresses are therefore arranged, as I have just stated,
to put this great law, and one or two collateral ones, in less
mistakeable light, securing even in this irregular form at least
clearness of assertion. For the rest, the question at issue is not one
to be decided by argument, but by experiment, which if the reader is
disinclined to make, all demonstration must be useless to him.

The lectures are for the most part printed as they were read, mending
only obscure sentences here and there. The parts which were trusted to
extempore speaking are supplied, as well as I can remember (only with
an addition here and there of things I forgot to say), in the words, or
at least the kind of words, used at the time; and they contain, at all
events, the substance of what I said more accurately than hurried
journal reports. I must beg my readers not in general to trust to such,
for even in fast speaking I try to use words carefully; and any
alteration of expression will sometimes involve a great alteration in
meaning. A little while ago I had to speak of an architectural design,
and called it "elegant," meaning, founded on good and well "elected"
models; the printed report gave "excellent" design (that is to say,
design _excellingly_ good), which I did not mean, and should, even
in the most hurried speaking, never have said.

The illustrations of the lecture on iron were sketches made too roughly
to be engraved, and yet of too elaborate subjects to allow of my
drawing them completely. Those now substituted will, however, answer
the purpose nearly as well, and are more directly connected with the
subjects of the preceding lectures; so that I hope throughout the
volume the student will perceive an insistance upon one main truth, nor
lose in any minor direction of inquiry the sense of the responsibility
which the acceptance of that truth fastens upon him; responsibility for
choice, decisive and conclusive, between two modes of study, which
involve ultimately the development, or deadening, of every power he
possesses. I have tried to hold that choice clearly out to him, and to
unveil for him to its farthest the issue of his turning to the right
hand or the left. Guides he may find many, and aids many; but all these
will be in vain unless he has first recognised the hour and the point
of life when the way divides itself, one way leading to the Olive
mountains--one to the vale of the Salt Sea. There are few cross roads,
that I know of, from one to the other. Let him pause at the parting of
THE TWO PATHS.




THE TWO PATHS


_BEING_

LECTURES ON ART, AND ITS APPLICATION TO DECORATION AND
MANUFACTURE DELIVERED IN 1858-9.




LECTURE I.

THE DETERIORATIVE POWER OF CONVENTIONAL ART OVER
NATIONS.


_An Inaugural Lecture, Delivered at the Kensington Museum,
January, 1858._

[Footnote: A few introductory words, in which, at the opening of this
lecture, I thanked the Chairman (Mr. Cockerell), for his support on the
occasion, and asked his pardon for any hasty expressions in my
writings, which might have seemed discourteous towards him, or other
architects whose general opinions were opposed to mine, may be found by
those who care for preambles, not much misreported, in the _Building
Chronicle;_ with such comments as the genius of that journal was
likely to suggest to it.]


As I passed, last summer, for the first time, through the north of
Scotland, it seemed to me that there was a peculiar painfulness in its 
scenery, caused by the non-manifestation of the powers of human art. I
had never travelled in, nor even heard or conceived of such a country
before; nor, though I had passed much of my life amidst mountain
scenery in the south, was I before aware how much of its charm depended
on the little gracefulnesses and tendernesses of human work, which are
mingled with the beauty of the Alps, or spared by their desolation. It
is true that the art which carves and colours the front of a Swiss
cottage is not of any very exalted kind; yet it testifies to the
completeness and the delicacy of the faculties of the mountaineer; it
is true that the remnants of tower and battlement, which afford footing
to the wild vine on the Alpine promontory, form but a small part of the
great serration of its rocks; and yet it is just that fragment of their
broken outline which gives them their pathetic power, and historical
majesty. And this element among the wilds of our own country I found
wholly wanting. The Highland cottage is literally a heap of gray
stones, choked up, rather than roofed over, with black peat and
withered heather; the only approach to an effort at decoration consists
in the placing of the clods of protective peat obliquely on its roof,
so as to give a diagonal arrangement of lines, looking somewhat as if
the surface had been scored over by a gigantic claymore.

And, at least among the northern hills of Scotland, elements of more
ancient architectural interest are equally absent. The solitary peel-
house is hardly discernible by the windings of the stream; the roofless
aisle of the priory is lost among the enclosures of the village; and
the capital city of the Highlands, Inverness, placed where it might
ennoble one of the sweetest landscapes, and by the shore of one of the
loveliest estuaries in the world;--placed between the crests of the
Grampians and the flowing of the Moray Firth, as if it were a jewel
clasping the folds of the mountains to the blue zone of the sea,--is
only distinguishable from a distance by one architectural feature, and
exalts all the surrounding landscape by no other associations than
those which can be connected with its modern castellated gaol.

While these conditions of Scottish scenery affected me very painfully,
it being the first time in my life that I had been in any country
possessing no valuable monuments or examples of art, they also forced
me into the consideration of one or two difficult questions respecting
the effect of art on the human mind; and they forced these questions
upon me eminently for this reason, that while I was wandering
disconsolately among the moors of the Grampians, where there was no art
to be found, news of peculiar interest was every day arriving from a
country where there was a great deal of art, and art of a delicate
kind, to be found. Among the models set before you in this institution,
and in the others established throughout the kingdom for the teaching
of design, there are, I suppose, none in their kind more admirable than
the decorated works of India. They are, indeed, in all materials
capable of colour, wool, marble, or metal, almost inimitable in their
delicate application of divided hue, and fine arrangement of fantastic
line. Nor is this power of theirs exerted by the people rarely, or
without enjoyment; the love of subtle design seems universal in the
race, and is developed in every implement that they shape, and every
building that they raise; it attaches itself with the same intensity,
and with the same success, to the service of superstition, of pleasure
or of cruelty; and enriches alike, with one profusion on enchanted
iridescence, the dome of the pagoda, the fringe of the girdle and the
edge of the sword.

So then you have, in these two great populations, Indian and Highland--
in the races of the jungle and of the moor--two national capacities
distinctly and accurately opposed. On the one side you have a race
rejoicing in art, and eminently and universally endowed with the gift
of it; on the other you have a people careless of art, and apparently
incapable of it, their utmost effort hitherto reaching no farther than
to the variation of the positions of the bars of colour in square
chequers. And we are thus urged naturally to enquire what is the effect
on the moral character, in each nation, of this vast difference in
their pursuits and apparent capacities? and whether those rude chequers
of the tartan, or the exquisitely fancied involutions of the Cashmere,
fold habitually over the noblest hearts? We have had our answer. Since
the race of man began its course of sin on this earth, nothing has ever
been done by it so significative of all bestial, and lower than bestial
degradation, as the acts the Indian race in the year that has just
passed by. Cruelty as fierce may indeed have been wreaked, and
brutality as abominable been practised before, but never under like
circumstances; rage of prolonged war, and resentment of prolonged
oppression, have made men as cruel before now; and gradual decline into
barbarism, where no examples of decency or civilization existed around
them, has sunk, before now, isolated populations to the lowest level of
possible humanity. But cruelty stretched to its fiercest against the
gentle and unoffending, and corruption festered to its loathsomest in
the midst of the witnessing presence of a disciplined civilization,--
these we could not have known to be within the practicable compass of
human guilt, but for the acts of the Indian mutineer. And, as thus, on
the one hand, you have an extreme energy of baseness displayed by these
lovers of art; on the other,--as if to put the question into the
narrowest compass--you have had an extreme energy of virtue displayed
by the despisers of art. Among all the soldiers to whom you owe your
victories in the Crimea, and your avenging in the Indies, to none are
you bound by closer bonds of gratitude than to the men who have been
born and bred among those desolate Highland moors. And thus you have
the differences in capacity and circumstance between the two nations,
and the differences in result on the moral habits of two nations, put
into the most significant--the most palpable--the most brief
opposition. Out of the peat cottage come faith, courage, self-
sacrifice, purity, and piety, and whatever else is fruitful in the work
of Heaven; out of the ivory palace come treachery, cruelty, cowardice,
idolatry, bestiality,--whatever else is fruitful in the work of Hell.

But the difficulty does not close here. From one instance, of however
great apparent force, it would be wholly unfair to gather any general
conclusion--wholly illogical to assert that because we had once found
love of art connected with moral baseness, the love of art must be the
general root of moral baseness; and equally unfair to assert that,
because we had once found neglect of art coincident with nobleness of
disposition, neglect of art must be always the source or sign of that
nobleness. But if we pass from the Indian peninsula into other
countries of the globe; and from our own recent experience, to the
records of history, we shall still find one great fact fronting us, in
stern universality--namely, the apparent connection of great success in
art with subsequent national degradation. You find, in the first place,
that the nations which possessed a refined art were always subdued by
those who possessed none: you find the Lydian subdued by the Mede; the
Athenian by the Spartan; the Greek by the Roman; the Roman by the Goth;
the Burgundian by the Switzer: but you find, beyond this--that even
where no attack by any external power has accelerated the catastrophe
of the state, the period in which any given people reach their highest
power in art is precisely that in which they appear to sign the warrant
of their own ruin; and that, from the moment in which a perfect statue
appears in Florence, a perfect picture in Venice, or a perfect fresco
in Rome, from that hour forward, probity, industry, and courage seem to
be exiled from their walls, and they perish in a sculpturesque
paralysis, or a many-coloured corruption.

But even this is not all. As art seems thus, in its delicate form, to
be one of the chief promoters of indolence and sensuality,--so, I need
hardly remind you, it hitherto has appeared only in energetic
manifestation when it was in the service of superstition. The four
greatest manifestations of human intellect which founded the four
principal kingdoms of art, Egyptian, Babylonian, Greek, and Italian,
were developed by the strong excitement of active superstition in the
worship of Osiris, Belus, Minerva, and the Queen of Heaven. Therefore,
to speak briefly, it may appear very difficult to show that art has
ever yet existed in a consistent and thoroughly energetic school,
unless it was engaged in the propagation of falsehood, or the
encouragement of vice.

And finally, while art has thus shown itself always active in the
service of luxury and idolatry, it has also been strongly directed to
the exaltation of cruelty. A nation which lives a pastoral and innocent
life never decorates the shepherd's staff or the plough-handle, but
races who live by depredation and slaughter nearly always bestow
exquisite ornaments on the quiver, the helmet, and the spear.

Does it not seem to you, then, on all these three counts, more than
questionable whether we are assembled here in Kensington Museum to any
good purpose? Might we not justly be looked upon with suspicion and
fear, rather than with sympathy, by the innocent and unartistical
public? Are we even sure of ourselves? Do we know what we are about?
Are we met here as honest people? or are we not rather so many
Catilines assembled to devise the hasty degradation of our country, or,
like a conclave of midnight witches, to summon and send forth, on new
and unexpected missions, the demons of luxury, cruelty, and
superstition?

I trust, upon the whole, that it is not so: I am sure that Mr. Redgrave
and Mr. Cole do not at all include results of this kind in their
conception of the ultimate objects of the institution which owes so
much to their strenuous and well-directed exertions. And I have put
this painful question before you, only that we may face it thoroughly,
and, as I hope, out-face it. If you will give it a little sincere
attention this evening, I trust we may find sufficiently good reasons
for our work, and proceed to it hereafter, as all good workmen should
do, with clear heads, and calm consciences.

To return, then, to the first point of difficulty, the relations
between art and mental disposition in India and Scotland. It is quite
true that the art of India is delicate and refined. But it has one
curious character distinguishing it from all other art of equal merit
in design--_it never represents a natural fact_. It either forms
its compositions out of meaningless fragments of colour and flowings of
line; or if it represents any living creature, it represents that
creature under some distorted and monstrous form. To all the facts and
forms of nature it wilfully and resolutely opposes itself; it will not
draw a man, but an eight-armed monster; it will not draw a flower, but
only a spiral or a zigzag.

It thus indicates that the people who practise it are cut off from all
possible sources of healthy knowledge or natural delight; that they
have wilfully sealed up and put aside the entire volume of the world,
and have got nothing to read, nothing to dwell upon, but that
imagination of the thoughts of their hearts, of which we are told that
"it is only evil continually." Over the whole spectacle of creation
they have thrown a veil in which there is no rent. For them no star
peeps through the blanket of the dark--for them neither their heaven
shines nor their mountains rise--for them the flowers do not blossom--
for them the creatures of field and forest do not live. They lie bound
in the dungeon of their own corruption, encompassed only by doleful
phantoms, or by spectral vacancy.

Need I remind you what an exact reverse of this condition of mind, as
respects the observance of nature, is presented by the people whom we
have just been led to contemplate in contrast with the Indian race? You
will find upon reflection, that all the highest points of the Scottish
character are connected with impressions derived straight from the
natural scenery of their country. No nation has ever before shown, in
the general tone of its language--in the general current of its
literature--so constant a habit of hallowing its passions and
confirming its principles by direct association with the charm, or
power, of nature. The writings of Scott and Burns--and yet more, of the
far greater poets than Burns who gave Scotland her traditional
ballads,--furnish you in every stanza--almost in every line--with
examples of this association of natural scenery with the passions;
[Footnote: The great poets of Scotland, like the great poets of all
other countries, never write dissolutely, either in matter or method;
but with stern and measured meaning in every syllable. Here's a bit of
first-rate work for example:

                      "Tweed said to Till,
                      'What gars ye rin sae still?'
                       Till said to Tweed,
                      'Though ye rin wi' speed,
                       And I rin slaw,
                       Whar ye droon ae man,
                       I droon twa.'"]

but an instance of its farther connection with moral principle struck
me forcibly just at the time when I was most lamenting the absence of
art among the people. In one of the loneliest districts of Scotland,
where the peat cottages are darkest, just at the western foot of that
great mass of the Grampians which encircles the sources of the Spey and
the Dee, the main road which traverses the chain winds round the foot
of a broken rock called Crag, or Craig Ellachie. There is nothing
remarkable in either its height or form; it is darkened with a few
scattered pines, and touched along its summit with a flush of heather;
but it constitutes a kind of headland, or leading promontory, in the
group of hills to which it belongs--a sort of initial letter of the
mountains; and thus stands in the mind of the inhabitants of the
district, the Clan Grant, for a type of their country, and of the
influence of that country upon themselves. Their sense of this is
beautifully indicated in the war-cry of the clan, "Stand fast, Craig
Ellachie." You may think long over those few words without exhausting
the deep wells of feeling and thought contained in them--the love of
the native land, the assurance of their faithfulness to it; the subdued
and gentle assertion of indomitable courage--I _may_ need to be
told to stand, but, if I do, Craig Ellachie does. You could not but
have felt, had you passed beneath it at the time when so many of
England's dearest children were being defended by the strength of heart
of men born at its foot, how often among the delicate Indian palaces,
whose marble was pallid with horror, and whose vermilion was darkened
with blood, the remembrance of its rough grey rocks and purple heaths
must have risen before the sight of the Highland soldier; how often the
hailing of the shot and the shriek of battle would pass away from his
hearing, and leave only the whisper of the old pine branches--"Stand 
fast, Craig Ellachie!"

You have, in these two nations, seen in direct opposition the effects
on moral sentiment of art without nature, and of nature without art.
And you see enough to justify you in suspecting--while, if you choose
to investigate the subject more deeply and with other examples, you
will find enough to justify you in _concluding_--that art,
followed as such, and for its own sake, irrespective of the
interpretation of nature by it, is destructive of whatever is best and 
noblest in humanity; but that nature, however simply observed, or
imperfectly known, is, in the degree of the affection felt for it,
protective and helpful to all that is noblest in humanity.

You might then conclude farther, that art, so far as it was devoted to
the record or the interpretation of nature, would be helpful and
ennobling also.

And you would conclude this with perfect truth. Let me repeat the
assertion distinctly and solemnly, as the first that I am permitted to
make in this building, devoted in a way so new and so admirable to the
service of the art-students of England--Wherever art is practised for
its own sake, and the delight of the workman is in what he _does_
and _produces_, instead of what he _interprets_ or _exhibits_,
--there art has an influence of the most fatal kind on brain and heart,
and it issues, if long so pursued, in the _destruction both of intellectual
power_ and _moral principal_; whereas art, devoted humbly and self-
forgetfully to the clear statement and record of the facts of the universe,
is always helpful and beneficent to mankind, full of comfort, strength,
and salvation.

Now, when you were once well assured of this, you might logically infer
another thing, namely, that when Art was occupied in the function in
which she was serviceable, she would herself be strengthened by the
service, and when she was doing what Providence without doubt intended
her to do, she would gain in vitality and dignity just as she advanced
in usefulness. On the other hand, you might gather, that when her
agency was distorted to the deception or degradation of mankind, she
would herself be equally misled and degraded--that she would be checked
in advance, or precipitated in decline.

And this is the truth also; and holding this clue you will easily and
justly interpret the phenomena of history. So long as Art is steady in
the contemplation and exhibition of natural facts, so long she herself
lives and grows; and in her own life and growth partly implies, partly
secures, that of the nation in the midst of which she is practised. But
a time has always hitherto come, in which, having thus reached a
singular perfection, she begins to contemplate that perfection, and to
imitate it, and deduce rules and forms from it; and thus to forget her
duty and ministry as the interpreter and discoverer of Truth. And in
the very instant when this diversion of her purpose and forgetfulness
of her function take place--forgetfulness generally coincident with her
apparent perfection--in that instant, I say, begins her actual
catastrophe; and by her own fall--so far as she has influence--she
accelerates the ruin of the nation by which she is practised.

The study, however, of the effect of art on the mind of nations is one
rather for the historian than for us; at all events it is one for the
discussion of which we have no more time this evening. But I will ask
your patience with me while I try to illustrate, in some further
particulars, the dependence of the healthy state and power of art
itself upon the exercise of its appointed function in the
interpretation of fact.

You observe that I always say _interpretation_, never
_imitation_. My reason for so doing is, first, that good art
rarely imitates; it usually only describes or explains. But my second
and chief reason is that good art always consists of two things: First,
the observation of fact; secondly, the manifesting of human design and
authority in the way that fact is told. Great and good art must unite
the two; it cannot exist for a moment but in their unity; it consists
of the two as essentially as water consists of oxygen and hydrogen, or
marble of lime and carbonic acid.

Let us inquire a little into the nature of each of the elements. The
first element, we say, is the love of Nature, leading to the effort to
observe and report her truly. And this is the first and leading
element. Review for yourselves the history of art, and you will find
this to be a manifest certainty, that _no great school ever yet
existed which had not for primal aim the representation of some natural
fact as truly as possible_. There have only yet appeared in the
world three schools of perfect art--schools, that is to say, that did
their work as well as it seems possible to do it. These are the
Athenian, [Footnote: See below, the farther notice of the real spirit
of Greek work, in the address at Bradford.] Florentine, and Venetian.
The Athenian proposed to itself the perfect representation of the form
of the human body. It strove to do that as well as it could; it did
that as well as it can be done; and all its greatness was founded upon
and involved in that single and honest effort. The Florentine school
proposed to itself the perfect expression of human emotion--the showing
of the effects of passion in the human face and gesture. I call this
the Florentine school, because, whether you take Raphael for the
culminating master of expressional art in Italy, or Leonardo, or
Michael Angelo, you will find that the whole energy of the national
effort which produced those masters had its root in Florence; not at
Urbino or Milan. I say, then, this Florentine or leading Italian school
proposed to itself human expression for its aim in natural truth; it
strove to do that as well as it could--did it as well as it can be
done--and all its greatness is rooted in that single and honest effort.
Thirdly, the Venetian school propose the representation of the effect
of colour and shade on all things; chiefly on the human form. It tried
to do that as well as it could--did it as well as it can be done--and
all its greatness is founded on that single and honest effort.

Pray, do not leave this room without a perfectly clear holding of these
three ideas. You may try them, and toss them about afterwards, as much
as you like, to see if they'll bear shaking; but do let me put them
well and plainly into your possession. Attach them to three works of
art which you all have either seen or continually heard of. There's the
(so-called) "Theseus" of the Elgin marbles. That represents the whole
end and aim of the Athenian school--the natural form of the human body.
All their conventional architecture--their graceful shaping and
painting of pottery--whatsoever other art they practised--was dependent
for its greatness on this sheet-anchor of central aim: true shape of
living man. Then take, for your type of the Italian school, Raphael's
"Disputa del Sacramento;" that will be an accepted type by everybody,
and will involve no possibly questionable points: the Germans will
admit it; the English academicians will admit it; and the English
purists and pre-Raphaelites will admit it. Well, there you have the
truth of human expression proposed as an aim. That is the way people
look when they feel this or that--when they have this or that other
mental character: are they devotional, thoughtful, affectionate,
indignant, or inspired? are they prophets, saints, priests, or kings?
then--whatsoever is truly thoughtful, affectionate, prophetic,
priestly, kingly--_that_ the Florentine school tried to discern,
and show; _that_ they have discerned and shown; and all their
greatness is first fastened in their aim at this central truth--the
open expression of the living human soul. Lastly, take Veronese's
"Marriage in Cana" in the Louvre. There you have the most perfect
representation possible of colour, and light, and shade, as they affect
the external aspect of the human form, and its immediate accessories,
architecture, furniture, and dress. This external aspect of noblest
nature was the first aim of the Venetians, and all their greatness
depended on their resolution to achieve, and their patience in
achieving it.

Here, then, are the three greatest schools of the former world
exemplified for you in three well-known works. The Phidian "Theseus"
represents the Greek school pursuing truth of form; the "Disputa" of
Raphael, the Florentine school pursuing truth of mental expression; the
"Marriage in Cana," the Venetian school pursuing truth of colour and
light. But do not suppose that the law which I am stating to you--the
great law of art-life--can only be seen in these, the most powerful of
all art schools. It is just as manifest in each and every school that
ever has had life in it at all. Wheresoever the search after truth
begins, there life begins; wheresoever that search ceases, there life
ceases. As long as a school of art holds any chain of natural facts,
trying to discover more of them and express them better daily, it may
play hither and thither as it likes on this side of the chain or that;
it may design grotesques and conventionalisms, build the simplest
buildings, serve the most practical utilities, yet all it does will be
gloriously designed and gloriously done; but let it once quit hold of
the chain of natural fact, cease to pursue that as the clue to its
work; let it propose to itself any other end than preaching this living
word, and think first of showing its own skill or its own fancy, and
from that hour its fall is precipitate--its destruction sure; nothing
that it does or designs will ever have life or loveliness in it more;
its hour has come, and there is no work, nor device, nor knowledge, nor
wisdom in the grave whither it goeth.

Let us take for example that school of art over which many of you would
perhaps think this law had but little power--the school of Gothic
architecture. Many of us may have been in the habit of thinking of that
school rather as of one of forms than of facts--a school of pinnacles,
and buttresses, and conventional mouldings, and disguise of nature by
monstrous imaginings--not a school of truth at all. I think I shall be
able, even in the little time we have to-night, to show that this is
not so; and that our great law holds just as good at Amiens and
Salisbury, as it does at Athens and Florence.

I will go back then first to the very beginnings of Gothic art, and
before you, the students of Kensington, as an impanelled jury, I will
bring two examples of the barbarism out of which Gothic art emerges,
approximately contemporary in date and parallel in executive skill;
but, the one, a barbarism that did not get on, and could not get on;
the other, a barbarism that could get on, and did get on; and you, the
impanelled jury, shall judge what is the essential difference between
the two barbarisms, and decide for yourselves what is the seed of life
in the one, and the sign of death in the other.

The first,--that which has in it the sign of death,--furnishes us at
the same time with an illustration far too interesting to be passed by,
of certain principles much depended on by our common modern designers.
Taking up one of our architectural publications the other day, and
opening it at random, I chanced upon this piece of information, put in
rather curious English; but you shall have it as it stands--

"Aristotle asserts, that the greatest species of the beautiful are
Order, Symmetry, and the Definite."

I should tell you, however, that this statement is not given as
authoritative; it is one example of various Architectural teachings,
given in a report in the _Building Chronicle_ for May, 1857, of a
lecture on Proportion; in which the only thing the lecturer appears to
have proved was that,--

The system of dividing the diameter of the shaft of a column into
parts for copying the ancient architectural remains of Greece and Rome,
adopted by architects from Vitruvius (circa B.C. 25) to the present
period, as a method for producing ancient architecture, _is entirely
useless_, for the several parts of Grecian architecture cannot be
reduced or subdivided by this system; neither does it apply to the
architecture of Rome.

Still, as far as I can make it out, the lecture appears to have been
one of those of which you will just at present hear so many, the
protests of architects who have no knowledge of sculpture--or of any
other mode of expressing natural beauty--_against_ natural beauty;
and their endeavour to substitute mathematical proportions for the
knowledge of life they do not possess, and the representation of life
of which they are incapable.[Illustration] Now, this substitution of
obedience to mathematical law for sympathy with observed life, is the
first characteristic of the hopeless work of all ages; as such, you
will find it eminently manifested in the specimen I have to give you of
the hopeless Gothic barbarism; the barbarism from which nothing could
emerge--for which no future was possible but extinction. The
Aristotelian principles of the Beautiful are, you remember, Order,
Symmetry, and the Definite. Here you have the three, in perfection,
applied to the ideal of an angel, in a psalter of the eighth century,
existing in the library of St. John's College, Cambridge.[Footnote: I
copy this woodcut from Westwood's "Palaeographia Sacra."]

Now, you see the characteristics of this utterly dead school are, first
the wilful closing of its eyes to natural facts;--for, however ignorant
a person may be, he need only look at a human being to see that it has
a mouth as well as eyes; and secondly, the endeavour to adorn or
idealize natural fact according to its own notions: it puts red spots
in the middle of the hands, and sharpens the thumbs, thinking to
improve them. Here you have the most pure type possible of the
principles of idealism in all ages: whenever people don't look at
Nature, they always think they can improve her. You will also admire,
doubtless, the exquisite result of the application of our great modern 
architectural principle of beauty--symmetry, or equal balance of part
by part; you see even the eyes are made symmetrical--entirely round,
instead of irregular, oval; and the iris is set properly in the middle,
instead of--as nature has absurdly put it--rather under the upper lid.
You will also observe the "principle of the pyramid" in the general
arrangement of the figure, and the value of "series" in the placing of
dots.

From this dead barbarism we pass to living barbarism--to work done by
hands quite as rude, if not ruder, and by minds as uninformed; and yet
work which in every line of it is prophetic of power, and has in it the
sure dawn of day. You have often heard it said that Giotto was the
founder of art in Italy. He was not: neither he, nor Giunta Pisano, nor
Niccolo Pisano. They all laid strong hands to the work, and brought it
first into aspect above ground; but the foundation had been laid for
them by the builders of the Lombardic churches in the valleys of the
Adda and the Arno. It is in the sculpture of the round arched churches
of North Italy, bearing disputable dates, ranging from the eighth to
the twelfth century, that you will find the lowest struck roots of the
art of Titian and Raphael. [Footnote: I have said elsewhere, "the root
of _all_ art is struck in the thirteenth century." This is quite
true: but of course some of the smallest fibres run lower, as in this
instance.] I go, therefore, to the church which is certainly the
earliest of these, St. Ambrogio, of Milan, said still to retain some
portions of the actual structure from which St. Ambrose excluded
Theodosius, and at all events furnishing the most archaic examples of
Lombardic sculpture in North Italy. I do not venture to guess their
date; they are barbarous enough for any date.

We find the pulpit of this church covered with interlacing patterns,
closely resembling those of the manuscript at Cambridge, but among them
is figure sculpture of a very different kind. It is wrought with mere
incisions in the stone, of which the effect may be tolerably given by
single lines in a drawing. Remember, therefore, for a moment--as
characteristic of culminating Italian art--Michael Angelo's fresco of
the "Temptation of Eve," in the Sistine chapel, and you will be more
interested in seeing the birth of Italian art, illustrated by the same
subject, from St. Ambrogio, of Milan, the "Serpent beguiling Eve."
[Footnote: This cut is ruder than it should be: the incisions in the
marble have a lighter effect than these rough black lines; but it is
not worth while to do it better.]

Yet, in that sketch, rude and ludicrous as it is, you have the elements
of life in their first form. The people who could do that were sure to
get on. For, observe, the workman's whole aim is straight at the facts,
as well as he can get them; and not merely at the facts, but at the
very heart of the facts. A common workman might have looked at nature
for his serpent, but he would have thought only of its scales. But this
fellow does not want scales, nor coils; he can do without them; he
wants the serpent's heart--malice and insinuation;--and he has actually
got them to some extent. So also a common workman, even in this
barbarous stage of art, might have carved Eve's arms and body a good
deal better; but this man does not care about arms and body, if he can
only get at Eve's mind--show that she is pleased at being flattered,
and yet in a state of uncomfortable hesitation. And some look of
listening, of complacency, and of embarrassment he has verily got:--
note the eyes slightly askance, the lips compressed, and the right hand
nervously grasping the left arm: nothing can be declared impossible to
the people who could begin thus--the world is open to them, and all
that is in it; while, on the contrary, nothing is possible to the man
who did the symmetrical angel--the world is keyless to him; he has
built a cell for himself in which he must abide, barred up for ever--
there is no more hope for him than for a sponge or a madrepore.

I shall not trace from this embryo the progress of Gothic art in Italy,
because it is much complicated and involved with traditions of other
schools, and because most of the students will be less familiar with
its results than with their own northern buildings. So, these two
designs indicating Death and Life in the beginnings of mediaeval art,
we will take an example of the _progress_ of that art from our
northern work. Now, many of you, doubtless, have been interested by the
mass, grandeur, and gloom of Norman architecture, as much as by Gothic
traceries; and when you hear me say that the root of all good work lies
in natural facts, you doubtless think instantly of your round arches,
with their rude cushion capitals, and of the billet or zigzag work by
which they are surrounded, and you cannot see what the knowledge of
nature has to do with either the simple plan or the rude mouldings. But
all those simple conditions of Norman art are merely the expiring of it
towards the extreme north. Do not study Norman architecture in
Northumberland, but in Normandy, and then you will find that it is just
a peculiarly manly, and practically useful, form of the whole great
French school of rounded architecture. And where has that French school
its origin? Wholly in the rich conditions of sculpture, which, rising
first out of imitations of the Roman bas-reliefs, covered all the
façades of the French early churches with one continuous arabesque of
floral or animal life. If you want to study round-arched buildings, do
not go to Durham, but go to Poictiers, and there you will see how all
the simple decorations which give you so much pleasure even in their
isolated application were invented by persons practised in carving men,
monsters, wild animals, birds, and flowers, in overwhelming redundance;
and then trace this architecture forward in central France, and you
will find it loses nothing of its richness--it only gains in truth, and
therefore in grace, until just at the moment of transition into the
pointed style, you have the consummate type of the sculpture of the
school given you in the west front of the Cathedral of Chartres. From
that front I have chosen two fragments to illustrate it. [Footnote:
This part of the lecture was illustrated by two drawings, made
admirably by Mr. J. T. Laing, with the help of photographs from statues
at Chartres. The drawings may be seen at present at the Kensington
Museum: but any large photograph of the west front of Chartres will
enable the reader to follow what is stated in the lecture, as far as is
needful.]

These statues have been long, and justly, considered as representative
of the highest skill of the twelfth or earliest part of the thirteenth
century in France; and they indeed possess a dignity and delicate
charm, which are for the most part wanting in later works. It is owing
partly to real nobleness of feature, but chiefly to the grace, mingled
with severity, of the falling lines of excessively _thin_ drapery;
as well as to a most studied finish in composition, every part of the
ornamentation tenderly harmonizing with the rest. So far as their power
over certain tones of religious mind is owing to a palpable degree of
non-naturalism in them, I do not praise it--the exaggerated thinness of
body and stiffness of attitude are faults; but they are noble faults,
and give the statues a strange look of forming part of the very
building itself, and sustaining it--not like the Greek caryatid,
without effort--nor like the Renaissance caryatid, by painful or
impossible effort--but as if all that was silent and stern, and
withdrawn apart, and stiffened in chill of heart against the terror of
earth, had passed into a shape of eternal marble; and thus the Ghost
had given, to bear up the pillars of the church on earth, all the
patient and expectant nature that it needed no more in heaven. This is
the transcendental view of the meaning of those sculptures. I do not
dwell upon it. What I do lean upon is their purely naturalistic and
vital power. They are all portraits--unknown, most of them, I believe,
--but palpably and unmistakeably portraits, if not taken from the actual
person for whom the statue stands, at all events studied from some
living person whose features might fairly represent those of the king
or saint intended. Several of them I suppose to be authentic: there is
one of a queen, who has evidently, while she lived, been notable for
her bright black eyes. The sculptor has cut the iris deep into the
stone, and her dark eyes are still suggested with her smile.

There is another thing I wish you to notice specially in these statues
--the way in which the floral moulding is associated with the vertical
lines of the figure. You have thus the utmost complexity and richness
of curvature set side by side with the pure and delicate parallel
lines, and both the characters gain in interest and beauty; but there
is deeper significance in the thing than that of mere effect in
composition; significance not intended on the part of the sculptor, but
all the more valuable because unintentional. I mean the close
association of the beauty of lower nature in animals and flowers, with
the beauty of higher nature in human form. You never get this in Greek
work. Greek statues are always isolated; blank fields of stone, or
depths of shadow, relieving the form of the statue, as the world of
lower nature which they despised retired in darkness from their hearts.
Here, the clothed figure seems the type of the Christian spirit--in
many respects feebler and more contracted--but purer; clothed in its
white robes and crown, and with the riches of all creation at its side.

The next step in the change will be set before you in a moment, merely
by comparing this statue from the west front of Chartres with that of
the Madonna, from the south transept door of Amiens. [Footnote: There
are many photographs of this door and of its central statue. Its
sculpture in the tympanum is farther described in the Fourth Lecture.]

This Madonna, with the sculpture round her, represents the culminating
power of Gothic art in the thirteenth century. Sculpture has been
gaining continually in the interval; gaining, simply because becoming
every day more truthful, more tender, and more suggestive. By the way,
the old Douglas motto, "Tender and true," may wisely be taken up again
by all of us, for our own, in art no less than in other things. Depend
upon it, the first universal characteristic of all great art is
Tenderness, as the second is Truth. I find this more and more every
day: an infinitude of tenderness is the chief gift and inheritance of
all the truly great men. It is sure to involve a relative intensity of
disdain towards base things, and an appearance of sternness and
arrogance in the eyes of all hard, stupid, and vulgar people--quite
terrific to such, if they are capable of terror, and hateful to them,
if they are capable of nothing higher than hatred. Dante's is the great
type of this class of mind. I say the first inheritance is Tenderness--
the second Truth, because the Tenderness is in the make of the
creature, the Truth in his acquired habits and knowledge; besides, the
love comes first in dignity as well as in time, and that is always pure
and complete: the truth, at best, imperfect.

To come back to our statue. You will observe that the arrangement of
this sculpture is exactly the same as at Chartres--severe falling
drapery, set off by rich floral ornament at the side; but the statue is
now completely animated: it is no longer fixed as an upright pillar,
but bends aside out of its niche, and the floral ornament, instead of
being a conventional wreath, is of exquisitely arranged hawthorn. The
work, however, as a whole, though perfectly characteristic of the
advance of the age in style and purpose, is in some subtler qualities
inferior to that of Chartres. The individual sculptor, though trained
in a more advanced school, has been himself a man of inferior order of
mind compared to the one who worked at Chartres. But I have not time to
point out to you the subtler characters by which I know this.

This statue, then, marks the culminating point of Gothic art, because,
up to this time, the eyes of its designers had been steadily fixed on
natural truth--they had been advancing from flower to flower, from form
to form, from face to face,--gaining perpetually in knowledge and
veracity--therefore, perpetually in power and in grace. But at this
point a fatal change came over their aim. From the statue they now
began to turn the attention chiefly to the niche of the statue, and
from the floral ornament to the mouldings that enclosed the floral
ornament. The first result of this was, however, though not the
grandest, yet the most finished of northern genius. You have, in the
earlier Gothic, less wonderful construction, less careful masonry, far
less expression of harmony of parts in the balance of the building.
Earlier work always has more or less of the character of a good solid
wall with irregular holes in it, well carved wherever there is room.
But the last phase of good Gothic has no room to spare; it rises as
high as it can on narrowest foundation, stands in perfect strength with
the least possible substance in its bars; connects niche with niche,
and line with line, in an exquisite harmony, from which no stone can be
removed, and to which you can add not a pinnacle; and yet introduces in
rich, though now more calculated profusion, the living element of its
sculpture: sculpture in the quatrefoils--sculpture in the brackets--
sculpture in the gargoyles--sculpture in the niches--sculpture in the
ridges and hollows of its mouldings,--not a shadow without meaning, and
not a light without life. [Footnote: The two _transepts_ of Rouen
Cathedral illustrate this style. There are plenty of photographs of
them. I take this opportunity of repeating what I have several times
before stated, for the sake of travellers, that St. Ouen, impressive as
it is, is entirely inferior to the transepts of Rouen Cathedral.] But
with this very perfection of his work came the unhappy pride of the
builder in what he had done. As long as he had been merely raising
clumsy walls and carving them like a child, in waywardness of fancy,
his delight was in the things he thought of as he carved; but when he
had once reached this pitch of constructive science, he began to think
only how cleverly he could put the stones together. The question was
not now with him, What can I represent? but, How high can I build--how
wonderfully can I hang this arch in air, or weave this tracery across
the clouds? And the catastrophe was instant and irrevocable.
Architecture became in France a mere web of waving lines,--in England a
mere grating of perpendicular ones. Redundance was substituted for
invention, and geometry for passion; tho Gothic art became a mere
expression of wanton expenditure, and vulgar mathematics; and was swept
away, as it then deserved to be swept away, by the severer pride, and
purer learning, of the schools founded on classical traditions.

You cannot now fail to see, how, throughout the history of this
wonderful art--from its earliest dawn in Lombardy to its last
catastrophe in France and England--sculpture, founded on love of
nature, was the talisman of its existence; wherever sculpture was
practised, architecture arose--wherever that was neglected,
architecture expired; and, believe me, all you students who love this
mediaeval art, there is no hope of your ever doing any good with it,
but on this everlasting principle. Your patriotic associations with it
are of no use; your romantic associations with it--either of chivalry
or religion--are of no use; they are worse than useless, they are
false. Gothic is not an art for knights and nobles; it is an art for
the people: it is not an art for churches or sanctuaries; it is an art
for houses and homes: it is not an art for England only, but an art for
the world: above all, it is not an art of form or tradition only, but
an art of vital practice and perpetual renewal. And whosoever pleads
for it as an ancient or a formal thing, and tries to teach it you as an
ecclesiastical tradition or a geometrical science, knows nothing of its
essence, less than nothing of its power.

Leave, therefore, boldly, though not irreverently, mysticism and
symbolism on the one side; cast away with utter scorn geometry and
legalism on the other; seize hold of God's hand and look full in the
face of His creation, and there is nothing He will not enable you to
achieve.

Thus, then, you will find--and the more profound and accurate your
knowledge of the history of art the more assuredly you will find--that
the living power in all the real schools, be they great or small, is
love of nature. But do not mistake me by supposing that I mean this law
to be all that is necessary to form a school. There needs to be much
superadded to it, though there never must be anything superseding it.
The main thing which needs to be superadded is the gift of design.

It is always dangerous, and liable to diminish the clearness of
impression, to go over much ground in the course of one lecture. But I
dare not present you with a maimed view of this important subject: I
dare not put off to another time, when the same persons would not be
again assembled, the statement of the great collateral necessity which,
as well as the necessity of truth, governs all noble art.

That collateral necessity is _the visible operation of human
intellect in the presentation of truth, _the evidence of what is
properly called design or plan in the work, no less than of veracity. A
looking-glass does not design--it receives and communicates
indiscriminately all that passes before it; a painter designs when he
chooses some things, refuses others, and arranges all.

This selection and arrangement must have influence over everything that
the art is concerned with, great or small--over lines, over colours,
and over ideas. Given a certain group of colours, by adding another
colour at the side of them, you will either improve the group and
render it more delightful, or injure it, and render it discordant and
unintelligible. "Design" is the choosing and placing the colour so as
to help and enhance all the other colours it is set beside. So of
thoughts: in a good composition, every idea is presented in just that
order, and with just that force, which will perfectly connect it with
all the other thoughts in the work, and will illustrate the others as
well as receive illustration from them; so that the entire chain of
thoughts offered to the beholder's mind shall be received by him with
as much delight and with as little effort as is possible. And thus you
see design, properly so called, is human invention, consulting human
capacity. Out of the infinite heap of things around us in the world, it
chooses a certain number which it can thoroughly grasp, and presents
this group to the spectator in the form best calculated to enable him
to grasp it also, and to grasp it with delight.

And accordingly, the capacities of both gatherer and receiver being
limited, the object is to make _everything that you offer helpful_
and precious. If you give one grain of weight too much, so as to
increase fatigue without profit, or bulk without value--that added
grain is hurtful; if you put one spot or one syllable out of its proper
place, that spot or syllable will be destructive--how far destructive
it is almost impossible to tell: a misplaced touch may sometimes
annihilate the labour of hours. Nor are any of us prepared to
understand the work of any great master, till we feel this, and feel it
as distinctly as we do the value of arrangement in the notes of music.
Take any noble musical air, and you find, on examining it, that not one
even of the faintest or shortest notes can be removed without
destruction to the whole passage in which it occurs; and that every
note in the passage is twenty times more beautiful so introduced, than
it would have been if played singly on the instrument. Precisely this
degree of arrangement and relation must exist between every touch
[Footnote: Literally. I know how exaggerated this statement sounds; but
I mean it,--every syllable of it.--See Appendix IV.] and line in a
great picture. You may consider the whole as a prolonged musical
composition: its parts, as separate airs connected in the story; its
little bits and fragments of colour and line, as separate passages or
bars in melodies; and down to the minutest note of the whole--down to
the minutest _touch_,--if there is one that can be spared--that
one is doing mischief.

Remember therefore always, you have two characters in which all
greatness of art consists:--First, the earnest and intense seizing of
natural facts; then the ordering those facts by strength of human
intellect, so as to make them, for all who look upon them, to the
utmost serviceable, memorable, and beautiful. And thus great art is
nothing else than the type of strong and noble life; for, as the
ignoble person, in his dealings with all that occurs in the world about
him, first sees nothing clearly,--looks nothing fairly in the face, and
then allows himself to be swept away by the trampling torrent, and
unescapable force, of the things that he would not foresee, and could
not understand: so the noble person, looking the facts of the world
full in the face, and fathoming them with deep faculty, then deals with
them in unalarmed intelligence and unhurried strength, and becomes,
with his human intellect and will, no unconscious nor insignificant
agent, in consummating their good, and restraining their evil.

Thus in human life you have the two fields of rightful toil for ever
distinguished, yet for ever associated; Truth first--plan or design,
founded thereon; so in art, you have the same two fields for ever
distinguished, for ever associated; Truth first--plan, or design,
founded thereon.

Now hitherto there is not the least difficulty in the subject; none of
you can look for a moment at any great sculptor or painter without
seeing the full bearing of these principles. But a difficulty arises
when you come to examine the art of a lower order, concerned with
furniture and manufacture, for in that art the element of design enters
without, apparently, the element of truth. You have often to obtain
beauty and display invention without direct representation of nature.
Yet, respecting all these things also, the principle is perfectly
simple. If the designer of furniture, of cups and vases, of dress
patterns, and the like, exercises himself continually in the imitation
of natural form in some leading division of his work; then, holding by
this stem of life, he may pass down into all kinds of merely
geometrical or formal design with perfect safety, and with noble
results.[Footnote: This principle, here cursorily stated, is one of the
chief subjects of inquiry in the following Lectures.] Thus Giotto,
being primarily a figure painter and sculptor, is, secondarily, the
richest of all designers in mere mosaic of coloured bars and triangles;
thus Benvenuto Cellini, being in all the higher branches of metal work
a perfect imitator of nature, is in all its lower branches the best
designer of curve for lips of cups and handles of vases; thus Holbein,
exercised primarily in the noble art of truthful portraiture, becomes,
secondarily, the most exquisite designer of embroideries of robe, and
blazonries on wall; and thus Michael Angelo, exercised primarily in the
drawing of body and limb, distributes in the mightiest masses the order
of his pillars, and in the loftiest shadow the hollows of his dome. But
once quit hold of this living stem, and set yourself to the designing
of ornamentation, either in the ignorant play of your own heartless
fancy, as the Indian does, or according to received application of
heartless laws, as the modern European does, and there is but one word
for you--Death:--death of every healthy faculty, and of every noble
intelligence, incapacity of understanding one great work that man has
ever done, or of doing anything that it shall be helpful for him to
behold. You have cut yourselves off voluntarily, presumptuously,
insolently, from the whole teaching of your Maker in His Universe; you
have cut yourselves off from it, not because you were forced to
mechanical labour for your bread--not because your fate had appointed
you to wear away your life in walled chambers, or dig your life out of
dusty furrows; but, when your whole profession, your whole occupation--
all the necessities and chances of your existence, led you straight to
the feet of the great Teacher, and thrust you into the treasury of His
works; where you have nothing to do but to live by gazing, and to grow
by wondering;--wilfully you bind up your eyes from the splendour--
wilfully bind up your life-blood from its beating--wilfully turn your
backs upon all the majesties of Omnipotence--wilfully snatch your hands
from all the aids of love, and what can remain for you, but
helplessness and blindness,--except the worse fate than the being blind
yourselves--that of becoming Leaders of the blind?

Do not think that I am speaking under excited feeling, or in any
exaggerated terms. I have written the words I use, that I may know what
I say, and that you, if you choose, may see what I have said. For,
indeed, I have set before you tonight, to the best of my power, the sum
and substance of the system of art to the promulgation of which I have
devoted my life hitherto, and intend to devote what of life may still
be spared to me. I have had but one steady aim in all that I have ever
tried to teach, namely--to declare that whatever was great in human art
was the expression of man's delight in God's work.

And at this time I have endeavoured to prove to you--if you investigate
the subject you may more entirely prove to yourselves--that no school
ever advanced far which had not the love of natural fact as a primal
energy. But it is still more important for you to be assured that the
conditions of life and death in the art of nations are also the
conditions of life and death in your own; and that you have it, each in
his power at this very instant, to determine in which direction his
steps are turning. It seems almost a terrible thing to tell you, that
all here have all the power of knowing at once what hope there is for
them as artists; you would, perhaps, like better that there was some
unremovable doubt about the chances of the future--some possibility
that you might be advancing, in unconscious ways, towards unexpected
successes--some excuse or reason for going about, as students do so
often, to this master or the other, asking him if they have genius, and
whether they are doing right, and gathering, from his careless or
formal replies, vague flashes of encouragement, or fitfulnesses of
despair. There is no need for this--no excuse for it. All of you have
the trial of yourselves in your own power; each may undergo at this
instant, before his own judgment seat, the ordeal by fire. Ask
yourselves what is the leading motive which actuates you while you are
at work. I do not ask you what your leading motive is for working--that
is a different thing; you may have families to support--parents to
help--brides to win; you may have all these, or other such sacred and
pre-eminent motives, to press the morning's labour and prompt the
twilight thought. But when you are fairly _at_ the work, what is
the motive then which tells upon every touch of it? If it is the love
of that which your work represents--if, being a landscape painter, it
is love of hills and trees that moves you--if, being a figure painter,
it is love of human beauty and human soul that moves you--if, being a
flower or animal painter, it is love, and wonder, and delight in petal
and in limb that move you, then the Spirit is upon you, and the earth
is yours, and the fulness thereof. But if, on the other hand, it is
petty self-complacency in your own skill, trust in precepts and laws,
hope for academical or popular approbation, or avarice of wealth,--it
is quite possible that by steady industry, or even by fortunate chance,
you may win the applause, the position, the fortune, that you desire;--
but one touch of true art you will never lay on canvas or on stone as
long as you live.

Make, then, your choice, boldly and consciously, for one way or other
it _must_ be made. On the dark and dangerous side are set, the
pride which delights in self-contemplation--the indolence which rests
in unquestioned forms--the ignorance that despises what is fairest
among God's creatures, and the dulness that denies what is marvellous
in His working: there is a life of monotony for your own souls, and of
misguiding for those of others. And, on the other side, is open to your
choice the life of the crowned spirit, moving as a light in creation--
discovering always--illuminating always, gaining every hour in
strength, yet bowed down every hour into deeper humility; sure of being
right in its aim, sure of being irresistible in its progress; happy in
what it has securely done--happier in what, day by day, it may as
securely hope; happiest at the close of life, when the right hand
begins to forget its cunning, to remember, that there never was a touch
of the chisel or the pencil it wielded, but has added to the knowledge
and quickened the happiness of mankind.




LECTURE II.

THE UNITY OF ART.

_Part of an Address delivered at Manchester, 14th March, 1859._

[Footnote: I was prevented, by press of other engagements, from
preparing this address with the care I wished; and forced to trust to
such expression as I could give at the moment to the points of
principal importance; reading, however, the close of the preceding
lecture, which I thought contained some truths that would bear
repetition. The whole was reported, better than it deserved, by Mr.
Pitman, of the _Manchester Courier_, and published nearly
verbatim. I have here extracted, from the published report, the facts
which I wish especially to enforce; and have a little cleared their
expression; its loose and colloquial character I cannot now help,
unless by re-writing the whole, which it seems not worth while to do.]


It is sometimes my pleasant duty to visit other cities, in the hope of
being able to encourage their art students; but here it is my
pleasanter privilege to come for encouragement myself. I do not know
when I have received so much as from the report read this evening by
Mr. Hammersley, bearing upon a subject which has caused me great
anxiety. For I have always felt in my own pursuit of art, and in my
endeavors to urge the pursuit of art on others, that while there are
many advantages now that never existed before, there are certain
grievous difficulties existing, just in the very cause that is giving
the stimulus to art--in the immense spread of the manufactures of every
country which is now attending vigorously to art. We find that
manufacture and art are now going on always together; that where there
is no manufacture there is no art. I know how much there is of
pretended art where there is no manufacture: there is much in Italy,
for instance; no country makes so bold pretence to the production of
new art as Italy at this moment; yet no country produces so little. If
you glance over the map of Europe, you will find that where the
manufactures are strongest, there art also is strongest. And yet I
always felt that there was an immense difficulty to be encountered by
the students who were in these centres of modern movement. They had to
avoid the notion that art and manufacture were in any respect one. Art
may be healthily associated with manufacture, and probably in future
will always be so; but the student must be strenuously warned against
supposing that they can ever be one and the same thing, that art can
ever be followed on the principles of manufacture. Each must be
followed separately; the one must influence the other, but each must be
kept distinctly separate from the other.

It would be well if all students would keep clearly in their mind the
real distinction between those words which we use so often,
"Manufacture," "Art," and "Fine Art." "MANUFACTURE" is, according to
the etymology and right use of the word, "the making of anything by
hands,"--directly or indirectly, with or without the help of
instruments or machines. Anything proceeding from the hand of man is
manufacture; but it must have proceeded from his hand only, acting
mechanically, and uninfluenced at the moment by direct intelligence.

Then, secondly, ART is the operation of the hand and the intelligence
of man together; there is an art of making machinery; there is an art
of building ships; an art of making carriages; and so on. All these,
properly called Arts, but not Fine Arts, are pursuits in which the hand
of man and his head go together, working at the same instant.

Then FINE ART is that in which the hand, the head, and the _heart_
of man go together.

Recollect this triple group; it will help you to solve many difficult
problems. And remember that though the hand must be at the bottom of
everything, it must also go to the top of everything; for Fine Art must
be produced by the hand of man in a much greater and clearer sense than
manufacture is. Fine Art must always be produced by the subtlest of all
machines, which is the human hand. No machine yet contrived, or
hereafter contrivable, will ever equal the fine machinery of the human
fingers. Thoroughly perfect art is that which proceeds from the heart,
which involves all the noble emotions;--associates with these the head,
yet as inferior to the heart; and the hand, yet as inferior to the
heart and head; and thus brings out the whole man.

Hence it follows that since Manufacture is simply the operation of the
hand of man in producing that which is useful to him, it essentially
separates itself from the emotions; when emotions interfere with
machinery they spoil it: machinery must go evenly, without emotion. But
the Fine Arts cannot go evenly; they always must have emotion ruling
their mechanism, and until the pupil begins to feel, and until all he
does associates itself with the current of his feeling, he is not an
artist. But pupils in all the schools in this country are now exposed
to all kinds of temptations which blunt their feelings. I constantly
feel discouraged in addressing them because I know not how to tell them
boldly what they ought to do, when I feel how practically difficult it
is for them to do it. There are all sorts of demands made upon them in
every direction, and money is to be made in every conceivable way but
the right way. If you paint as you ought, and study as you ought,
depend upon it the public will take no notice of you for a long while.
If you study wrongly, and try to draw the attention of the public upon
you,--supposing you to be clever students--you will get swift reward;
but the reward does not come fast when it is sought wisely; it is
always held aloof for a little while; the right roads of early life are
very quiet ones, hedged in from nearly all help or praise. But the
wrong roads are noisy,--vociferous everywhere with all kinds of demand
upon you for art which is not properly art at all; and in the various
meetings of modern interests, money is to be made in every way; but art
is to be followed only in _one_ way. That is what I want mainly to
say to you, or if not to you yourselves (for, from what I have heard
from your excellent master to-night, I know you are going on all
rightly), you must let me say it through you to others. Our Schools of
Art are confused by the various teaching and various interests that are
now abroad among us. Everybody is talking about art, and writing about
it, and more or less interested in it; everybody wants art, and there
is not art for everybody, and few who talk know what they are talking
about; thus students are led in all variable ways, while there is only
one way in which they can make steady progress, for true art is always
and will be always one. Whatever changes may be made in the customs of
society, whatever new machines we may invent, whatever new manufactures
we may supply, Fine Art must remain what it was two thousand years ago,
in the days of Phidias; two thousand years hence, it will be, in all
its principles, and in all its great effects upon the mind of man, just
the same. Observe this that I say, please, carefully, for I mean it to
the very utmost. _There is but one right way of doing any given thing
required of an artist_; there may be a hundred wrong, deficient, or
mannered ways, but there is only one complete and right way. Whenever
two artists are trying to do the same thing with the same materials,
and do it in different ways, one of them is wrong; he may be charmingly
wrong, or impressively wrong--various circumstances in his temper may
make his wrong pleasanter than any person's right; it may for him,
under his given limitations of knowledge or temper, be better perhaps
that he should err in his own way than try for anybody else's--but for
all that his way is wrong, and it is essential for all masters of
schools to know what the right way is, and what right art is, and to
see how simple and how single all right art has been, since the
beginning of it.

But farther, not only is there but one way of _doing_ things
rightly, but there is only one way of _seeing_ them, and that is,
seeing the whole of them, without any choice, or more intense
perception of one point than another, owing to our special
idiosyncrasies. Thus, when Titian or Tintoret look at a human being,
they see at a glance the whole of its nature, outside and in; all that
it has of form, of colour, of passion, or of thought; saintliness, and
loveliness; fleshly body, and spiritual power; grace, or strength, or
softness, or whatsoever other quality, those men will see to the full,
and so paint, that, when narrower people come to look at what they have
done, every one may, if he chooses, find his own special pleasure in
the work. The sensualist will find sensuality in Titian; the thinker
will find thought; the saint, sanctity; the colourist, colour; the
anatomist, form; and yet the picture will never be a popular one in the 
full sense, for none of these narrower people will find their special
taste so alone consulted, as that the qualities which would ensure
their gratification shall be sifted or separated from others; they are
checked by the presence of the other qualities which ensure the
gratification of other men. Thus, Titian is not soft enough for the
sensualist, Correggio suits him better; Titian is not defined enough
for the formalist,--Leonardo suits him better; Titian is not pure
enough for the religionist,--Raphael suits him better; Titian is not
polite enough for the man of the world,--Vandyke suits him better;
Titian is not forcible enough for the lovers of the picturesque,--
Rembrandt suits him better. So Correggio is popular with a certain set,
and Vandyke with a certain set, and Rembrandt with a certain set. All
are great men, but of inferior stamp, and therefore Vandyke is popular,
and Rembrandt is popular, [Footnote: And Murillo, of all true painters
the narrowest, feeblest, and most superficial, for those reasons the
most popular.] but nobody cares much at heart about Titian; only there
is a strange under-current of everlasting murmur about his name, which
means the deep consent of all great men that he is greater than they--
the consent of those who, having sat long enough at his feet, have
found in that restrained harmony of his strength there are indeed
depths of each balanced power more wonderful than all those separate
manifestations in inferior painters: that there is a softness more
exquisite than Correggio's, a purity loftier than Leonardo's, a force
mightier than Rembrandt's, a sanctity more solemn even than
Raffaelle's.

Do not suppose that in saying this of Titian, I am returning to the old
eclectic theories of Bologna; for all those eclectic theories, observe,
were based, not upon an endeavour to unite the various characters of
nature (which it is possible to do), but the various narrownesses of
taste, which it is impossible to do. Rubens is not more vigorous than
Titian, but less vigorous; but because he is so narrow-minded as to
enjoy vigour only, he refuses to give the other qualities of nature,
which would interfere with that vigour and with our perception of it.
Again, Rembrandt is not a greater master of chiaroscuro than Titian;--
he is a less master, but because he is so narrow-minded as to enjoy
chiaroscuro only, he withdraws from you the splendour of hue which
would interfere with this, and gives you only the shadow in which you
can at once feel it.

Now all these specialties have their own charm in their own way: and
there are times when the particular humour of each man is refreshing to
us from its very distinctness; but the effort to add any other
qualities to this refreshing one instantly takes away the
distinctiveness, and therefore the exact character to be enjoyed in its
appeal to a particular humour in us. Our enjoyment arose from a
weakness meeting a weakness, from a partiality in the painter fitting
to a partiality in us, and giving us sugar when we wanted sugar, and
myrrh when we wanted myrrh; but sugar and myrrh are not meat: and when
we want meat and bread, we must go to better men.

The eclectic schools endeavoured to unite these opposite partialities
and weaknesses. They trained themselves under masters of exaggeration,
and tried to unite opposite exaggerations. That was impossible. They
did not see that the only possible eclecticism had been already
accomplished;--the eclecticism of temperance, which, by the restraint
of force, gains higher force; and by the self-denial of delight, gains
higher delight. This you will find is ultimately the case with every
true and right master; at first, while we are tyros in art, or before
we have earnestly studied the man in question, we shall see little in
him; or perhaps see, as we think, deficiencies; we shall fancy he is
inferior to this man in that, and to the other man in the other; but as
we go on studying him we shall find that he has got both that and the
other; and both in a far higher sense than the man who seemed to
possess those qualities in excess. Thus in Turner's lifetime, when
people first looked at him, those who liked rainy, weather, said he was
not equal to Copley Fielding; but those who looked at Turner long
enough found that he could be much more wet than Copley Fielding, when
he chose. The people who liked force, said that "Turner was not strong
enough for them; he was effeminate; they liked De Wint,--nice strong
tone;--or Cox--great, greeny, dark masses of colour--solemn feeling of
the freshness and depth of nature;--they liked Cox--Turner was too hot
for them." Had they looked long enough they would have found that he
had far more force than De Wint, far more freshness than Cox when he
chose,--only united with other elements; and that he didn't choose to
be cool, if nature had appointed the weather to be hot. The people who
liked Prout said "Turner had not firmness of hand--he did not know
enough about architecture--he was not picturesque enough." Had they
looked at his architecture long, they would have found that it
contained subtle picturesquenesses, infinitely more picturesque than
anything of Prout's. People who liked Callcott said that "Turner was
not correct or pure enough--had no classical taste." Had they looked at
Turner long enough they would have found him as severe, when he chose,
as the greater Poussin;--Callcott, a mere vulgar imitator of other
men's high breeding. And so throughout with all thoroughly great men,
their strength is not seen at first, precisely because they unite, in
due place and measure, every great quality.

Now the question is, whether, as students, we are to study only these
mightiest men, who unite all greatness, or whether we are to study the
works of inferior men, who present us with the greatness which we
particularly like? That question often comes before me when I see a
strong idiosyncrasy in a student, and he asks me what he should study.
Shall I send him to a true master, who does not present the quality in
a prominent way in which that student delights, or send him to a man
with whom he has direct sympathy? It is a hard question. For very
curious results have sometimes been brought out, especially in late
years, not only by students following their own bent, but by their
being withdrawn from teaching altogether. I have just named a very
great man in his own field--Prout. We all know his drawings, and love
them: they have a peculiar character which no other architectural
drawings ever possessed, and which no others can possess, because all
Prout's subjects are being knocked down or restored. (Prout did not
like restored buildings any more than I do.) There will never be any
more Prout drawings. Nor could he have been what he was, or expressed
with that mysteriously effective touch that peculiar delight in broken
and old buildings, unless he had been withdrawn from all high art
influence. You know that Prout was born of poor parents--that he was
educated down in Cornwall;--and that, for many years, all the art-
teaching he had was his own, or the fishermen's. Under the keels of the
fishing-boats, on the sands of our southern coasts, Prout learned all
that he needed to learn about art. Entirely by himself, he felt his way
to this particular style, and became the painter of pictures which I
think we should all regret to lose. It becomes a very difficult
question what that man would have been, had he been brought under some
entirely wholesome artistic influence, He had immense gifts of
composition. I do not know any man who had more power of invention than
Prout, or who had a sublimer instinct in his treatment of things; but
being entirely withdrawn from all artistical help, he blunders his way
to that short-coming representation, which, by the very reason of its
short-coming, has a certain charm we should all be sorry to lose. And
therefore I feel embarrassed when a student comes to me, in whom I see
a strong instinct of that kind: and cannot tell whether I ought to say
to him, "Give up all your studies of old boats, and keep away from the
sea-shore, and come up to the Royal Academy in London, and look at
nothing but Titian." It is a difficult thing to make up one's mind to
say that. However, I believe, on the whole, we may wisely leave such
matters in the hands of Providence; that if we have the power of
teaching the right to anybody, we should teach them the right; if we
have the power of showing them the best thing, we should show them the
best thing; there will always, I fear, be enough want of teaching, and
enough bad teaching, to bring out very curious erratical results if we
want them. So, if we are to teach at all, let us teach the right thing,
and ever the right thing. There are many attractive qualities
inconsistent with rightness;--do not let us teach them,--let us be
content to waive them. There are attractive qualities in Burns, and
attractive qualities in Dickens, which neither of those writers would
have possessed if the one had been educated, and the other had been
studying higher nature than that of cockney London; but those
attractive qualities are not such as we should seek in a school of
literature. If we want to teach young men a good manner of writing, we
should teach it from Shakspeare,--not from Burns; from Walter Scott,--
and not from Dickens. And I believe that our schools of painting are at
present inefficient in their action, because they have not fixed on
this high principle what are the painters to whom to point; nor boldly
resolved to point to the best, if determinable. It is becoming a matter
of stern necessity that they should give a simple direction to the
attention of the student, and that they should say, "This is the mark
you are to aim at; and you are not to go about to the print-shops, and
peep in, to see how this engraver does that, and the other engraver
does the other, and how a nice bit of character has been caught by a
new man, and why this odd picture has caught the popular attention. You
are to have nothing to do with all that; you are not to mind about
popular attention just now; but here is a thing which is eternally
right and good: you are to look at that, and see if you cannot do
something eternally right and good too."

But suppose you accept this principle: and resolve to look to some
great man, Titian, or Turner, or whomsoever it may be, as the model of
perfection in art;--then the question is, since this great man pursued
his art in Venice, or in the fields of England, under totally different
conditions from those possible to us now--how are you to make your
study of him effective here in Manchester? how bring it down into
patterns, and all that you are called upon as operatives to produce?
how make it the means of your livelihood, and associate inferior
branches of art with this great art? That may become a serious doubt to
you. You may think there is some other way of producing clever, and
pretty, and saleable patterns than going to look at Titian, or any
other great man. And that brings me to the question, perhaps the most
vexed question of all amongst us just now, between conventional and 
perfect art. You know that among architects and artists there are, and
have been almost always, since art became a subject of much discussion,
two parties, one maintaining that nature should be always altered and
modified, and that the artist is greater than nature; they do not
maintain, indeed, in words, but they maintain in idea, that the artist
is greater than the Divine Maker of these things, and can improve them;
while the other party say that he cannot improve nature, and that
nature on the whole should improve him. That is the real meaning of the
two parties, the essence of them; the practical result of their several
theories being that the Idealists are always producing more or less
formal conditions of art, and the Realists striving to produce in all
their art either some image of nature, or record of nature; these,
observe, being quite different things, the image being a resemblance,
and the record, something which will give information about nature, but
not necessarily imitate it.

[Footnote: The portion of the lecture here omitted was a recapitulation
of that part of the previous one which opposed conventional art to
natural art.]

       *       *       *       *       *

You may separate these two groups of artists more distinctly in your
mind as those who seek for the pleasure of art, in the relations of its
colours and lines, without caring to convey any truth with it; and
those who seek for the truth first, and then go down from the truth to
the pleasure of colour and line. Marking those two bodies distinctly as
separate, and thinking over them, you may come to some rather notable
conclusions respecting the mental dispositions which are involved in
each mode of study. You will find that large masses of the art of the
world fall definitely under one or the other of these heads. Observe,
pleasure first and truth afterwards, (or not at all,) as with the
Arabians and Indians; or, truth first and pleasure afterwards, as with 
Angelico and all other great European painters. You will find that the
art whose end is pleasure only is pre-eminently the gift of cruel and
savage nations, cruel in temper, savage in habits and conception; but
that the art which is especially dedicated to natural fact always
indicates a peculiar gentleness and tenderness of mind, and that all
great and successful work of that kind will assuredly be the production
of thoughtful, sensitive, earnest, kind men, large in their views of
life, and full of various intellectual power. And farther, when you
examine the men in whom the gifts of art are variously mingled, or
universally mingled, you will discern that the ornamental, or
pleasurable power, though it may be possessed by good men, is not in
itself an indication of their goodness, but is rather, unless balanced
by other faculties, indicative of violence of temper, inclining to
cruelty and to irreligion. On the other hand, so sure as you find any
man endowed with a keen and separate faculty of representing natural
fact, so surely you will find that man gentle and upright, full of
nobleness and breadth of thought. I will give you two instances, the
first peculiarly English, and another peculiarly interesting because it
occurs among a nation not generally very kind or gentle.

I am inclined to think that, considering all the disadvantages of
circumstances and education under which his genius was developed, there
was perhaps hardly ever born a man with a more intense and innate gift
of insight into nature than our own Sir Joshua Reynolds. Considered as
a painter of individuality in the human form and mind, I think him,
even as it is, the prince of portrait painters. Titian paints nobler
pictures, and Vandyke had nobler subjects, but neither of them entered
so subtly as Sir Joshua did into the minor varieties of human heart and
temper; arid when you consider that, with a frightful conventionality
of social habitude all around him, he yet conceived the simplest types
of all feminine and childish loveliness;--that in a northern climate,
and with gray, and white, and black, as the principal colours around
him, he yet became a colourist who can be crushed by none, even of the
Venetians;--and that with Dutch painting and Dresden china for the
prevailing types of art in the saloons of his day, he threw himself at
once at the feet of the great masters of Italy, and arose from their
feet to share their throne--I know not that in the whole history of art
you can produce another instance of so strong, so unaided, so unerring
an instinct for all that was true, pure, and noble.

Now, do you recollect the evidence respecting the character of this
man,--the two points of bright peculiar evidence given by the sayings
of the two greatest literary men of his day, Johnson and Goldsmith?
Johnson, who, as you know, was always Reynolds' attached friend, had
but one complaint to make against him, that he hated nobody:--
"Reynolds," he said, "you hate no one living; I like a good hater!"
Still more significant is the little touch in Goldsmith's
"Retaliation." You recollect how in that poem he describes the various
persons who met at one of their dinners at St. James's Coffee-house,
each person being described under the name of some appropriate dish.
You will often hear the concluding lines about Reynolds Quoted--

                  "He shifted his trumpet," &c;--

less often, or at least less attentively, the preceding ones, far more
important--

        "Still born to improve us in every part--
         His pencil our faces, his _manners our heart;_"

and never, the most characteristic touch of all, near the beginning:--

        "Our dean shall be venison, just fresh from the plains;
         Our Burke shall be tongue, with a garnish of brains.
         To make out the dinner, full certain I am,
         That Rich is anchovy, and Reynolds is _lamb_."

The other painter whom I would give you as an instance of this
gentleness is a man of another nation, on the whole I suppose one of
the most cruel civilized nations in the world--the Spaniards. They
produced but one great painter, only one; but he among the very
greatest of painters, Velasquez. You would not suppose, from looking at
Velasquez' portraits generally, that he was an especially kind or good
man; you perceive a peculiar sternness about them; for they were as
true as steel, and the persons whom he had to paint being not generally
kind or good people, they were stern in expression, and Velasquez gave
the sternness; but he had precisely the same intense perception of
truth, the same marvellous instinct for the rendering of all natural
soul and all natural form that our Reynolds had. Let me, then, read you
his character as it is given by Mr. Stirling, of Kier:--

"Certain charges, of what nature we are not informed, brought against
him after his death, made it necessary for his executor, Fuensalida, to
refute them at a private audience granted to him by the king for that
purpose. After listening to the defence of his friend, Philip
immediately made answer: 'I can believe all you say of the excellent
disposition of Diego Velasquez.' Having lived for half his life in
courts, he was yet capable both of gratitude and generosity, and in the
misfortunes, he could remember the early kindness of Olivares. The
friend of the exile of Loeches, it is just to believe that he was also
the friend of the all-powerful favourite at Buenretiro. No mean
jealousy ever influenced his conduct to his brother artists; he could
afford not only to acknowledge the merits, but to forgive the malice,
of his rivals. His character was of that _rare and happy kind, in
which high intellectual power is combined with indomitable strength of
will, and a winning sweetness of temper_, and which seldom fails to
raise the possessor above his fellow-men, making his life a

               'laurelled victory, and smooth success
                Be strewed before his feet.'"

I am sometimes accused of trying to make art too moral; yet, observe, I
do not say in the least that in order to be a good painter you must be
a good man; but I do say that in order to be a good natural painter
there must be strong elements of good in the mind, however warped by
other parts of the character. There are hundreds of other gifts of
painting which are not at all involved with moral conditions, but this
one, the perception of nature, is never given but under certain moral
conditions. Therefore, now you have it in your choice; here are your
two paths for you: it is required of you to produce conventional
ornament, and you may approach the task as the Hindoo does, and as the
Arab did,--without nature at all, with the chance of approximating your
disposition somewhat to that of the Hindoos and Arabs; or as Sir Joshua
and Velasquez did, with, not the chance, but the certainty, of
approximating your disposition, according to the sincerity of your
effort--to the disposition of those great and good men.

And do you suppose you will lose anything by approaching your
conventional art from this higher side? Not so. I called, with
deliberate measurement of my expression, long ago, the decoration of
the Alhambra "detestable," not merely because indicative of base
conditions of moral being, but because merely as decorative work,
however captivating in some respects, it is wholly wanting in the real,
deep, and intense qualities of ornamental art. Noble conventional
decoration belongs only to three periods. First, there is the
conventional decoration of the Greeks, used in subordination to their
sculpture. There are then the noble conventional decoration of the
early Gothic schools, and the noble conventional arabesque of the great
Italian schools. All these were reached from above, all reached by
stooping from a knowledge of the human form. Depend upon it you will
find, as you look more and more into the matter, that good subordinate
ornament has ever been rooted in a higher knowledge; and if you are
again to produce anything that is noble, you must have the higher
knowledge first, and descend to all lower service; condescend as much
as you like,--condescension never does any man any harm,--but get your
noble standing first. So, then, without any scruple, whatever branch of
art you may be inclined as a student here to follow,--whatever you are
to make your bread by, I say, so far as you have time and power, make
yourself first a noble and accomplished artist; understand at least
what noble and accomplished art is, and then you will be able to apply
your knowledge to all service whatsoever.

I am now going to ask your permission to name the masters whom I think
it would be well if we could agree, in our Schools of Art in England,
to consider our leaders. The first and chief I will not myself presume
to name; he shall be distinguished for you by the authority of those
two great painters of whom we have just been speaking--Reynolds and
Velasquez. You may remember that in your Manchester Art Treasures
Exhibition the most impressive things were the works of those two men--
nothing told upon the eye so much; no other pictures retained it with
such a persistent power. Now, I have the testimony, first of Reynolds
to Velasquez, and then of Velasquez to the man whom I want you to take
as the master of all your English schools. The testimony of Reynolds to
Velasquez is very striking. I take it from some fragments which have
just been published by Mr. William Cotton--precious fragments--of
Reynolds' diaries, which I chanced upon luckily as I was coming down
here: for I was going to take Velasquez' testimony alone, and then fell
upon this testimony of Reynolds to Velasquez, written most fortunately
in Reynolds' own hand-you may see the manuscript. "What _we_ are
all," said Reynolds, "attempting to do with great labor, Velasquez does
at once." Just think what is implied when a man of the enormous power
and facility that Reynolds had, says he was "trying to do with great
labor" what Velasquez "did at once."

Having thus Reynolds' testimony to Velasquez, I will take Velasquez'
testimony to somebody else. You know that Velasquez was sent by Philip
of Spain to Italy, to buy pictures for him. He went all over Italy, saw
the living artists there, and all their best pictures when freshly
painted, so that he had every opportunity of judging; and never was a
man so capable of judging. He went to Rome and ordered various works of
living artists; and while there, he was one day asked by Salvator Rosa
what he thought of Raphael. His reply, and the ensuing conversation,
are thus reported by Boschini, in curious Italian verse, which, thus
translated by Dr. Donaldson, is quoted in Mr. Stirling's Life of
Velasquez:--

          "The master" [Velasquez] "stiffly bowed his figure tall
             And said, 'For Rafael, to speak the truth--
             I always was plain-spoken from my youth--
           I cannot say I like his works at all.'

          "'Well,' said the other" [Salvator], 'if you can run down
             So great a man, I really cannot see
             What you can find to like in Italy;
           To him we all agree to give the crown.'

          "Diego answered thus: 'I saw in Venice
             The true test of the good and beautiful;
             First in my judgment, ever stands that school,
           And Titian first of all Italian men is.'"

          "_Tizian ze quel die porta la bandiera_"

Learn that line by heart and act, at all events for some time to come,
upon Velasquez' opinion in that matter. Titian is much the safest
master for you. Raphael's power, such as it characters in his mind; it
is "Raphaelesque," properly so called; but Titian's power is simply the
power of doing right. Whatever came before Titian, he did wholly as it
_ought_ to be done. Do not suppose that now in recommending Titian
to you so strongly, and speaking of nobody else to-night, I am
retreating in anywise from what some of you may perhaps recollect in my
works, the enthusiasm with which I have always spoken of another
Venetian painter. There are three Venetians who are never separated in
my mind--Titian, Veronese, and Tintoret. They all have their own
unequalled gifts, and Tintoret especially has imagination and depth of
soul which I think renders him indisputably the greatest man; but,
equally indisputably, Titian is the greatest painter; and therefore the
greatest painter who ever lived. You may be led wrong by Tintoret
[Footnote: See Appendix I.--"Right and Wrong."] in many respects, wrong
by Raphael in more; all that you learn from Titian will be right. Then,
with Titian, take Leonardo, Rembrandt, and Albert Dürer. I name those
three masters for this reason: Leonardo has powers of subtle drawing
which are peculiarly applicable in many ways to the drawing of fine
ornament, and are very useful for all students. Rembrandt and Dürer are
the only men whose actual work of hand you can have to look at; you can
have Rembrandt's etchings, or Dürer's engravings actually hung in your
schools; and it is a main point for the student to see the real thing,
and avoid judging of masters at second-hand. As, however, in obeying
this principle, you cannot often have opportunities of studying
Venetian painting, it is desirable that you should have a useful
standard of colour, and I think it is possible for you to obtain this.
I cannot, indeed, without entering upon ground which might involve the
hurting the feelings of living artists, state exactly what I believe to
be the relative position of various painters in England at present with
respect to power of colour. But I may say this, that in the peculiar
gifts of colour which will be useful to you as students, there are only
one or two of the pre-Raphaelites, and William Hunt, of the old Water
Colour Society, who would be safe guides for you: and as quite a safe
guide, there is nobody but William Hunt, because the pre-Raphaelites
are all more or less affected by enthusiasm and by various morbid
conditions of intellect and temper; but old William Hunt--I am sorry to
say "old," but I say it in a loving way, for every year that has added
to his life has added also to his skill--William Hunt is as right as
the Venetians, as far as he goes, and what is more, nearly as
inimitable as they. And I think if we manage to put in the principal
schools of England a little bit of Hunt's work, and make that somewhat
of a standard of colour, that we can apply his principles of colouring
to subjects of all kinds. Until you have had a work of his long near
you; nay, unless you have been labouring at it, and trying to copy it,
you do not know the thoroughly grand qualities that are concentrated in
it. Simplicity, and intensity, both of the highest character;--
simplicity of aim, and intensity of power and success, are involved in
that man's unpretending labour.

Finally, you cannot believe that I would omit my own favourite, Turner.
I fear from the very number of his works left to the nation, that there
is a disposition now rising to look upon his vast bequest with some
contempt. I beg of you, if in nothing else, to believe me in this, that
you cannot further the art of England in any way more distinctly than
by giving attention to every fragment that has been left by that man.
The time will come when his full power and right place will be
acknowledged; that time will not be for many a day yet: nevertheless,
be assured--as far as you are inclined to give the least faith to
anything I may say to you, be assured--that you can act for the good of
art in England in no better way than by using whatever influence any of
you have in any direction to urge the reverent study and yet more
reverent preservation of the works of Turner. I do not say "the
exhibition" of his works, for we are not altogether ripe for it: they
are still too far above us; uniting, as I was telling you, too many
qualities for us yet to feel fully their range and their influence;--
but let us only try to keep them safe from harm, and show thoroughly
and conveniently what we show of them at all, and day by day their
greatness will dawn upon us more and more, and be the root of a school
of art in England, which I do not doubt may be as bright, as just, and
as refined as even that of Venice herself. The dominion of the sea
seems to have been associated, in past time, with dominion in the arts
also: Athens had them together; Venice had them together; but by so
much as our authority over the ocean is wider than theirs over the
Ægean or Adriatic, let us strive to make our art more widely beneficent
than theirs, though it cannot be more exalted; so working out the
fulfilment, in their wakening as well as their warning sense, of those
great words of the aged Tintoret:

                    "Sempre si fa il mare maggiore."




LECTURE III.

MODERN MANUFACTURE AND DESIGN.

_A Lecture delivered at Bradford, March, 1859_.


It is with a deep sense of necessity for your indulgence that I venture
to address you to-night, or that I venture at any time to address the
pupils of schools of design intended for the advancement of taste in
special branches of manufacture. No person is able to give useful and
definite help towards such special applications of art, unless he is
entirely familiar with the conditions of labour and natures of material
involved in the work; and indefinite help is little better than no help
at all. Nay, the few remarks which I propose to lay before you this
evening will, I fear, be rather suggestive of difficulties than helpful
in conquering them: nevertheless, it may not be altogether
unserviceable to define clearly for you (and this, at least, I am able
to do) one or two of the more stern general obstacles which stand at
present in the way of our success in design; and to warn you against
exertion of effort in any vain or wasteful way, till these main
obstacles are removed.

The first of these is our not understanding the scope and dignity of
Decorative design. With all our talk about it, the very meaning of the
words "Decorative art" remains confused and undecided. I want, if
possible, to settle this question for you to-night, and to show you
that the principles on which you must work are likely to be false, in
proportion as they are narrow; true, only as they are founded on a
perception of the connection of all branches of art with each other.

Observe, then, first--the only essential distinction between Decorative
and other art is the being fitted for a fixed place; and in that place,
related, either in subordination or command, to the effect of other
pieces of art. And all the greatest art which the world has produced is
thus fitted for a place, and subordinated to a purpose. There is no
existing highest-order art but is decorative. The best sculpture yet
produced has been the decoration of a temple front--the best painting,
the decoration of a room. Raphael's best doing is merely the wall-
colouring of a suite of apartments in the Vatican, and his cartoons
were made for tapestries. Correggio's best doing is the decoration of
two small church cupolas at Parma; Michael Angelo's of a ceiling in the
Pope's private chapel; Tintoret's, of a ceiling and side wall belonging
to a charitable society at Venice; while Titian and Veronese threw out
their noblest thoughts, not even on the inside, but on the outside of
the common brick and plaster walls of Venice.

Get rid, then, at once of any idea of Decorative art being a degraded
or a separate kind of art. Its nature or essence is simply its being
fitted for a definite place; and, in that place, forming part of a
great and harmonious whole, in companionship with other art; and so far
from this being a degradation to it--so far from Decorative art being
inferior to other art because it is fixed to a spot--on the whole it
may be considered as rather a piece of degradation that it should be
portable. Portable art--independent of all place--is for the most part
ignoble art. Your little Dutch landscape, which you put over your
sideboard to-day, and between the windows tomorrow, is a far more
contemptible piece of work than the extents of field and forest with
which Benozzo has made green and beautiful the once melancholy arcade
of the Campo Santo at Pisa; and the wild boar of silver which you use
for a seal, or lock into a velvet case, is little likely to be so noble
a beast as the bronze boar who foams forth the fountain from under his
tusks in the market-place of Florence. It is, indeed, possible that the
portable picture or image may be first-rate of its kind, but it is not
first-rate because it is portable; nor are Titian's frescoes less than
first-rate because they are fixed; nay, very frequently the highest
compliment you can pay to a cabinet picture is to say--"It is as grand
as a fresco."

Keeping, then, this fact fixed in our minds,--that all art _may_
be decorative, and that the greatest art yet produced has been
decorative,--we may proceed to distinguish the orders and dignities of
decorative art, thus:--

I. The first order of it is that which is meant for places where it
cannot be disturbed or injured, and where it can be perfectly seen; and
then the main parts of it should be, and have always been made, by the
great masters, as perfect, and as full of nature as possible.

You will every day hear it absurdly said that room decoration should be
by flat patterns--by dead colours--by conventional monotonies, and I
know not what. Now, just be assured of this--nobody ever yet used
conventional art to decorate with, when he could do anything better,
and knew that what he did would be safe. Nay, a great painter will
always give you the natural art, safe or not. Correggio gets a
commission to paint a room on the ground floor of a palace at Parma:
any of our people--bred on our fine modern principles--would have
covered it with a diaper, or with stripes or flourishes, or mosaic
patterns. Not so Correggio: he paints a thick trellis of vine-leaves,
with oval openings, and lovely children leaping through them into the
room; and lovely children, depend upon it, are rather more desirable
decorations than diaper, if you can do them--but they are not quite so
easily done. In like manner Tintoret has to paint the whole end of the
Council Hall at Venice. An orthodox decorator would have set himself to
make the wall look like a wall--Tintoret thinks it would be rather
better, if he can manage it, to make it look a little like Paradise;--
stretches his canvas right over the wall, and his clouds right over his
canvas; brings the light through his clouds--all blue and clear--zodiac
beyond zodiac; rolls away the vaporous flood from under the feet of
saints, leaving them at last in infinitudes of light--unorthodox in the
last degree, but, on the whole, pleasant.

And so in all other cases whatever, the greatest decorative art is
wholly unconventional--downright, pure, good painting and sculpture,
but always fitted for its place; and subordinated to the purpose it has
to serve in that place.

II. But if art is to be placed where it is liable to injury--to wear
and tear; or to alteration of its form; as, for instance, on domestic
utensils, and armour, and weapons, and dress; in which either the
ornament will be worn out by the usage of the thing, or will be cast
into altered shape by the play of its folds; then it is wrong to put
beautiful and perfect art to such uses, and you want forms of inferior
art, such as will be by their simplicity less liable to injury; or, by
reason of their complexity and continuousness, may show to advantage,
however distorted by the folds they are cast into.

And thus arise the various forms of inferior decorative art, respecting
which the general law is, that the lower the place and office of the
thing, the less of natural or perfect form you should have in it; a
zigzag or a chequer is thus a better, because a more consistent
ornament for a cup or platter than a landscape or portrait is: hence
the general definition of the true forms of conventional ornament is,
that they consist in the bestowal of as much beauty on the object as
shall be consistent with its Material, its Place, and its Office.

Let us consider these three modes of consistency a little.

(A.) Conventionalism by cause of inefficiency of material.

If, for instance, we are required to represent a human figure with
stone only, we cannot represent its colour; we reduce its colour to
whiteness. That is not elevating the human body, but degrading it; only
it would be a much greater degradation to give its colour falsely.
Diminish beauty as much as you will, but do not misrepresent it. So
again, when we are sculpturing a face, we can't carve its eyelashes. 
The face is none the better for wanting its eyelashes--it is injured by
the want; but would be much more injured by a clumsy representation of
them.

Neither can we carve the hair. We must be content with the
conventionalism of vile solid knots and lumps of marble, instead of the
golden cloud that encompasses the fair human face with its waving
mystery. The lumps of marble are not an elevated representation of
hair--they are a degraded one; yet better than any attempt to imitate
hair with the incapable material.

In all cases in which such imitation is attempted, instant degradation
to a still lower level is the result. For the effort to imitate shows
that the workman has only a base and poor conception of the beauty of
the reality--else he would know his task to be hopeless, and give it up
at once; so that all endeavours to avoid conventionalism, when the
material demands it, result from insensibility to truth, and are among
the worst forms of vulgarity. Hence, in the greatest Greek statues, the
hair is very slightly indicated--not because the sculptor disdained
hair, but because he knew what it was too well to touch it insolently.
I do not doubt but that the Greek painters drew hair exactly as Titian
does. Modern attempts to produce finished pictures on glass result from
the same base vulgarism. No man who knows what painting means, can
endure a painted glass window which emulates painter's work. But he
rejoices in a glowing mosaic of broken colour: for that is what the
glass has the special gift and right of producing. [Footnote: See
Appendix II., Sir Joshua Reynolds's disappointment.]

(B.) Conventionalism by cause of inferiority of place.

When work is to be seen at a great distance, or in dark places, or in
some other imperfect way, it constantly becomes necessary to treat it
coarsely or severely, in order to make it effective. The statues on
cathedral fronts, in good times of design, are variously treated
according to their distances: no fine execution is put into the
features of the Madonna who rules the group of figures above the south
transept of Rouen at 150 feet above the ground; but in base modern
work, as Milan Cathedral, the sculpture is finished without any
reference to distance; and the merit of every statue is supposed to
consist in the visitor's being obliged to ascend three hundred steps
before he can see it.

(C.) Conventionalism by cause of inferiority of office.

When one piece of ornament is to be subordinated to another (as the
moulding is to the sculpture it encloses, or the fringe of a drapery to
the statue it veils), this inferior ornament needs to be degraded in
order to mark its lower office; and this is best done by refusing, more
or less, the introduction of natural form. The less of nature it
contains, the more degraded is the ornament, and the fitter for a
humble place; but, however far a great workman may go in refusing the
higher organisms of nature, he always takes care to retain the
magnificence of natural lines; that is to say, of the infinite curves,
such as I have analyzed in the fourth volume of "Modern Painters." His
copyists, fancying that they can follow him without nature, miss
precisely the essence of all the work; so that even the simplest piece
of Greek conventional ornament loses the whole of its value in any
modern imitation of it, the finer curves being always missed. Perhaps
one of the dullest and least justifiable mistakes which have yet been
made about my writing, is the supposition that I have attacked or
despised Greek work. I have attacked Palladian work, and modern
imitation of Greek work. Of Greek work itself I have never spoken but
with a reverence quite infinite: I name Phidias always in exactly the
same tone with which I speak of Michael Angelo, Titian, and Dante. My
first statement of this faith, now thirteen years ago, was surely clear
enough. "We shall see by this light three colossal images standing up
side by side, looming in their great rest of spirituality above the
whole world horizon. Phidias, Michael Angelo, and Dante,--from these we
may go down step by step among the mighty men of every age, securely
and certainly observant of diminished lustre in every appearance of
restlessness and effort, until the last trace of inspiration vanishes
in the tottering affectation or tortured insanities of modern times."
("Modern Painters," vol. ii., p. 253.) This was surely plain speaking
enough, and from that day to this my effort has been not less
continually to make the heart of Greek work known than the heart of
Gothic: namely, the nobleness of conception of form derived from
perpetual study of the figure; and my complaint of the modern architect
has been not that he followed the Greeks, but that he denied the first
laws of life in theirs as in all other art.

The fact is, that all good subordinate forms of ornamentation ever yet
existent in the world have been invented, and others as beautiful can
only be invented, by men primarily exercised in drawing or carving the
human figure. I will not repeat here what I have already twice insisted
upon, to the students of London and Manchester, respecting the
degradation of temper and intellect which follows the pursuit of art
without reference to natural form, as among the Asiatics: here, I will
only trespass on your patience so far as to mark the inseparable
connection between figure-drawing and good ornamental work, in the
great European schools, and all that are connected with them.

Tell me, then, first of all, what ornamental work is usually put before
our students as the type of decorative perfection? Raphael's
arabesques; are they not? Well, Raphael knew a little about the figure,
I suppose, before he drew them. I do not say that I like those
arabesques; but there are certain qualities in them which are
inimitable by modern designers; and those qualities are just the fruit
of the master's figure study. What is given the student as next to
Raphael's work? Cinquecento ornament generally. Well, cinquecento
generally, with its birds, and cherubs, and wreathed foliage, and
clustered fruit, was the amusement of men who habitually and easily
carved the figure, or painted it. All the truly fine specimens of it
have figures or animals as main parts of the design.

"Nay, but," some anciently or mediævally minded person will exclaim,
"we don't want to study cinquecento. We want severer, purer
conventionalism." What will you have? Egyptian ornament? Why, the whole
mass of it is made up of multitudinous human figures in every kind of
action--and magnificent action; their kings drawing their bows in their
chariots, their sheaves of arrows rattling at their shoulders; the
slain falling under them as before a pestilence; their captors driven
before them in astonied troops; and do you expect to imitate Egyptian
ornament without knowing how to draw the human figure? Nay, but you
will take Christian ornament--purest mediaeval Christian--thirteenth
century! Yes: and do you suppose you will find the Christian less
human? The least natural and most purely conventional ornament of the
Gothic schools is that of their painted glass; and do you suppose
painted glass, in the fine times, was ever wrought without figures? We
have got into the way, among our other modern wretchednesses, of trying
to make windows of leaf diapers, and of strips of twisted red and
yellow bands, looking like the patterns of currant jelly on the top of
Christmas cakes; but every casement of old glass contained a saint's
history. The windows of Bourges, Chartres, or Rouen have ten, fifteen,
or twenty medallions in each, and each medallion contains two figures
at least, often six or seven, representing every event of interest in
the history of the saint whose life is in question. Nay, but, you say
those figures are rude and quaint, and ought not to be imitated. Why,
so is the leafage rude and quaint, yet you imitate that. The coloured
border pattern of geranium or ivy leaf is not one whit better drawn, or
more like geraniums and ivy, than the figures are like figures; but you
call the geranium leaf idealized--why don't you call the figures so?
The fact is, neither are idealized, but both are conventionalized on
the same principles, and in the same way; and if you want to learn how
to treat the leafage, the only way is to learn first how to treat the
figure. And you may soon test your powers in this respect. Those old
workmen were not afraid of the most familiar subjects. The windows of
Chartres were presented by the trades of the town, and at the bottom of
each window is a representation of the proceedings of the tradesmen at
the business which enabled them to pay for the window. There are smiths
at the forge, curriers at their hides, tanners looking into their pits,
mercers selling goods over the counter--all made into beautiful
medallions. Therefore, whenever you want to know whether you have got
any real power of composition or adaptation in ornament, don't be
content with sticking leaves together by the ends,--anybody can do
that; but try to conventionalize a butcher's or a greengrocer's, with
Saturday night customers buying cabbage and beef. That will tell you if
you can design or not.

I can fancy your losing patience with me altogether just now. "We asked
this fellow down to tell our workmen how to make shawls, and he is only
trying to teach them how to caricature." But have a little patience
with me, and examine, after I have done, a little for yourselves into
the history of ornamental art, and you will discover why I do this. You
will discover, I repeat, that all great ornamental art whatever is
founded on the effort of the workman to draw the figure, and, in the
best schools, to draw all that he saw about him in living nature. The
best art of pottery is acknowledged to be that of Greece, and all the
power of design exhibited in it, down to the merest zigzag, arises
primarily from the workman having been forced to outline nymphs and
knights; from those helmed and draped figures he holds his power. Of
Egyptian ornament I have just spoken. You have everything given there
that the workman saw; people of his nation employed in hunting,
fighting, fishing, visiting, making love, building, cooking--everything
they did is drawn, magnificently or familiarly, as was needed. In
Byzantine ornament, saints, or animals which are types of various
spiritual power, are the main subjects; and from the church down to the
piece of enamelled metal, figure,--figure,--figure, always principal.
In Norman and Gothic work you have, with all their quiet saints, also
other much disquieted persons, hunting, feasting, fighting, and so on;
or whole hordes of animals racing after each other. In the Bayeux
tapestry, Queen Matilda gave, as well as she could,--in many respects
graphically enough,--the whole history of the conquest of England.
Thence, as you increase in power of art, you have more and more
finished figures, up to the solemn sculptures of Wells Cathedral, or
the cherubic enrichments of the Venetian Madonna dei Miracoli.
Therefore, I will tell you fearlessly, for I know it is true, you must
raise your workman up to life, or you will never get from him one line
of well-imagined conventionalism. We have at present no good ornamental
design. We can't have it yet, and we must be patient if we want to have
it. Do not hope to feel the effect of your schools at once, but raise
the men as high as you can, and then let them stoop as low as you need;
no great man ever minds stooping. Encourage the students, in sketching
accurately and continually from nature anything that comes in their
way--still life, flowers, animals; but, above all, figures; and so far
as you allow of any difference between an artist's training and theirs,
let it be, not in what they draw, but in the degree of conventionalism
you require in the sketch.

For my own part, I should always endeavour to give thorough artistical
training first; but I am not certain (the experiment being yet untried)
what results may be obtained by a truly intelligent practice of
conventional drawing, such as that of the Egyptians, Greeks, or
thirteenth century French, which consists in the utmost possible
rendering of natural form by the fewest possible lines. The animal and
bird drawing of the Egyptians is, in their fine age, quite magnificent
under its conditions; magnificent in two ways--first, in keenest
perception of the main forms and facts in the creature; and, secondly,
in the grandeur of line by which their forms are abstracted and
insisted on, making every asp, ibis, and vulture a sublime spectre of
asp or ibis or vulture power. The way for students to get some of this
gift again (_some_ only, for I believe the fulness of the gift
itself to be connected with vital superstition, and with resulting
intensity of reverence; people were likely to know something about
hawks and ibises, when to kill one was to be irrevocably judged to
death) is never to pass a day without drawing some animal from the
life, allowing themselves the fewest possible lines and colours to do
it with, but resolving that whatever is characteristic of the animal
shall in some way or other be shown. [Footnote: Plate 75 in Vol. V. of
Wilkinson's "Ancient Egypt" will give the student an idea of how to set
to work.] I repeat, it cannot yet be judged what results might be
obtained by a nobly practised conventionalism of this kind; but,
however that may be, the first fact,--the necessity of animal and
figure drawing, is absolutely certain, and no person who shrinks from
it will ever become a great designer.

One great good arises even from the first step in figure drawing, that
it gets the student quit at once of the notion of formal symmetry. If
you learn only to draw a leaf well, you are taught in some of our
schools to turn it the other way, opposite to itself; and the two
leaves set opposite ways are called "a design:" and thus it is supposed
possible to produce ornamentation, though you have no more brains than
a looking-glass or a kaleidoscope has. But if you once learn to draw
the human figure, you will find that knocking two men's heads together
does not necessarily constitute a good design; nay, that it makes a
very bad design, or no design at all; and you will see at once that to
arrange a group of two or more figures, you must, though perhaps it may
be desirable to balance, or oppose them, at the same time vary their
attitudes, and make one, not the reverse of the other, but the
companion of the other.

I had a somewhat amusing discussion on this subject with a friend, only
the other day; and one of his retorts upon me was so neatly put, and
expresses so completely all that can either be said or shown on the
opposite side, that it is well worth while giving it you exactly in the
form it was sent to me. My friend had been maintaining that the essence
of ornament consisted in three things:--contrast, series, and symmetry.
I replied (by letter) that "none of them, nor all of them together,
would produce ornament. Here"--(making a ragged blot with the back of
my pen on the paper)--"you have contrast; but it isn't ornament: here,
1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6,"--(writing the numerals)--"You have series; but it
isn't ornament: and here,"--(sketching a rough but symmetrical "stick-
figure" sketch of a human body at the side)--"you have symmetry; but it
isn't ornament."

My friend replied:--

"Your materials were not ornament, because you did not apply them. I
send them to you back, made up into a choice sporting neckerchief:"

[Illustration: Sketch of a square of cloth decorated with a diagonal
grid pattern of stick-figure human forms, with repeated and reflected
ink-blot shapes at the corners and the digits 1 through 6 arranged into
simple symmetrical shapes and repeated around the border.]

               Symmetrical figure         Unit of diaper.
               Contrast                   Corner ornaments.
               Series                     Border ornaments.

"Each figure is converted into a harmony by being revolved on its two
axes, the whole opposed in contrasting series."

My answer was--or rather was to the effect (for I must expand it a
little, here)--that his words, "because you did not apply them,"
contained the gist of the whole matter;--that the application of them,
or any other things, was precisely the essence of design; the non-
application, or wrong application, the negation of design: that his use
of the poor materials was in this case admirable; and that if he could
explain to me, in clear words, the principles on which he had so used
them, he would be doing a very great service to all students of art.

"Tell me, therefore (I asked), these main points:

"1. How did you determine the number of figures you would put into the
neckerchief? Had there been more, it would have been mean and
ineffective,--a pepper-and-salt sprinkling of figures. Had there been
fewer, it would have been monstrous. How did you fix the number?

"2. How did you determine the breadth of the border and relative size
of the numerals?

"3. Why are there two lines outside of the border, and one only inside?
Why are there no more lines? Why not three and two, or three and five?
Why lines at all to separate the barbarous figures; and why, if lines
at all, not double or treble instead of single?

"4. Why did you put the double blots at the corners? Why not at the
angles of the chequers,--or in the middle of the border?

"It is precisely your knowing why _not_ to do these things, and
why to do just what you have done, which constituted your power of
design; and like all the people I have ever known who had that power,
you are entirely unconscious of the essential laws by which you work,
and confuse other people by telling them that the design depends on
symmetry and series, when, in fact, it depends entirely on your own
sense and judgment."

This was the substance of my last answer--to which (as I knew
beforehand would be the case) I got no reply; but it still remains to
be observed that with all the skill and taste (especially involving the
architect's great trust, harmony of proportion), which my friend could
bring to bear on the materials given him, the result is still only--a
sporting neckerchief--that is to say, the materials addressed, first,
to recklessness, in the shape of a mere blot; then to computativeness
in a series of figures; and then to absurdity and ignorance, in the
shape of an ill-drawn caricature--such materials, however treated, can
only work up into what will please reckless, computative, and vulgar
persons,--that is to say, into a sporting neckerchief. The difference
between this piece of ornamentation and Correggio's painting at Parma
lies simply and wholly in the additions (somewhat large ones), of truth
and of tenderness: in the drawing being lovely as well as symmetrical--
and representative of realities as well as agreeably disposed. And
truth, tenderness, and inventive application or disposition are indeed
the roots of ornament--not contrast, nor symmetry.

It ought yet farther to be observed, that _the nobler the materials,
the less their symmetry is endurable_. In the present case, the
sense of fitness and order, produced by the repetition of the figures,
neutralizes, in some degree, their reckless vulgarity; and is wholly,
therefore, beneficent to them. But draw the figures better, and their
repetition will become painful. You may harmlessly balance a mere
geometrical form, and oppose one quatrefoil or cusp by another exactly
like it. But put two Apollo Belvideres back to back, and you will not
think the symmetry improves them. _Whenever the materials of ornament
are noble, they must be various_; and repetition of parts is either
the sign of utterly bad, hopeless, and base work; or of the intended
degradation of the parts in which such repetition is allowed, in order
to foil others more noble.

Such, then, are a few of the great principles, by the enforcement of
which you may hope to promote the success of the modern student of
design; but remember, none of these principles will be useful at all,
unless you understand them to be, in one profound and stern sense,
useless. [Footnote: I shall endeavour for the future to put my self-
contradictions in short sentences and direct terms, in order to save
sagacious persons the trouble of looking for them.]

That is to say, unless you feel that neither you nor I, nor any one,
can, in the great ultimate sense, teach anybody how to make a good
design.

If designing _could_ be taught, all the world would learn: as all
the world reads--or calculates. But designing is not to be spelled, nor
summed. My men continually come to me, in my drawing class in London,
thinking I am to teach them what is instantly to enable them to gain
their bread. "Please, sir, show us how to design." "Make designers of
us." And you, I doubt not, partly expect me to tell you to-night how to
make designers of your Bradford youths. Alas! I could as soon tell you
how to make or manufacture an ear of wheat, as to make a good artist of
any kind. I can analyze the wheat very learnedly for you--tell you
there is starch in it, and carbon, and silex. I can give you starch,
and charcoal, and flint; but you are as far from your ear of wheat as
you were before. All that can possibly be done for any one who wants
ears of wheat is to show them where to find grains of wheat, and how to
sow them, and then, with patience, in Heaven's time, the ears will
come--or will perhaps come--ground and weather permitting. So in this
matter of making artists--first you must find your artist in the grain;
then you must plant him; fence and weed the field about him; and with
patience, ground and weather permitting, you may get an artist out of
him--not otherwise. And what I have to speak to you about, tonight, is
mainly the ground and the weather, it being the first and quite most
material question in this matter, whether the ground and weather of
Bradford, or the ground and weather of England in general,--suit wheat.

And observe in the outset, it is not so much what the present
circumstances of England are, as what we wish to make them, that we
have to consider. If you will tell me what you ultimately intend
Bradford to be, perhaps I can tell you what Bradford can ultimately
produce. But you must have your minds clearly made up, and be distinct
in telling me what you do want. At present I don't know what you are
aiming at, and possibly on consideration you may feel some doubt
whether you know yourselves. As matters stand, all over England, as
soon as one mill is at work, occupying two hundred hands, we try, by
means of it, to set another mill at work, occupying four hundred. That
is all simple and comprehensive enough--but what is it to come to? How
many mills do we want? or do we indeed want no end of mills? Let us
entirely understand each other on this point before we go any farther.
Last week, I drove from Rochdale to Bolton Abbey; quietly, in order to
see the country, and certainly it was well worth while. I never went
over a more interesting twenty miles than those between Rochdale and
Burnley. Naturally, the valley has been one of the most beautiful in
the Lancashire hills; one of the far away solitudes, full of old
shepherd ways of life. At this time there are not,--I speak
deliberately, and I believe quite literally,--there are not, I think,
more than a thousand yards of road to be traversed anywhere, without
passing a furnace or mill.

Now, is that the kind of thing you want to come to everywhere? Because,
if it be, and you tell me so distinctly, I think I can make several
suggestions to-night, and could make more if you give me time, which
would materially advance your object. The extent of our operations at
present is more or less limited by the extent of coal and ironstone,
but we have not yet learned to make proper use of our clay. Over the
greater part of England, south of the manufacturing districts, there
are magnificent beds of various kinds of useful clay; and I believe
that it would not be difficult to point out modes of employing it which
might enable us to turn nearly the whole of the south of England into a
brickfield, as we have already turned nearly the whole of the north
into a coal-pit. I say "nearly" the whole, because, as you are
doubtless aware, there are considerable districts in the south composed
of chalk renowned up to the present time for their downs and mutton.
But, I think, by examining carefully into the conceivable uses of
chalk, we might discover a quite feasible probability of turning all
the chalk districts into a limekiln, as we turn the clay districts into
a brickfield. There would then remain nothing but the mountain
districts to be dealt with; but, as we have not yet ascertained all the
uses of clay and chalk, still less have we ascertained those of stone;
and I think, by draining the useless inlets of the Cumberland, Welsh,
and Scotch lakes, and turning them, with their rivers, into navigable
reservoirs and canals, there would be no difficulty in working the
whole of our mountain districts as a gigantic quarry of slate and
granite, from which all the rest of the world might be supplied with
roofing and building stone.

Is this, then, what you want? You are going straight at it at present;
and I have only to ask under what limitations I am to conceive or
describe your final success? Or shall there be no limitations? There
are none to your powers; every day puts new machinery at your disposal,
and increases, with your capital, the vastness of your undertakings.
The changes in the state of this country are now so rapid, that it
would be wholly absurd to endeavour to lay down laws of art education
for it under its present aspect and circumstances; and therefore I must
necessarily ask, how much of it do you seriously intend within the next
fifty years to be coal-pit, brickfield, or quarry? For the sake of
distinctness of conclusion, I will suppose your success absolute: that
from shore to shore the whole of the island is to be set as thick with
chimneys as the masts stand in the docks of Liverpool: and there shall
be no meadows in it; no trees; no gardens; only a little corn grown
upon the housetops, reaped and threshed by steam: that you do not leave
even room for roads, but travel either over the roofs of your mills, on
viaducts; or under their floors, in tunnels: that, the smoke having
rendered the light of the sun unserviceable, you work always by the
light of your own gas: that no acre of English ground shall be without
its shaft and its engine; and therefore, no spot of English ground
left, on which it shall be possible to stand, without a definite and
calculable chance of being blown off it, at any moment, into small
pieces.

Under these circumstances, (if this is to be the future of England,) no
designing or any other development of beautiful art will be possible.
Do not vex your minds, nor waste your money with any thought or effort
in the matter. Beautiful art can only be produced by people who have
beautiful things about them, and leisure to look at them; and unless
you provide some elements of beauty for your workmen to be surrounded
by, you will find that no elements of beauty can be invented by them.

I was struck forcibly by the bearing of this great fact upon our modern
efforts at ornamentation in an afternoon walk, last week, in the
suburbs of one of our large manufacturing towns. I was thinking of the
difference in the effect upon the designer's mind, between the scene
which I then came upon, and the scene which would have presented itself
to the eyes of any designer of the middle ages, when he left his
workshop. Just outside the town I came upon an old English cottage, or
mansion, I hardly know which to call it, set close under the hill, and
beside the river, perhaps built somewhere in the Charles's time, with
mullioned windows and a low arched porch; round which, in the little
triangular garden, one can imagine the family as they used to sit in
old summer times, the ripple of the river heard faintly through the
sweetbrier hedge, and the sheep on the far-off wolds shining in the
evening sunlight. There, uninhabited for many and many a year, it had
been left in unregarded havoc of ruin; the garden-gate still swung
loose to its latch; the garden, blighted utterly into a field of ashes,
not even a weed taking root there; the roof torn into shapeless rents;
the shutters hanging about the windows in rags of rotten wood; before
its gate, the stream which had gladdened it now soaking slowly by,
black as ebony, and thick with curdling scum; the bank above it trodden
into unctuous, sooty slime: far in front of it, between it and the old
hills, the furnaces of the city foaming forth perpetual plague of
sulphurous darkness; the volumes of their storm clouds coiling low over
a waste of grassless fields, fenced from each other, not by hedges, but
by slabs of square stone, like gravestones, riveted together with iron.

That was your scene for the designer's contemplation in his afternoon
walk at Rochdale. Now fancy what was the scene which presented itself,
in his afternoon walk, to a designer of the Gothic school of Pisa--Nino
Pisano, or any of his men.

On each side of a bright river he saw rise a line of brighter palaces,
arched and pillared, and inlaid with deep red porphyry, and with
serpentine; along the quays before their gates were riding troops of
knights, noble in face and form, dazzling in crest and shield; horse
and man one labyrinth of quaint colour and gleaming light--the purple,
and silver, and scarlet fringes flowing over the strong limbs and
clashing mail, like sea-waves over rocks at sunset. Opening on each
side from the river were gardens, courts, and cloisters; long
successions of white pillars among wreaths of vine; leaping of
fountains through buds of pomegranate and orange: and still along the
garden-paths, and under and through the crimson of the pomegranate
shadows, moving slowly, groups of the fairest women that Italy ever
saw--fairest, because purest and thoughtfullest; trained in all high
knowledge, as in all courteous art--in dance, in song, in sweet wit, in
lofty learning, in loftier courage, in loftiest love--able alike to
cheer, to enchant, or save, the souls of men. Above all this scenery of
perfect human life, rose dome and bell-tower, burning with white
alabaster and gold; beyond dome and bell-tower the slopes of mighty
hills, hoary with olive; far in the north, above a purple sea of peaks
of solemn Apennine, the clear, sharp-cloven Carrara mountains sent up
their steadfast flames of marble summit into amber sky; the great sea
itself, scorching with expanse of light, stretching from their feet to
the Gorgonian isles; and over all these, ever present, near or far--
seen through the leaves of vine, or imaged with all its march of clouds
in the Arno's stream, or set with its depth of blue close against the
golden hair and burning cheek of lady and knight,--that untroubled and
sacred sky, which was to all men, in those days of innocent faith,
indeed the unquestioned abode of spirits, as the earth was of men; and
which opened straight through its gates of cloud and veils of dew into
the awfulness of the eternal world;--a heaven in which every cloud that
passed was literally the chariot of an angel, and every ray of its
Evening and Morning streamed from the throne of God.

What think you of that for a school of design?

I do not bring this contrast before you as a ground of hopelessness in
our task; neither do I look for any possible renovation of the Republic
of Pisa, at Bradford, in the nineteenth century; but I put it before
you in order that you may be aware precisely of the kind of difficulty
you have to meet, and may then consider with yourselves how far you can
meet it. To men surrounded by the depressing and monotonous
circumstances of English manufacturing life, depend upon it, design is
simply impossible. This is the most distinct of all the experiences I
have had in dealing with the modern workman. He is intelligent and
ingenious in the highest degree--subtle in touch and keen in sight: but
he is, generally speaking, wholly destitute of designing power. And if
you want to give him the power, you must give him the materials, and
put him in the circumstances for it. Design is not the offspring of
idle fancy: it is the studied result of accumulative observation and
delightful habit. Without observation and experience, no design--
without peace and pleasurableness in occupation, no design--and all the
lecturings, and teachings, and prizes, and principles of art, in the
world, are of no use, so long as you don't surround your men with happy
influences and beautiful things. It is impossible for them to have
right ideas about colour, unless they see the lovely colours of nature
unspoiled; impossible for them to supply beautiful incident and action
in their ornament, unless they see beautiful incident and action in the
world about them. Inform their minds, refine their habits, and you form
and refine their designs; but keep them illiterate, uncomfortable, and
in the midst of unbeautiful things, and whatever they do will still be
spurious, vulgar, and valueless.

I repeat, that I do not ask you nor wish you to build a new Pisa for
them. We don't want either the life or the decorations of the
thirteenth century back again; and the circumstances with which you
must surround your workmen are those simply of happy modern English
life, because the designs you have now to ask for from your workmen are
such as will make modern English life beautiful. All that gorgeousness
of the middle ages, beautiful as it sounds in description, noble as in
many respects it was in reality, had, nevertheless, for foundation and
for end, nothing but the pride of life--the pride of the so-called
superior classes; a pride which supported itself by violence and
robbery, and led in the end to the destruction both of the arts
themselves and the States in which they nourished.

The great lesson of history is, that all the fine arts hitherto--having
been supported by the selfish power of the noblesse, and never having
extended their range to the comfort or the relief of the mass of the
people--the arts, I say, thus practised, and thus matured, have only
accelerated the ruin of the States they adorned; and at the moment
when, in any kingdom, you point to the triumphs of its greatest
artists, you point also to the determined hour of the kingdom's
decline. The names of great painters are like passing bells: in the
name of Velasquez, you hear sounded the fall of Spain; in the name of
Titian, that of Venice; in the name of Leonardo, that of Milan; in the
name of Raphael, that of Rome. And there is profound justice in this;
for in proportion to the nobleness of the power is the guilt of its use
for purposes vain or vile; and hitherto the greater the art, the more
surely has it been used, and used solely, for the decoration of pride,
[Footnote:  Whether religious or profane pride,--chapel or banqueting
room,--is no matter.] or the provoking of sensuality. Another course
lies open to us. We may abandon the hope--or if you like the words
better--we may disdain the temptation, of the pomp and grace of Italy
in her youth. For us there can be no more the throne of marble--for us
no more the vault of gold--but for us there is the loftier and lovelier
privilege of bringing the power and charm of art within the reach of
the humble and the poor; and as the magnificence of past ages failed by
its narrowness and its pride, ours may prevail and continue, by its
universality and its lowliness.

And thus, between the picture of too laborious England, which we
imagined as future, and the picture of too luxurious Italy, which we
remember in the past, there may exist--there will exist, if we do our
duty--an intermediate condition, neither oppressed by labour nor wasted
in vanity--the condition of a peaceful and thoughtful temperance in
aims, and acts, and arts.

We are about to enter upon a period of our world's history in which
domestic life, aided by the arts of peace, will slowly, but at last
entirely, supersede public life and the arts of war. For our own
England, she will not, I believe, be blasted throughout with furnaces;
nor will she be encumbered with palaces. I trust she will keep her
green fields, her cottages, and her homes of middle life; but these
ought to be, and I trust will be enriched with a useful, truthful,
substantial form of art. We want now no more feasts of the gods, nor
martyrdoms of the saints; we have no need of sensuality, no place for
superstition, or for costly insolence. Let us have learned and faithful
historical painting--touching and thoughtful representations of human
nature, in dramatic painting; poetical and familiar renderings of
natural objects and of landscape; and rational, deeply-felt
realizations of the events which are the subjects of our religious
faith. And let these things we want, as far as possible, be scattered
abroad and made accessible to all men.

So also, in manufacture: we require work substantial rather than rich
in make; and refined, rather than splendid in design. Your stuffs need
not be such as would catch the eye of a duchess; but they should be
such as may at once serve the need, and refine the taste, of a
cottager. The prevailing error in English dress, especially among the
lower orders, is a tendency to flimsiness and gaudiness, arising mainly
from the awkward imitation of their superiors. [Footnote: If their
superiors would give them simplicity and economy to imitate, it would,
in the issue, be well for themselves, as well as for those whom they
guide. The typhoid fever of passion for dress, and all other display,
which has struck the upper classes of Europe at this time, is one of
the most dangerous political elements we have to deal with. Its
wickedness I have shown elsewhere (Polit. Economy of Art, p. 62, _et
seq._); but its wickedness is, in the minds of most persons, a
matter of no importance. I wish I had time also to show them its
danger. I cannot enter here into political investigation; but this is a
certain fact, that the wasteful and vain expenses at present indulged
in by the upper classes are hastening the advance of republicanism more
than any other element of modern change. No agitators, no clubs, no
epidemical errors, ever were, or will be, fatal to social order in any
nation. Nothing but the guilt of the upper classes, wanton,
accumulated, reckless, and merciless, ever overthrows them Of such
guilt they have now much to answer for--let them look to it in time.]
It should be one of the first objects of all manufacturers to produce
stuffs not only beautiful and quaint in design, but also adapted for
every-day service, and decorous in humble and secluded life. And you
must remember always that your business, as manufacturers, is to form
the market, as much as to supply it. If, in shortsighted and reckless
eagerness for wealth, you catch at every humour of the populace as it
shapes itself into momentary demand--if, in jealous rivalry with
neighbouring States, or with other producers, you try to attract
attention by singularities, novelties, and gaudinesses--to make every
design an advertisement, and pilfer every idea of a successful
neighbour's, that you may insidiously imitate it, or pompously eclipse
--no good design will ever be possible to you, or perceived by you. You
may, by accident, snatch the market; or, by energy, command it; you may
obtain the confidence of the public, and cause the ruin of opponent
houses; or you may, with equal justice of fortune, be ruined by them.
But whatever happens to you, this, at least, is certain, that the whole
of your life will have been spent in corrupting public taste and
encouraging public extravagance. Every preference you have won by
gaudiness must have been based on the purchaser's vanity; every demand
you have created by novelty has fostered in the consumer a habit of
discontent; and when you retire into inactive life, you may, as a
subject of consolation for your declining years, reflect that precisely
according to the extent of your past operations, your life has been
successful in retarding the arts,--tarnishing the virtues, and
confusing the manners of your country.

But, on the other hand, if you resolve from the first that, so far as
you can ascertain or discern what is best, you will produce what is
best, on an intelligent consideration of the probable tendencies and
possible tastes of the people whom you supply, you may literally become
more influential for all kinds of good than many lecturers on art, or
many treatise-writers on morality. Considering the materials dealt
with, and the crude state of art knowledge at the time, I do not know
that any more wide or effective influence in public taste was ever
exercised than that of the Staffordshire manufacture of pottery under
William Wedgwood, and it only rests with the manufacturer in every
other business to determine whether he will, in like manner, make his
wares educational instruments, or mere drugs of the market. You all
should, be, in a certain sense, authors: you must, indeed, first catch
the public eye, as an author must the public ear; but once gain your
audience, or observance, and as it is in the writer's power
thenceforward to publish what will educate as it amuses--so it is in
yours to publish what will educate as it adorns. Nor is this surely a
subject of poor ambition. I hear it said continually that men are too
ambitious: alas! to me, it seems they are never enough ambitious. How
many are content to be merely the thriving merchants of a state, when
they might be its guides, counsellors, and rulers--wielding powers of
subtle but gigantic beneficence, in restraining its follies while they
supplied its wants. Let such duty, such ambition, be once accepted in
their fulness, and the best glory of European art and of European
manufacture may yet be to come. The paintings of Raphael and of
Buonaroti gave force to the falsehoods of superstition, and majesty to
the imaginations of sin; but the arts of England may have, for their
task, to inform the soul with truth, and touch the heart with
compassion. The steel of Toledo and the silk of Genoa did but give
strength to oppression and lustre to pride: let it be for the furnace
and for the loom of England, as they have already richly earned, still
more abundantly to bestow, comfort on the indigent, civilization on the
rude, and to dispense, through the peaceful homes of nations, the grace
and the preciousness of simple adornment, and useful possession.




LECTURE IV.

INFLUENCE OF IMAGINATION IN ARCHITECTURE

_An Address Delivered to the Members of the Architectural
Association, in Lyon's Inn Hall, 1857._


If we were to be asked abruptly, and required to answer briefly, what
qualities chiefly distinguish great artists from feeble artists, we
should answer, I suppose, first, their sensibility and tenderness;
secondly, their imagination; and thirdly, their industry. Some of us
might, perhaps, doubt the justice of attaching so much importance to
this last character, because we have all known clever men who were
indolent, and dull men who were industrious. But though you may have
known clever men who were indolent, you never knew a great man who was
so; and, during such investigation as I have been able to give to the
lives of the artists whose works are in all points noblest, no fact
ever looms so large upon me--no law remains so steadfast in the
universality of its application, as the fact and law that they are all
great workers: nothing concerning them is matter of more astonishment
than the quantity they have accomplished in the given length of their
life; and when I hear a young man spoken of, as giving promise of high
genius, the first question I ask about him is always--

Does he work?

But though this quality of industry is essential to an artist, it does
not in anywise make an artist; many people are busy, whose doings are
little worth. Neither does sensibility make an artist; since, as I
hope, many can feel both strongly and nobly, who yet care nothing about
art. But the gifts which distinctively mark the artist--_without_
which he must be feeble in life, forgotten in death--_with_ which
he may become one of the shakers of the earth, and one of the signal
lights in heaven--are those of sympathy and imagination. I will not
occupy your time, nor incur the risk of your dissent, by endeavouring
to give any close definition of this last word. We all have a general
and sufficient idea of imagination, and of its work with our hands and
in our hearts: we understand it, I suppose, as the imaging or picturing
of new things in our thoughts; and we always show an involuntary
respect for this power, wherever we can recognize it, acknowledging it
to be a greater power than manipulation, or calculation, or
observation, or any other human faculty. If we see an old woman
spinning at the fireside, and distributing her thread dexterously from
the distaff, we respect her for her manipulation--if we ask her how
much she expects to make in a year, and she answers quickly, we respect
her for her calculation--if she is watching at the same time that none
of her grandchildren fall into the fire, we respect her for her
observation--yet for all this she may still be a commonplace old woman
enough. But if she is all the time telling her grandchildren a fairy
tale out of her head, we praise her for her imagination, and say, she
must be a rather remarkable old woman. Precisely in like manner, if an
architect does his working-drawing well, we praise him for his
manipulation--if he keeps closely within his contract, we praise him
for his honest arithmetic--if he looks well to the laying of his beams,
so that nobody shall drop through the floor, we praise him for his
observation. But he must, somehow, tell us a fairy tale out of his head
beside all this, else we cannot praise him for his imagination, nor
speak of him as we did of the old woman, as being in any wise out of
the common way, a rather remarkable architect. It seemed to me,
therefore, as if it might interest you to-night, if we were to consider
together what fairy tales are, in and by architecture, to be told--what
there is for you to do in this severe art of yours "out of your heads,"
as well as by your hands.

Perhaps the first idea which a young architect is apt to be allured by,
as a head-problem in these experimental days, is its being incumbent
upon him to invent a "new style" worthy of modern civilization in
general, and of England in particular; a style worthy of our engines
and telegraphs; as expansive as steam, and as sparkling as electricity.

But, if there are any of my hearers who have been impressed with this
sense of inventive duty, may I ask them first, whether their plan is
that every inventive architect among us shall invent a new style for
himself, and have a county set aside for his conceptions, or a province
for his practice? Or, must every architect invent a little piece of the
new style, and all put it together at last like a dissected map? And if
so, when the new style is invented, what is to be done next? I will
grant you this Eldorado of imagination--but can you have more than one
Columbus? Or, if you sail in company, and divide the prize of your
discovery and the honour thereof, who is to come after you clustered
Columbuses? to what fortunate islands of style are your architectural
descendants to sail, avaricious of new lands? When our desired style is
invented, will not the best we can all do be simply--to build in it?--
and cannot you now do that in styles that are known? Observe, I grant,
for the sake of your argument, what perhaps many of you know that I
would not grant otherwise--that a new style _can_ be invented. I
grant you not only this, but that it shall be wholly different from any
that was ever practised before. We will suppose that capitals are to be
at the bottom of pillars instead of the top; and that buttresses shall
be on the tops of pinnacles instead of at the bottom; that you roof
your apertures with stones which shall neither be arched nor
horizontal; and that you compose your decoration of lines which shall
neither be crooked nor straight. The furnace and the forge shall be at
your service: you shall draw out your plates of glass and beat out your
bars of iron till you have encompassed us all,--if your style is of the
practical kind,--with endless perspective of black skeleton and
blinding square,--or if your style is to be of the ideal kind--you
shall wreathe your streets with ductile leafage, and roof them with
variegated crystal--you shall put, if you will, all London under one
blazing dome of many colours that shall light the clouds round it with
its flashing, as far as to the sea. And still, I ask you, What after
this? Do you suppose those imaginations of yours will ever lie down
there asleep beneath the shade of your iron leafage, or within the
coloured light of your enchanted dome? Not so. Those souls, and
fancies, and ambitions of yours, are wholly infinite; and, whatever may
be done by others, you will still want to do something for yourselves;
if you cannot rest content with Palladio, neither will you with Paxton:
all the metal and glass that ever were melted have not so much weight
in them as will clog the wings of one human spirit's aspiration.

If you will think over this quietly by yourselves, and can get the
noise out of your ears of the perpetual, empty, idle, incomparably
idiotic talk about the necessity of some novelty in architecture, you
will soon see that the very essence of a Style, properly so called, is
that it should be practised _for ages_, and applied to all
purposes; and that so long as any given style is in practice, all that
is left for individual imagination to accomplish must be within the
scope of that style, not in the invention of a new one. If there are
any here, therefore, who hope to obtain celebrity by the invention of
some strange way of building which must convince all Europe into its
adoption, to them, for the moment, I must not be understood to address
myself, but only to those who would be content with that degree of
celebrity which an artist may enjoy who works in the manner of his
forefathers;--which the builder of Salisbury Cathedral might enjoy in
England, though he did not invent Gothic; and which Titian might enjoy
at Venice, though he did not invent oil painting. Addressing myself
then to those humbler, but wiser, or rather, only wise students who are
content to avail themselves of some system of building already
understood, let us consider together what room for the exercise of the
imagination may be left to us under such conditions. And, first, I
suppose it will be said, or thought, that the architect's principal
field for exercise of his invention must be in the disposition of
lines, mouldings, and masses, in agreeable proportions. Indeed, if you
adopt some styles of architecture, you cannot exercise invention in any
other way. And I admit that it requires genius and special gift to do
this rightly. Not by rule, nor by study, can the gift of graceful
proportionate design be obtained; only by the intuition of genius can
so much as a single tier of façade be beautifully arranged; and the man
has just cause for pride, as far as our gifts can ever be a cause for
pride, who finds himself able, in a design of his own, to rival even
the simplest arrangement of parts in one by Sanmicheli, Inigo Jones, or
Christopher Wren.

Invention, then, and genius being granted, as necessary to accomplish
this, let me ask you, What, after all, with this special gift and
genius, you _have_ accomplished, when you have arranged the lines
of a building beautifully?

In the first place you will not, I think, tell me that the beauty there
attained is of a touching or pathetic kind. A well-disposed group of
notes in music will make you sometimes weep and sometimes laugh. You
can express the depth of all affections by those dispositions of sound:
you can give courage to the soldier, language to the lover, consolation
to the mourner, more joy to the joyful, more humility to the devout.
Can you do as much by your group of lines? Do you suppose the front of
Whitehall, a singularly beautiful one ever inspires the two Horse
Guards, during the hour they sit opposite to it, with military ardour?
Do you think that the lovers in our London walk down to the front of
Whitehall for consolation when mistresses are unkind; or that any
person wavering in duty, or feeble in faith, was ever confirmed in
purpose or in creed by the pathetic appeal of those harmonious
architraves? You will not say so. Then, if they cannot touch, or
inspire, or comfort any one, can your architectural proportions amuse
any one? Christmas is just over; you have doubtless been at many merry
parties during the period. Can you remember any in which architectural
proportions contributed to the entertainment of the evening?
Proportions of notes in music were, I am sure, essential to your
amusement; the setting of flowers in hair, and of ribands on dresses,
were also subjects of frequent admiration with you, not inessential to
your happiness. Among the juvenile members of your society the
proportion of currants in cake, and of sugar in comfits, became
subjects of acute interest; and, when such proportions were harmonious,
motives also of gratitude to cook and to confectioner. But did you ever
see either young or old amused by the architrave of the door? Or
otherwise interested in the proportions of the room than as they
admitted more or fewer friendly faces? Nay, if all the amusement that
there is in the best proportioned architecture of London could be
concentrated into one evening, and you were to issue tickets for
nothing to this great proportional entertainment;--how do you think it
would stand between you and the Drury pantomine?

You are, then, remember, granted to be people of genius--great and
admirable; and you devote your lives to your art, but you admit that
you cannot comfort anybody, you cannot encourage anybody, you cannot
improve anybody, and you cannot amuse anybody. I proceed then farther
to ask, Can you inform anybody? Many sciences cannot be considered as
highly touching or emotional; nay, perhaps not specially amusing;
scientific men may sometimes, in these respects, stand on the same
ground with you. As far as we can judge by the results of the late war,
science helps our soldiers about as much as the front of Whitehall; and
at the Christmas parties, the children wanted no geologists to tell
them about the behaviour of bears and dragons in Queen Elizabeth's
time. Still, your man of science teaches you something; he may be dull
at a party, or helpless in a battle, he is not always that; but he can
give you, at all events, knowledge of noble facts, and open to you the
secrets of the earth and air. Will your architectural proportions do as
much? Your genius is granted, and your life is given, and what do you
teach us?--Nothing, I believe, from one end of that life to the other,
but that two and two make four, and that one is to two as three is to
six.

You cannot, then, it is admitted, comfort any one, serve or amuse any
one, nor teach any one. Finally, I ask, Can you be of _Use_ to any
one? "Yes," you reply; "certainly we are of some use--we architects--in
a climate like this, where it always rains." You are of use certainly;
but, pardon me, only as builders--not as proportionalists. We are not
talking of building as a protection, but only of that special work
which your genius is to do; not of building substantial and comfortable
houses like Mr. Cubitt, but of putting beautiful façades on them like
Inigo Jones. And, again, I ask--Are you of use to any one? Will your
proportions of the façade heal the sick, or clothe the naked? Supposing
you devoted your lives to be merchants, you might reflect at the close
of them, how many, fainting for want, you had brought corn to sustain;
how many, infected with disease, you had brought balms to heal; how
widely, among multitudes of far-away nations, you had scattered the
first seeds of national power, and guided the first rays of sacred
light. Had you been, in fine, _anything_ else in the world
_but_ architectural designers, you might have been of some use or
good to people. Content to be petty tradesmen, you would have saved the
time of mankind;--rough-handed daily labourers, you would have added to
their stock of food or of clothing. But, being men of genius, and
devoting your lives to the exquisite exposition of this genius, on what
achievements do you think the memories of your old age are to fasten?
Whose gratitude will surround you with its glow, or on what
accomplished good, of that greatest kind for which men show _no_
gratitude, will your life rest the contentment of its close? Truly, I
fear that the ghosts of proportionate lines will be thin phantoms at
your bedsides--very speechless to you; and that on all the emanations
of your high genius you will look back with less delight than you might
have done on a cup of cold water given to him who was thirsty, or to a
single moment when you had "prevented with your bread him that fled."

Do not answer, nor think to answer, that with your great works and
great payments of workmen in them, you would do this; I know you would,
and will, as Builders; but, I repeat, it is not your _building_
that I am talking about, but your _brains_; it is your invention
and imagination of whose profit I am speaking. The good done through
the building, observe, is done by your employers, not by you--you share
in the benefit of it. The good that _you_ personally must do is by
your designing; and I compare you with musicians who do good by their
pathetic composing, not as they do good by employing fiddlers in the
orchestra; for it is the public who in reality do that, not the
musicians. So clearly keeping to this one question, what good we
architects are to do by our genius; and having found that on our
proportionate system we can do no good to others, will you tell me,
lastly, what good we can do to _ourselves_?

Observe, nearly every other liberal art or profession has some intense
pleasure connected with it, irrespective of any good to others. As
lawyers, or physicians, or clergymen, you would have the pleasure of
investigation, and of historical reading, as part of your work: as men
of science you would be rejoicing in curiosity perpetually gratified
respecting the laws and facts of nature: as artists you would have
delight in watching the external forms of nature: as day labourers or
petty tradesmen, supposing you to undertake such work with as much
intellect as you are going to devote to your designing, you would find
continued subjects of interest in the manufacture or the agriculture
which you helped to improve; or in the problems of commerce which bore
on your business. But your architectural designing leads you into no
pleasant journeys,--into no seeing of lovely things,--no discerning of
just laws,--no warmths of compassion, no humilities of veneration, no
progressive state of sight or soul. Our conclusion is--must be--that
you will not amuse, nor inform, nor help anybody; you will not amuse,
nor better, nor inform yourselves; you will sink into a state in which
you can neither show, nor feel, nor see, anything, but that one is to
two as three is to six. And in that state what should we call
ourselves? Men? I think not. The right name for us would be--numerators
and denominators. Vulgar Fractions.

Shall we, then, abandon this theory of the soul of architecture being
in proportional lines, and look whether we can find anything better to
exert our fancies upon?

May we not, to begin with, accept this great principle--that, as our
bodies, to be in health, must be _generally_ exercised, so our
minds, to be in health, must be _generally_ cultivated? You would
not call a man healthy who had strong arms but was paralytic in his
feet; nor one who could walk well, but had no use of his hands; nor one
who could see well, if he could not hear. You would not voluntarily
reduce your bodies to any such partially developed state. Much more,
then, you would not, if you could help it, reduce your minds to it.
Now, your minds are endowed with a vast number of gifts of totally
different uses--limbs of mind as it were, which, if you don't exercise,
you cripple. One is curiosity; that is a gift, a capacity of pleasure
in knowing; which if you destroy, you make yourselves cold and dull.
Another is sympathy; the power of sharing in the feelings of living
creatures, which if you destroy, you make yourselves hard and cruel.
Another of your limbs of mind is admiration; the power of enjoying
beauty or ingenuity, which, if you destroy, you make yourselves base
and irreverent. Another is wit; or the power of playing with the lights
on the many sides of truth; which if you destroy, you make yourselves
gloomy, and less useful and cheering to others than you might be. So
that in choosing your way of work it should be your aim, as far as
possible, to bring out all these faculties, as far as they exist in
you; not one merely, nor another, but all of them. And the way to bring
them out, is simply to concern yourselves attentively with the subjects
of each faculty. To cultivate sympathy you must be among living
creatures, and thinking about them; and to cultivate admiration, you
must be among beautiful things and looking at them.

All this sounds much like truism, at least I hope it does, for then you
will surely not refuse to act upon it; and to consider farther, how, as
architects, you are to keep yourselves in contemplation of living
creatures and lovely things.

You all probably know the beautiful photographs which have been
published within the last year or two of the porches of the Cathedral
of Amiens. I hold one of these up to you, (merely that you may know
what I am talking about, as of course you cannot see the detail at this
distance, but you will recognise the subject.) Have you ever considered
how much sympathy, and how much humour, are developed in filling this
single doorway [Footnote: The tympanum of the south transcept door; it
is to be found generally among all collections of architectural
photographs] with these sculptures of the history of St. Honoré (and,
by the way, considering how often we English are now driving up and
down the Rue St. Honoré, we may as well know as much of the saint as
the old architect cared to tell us). You know in all legends of saints
who ever were bishops, the first thing you are told of them is that
they didn't want to be bishops. So here is St. Honoré, who doesn't want
to be a bishop, sitting sulkily in the corner; he hugs his book with
both hands, and won't get up to take his crosier; and here are all the
city aldermen of Amiens come to _poke_ him up; and all the monks
in the town in a great puzzle what they shall do for a bishop if St.
Honoré won't be; and here's one of the monks in the opposite corner who
is quite cool about it, and thinks they'll get on well enough without
St Honoré,--you see that in his face perfectly. At last St. Honoré
consents to be bishop, and here he sits in a throne, and has his book
now grandly on his desk instead of his knees, and he directs one of his
village curates how to find relics in a wood; here is the wood, and
here is the village curate, and here are the tombs, with the bones of
St. Victorien and Gentien in them.

After this, St. Honoré performs grand mass, and the miracle occurs of
the appearance of a hand blessing the wafer, which occurrence
afterwards was painted for the arms of the abbey. Then St. Honoré dies;
and here is his tomb with his statue on the top; and miracles are being
performed at it--a deaf man having his ear touched, and a blind man
groping his way up to the tomb with his dog. Then here is a great
procession in honour of the relics of St. Honoré; and under his coffin
are some cripples being healed; and the coffin itself is put above the
bar which separates the cross from the lower subjects, because the
tradition is that the figure on the crucifix of the Church of St.
Firmin bowed its head in token of acceptance, as the relics of St.
Honoré passed beneath.

Now just consider the amount of sympathy with human nature, and
observance of it, shown in this one bas-relief; the sympathy with
disputing monks, with puzzled aldermen, with melancholy recluse, with
triumphant prelate, with palsy-stricken poverty, with ecclesiastical
magnificence, or miracle-working faith. Consider how much intellect was
needed in the architect, and how much observance of nature before he
could give the expression to these various figures--cast these
multitudinous draperies--design these rich and quaint fragments of
tombs and altars--weave with perfect animation the entangled branches
of the forest.

But you will answer me, all this is not architecture at all--it is
sculpture. Will you then tell me precisely where the separation exists
between one and the other? We will begin at the very beginning. I will
show you a piece of what you will certainly admit to be a piece of pure
architecture; [Footnote: See Appendix III., "Classical Architecture."]
it is drawn on the back of another photograph, another of these
marvellous tympana from Notre Dame, which you call, I suppose, impure.
Well, look on this picture, and on this. Don't laugh; you must not
laugh, that's very improper of you, this is classical architecture. I
have taken it out of the essay on that subject in the "Encyclopædia
Britannica."

Yet I suppose none of you would think yourselves particularly ingenious
architects if you had designed nothing more than this; nay, I will even
let you improve it into any grand proportion you choose, and add to it
as many windows as you choose; the only thing I insist upon in our
specimen of pure architecture is, that there shall be no mouldings nor
ornaments upon it. And I suspect you don't quite like your architecture
so "pure" as this. We want a few mouldings, you will say--just a few.
Those who want mouldings, hold up their hands. We are unanimous, I
think. Will, you, then, design the profiles of these mouldings
yourselves, or will you copy them? If you wish to copy them, and to
copy them always, of course I leave you at once to your authorities,
and your imaginations to their repose. But if you wish to design them
yourselves, how do you do it? You draw the profile according to your
taste, and you order your mason to cut it. Now, will you tell me the
logical difference between drawing the profile of a moulding and giving
_that_ to be cut, and drawing the folds of the drapery of a statue
and giving _those_ to be cut. The last is much more difficult to
do than the first; but degrees of difficulty constitute no specific
difference, and you will not accept it, surely, as a definition of the
difference between architecture and sculpture, that "architecture is
doing anything that is easy, and sculpture anything that is difficult."

It is true, also, that the carved moulding represents nothing, and the
carved drapery represents something; but you will not, I should think,
accept, as an explanation of the difference between architecture and
sculpture, this any more than the other, that "sculpture is art which
has meaning, and architecture art which has none."

Where, then, is your difference? In this, perhaps, you will say; that
whatever ornaments we can direct ourselves, and get accurately cut to
order, we consider architectural. The ornaments that we are obliged to
leave to the pleasure of the workman, or the superintendence of some 
other designer, we consider sculptural, especially if they are more or
less extraneous and incrusted--not an essential part of the building.

Accepting this definition, I am compelled to reply, that it is in
effect nothing more than an amplification of my first one--that
whatever is easy you call architecture, whatever is difficult you call
sculpture. For you cannot suppose the arrangement of the place in which
the sculpture is to be put is so difficult or so great a part of the
design as the sculpture itself. For instance: you all know the pulpit
of Niccolo Pisano, in the baptistry at Pisa. It is composed of seven
rich _relievi_, surrounded by panel mouldings, and sustained on
marble shafts. Do you suppose Niccolo Pisano's reputation--such part of
it at least as rests on this pulpit (and much does)--depends on the
panel mouldings, or on the relievi? The panel mouldings are by his
hand; he would have disdained to leave even them to a common workman;
but do you think he found any difficulty in them, or thought there was
any credit in them? Having once done the sculpture, those enclosing
lines were mere child's play to him; the determination of the diameter
of shafts and height of capitals was an affair of minutes; his
_work_ was in carving the Crucifixion and the Baptism.

Or, again, do you recollect Orcagna's tabernacle in the church of San
Michele, at Florence? That, also, consists of rich and multitudinous
bas-reliefs, enclosed in panel mouldings, with shafts of mosaic, and
foliated arches sustaining the canopy. Do you think Orcagna, any more
than Pisano, if his spirit could rise in the midst of us at this
moment, would tell us that he had trusted his fame to the foliation, or
had put his soul's pride into the panelling? Not so; he would tell you
that his spirit was in the stooping figures that stand round the couch
of the dying Virgin.

Or, lastly, do you think the man who designed the procession on the
portal of Amiens was the subordinate workman? that there was an
architect over _him_, restraining him within certain limits, and
ordering of him his bishops at so much a mitre, and his cripples at so
much a crutch? Not so. _Here_, on this sculptured shield, rests
the Master's hand; _this_ is the centre of the Master's thought;
from this, and in subordination to this, waved the arch and sprang the
pinnacle. Having done this, and being able to give human expression and
action to the stone, all the rest--the rib, the niche, the foil, the
shaft--were mere toys to his hand and accessories to his conception:
and if once you also gain the gift of doing this, if once you can carve
one fronton such as you have here, I tell you, you would be able--so
far as it depended on your invention--to scatter cathedrals over
England as fast as clouds rise from its streams after summer rain.

Nay, but perhaps you answer again, our sculptors at present do not
design cathedrals, and could not. No, they could not; but that is
merely because we have made architecture so dull that they cannot take
any interest in it, and, therefore, do not care to add to their higher
knowledge the poor and common knowledge of principles of building. You
have thus separated building from sculpture, and you have taken away
the power of both; for the sculptor loses nearly as much by never
having room for the development of a continuous work, as you do from
having reduced your work to a continuity of mechanism. You are
essentially, and should always be, the same body of men, admitting only
such difference in operation as there is between the work of a painter
at different times, who sometimes labours on a small picture, and
sometimes on the frescoes of a palace gallery.

This conclusion, then, we arrive at, _must_ arrive at; the fact
being irrevocably so:--that in order to give your imagination and the
other powers of your souls full play, you must do as all the great
architects of old time did--you must yourselves be your sculptors.
Phidias, Michael Angelo, Orcagna, Pisano, Giotto,--which of these men,
do you think, could not use his chisel? You say, "It is difficult;
quite out of your way." I know it is; nothing that is great is easy;
and nothing that is great, so long as you study building without
sculpture, can be _in_ your way. I want to put it in your way, and
you to find your way to it. But, on the other hand, do not shrink from
the task as if the refined art of perfect sculpture were always
required from you. For, though architecture and sculpture are not
separate arts, there is an architectural _manner_ of sculpture;
and it is, in the majority of its applications, a comparatively easy
one. Our great mistake at present, in dealing with stone at all, is
requiring to have all our work too refined; it is just the same mistake
as if we were to require all our book illustrations to be as fine work
as Raphael's. John Leech does not sketch so well as Leonardo da Vinci;
but do you think that the public could easily spare him; or that he is
wrong in bringing out his talent in the way in which it is most
effective? Would you advise him, if he asked your advice, to give up
his wood-blocks and take to canvas? I know you would not; neither would
you tell him, I believe, on the other hand, that because he could not
draw as well as Leonardo, therefore he ought to draw nothing but
straight lines with a ruler, and circles with compasses, and no figure-
subjects at all. That would be some loss to you; would it not? You
would all be vexed if next week's _Punch_ had nothing in it but
proportionate lines. And yet, do not you see that you are doing
precisely the same thing with _your_ powers of sculptural design
that he would be doing with his powers of pictorial design, if he gave
you nothing but such lines. You feel that you cannot carve like
Phidias; therefore you will not carve at all, but only draw mouldings;
and thus all that intermediate power which is of especial value in
modern days,--that popular power of expression which is within the
attainment of thousands,--and would address itself to tens of
thousands,--is utterly lost to us in stone, though in ink and paper it
has become one of the most desired luxuries of modern civilization.

Here, then, is one part of the subject to which I would especially
invite your attention, namely, the distinctive character which may be
wisely permitted to belong to architectural sculpture, as distinguished
from perfect sculpture on one side, and from mere geometrical
decoration on the other.

And first, observe what an indulgence we have in the distance at which
most work is to be seen. Supposing we were able to carve eyes and lips
with the most exquisite precision, it would all be of no use as soon as
the work was put far above the eye; but, on the other hand, as beauties
disappear by being far withdrawn, so will faults; and the mystery and
confusion which are the natural consequence of distance, while they
would often render your best skill but vain, will as often render your
worst errors of little consequence; nay, more than this, often a deep
cut, or a rude angle, will produce in certain positions an effect of
expression both startling and true, which you never hoped for. Not that
mere distance will give animation to the work, if it has none in
itself; but if it has life at all, the distance will make that life
more perceptible and powerful by softening the defects of execution. So 
that you are placed, as workmen, in this position of singular
advantage, that you may give your fancies free play, and strike hard
for the expression that you want, knowing that, if you miss it, no one
will detect you; if you at all touch it, nature herself will help you,
and with every changing shadow and basking sunbeam bring forth new
phases of your fancy.

But it is not merely this privilege of being imperfect which belongs to
architectural sculpture. It has a true privilege of imagination, far
excelling all that can be granted to the more finished work, which, for
the sake of distinction, I will call,--and I don't think we can have a
much better term--"furniture sculpture;" sculpture, that is, which can
be moved from place to furnish rooms.

For observe, to that sculpture the spectator is usually brought in a
tranquil or prosaic state of mind; he sees it associated rather with
what is sumptuous than sublime, and under circumstances which address
themselves more to his comfort than his curiosity. The statue which is
to be pathetic, seen between the flashes of footmen's livery round the
dining-table, must have strong elements of pathos in itself; and the
statue which is to be awful, in the midst of the gossip of the drawing-
room, must have the elements of awe wholly in itself. But the spectator
is brought to _your_ work already in an excited and imaginative
mood. He has been impressed by the cathedral wall as it loomed over the
low streets, before he looks up to the carving of its porch--and his
love of mystery has been touched by the silence and the shadows of the
cloister, before he can set himself to decipher the bosses on its
vaulting. So that when once he begins to observe your doings, he will
ask nothing better from you, nothing kinder from you, than that you
would meet this imaginative temper of his half way;--that you would
farther touch the sense of terror, or satisfy the expectation of things
strange, which have been prompted by the mystery or the majesty of the
surrounding scene. And thus, your leaving forms more or less undefined,
or carrying out your fancies, however extravagant, in grotesqueness of
shadow or shape, will be for the most part in accordance with the
temper of the observer; and he is likely, therefore, much more
willingly to use his fancy to help your meanings, than his judgment to
detect your faults.

Again. Remember that when the imagination and feelings are strongly
excited, they will not only bear with strange things, but they will
_look_ into _minute_ things with a delight quite unknown in
hours of tranquillity. You surely must remember moments of your lives
in which, under some strong excitement of feeling, all the details of
visible objects presented themselves with a strange intensity and
insistance, whether you would or no; urging themselves upon the mind,
and thrust upon the eye, with a force of fascination which you could
not refuse. Now, to a certain extent, the senses get into this state
whenever the imagination is strongly excited. Things trivial at other
times assume a dignity or significance which we cannot explain; but
which is only the more attractive because inexplicable: and the powers
of attention, quickened by the feverish excitement, fasten and feed
upon the minutest circumstances of detail, and remotest traces of
intention. So that what would at other times be felt as more or less
mean or extraneous in a work of sculpture, and which would assuredly be
offensive to the perfect taste in its moments of languor, or of
critical judgment, will be grateful, and even sublime, when it meets
this frightened inquisitiveness, this fascinated watchfulness, of the
roused imagination. And this is all for your advantage; for, in the
beginnings of your sculpture, you will assuredly find it easier to
imitate minute circumstances of costume or character, than to perfect
the anatomy of simple forms or the flow of noble masses; and it will be
encouraging to remember that the grace you cannot perfect, and the
simplicity you cannot achieve, would be in great part vain, even if you
could achieve them, in their appeal to the hasty curiosity of
passionate fancy; but that the sympathy which would be refused to your
science will be granted to your innocence: and that the mind of the
general observer, though wholly unaffected by the correctness of
anatomy or propriety of gesture, will follow you with fond and pleased
concurrence, as you carve the knots of the hair, and the patterns of
the vesture.

Farther yet. We are to remember that not only do the associated
features of the larger architecture tend to excite the strength of
fancy, but the architectural laws to which you are obliged to submit 
your decoration stimulate its _ingenuity_. Every crocket which you
are to crest with sculpture,--every foliation which you have to fill,
presents itself to the spectator's fancy, not only as a pretty thing,
but as a _problematic_ thing. It contained, he perceives
immediately, not only a beauty which you wished to display, but a
necessity which you were forced to meet; and the problem, how to occupy
such and such a space with organic form in any probable way, or how to
turn such a boss or ridge into a conceivable image of life, becomes at
once, to him as to you, a matter of amusement as much as of admiration.
The ordinary conditions of perfection in form, gesture, or feature, are
willingly dispensed with, when the ugly dwarf and ungainly goblin have
only to gather themselves into angles, or crouch to carry corbels; and
the want of skill which, in other kinds of work would have been
required for the finishing of the parts, will at once be forgiven here,
if you have only disposed ingeniously what you have executed roughly,
and atoned for the rudeness of your hands by the quickness of your
wits.

Hitherto, however, we have been considering only the circumstances in
architecture favourable to the development of the _powers_ of
imagination. A yet more important point for us seems, to me, the place
which it gives to all the _objects_ of imagination.

For, I suppose, you will not wish me to spend any time in proving, that
imagination must be vigorous in proportion to the quantity of material
which it has to handle; and that, just as we increase the range of what
we see, we increase the richness of what we can imagine. Granting this,
consider what a field is opened to your fancy merely in the subject
matter which architecture admits. Nearly every other art is severely
limited in its subjects--the landscape painter, for instance, gets
little help from the aspects of beautiful humanity; the historical
painter, less, perhaps, than he ought, from the accidents of wild
nature; and the pure sculptor, still less, from the minor details of
common life. But is there anything within range of sight, or
conception, which may not be of use to _you_, or in which your
interest may not be excited with advantage to your art? From visions of
angels, down to the least important gesture of a child at play,
whatever may be conceived of Divine, or beheld of Human, may be dared
or adopted by you: throughout the kingdom of animal life, no creature
is so vast, or so minute, that you cannot deal with it, or bring it
into service; the lion and the crocodile will couch about your shafts;
the moth and the bee will sun themselves upon your flowers; for you,
the fawn will leap; for you, the snail be slow; for you, the dove
smooth her bosom; and the hawk spread her wings toward the south. All
the wide world of vegetation blooms and bends for you; the leaves
tremble that you may bid them be still under the marble snow; the thorn
and the thistle, which the earth casts forth as evil, are to you the
kindliest servants; no dying petal, nor drooping tendril, is so feeble
as to have no more help for you; no robed pride of blossom so kingly,
but it will lay aside its purple to receive at your hands the pale
immortality. Is there anything in common life too mean,--in common too
trivial,--to be ennobled by your touch? As there is nothing in life, so
there is nothing in lifelessness which has not its lesson for you, or
its gift; and when you are tired of watching the strength of the plume,
and the tenderness of the leaf, you may walk down to your rough river
shore, or into the thickest markets of your thoroughfares, and there is
not a piece of torn cable that will not twine into a perfect moulding;
there is not a fragment of cast-away matting, or shattered basket-work,
that will not work into a chequer or capital. Yes: and if you gather up
the very sand, and break the stone on which you tread, among its
fragments of all but invisible shells you will find forms that will
take their place, and that proudly, among the starred traceries of your
vaulting; and you, who can crown the mountain with its fortress, and
the city with its towers, are thus able also to give beauty to ashes,
and worthiness to dust.

Now, in that your art presents all this material to you, you have
already much to rejoice in. But you have more to rejoice in, because
all this is submitted to you, not to be dissected or analyzed, but to
be sympathized with, and to bring out, therefore, what may be
accurately called the moral part of imagination. We saw that, if we
kept ourselves among lines only, we should have cause to envy the
naturalist, because he was conversant with facts; but you will have
little to envy now, if you make yourselves conversant with the feelings
that arise out of his facts. For instance, the naturalist coming upon a
block of marble, has to begin considering immediately how far its
purple is owing to iron, or its whiteness to magnesia; he breaks his
piece of marble, and at the close of his day, has nothing but a little
sand in his crucible and some data added to the theory of the elements.
But _you_ approach your marble to sympathize with it, and rejoice
over its beauty. You cut it a little indeed; but only to bring out its
veins more perfectly; and at the end of your day's work you leave your
marble shaft with joy and complacency in its perfectness, as marble.
When you have to watch an animal instead of a stone, you differ from
the naturalist in the same way. He may, perhaps, if he be an amiable
naturalist, take delight in having living creatures round him;--still,
the major part of his work is, or has been, in counting feathers,
separating fibres, and analyzing structures. But _your_ work is
always with the living creature; the thing you have to get at in him is
his life, and ways of going about things. It does not matter to you how
many cells there are in his bones, or how many filaments in his
feathers; what you want is his moral character and way of behaving
himself; it is just that which your imagination, if healthy, will first
seize--just that which your chisel, if vigorous, will first cut. You
must get the storm spirit into your eagles, and the lordliness into
your lions, and the tripping fear into your fawns; and in order to do
this, you must be in continual sympathy with every fawn of them; and be
hand-in-glove with all the lions, and hand-in-claw with all the hawks.
And don't fancy that you will lower yourselves by sympathy with the
lower creatures; you cannot sympathize rightly with the higher, unless
you do with those: but you have to sympathize with the higher, too--
with queens, and kings, and martyrs, and angels. Yes, and above all,
and more than all, with simple humanity in all its needs and ways, for
there is not one hurried face that passes you in the street that will
not be impressive, if you can only fathom it. All history is open to
you, all high thoughts and dreams that the past fortunes of men can
suggest, all fairy land is open to you--no vision that ever haunted
forest, or gleamed over hill-side, but calls you to understand how it
came into men's hearts, and may still touch them; and all Paradise is
open to you--yes, and the work of Paradise; for in bringing all this,
in perpetual and attractive truth, before the eyes of your fellow-men,
you have to join in the employment of the angels, as well as to imagine
their companies.

And observe, in this last respect, what a peculiar importance, and
responsibility, are attached to your work, when you consider its
permanence, and the multitudes to whom it is addressed. We frequently
are led, by wise people, to consider what responsibility may sometimes
attach to words, which yet, the chance is, will be heard by few, and
forgotten as soon as heard. But none of _your_ words will be heard
by few, and none will be forgotten, for five or six hundred years, if
you build well. You will talk to all who pass by; and all those little
sympathies, those freaks of fancy, those jests in stone, those
workings-out of problems in caprice, will occupy mind after mind of
utterly countless multitudes, long after you are gone. You have not,
like authors, to plead for a hearing, or to fear oblivion. Do but build
large enough, and carve boldly enough, and all the world will hear you;
they cannot choose but look.

I do not mean to awe you by this thought; I do not mean that because
you will have so many witnesses and watchers, you are never to jest, or
do anything gaily or lightly; on the contrary, I have pleaded, from the
beginning, for this art of yours, especially because it has room for
the whole of your character--if jest is in you, let the jest be jested;
if mathematical ingenuity is yours, let your problem be put, and your
solution worked out, as quaintly as you choose; above all, see that
your work is easily and happily done, else it will never make anybody 
else happy; but while you thus give the rein to all your impulses, see
that those impulses be headed and centred by one noble impulse; and let
that be Love--triple love--for the art which you practise, the creation
in which you move, and the creatures to whom you minister.

I. I say, first, Love for the art which you practise. Be assured that
if ever any other motive becomes a leading one in your mind, as the
principal one for exertion, except your love of art, that moment it is
all over with your art. I do not say you are to desire money, nor to
desire fame, nor to desire position; you cannot but desire all three;
nay, you may--if you are willing that I should use the word Love in a
desecrated sense--love all three; that is, passionately covet them, yet
you must not covet or love them in the first place. Men of strong
passions and imaginations must always care a great deal for anything
they care for at all; but the whole question is one of first or second.
Does your art lead you, or your gain lead you? You may like making
money exceedingly; but if it come to a fair question, whether you are
to make five hundred pounds less by this business, or to spoil your
building, and you choose to spoil your building, there's an end of you.
So you may be as thirsty for fame as a cricket is for cream; but, if it
come to a fair question, whether you are to please the mob, or do the
thing as you know it ought to be done; and you can't do both, and
choose to please the mob, it's all over with you--there's no hope for
you; nothing that you can do will ever be worth a man's glance as he
passes by. The test is absolute, inevitable--Is your art first with
you? Then you are artists; you may be, after you have made your money,
misers and usurers; you may be, after you have got your fame, jealous,
and proud, and wretched, and base: but yet, _as long as you won't
spoil your work_, you are artists. On the other hand--Is your money
first with you, and your fame first with you? Then, you may be very
charitable with your money, and very magnificent with your money, and
very graceful in the way you wear your reputation, and very courteous
to those beneath you, and very acceptable to those above you; but you
are _not artists_. You are mechanics, and drudges.

II. You must love the creation you work in the midst of. For, wholly in
proportion to the intensity of feeling which you bring to the subject
you have chosen, will be the depth and justice of our perception of its
character. And this depth of feeling is not to be gained on the
instant, when you want to bring it to bear on this or that. It is the
result of the general habit of striving to feel rightly; and, among
thousands of various means of doing this, perhaps the one I ought
specially to name to you, is the keeping yourselves clear of petty and
mean cares. Whatever you do, don't be anxious, nor fill your heads with
little chagrins and little desires. I have just said, that you may be
great artists, and yet be miserly and jealous, and troubled about many
things. So you may be; but I said also that the miserliness or trouble
must not be in your hearts all day. It is possible that you may get a
habit of saving money; or it is possible, at a time of great trial, you
may yield to the temptation of speaking unjustly of a rival,--and you
will shorten your powers arid dim your sight even by this;--but the
thing that you have to dread far more than any such unconscious habit,
or--any such momentary fall--is the _constancy of small emotions_;--the
anxiety whether Mr. So-and-so will like your work; whether such and such
a workman will do all that you want of him, and so on;--not wrong feelings
or anxieties in themselves, but impertinent, and wholly incompatible with
the full exercise of your imagination.

Keep yourselves, therefore, quiet, peaceful, with your eyes open. It
doesn't matter at all what Mr. So-and-so thinks of your work; but it
matters a great deal what that bird is doing up there in its nest, or
how that vagabond child at the street corner is managing his game of
knuckle-down. And remember, you cannot turn aside from your own
interests, to the birds' and the children's interests, unless you have
long before got into the habit of loving and watching birds and
children; so that it all comes at last to the forgetting yourselves,
and the living out of yourselves, in the calm of the great world, or if
you will, in its agitation; but always in a calm of your own bringing.
Do not think it wasted time to submit yourselves to any influence which
may bring upon you any noble feeling. Rise early, always watch the
sunrise, and the way the clouds break from the dawn; you will cast your
statue-draperies in quite another than your common way, when the
remembrance of that cloud motion is with you, and of the scarlet
vesture of the morning. Live always in the springtime in the country;
you do not know what leaf-form means, unless you have seen the buds
burst, and the young leaves breathing low in the sunshine, and
wondering at the first shower of rain. But above all, accustom
yourselves to look for, and to love, all nobleness of gesture and
feature in the human form; and remember that the highest nobleness is
usually among the aged, the poor, and the infirm; you will find, in the
end, that it is not the strong arm of the soldier, nor the laugh of the
young beauty, that are the best studies for you. Look at them, and look
at them reverently; but be assured that endurance is nobler than
strength, and patience than beauty; and that it is not in the high
church pews, where the gay dresses are, but in the church free seats,
where the widows' weeds are, that you may see the faces that will fit
best between the angels' wings, in the church porch.

III. And therefore, lastly, and chiefly, you must love the creatures to
whom you minister, your fellow-men; for, if you do not love them, not
only will you be little interested in the passing events of life, but
in all your gazing at humanity, you will be apt to be struck only by
outside form, and not by expression. It is only kindness and tenderness
which will ever enable you to see what beauty there is in the dark eyes
that are sunk with weeping, and in the paleness of those fixed faces
which the earth's adversity has compassed about, till they shine in
their patience like dying watchfires through twilight. But it is not
this only which makes it needful for you, if you would be great, to be
also kind; there is a most important and all-essential reason in the
very nature of your own art. So soon as you desire to build largely,
and with addition of noble sculpture, you will find that your work must
be associative. You cannot carve a whole cathedral yourself--you can
carve but few and simple parts of it. Either your own work must be
disgraced in the mass of the collateral inferiority, or you must raise
your fellow-designers to correspondence of power. If you have genius,
you will yourselves take the lead in the building you design; you will
carve its porch and direct its disposition. But for all subsequent
advancement of its detail, you must trust to the agency and the
invention of others; and it rests with you either to repress what
faculties your workmen have, into cunning subordination to your own; or
to rejoice in discovering even the powers that may rival you, and
leading forth mind after mind into fellowship with your fancy, and
association with your fame.

I need not tell you that if you do the first--if you endeavour to
depress or disguise the talents of your subordinates--you are lost; for
nothing could imply more darkly and decisively than this, that your art
and your work were not beloved by you; that it was your own prosperity
that you were seeking, and your own skill only that you cared to
contemplate. I do not say that you must not be jealous at all; it is
rarely in human nature to be wholly without jealousy; and you may be
forgiven for going some day sadly home, when you find some youth,
unpractised and unapproved, giving the life-stroke to his work which
you, after years of training, perhaps, cannot reach; but your jealousy
must not conquer--your love of your building must conquer, helped by
your kindness of heart. See--I set no high or difficult standard before
you. I do not say that you are to surrender your pre-eminence in
_mere_ unselfish generosity. But I do say that you must surrender
your pre-eminence in your love of your building helped by your
kindness; and that whomsoever you find better able to do what will
adorn it than you,--that person you are to give place to; and to
console yourselves for the humiliation, first, by your joy in seeing
the edifice grow more beautiful under his chisel, and secondly, by your
sense of having done kindly and justly. But if you are morally strong
enough to make the kindness and justice the first motive, it will be
better;--best of all, if you do not consider it as kindness at all, but
bare and stern justice; for, truly, such help as we can give each other
in this world is a _debt_ to each other; and the man who perceives
a superiority or a capacity in a subordinate, and neither confesses,
nor assists it, is not merely the withholder of kindness, but the
committer of injury. But be the motive what you will, only see that you
do the thing; and take the joy of the consciousness that, as your art
embraces a wider field than all others--and addresses a vaster
multitude than all others--and is surer of audience than all others--so
it is profounder and holier in Fellowship than all others. The artist,
when his pupil is perfect, must see him leave his side that he may
declare his distinct, perhaps opponent, skill. Man of science wrestles
with man of science for priority of discovery, and pursues in pangs of
jealous haste his solitary inquiry. You alone are called by kindness,--
by necessity,--by equity, to fraternity of toil; and thus, in those
misty and massive piles which rise above the domestic roofs of our
ancient cities, there was--there may be again--a meaning more profound
and true than any that fancy so commonly has attached to them. Men say
their pinnacles point to heaven. Why, so does every tree that buds, and
every bird that rises as it sings. Men say their aisles are good for
worship. Why, so is every mountain glen, and rough sea-shore. But this
they have of distinct and indisputable glory,--that their mighty walls
were never raised, and never shall be, but by men who love and aid each
other in their weakness;--that all their interlacing strength of
vaulted stone has its foundation upon the stronger arches of manly
fellowship, and all their changing grace of depressed or lifted
pinnacle owes its cadence and completeness to sweeter symmetries of
human soul.




LECTURE V.

THE WORK OP IRON, IN NATURE, ART, AND POLICY.

_A Lecture Delivered at Tunbridge Wells, February, 1858._


When first I heard that you wished me to address you this evening, it
was a matter of some doubt with me whether I could find any subject
that would possess any sufficient interest for you to justify my
bringing you out of your comfortable houses on a winter's night. When I
venture to speak about my own special business of art, it is almost
always before students of art, among whom I may sometimes permit myself
to be dull, if I can feel that I am useful: but a mere talk about art,
especially without examples to refer to (and I have been unable to
prepare any careful illustrations for this lecture), is seldom of much
interest to a general audience. As I was considering what you might
best bear with me in speaking about, there came naturally into my mind
a subject connected with the origin and present prosperity of the town
you live in; and, it seemed to me, in the out-branchings of it, capable
of a very general interest. When, long ago (I am afraid to think how
long), Tunbridge Wells was my Switzerland, and I used to be brought
down here in the summer, a sufficiently active child, rejoicing in the
hope of clambering sandstone cliffs of stupendous height above the
common, there used sometimes, as, I suppose, there are in the lives of
all children at the Wells, to be dark days in my life--days of
condemnation to the pantiles and band--under which calamities my only
consolation used to be in watching, at every turn in my walk, the
welling forth of the spring over the orange rim of its marble basin.
The memory of the clear water, sparkling over its saffron stain, came
back to me as the strongest image connected with the place; and it
struck me that you might not be unwilling, to-night, to think a little
over the full significance of that saffron stain, and of the power, in
other ways and other functions, of the steelly element to which so many
here owe returning strength and life;--chief as it has been always, and
is yet more and more markedly so day by day, among the precious gifts
of the earth.

The subject is, of course, too wide to be more than suggestively
treated; and even my suggestions must be few, and drawn chiefly from my
own fields of work; nevertheless, I think I shall have time to indicate
some courses of thought which you may afterwards follow out for
yourselves if they interest you; and so I will not shrink from the full
scope of the subject which I have announced to you--the functions of
Iron, in Nature, Art, and Policy.

Without more preface, I will take up the first head.

I. IRON IN NATURE.--You all probably know that the ochreous stain,
which, perhaps, is often thought to spoil the basin of your spring, is
iron in a state of rust: and when you see rusty iron in other places
you generally think, not only that it spoils the places it stains, but
that it is spoiled itself--that rusty iron is spoiled iron.

For most of our uses it generally is so; and because we cannot use a
rusty knife or razor so well as a polished one, we suppose it to be a
great defect in iron that it is subject to rust. But not at all. On the
contrary, the most perfect and useful state of it is that ochreous
stain; and therefore it is endowed with so ready a disposition to get
itself into that state. It is not a fault in the iron, but a virtue, to
be so fond of getting rusted, for in that condition it fulfils its most
important functions in the universe, and most kindly duties to mankind.
Nay, in a certain sense, and almost a literal one, we may say that iron
rusted is Living; but when pure or polished, Dead. You all probably
know that in the mixed air we breathe, the part of it essentially
needful to us is called oxygen; and that this substance is to all
animals, in the most accurate sense of the word, "breath of life." The
nervous power of life is a different thing; but the supporting element
of the breath, without which the blood, and therefore the life, cannot
be nourished, is this oxygen. Now it is this very same air which the
iron breathes when it gets rusty. It takes the oxygen from the
atmosphere as eagerly as we do, though it uses it differently. The iron
keeps all that it gets; we, and other animals, part with it again; but
the metal absolutely keeps what it has once received of this aerial
gift; and the ochreous dust which we so much despise is, in fact, just
so much nobler than pure iron, in so far as it is _iron and the
air._ Nobler, and more useful--for, indeed, as I shall be able to
show you presently--the main service of this metal, and of all other
metals, to us, is not in making knives, and scissors, and pokers, and
pans, but in making the ground we feed from, and nearly all the
substances first needful to our existence. For these are all nothing
but metals and oxygen--metals with breath put into them. Sand, lime,
clay, and the rest of the earths--potash and soda, and the rest of the
alkalies--are all of them metals which have undergone this, so to
speak, vital change, and have been rendered fit for the service of man
by permanent unity with the purest air which he himself breathes. There
is only one metal which does not rust readily; and that, in its
influence on Man hitherto, has caused Death rather than Life; it will
not be put to its right use till it is made a pavement of, and so
trodden under foot.

Is there not something striking in this fact, considered largely as one
of the types, or lessons, furnished by the inanimate creation? Here you
have your hard, bright, cold, lifeless metal--good enough for swords
and scissors--but not for food. You think, perhaps, that your iron is
wonderfully useful in a pure form, but how would you like the world, if
all your meadows, instead of grass, grew nothing but iron wire--if all
your arable ground, instead of being made of sand and clay, were
suddenly turned into flat surfaces of steel--if the whole earth,
instead of its green and glowing sphere, rich with forest and flower,
showed nothing but the image of the vast furnace of a ghastly engine--a
globe of black, lifeless, excoriated metal? It would be that,--probably
it was once that; but assuredly it would be, were it not that all the
substance of which it is made sucks and breathes the brilliancy of the
atmosphere; and as it breathes, softening from its merciless hardness,
it falls into fruitful and beneficent dust; gathering itself again into
the earths from which we feed, and the stones with which we build;--
into the rocks that frame the mountains, and the sands that bind the
sea.

Hence, it is impossible for you to take up the most insignificant
pebble at your feet, without being able to read, if you like, this
curious lesson in it. You look upon it at first as if it were earth
only. Nay, it answers, "I am not earth--I am earth and air in one; part
of that blue heaven which you love, and long for, is already in me; it
is all my life--without it I should be nothing, and able for nothing; I
could not minister to you, nor nourish you--I should be a cruel and
helpless thing; but, because there is, according to my need and place
in creation, a kind of soul in me, I have become capable of good, and
helpful in the circles of vitality."

Thus far the same interest attaches to all the earths, and all the
metals of which they are made; but a deeper interest, and larger
beneficence belong to that ochreous earth of iron which stains the
marble of your springs. It stains much besides that marble. It stains
the great earth wheresoever you can see it, far and wide--it is the
colouring substance appointed to colour the globe for the sight, as
well as subdue it to the service of man. You have just seen your hills
covered with snow, and, perhaps, have enjoyed, at first, the contrast
of their fair white with the dark blocks of pine woods; but have you
ever considered how you would like them always white--not pure white,
but dirty white--the white of thaw, with all the chill of snow in it,
but none of its brightness? That is what the colour of the earth would
be without its iron; that would be its colour, not here or there only,
but in all places, and at all times. Follow out that idea till you get
it in some detail. Think first of your pretty gravel walks in your
gardens, yellow and fine, like plots of sunshine between the flower-
beds; fancy them all suddenly turned to the colour of ashes. That is
what they would be without iron ochre. Think of your winding walks over
the common, as warm to the eye as they are dry to the foot, and imagine
them all laid down suddenly with gray cinders. Then pass beyond the
common into the country, and pause at the first ploughed field that you
see sweeping up the hill sides in the sun, with its deep brown furrows,
and wealth of ridges all a-glow, heaved aside by the ploughshare, like
deep folds of a mantle of russet velvet--fancy it all changed suddenly
into grisly furrows in a field of mud. That is what it would be without
iron. Pass on, in fancy, over hill and dale, till you reach the bending
line of the sea shore; go down upon its breezy beach--watch the white
foam flashing among the amber of it, and all the blue sea embayed in
belts of gold: then fancy those circlets of far sweeping shore suddenly
put into mounds of mourning--all those golden sands turned into gray
slime, the fairies no more able to call to each other, "Come unto these
yellow sands;" but, "Come unto these drab sands." That is what they
would be, without iron.

Iron is in some sort, therefore, the sunshine and light of landscape,
so far as that light depends on the ground; but it is a source of
another kind of sunshine, quite as important to us in the way we live
at present--sunshine, not of landscape, but of dwelling-place.

In these days of swift locomotion I may doubtless assume that most of
my audience have been somewhere out of England--have been in Scotland,
or France, or Switzerland. Whatever may have been their impression, on
returning to their own country, of its superiority or inferiority in
other respects, they cannot but have felt one thing about it--the
comfortable look of its towns and villages. Foreign towns are often
very picturesque, very beautiful, but they never have quite that look
of warm self-sufficiency and wholesome quiet, with which our villages
nestle themselves down among the green fields. If you will take the
trouble to examine into the sources of this impression, you will find
that by far the greater part of that warm and satisfactory appearance
depends upon the rich scarlet colour of the bricks and tiles. It does
not belong to the neat building--very neat building has an
uncomfortable rather than a comfortable look--but it depends on the
_warm_ building; our villages are dressed in red tiles as our old
women are in red cloaks; and it does not matter how worn the cloaks, or
how bent and bowed the roof may be, so long as there are no holes in
either one or the other, and the sobered but unextinguishable colour
still glows in the shadow of the hood, and burns among the green mosses
of the gable. And what do you suppose dyes your tiles of cottage roof?
You don't paint them. It is nature who puts all that lovely vermilion
into the clay for you; and all that lovely vermilion is this oxide of
iron. Think, therefore, what your streets of towns would become--ugly
enough, indeed, already, some of them, but still comfortable-looking--
if instead of that warm brick red, the houses became all pepper-and-
salt colour. Fancy your country villages changing from that homely
scarlet of theirs which, in its sweet suggestion of laborious peace, is
as honourable as the soldiers' scarlet of laborious battle--suppose all
those cottage roofs, I say, turned at once into the colour of unbaked
clay, the colour of street gutters in rainy weather. That's what they
would be, without iron.

There is, however, yet another effect of colour in our English country
towns which, perhaps, you may not all yourselves have noticed, but for
which you must take the word of a sketcher. They are not so often
merely warm scarlet as they are warm purple;--a more beautiful colour
still: and they owe this colour to a mingling with the vermilion of the
deep grayish or purple hue of our fine Welsh slates on the more
respectable roofs, made more blue still by the colour of intervening
atmosphere. If you examine one of these Welsh slates freshly broken,
you will find its purple colour clear and vivid; and although never
strikingly so after it has been long exposed to weather, it always
retains enough of the tint to give rich harmonies of distant purple in
opposition to the green of our woods and fields. Whatever brightness or
power there is in the hue is entirely owing to the oxide of iron.
Without it the slates would either be pale stone colour, or cold gray,
or black.

Thus far we have only been considering the use and pleasantness of iron
in the common earth of clay. But there are three kinds of earth which
in mixed mass and prevalent quantity, form the world. Those are, in
common language, the earths of clay, of lime, and of flint. Many other
elements are mingled with these in sparing quantities; but the great
frame and substance of the earth is made of these three, so that
wherever you stand on solid ground, in any country of the globe, the
thing that is mainly under your feet will be either clay, limestone, or
some condition of the earth of flint, mingled with both.

These being what we have usually to deal with, Nature seems to have set
herself to make these three substances as interesting to us, and as
beautiful for us, as she can. The clay, being a soft and changeable
substance, she doesn't take much pains about, as we have seen, till it
is baked; she brings the colour into it only when it receives a
permanent form. But the limestone and flint she paints, in her own way,
in their native state: and her object in painting them seems to be much
the same as in her painting of flowers; to draw us, careless and idle
human creatures, to watch her a little, and see what she is about--that
being on the whole good for us,--her children. For Nature is always
carrying on very strange work with this limestone and flint of hers:
laying down beds of them at the bottom of the sea; building islands out
of the sea; filling chinks and veins in mountains with curious
treasures; petrifying mosses, and trees, and shells; in fact, carrying
on all sorts of business, subterranean or submarine, which it would be
highly desirable for us, who profit and live by it, to notice as it
goes on. And apparently to lead us to do this, she makes picture-books
for us of limestone and flint; and tempts us, like foolish children as
we are, to read her books by the pretty colours in them. The pretty
colours in her limestone-books form those variegated marbles which all
mankind have taken delight to polish and build with from the beginning
of time; and the pretty colours in her flint-books form those agates,
jaspers, cornelians, bloodstones, onyxes, cairngorms, chrysoprases,
which men have in like manner taken delight to cut, and polish, and
make ornaments of, from the beginning of time; and yet, so much of
babies are they, and so fond of looking at the pictures instead of
reading the book, that I question whether, after six thousand years of
cutting and polishing, there are above two or three people out of any
given hundred, who know, or care to know, how a bit of agate or a bit
of marble was made, or painted.

How it was made, may not be always very easy to say; but with what it
was painted there is no manner of question. All those beautiful violet
veinings and variegations of the marbles of Sicily and Spain, the
glowing orange and amber colours of those of Siena, the deep russet of
the Rosso antico, and the blood-colour of all the precious jaspers that
enrich the temples of Italy; and, finally, all the lovely transitions
of tint in the pebbles of Scotland and the Rhine, which form, though
not the most precious, by far the most interesting portion of our
modern jewellers' work;--all these are painted by nature with this one
material only, variously proportioned and applied--the oxide of iron
that stains your Tunbridge springs.

But this is not all, nor the best part of the work of iron. Its service
in producing these beautiful stones is only rendered to rich people,
who can afford to quarry and polish them. But Nature paints for all the
world, poor and rich together: and while, therefore, she thus adorns
the innermost rocks of her hills, to tempt your investigation, or
indulge your luxury,--she paints, far more carefully, the outsides of
the hills, which are for the eyes of the shepherd and the ploughman. I
spoke just now of the effect in the roofs of our villages of their
purple slates: but if the slates are beautiful even in their flat and
formal rows on house-roofs, much more are they beautiful on the rugged
crests and flanks of their native mountains. Have you ever considered,
in speaking as we do so often of distant blue hills, what it is that
makes them blue? To a certain extent it is distance; but distance alone
will not do it. Many hills look white, however distant. That lovely
dark purple colour of our Welsh and Highland hills is owing, not to
their distance merely, but to their rocks. Some of their rocks are,
indeed, too dark to be beautiful, being black or ashy gray; owing to
imperfect and porous structure. But when you see this dark colour
dashed with russet and blue, and coming out in masses among the green
ferns, so purple that you can hardly tell at first whether it is rock
or heather, then you must thank your old Tunbridge friend, the oxide of
iron.

But this is not all. It is necessary for the beauty of hill scenery
that Nature should colour not only her soft rocks, but her hard ones;
and she colours them with the same thing, only more beautifully.
Perhaps you have wondered at my use of the word "purple," so often of
stones; but the Greeks, and still more the Romans, who had profound
respect for purple, used it of stone long ago. You have all heard of
"porphyry" as among the most precious of the harder massive stones. The
colour which gave it that noble name, as well as that which gives the
flush to all the rosy granite of Egypt--yes, and to the rosiest summits
of the Alps themselves--is still owing to the same substance--your
humble oxide of iron.

And last of all:

A nobler colour than all these--the noblest colour ever seen on this
earth--one which belongs to a strength greater than that of the
Egyptian granite, and to a beauty greater than that of the sunset or
the rose--is still mysteriously connected with the presence of this
dark iron. I believe it is not ascertained on what the crimson of blood
actually depends; but the colour is connected, of course, with its
vitality, and that vitality with the existence of iron as one of its
substantial elements.

Is it not strange to find this stern and strong metal mingled so
delicately in our human life, that we cannot even blush without its
help? Think of it, my fair and gentle hearers; how terrible the
alternative--sometimes you have actually no choice but to be brazen-
faced, or iron-faced!

In this slight review of some of the functions of the metal, you
observe that I confine myself strictly to its operations as a colouring
element. I should only confuse your conception of the facts, if I
endeavoured to describe its uses as a substantial element, either in
strengthening rocks, or influencing vegetation by the decomposition of
rocks. I have not, therefore, even glanced at any of the more serious
uses of the metal in the economy of nature. But what I wish you to
carry clearly away with you is the remembrance that in all these uses
the metal would be nothing without the air. The pure metal has no
power, and never occurs in nature at all except in meteoric stones,
whose fall no one can account for, and which are useless after they
have fallen: in the necessary work of the world, the iron is invariably
joined with the oxygen, and would be capable of no service or beauty
whatever without it.

II. IRON IN ART.--Passing, then, from the offices of the metal in the
operations of nature to its uses in the hands of man, you must
remember, in the outset, that the type which has been thus given you,
by the lifeless metal, of the action of body and soul together, has
noble antitype in the operation of all human power. All art worthy the
name is the energy--neither of the human body alone, nor of the human
soul alone, but of both united, one guiding the other: good
craftsmanship and work of the fingers, joined with good emotion and
work of the heart.

There is no good art, nor possible judgment of art, when these two are
not united; yet we are constantly trying to separate them. Our amateurs
cannot be persuaded but that they may produce some kind of art by their
fancy or sensibility, without going through the necessary manual toil.
That is entirely hopeless. Without a certain number, and that a very
great number, of steady acts of hand--a practice as careful and
constant as would be necessary to learn any other manual business--no
drawing is possible. On the other side, the workman, and those who
employ him, are continually trying to produce art by trick or habit of
fingers, without using their fancy or sensibility. That also is
hopeless. Without mingling of heart-passion with hand-power, no art is
possible. [Footnote: No fine art, that is. See the previous definition
of fine art at p. 38.] The highest art unites both in their intensest
degrees: the action of the hand at its finest, with that of the heart
at its fullest.

Hence it follows that the utmost power of art can only be given in a
material capable of receiving and retaining the influence of the
subtlest touch of the human hand. That hand is the most perfect agent
of material power existing in the universe; and its full subtlety can
only be shown when the material it works on, or with, is entirely
yielding. The chords of a perfect instrument will receive it, but not
of an imperfect one; the softly bending point of the hair pencil, and
soft melting of colour, will receive it, but not even the chalk or pen
point, still less the steel point, chisel, or marble. The hand of a
sculptor may, indeed, be as subtle as that of a painter, but all its
subtlety is not bestowable nor expressible: the touch of Titian,
Correggio, or Turner, [Footnote: See Appendix IV., "Subtlety of Hand."]
is a far more marvellous piece of nervous action than can be shown in
anything but colour, or in the very highest conditions of executive
expression in music. In proportion as the material worked upon is less
delicate, the execution necessarily becomes lower, and the art with it.
This is one main principle of all work. Another is, that whatever the
material you choose to work with, your art is base if it does not bring
out the distinctive qualities of that material.

The reason of this second law is, that if you don't want the qualities
of the substance you use, you ought to use some other substance: it can
be only affectation, and desire to display your skill, that lead you to
employ a refractory substance, and therefore your art will all be base.
Glass, for instance, is eminently, in its nature, transparent. If you
don't want transparency, let the glass alone. Do not try to make a
window look like an opaque picture, but take an opaque ground to begin
with. Again, marble is eminently a solid and massive substance. Unless
you want mass and solidity, don't work in marble. If you wish for
lightness, take wood; if for freedom, take stucco; if for ductility,
take glass. Don't try to carve leathers, or trees, or nets, or foam,
out of marble. Carve white limbs and broad breasts only out of that.

So again, iron is eminently a ductile and tenacious substance--
tenacious above all things, ductile more than most. When you want
tenacity, therefore, and involved form, take iron. It is eminently made
for that. It is the material given to the sculptor as the companion of
marble, with a message, as plain as it can well be spoken, from the
lips of the earth-mother, "Here's for you to cut, and here's for you to
hammer. Shape this, and twist that. What is solid and simple, carve
out; what is thin and entangled, beat out. I give you all kinds of
forms to be delighted in;--fluttering leaves as well as fair bodies;
twisted branches as well as open brows. The leaf and the branch you may
beat and drag into their imagery: the body and brow you shall
reverently touch into their imagery. And if you choose rightly and work
rightly, what you do shall be safe afterwards. Your slender leaves
shall not break off in my tenacious iron, though they may be rusted a
little with an iron autumn. Your broad surfaces shall not be unsmoothed
in my pure crystalline marble--no decay shall touch them. But if you
carve in the marble what will break with a touch, or mould in the metal
what a stain of rust or verdigris will spoil, it is your fault--not
mine."

These are the main principles in this matter; which, like nearly all
other right principles in art, we moderns delight in contradicting as
directly and specially as may be. We continually look for, and praise,
in our exhibitions the sculpture of veils, and lace, and thin leaves,
and all kinds of impossible things pushed as far as possible in the
fragile stone, for the sake of showing the sculptor's dexterity.
[Footnote: I do not mean to attach any degree of blame to the effort to
represent leafage in marble for certain expressive purposes. The later
works of Mr. Munro have depended for some of their most tender thoughts
on a delicate and skilful use of such accessories. And in general, leaf
sculpture is good and admirable, if it renders, as in Gothic work, the
grace and lightness of the leaf by the arrangement of light and shadow
--supporting the masses well by strength of stone below; but all carving
is base which proposes to itself _slightness_ as an aim, and tries
to imitate the absolute thinness of thin or slight things, as much
modern wood carving does, I saw in Italy, a year or two ago, a marble
sculpture of birds' nests.] On the other hand, we _cast_ our iron
into bars--brittle, though an inch thick--sharpen them at the ends,
and consider fences, and other work, made of such materials,
decorative! I do not believe it would be easy to calculate the amount
of mischief done to our taste in England by that fence iron-work of
ours alone. If it were asked of us by a single characteristic, to
distinguish the dwellings of a country into two broad sections; and to
set, on one side, the places where people were, for the most part,
simple, happy, benevolent, and honest; and, on the other side, the
places where at least a great number of the people were sophisticated,
unkind, uncomfortable, and unprincipled, there is, I think, one feature
that you could fix upon as a positive test: the uncomfortable and
unprincipled parts of a country would be the parts where people lived
among iron railings, and the comfortable and principled parts where
they had none. A broad generalization, you will say! Perhaps a little
too broad; yet, in all sobriety, it will come truer than you think.
Consider every other kind of fence or defence, and you will find some
virtue in it; but in the iron railing none. There is, first, your
castle rampart of stone--somewhat too grand to be considered here among
our types of fencing; next, your garden or park wall of brick, which
has indeed often an unkind look on the outside, but there is more
modesty in it than unkindness. It generally means, not that the builder
of it wants to shut you out from the view of his garden, but from the
view of himself: it is a frank statement that as he needs a certain
portion of time to himself, so he needs a certain portion of ground to
himself, and must not be stared at when he digs there in his shirt-
sleeves, or plays at leapfrog with his boys from school, or talks over
old times with his wife, walking up and down in the evening sunshine.
Besides, the brick wall has good practical service in it, and shelters
you from the east wind, and ripens your peaches and nectarines, and
glows in autumn like a sunny bank. And, moreover, your brick wall, if
you build it properly, so that it shall stand long enough, is a
beautiful thing when it is old, and has assumed its grave purple red,
touched with mossy green.

Next to your lordly wall, in dignity of enclosure, comes your close-set
wooden paling, which is more objectionable, because it commonly means
enclosure on a larger scale than people want. Still it is significative
of pleasant parks, and well-kept field walks, and herds of deer, and
other such aristocratic pastoralisms, which have here and there their
proper place in a country, and may be passed without any discredit.

Next to your paling, comes your low stone dyke, your mountain fence,
indicative at a glance either of wild hill country, or of beds of stone
beneath the soil; the hedge of the mountains--delightful in all its
associations, and yet more in the varied and craggy forms of the loose
stones it is built of; and next to the low stone wall, your lowland
hedge, either in trim line of massive green, suggested of the
pleasances of old Elizabethan houses, and smooth alleys for aged feet,
and quaint labyrinths for young ones, or else in fair entanglement of
eglantine and virgin's bower, tossing its scented luxuriance along our
country waysides;--how many such you have here among your pretty hills,
fruitful with black clusters of the bramble for boys in autumn, and
crimson hawthorn berries for birds in winter. And then last, and most
difficult to class among fences, comes your handrail, expressive of all
sorts of things; sometimes having a knowing and vicious look, which it
learns at race-courses; sometimes an innocent and tender look, which it
learns at rustic bridges over cressy brooks; and sometimes a prudent
and protective look, which it learns on passes of the Alps, where it
has posts of granite and bars of pine, and guards the brows of cliffs
and the banks of torrents. So that in all these kinds of defence there
is some good, pleasant, or noble meaning. But what meaning has the iron
railing? Either, observe, that you are living in the midst of such bad
characters that you must keep them out by main force of bar, or that
you are yourself of a character requiring to be kept inside in the same
manner. Your iron railing always means thieves outside, or Bedlam
inside; it _can_ mean nothing else than that. If the people
outside were good for anything, a hint in the way of fence would be
enough for them; but because they are violent and at enmity with you,
you are forced to put the close bars and the spikes at the top.

Last summer I was lodging for a little while in a cottage in the
country, and in front of my low window there were, first some beds of
daisies, then a row of gooseberry and currant bushes, and then a low
wall about three feet above the ground, covered with stone-cress.
Outside, a corn-field, with its green ears glistening in the sun, and a
field path through it, just past the garden gate. From my window I
could see every peasant of the village who passed that way, with basket
on arm for market, or spade on shoulder for field. When I was inclined
for society, I could lean over my wall, and talk to anybody; when I was
inclined for science, I could botanize all along the top of my wall--
there were four species of stone-cress alone growing on it; and when I
was inclined for exercise, I could jump over my wall, backwards and
forwards. That's the sort of fence to have in a Christian country; not
a thing which you can't walk inside of without making yourself look
like a wild beast, nor look at out of your window in the morning
without expecting to see somebody impaled upon it in the night.

And yet farther, observe that the iron railing is a useless fence--it
can shelter nothing, and support nothing; you can't nail your peaches
to it, nor protect your flowers with it, nor make anything whatever out
of its costly tyranny; and besides being useless, it is an insolent
fence;--it says plainly to everybody who passes--"You may be an honest
person,--but, also, you may be a thief: honest or not, you shall not
get in here, for I am a respectable person, and much above you; you
shall only see what a grand place I have got to keep you out of--look
here, and depart in humiliation."

This, however, being in the present state of civilization a frequent
manner of discourse, and there being unfortunately many districts where
the iron railing is unavoidable, it yet remains a question whether you
need absolutely make it ugly, no less than significative of evil. You
must have railings round your squares in London, and at the sides of
your areas; but need you therefore have railings so ugly that the
constant sight of them is enough to neutralise the effect of all the
schools of art in the kingdom? You need not. Far from such necessity,
it is even in your power to turn all your police force of iron bars
actually into drawing masters, and natural historians. Not, of course,
without some trouble and some expense; you can do nothing much worth
doing, in this world, without trouble, you can get nothing much worth
having without expense. The main question is only--what is worth doing
and having:--Consider, therefore, if this be not. Here is your iron
railing, as yet, an uneducated monster; a sombre seneschal, incapable
of any words, except his perpetual "Keep out!" and "Away with you!"
Would it not be worth some trouble and cost to turn this ungainly
ruffian porter into a well-educated servant; who, while he was severe
as ever in forbidding entrance to evilly-disposed people, should yet
have a kind word for well-disposed people, and a pleasant look, and a
little useful information at his command, in case he should be asked a
question by the passers-by?

We have not time to-night to look at many examples of ironwork; and
those I happen to have by me are not the best; ironwork is not one of
my special subjects of study; so that I only have memoranda of bits
that happened to come into picturesque subjects which I was drawing for
other reasons. Besides, external ironwork is more difficult to find
good than any other sort of ancient art; for when it gets rusty and
broken, people are sure, if they can afford it, to send it to the old
iron shop, and get a fine new grating instead; and in the great cities
of Italy, the old iron is thus nearly all gone: the best bits I
remember in the open air were at Brescia;--fantastic sprays of laurel-
like foliage rising over the garden gates; and there are a few fine
fragments at Verona, and some good trellis-work enclosing the Scala
tombs; but on the whole, the most interesting pieces, though by no
means the purest in style, are to be found in out-of-the-way provincial
towns, where people do not care, or are unable, to make polite
alterations. The little town of Bellinzona, for instance, on the south
of the Alps, and that of Sion on the north, have both of them complete
schools of ironwork in their balconies and vineyard gates. That of
Bellinzona is the best, though not very old--I suppose most of it of
the seventeenth century; still it is very quaint and beautiful. Here,
for example, are two balconies, from two different houses; one has been
a cardinal's, and the hat is the principal ornament of the balcony; its
tassels being wrought with delightful delicacy and freedom; and
catching the eye clearly even among the mass of rich wreathed leaves.
These tassels and strings are precisely the kind of subject fit for
ironwork--noble in ironwork, they would have been entirely ignoble in
marble, on the grounds above stated. The real plant of oleander
standing in the window enriches the whole group of lines very happily.

The other balcony, from a very ordinary-looking house in the same
street, is much more interesting in its details. It is shown in the
plate as it appeared last summer, with convolvulus twined about the
bars, the arrow-shaped living leaves mingled among the leaves of iron;
but you may see in the centre of these real leaves a cluster of lighter 
ones, which are those of the ironwork itself. This cluster is worth
giving a little larger to show its treatment. Fig. 2 (in Appendix V.)
is the front view of it: Fig. 4, its profile. It is composed of a large
tulip in the centre; then two turkscap lilies; then two pinks, a little
conventionalized; then two narcissi; then two nondescripts, or, at
least, flowers I do not know; and then two dark buds, and a few leaves.
I say, dark buds, for all these flowers have been coloured in their
original state. The plan of the group is exceedingly simple: it is all
enclosed in a pointed arch (Fig. 3, Appendix V.): the large mass of the
tulip forming the apex; a six-foiled star on each side; then a jagged
star; then a five-foiled star; then an unjagged star or rose; finally a
small bud, so as to establish relation and cadence through the whole
group. The profile is very free and fine, and the upper bar of the
balcony exceedingly beautiful in effect;--none the less so on account
of the marvellously simple means employed. A thin strip of iron is bent
over a square rod; out of the edge of this strip are cut a series of
triangular openings--widest at top, leaving projecting teeth of iron
(Appendix, Fig. 5); then each of these projecting pieces gets a little
sharp tap with the hammer in front, which beaks its edge inwards,
tearing it a little open at the same time, and the thing is done.

The common forms of Swiss ironwork are less naturalistic than these
Italian balconies, depending more on beautiful arrangements of various
curve; nevertheless, there has been a rich naturalist school at
Fribourg, where a few bell-handles are still left, consisting of rods
branched into laurel and other leafage. At Geneva, modern improvements
have left nothing; but at Annecy, a little good work remains; the
balcony of its old hôtel de ville especially, with a trout of the lake
--presumably the town arms--forming its central ornament.

I might expatiate all night--if you would sit and hear me--on the
treatment of such required subject, or introduction of pleasant caprice
by the old workmen; but we have no more time to spare, and I must quit
this part of our subject--the rather as I could not explain to you the
intrinsic merit of such ironwork without going fully into the theory of
curvilinear design; only let me leave with you this one distinct
assertion--that the quaint beauty and character of many natural
objects, such as intricate branches, grass, foliage (especially thorny
branches and prickly foliage), as well as that of many animals, plumed,
spined, or bristled, is sculpturally expressible in iron only, and in
iron would be majestic and impressive in the highest degree; and that
every piece of metal work you use might be, rightly treated, not only a
superb decoration, but a most valuable abstract of portions of natural
forms, holding in dignity precisely the same relation to the painted
representation of plants, that a statue does to the painted form of
man. It is difficult to give you an idea of the grace and interest
which the simplest objects possess when their forms are thus abstracted
from among the surrounding of rich circumstance which in nature
disturbs the feebleness of our attention. In Plate 2, a few blades of
common green grass, and a wild leaf or two--just as they were thrown by
nature,--are thus abstracted from the associated redundance of the
forms about them, and shown on a dark ground: every cluster of herbage
would furnish fifty such groups, and every such group would work into
iron (fitting it, of course, rightly to its service) with perfect ease,
and endless grandeur of result.

III. IRON in POLICY.--Having thus obtained some idea of the use of iron
in art, as dependent on its ductility, I need not, certainly, say
anything of its uses in manufacture and commerce; we all of us know
enough,--perhaps a little too much--about _them_. So I pass lastly
to consider its uses in policy; dependent chiefly upon its tenacity--
that is to say, on its power of bearing a pull, and receiving an edge.
These powers, which enable it to pierce, to bind, and to smite, render
it fit for the three great instruments, by which its political action
may be simply typified; namely, the Plough, the Fetter, and the Sword.

On our understanding the right use of these three instruments, depend,
of course, all our power as a nation, and all our happiness as
individuals.

I. THE PLOUGH.--I say, first, on our understanding the right use of the
plough, with which, in justice to the fairest of our labourers, we must
always associate that feminine plough--the needle. The first
requirement for the happiness of a nation is that it should understand
the function in this world of these two great instruments: a happy
nation may be defined as one in which the husband's hand is on the
plough, and the housewife's on the needle; so in due time reaping its
golden harvest, and shining in golden vesture: and an unhappy nation is
one which, acknowledging no use of plough nor needle, will assuredly at
last find its storehouse empty in the famine, and its breast naked to
the cold.

Perhaps you think this is a mere truism, which I am wasting your time
in repeating. I wish it were.

By far the greater part of the suffering and crime which exist at this
moment in civilized Europe, arises simply from people not understanding
this truism--not knowing that produce or wealth is eternally connected
by the laws of heaven and earth with resolute labour; but hoping in
some way to cheat or abrogate this everlasting law of life, and to feed
where they have not furrowed, and be warm where they have not woven.

I repeat, nearly all our misery and crime result from this one
misapprehension. The law of nature is, that a certain quantity of work
is necessary to produce a certain quantity of good, of any kind
whatever. If you want knowledge, you must toil for it: if food, you
must toil for it; and if pleasure, you must toil for it. But men do not
acknowledge this law, or strive to evade it, hoping to get their
knowledge, and food, and pleasure for nothing; and in this effort they
either fail of getting them, and remain ignorant and miserable, or they
obtain them by making other men work for their benefit; and then they
are tyrants and robbers. Yes, and worse than robbers. I am not one who
in the least doubts or disputes the progress of this century in many
things useful to mankind; but it seems to me a very dark sign
respecting us that we look with so much indifference upon dishonesty
and cruelty in the pursuit of wealth. In the dream of Nebuchadnezzar it
was only the _feet_ that were part of iron and part of clay; but
many of us are now getting so cruel in our avarice, that it seems as
if, in us, the _heart_ were part of iron, and part of clay.

From what I have heard of the inhabitants of this town, I do not doubt
but that I may be permitted to do here what I have found it usually
thought elsewhere highly improper and absurd to do, namely, trace a few
Bible sentences to their practical result.

You cannot but have noticed how often in those parts of the Bible which
are likely to be oftenest opened when people look for guidance,
comfort, or help in the affairs of daily life, namely, the Psalms and
Proverbs, mention is made of the guilt attaching to the
_Oppression_ of the poor. Observe: not the neglect of them, but
the _Oppression_ of them: the word is as frequent as it is 
strange. You can hardly open either of those books, but somewhere in
their pages you will find a description of the wicked man's attempts
against the poor: such as--"He doth ravish the poor when he getteth him
into his net."

"He sitteth in the lurking places of the villages; his eyes are privily
set against the poor."

"In his pride he doth persecute the poor, and blesseth the covetous,
whom God abhorreth."

"His mouth is full of deceit and fraud; in the secret places doth he
murder the innocent. Have the workers of iniquity no knowledge, who eat
up my people as they eat bread? They have drawn out the sword, and bent
the bow, to cast down the poor and needy."

"They are corrupt, and speak wickedly concerning oppression."

"Pride compasseth them about as a chain, and violence as a garment."

"Their poison is like the poison of a serpent. Ye weigh the violence of
your hands in the earth."

Yes: "Ye weigh the violence of your hands:"--weigh these words as well.
The last things we ever usually think of weighing are Bible words. We
like to dream and dispute over them; but to weigh them, and see what
their true contents are--anything but that. Yet, weigh these; for I
have purposely taken all these verses, perhaps more striking to you
read in this connection, than separately in their places, out of the
Psalms, because, for all people belonging to the Established Church of
this country these Psalms are appointed lessons, portioned out to them
by their clergy to be read once through every month. Presumably,
therefore, whatever portions of Scripture we may pass by or forget,
these at all events, must be brought continually to our observance as
useful for direction of daily life. Now, do we ever ask ourselves what
the real meaning of these passages may be, and who these wicked people
are, who are "murdering the innocent?" You know it is rather singular
language this!--rather strong language, we might, perhaps, call it--
hearing it for the first time. Murder! and murder of innocent people!--
nay, even a sort of cannibalism. Eating people,--yes, and God's people,
too--eating _My_ people as if they were bread! swords drawn, bows
bent, poison of serpents mixed! violence of hands weighed, measured,
and trafficked with as so much coin! where is all this going on? Do you
suppose it was only going on in the time of David, and that nobody but
Jews ever murder the poor? If so, it would surely be wiser not to
mutter and mumble for our daily lessons what does not concern us; but
if there be any chance that it may concern us, and if this description,
in the Psalms, of human guilt is at all generally applicable, as the
descriptions in the Psalms of human sorrow are, may it not be advisable
to know wherein this guilt is being committed round about us, or by
ourselves? and when we take the words of the Bible into our mouths in a
congregational way, to be sure whether we mean merely to chant a piece
of melodious poetry relating to other people--(we know not exactly to
whom)--or to assert our belief in facts bearing somewhat stringently on
ourselves and our daily business. And if you make up your minds to do
this no longer, and take pains to examine into the matter, you will
find that these strange words, occurring as they do, not in a few
places only, but almost in every alternate psalm and every alternate
chapter of proverb, or prophecy, with tremendous reiteration, were not
written for one nation or one time only; but for all nations and
languages, for all places and all centuries; and it is as true of the
wicked man now as ever it was of Nabal or Dives, that "his eyes are set
against the poor."

Set _against_ the poor, mind you. Not merely set _away_ from
the poor, so as to neglect or lose sight of them, but set against, so
as to afflict and destroy them. This is the main point I want to fix.
your attention upon. You will often hear sermons about neglect or
carelessness of the poor. But neglect and carelessness are not at all
the points. The Bible hardly ever talks about neglect of the poor. It
always talks of _oppression_ of the poor--a very different matter.
It does not merely speak of passing by on the other side, and binding
up no wounds, but of drawing the sword and ourselves smiting the men
down. It does not charge us with being idle in the pest-house, and
giving no medicine, but with being busy in the pest-house, and giving
much poison.

May we not advisedly look into this matter a little, even tonight, and
ask first, Who are these poor?

No country is, or ever will be, without them: that is to say, without
the class which cannot, on the average, do more by its labour than
provide for its subsistence, and which has no accumulations of property
laid by on any considerable scale. Now there are a certain number of
this class whom we cannot oppress with much severity. An able-bodied
and intelligent workman--sober, honest, and industrious, will almost
always command a fair price for his work, and lay by enough in a few
years to enable him to hold his own in the labour market. But all men
are not able-bodied, nor intelligent, nor industrious; and you cannot
expect them to be. Nothing appears to me at once more ludicrous and
more melancholy than the way the people of the present age usually talk
about the morals of labourers. You hardly ever address a labouring man
upon his prospects in life, without quietly assuming that he is to
possess, at starting, as a small moral capital to begin with, the
virtue of Socrates, the philosophy of Plato, and the heroism of
Epaminondas. "Be assured, my good man,"--you say to him,--"that if you
work steadily for ten hours a day all your life long, and if you drink
nothing but water, or the very mildest beer, and live on very plain
food, and never lose your temper, and go to church every Sunday, and
always remain content in the position in which Providence has placed
you, and never grumble nor swear; and always keep your clothes decent,
and rise early, and use every opportunity of improving yourself, you
will get on very well, and never come to the parish."

All this is exceedingly true; but before giving the advice so
confidently, it would be well if we sometimes tried it practically
ourselves, and spent a year or so at some hard manual labour, not of an
entertaining kind--ploughing or digging, for instance, with a very
moderate allowance of beer; nothing hut bread and cheese for dinner; no
papers nor muffins in the morning; no sofas nor magazines at night; one
small room for parlour and kitchen; and a large family of children
always in the middle of the floor. If we think we could, under these
circumstances, enact Socrates or Epaminondas entirely to our own
satisfaction, we shall be somewhat justified in requiring the same
behaviour from our poorer neighbours; but if not, we should surely
consider a little whether among the various forms of the oppression of
the poor, we may not rank as one of the first and likeliest--the
oppression of expecting too much from them.

But let this pass; and let it be admitted that we can never be guilty
of oppression towards the sober, industrious, intelligent, exemplary
labourer. There will always be in the world some who are not
altogether, intelligent and exemplary; we shall, I believe, to the end
of time find the majority somewhat unintelligent, a little inclined to
be idle, and occasionally, on Saturday night, drunk; we must even be
prepared to hear of reprobates who like skittles on Sunday morning
better than prayers; and of unnatural parents who send their children
out to beg instead of to go to school.

Now these are the kind of people whom you _can_ oppress, and whom
you do oppress, and that to purpose,--and with all the more cruelty and
the greater sting, because it is just their own fault that puts them
into your power. You know the words about wicked people are, "He doth
ravish the poor when he getteth him _into his net_." This getting
into the net is constantly the fault or folly of the sufferer--his own
heedlessness or his own indolence; but after he is once in the net, the
oppression of him, and making the most of his distress, are ours. The
nets which we use against the poor are just those worldly
embarrassments which either their ignorance or their improvidence are
almost certain at some time or other to bring them into: then, just at
the time when we ought to hasten to help them, and disentangle them,
and teach them how to manage better in future, we rush forward to
_pillage_ them, and force all we can out of them in their
adversity. For, to take one instance only, remember this is literally
and simply what we do, whenever we buy, or try to buy, cheap goods--
goods offered at a price which we know cannot be remunerative for the
labour involved in them. Whenever we buy such goods, remember we are
stealing somebody's labour. Don't let us mince the matter. I say, in
plain Saxon, STEALING--taking from him the proper reward of his work,
and putting it into our own pocket. You know well enough that the thing
could not have been offered you at that price, unless distress of some
kind had forced the producer to part with it. You take advantage of
this distress, and you force as much out of him as you can under the
circumstances. The old barons of the middle ages used, in general, the
thumbscrew to extort property; we moderns use, in preference, hunger or
domestic affliction: but the fact of extortion remains precisely the
same. Whether we force the man's property from him by pinching his
stomach, or pinching his fingers, makes some difference anatomically;--
morally, none whatsoever: we use a form of torture of some sort in
order to make him give up his property; we use, indeed, the man's own
anxieties, instead of the rack; and his immediate peril of starvation,
instead of the pistol at the head; but otherwise we differ from Front
de Buf, or Dick Turpin, merely in being less dexterous, more cowardly,
and more cruel. More cruel, I say, because the fierce baron and the
redoubted highwayman are reported to have robbed, at least by
preference, only the rich; _we_ steal habitually from the poor. We
buy our liveries, and gild our prayer-books, with pilfered pence out of
children's and sick men's wages, and thus ingeniously dispose a given
quantity of Theft, so that it may produce the largest possible measure
of delicately distributed suffering.

But this is only one form of common oppression of the poor--only one
way of taking our hands off the plough handle, and binding another's
upon it. This first way of doing it is the economical way--the way
preferred by prudent and virtuous people. The bolder way is the
acquisitive way:--the way of speculation. You know we are considering
at present the various modes in which a nation corrupts itself, by not
acknowledging the eternal connection between its plough and its
pleasure;--by striving to get pleasure, without working for it. Well, I
say the first and commonest way of doing so is to try to get the
product of other people's work, and enjoy it ourselves, by cheapening
their labour in times of distress: then the second way is that grand
one of watching the chances of the market;--the way of speculation. Of
course there are some speculations that are fair and honest--
speculations made with our own money, and which do not involve in their
success the loss, by others, of what we gain. But generally modern
speculation involves much risk to others, with chance of profit only to
ourselves: even in its best conditions it is merely one of the forms of
gambling or treasure hunting; it is either leaving the steady plough
and the steady pilgrimage of life, to look for silver mines beside the
way; or else it is the full stop beside the dice-tables in Vanity Fair
--investing all the thoughts and passions of the soul in the fall of the
cards, and choosing rather the wild accidents of idle fortune than the
calm and accumulative rewards of toil. And this is destructive enough,
at least to our peace and virtue. But is usually destructive of far
more than _our_ peace, or _our_ virtue. Have you ever deliberately set
yourselves to imagine and measure the suffering, the guilt, and the
mortality caused necessarily by the failure of any large-dealing merchant,
or largely-branched bank? Take it at the lowest possible supposition-
count, at the fewest you choose, the families  whose means of support have
been involved in the catastrophe. Then, on the morning after the intelli-
gence of ruin, let us go forth amongst them in earnest thought; let us use
that imagination which we waste so often on fictitious sorrow, to measure
the stern facts of that multitudinous distress; strike open the private
doors of their chambers, and enter silently into the midst of the domestic
misery; look upon the old men, who had reserved for their failing strength
some remainder of rest in the evening-tide of life, cast helplessly back
into its trouble and tumult; look upon the active strength of middle
age suddenly blasted into incapacity--its hopes crushed, and its hardly
earned rewards snatched away in the same instant--at once the heart
withered, and the right arm snapped; look upon the piteous children,
delicately nurtured, whose soft eyes, now large with wonder at their
parents' grief, must soon be set in the dimness of famine; and, far
more than all this, look forward to the length of sorrow beyond--to the
hardest labour of life, now to be undergone either in all the severity
of unexpected and inexperienced trial, or else, more bitter still, to
be begun again, and endured for the second time, amidst the ruins of
cherished hopes and the feebleness of advancing years, embittered by
the continual sting and taunt of the inner feeling that it has all been
brought about, not by the fair course of appointed circumstance, but by
miserable chance and wanton treachery; and, last of all, look beyond
this--to the shattered destinies of those who have faltered under the
trial, and sunk past recovery to despair. And then consider whether the
hand which has poured this poison into all the springs of life be one
whit less guiltily red with human blood than that which literally pours
the hemlock into the cup, or guides the dagger to the heart? We read
with horror of the crimes of a Borgia or a Tophana; but there never
lived Borgias such as live now in the midst of us. The cruel lady of
Ferrara slew only in the strength of passion--she slew only a few,
those who thwarted her purposes or who vexed her soul; she slew sharply
and suddenly, embittering the fate of her victims with no foretastes of
destruction, no prolongations of pain; and, finally and chiefly, she
slew, not without remorse, nor without pity. But _we,_ in no storm
of pa