ng creatures of the chase,
   We hunt them for the beauty of their skins;
   They love us for it, and we ride them down.
   Wheedling and siding with them!  Out! for shame!
   Boy, there's no rose that's half so dear to them
   As he that does the thing they dare not do,
   Breathing and sounding beauteous battle, comes
   With the air of the trumpet round him, and leaps in
   Among the women, snares them by the score
   Flattered and flustered, wins, though dashed with death
   He reddens what he kisses:  thus I won
   You mother, a good mother, a good wife,
   Worth winning; but this firebrand--gentleness
   To such as her! if Cyril spake her true,
   To catch a dragon in a cherry net,
   To trip a tigress with a gossamer
   Were wisdom to it.'
                      'Yea but Sire,' I cried,
   'Wild natures need wise curbs.  The soldier?  No:
   What dares not Ida do that she should prize
   The soldier?  I beheld her, when she rose
   The yesternight, and storming in extremes,
   Stood for her cause, and flung defiance down
   Gagelike to man, and had not shunned the death,
   No, not the soldier's:  yet I hold her, king,
   True woman:  you clash them all in one,
   That have as many differences as we.
   The violet varies from the lily as far
   As oak from elm:  one loves the soldier, one
   The silken priest of peace, one this, one that,
   And some unworthily; their sinless faith,
   A maiden moon that sparkles on a sty,
   Glorifying clown and satyr; whence they need
   More breadth of culture:  is not Ida right?
   They worth it? truer to the law within?
   Severer in the logic of a life?
   Twice as magnetic to sweet influences
   Of earth and heaven? and she of whom you speak,
   My mother, looks as whole as some serene
   Creation minted in the golden moods
   Of sovereign artists; not a thought, a touch,
   But pure as lines of green that streak the white
   Of the first snowdrop's inner leaves; I say,
   Not like the piebald miscellany, man,
   Bursts of great heart and slips in sensual mire,
   But whole and one:  and take them all-in-all,
   Were we ourselves but half as good, as kind,
   As truthful, much that Ida claims as right
   Had ne'er been mooted, but as frankly theirs
   As dues of Nature.  To our point:  not war:
   Lest I lose all.'
                    'Nay, nay, you spake but sense'
   Said Gama.  'We remember love ourself
   In our sweet youth; we did not rate him then
   This red-hot iron to be shaped with blows.
   You talk almost like Ida:  _she_ can talk;
   And there is something in it as you say:
   But you talk kindlier:  we esteem you for it.--
   He seems a gracious and a gallant Prince,
   I would he had our daughter:  for the rest,
   Our own detention, why, the causes weighed,
   Fatherly fears--you used us courteously--
   We would do much to gratify your Prince--
   We pardon it; and for your ingress here
   Upon the skirt and fringe of our fair land,
   you did but come as goblins in the night,
   Nor in the furrow broke the ploughman's head,
   Nor burnt the grange, nor bussed the milking-maid,
   Nor robbed the farmer of his bowl of cream:
   But let your Prince (our royal word upon it,
   He comes back safe) ride with us to our lines,
   And speak with Arac:  Arac's word is thrice
   As ours with Ida:  something may be done--
   I know not what--and ours shall see us friends.
   You, likewise, our late guests, if so you will,
   Follow us:  who knows? we four may build some plan
   Foursquare to opposition.'
                             Here he reached
   White hands of farewell to my sire, who growled
   An answer which, half-muffled in his beard,
   Let so much out as gave us leave to go.

        Then rode we with the old king across the lawns
   Beneath huge trees, a thousand rings of Spring
   In every bole, a song on every spray
   Of birds that piped their Valentines, and woke
   Desire in me to infuse my tale of love
   In the old king's ears, who promised help, and oozed
   All o'er with honeyed answer as we rode
   And blossom-fragrant slipt the heavy dews
   Gathered by night and peace, with each light air
   On our mailed heads:  but other thoughts than Peace
   Burnt in us, when we saw the embattled squares,
   And squadrons of the Prince, trampling the flowers
   With clamour:  for among them rose a cry
   As if to greet the king; they made a halt;
   The horses yelled; they clashed their arms; the drum
   Beat; merrily-blowing shrilled the martial fife;
   And in the blast and bray of the long horn
   And serpent-throated bugle, undulated
   The banner:  anon to meet us lightly pranced
   Three captains out; nor ever had I seen
   Such thews of men:  the midmost and the highest
   Was Arac:  all about his motion clung
   The shadow of his sister, as the beam
   Of the East, that played upon them, made them glance
   Like those three stars of the airy Giant's zone,
   That glitter burnished by the frosty dark;
   And as the fiery Sirius alters hue,
   And bickers into red and emerald, shone
   Their morions, washed with morning, as they came.

        And I that prated peace, when first I heard
   War-music, felt the blind wildbeast of force,
   Whose home is in the sinews of a man,
   Stir in me as to strike:  then took the king
   His three broad sons; with now a wandering hand
   And now a pointed finger, told them all:
   A common light of smiles at our disguise
   Broke from their lips, and, ere the windy jest
   Had laboured down within his ample lungs,
   The genial giant, Arac, rolled himself
   Thrice in the saddle, then burst out in words.

        'Our land invaded, 'sdeath! and he himself
   Your captive, yet my father wills not war:
   And, 'sdeath! myself, what care I, war or no?
   but then this question of your troth remains:
   And there's a downright honest meaning in her;
   She flies too high, she flies too high! and yet
   She asked but space and fairplay for her scheme;
   She prest and prest it on me--I myself,
   What know I of these things? but, life and soul!
   I thought her half-right talking of her wrongs;
   I say she flies too high, 'sdeath! what of that?
   I take her for the flower of womankind,
   And so I often told her, right or wrong,
   And, Prince, she can be sweet to those she loves,
   And, right or wrong, I care not:  this is all,
   I stand upon her side:  she made me swear it--
   'Sdeath--and with solemn rites by candle-light--
   Swear by St something--I forget her name--
   Her that talked down the fifty wisest men;
   _She_ was a princess too; and so I swore.
   Come, this is all; she will not:  waive your claim:
   If not, the foughten field, what else, at once
   Decides it, 'sdeath! against my father's will.'

        I lagged in answer loth to render up
   My precontract, and loth by brainless war
   To cleave the rift of difference deeper yet;
   Till one of those two brothers, half aside
   And fingering at the hair about his lip,
   To prick us on to combat 'Like to like!
   The woman's garment hid the woman's heart.'
   A taunt that clenched his purpose like a blow!
   For fiery-short was Cyril's counter-scoff,
   And sharp I answered, touched upon the point
   Where idle boys are cowards to their shame,
   'Decide it here:  why not? we are three to three.'

        Then spake the third 'But three to three? no more?
   No more, and in our noble sister's cause?
   More, more, for honour:  every captain waits
   Hungry for honour, angry for his king.
   More, more some fifty on a side, that each
   May breathe himself, and quick! by overthrow
   Of these or those, the question settled die.'

        'Yea,' answered I, 'for this wreath of air,
   This flake of rainbow flying on the highest
   Foam of men's deeds--this honour, if ye will.
   It needs must be for honour if at all:
   Since, what decision? if we fail, we fail,
   And if we win, we fail:  she would not keep
   Her compact.'  ''Sdeath! but we will send to her,'
   Said Arac, 'worthy reasons why she should
   Bide by this issue:  let our missive through,
   And you shall have her answer by the word.'

        'Boys!' shrieked the old king, but vainlier than a hen
   To her false daughters in the pool; for none
   Regarded; neither seemed there more to say:
   Back rode we to my father's camp, and found
   He thrice had sent a herald to the gates,
   To learn if Ida yet would cede our claim,
   Or by denial flush her babbling wells
   With her own people's life:  three times he went:
   The first, he blew and blew, but none appeared:
   He battered at the doors; none came:  the next,
   An awful voice within had warned him thence:
   The third, and those eight daughters of the plough
   Came sallying through the gates, and caught his hair,
   And so belaboured him on rib and cheek
   They made him wild:  not less one glance he caught
   Through open doors of Ida stationed there
   Unshaken, clinging to her purpose, firm
   Though compassed by two armies and the noise
   Of arms; and standing like a stately Pine
   Set in a cataract on an island-crag,
   When storm is on the heights, and right and left
   Sucked from the dark heart of the long hills roll
   The torrents, dashed to the vale:  and yet her will
   Bred will in me to overcome it or fall.

        But when I told the king that I was pledged
   To fight in tourney for my bride, he clashed
   His iron palms together with a cry;
   Himself would tilt it out among the lads:
   But overborne by all his bearded lords
   With reasons drawn from age and state, perforce
   He yielded, wroth and red, with fierce demur:
   And many a bold knight started up in heat,
   And sware to combat for my claim till death.

        All on this side the palace ran the field
   Flat to the garden-wall:  and likewise here,
   Above the garden's glowing blossom-belts,
   A columned entry shone and marble stairs,
   And great bronze valves, embossed with Tomyris
   And what she did to Cyrus after fight,
   But now fast barred:  so here upon the flat
   All that long morn the lists were hammered up,
   And all that morn the heralds to and fro,
   With message and defiance, went and came;
   Last, Ida's answer, in a royal hand,
   But shaken here and there, and rolling words
   Oration-like.  I kissed it and I read.

        'O brother, you have known the pangs we felt,
   What heats of indignation when we heard
   Of those that iron-cramped their women's feet;
   Of lands in which at the altar the poor bride
   Gives her harsh groom for bridal-gift a scourge;
   Of living hearts that crack within the fire
   Where smoulder their dead despots; and of those,--
   Mothers,--that, with all prophetic pity, fling
   Their pretty maids in the running flood, and swoops
   The vulture, beak and talon, at the heart
   Made for all noble motion:  and I saw
   That equal baseness lived in sleeker times
   With smoother men:  the old leaven leavened all:
   Millions of throats would bawl for civil rights,
   No woman named:  therefore I set my face
   Against all men, and lived but for mine own.
   Far off from men I built a fold for them:
   I stored it full of rich memorial:
   I fenced it round with gallant institutes,
   And biting laws to scare the beasts of prey
   And prospered; till a rout of saucy boys
   Brake on us at our books, and marred our peace,
   Masked like our maids, blustering I know not what
   Of insolence and love, some pretext held
   Of baby troth, invalid, since my will
   Sealed not the bond--the striplings! for their sport!--
   I tamed my leopards:  shall I not tame these?
   Or you? or I? for since you think me touched
   In honour--what, I would not aught of false--
   Is not our case pure? and whereas I know
   Your prowess, Arac, and what mother's blood
   You draw from, fight; you failing, I abide
   What end soever:  fail you will not.  Still
   Take not his life:  he risked it for my own;
   His mother lives:  yet whatsoe'er you do,
   Fight and fight well; strike and strike him.  O dear
   Brothers, the woman's Angel guards you, you
   The sole men to be mingled with our cause,
   The sole men we shall prize in the after-time,
   Your very armour hallowed, and your statues
   Reared, sung to, when, this gad-fly brushed aside,
   We plant a solid foot into the Time,
   And mould a generation strong to move
   With claim on claim from right to right, till she
   Whose name is yoked with children's, know herself;
   And Knowledge in our own land make her free,
   And, ever following those two crownèd twins,
   Commerce and conquest, shower the fiery grain
   Of freedom broadcast over all the orbs
   Between the Northern and the Southern morn.'

        Then came a postscript dashed across the rest.
   See that there be no traitors in your camp:
   We seem a nest of traitors--none to trust
   Since our arms failed--this Egypt-plague of men!
   Almost our maids were better at their homes,
   Than thus man-girdled here:  indeed I think
   Our chiefest comfort is the little child
   Of one unworthy mother; which she left:
   She shall not have it back:  the child shall grow
   To prize the authentic mother of her mind.
   I took it for an hour in mine own bed
   This morning:  there the tender orphan hands
   Felt at my heart, and seemed to charm from thence
   The wrath I nursed against the world:  farewell.'

        I ceased; he said, 'Stubborn, but she may sit
   Upon a king's right hand in thunder-storms,
   And breed up warriors!  See now, though yourself
   Be dazzled by the wildfire Love to sloughs
   That swallow common sense, the spindling king,
   This Gama swamped in lazy tolerance.
   When the man wants weight, the woman takes it up,
   And topples down the scales; but this is fixt
   As are the roots of earth and base of all;
   Man for the field and woman for the hearth:
   Man for the sword and for the needle she:
   Man with the head and woman with the heart:
   Man to command and woman to obey;
   All else confusion.  Look you! the gray mare
   Is ill to live with, when her whinny shrills
   From tile to scullery, and her small goodman
   Shrinks in his arm-chair while the fires of Hell
   Mix with his hearth:  but you--she's yet a colt--
   Take, break her:  strongly groomed and straitly curbed
   She might not rank with those detestable
   That let the bantling scald at home, and brawl
   Their rights and wrongs like potherbs in the street.
   They say she's comely; there's the fairer chance:
   _I_ like her none the less for rating at her!
   Besides, the woman wed is not as we,
   But suffers change of frame.  A lusty brace
   Of twins may weed her of her folly.  Boy,
   The bearing and the training of a child
   Is woman's wisdom.'
                      Thus the hard old king:
   I took my leave, for it was nearly noon:
   I pored upon her letter which I held,
   And on the little clause 'take not his life:'
   I mused on that wild morning in the woods,
   And on the 'Follow, follow, thou shalt win:'
   I thought on all the wrathful king had said,
   And how the strange betrothment was to end:
   Then I remembered that burnt sorcerer's curse
   That one should fight with shadows and should fall;
   And like a flash the weird affection came:
   King, camp and college turned to hollow shows;
   I seemed to move in old memorial tilts,
   And doing battle with forgotten ghosts,
   To dream myself the shadow of a dream:
   And ere I woke it was the point of noon,
   The lists were ready.  Empanoplied and plumed
   We entered in, and waited, fifty there
   Opposed to fifty, till the trumpet blared
   At the barrier like a wild horn in a land
   Of echoes, and a moment, and once more
   The trumpet, and again:  at which the storm
   Of galloping hoofs bare on the ridge of spears
   And riders front to front, until they closed
   In conflict with the crash of shivering points,
   And thunder.  Yet it seemed a dream, I dreamed
   Of fighting.  On his haunches rose the steed,
   And into fiery splinters leapt the lance,
   And out of stricken helmets sprang the fire.
   Part sat like rocks:  part reeled but kept their seats:
   Part rolled on the earth and rose again and drew:
   Part stumbled mixt with floundering horses.  Down
   From those two bulks at Arac's side, and down
   From Arac's arm, as from a giant's flail,
   The large blows rained, as here and everywhere
   He rode the mellay, lord of the ringing lists,
   And all the plain,--brand, mace, and shaft, and shield--
   Shocked, like an iron-clanging anvil banged
   With hammers; till I thought, can this be he
   From Gama's dwarfish loins? if this be so,
   The mother makes us most--and in my dream
   I glanced aside, and saw the palace-front
   Alive with fluttering scarfs and ladies' eyes,
   And highest, among the statues, statuelike,
   Between a cymballed Miriam and a Jael,
   With Psyche's babe, was Ida watching us,
   A single band of gold about her hair,
   Like a Saint's glory up in heaven:  but she
   No saint--inexorable--no tenderness--
   Too hard, too cruel:  yet she sees me fight,
   Yea, let her see me fall! and with that I drave
   Among the thickest and bore down a Prince,
   And Cyril, one.  Yea, let me make my dream
   All that I would.  But that large-moulded man,
   His visage all agrin as at a wake,
   Made at me through the press, and, staggering back
   With stroke on stroke the horse and horseman, came
   As comes a pillar of electric cloud,
   Flaying the roofs and sucking up the drains,
   And shadowing down the champaign till it strikes
   On a wood, and takes, and breaks, and cracks, and splits,
   And twists the grain with such a roar that Earth
   Reels, and the herdsmen cry; for everything
   Game way before him:  only Florian, he
   That loved me closer than his own right eye,
   Thrust in between; but Arac rode him down:
   And Cyril seeing it, pushed against the Prince,
   With Psyche's colour round his helmet, tough,
   Strong, supple, sinew-corded, apt at arms;
   But tougher, heavier, stronger, he that smote
   And threw him:  last I spurred; I felt my veins
   Stretch with fierce heat; a moment hand to hand,
   And sword to sword, and horse to horse we hung,
   Till I struck out and shouted; the blade glanced,
   I did but shear a feather, and dream and truth
   Flowed from me; darkness closed me; and I fell.


   Home they brought her warrior dead:
      She nor swooned, nor uttered cry:
   All her maidens, watching, said,
      'She must weep or she will die.'

   Then they praised him, soft and low,
      Called him worthy to be loved,
   Truest friend and noblest foe;
      Yet she neither spoke nor moved.

   Stole a maiden from her place,
      Lightly to the warrior stept,
   Took the face-cloth from the face;
      Yet she neither moved nor wept.

   Rose a nurse of ninety years,
      Set his child upon her knee--
   Like summer tempest came her tears--
      'Sweet my child, I live for thee.'




VI



   My dream had never died or lived again.
   As in some mystic middle state I lay;
   Seeing I saw not, hearing not I heard:
   Though, if I saw not, yet they told me all
   So often that I speak as having seen.

        For so it seemed, or so they said to me,
   That all things grew more tragic and more strange;
   That when our side was vanquished and my cause
   For ever lost, there went up a great cry,
   The Prince is slain.  My father heard and ran
   In on the lists, and there unlaced my casque
   And grovelled on my body, and after him
   Came Psyche, sorrowing for Aglaïa.
        But high upon the palace Ida stood
   With Psyche's babe in arm:  there on the roofs
   Like that great dame of Lapidoth she sang.


      'Our enemies have fallen, have fallen:  the seed,
   The little seed they laughed at in the dark,
   Has risen and cleft the soil, and grown a bulk
   Of spanless girth, that lays on every side
   A thousand arms and rushes to the Sun.

      'Our enemies have fallen, have fallen:  they came;
   The leaves were wet with women's tears:  they heard
   A noise of songs they would not understand:
   They marked it with the red cross to the fall,
   And would have strown it, and are fallen themselves.

      'Our enemies have fallen, have fallen:  they came,
   The woodmen with their axes:  lo the tree!
   But we will make it faggots for the hearth,
   And shape it plank and beam for roof and floor,
   And boats and bridges for the use of men.

      'Our enemies have fallen, have fallen:  they struck;
   With their own blows they hurt themselves, nor knew
   There dwelt an iron nature in the grain:
   The glittering axe was broken in their arms,
   Their arms were shattered to the shoulder blade.

      'Our enemies have fallen, but this shall grow
   A night of Summer from the heat, a breadth
   Of Autumn, dropping fruits of power:  and rolled
   With music in the growing breeze of Time,
   The tops shall strike from star to star, the fangs
   Shall move the stony bases of the world.

        'And now, O maids, behold our sanctuary
   Is violate, our laws broken:  fear we not
   To break them more in their behoof, whose arms
   Championed our cause and won it with a day
   Blanched in our annals, and perpetual feast,
   When dames and heroines of the golden year
   Shall strip a hundred hollows bare of Spring,
   To rain an April of ovation round
   Their statues, borne aloft, the three:  but come,
   We will be liberal, since our rights are won.
   Let them not lie in the tents with coarse mankind,
   Ill nurses; but descend, and proffer these
   The brethren of our blood and cause, that there
   Lie bruised and maimed, the tender ministries
   Of female hands and hospitality.'

        She spoke, and with the babe yet in her arms,
   Descending, burst the great bronze valves, and led
   A hundred maids in train across the Park.
   Some cowled, and some bare-headed, on they came,
   Their feet in flowers, her loveliest:  by them went
   The enamoured air sighing, and on their curls
   From the high tree the blossom wavering fell,
   And over them the tremulous isles of light
   Slided, they moving under shade:  but Blanche
   At distance followed:  so they came:  anon
   Through open field into the lists they wound
   Timorously; and as the leader of the herd
   That holds a stately fretwork to the Sun,
   And followed up by a hundred airy does,
   Steps with a tender foot, light as on air,
   The lovely, lordly creature floated on
   To where her wounded brethren lay; there stayed;
   Knelt on one knee,--the child on one,--and prest
   Their hands, and called them dear deliverers,
   And happy warriors, and immortal names,
   And said 'You shall not lie in the tents but here,
   And nursed by those for whom you fought, and served
   With female hands and hospitality.'

        Then, whether moved by this, or was it chance,
   She past my way.  Up started from my side
   The old lion, glaring with his whelpless eye,
   Silent; but when she saw me lying stark,
   Dishelmed and mute, and motionlessly pale,
   Cold even to her, she sighed; and when she saw
   The haggard father's face and reverend beard
   Of grisly twine, all dabbled with the blood
   Of his own son, shuddered, a twitch of pain
   Tortured her mouth, and o'er her forehead past
   A shadow, and her hue changed, and she said:
   'He saved my life:  my brother slew him for it.'
   No more:  at which the king in bitter scorn
   Drew from my neck the painting and the tress,
   And held them up:  she saw them, and a day
   Rose from the distance on her memory,
   When the good Queen, her mother, shore the tress
   With kisses, ere the days of Lady Blanche:
   And then once more she looked at my pale face:
   Till understanding all the foolish work
   Of Fancy, and the bitter close of all,
   Her iron will was broken in her mind;
   Her noble heart was molten in her breast;
   She bowed, she set the child on the earth; she laid
   A feeling finger on my brows, and presently
   'O Sire,' she said, 'he lives:  he is not dead:
   O let me have him with my brethren here
   In our own palace:  we will tend on him
   Like one of these; if so, by any means,
   To lighten this great clog of thanks, that make
   Our progress falter to the woman's goal.'

        She said:  but at the happy word 'he lives'
   My father stooped, re-fathered o'er my wounds.
   So those two foes above my fallen life,
   With brow to brow like night and evening mixt
   Their dark and gray, while Psyche ever stole
   A little nearer, till the babe that by us,
   Half-lapt in glowing gauze and golden brede,
   Lay like a new-fallen meteor on the grass,
   Uncared for, spied its mother and began
   A blind and babbling laughter, and to dance
   Its body, and reach its fatling innocent arms
   And lazy lingering fingers.  She the appeal
   Brooked not, but clamouring out 'Mine--mine--not yours,
   It is not yours, but mine:  give me the child'
   Ceased all on tremble:  piteous was the cry:
   So stood the unhappy mother open-mouthed,
   And turned each face her way:  wan was her cheek
   With hollow watch, her blooming mantle torn,
   Red grief and mother's hunger in her eye,
   And down dead-heavy sank her curls, and half
   The sacred mother's bosom, panting, burst
   The laces toward her babe; but she nor cared
   Nor knew it, clamouring on, till Ida heard,
   Looked up, and rising slowly from me, stood
   Erect and silent, striking with her glance
   The mother, me, the child; but he that lay
   Beside us, Cyril, battered as he was,
   Trailed himself up on one knee:  then he drew
   Her robe to meet his lips, and down she looked
   At the armed man sideways, pitying as it seemed,
   Or self-involved; but when she learnt his face,
   Remembering his ill-omened song, arose
   Once more through all her height, and o'er him grew
   Tall as a figure lengthened on the sand
   When the tide ebbs in sunshine, and he said:

        'O fair and strong and terrible!  Lioness
   That with your long locks play the Lion's mane!
   But Love and Nature, these are two more terrible
   And stronger.  See, your foot is on our necks,
   We vanquished, you the Victor of your will.
   What would you more? Give her the child! remain
   Orbed in your isolation:  he is dead,
   Or all as dead:  henceforth we let you be:
   Win you the hearts of women; and beware
   Lest, where you seek the common love of these,
   The common hate with the revolving wheel
   Should drag you down, and some great Nemesis
   Break from a darkened future, crowned with fire,
   And tread you out for ever:  but howso'er
   Fixed in yourself, never in your own arms
   To hold your own, deny not hers to her,
   Give her the child!  O if, I say, you keep
   One pulse that beats true woman, if you loved
   The breast that fed or arm that dandled you,
   Or own one port of sense not flint to prayer,
   Give her the child! or if you scorn to lay it,
   Yourself, in hands so lately claspt with yours,
   Or speak to her, your dearest, her one fault,
   The tenderness, not yours, that could not kill,
   Give _me_ it:  _I_ will give it her.
                                   He said:
   At first her eye with slow dilation rolled
   Dry flame, she listening; after sank and sank
   And, into mournful twilight mellowing, dwelt
   Full on the child; she took it:  'Pretty bud!
   Lily of the vale! half opened bell of the woods!
   Sole comfort of my dark hour, when a world
   Of traitorous friend and broken system made
   No purple in the distance, mystery,
   Pledge of a love not to be mine, farewell;
   These men are hard upon us as of old,
   We two must part:  and yet how fain was I
   To dream thy cause embraced in mine, to think
   I might be something to thee, when I felt
   Thy helpless warmth about my barren breast
   In the dead prime:  but may thy mother prove
   As true to thee as false, false, false to me!
   And, if thou needs must needs bear the yoke, I wish it
   Gentle as freedom'--here she kissed it:  then--
   'All good go with thee! take it Sir,' and so
   Laid the soft babe in his hard-mailèd hands,
   Who turned half-round to Psyche as she sprang
   To meet it, with an eye that swum in thanks;
   Then felt it sound and whole from head to foot,
   And hugged and never hugged it close enough,
   And in her hunger mouthed and mumbled it,
   And hid her bosom with it; after that
   Put on more calm and added suppliantly:

        'We two were friends:  I go to mine own land
   For ever:  find some other:  as for me
   I scarce am fit for your great plans:  yet speak to me,
   Say one soft word and let me part forgiven.'

        But Ida spoke not, rapt upon the child.
   Then Arac.  'Ida--'sdeath! you blame the man;
   You wrong yourselves--the woman is so hard
   Upon the woman.  Come, a grace to me!
   I am your warrior:  I and mine have fought
   Your battle:  kiss her; take her hand, she weeps:
   'Sdeath!  I would sooner fight thrice o'er than see it.'

        But Ida spoke not, gazing on the ground,
   And reddening in the furrows of his chin,
   And moved beyond his custom, Gama said:

        'I've heard that there is iron in the blood,
   And I believe it.  Not one word? not one?
   Whence drew you this steel temper? not from me,
   Not from your mother, now a saint with saints.
   She said you had a heart--I heard her say it--
   "Our Ida has a heart"--just ere she died--
   "But see that some on with authority
   Be near her still" and I--I sought for one--
   All people said she had authority--
   The Lady Blanche:  much profit!  Not one word;
   No! though your father sues:  see how you stand
   Stiff as Lot's wife, and all the good knights maimed,
   I trust that there is no one hurt to death,
   For our wild whim:  and was it then for this,
   Was it for this we gave our palace up,
   Where we withdrew from summer heats and state,
   And had our wine and chess beneath the planes,
   And many a pleasant hour with her that's gone,
   Ere you were born to vex us?  Is it kind?
   Speak to her I say:  is this not she of whom,
   When first she came, all flushed you said to me
   Now had you got a friend of your own age,
   Now could you share your thought; now should men see
   Two women faster welded in one love
   Than pairs of wedlock; she you walked with, she
   You talked with, whole nights long, up in the tower,
   Of sine and arc, spheroïd and azimuth,
   And right ascension, Heaven knows what; and now
   A word, but one, one little kindly word,
   Not one to spare her:  out upon you, flint!
   You love nor her, nor me, nor any; nay,
   You shame your mother's judgment too.  Not one?
   You will not? well--no heart have you, or such
   As fancies like the vermin in a nut
   Have fretted all to dust and bitterness.'
   So said the small king moved beyond his wont.

        But Ida stood nor spoke, drained of her force
   By many a varying influence and so long.
   Down through her limbs a drooping languor wept:
   Her head a little bent; and on her mouth
   A doubtful smile dwelt like a clouded moon
   In a still water:  then brake out my sire,
   Lifted his grim head from my wounds.  'O you,
   Woman, whom we thought woman even now,
   And were half fooled to let you tend our son,
   Because he might have wished it--but we see,
   The accomplice of your madness unforgiven,
   And think that you might mix his draught with death,
   When your skies change again:  the rougher hand
   Is safer:  on to the tents:  take up the Prince.'

        He rose, and while each ear was pricked to attend
   A tempest, through the cloud that dimmed her broke
   A genial warmth and light once more, and shone
   Through glittering drops on her sad friend.
                                              'Come hither.
   O Psyche,' she cried out, 'embrace me, come,
   Quick while I melt; make reconcilement sure
   With one that cannot keep her mind an hour:
   Come to the hollow hear they slander so!
   Kiss and be friends, like children being chid!
   _I_ seem no more:  _I_ want forgiveness too:
   I should have had to do with none but maids,
   That have no links with men.  Ah false but dear,
   Dear traitor, too much loved, why?--why?--Yet see,
   Before these kings we embrace you yet once more
   With all forgiveness, all oblivion,
   And trust, not love, you less.
                                 And now, O sire,
   Grant me your son, to nurse, to wait upon him,
   Like mine own brother.  For my debt to him,
   This nightmare weight of gratitude, I know it;
   Taunt me no more:  yourself and yours shall have
   Free adit; we will scatter all our maids
   Till happier times each to her proper hearth:
   What use to keep them here--now? grant my prayer.
   Help, father, brother, help; speak to the king:
   Thaw this male nature to some touch of that
   Which kills me with myself, and drags me down
   From my fixt height to mob me up with all
   The soft and milky rabble of womankind,
   Poor weakling even as they are.'
                                   Passionate tears
   Followed:  the king replied not:  Cyril said:
   'Your brother, Lady,--Florian,--ask for him
   Of your great head--for he is wounded too--
   That you may tend upon him with the prince.'
   'Ay so,' said Ida with a bitter smile,
   'Our laws are broken:  let him enter too.'
   Then Violet, she that sang the mournful song,
   And had a cousin tumbled on the plain,
   Petitioned too for him.  'Ay so,' she said,
   'I stagger in the stream:  I cannot keep
   My heart an eddy from the brawling hour:
   We break our laws with ease, but let it be.'
   'Ay so?' said Blanche:  'Amazed am I to her
   Your Highness:  but your Highness breaks with ease
   The law your Highness did not make:  'twas I.
   I had been wedded wife, I knew mankind,
   And blocked them out; but these men came to woo
   Your Highness--verily I think to win.'

        So she, and turned askance a wintry eye:
   But Ida with a voice, that like a bell
   Tolled by an earthquake in a trembling tower,
   Rang ruin, answered full of grief and scorn.

        'Fling our doors wide! all, all, not one, but all,
   Not only he, but by my mother's soul,
   Whatever man lies wounded, friend or foe,
   Shall enter, if he will.  Let our girls flit,
   Till the storm die! but had you stood by us,
   The roar that breaks the Pharos from his base
   Had left us rock.  She fain would sting us too,
   But shall not.  Pass, and mingle with your likes.
   We brook no further insult but are gone.'
        She turned; the very nape of her white neck
   Was rosed with indignation:  but the Prince
   Her brother came; the king her father charmed
   Her wounded soul with words:  nor did mine own
   Refuse her proffer, lastly gave his hand.

        Then us they lifted up, dead weights, and bare
   Straight to the doors:  to them the doors gave way
   Groaning, and in the Vestal entry shrieked
   The virgin marble under iron heels:
   And on they moved and gained the hall, and there
   Rested:  but great the crush was, and each base,
   To left and right, of those tall columns drowned
   In silken fluctuation and the swarm
   Of female whisperers:  at the further end
   Was Ida by the throne, the two great cats
   Close by her, like supporters on a shield,
   Bow-backed with fear:  but in the centre stood
   The common men with rolling eyes; amazed
   They glared upon the women, and aghast
   The women stared at these, all silent, save
   When armour clashed or jingled, while the day,
   Descending, struck athwart the hall, and shot
   A flying splendour out of brass and steel,
   That o'er the statues leapt from head to head,
   Now fired an angry Pallas on the helm,
   Now set a wrathful Dian's moon on flame,
   And now and then an echo started up,
   And shuddering fled from room to room, and died
   Of fright in far apartments.
                               Then the voice
   Of Ida sounded, issuing ordinance:
   And me they bore up the broad stairs, and through
   The long-laid galleries past a hundred doors
   To one deep chamber shut from sound, and due
   To languid limbs and sickness; left me in it;
   And others otherwhere they laid; and all
   That afternoon a sound arose of hoof
   And chariot, many a maiden passing home
   Till happier times; but some were left of those
   Held sagest, and the great lords out and in,
   From those two hosts that lay beside the walls,
   Walked at their will, and everything was changed.


   Ask me no more:  the moon may draw the sea;
      The cloud may stoop from heaven and take the shape
      With fold to fold, of mountain or of cape;
   But O too fond, when have I answered thee?
                          Ask me no more.

   Ask me no more:  what answer should I give?
      I love not hollow cheek or faded eye:
      Yet, O my friend, I will not have thee die!
   Ask me no more, lest I should bid thee live;
                          Ask me no more.

   Ask me no more:  thy fate and mine are sealed:
      I strove against the stream and all in vain:
      Let the great river take me to the main:
   No more, dear love, for at a touch I yield;
                          Ask me no more.




VII



   So was their sanctuary violated,
   So their fair college turned to hospital;
   At first with all confusion:  by and by
   Sweet order lived again with other laws:
   A kindlier influence reigned; and everywhere
   Low voices with the ministering hand
   Hung round the sick:  the maidens came, they talked,
   They sang, they read:  till she not fair began
   To gather light, and she that was, became
   Her former beauty treble; and to and fro
   With books, with flowers, with Angel offices,
   Like creatures native unto gracious act,
   And in their own clear element, they moved.

        But sadness on the soul of Ida fell,
   And hatred of her weakness, blent with shame.
   Old studies failed; seldom she spoke:  but oft
   Clomb to the roofs, and gazed alone for hours
   On that disastrous leaguer, swarms of men
   Darkening her female field:  void was her use,
   And she as one that climbs a peak to gaze
   O'er land and main, and sees a great black cloud
   Drag inward from the deeps, a wall of night,
   Blot out the slope of sea from verge to shore,
   And suck the blinding splendour from the sand,
   And quenching lake by lake and tarn by tarn
   Expunge the world:  so fared she gazing there;
   So blackened all her world in secret, blank
   And waste it seemed and vain; till down she came,
   And found fair peace once more among the sick.

        And twilight dawned; and morn by morn the lark
   Shot up and shrilled in flickering gyres, but I
   Lay silent in the muffled cage of life:
   And twilight gloomed; and broader-grown the bowers
   Drew the great night into themselves, and Heaven,
   Star after Star, arose and fell; but I,
   Deeper than those weird doubts could reach me, lay
   Quite sundered from the moving Universe,
   Nor knew what eye was on me, nor the hand
   That nursed me, more than infants in their sleep.

        But Psyche tended Florian:  with her oft,
   Melissa came; for Blanche had gone, but left
   Her child among us, willing she should keep
   Court-favour:  here and there the small bright head,
   A light of healing, glanced about the couch,
   Or through the parted silks the tender face
   Peeped, shining in upon the wounded man
   With blush and smile, a medicine in themselves
   To wile the length from languorous hours, and draw
   The sting from pain; nor seemed it strange that soon
   He rose up whole, and those fair charities
   Joined at her side; nor stranger seemed that hears
   So gentle, so employed, should close in love,
   Than when two dewdrops on the petals shake
   To the same sweet air, and tremble deeper down,
   And slip at once all-fragrant into one.

        Less prosperously the second suit obtained
   At first with Psyche.  Not though Blanche had sworn
   That after that dark night among the fields
   She needs must wed him for her own good name;
        Not though he built upon the babe restored;
   Nor though she liked him, yielded she, but feared
   To incense the Head once more; till on a day
   When Cyril pleaded, Ida came behind
   Seen but of Psyche:  on her foot she hung
   A moment, and she heard, at which her face
   A little flushed, and she past on; but each
   Assumed from thence a half-consent involved
   In stillness, plighted troth, and were at peace.

        Nor only these:  Love in the sacred halls
   Held carnival at will, and flying struck
   With showers of random sweet on maid and man.
   Nor did her father cease to press my claim,
   Nor did mine own, now reconciled; nor yet
   Did those twin-brothers, risen again and whole;
   Nor Arac, satiate with his victory.

        But I lay still, and with me oft she sat:
   Then came a change; for sometimes I would catch
   Her hand in wild delirium, gripe it hard,
   And fling it like a viper off, and shriek
   'You are not Ida;' clasp it once again,
   And call her Ida, though I knew her not,
   And call her sweet, as if in irony,
   And call her hard and cold which seemed a truth:
   And still she feared that I should lose my mind,
   And often she believed that I should die:
   Till out of long frustration of her care,
   And pensive tendance in the all-weary noons,
   And watches in the dead, the dark, when clocks
   Throbbed thunder through the palace floors, or called
   On flying Time from all their silver tongues--
   And out of memories of her kindlier days,
   And sidelong glances at my father's grief,
   And at the happy lovers heart in heart--
   And out of hauntings of my spoken love,
   And lonely listenings to my muttered dream,
   And often feeling of the helpless hands,
   And wordless broodings on the wasted cheek--
   From all a closer interest flourished up,
   Tenderness touch by touch, and last, to these,
   Love, like an Alpine harebell hung with tears
   By some cold morning glacier; frail at first
   And feeble, all unconscious of itself,
   But such as gathered colour day by day.

   Last I woke sane, but well-nigh close to death
   For weakness:  it was evening:  silent light
   Slept on the painted walls, wherein were wrought
   Two grand designs; for on one side arose
   The women up in wild revolt, and stormed
   At the Oppian Law.  Titanic shapes, they crammed
   The forum, and half-crushed among the rest
   A dwarf-like Cato cowered.  On the other side
   Hortensia spoke against the tax; behind,
   A train of dames:  by axe and eagle sat,
   With all their foreheads drawn in Roman scowls,
   And half the wolf's-milk curdled in their veins,
   The fierce triumvirs; and before them paused
   Hortensia pleading:  angry was her face.

        I saw the forms:  I knew not where I was:
   They did but look like hollow shows; nor more
   Sweet Ida:  palm to palm she sat:  the dew
   Dwelt in her eyes, and softer all her shape
   And rounder seemed:  I moved:  I sighed:  a touch
   Came round my wrist, and tears upon my hand:
   Then all for languor and self-pity ran
   Mine down my face, and with what life I had,
   And like a flower that cannot all unfold,
   So drenched it is with tempest, to the sun,
   Yet, as it may, turns toward him, I on her
   Fixt my faint eyes, and uttered whisperingly:

        'If you be, what I think you, some sweet dream,
   I would but ask you to fulfil yourself:
   But if you be that Ida whom I knew,
   I ask you nothing:  only, if a dream,
   Sweet dream, be perfect.  I shall die tonight.
   Stoop down and seem to kiss me ere I die.'

        I could no more, but lay like one in trance,
   That hears his burial talked of by his friends,
   And cannot speak, nor move, nor make one sign,
   But lies and dreads his doom.  She turned; she paused;
   She stooped; and out of languor leapt a cry;
   Leapt fiery Passion from the brinks of death;
   And I believed that in the living world
   My spirit closed with Ida's at the lips;
   Till back I fell, and from mine arms she rose
   Glowing all over noble shame; and all
   Her falser self slipt from her like a robe,
   And left her woman, lovelier in her mood
   Than in her mould that other, when she came
   From barren deeps to conquer all with love;
   And down the streaming crystal dropt; and she
   Far-fleeted by the purple island-sides,
   Naked, a double light in air and wave,
   To meet her Graces, where they decked her out
   For worship without end; nor end of mine,
   Stateliest, for thee! but mute she glided forth,
   Nor glanced behind her, and I sank and slept,
   Filled through and through with Love, a happy sleep.

        Deep in the night I woke:  she, near me, held
   A volume of the Poets of her land:
   There to herself, all in low tones, she read.


      'Now sleeps the crimson petal, now the white;
   Nor waves the cypress in the palace walk;
   Nor winks the gold fin in the porphyry font:
   The fire-fly wakens:  wake thou with me.

      Now droops the milkwhite peacock like a ghost,
   And like a ghost she glimmers on to me.

      Now lies the Earth all Danaë to the stars,
   And all thy heart lies open unto me.

      Now lies the silent meteor on, and leaves
   A shining furrow, as thy thoughts in me.

      Now folds the lily all her sweetness up,
   And slips into the bosom of the lake:
   So fold thyself, my dearest, thou, and slip
   Into my bosom and be lost in me.'


   I heard her turn the page; she found a small
   Sweet Idyl, and once more, as low, she read:


      'Come down, O maid, from yonder mountain height:
   What pleasure lives in height (the shepherd sang)
   In height and cold, the splendour of the hills?
   But cease to move so near the Heavens, and cease
   To glide a sunbeam by the blasted Pine,
   To sit a star upon the sparkling spire;
   And come, for love is of the valley, come,
   For love is of the valley, come thou down
   And find him; by the happy threshold, he,
   Or hand in hand with Plenty in the maize,
   Or red with spirted purple of the vats,
   Or foxlike in the vine; nor cares to walk
   With Death and Morning on the silver horns,
   Nor wilt thou snare him in the white ravine,
   Nor find him dropt upon the firths of ice,
   That huddling slant in furrow-cloven falls
   To roll the torrent out of dusky doors:
   But follow; let the torrent dance thee down
   To find him in the valley; let the wild
   Lean-headed Eagles yelp alone, and leave
   The monstrous ledges there to slope, and spill
   Their thousand wreaths of dangling water-smoke,
   That like a broken purpose waste in air:
   So waste not thou; but come; for all the vales
   Await thee; azure pillars of the hearth
   Arise to thee; the children call, and I
   Thy shepherd pipe, and sweet is every sound,
   Sweeter thy voice, but every sound is sweet;
   Myriads of rivulets hurrying through the lawn,
   The moan of doves in immemorial elms,
   And murmuring of innumerable bees.'


   So she low-toned; while with shut eyes I lay
   Listening; then looked.  Pale was the perfect face;
   The bosom with long sighs laboured; and meek
   Seemed the full lips, and mild the luminous eyes,
   And the voice trembled and the hand.  She said
   Brokenly, that she knew it, she had failed
   In sweet humility; had failed in all;
   That all her labour was but as a block
   Left in the quarry; but she still were loth,
   She still were loth to yield herself to one
   That wholly scorned to help their equal rights
   Against the sons of men, and barbarous laws.
   She prayed me not to judge their cause from her
   That wronged it, sought far less for truth than power
   In knowledge:  something wild within her breast,
   A greater than all knowledge, beat her down.
   And she had nursed me there from week to week:
   Much had she learnt in little time.  In part
   It was ill counsel had misled the girl
   To vex true hearts:  yet was she but a girl--
   'Ah fool, and made myself a Queen of farce!
   When comes another such? never, I think,
   Till the Sun drop, dead, from the signs.'
                                            Her voice
   choked, and her forehead sank upon her hands,
   And her great heart through all the faultful Past
   Went sorrowing in a pause I dared not break;
   Till notice of a change in the dark world
   Was lispt about the acacias, and a bird,
   That early woke to feed her little ones,
   Sent from a dewy breast a cry for light:
   She moved, and at her feet the volume fell.

        'Blame not thyself too much,' I said, 'nor blame
   Too much the sons of men and barbarous laws;
   These were the rough ways of the world till now.
   Henceforth thou hast a helper, me, that know
   The woman's cause is man's:  they rise or sink
   Together, dwarfed or godlike, bond or free:
   For she that out of Lethe scales with man
   The shining steps of Nature, shares with man
   His nights, his days, moves with him to one goal,
   Stays all the fair young planet in her hands--
   If she be small, slight-natured, miserable,
   How shall men grow? but work no more alone!
   Our place is much:  as far as in us lies
   We two will serve them both in aiding her--
   Will clear away the parasitic forms
   That seem to keep her up but drag her down--
   Will leave her space to burgeon out of all
   Within her--let her make herself her own
   To give or keep, to live and learn and be
   All that not harms distinctive womanhood.
   For woman is not undevelopt man,
   But diverse:  could we make her as the man,
   Sweet Love were slain:  his dearest bond is this,
   Not like to like, but like in difference.
   Yet in the long years liker must they grow;
   The man be more of woman, she of man;
   He gain in sweetness and in moral height,
   Nor lose the wrestling thews that throw the world;
   She mental breadth, nor fail in childward care,
   Nor lose the childlike in the larger mind;
   Till at the last she set herself to man,
   Like perfect music unto noble words;
   And so these twain, upon the skirts of Time,
   Sit side by side, full-summed in all their powers,
   Dispensing harvest, sowing the To-be,
   Self-reverent each and reverencing each,
   Distinct in individualities,
   But like each other even as those who love.
   Then comes the statelier Eden back to men:
   Then reign the world's great bridals, chaste and calm:
   Then springs the crowning race of humankind.
   May these things be!'
                        Sighing she spoke 'I fear
   They will not.'
                  'Dear, but let us type them now
   In our own lives, and this proud watchword rest
   Of equal; seeing either sex alone
   Is half itself, and in true marriage lies
   Nor equal, nor unequal:  each fulfils
   Defect in each, and always thought in thought,
   Purpose in purpose, will in will, they grow,
   The single pure and perfect animal,
   The two-celled heart beating, with one full stroke,
   Life.'
         And again sighing she spoke:  'A dream
   That once was mind! what woman taught you this?'

        'Alone,' I said, 'from earlier than I know,
   Immersed in rich foreshadowings of the world,
   I loved the woman:  he, that doth not, lives
   A drowning life, besotted in sweet self,
   Or pines in sad experience worse than death,
   Or keeps his winged affections clipt with crime:
   Yet was there one through whom I loved her, one
   Not learnèd, save in gracious household ways,
   Not perfect, nay, but full of tender wants,
   No Angel, but a dearer being, all dipt
   In Angel instincts, breathing Paradise,
   Interpreter between the Gods and men,
   Who looked all native to her place, and yet
   On tiptoe seemed to touch upon a sphere
   Too gross to tread, and all male minds perforce
   Swayed to her from their orbits as they moved,
   And girdled her with music.  Happy he
   With such a mother! faith in womankind
   Beats with his blood, and trust in all things high
   Comes easy to him, and though he trip and fall
   He shall not blind his soul with clay.'
                                          'But I,'
   Said Ida, tremulously, 'so all unlike--
   It seems you love to cheat yourself with words:
   This mother is your model.  I have heard
   of your strange doubts:  they well might be:  I seem
   A mockery to my own self.  Never, Prince;
   You cannot love me.'
                       'Nay but thee' I said
   'From yearlong poring on thy pictured eyes,
   Ere seen I loved, and loved thee seen, and saw
   Thee woman through the crust of iron moods
   That masked thee from men's reverence up, and forced
   Sweet love on pranks of saucy boyhood:  now,
   Given back to life, to life indeed, through thee,
   Indeed I love:  the new day comes, the light
   Dearer for night, as dearer thou for faults
   Lived over:  lift thine eyes; my doubts are dead,
   My haunting sense of hollow shows:  the change,
   This truthful change in thee has killed it.  Dear,
   Look up, and let thy nature strike on mine,
   Like yonder morning on the blind half-world;
   Approach and fear not; breathe upon my brows;
   In that fine air I tremble, all the past
   Melts mist-like into this bright hour, and this
   Is morn to more, and all the rich to-come
   Reels, as the golden Autumn woodland reels
   Athwart the smoke of burning weeds.  Forgive me,
   I waste my heart in signs:  let be.  My bride,
   My wife, my life.  O we will walk this world,
   Yoked in all exercise of noble end,
   And so through those dark gates across the wild
   That no man knows.  Indeed I love thee:  come,
   Yield thyself up:  my hopes and thine are one:
   Accomplish thou my manhood and thyself;
   Lay thy sweet hands in mine and trust to me.'




CONCLUSION



   So closed our tale, of which I give you all
   The random scheme as wildly as it rose:
   The words are mostly mine; for when we ceased
   There came a minute's pause, and Walter said,
   'I wish she had not yielded!' then to me,
   'What, if you drest it up poetically?'
   So prayed the men, the women:  I gave assent:
   Yet how to bind the scattered scheme of seven
   Together in one sheaf?  What style could suit?
   The men required that I should give throughout
   The sort of mock-heroic gigantesque,
   With which we bantered little Lilia first:
   The women--and perhaps they felt their power,
   For something in the ballads which they sang,
   Or in their silent influence as they sat,
   Had ever seemed to wrestle with burlesque,
   And drove us, last, to quite a solemn close--
   They hated banter, wished for something real,
   A gallant fight, a noble princess--why
   Not make her true-heroic--true-sublime?
   Or all, they said, as earnest as the close?
   Which yet with such a framework scarce could be.
   Then rose a little feud betwixt the two,
   Betwixt the mockers and the realists:
   And I, betwixt them both, to please them both,
   And yet to give the story as it rose,
   I moved as in a strange diagonal,
   And maybe neither pleased myself nor them.

        But Lilia pleased me, for she took no part
   In our dispute:  the sequel of the tale
   Had touched her; and she sat, she plucked the grass,
   She flung it from her, thinking:  last, she fixt
   A showery glance upon her aunt, and said,
   'You--tell us what we are' who might have told,
   For she was crammed with theories out of books,
   But that there rose a shout:  the gates were closed
   At sunset, and the crowd were swarming now,
   To take their leave, about the garden rails.

        So I and some went out to these:  we climbed
   The slope to Vivian-place, and turning saw
   The happy valleys, half in light, and half
   Far-shadowing from the west, a land of peace;
   Gray halls alone among their massive groves;
   Trim hamlets; here and there a rustic tower
   Half-lost in belts of hop and breadths of wheat;
   The shimmering glimpses of a stream; the seas;
   A red sail, or a white; and far beyond,
   Imagined more than seen, the skirts of France.

        'Look there, a garden!' said my college friend,
   The Tory member's elder son, 'and there!
   God bless the narrow sea which keeps her off,
   And keeps our Britain, whole within herself,
   A nation yet, the rulers and the ruled--
   Some sense of duty, something of a faith,
   Some reverence for the laws ourselves have made,
   Some patient force to change them when we will,
   Some civic manhood firm against the crowd--
   But yonder, whiff! there comes a sudden heat,
   The gravest citizen seems to lose his head,
   The king is scared, the soldier will not fight,
   The little boys begin to shoot and stab,
   A kingdom topples over with a shriek
   Like an old woman, and down rolls the world
   In mock heroics stranger than our own;
   Revolts, republics, revolutions, most
   No graver than a schoolboys' barring out;
   Too comic for the serious things they are,
   Too solemn for the comic touches in them,
   Like our wild Princess with as wise a dream
   As some of theirs--God bless the narrow seas!
   I wish they were a whole Atlantic broad.'

        'Have patience,' I replied, 'ourselves are full
   Of social wrong; and maybe wildest dreams
   Are but the needful preludes of the truth:
   For me, the genial day, the happy crowd,
   The sport half-science, fill me with a faith.
   This fine old world of ours is but a child
   Yet in the go-cart.  Patience!  Give it time
   To learn its limbs:  there is a hand that guides.'

        In such discourse we gained the garden rails,
   And there we saw Sir Walter where he stood,
   Before a tower of crimson holly-hoaks,
   Among six boys, head under head, and looked
   No little lily-handed Baronet he,
   A great broad-shouldered genial Englishman,
   A lord of fat prize-oxen and of sheep,
   A raiser of huge melons and of pine,
   A patron of some thirty charities,
   A pamphleteer on guano and on grain,
   A quarter-sessions chairman, abler none;
   Fair-haired and redder than a windy morn;
   Now shaking hands with him, now him, of those
   That stood the nearest--now addressed to speech--
   Who spoke few words and pithy, such as closed
   Welcome, farewell, and welcome for the year
   To follow:  a shout rose again, and made
   The long line of the approaching rookery swerve
   From the elms, and shook the branches of the deer
   From slope to slope through distant ferns, and rang
   Beyond the bourn of sunset; O, a shout
   More joyful than the city-roar that hails
   Premier or king!  Why should not these great Sirs
   Give up their parks some dozen times a year
   To let the people breathe?  So thrice they cried,
   I likewise, and in groups they streamed away.

        But we went back to the Abbey, and sat on,
   So much the gathering darkness charmed:  we sat
   But spoke not, rapt in nameless reverie,
   Perchance upon the future man:  the walls
   Blackened about us, bats wheeled, and owls whooped,
   And gradually the powers of the night,
   That range above the region of the wind,
   Deepening the courts of twilight broke them up
   Through all the silent spaces of the worlds,
   Beyond all thought into the Heaven of Heavens.

        Last little Lilia, rising quietly,
   Disrobed the glimmering statue of Sir Ralph
   From those rich silks, and home well-pleased we went.





THE SUPPRESSED POEMS

OF

ALFRED LORD TENNYSON

1830-1868


Edited By J.C. Thomson




Contents


EDITOR'S NOTE


TIMBUCTOO


POEMS CHIEFLY LYRICAL

    i. The How and the Why
   ii. The Burial of Love
  iii. To ----
   iv. Song _'I' the gloaming light'_
    v. Song _'Every day hath its night'_
   vi. Hero to Leander
  vii. The Mystic
 viii. The Grasshopper
   ix. Love, Pride and Forgetfulness
    x. Chorus _'The varied earth, the moving heaven'_
   xi. Lost Hope
  xii. The Tears of Heaven
 xiii. Love and Sorrow
  xiv. To a Lady sleeping
   xv. Sonnet _'Could I outwear my present state of woe'_
  xvi. Sonnet _'Though night hath climbed'_
 xvii. Sonnet _'Shall the hag Evil die'_
xviii. Sonnet _'The pallid thunder stricken sigh for gain'_
  xix. Love
   xx. English War Song
  xxi. National Song
 xxii. Dualisms
xxiii. [Greek: ohi rheontes]
 xxiv. Song _'The lintwhite and the throstlecock'_


CONTRIBUTIONS TO PERIODICALS, 1831-32

   xxv. A Fragment
  xxvi. Anacreontics
 xxvii. _'O sad no more! O sweet no more'_
xxviii. Sonnet _'Check every outflash, every ruder sally'_
  xxix. Sonnet _'Me my own fate to lasting sorrow doometh'_
   xxx. Sonnet _'There are three things that fill my heart with sighs'_


POEMS, 1833

   xxxi. Sonnet _'Oh beauty, passing beauty'_
  xxxii. The Hesperides
 xxxiii. Rosalind
  xxxiv. Song _'Who can say'_
   xxxv. Sonnet _'Blow ye the trumpet, gather from afar'_
  xxxvi. O Darling Room
 xxxvii. To Christopher North
xxxviii. The Lotos-Eaters
  xxxix. A Dream of Fair Women


MISCELLANEOUS POEMS AND CONTRIBUTIONS TO PERIODICALS, 1833-68

    xl. Cambridge
   xli. The Germ of 'Maud'
  xlii. _'A gate and afield half ploughed'_
 xliii. The Skipping-Rope
  xliv. The New Timon and the Poets
   xlv. Mablethorpe
  xlvi. _'What time I wasted youthful hours'_
 xlvii. Britons, guard your own
xlviii. Hands all round
  xlix. Suggested by reading an article in a newspaper
     l. _'God bless our Prince and Bride'_
    li. The Ringlet
   lii. Song _'Home they brought him slain with spears'_
  liii. 1865-1866


THE LOVER'S TALE, 1833.


INDEX OF FIRST LINES




_Note_

_To those unacquainted with Tennyson's conscientious methods, it may
seem strange that a volume of 160 pages is necessary to contain those
poems written and published by him during his active literary career,
and ultimately rejected as unsatisfactory. Of this considerable body
of verse, a great part was written, not in youth or old age, but while
Tennyson's powers were at their greatest. Whatever reasons may once
have existed for suppressing the poems that follow, the student of
English literature is entitled to demand that the whole body of
Tennyson's work should now be open, without restriction or impediment,
to the critical study to which the works of his compeers are
subjected._

_The bibliographical notes prefixed to the various poems give, in every
case, the date and medium of first publication._

_J.C.T._




=Timbuctoo=

A Poem Which Obtained The Chancellor's Medal At The
_Cambridge Commencement_  MDCCCXXIX

By
A. Tennyson
Of Trinity College

[Printed in Cambridge _Chronicle and Journal_ of Friday, July 10,
1829, and at the University Press by James Smith, among the
_Prolusiones Academicæ Præmiis annuis dignatæ et in Curia
Cantabrigiensi Recitatæ Comitiis Maximis_, MDCCCXXIX. Republished in
_Cambridge Prize Poems_, 1813 to 1858, by Messrs. Macmillan in 1859,
without alteration; and in 1893 in the appendix to a reprint of _Poems
by Two Brothers_].


=Timbuctoo=

    Deep in that lion-haunted inland lies
    A mystic city, goal of high Emprize.[A]
      --CHAPMAN.

  I stood upon the Mountain which o'erlooks
  The narrow seas, whose rapid interval
  Parts Afric from green Europe, when the Sun
  Had fall'n below th' Atlantick, and above
  The silent Heavens were blench'd with faery light,
  Uncertain whether faery light or cloud,
  Flowing Southward, and the chasms of deep, deep blue
  Slumber'd unfathomable, and the stars
  Were flooded over with clear glory and pale.
  I gaz'd upon the sheeny coast beyond,
  There where the Giant of old Time infixed
  The limits of his prowess, pillars high
  Long time eras'd from Earth: even as the sea
  When weary of wild inroad buildeth up
  Huge mounds whereby to stay his yeasty waves.
  And much I mus'd on legends quaint and old
  Which whilome won the hearts of all on Earth
  Toward their brightness, ev'n as flame draws air;
  But had their being in the heart of Man
  As air is th' life of flame: and thou wert then
  A center'd glory-circled Memory,
  Divinest Atalantis, whom the waves
  Have buried deep, and thou of later name
  Imperial Eldorado root'd with gold:
  Shadows to which, despite all shocks of Change,
  All on-set of capricious Accident,
  Men clung with yearning Hope which would not die.
  As when in some great City where the walls
  Shake, and the streets with ghastly faces throng'd
  Do utter forth a subterranean voice,
  Among the inner columns far retir'd
  At midnight, in the lone Acropolis.
  Before the awful Genius of the place
  Kneels the pale Priestess in deep faith, the while
  Above her head the weak lamp dips and winks
  Unto the fearful summoning without:
  Nathless she ever clasps the marble knees,
  Bathes the cold hand with tears, and gazeth on
  Those eyes which wear no light but that wherewith
  Her phantasy informs them.

                   Where are ye
  Thrones of the Western wave, fair Islands green?
  Where are your moonlight halls, your cedarn glooms,
  The blossoming abysses of your hills?
  Your flowering Capes and your gold-sanded bays
  Blown round with happy airs of odorous winds?
  Where are the infinite ways which, Seraphtrod,
  Wound thro' your great Elysian solitudes,
  Whose lowest depths were, as with visible love,
  Fill'd with Divine effulgence, circumfus'd,
  Flowing between the clear and polish'd stems,
  And ever circling round their emerald cones
  In coronals and glories, such as gird
  The unfading foreheads of the Saints in Heaven?
  For nothing visible, they say, had birth
  In that blest ground but it was play'd about
  With its peculiar glory. Then I rais'd
  My voice and cried 'Wide Afric, doth thy Sun
  Lighten, thy hills enfold a City as fair
  As those which starr'd the night o' the Elder World?
  Or is the rumour of thy Timbuctoo
  A dream as frail as those of ancient Time?'

  A curve of whitening, flashing, ebbing light!
  A rustling of white wings! The bright descent
  Of a young Seraph! and he stood beside me
  There on the ridge, and look'd into my face
  With his unutterable, shining orbs,
  So that with hasty motion I did veil
  My vision with both hands, and saw before me
  Such colour'd spots as dance athwart the eyes
  Of those that gaze upon the noonday Sun.
  Girt with a Zone of flashing gold beneath
  His breast, and compass'd round about his brow
  With triple arch of everchanging bows,
  And circled with the glory of living light
  And alternations of all hues, he stood.
  'O child of man, why muse you here alone
  Upon the Mountain, on the dreams of old
  Which fill'd the Earth with passing loveliness,
  Which flung strange music on the howling winds,
  And odours rapt from remote Paradise?
  Thy sense is clogg'd with dull mortality,
  Thy spirit fetter'd with the bond of clay:
  Open thine eye and see.'

                    I look'd, but not
  Upon his face, for it was wonderful
  With its exceeding brightness, and the light
  Of the great angel mind which look'd from out
  The starry glowing of his restless eyes.
  I felt my soul grow mighty, and my spirit
  With supernatural excitation bound
  Within me, and my mental eye grew large
  With such a vast circumference of thought,
  That in my vanity I seem'd to stand
  Upon the outward verge and bound alone
  Of full beatitude. Each failing sense
  As with a momentary flash of light
  Grew thrillingly distinct and keen. I saw
  The smallest grain that dappled the dark Earth,
  The indistinctest atom in deep air,
  The Moon's white cities, and the opal width
  Of her small glowing lakes, her silver heights
  Unvisited with dew of vagrant cloud,
  And the unsounded, undescended depth
  Of her black hollows. The clear Galaxy
  Shorn of its hoary lustre, wonderful,
  Distinct and vivid with sharp points of light
  Blaze within blaze, an unimagin'd depth
  And harmony of planet-girded Suns
  And moon-encircled planets, wheel in wheel,
  Arch'd the wan Sapphire. Nay, the hum of men,
  Or other things talking in unknown tongues,
  And notes of busy life in distant worlds
  Beat like a far wave on my anxious ear.

  A maze of piercing, trackless, thrilling thoughts
  Involving and embracing each with each
  Rapid as fire, inextricably link'd,
  Expanding momently with every sight
  And sound which struck the palpitating sense,
  The issue of strong impulse, hurried through
  The riv'n rapt brain: as when in some large lake
  From pressure of descendant crags, which lapse
  Disjointed, crumbling from their parent slope
  At slender interval, the level calm
  Is ridg'd with restless and increasing spheres
  Which break upon each other, each th' effect
  Of separate impulse, but more fleet and strong
  Than its precursor, till the eyes in vain
  Amid the wild unrest of swimming shade
  Dappled with hollow and alternate rise
  Of interpenetrated arc, would scan
  Definite round.
                   I know not if I shape
  These things with accurate similitude
  From visible objects, for but dimly now,
  Less vivid than a half-forgotten dream,
  The memory of that mental excellence
  Comes o'er me, and it may be I entwine
  The indecision of my present mind
  With its past clearness, yet it seems to me
  As even then the torrent of quick thought
  Absorbed me from the nature of itself
  With its own fleetness. Where is he that, borne
  Adown the sloping of an arrowy stream,
  Could link his shallop to the fleeting edge,
  And muse midway with philosophic calm
  Upon the wondrous laws which regulate
  The fierceness of the bounding element?
  My thoughts which long had grovell'd in the slime
  Of this dull world, like dusky worms which house
  Beneath unshaken waters, but at once
  Upon some earth-awakening day of spring
  Do pass from gloom to glory, and aloft
  Winnow the purple, bearing on both sides
  Double display of starlit wings which burn
  Fanlike and fibred, with intensest bloom:
  E'en so my thoughts, erewhile so low, now felt
  Unutterable buoyancy and strength
  To bear them upward through the trackless fields
  Of undefin'd existence far and free.

  Then first within the South methought I saw
  A wilderness of spires, and chrystal pile
  Of rampart upon rampart, dome on dome,
  Illimitable range of battlement
  On battlement, and the Imperial height
  Of Canopy o'ercanopied.
                              Behind,
  In diamond light, upsprung the dazzling Cones
  Of Pyramids, as far surpassing Earth's
  As Heaven than Earth is fairer. Each aloft
  Upon his renown'd Eminence bore globes
  Of wheeling suns, or stars, or semblances
  Of either, showering circular abyss
  Of radiance. But the glory of the place
  Stood out a pillar'd front of burnish'd gold
  Interminably high, if gold it were
  Or metal more ethereal, and beneath
  Two doors of blinding brilliance, where no gaze
  Might rest, stood open, and the eye could scan
  Through length of porch and lake and boundless
      hall,
  Part of a throne of fiery flame, wherefrom
  The snowy skirting of a garment hung,
  And glimpse of multitudes of multitudes
  That minister'd around it--if I saw
  These things distinctly, for my human brain
  Stagger'd beneath the vision, and thick night
  Came down upon my eyelids, and I fell.

  With ministering hand he rais'd me up;
  Then with a mournful and ineffable smile,
  Which but to look on for a moment fill'd
  My eyes with irresistible sweet tears,
  In accents of majestic melody,
  Like a swol'n river's gushings in still night
  Mingled with floating music, thus he spake:
  'There is no mightier Spirit than I to sway
  The heart of man: and teach him to attain
  By shadowing forth the Unattainable;
  And step by step to scale that mighty stair
  Whose landing-place is wrapt about with clouds
  Of glory of Heaven.[B] With earliest Light of Spring,
  And in the glow of sallow Summertide,
  And in red Autumn when the winds are wild
  With gambols, and when full-voiced Winter roofs
  The headland with inviolate white snow,
  I play about his heart a thousand ways,
  Visit his eyes with visions, and his ears
  With harmonies of wind and wave and wood
  --Of winds which tell of waters, and of waters
  Betraying the close kisses of the wind--
  And win him unto me: and few there be
  So gross of heart who have not felt and known
  A higher than they see: They with dim eyes
  Behold me darkling. Lo! I have given _thee_
  To understand my presence, and to feel
  My fullness; I have fill'd thy lips with power.
  I have rais'd thee higher to the Spheres of Heaven,
  Man's first, last home: and thou with ravish'd sense
  Listenest the lordly music flowing from
  Th' illimitable years. I am the Spirit,
  The permeating life which courseth through
  All th' intricate and labyrinthine veins
  Of the great vine of _Fable_, which, outspread
  With growth of shadowing leaf and clusters rare,
  Reacheth to every corner under Heaven,
  Deep-rooted in the living soil of truth:
  So that men's hopes and fears take refuge in
  The fragrance of its complicated glooms
  And cool impleachèd twilights. Child of Man,
  See'st thou yon river, whose translucent wave,
  Forth issuing from darkness, windeth through
  The argent streets o' the City, imaging
  The soft inversion of her tremulous Domes;
  Her gardens frequent with the stately Palm,
  Her Pagods hung with music of sweet bells:
  Her obelisks of rangèd Chrysolite,
  Minarets and towers? Lo! how he passeth by,
  And gulphs himself in sands, as not enduring
  To carry through the world those waves, which bore
  The reflex of my City in their depths.
  Oh City! Oh latest Throne! where I was rais'd
  To be a mystery of loveliness
  Unto all eyes, the time is well nigh come
  When I must render up this glorious home
  To keen _Discovery_: soon yon brilliant towers
  Shall darken with the waving of her wand;
  Darken, and shrink and shiver into huts,
  Black specks amid a waste of dreary sand,
  Low-built, mud-walled, Barbarian settlement,
  How chang'd from this fair City!'
                    Thus far the Spirit:
  Then parted Heavenward on the wing: and I
  Was left alone on Calpe, and the Moon
  Had fallen from the night, and all was dark!


[The following review of 'Timbuctoo' was published in the _Athenæum_
of 22nd July, 1829: 'We have accustomed ourselves to think, perhaps
without any very good reason, that poetry was likely to perish among
us for a considerable period after the great generation of poets which
is now passing away. The age seems determined to contradict us, and
that in the most decided manner; for it has put forth poetry by a
young man, and that where we should least expect it--namely, in a
prize poem. These productions have often been ingenious and elegant
but we have never before seen one of them which indicated really
first-rate poetical genius, and which would have done honour to any
men that ever wrote. Such, we do not hesitate to affirm, is the little
work before us; and the examiners seem to have felt it like ourselves,
for they have assigned the prize to the author, though the measure in
which he writes was never before, we believe, thus selected for
honour. We extract a few lines to justify our admiration (50 lines,
62-112, quoted). How many men have lived for a century who could equal
this?' At the time when this highly eulogistic notice of the youthful
unknown poet appeared, the _Athenæum_ was edited by John Sterling and
Frederick Denison Maurice, its then proprietors.]


[Footnote A: Mr Swinburne failed to find this couplet in any of
Chapman's original poems or translations, and was of opinion that it
is Tennyson's own.]

[Footnote B: Be ye perfect even as your Father in Heaven is perfect.]




=Poems Chiefly Lyrical=

[The poems numbered I-XXIV which follow, were published in 1830 in the
volume _Poems chiefly Lyrical_. (London: Effingham Wilson, Royal
Exchange, 1830.) They were never republished by Tennyson.]




I

=The 'How' and the 'Why'=

      I am any man's suitor,
      If any will be my tutor:
  Some say this life is pleasant,
      Some think it speedeth fast:
  In time there is no present,
      In eternity no future,
      In eternity no past.
  We laugh, we cry, we are born, we die,
  Who will riddle me the _how_ and the _why_?

  The bulrush nods unto his brother
  The wheatears whisper to each other:
  What is it they say? What do they there?
  Why two and two make four? Why round is not square?
  Why the rocks stand still, and the light clouds fly?
  Why the heavy oak groans, and the white willows sigh?
  Why deep is not high, and high is not deep?
  Whether we wake or whether we sleep?
  Whether we sleep or whether we die?
  How you are you? Why I am I?
  Who will riddle me the _how_ and the _why_?

  The world is somewhat; it goes on somehow;
  But what is the meaning of _then_ and _now_!
  I feel there is something; but how and what?
  I know there is somewhat; but what and why!
  I cannot tell if that somewhat be I.

  The little bird pipeth 'why! why!'
  In the summerwoods when the sun falls low,
  And the great bird sits on the opposite bough,
  And stares in his face and shouts 'how? how?'
  And the black owl scuds down the mellow twilight,
  And chaunts 'how? how?' the whole of the night.

  Why the life goes when the blood is spilt?
  What the life is? where the soul may lie?
  Why a church is with a steeple built;
  And a house with a chimney-pot?
  Who will riddle me the how and the what?
  Who will riddle me the what and the why?




II

=The Burial of Love=

      His eyes in eclipse,
      Pale cold his lips,
  The light of his hopes unfed,
      Mute his tongue,
      His bow unstrung
  With the tears he hath shed,
  Backward drooping his graceful head.

      Love is dead;
      His last arrow sped;
  He hath not another dart;
      Go--carry him to his dark deathbed;
  Bury him in the cold, cold heart--
      Love is dead.

  Oh, truest love! art thou forlorn,
      And unrevenged? Thy pleasant wiles
  Forgotten, and thine innocent joy?
      Shall hollow-hearted apathy,
  The cruellest form of perfect scorn,
      With langour of most hateful smiles,
  For ever write
  In the weathered light
      Of the tearless eye
      An epitaph that all may spy?
      No! sooner she herself shall die.

  For her the showers shall not fall,
  Nor the round sun that shineth to all;
      Her light shall into darkness change;
  For her the green grass shall not spring,
  Nor the rivers flow, nor the sweet birds sing,
      Till Love have his full revenge.




III

=To ----=

  Sainted Juliet! dearest name!
      If to love be life alone,
        Divinest Juliet,
      I love thee, and live; and yet
  Love unreturned is like the fragrant flame
      Folding the slaughter of the sacrifice
      Offered to Gods upon an altarthrone;
  My heart is lighted at thine eyes,
  Changed into fire, and blown about with sighs.




IV

=Song=

  I

      I' the glooming light
      Of middle night,
      So cold and white,
  Worn Sorrow sits by the moaning wave;
      Beside her are laid,
      Her mattock and spade,
  For she hath half delved her own deep grave.
      Alone she is there:
  The white clouds drizzle: her hair falls loose;
      Her shoulders are bare;
  Her tears are mixed with the bearded dews.

  II

      Death standeth by;
      She will not die;
      With glazèd eye
  She looks at her grave: she cannot sleep;
      Ever alone
      She maketh her moan:
  She cannot speak; she can only weep;
      For she will not hope.
  The thick snow falls on her flake by flake,
      The dull wave mourns down the slope,
  The world will not change, and her heart will not break.




V

=Song=

  I

  Every day hath its night:
      Every night its morn:
  Through dark and bright
      Wingèd hours are borne;
          Ah! welaway!
  Seasons flower and fade;
      Golden calm and storm
          Mingle day by day.
      There is no bright form
  Doth not cast a shade--
          Ah! welaway!

  II

  When we laugh, and our mirth
      Apes the happy vein,
  We're so kin to earth
      Pleasuance fathers pain--
          Ah! welaway!
  Madness laugheth loud:
      Laughter bringeth tears:
          Eyes are worn away
      Till the end of fears
  Cometh in the shroud,
          Ah! welaway!

  III

  All is change, woe or weal;
      Joy is sorrow's brother;
  Grief and sadness steal
      Symbols of each other;
          Ah! welaway!
  Larks in heaven's cope
      Sing: the culvers mourn
          All the livelong day.
      Be not all forlorn;
  Let us weep in hope--
          Ah! welaway!




VI

=Hero to Leander=

  Oh go not yet, my love,
      The night is dark and vast;
  The white moon is hid in her heaven above,
      And the waves climb high and fast.
  Oh! kiss me, kiss me, once again,
      Lest thy kiss should be the last.
      Oh kiss me ere we part;
      Grow closer to my heart.
  My heart is warmer surely than the bosom of the main.

  Oh joy! O bliss of blisses!
      My heart of hearts art thou.
  Come bathe me with thy kisses,
      My eyelids and my brow.
  Hark how the wild rain hisses,
      And the loud sea roars below.

  Thy heart beats through thy rosy limbs
      So gladly doth it stir;
  Thine eye in drops of gladness swims.
      I have bathed thee with the pleasant myrrh;
  Thy locks are dripping balm;
      Thou shalt not wander hence to-night,
  I'll stay thee with my kisses.
      To-night the roaring brine
  Will rend thy golden tresses;
      The ocean with the morrow light
  Will be both blue and calm;
      And the billow will embrace thee with a kiss as soft as mine.

  No western odours wander
      On the black and moaning sea,
  And when thou art dead, Leander,
      My soul shall follow thee!
  Oh go not yet, my love,
      Thy voice is sweet and low;
  The deep salt wave breaks in above
      Those marble steps below.
  The turretstairs are wet
      That lead into the sea.
  Leander! go not yet.
  The pleasant stars have set!
  Oh! go not, go not yet,
      Or I will follow thee.




VII

=The Mystic=

  Angels have talked with him, and showed him thrones:
  Ye knew him not: he was not one of ye,
  Ye scorned him with an undiscerning scorn:
  Ye could not read the marvel in his eye,
  The still serene abstraction; he hath felt
  The vanities of after and before;
  Albeit, his spirit and his secret heart
  The stern experiences of converse lives,
  The linkèd woes of many a fiery change
  Had purified, and chastened, and made free.
  Always there stood before him, night and day,
  Of wayward vary coloured circumstance,
  The imperishable presences serene,
  Colossal, without form, or sense, or sound,
  Dim shadows but unwaning presences
  Fourfacèd to four corners of the sky;
  And yet again, three shadows, fronting one,
  One forward, one respectant, three but one;
  And yet again, again and evermore,
  For the two first were not, but only seemed
  One shadow in the midst of a great light,
  One reflex from eternity on time,
  One mighty countenance of perfect calm,
  Awful with most invariable eyes.
  For him the silent congregated hours,
  Daughters of time, divinely tall, beneath
  Severe and youthful brows, with shining eyes
  Smiling a godlike smile (the innocent light
  Of earliest youth pierced through and through with all
  Keen knowledges of low-embowèd eld)
  Upheld, and ever hold aloft the cloud
  Which droops low hung on either gate of life,
  Both birth and death; he in the centre fixed,
  Saw far on each side through the grated gates
  Most pale and clear and lovely distances.
  He often lying broad awake, and yet
  Remaining from the body, and apart
  In intellect and power and will, hath heard
  Time flowing in the middle of the night,
  And all things creeping to a day of doom.
  How could ye know him? Ye were yet within
  The narrower circle; he had well nigh reached
  The last, with which a region of white flame,
  Pure without heat, into a larger air
  Upburning, and an ether of black hue,
  Investeth and ingirds all other lives.




VIII

=The Grasshopper=

  I

  Voice of the summerwind,
      Joy of the summerplain,
      Life of the summerhours,
    Carol clearly, bound along.
      No Tithon thou as poets feign
  (Shame fall 'em they are deaf and blind)
    But an insect lithe and strong,
      Bowing the seeded summerflowers.
  Prove their falsehood and thy quarrel,
      Vaulting on thine airy feet.
  Clap thy shielded sides and carol,
      Carol clearly, chirrup sweet
  Thou art a mailèd warrior in youth and strength complete;
      Armed cap-a-pie,
      Full fair to see;
        Unknowing fear,
      Undreading loss,
        A gallant cavalier
  _Sans peur et sans reproche_,
      In sunlight and in shadow,
      The Bayard of the meadow.

  II

  I would dwell with thee,
      Merry grasshopper,
  Thou art so glad and free,
      And as light as air;
  Thou hast no sorrow or tears,
  Thou hast no compt of years,
  No withered immortality,
  But a short youth sunny and free.
  Carol clearly, bound along,
      Soon thy joy is over,
  A summer of loud song,
      And slumbers in the clover.
      What hast thou to do with evil
      In thine hour of love and revel,
      In thy heat of summerpride,
      Pushing the thick roots aside
      Of the singing flowerèd grasses,
      That brush thee with their silken tresses?
  What hast thou to do with evil,
  Shooting, singing, ever springing
      In and out the emerald glooms,
  Ever leaping, ever singing,
      Lighting on the golden blooms?




IX

=Love, Pride and Forgetfulness=

  Ere yet my heart was sweet Love's tomb,
  Love laboured honey busily.
  I was the hive and Love the bee,
  My heart the honey-comb.
  One very dark and chilly night
  Pride came beneath and held a light.

  The cruel vapours went through all,
  Sweet Love was withered in his cell;
  Pride took Love's sweets, and by a spell
  Did change them into gall;
  And Memory tho' fed by Pride
  Did wax so thin on gall,
  Awhile she scarcely lived at all,
  What marvel that she died?




X

=Chorus=

_In an unpublished drama written very early._

  The varied earth, the moving heaven,
      The rapid waste of roving sea,
  The fountainpregnant mountains riven
      To shapes of wildest anarchy,
  By secret fire and midnight storms
      That wander round their windy cones,
  The subtle life, the countless forms
      Of living things, the wondrous tones
  Of man and beast are full of strange
  Astonishment and boundless change.

  The day, the diamonded light,
      The echo, feeble child of sound,
  The heavy thunder's girding might,
      The herald lightning's starry bound,
  The vocal spring of bursting bloom,
      The naked summer's glowing birth,
  The troublous autumn's sallow gloom,
      The hoarhead winter paving earth
  With sheeny white, are full of strange
  Astonishment and boundless change.

  Each sun which from the centre flings
      Grand music and redundant fire,
  The burning belts, the mighty rings,
      The murmurous planets' rolling choir,
  The globefilled arch that, cleaving air,
      Lost in its effulgence sleeps,
  The lawless comets as they glare,
      And thunder thro' the sapphire deeps
  In wayward strength, are full of strange
  Astonishment and boundless change.




XI

=Lost Hope=

  You cast to ground the hope which once was mine,
      But did the while your harsh decree deplore,
  Embalming with sweet tears the vacant shrine,
      My heart, where Hope had been and was no more.

  So on an oaken sprout
      A goodly acorn grew;
  But winds from heaven shook the acorn out,
      And filled the cup with dew.




XII

=The Tears of Heaven=

  Heaven weeps above the earth all night till morn,
  In darkness weeps, as all ashamed to weep,
  Because the earth hath made her state forlorn
  With selfwrought evils of unnumbered years,
  And doth the fruit of her dishonour reap.
  And all the day heaven gathers back her tears
  Into her own blue eyes so clear and deep,
  And showering down the glory of lightsome day,
  Smiles on the earth's worn brow to win her if she may.




XIII

=Love and Sorrow=

  O maiden, fresher than the first green leaf
  With which the fearful springtide flecks the lea,
  Weep not, Almeida, that I said to thee
  That thou hast half my heart, for bitter grief
  Doth hold the other half in sovranty.
  Thou art my heart's sun in love's crystalline:
  Yet on both sides at once thou canst not shine:
  Thine is the bright side of my heart, and thine
  My heart's day, but the shadow of my heart,
  Issue of its own substance, my heart's night
  Thou canst not lighten even with _thy_ light,
  All powerful in beauty as thou art.
  Almeida, if my heart were substanceless,
  Then might thy rays pass thro' to the other side,
  So swiftly, that they nowhere would abide,
  But lose themselves in utter emptiness.
  Half-light, half-shadow, let my spirit sleep
  They never learnt to love who never knew to weep.




XIV

=To a Lady Sleeping=

  O thou whose fringèd lids I gaze upon,
  Through whose dim brain the wingèd dreams are born,
  Unroof the shrines of clearest vision,
  In honour of the silverfleckèd morn:
  Long hath the white wave of the virgin light
  Driven back the billow of the dreamful dark.
  Thou all unwittingly prolongest night,
  Though long ago listening the poisèd lark,
  With eyes dropt downward through the blue serene,
  Over heaven's parapets the angels lean.




XV

=Sonnet=

  Could I outwear my present state of woe
  With one brief winter, and indue i' the spring
  Hues of fresh youth, and mightily outgrow
  The wan dark coil of faded suffering--
  Forth in the pride of beauty issuing
  A sheeny snake, the light of vernal bowers,
  Moving his crest to all sweet plots of flowers
  And watered vallies where the young birds sing;
  Could I thus hope my lost delights renewing,
  I straightly would commend the tears to creep
  From my charged lids; but inwardly I weep:
  Some vital heat as yet my heart is wooing:
  This to itself hath drawn the frozen rain
  From my cold eyes and melted it again.




XVI

=Sonnet=

  Though Night hath climbed her peak of highest noon,
  And bitter blasts the screaming autumn whirl,
  All night through archways of the bridgèd pearl
  And portals of pure silver walks the moon.
  Wake on, my soul, nor crouch to agony:
  Turn cloud to light, and bitterness to joy,
  And dross to gold with glorious alchemy,
  Basing thy throne above the world's annoy.
  Reign thou above the storms of sorrow and ruth
  That roar beneath; unshaken peace hath won thee:
  So shall thou pierce the woven glooms of truth;
  So shall the blessing of the meek be on thee;
  So in thine hour of dawn, the body's youth,
  An honourable eld shall come upon thee.




XVII

=Sonnet=

  Shall the hag Evil die with the child of Good,
  Or propagate again her loathèd kind,
  Thronging the cells of the diseased mind,
  Hateful with hanging cheeks, a withered brood,
  Though hourly pastured on the salient blood?
  Oh! that the wind which bloweth cold or heat
  Would shatter and o'erbear the brazen beat
  Of their broad vans, and in the solitude
  Of middle space confound them, and blow back
  Their wild cries down their cavernthroats, and slake
  With points of blastborne hail their heated eyne!
  So their wan limbs no more might come between
  The moon and the moon's reflex in the night;
  Nor blot with floating shades the solar light.




XVIII

=Sonnet=

  The palid thunderstricken sigh for gain,
  Down an ideal stream they ever float,
  And sailing on Pactolus in a boat,
  Drown soul and sense, while wistfully they strain
  Weak eyes upon the glistering sands that robe
  The understream. The wise could he behold
  Cathedralled caverns of thick-ribbèd gold
  And branching silvers of the central globe,
  Would marvel from so beautiful a sight
  How scorn and ruin, pain and hate could flow:
  But Hatred in a gold cave sits below,
  Pleached with her hair, in mail of argent light
  Shot into gold, a snake her forehead clips
  And skins the colour from her trembling lips.




XIX

=Love=

  I

  Thou, from the first, unborn, undying love,
  Albeit we gaze not on thy glories near,
  Before the face of God didst breath and move,
  Though night and pain and ruin and death reign here.
  Thou foldest, like a golden atmosphere,
  The very throne of the eternal God:
  Passing through thee the edicts of his fear
  Are mellowed into music, borne abroad
  By the loud winds, though they uprend the sea,
  Even from his central deeps: thine empery
  Is over all: thou wilt not brook eclipse;
  Thou goest and returnest to His Lips
  Like lightning: thou dost ever brood above
  The silence of all hearts, unutterable Love.

  II

  To know thee is all wisdom, and old age
  Is but to know thee: dimly we behold thee
  Athwart the veils of evil which enfold thee
  We beat upon our aching hearts with rage;
  We cry for thee: we deem the world thy tomb.
  As dwellers in lone planets look upon
  The mighty disk of their majestic sun,
  Hallowed in awful chasms of wheeling gloom,
  Making their day dim, so we gaze on thee.
  Come, thou of many crowns, white-robèd love,
  Oh! rend the veil in twain: all men adore thee;
  Heaven crieth after thee; earth waileth for thee:
  Breathe on thy wingèd throne, and it shall move
  In music and in light o'er land and sea.

  III

  And now--methinks I gaze upon thee now,
  As on a serpent in his agonies
  Awestricken Indians; what time laid low
  And crushing the thick fragrant reeds he lies,
  When the new year warm breathèd on the earth,
  Waiting to light him with his purple skies,
  Calls to him by the fountain to uprise.
  Already with the pangs of a new birth
  Strain the hot spheres of his convulsèd eyes,
  And in his writhings awful hues begin
  To wander down his sable sheeny sides,
  Like light on troubled waters: from within
  Anon he rusheth forth with merry din,
  And in him light and joy and strength abides;
  And from his brows a crown of living light
  Looks through the thickstemmed woods by day and night




XX

=English War Song=

      Who fears to die? Who fears to die?
      Is there any here who fears to die
  He shall find what he fears, and none shall grieve
      For the man who fears to die:
  But the withering scorn of the many shall cleave
      To the man who fears to die.

  _Chorus_.--Shout for England!
                  Ho! for England!
                  George for England!
                  Merry England!
                  England for aye!

  The hollow at heart shall crouch forlorn,
  He shall eat the bread of common scorn;
      It shall be steeped in the salt, salt tear,
      Shall be steeped in his own salt tear:
  Far better, far better he never were born
      Than to shame merry England here.

  _Chorus_.--Shout for England! etc.

  There standeth our ancient enemy;
  Hark! he shouteth--the ancient enemy!
      On the ridge of the hill his banners rise;
      They stream like fire in the skies;
  Hold up the Lion of England on high
      Till it dazzle and blind his eyes.

      _Chorus_.--Shout for England! etc.

  Come along! we alone of the earth are free;
  The child in our cradles is bolder than he;
      For where is the heart and strength of slaves?
      Oh! where is the strength of slaves?
  He is weak! we are strong; he a slave, we are free;
      Come along! we will dig their graves.

      _Chorus_.--Shout for England! etc.

  There standeth our ancient enemy;
  Will he dare to battle with the free?
      Spur along! spur amain! charge to the fight:
      Charge! charge to the fight!
  Hold up the Lion of England on high!
      Shout for God and our right!

      _Chorus_.--Shout for England! etc.




XXI

=National Song=

  There is no land like England
    Where'er the light of day be;
  There are no hearts like English hearts,
    Such hearts of oak as they be.
  There is no land like England
    Where'er the light of day be;
  There are no men like Englishmen,
    So tall and bold as they be.

  _Chorus_.--For the French the Pope may shrive 'em,
                  For the devil a whit we heed 'em,
                  As for the French, God speed 'em
                    Unto their hearts' desire,
                  And the merry devil drive 'em
                    Through the water and the fire.

  _Chorus_.--Our glory is our freedom,
                    We lord it o'er the sea;
                  We are the sons of freedom,
                    We are free.

  There is no land like England,
    Where'er the light of day be;
  There are no wives like English wives,
    So fair and chaste as they be.
  There is no land like England,
    Where'er the light of day be,
  There are no maids like English maids,
    So beautiful as they be.

  _Chorus_.--For the French, etc.

[Sixty years after first publication this Song was incorporated in
'The Foresters' (published 1892) as the opening chorus of the second
act. The two verses were unaltered, but the two choruses were
re-written.]




XXII

=Dualisms=

  Two bees within a chrystal flowerbell rockèd
  Hum a lovelay to the westwind at noontide.
  Both alike, they buzz together,
  Both alike, they hum together
  Through and through the flowered heather.

  Where in a creeping cove the wave unshockèd
    Lays itself calm and wide,
  Over a stream two birds of glancing feather
  Do woo each other, carolling together.
  Both alike, they glide together
    Side by side;
  Both alike, they sing together,
  Arching blue-glossèd necks beneath the purple weather.

  Two children lovelier than love, adown the lea are singing,
  As they gambol, lilygarlands ever stringing:
  Both in blosmwhite silk are frockèd:
  Like, unlike, they roam together
  Under a summervault of golden weather;
  Like, unlike, they sing together
    Side by side;
  Mid May's darling goldenlockèd,
  Summer's tanling diamondeyed.




XXIII

[Greek: ohi rheontes]

  I

  All thoughts, all creeds, all dreams are true,
    All visions wild and strange;
  Man is the measure of all truth
    Unto himself. All truth is change:
  All men do walk in sleep, and all
    Have faith in that they dream:
  For all things are as they seem to all,
    And all things flow like a stream.

  II

  There is no rest, no calm, no pause,
    Nor good nor ill, nor light nor shade,
  Nor essence nor eternal laws:
    For nothing is, but all is made,
  But if I dream that all these are,
    They are to me for that I dream;
  For all things are as they seem to all,
    And all things flow like a stream.


Argal.--This very opinion is only true relatively to the flowing
philosophers. (Tennyson's note.)




XXIV

=Song=

  I

  The lintwhite and the throstlecock
      Have voices sweet and clear;
    All in the bloomèd May.
  They from the blosmy brere
  Call to the fleeting year,
  If that he would them hear
      And stay.
  Alas! that one so beautiful
    Should have so dull an ear.

  II

  Fair year, fair year, thy children call,
      But thou art deaf as death;
    All in the bloomèd May.
  When thy light perisheth
  That from thee issueth,
  Our life evanisheth:
      Oh! stay.
  Alas! that lips so cruel dumb
    Should have so sweet a breath!

  III

  Fair year, with brows of royal love
      Thou comest, as a King.
    All in the bloomèd May.
  Thy golden largess fling,
  And longer hear us sing;
  Though thou art fleet of wing,
      Yet stay.
  Alas! that eyes so full of light
  Should be so wandering!

  IV

  Thy locks are full of sunny sheen
      In rings of gold yronne,[C]
    All in the bloomèd May,
  We pri' thee pass not on;
  If thou dost leave the sun,
  Delight is with thee gone,
      Oh! stay.
  Thou art the fairest of thy feres,
    We pri' thee pass not on.

[Footnote C: His crispè hair in ringis was yronne.--Chaucer, _Knight's
Tale_. (Tennyson's note.)]




=Contributions to Periodicals 1831-32=


XXV

=A Fragment=

[Published in _The Gem: a Literary Annual_. London: W. Marshall,
Holborn Bars, mdcccxxxi.]

  Where is the Giant of the Sun, which stood
  In the midnoon the glory of old Rhodes,
  A perfect Idol, with profulgent brows
  Far sheening down the purple seas to those
  Who sailed from Mizraim underneath the star
  Named of the Dragon--and between whose limbs
  Of brassy vastness broad-blown Argosies
  Drave into haven? Yet endure unscathed
  Of changeful cycles the great Pyramids
  Broad-based amid the fleeting sands, and sloped
  Into the slumberous summer noon; but where,
  Mysterious Egypt, are thine obelisks
  Graven with gorgeous emblems undiscerned?
  Thy placid Sphinxes brooding o'er the Nile?
  Thy shadowy Idols in the solitudes,
  Awful Memnonian countenances calm
  Looking athwart the burning flats, far off
  Seen by the high-necked camel on the verge
  Journeying southward? Where are thy monuments
  Piled by the strong and sunborn Anakim
  Over their crowned brethren [Greek: ON] and [Greek: ORÊ]?
  Thy Memnon, when his peaceful lips are kissed
  With earliest rays, that from his mother's eyes
  Flow over the Arabian bay, no more
  Breathes low into the charmed ears of morn
  Clear melody flattering the crisped Nile
  By columned Thebes. Old Memphis hath gone down:
  The Pharaohs are no more: somewhere in death
  They sleep with staring eyes and gilded lips,
  Wrapped round with spiced cerements in old grots
  Rock-hewn and sealed for ever.




XXVI

=Anacreontics=

[Published in _The Gem: a Literary Annual_. London: W. Marshall,
Holborn Bars, mdcccxxxi.]

  With roses musky breathed,
  And drooping daffodilly,
  And silverleaved lily,
  And ivy darkly-wreathed,
  I wove a crown before her,
  For her I love so dearly,
  A garland for Lenora.
  With a silken cord I bound it.
  Lenora, laughing clearly
  A light and thrilling laughter,
  About her forehead wound it,
  And loved me ever after.




XXVII

[Published in _The Gem: a Literary Annual_. London: W. Marshall,
Holborn Bars, mdcccxxxi.]

      O sad _No more!_ O sweet _No more!_
                O strange _No more!_
      By a mossed brookbank on a stone
      I smelt a wildweed flower alone;
      There was a ringing in my ears,
      And both my eyes gushed out with tears.
  Surely all pleasant things had gone before,
  Low-buried fathom deep beneath with thee,
                NO MORE!




XXVIII

=Sonnet=

[Published in the _Englishman's Magazine_, August, 1831. London:
Edward Moxon, 64 New Bond Street. Reprinted in _Friendship's Offering:
a Literary Album_ for 1833. London; Smith and Elder.]

  Check every outflash, every ruder sally
    Of thought and speech; speak low, and give up wholly
    Thy spirit to mild-minded Melancholy;
  This is the place. Through yonder poplar alley
  Below, the blue-green river windeth slowly;
    But in the middle of the sombre valley
    The crispèd waters whisper musically,
  And all the haunted place is dark and holy.
  The nightingale, with long and low preamble,
    Warbled from yonder knoll of solemn larches,
    And in and out the woodbine's flowery arches
  The summer midges wove their wanton gambol,
    And all the white-stemmed pinewood slept above--
    When in this valley first I told my love.




XXIX

=Sonnet=

[Published in _Friendships Offering: a Literary Album_ for 1832.
London: Smith and Elder.]

  Me my own fate to lasting sorrow doometh:
    Thy woes are birds of passage, transitory:
    Thy spirit, circled with a living glory,
  In summer still a summer joy resumeth.
  Alone my hopeless melancholy gloometh,
    Like a lone cypress, through the twilight hoary,
  From an old garden where no flower bloometh,
    One cypress on an inland promontory.
  But yet my lonely spirit follows thine,
    As round the rolling earth night follows day:
  But yet thy lights on my horizon shine
    Into my night when thou art far away;
  I am so dark, alas! and thou so bright,
  When we two meet there's never perfect light.




XXX

=Sonnet=

[Published in the _Yorkshire Literary Annual_ for 1832. Edited by C.F.
Edgar, London: Longman and Co. Reprinted in the _Athenæum_, 4 May,
1867.]

  There are three things that fill my heart with sighs
  And steep my soul in laughter (when I view
  Fair maiden forms moving like melodies),
  Dimples, roselips, and eyes of any hue.

  There are three things beneath the blessed skies
  For which I live--black eyes, and brown and blue;
  I hold them all most dear; but oh! black eyes,
  I live and die, and only die for you.

  Of late such eyes looked at me--while I mused
  At sunset, underneath a shadowy plane
  In old Bayona, nigh the Southern Sea--
  From an half-open lattice looked at _me_.

  I saw no more only those eyes--confused
  And dazzled to the heart with glorious pain.




=Poems, 1833=


[The poems numbered XXXI-XXXIX were published in the 1832 volume
(_Poems by Alfred Tennyson_. London: Edward Moxon, 94 New Bond Street.
MDCCCXXXIII; published December, 1832), and were thereafter
suppressed.]




XXXI

=Sonnet=

  Oh, Beauty, passing beauty! sweetest Sweet!
    How canst thou let me waste my youth in sighs;
  I only ask to sit beside thy feet.
    Thou knowest I dare not look into thine eyes,
  Might I but kiss thy hand! I dare not fold
    My arms about thee--scarcely dare to speak.
  And nothing seems to me so wild and bold,
    As with one kiss to touch thy blessèd cheek.
  Methinks if I should kiss thee, no control
    Within the thrilling brain could keep afloat
    The subtle spirit. Even while I spoke,
  The bare word KISS hath made my inner soul
    To tremble like a lutestring, ere the note
    Hath melted in the silence that it broke.




XXXII

=The Hesperides=

    Hesperus and his daughters three
    That sing about the golden tree.
      --COMUS.

  The Northwind fall'n, in the newstarréd night
  Zidonian Hanno, voyaging beyond
  The hoary promontory of Soloë
  Past Thymiaterion, in calmèd bays,
  Between the Southern and the Western Horn,
  Heard neither warbling of the nightingale,
  Nor melody o' the Lybian lotusflute
  Blown seaward from the shore; but from a slope
  That ran bloombright into the Atlantic blue,
  Beneath a highland leaning down a weight
  Of cliffs, and zoned below with cedarshade,
  Came voices, like the voices in a dream,
  Continuous till he reached the other sea.


_Song_

  I

  The golden apple, the golden apple, the hallowed fruit,
  Guard it well, guard it warily,
  Singing airily,
  Standing about the charméd root.
  Round about all is mute,
  As the snowfield on the mountain-peaks,
  As the sandfield at the mountain-foot.
  Crocodiles in briny creeks
  Sleep and stir not: all is mute.
  If ye sing not, if ye make false measure,
  We shall lose eternal pleasure,
  Worth eternal want of rest.
  Laugh not loudly: watch the treasure
  Of the wisdom of the West.
  In a corner wisdom whispers. Five and three
  (Let it not be preached abroad) make an awful mystery.
  For the blossom unto three-fold music bloweth;
  Evermore it is born anew;
  And the sap to three-fold music floweth,
  From the root
  Drawn in the dark,
  Up to the fruit,
  Creeping under the fragrant bark,
  Liquid gold, honeysweet thro' and thro'.
  Keen-eyed Sisters, singing airily,
  Looking warily
  Every way,
  Guard the apple night and day,
  Lest one from the East come and take it away.

  II

  Father Hesper, Father Hesper, watch, watch, ever and aye,
  Looking under silver hair with a silver eye.
  Father, twinkle not thy stedfast sight;
  Kingdoms lapse, and climates change, and races die;
  Honour comes with mystery;
  Hoarded wisdom brings delight.
  Number, tell them over and number
  How many the mystic fruit-tree holds,
  Lest the redcombed dragon slumber
  Rolled together in purple folds.
  Look to him, father, lest he wink, and the golden apple be stol'n away,
  For his ancient heart is drunk with overwatchings night and day,
  Round about the hallowed fruit tree curled--
  Sing away, sing aloud and evermore in the wind, without stop,
  Lest his scalèd eyelid drop,
  For he is older than the world.
  If he waken, we waken,
  Rapidly levelling eager eyes.
  If he sleep, we sleep,
  Dropping the eyelid over the eyes.
  If the golden apple be taken
  The world will be overwise.
  Five links, a golden chain, are we,
  Hesper, the dragon, and sisters three,
  Bound about the golden tree.

  III

  Father Hesper, Father Hesper, watch, watch, night and day,
  Lest the old wound of the world be healèd,
  The glory unsealèd,
  The golden apple stol'n away,
  And the ancient secret revealèd.
  Look from west to east along:
  Father, old Himla weakens, Caucasus is bold and strong.
  Wandering waters unto wandering waters call;
  Let them clash together, foam and fall.
  Out of watchings, out of wiles,
  Comes the bliss of secret smiles,
  All things are not told to all,
  Half round the mantling night is drawn,
  Purplefringed with even and dawn.
  Hesper hateth Phosphor, evening hateth morn.

  IV

  Every flower and every fruit the redolent breath
  Of this warm seawind ripeneth,
  Arching the billow in his sleep;
  But the land-wind wandereth,
  Broken by the highland-steep,
  Two streams upon the violet deep:
  For the western sun and the western star,
  And the low west wind, breathing afar,
  The end of day and beginning of night
  Make the apple holy and bright,
  Holy and bright, round and full, bright and blest,
  Mellowed in a land of rest;
  Watch it warily day and night;
  All good things are in the west,
  Till midnoon the cool east light
  Is shut out by the round of the tall hillbrow;
  But when the fullfaced sunset yellowly
  Stays on the flowering arch of the bough,
  The luscious fruitage clustereth mellowly,
  Goldenkernelled, goldencored,
  Sunset ripened, above on the tree,
  The world is wasted with fire and sword,
  But the apple of gold hangs over the sea,
  Five links, a golden chain, are we,
  Hesper, the dragon, and sisters three,
      Daughters three,
      Bound about
      All round about
  The gnarlèd bole of the charmèd tree,
  The golden apple, the golden apple, the hallowed fruit,
  Guard it well, guard it warily,
      Watch it warily,
      Singing airily,
  Standing about the charmèd root.




XXXIII

=Rosalind=

    My Rosalind, my Rosalind,
  Bold, subtle, careless Rosalind,
  Is one of those who know no strife
  Of inward woe or outward fear;
  To whom the slope and stream of life,
  The life before, the life behind,
  In the ear, from far and near,
  Chimeth musically clear.
  My falconhearted Rosalind
  Fullsailed before a vigorous wind,
  Is one of those who cannot weep
  For others' woes, but overleap
  All the petty shocks and fears
  That trouble life in early years,
  With a flash of frolic scorn
  And keen delight, that never falls
  Away from freshness, self-upborne
  With such gladness, as, whenever
  The freshflushing springtime calls
  To the flooding waters cool,
  Young fishes, on an April morn,
  Up and down a rapid river,
  Leap the little waterfalls
  That sing into the pebbled pool.
  My happy falcon, Rosalind,
  Hath daring fancies of her own,
  Fresh as the dawn before the day,
  Fresh as the early seasmell blown
  Through vineyards from an inland bay.
  My Rosalind, my Rosalind,
  Because no shadow on you falls,
  Think you hearts are tennis balls
  To play with, wanton Rosalind?




XXXIV

=Song=

  Who can say
  Why To-day
  To-morrow will be yesterday?
  Who can tell
  Why to smell
  The violet, recalls the dewy prime
  Of youth and buried time?
  The cause is nowhere found in rhyme.




XXXV

=Sonnet=

_Written on hearing of the outbreak of the Polish Insurrection._

  Blow ye the trumpet, gather from afar
    The hosts to battle: be not bought and sold.
    Arise, brave Poles, the boldest of the bold;
  Break through your iron shackles--fling them far.
  O for those days of Piast, ere the Czar
    Grew to this strength among his deserts cold;
    When even to Moscow's cupolas were rolled
  The growing murmurs of the Polish war!
  Now must your noble anger blaze out more
    Than when from Sobieski, clan by clan,
  The Moslem myriads fell, and fled before--
    Than when Zamoysky smote the Tartar Khan,
  Than earlier, when on the Baltic shore
    Boleslas drove the Pomeranian.




XXXVI

=O Darling Room=[D]

  I

  O darling room, my heart's delight,
  Dear room, the apple of my sight,
  With thy two couches soft and white,
  There is no room so exquisite,
  No little room so warm and bright
  Wherein to read, wherein to write.

  II

  For I the Nonnenwerth have seen,
  And Oberwinter's vineyards green,
  Musical Lurlei; and between
  The hills to Bingen have I been,
  Bingen in Darmstadt, where the Rhene
  Curves towards Mentz, a woody scene.

  III

  Yet never did there meet my sight,
  In any town, to left or right,
  A little room so exquisite,
  With two such couches soft and white;
  Not any room so warm and bright,
  Wherein to read, wherein to write.

[Footnote D: 'As soon as this poem was published, I altered the second
line to "All books and pictures ranged aright"; yet "Dear room, the
apple of my sight" (which was much abused) is not as bad as "Do go,
dear rain, do go away."' [Note initialed 'A.T.' in _Life_, vol. I, p.
89.] The worthlessness of much of the criticism lavished on Tennyson
by his coterie of adulating friends may be judged from the fact that
Arthur Hallam wrote to Tennyson that this poem was 'mighty
pleasant.']




XXXVII

=To Christopher North=

  You did late review my lays,
    Crusty Christopher;
  You did mingle blame and praise,
    Rusty Christopher.
  When I learnt from whom it came,
  I forgave you all the blame,
    Musty Christopher;
  I could _not_ forgive the praise,
    Fusty Christopher.

[This epigram was Tennyson's reply to an article by Professor
Wilson--'Christopher North'--in _Blackwood's Magazine_ for May 1832,
dealing in sensible fashion with Tennyson's 1830 volume, and
ridiculing the fulsome praise lavished on him by his inconsiderate
friends--especially referring to Arthur Hallam's article in the
_Englishman's Magazine_ for August, 1831.]




XXXVIII

=The Lotos-Eaters=

[These forty lines formed the conclusion to the original (1833)
version of the poem. When the poem was reprinted in the 1842 volumes
these lines were suppressed.]

  We have had enough of motion,
  Weariness and wild alarm,
  Tossing on the tossing ocean,
  Where the tuskèd seahorse walloweth
  In a stripe of grassgreen calm,
  At noon-tide beneath the lea;
  And the monstrous narwhale swalloweth
  His foamfountains in the sea.
  Long enough the winedark wave our weary bark did carry.
  This is lovelier and sweeter,
  Men of Ithaca, this is meeter,
  In the hollow rosy vale to tarry,
  Like a dreamy Lotos-eater, a delirious Lotos-eater!
  We will eat the Lotos, sweet
  As the yellow honeycomb,
  In the valley some, and some
  On the ancient heights divine;
  And no more roam,
  On the loud hoar foam,
  To the melancholy home
  At the limit of the brine,
  The little isle of Ithaca, beneath the day's decline.
  We'll lift no more the shattered oar,
  No more unfurl the straining sail;
  With the blissful Lotos-eaters pale
  We will abide in the golden vale
  Of the Lotos-land, till the Lotos fail;
  We will not wander more.
  Hark! how sweet the horned ewes bleat
  On the solitary steeps,
  And the merry lizard leaps,
  And the foam-white waters pour;
  And the dark pine weeps,
  And the lithe vine creeps,
  And the heavy melon sleeps
  On the level of the shore:
  Oh! islanders of Ithaca, we will not wander more,
  Surely, surely, slumber is more sweet than toil, the shore
  Than labour in the ocean, and rowing with the oar,
  Oh! islanders of Ithaca, we will return no more.




XXXIX

=A Dream of Fair Women=

[In the 1833 volume the poem opened with the following four verses,
suppressed after 1842. These Fitz Gerald considered made 'a perfect
poem by themselves.']

  As when a man, that sails in a balloon,
    Downlooking sees the solid shining ground
  Stream from beneath him in the broad blue noon,
    Tilth, hamlet, mead and mound:

  And takes his flags and waves them to the mob
    That shout below, all faces turned to where
  Glows rubylike the far-up crimson globe,
    Filled with a finer air:

  So, lifted high, the poet at his will
    Lets the great world flit from him, seeing all,
  Higher thro' secret splendours mounting still,
    Self-poised, nor fears to fall.

  Hearing apart the echoes of his fame.
    While I spoke thus, the seedsman, Memory,
  Sowed my deep-furrowed thought with many a name
    Whose glory will not die.




=Miscellaneous Poems and Contributions to Periodicals=
=1833-1868=




XL

=Cambridge=

[This poem is written in pencil on the fly-leaf of a copy of _Poems_
1833 in the Dyce Collection in South Kensington Museum. Reprinted with
many alterations in _Life_, vol. I, p. 67.]

  Therefore your halls, your ancient colleges,
    Your portals statued with old kings and queens,
  Your bridges and your busted libraries,
    Wax-lighted chapels and rich carved screens,
    Your doctors and your proctors and your deans
  Shall not avail you when the day-beam sports
    New-risen o'er awakened Albion--No,
    Nor yet your solemn organ-pipes that blow
  Melodious thunders through your vacant courts
  At morn and even; for your manner sorts
    Not with this age, nor with the thoughts that roll,
  Because the words of little children preach
  Against you,--ye that did profess to teach
    And have taught nothing, feeding on the soul.




XLI

=The Germ of 'Maud'=

[There was published in 1837 in _The Tribute_, (a collection of
original poems by various authors, edited by Lord Northampton), a
contribution by Tennyson entitled 'Stanzas,' consisting of xvi stanzas
of varying lengths (110 lines in all). In 1855 the first xii stanzas
were published as the fourth section of the second part of 'Maud.'
Some verbal changes and transpositions of lines were made; a new
stanza (the present sixth) and several new lines were introduced, and
the xth stanza of 1837 became the xiiith of 1855. But stanzas xiii-xvi
of 1837 have never been reprinted in any edition of Tennyson's works,
though quoted in whole or part in various critical studies of the
poet. Swinburne refers to this poem as 'the poem of deepest charm and
fullest delight of pathos and melody ever written, even by Mr
Tennyson.' This poem in _The Tribute_ gained Tennyson his first notice
in the _Edinburgh Review_, which had till then ignored him.]

  XIII

  But she tarries in her place
  And I paint the beauteous face
      Of the maiden, that I lost,
          In my inner eyes again,
  Lest my heart be overborne,
  By the thing I hold in scorn,
      By a dull mechanic ghost
          And a juggle of the brain.

  XIV

  I can shadow forth my bride
      As I knew her fair and kind
          As I woo'd her for my wife;
  She is lovely by my side
      In the silence of my life--
          'Tis a phantom of the mind.

  XV

  'Tis a phantom fair and good
      I can call it to my side,
          So to guard my life from ill,
      Tho' its ghastly sister glide
          And be moved around me still
  With the moving of the blood
      That is moved not of the will.

  XVI

  Let it pass, the dreary brow,
      Let the dismal face go by,
  Will it lead me to the grave?
      Then I lose it: it will fly:
  Can it overlast the nerves?
      Can it overlive the eye?
  But the other, like a star,
  Thro' the channel windeth far
      Till it fade and fail and die,
  To its Archetype that waits
  Clad in light by golden gates,
  Clad in light the Spirit waits
      To embrace me in the sky.




XLII

[On the fly-leaf of a book illustrated by Bewick, in the library of
the late Lord Ravensworth, the following lines in Tennyson's autograph
were discovered in 1903.]

  A gate and a field half ploughed,
  A solitary cow,
  A child with a broken slate,
  And a titmarsh in the bough.
  But where, alack, is Bewick
  To tell the meaning now?




XLIII

=The Skipping-Rope=

[This poem, published in the second volume of _Poems by Alfred
Tennyson_ (in two volumes, London, Edward Moxon, MDCCCXLII), was
reprinted in every edition until 1851, when it was suppressed.]

  Sure never yet was Antelope
    Could skip so lightly by.
  Stand off, or else my skipping-rope
    Will hit you in the eye.
  How lightly whirls the skipping-rope!
    How fairy-like you fly!
  Go, get you gone, you muse and mope--
    I hate that silly sigh.
  Nay, dearest, teach me how to hope,
    Or tell me how to die.
  There, take it, take my skipping-rope
    And hang yourself thereby.




XLIV

=The New Timon and the Poets=

[From _Punch_, February 28, 1846. Bulwer Lytton published in 1845 his
satirical poem 'New Timon: a Romance of London,' in which he bitterly
attacked Tennyson for the civil list pension granted the previous
year, particularly referring to the poem 'O Darling Room' in the 1833
volume. Tennyson replied in the following vigorous verses, which made
the literary sensation of the year. Tennyson afterwards declared: 'I
never sent my lines to _Punch_. John Forster did. They were too
bitter. I do not think that I should ever have published
them.'--_Life_, vol. I, p. 245.]

  We know him, out of Shakespeare's art,
    And those fine curses which he spoke;
  The old Timon, with his noble heart,
    That, strongly loathing, greatly broke.

  So died the Old: here comes the New:
    Regard him: a familiar face:
  I _thought_ we knew him: What, it's you
    The padded man--that wears the stays--

  Who killed the girls and thrill'd the boys
    With dandy pathos when you wrote,
  A Lion, you, that made a noise,
    And shook a mane en papillotes.

  And once you tried the Muses too:
    You fail'd, Sir: therefore now you turn,
  You fall on those who are to you
    As captain is to subaltern.

  But men of long enduring hopes,
    And careless what this hour may bring,
  Can pardon little would-be Popes
    And Brummels, when they try to sting.

  An artist, Sir, should rest in art,
    And wave a little of his claim;
  To have the deep poetic heart
    Is more than all poetic fame.

  But you, Sir, you are hard to please;
    You never look but half content:
  Nor like a gentleman at ease
    With moral breadth of temperament.

  And what with spites and what with fears,
    You cannot let a body be:
  It's always ringing in your ears,
    'They call this man as good as _me_.'

  What profits now to understand
    The merits of a spotless shirt--
  A dapper boot--a little hand--
    If half the little soul is dirt?

  _You_ talk of tinsel! why we see
    The old mark of rouge upon your cheeks.
  _You_ prate of nature! you are he
  That spilt his life about the cliques.

  A Timon you! Nay, nay, for shame:
    It looks too arrogant a jest--
  The fierce old man--to take _his_ name
  You bandbox. Off, and let him rest.




XLV

=Mablethorpe=

[Published in _Manchester Athænaum Album_, 1850. Written, 1837.
Republished, altered, in _Life_, vol. I, p. 161.]

  How often, when a child I lay reclined,
    I took delight in this locality!
  Here stood the infant Ilion of the mind,
    And here the Grecian ships did seem to be.

  And here again I come and only find
    The drain-cut levels of the marshy lea,--
  Gray sand banks and pale sunsets--dreary wind,
    Dim shores, dense rains, and heavy clouded sea.




XLVI

[Published in _The Keepsake for 1851: an illustrated annual_, edited
by Miss Power. London: David Bogue. To this issue of the Keepsake
Tennyson also contributed 'Come not when I am dead' now included in
the collected Works.]

  What time I wasted youthful hours
  One of the shining wingèd powers,
  Show'd me vast cliffs with crown of towers,

  As towards the gracious light I bow'd,
  They seem'd high palaces and proud,
  Hid now and then with sliding cloud.

  He said, 'The labour is not small;
  Yet winds the pathway free to all:--
  Take care thou dost not fear to fall!'




XLVII

=Britons, Guard your Own=

[Published in _The Examiner_, January 31, 1852. Verses 1 (considerably
altered), 7, 8 and 10, are reprinted in Life, vol. I, p. 344.]

  Rise, Britons, rise, if manhood be not dead;
  The world's last tempest darkens overhead;
          The Pope has bless'd him;
          The Church caress'd him;
  He triumphs; maybe, we shall stand alone:
          Britons, guard your own.

  His ruthless host is bought with plunder'd gold,
  By lying priest's the peasant's votes controlled.
          All freedom vanish'd,
          The true men banished,
  He triumphs; maybe, we shall stand alone.
          Britons, guard your own.

  Peace-lovers we--sweet Peace we all desire--
  Peace-lovers we--but who can trust a liar?--
         Peace-lovers, haters
         Of shameless traitors,
  We hate not France, but this man's heart of stone.
          Britons, guard your own.

  We hate not France, but France has lost her voice
  This man is France, the man they call her choice.
          By tricks and spying,
          By craft and lying,
  And murder was her freedom overthrown.
          Britons, guard your own.

  'Vive l'Empereur' may follow by and bye;
  'God save the Queen' is here a truer cry.
          God save the Nation,
          The toleration,
  And the free speech that makes a Briton known.
          Britons, guard your own.

  Rome's dearest daughter now is captive France,
  The Jesuit laughs, and reckoning on his chance,
          Would, unrelenting,
          Kill all dissenting,
  Till we were left to fight for truth alone.
          Britons, guard your own.

  Call home your ships across Biscayan tides,
  To blow the battle from their oaken sides.
          Why waste they yonder
          Their idle thunder?
  Why stay they there to guard a foreign throne?
          Seamen, guard your own.

  We were the best of marksmen long ago,
  We won old battles with our strength, the bow.
          Now practise, yeomen,
          Like those bowmen,
  Till your balls fly as their true shafts have flown.
          Yeomen, guard your own.

  His soldier-ridden Highness might incline
  To take Sardinia, Belgium, or the Rhine:
         Shall we stand idle,
         Nor seek to bridle
  His vile aggressions, till we stand alone?
          Make their cause your own.

  Should he land here, and for one hour prevail,
  There must no man go back to bear the tale:
          No man to bear it--
          Swear it! We swear it!
  Although we fought the banded world alone,
          We swear to guard our own.




XLVIII

=Hands all Round=

[Published in _The Examiner_, February 7, 1852. Reprinted, slightly
altered, in Life, vol. I, p. 345. Included, almost entirely
re-written, in collected Works.]

  First drink a health, this solemn night,
    A health to England, every guest;
  That man's the best cosmopolite
    Who loves his native country best.
  May Freedom's oak for ever live
    With stronger life from day to day;
  That man's the best Conservative
    Who lops the mouldered branch away.
          Hands all round!
  God the tyrant's hope confound!
  To this great cause of Freedom drink, my friends,
    And the great name of England round and round.

  A health to Europe's honest men!
    Heaven guard them from her tyrants' jails!
  From wronged Poerio's noisome den,
    From iron limbs and tortured nails!
  We curse the crimes of Southern kings,
    The Russian whips and Austrian rods--
  We likewise have our evil things;
    Too much we make our Ledgers, Gods.
          Yet hands all round!
    God the tyrant's cause confound!
  To Europe's better health we drink, my friends,
    And the great name of England round and round.

  What health to France, if France be she
    Whom martial progress only charms?
  Yet tell her--better to be free
    Than vanquish all the world in arms.
  Her frantic city's flashing heats
    But fire, to blast the hopes of men.
  Why change the titles of your streets?
    You fools, you'll want them all again.
          Hands all round!
    God the tyrant's cause confound!
  To France, the wiser France, we drink, my friends,
    And the great name of England round and round.

  Gigantic daughter of the West,
    We drink to thee across the flood,
  We know thee most, we love thee best,
    For art thou not of British blood?
  Should war's mad blast again be blown,
    Permit not thou the tyrant powers
  To fight thy mother here alone,
    But let thy broadsides roar with ours.
          Hands all round!
    God the tyrant's cause confound!
  To our great kinsmen of the West, my friends,
    And the great name of England round and round.

  O rise, our strong Atlantic sons,
    When war against our freedom springs!
  O speak to Europe through your guns!
  They _can_ be understood by kings.
  You must not mix our Queen with those
    That wish to keep their people fools;
  Our freedom's foemen are her foes,
    She comprehends the race she rules.
          Hands all round!
    God the tyrant's cause confound!
  To our dear kinsmen of the West, my friends,
    And the great name of England round and round.




XLIX

=Suggested by Reading an Article in a Newspaper=

[Published in _The Examiner_, February 14, 1852, and never reprinted
nor acknowledged. The proof sheets of the poem, with alterations in
Tennyson's autograph, were offered for public sale in 1906.]

To the Editor of _The Examiner_.

SIR,--I have read with much interest the poems of Merlin. The enclosed
is longer than either of those, and certainly not so good: yet as I
flatter myself that it has a smack of Merlin's style in it, and as I
feel that it expresses forcibly enough some of the feelings of our
time, perhaps you may be induced to admit it.

TALIESSEN.


  How much I love this writer's manly style!
    By such men led, our press had ever been
  The public conscience of our noble isle,
    Severe and quick to feel a civic sin,
  To raise the people and chastise the times
  With such a heat as lives in great creative rhymes.

  O you, the Press! what good from you might spring!
    What power is yours to blast a cause or bless!
  I fear for you, as for some youthful king,
    Lest you go wrong from power in excess.
  Take heed of your wide privileges! we
  The thinking men of England, loathe a tyranny.

  A freeman is, I doubt not, freest here;
    The single voice may speak his mind aloud;
  An honest isolation need not fear
    The Court, the Church, the Parliament, the crowd.
  No, nor the Press! and look you well to that--
  We must not dread in you the nameless autocrat.

  And you, dark Senate of the public pen,
    You may not, like yon tyrant, deal in spies.
  Yours are the public acts of public men,
    But yours are not their household privacies.
  I grant you one of the great Powers on earth,
  But be not you the blatant traitors of the hearth.

  You hide the hand that writes: it must be so,
    For better so you fight for public ends;
  But some you strike can scarce return the blow;
    You should be all the nobler, O my friends.
  Be noble, you! nor work with faction's tools
    To charm a lower sphere of fulminating fools.

  But knowing all your power to heat or cool,
    To soothe a civic wound or keep it raw,
  Be loyal, if you wish for wholesome rule:
    Our ancient boast is this--we reverence law.
  We still were loyal in our wildest fights,
  Or loyally disloyal battled for our rights.

  O Grief and Shame if while I preach of laws
    Whereby to guard our Freedom from offence--
  And trust an ancient manhood and the cause
    Of England and her health of commonsense--
  There hang within the heavens a dark disgrace,
  Some vast Assyrian doom to burst upon our race.

  I feel the thousand cankers of our State,
    I fain would shake their triple-folded ease,
  The hogs who can believe in nothing great,
    Sneering bedridden in the down of Peace
  Over their scrips and shares, their meats and wine,
  With stony smirks at all things human and divine!

  I honour much, I say, this man's appeal.
    We drag so deep in our commercial mire,
  We move so far from greatness, that I feel
    Exception to be character'd in fire.
  Who looks for Godlike greatness here shall see
  The British Goddess, sleek Respectability.

  Alas for her and all her small delights!
    She feels not how the social frame is rack'd.
  She loves a little scandal which excites;
    A little feeling is a want of tact.
  For her there lie in wait millions of foes,
  And yet the 'not too much' is all the rule she knows.

  Poor soul! behold her: what decorous calm!
    She, with her week-day worldliness sufficed,
  Stands in her pew and hums her decent psalm
    With decent dippings at the name of Christ!
  And she has mov'd in that smooth way so long,
    She hardly can believe that she shall suffer wrong.

  Alas, our Church! alas, her growing ills,
    And those who tolerate not her tolerance,
  But needs must sell the burthen of their wills
    To that half-pagan harlot kept by France!
  Free subjects of the kindliest of all thrones,
  Headlong they plunge their doubts among old rags and bones.

  Alas, Church writers, altercating tribes--
    The vessel and your Church may sink in storms.
  Christ cried: Woe, woe, to Pharisees and Scribes!
    Like them, you bicker less for truth than forms.
  I sorrow when I read the things you write,
  What unheroic pertness! what un-Christian spite!

  Alas, our youth, so clever yet so small,
    Thin dilletanti deep in nature's plan,
  Who make the emphatic One, by whom is all,
    An essence less concentred than a man!
  Better wild Mahmoud's war-cry once again!
  O fools, we want a manlike God and Godlike men!

  Go, frightful omens. Yet once more I turn
    To you that mould men's thoughts; I call on you
  To make opinion warlike, lest we learn
    A sharper lesson than we ever knew.
  I hear a thunder though the skies are fair,
  But shrill you, loud and long, the warning-note:
      Prepare!




L

[Lord Tennyson wrote, by Royal request, two stanzas which were sung as
part of _God Save the Queen_ at a State concert in connection with the
Princess Royal's marriage: these were printed in the _Times_ of
January 26, 1858.]

  God bless our Prince and Bride!
  God keep their lands allied,
    God save the Queen!
  Clothe them with righteousness,
  Crown them with happiness,
  Them with all blessings bless,
    God save the Queen.

  Fair fall this hallow'd hour,
  Farewell our England's flower,
    God save the Queen!
  Farewell, fair rose of May!
  Let both the peoples say,
  God bless thy marriage-day,
    God bless the Queen.




LI

=The Ringlet=

[Published in _Enoch Arden_ volume (London: E. Moxon & Co, 1864) and
never reprinted.]

  'Your ringlets, your ringlets,
    That look so golden-gay,
  If you will give me one, but one,
    To kiss it night and day,
  Then never chilling touch of Time
    Will turn it silver-gray;
  And then shall I know it is all true gold
  To flame and sparkle and stream as of old,
  Till all the comets in heaven are cold,
    And all her stars decay.'
  'Then take it, love, and put it by;
  This cannot change, nor yet can I.'

  'My ringlet, my ringlet,
    That art so golden-gay,
  Now never chilling touch of Time
    Can turn thee silver-gray;
  And a lad may wink, and a girl may hint,
    And a fool may say his say;
  For my doubts and fears were all amiss,
  And I swear henceforth by this and this,
  That a doubt will only come for a kiss,
    And a fear to be kissed away.'
  'Then kiss it, love, and put it by:
  If this can change, why so can I.'

  O Ringlet, O Ringlet,
    I kiss'd you night and day,
  And Ringlet, O Ringlet,
    You still are golden-gay,
  But Ringlet, O Ringlet,
    You should be silver-gray:
  For what is this which now I'm told,
  I that took you for true gold,
  She that gave you's bought and sold,
          Sold, sold.

  O Ringlet, O Ringlet,
    She blush'd a rosy red,
  When Ringlet, O Ringlet,
    She clipt you from her head,
  And Ringlet, O Ringlet,
    She gave you me, and said,
  'Come, kiss it, love, and put it by:
  If this can change, why so can I.'
  O fie, you golden nothing, fie
          You golden lie.

  O Ringlet, O Ringlet,
    I count you much to blame,
  For Ringlet, O Ringlet,
    You put me much to shame,
  So Ringlet, O Ringlet,
    I doom you to the flame.
  For what is this which now I learn,
  Has given all my faith a turn?
  Burn, you glossy heretic, burn,
            Burn, burn.




LII

=Song=

[This first form of the Song in _The Princess_ ('Home they brought her
warrior dead') was published only in _Selections from Tennyson_.
London: E. Moxon & Co, 1864.]

  Home they brought him slain with spears.
    They brought him home at even-fall:
  All alone she sits and hears
    Echoes in his empty hall,
      Sounding on the morrow.

  The Sun peeped in from open field,
    The boy began to leap and prance,
    Rode upon his father's lance,
  Beat upon his father's shield--
      'Oh hush, my joy, my sorrow.'




LIII

=1865-1866=

[Published in _Good Words_ for March 1, 1868 as a decorative page,
with an accompanying full page plate by T. Dalziel. The lines were
never reprinted.]

  I stood on a tower in the wet,
  And New Year and Old Year met,
  And winds were roaring and blowing;
  And I said, 'O years that meet in tears,
  Have ye aught that is worth the knowing?

  'Science enough and exploring
  Wanderers coming and going
  Matter enough for deploring
  But aught that is worth the knowing?'

  Seas at my feet were flowing
  Waves on the shingle pouring,
  Old Year roaring and blowing
  And New Year blowing and roaring.




=The Lover's Tale=
1833

[It was originally intended by Tennyson that this poem should
form part of his 1833 volume. It was put in type and, according to
custom, copies were distributed among his friends, when, on the eve of
publication, he decided to omit it. Again, in 1869, it was sent to
press with a new third part added, and was again withdrawn, the third
part only--'The Golden Supper,' founded on a story in Boccaccio's
_Decameron_--being published in the volume, 'The Holy Grail.' In 1866,
1870 and 1875, attempts had been made by Mr Herne Shepherd to publish
editions of 'The Lover's Tale,' reprinted from stray proof copies of
the 1833 printing. Each of these attempts was repressed by Tennyson,
and at last in 1879 the complete poem, as now included in the
collected Works, was issued, with an apologetic reference to the
necessity of reprinting the poem to prevent its circulation in an
unauthorised form. But the 1879 issue is considerably altered from the
original issue of 1833, as written by Tennyson in his nineteenth year.
Since only as a product of Tennyson's youth does the poem merit any
attention, it has seemed good to reprint it here as originally
written.]

A FRAGMENT

The Poem of the Lover's Tale (the lover is supposed to be himself a
poet) was written in my nineteenth year, and consequently contains
nearly as many faults as words. That I deemed it not wholly unoriginal
is my only apology for its publication--an apology lame and poor, and
somewhat impertinent to boot: so that if its infirmities meet with
more laughter than charity in the world, I shall not raise my voice in
its defence. I am aware how deficient the Poem is in point of art, and
it is not without considerable misgivings that I have ventured to
publish even this fragment of it. 'Enough,' says the old proverb, 'is
as good as a feast.'--(Tennyson's original introductory note.)

  Here far away, seen from the topmost cliff,
  Filling with purple gloom the vacancies
  Between the tufted hills the sloping seas
  Hung in mid-heaven, and half-way down rare sails,
  White as white clouds, floated from sky to sky.
  Oh! pleasant breast of waters, quiet bay,
  Like to a quiet mind in the loud world,
  Where the chafed breakers of the outer sea
  Sunk powerless, even as anger falls aside,
  And withers on the breast of peaceful love,
  Thou didst receive that belt of pines, that fledged
  The hills that watch'd thee, as Love watcheth Love,--
  In thine own essence, and delight thyself
  To make it wholly thine on sunny days.
  Keep thou thy name of 'Lover's bay': See, Sirs,
  Even now the Goddess of the Past, that takes
  The heart, and sometimes toucheth but one string,
  That quivers, and is silent, and sometimes
  Sweeps suddenly all its half-moulder'd chords
  To an old melody, begins to play
  On those first-moved fibres of the brain.
  I come, Great mistress of the ear and eye:
  Oh! lead me tenderly, for fear the mind
  Rain thro' my sight, and strangling sorrow weigh
  Mine utterance with lameness. Tho' long years
  Have hallowed out a valley and a gulf
  Betwixt the native land of Love and me,
  Breathe but a little on me, and the sail
  Will draw me to the rising of the sun,
  The lucid chambers of the morning star,
  And East of life.
                    Permit me, friend, I prithee,
  To pass my hand across my brows, and muse
  On those dear hills, that nevermore will meet
  The sight that throbs and aches beneath my touch,
  As tho' there beat a heart in either eye;
  For when the outer lights are darken'd thus,
  The memory's vision hath a keener edge.
  It grows upon me now--the semicircle
  Of dark blue waters and the narrow fringe
  Of curving beach--its wreaths of dripping green--
  Its pale pink shells--the summer-house aloft
  That open'd on the pines with doors of glass,
  A mountain nest the pleasure boat that rock'd
  Light-green with its own shadow, keel to keel,
  Upon the crispings of the dappled waves
  That blanched upon its side.
                               O Love, O Hope,
  They come, they crowd upon me all at once,
  Moved from the cloud of unforgotten things,
  That sometimes on the horizon of the mind
  Lies folded--often sweeps athwart in storm--
  They flash across the darkness of my brain,
  The many pleasant days, the moolit nights,
  The dewy dawnings and the amber eyes,
  When thou and I, Camilla, thou and I
  Were borne about the bay, or safely moor'd
  Beneath some low brow'd cavern, where the wave
  Plash'd sapping its worn ribs (the while without,
  And close above us, sang the wind-tost pine,
  And shook its earthly socket, for we heard,
  In rising and in falling with the tide,
  Close by our ears, the huge roots strain and creak),
  Eye feeding upon eye with deep intent;
  And mine, with love too high to be express'd
  Arrested in its sphere, and ceasing from
  All contemplation of all forms, did pause
  To worship mine own image, laved in light,
  The centre of the splendours, all unworthy
  Of such a shrine--mine image in her eyes,
  By diminution made most glorious,
  Moved with their motions, as those eyes were moved
  With motions of the soul, as my heart beat
  Twice to the melody of hers. Her face
  Was starry-fair, not pale, tenderly flush'd
  As 'twere with dawn. She was dark-hair'd, dark-eyed;
  Oh, such dark eyes! A single glance of them
  Will govern a whole life from birth to death,
  Careless of all things else, led on with light
  In trances and in visions: look at them,
  You lose yourself in utter ignorance,
  You cannot find their depth; for they go back,
  And farther back, and still withdraw themselves
  Quite into the deep soul, that evermore,
  Fresh springing from her fountains in the brain,
  Still pouring thro', floods with redundant light
  Her narrow portals.

                      Trust me, long ago
  I should have died, if it were possible
  To die in gazing on that perfectness
  Which I do bear within me; I had died
  But from my farthest lapse, my latest ebb,
  Thine image, like a charm of light and strength
  Upon the waters, pushed me back again
  On these deserted sands of barren life.
  Tho' from the deep vault, where the heart of hope
  Fell into dust, and crumbled in the dark--
  Forgetting who to render beautiful
  Her countenance with quick and healthful blood--
  Thou didst not sway me upward, could I perish
  With such a costly casket in the grasp
  Of memory? He, that saith it, hath o'erstepp'd
  The slippery footing of his narrow wit,
  And fall'n away from judgment. Thou art light,
  To which my spirit leaneth all her flowers,
  And length of days, and immortality
  Of thought, and freshness ever self-renew'd.
  For Time and Grief abode too long with Life,
  And like all other friends i' the world, at last
  They grew aweary of her fellowship:
  So Time and Grief did beckon unto Death,
  And Death drew nigh and beat the doors of Life;
  But thou didst sit alone in the inner house,
  A wakeful port'ress and didst parle with Death,
  'This is a charmed dwelling which I hold';
  So Death gave back, and would no further come.
  Yet is my life nor in the present time,
  Nor in the present place. To me alone,
  Pushed from his chair of regal heritage,
  The Present is the vassal of the Past:
  So that, in that I _have_ lived, do I live,
  And cannot die, and am, in having been,
  A portion of the pleasant yesterday,
  Thrust forward on to-day and out of place;
  A body journeying onward, sick with toil,
  The lithe limbs bow'd as with a heavy weight
  And all the senses weaken'd in all save that
  Which, long ago, they had glean'd and garner'd up
  Into the granaries of memory--
  The clear brow, bulwark of the precious brain,
  Now seam'd and chink'd with years--and all the while
  The light soul twines and mingles with the growths
  Of vigorous early days, attracted, won,
  Married, made one with, molten into all
  The beautiful in Past of act or place.
  Even as the all-enduring camel, driven
  Far from the diamond fountain by the palms,
  Toils onward thro' the middle moonlight nights,
  Shadow'd and crimson'd with the drifting dust,
  Or when the white heats of the blinding noons
  Beat from the concave sand; yet in him keeps
  A draught of that sweet fountain that he loves,
  To stay his feet from falling, and his spirit
  From bitterness of death.

                            Ye ask me, friends,
  When I began to love. How should I tell ye?
  Or from the after fulness of my heart,
  Flow back again unto my slender spring
  And first of love, tho' every turn and depth
  Between is clearer in my life than all
  Its present flow. Ye know not what ye ask.
  How should the broad and open flower tell
  What sort of bud it was, when press'd together
  In its green sheath, close lapt in silken folds?
  It seemed to keep its sweetness to itself,
  Yet was not the less sweet for that it seem'd.
  For young Life knows not when young Life was born,
  But takes it all for granted: neither Love,
  Warm in the heart, his cradle can remember
  Love in the womb, but resteth satisfied,
  Looking on her that brought him to the light:
  Or as men know not when they fall asleep
  Into delicious dreams, our other life,
  So know I not when I began to love.
  This is my sum of knowledge--that my love
  Grew with myself--and say rather, was my growth,
  My inward sap, the hold I have on earth,
  My outward circling air wherein I breathe,
  Which yet upholds my life, and evermore
  Was to me daily life and daily death:
  For how should I have lived and not have loved?
  Can ye take off the sweetness from the flower,
  The colour and the sweetness from the rose,
  And place them by themselves? or set apart
  Their motions and their brightness from the stars,
  And then point out the flower or the star?
  Or build a wall betwixt my life and love,
  And tell me where I am? 'Tis even thus:
  In that I live I love; because I love
  I live: whate'er is fountain to the one
  Is fountain to the other; and whene'er
  Our God unknits the riddle of the one,
  There is no shade or fold of mystery
  Swathing the other.

                      Many, many years,
  For they seem many and my most of life,
  And well I could have linger'd in that porch,
  So unproportioned to the dwelling place,
  In the maydews of childhood, opposite
  The flush and dawn of youth, we lived together,
  Apart, alone together on those hills.
  Before he saw my day my father died,
  And he was happy that he saw it not:
  But I and the first daisy on his grave
  From the same clay came into light at once.
  As Love and I do number equal years
  So she, my love, is of an age with me.
  How like each other was the birth of each!
  The sister of my mother--she that bore
  Camilla close beneath her beating heart,
  Which to the imprisoned spirit of the child,
  With its true touched pulses in the flow
  And hourly visitation of the blood,
  Sent notes of preparation manifold,
  And mellow'd echoes of the outer world--
  My mother's sister, mother of my love,
  Who had a twofold claim upon my heart,
  One twofold mightier than the other was,
  In giving so much beauty to the world,
  And so much wealth as God had charged her with,
  Loathing to put it from herself for ever,
  Crown'd with her highest act the placid face
  And breathless body of her good deeds past.
  So we were born, so orphan'd. She was motherless,
  And I without a father. So from each
  Of those two pillars which from earth uphold
  Our childhood, one had fall'n away, and all
  The careful burthen of our tender years
  Trembled upon the other. He that gave
  Her life, to me delightedly fulfill'd
  All loving-kindnesses, all offices
  Of watchful care and trembling tenderness.
  He worked for both: he pray'd for both: he slept
  Dreaming of both; nor was his love the less
  Because it was divided, and shot forth
  Boughs on each side, laden with wholesome shade,
  Wherein we rested sleeping or awake,
  And sung aloud the matin-song of life.

  She was my foster-sister: on one arm
  The flaxen ringlets of our infancies
  Wander'd, the while we rested: one soft lap
  Pillow'd us both: one common light of eyes
  Was on us as we lay: our baby lips,
  Kissing one bosom, ever drew from thence
  The stream of life, one stream, one life, one blood,
  One sustenance, which, still as thought grew large,
  Still larger moulding all the house of thought,
  Perchance assimilated all our tastes
  And future fancies. 'Tis a beautiful
  And pleasant meditation, what whate'er
  Our general mother meant for me alone,
  Our mutual mother dealt to both of us:
  So what was earliest mine in earliest life,
  I shared with her in whom myself remains.
  As was our childhood, so our infancy,
  They tell me, was a very miracle
  Of fellow-feeling and communion.
  They tell me that we would not be alone,--
  We cried when we were parted; when I wept,
  Her smile lit up the rainbow on my tears,
  Stay'd on the clouds of sorrow; that we loved
  The sound of one another's voices more
  Than the grey cuckoo loves his name, and learn'd
  To lisp in tune together; that we slept
  In the same cradle always, face to face,
  Heart beating time to heart, lip pressing lip,
  Folding each other, breathing on each other,
  Dreaming together (dreaming of each other
  They should have added) till the morning light
  Sloped thro' the pines, upon the dewy pane
  Falling, unseal'd our eyelids, and we woke
  To gaze upon each other. If this be true,
  At thought of which my whole soul languishes
  And faints, and hath no pulse, no breath, as tho'
  A man in some still garden should infuse
  Rich attar in the bosom of the rose,
  Till, drunk with its own wine and overfull
  Of sweetness, and in smelling of itself,
  It fall on its own thorns--if this be true--
  And that way my wish leaneth evermore
  Still to believe it--'tis so sweet a thought,
  Why in the utter stillness of the soul
  Doth question'd memory answer not, nor tell,
  Of this our earliest, our closest drawn,
  Most loveliest, most delicious union?
  Oh, happy, happy outset of my days!
  Green springtide, April promise, glad new year
  Of Being, which with earliest violets,
  And lavish carol of clear-throated larks,
  Fill'd all the march of life.--I will not speak of thee;
  These have not seen thee, these can never know thee,
  They cannot understand me. Pass on then
  A term of eighteen years. Ye would but laugh
  If I should tell ye how I heard in thought
  Those rhymes, 'The Lion and the Unicorn'
  'The Four-and-twenty Blackbirds' 'Banbury Cross,'
  'The Gander' and 'The man of Mitylene,'
  And all the quaint old scraps of ancient crones,
  Which are as gems set in my memory,
  Because she learn'd them with me. Or what profits it
  To tell ye that her father died, just ere
  The daffodil was blown; or how we found
  The drowned seaman on the shore? These things
  Unto the quiet daylight of your minds
  Are cloud and smoke, but in the dark of mine
  Show traced with flame. Move with me to that hour,
  Which was the hinge on which the door of Hope,
  Once turning, open'd far into the outward,
  And never closed again.

                        I well remember,
  It was a glorious morning, such a one
  As dawns but once a season. Mercury
  On such a morning would have flung himself
  From cloud to cloud, and swum with balanced wings
  To some tall mountain. On that day the year
  First felt his youth and strength, and from his spring
  Moved smiling toward his summer. On that day,
  Love working shook his wings (that charged the winds
  With spiced May-sweets from bound to bound) and blew
  Fresh fire into the sun, and from within
  Burst thro' the heated buds, and sent his soul
  Into the songs of birds, and touch'd far-off
  His mountain-altars, his high hills, with flame
  Milder and purer. Up the rocks we wound;
  The great pine shook with lovely sounds of joy,
  That came on the sea-wind. As mountain brooks
  Our blood ran free: the sunshine seem'd to brood
  More warmly on the heart than on the brow.
  We often paused, and looking back, we saw
  The clefts and openings in the hills all fill'd
  With the blue valley and the glistening brooks,
  And with the low dark groves--a land of Love;
  Where Love was worshipp'd upon every height,
  Where Love was worshipp'd under every tree--
  A land of promise, flowing with the milk
  And honey of delicious memories
  Down to the sea, as far as eye could ken,
  From verge to verge it was a holy land,
  Still growing holier as you near'd the bay,
  For where the temple stood. When we had reach'd
  The grassy platform on some hill, I stoop'd,
  I gather'd the wild herbs, and for her brows
  And mine wove chaplets of the self-same flower,
  Which she took smiling, and with my work there
  Crown'd her clear forehead. Once or twice she told me
  (For I remember all things), to let grow
  The flowers that run poison in their veins.
  She said, 'The evil flourish in the world';
  Then playfully she gave herself the lie:
  'Nothing in nature is unbeautiful,
  So, brother, pluck and spare not.' So I wove
  Even the dull-blooded poppy, 'whose red flower
  Hued with the scarlet of a fierce sunrise,
  Like to the wild youth of an evil king,
  Is without sweetness, but who crowns himself
  Above the secret poisons of his heart
  In his old age'--a graceful thought of hers
  Graven on my fancy! As I said, with these
  She crown'd her forehead. O how like a nymph,
  A stately mountain-nymph, she look'd! how native
  Unto the hills she trod on! What an angel!
  How clothed with beams! My eyes, fix'd upon hers,
  Almost forgot even to move again.
  My spirit leap'd as with those thrills of bliss
  That shoot across the soul in prayer, and show us
  That we are surely heard. Methought a light
  Burst from the garland I had woven, and stood
  A solid glory on her bright black hair:
  A light, methought, broke from her dark, dark eyes,
  And shot itself into the singing winds;
  A light, methought, flash'd even from her white robe,
  As from a glass in the sun, and fell about
  My footsteps on the mountains.

                      About sunset
  We came unto the hill of woe, so call'd
  Because the legend ran that, long time since,
  One rainy night, when every wind blew loud,
  A woful man had thrust his wife and child
  With shouts from off the bridge, and following, plunged
  Into the dizzy chasm below. Below,
  Sheer thro' the black-wall'd cliff the rapid brook
  Shot down his inner thunders, built above
  With matted bramble and the shining gloss
  Of ivy-leaves, whose low-hung tresses, dipp'd
  In the fierce stream, bore downward with the wave.
  The path was steep and loosely strewn with crags
  We mounted slowly: yet to both of us
  It was delight, not hindrance: unto both
  Delight from hardship to be overcome,
  And scorn of perilous seeming: unto me
  Intense delight and rapture that I breathed,
  As with a sense of nigher Deity,
  With her to whom all outward fairest things
  Were by the busy mind referr'd, compared,
  As bearing no essential fruits of excellence.
  Save as they were the types and shadowings
  Of hers--and then that I became to her
  A tutelary angel as she rose,
  And with a fearful self-impelling joy
  Saw round her feet the country far away,
  Beyond the nearest mountain's bosky brows,
  Burst into open prospect--heath and hill,
  And hollow lined and wooded to the lips--
  And steep down walls of battlemented rock
  Girded with broom or shiver'd into peaks--
  And glory of broad waters interfused,
  Whence rose as it were breath and steam of gold;
  And over all the great wood rioting
  And climbing, starr'd at slender intervals
  With blossom tufts of purest white; and last,
  Framing the mighty landskip to the West,
  A purple range of purple cones, between
  Whose interspaces gush'd, in blinding bursts,
  The incorporate light of sun and sea.

                            At length,
  Upon the tremulous bridge, that from beneath
  Seemed with a cobweb firmament to link
  The earthquake-shattered chasm, hung with shrubs,
  We passed with tears of rapture. All the West,
  And even unto the middle South, was ribb'd
  And barr'd with bloom on bloom. The sun beneath,
  Held for a space 'twixt cloud and wave, shower'd down
  Rays of a mighty circle, weaving over
  That varied wilderness a tissue of light
  Unparallel'd. On the other side the moon,
  Half-melted into thin blue air, stood still
  And pale and fibrous as a wither'd leaf,
  Nor yet endured in presence of his eyes
  To imbue his lustre; most unloverlike;
  Since in his absence full of light and joy
  And giving light to others. But this chiefest,
  Next to her presence whom I loved so well,
  Spoke loudly, even into my inmost heart,
  As to my outward hearing: the loud stream,
  Forth issuing from his portals in the crag
  (A visible link unto the home of my heart),
  Ran amber toward the West, and nigh the sea,
  Parting my own loved mountains, was received
  Shorn of its strength, into the sympathy
  Of that small bay, which into open main
  Glow'd intermingling close beneath the sun
  Spirit of Love! That little hour was bound,
  Shut in from Time, and dedicate to thee;
  Thy fires from heav'n had touch'd it, and the earth
  They fell on became hallow'd evermore.

  We turn'd: our eyes met: her's were bright, and mine
  Were dim with floating tears, that shot the sunset,
  In light rings round me; and my name was borne
  Upon her breath. Henceforth my name has been
  A hallow'd memory, like the names of old;
  A center'd, glory-circled memory,
  And a peculiar treasure, brooking not
  Exchange or currency; and in that hour
  A hope flow'd round me, like a golden mist
  Charm'd amid eddies of melodious airs,
  A moment, ere the onward whirlwind shatter it,
  Waver'd and floated--which was less than Hope,
  Because it lack'd the power of perfect Hope;
  But which was more and higher than all Hope,
  Because all other Hope hath lower aim;
  Even that this name to which her seraph lips
  Did lend such gentle utterance, this one name
  In some obscure hereafter, might inwreathe
  (How lovelier, nobler then!) her life, her love,
  With my life, love, soul, spirit and heart and strength.

  'Brother,' she said, 'let this be call'd henceforth
  The Hill of Hope'; and I replied: 'O sister,
  My will is one with thine; the Hill of Hope.'
  Nevertheless, we did not change the name.

  Love lieth deep; Love dwells not in lip-depths:
  Love wraps her wings on either side the heart,
  Constraining it with kisses close and warm,
  Absorbing all the incense of sweet thoughts
  So that they pass not to the shrine of sound.
  Else had the life of that delighted hour
  Drunk in the largeness of the utterance
  Of Love; but how should earthly measure mete
  The heavenly unmeasured or unlimited Love,
  Which scarce can tune his high majestic sense
  Unto the thunder-song that wheels the spheres;
  Scarce living in the Aeolian harmony,
  And flowing odour of the spacious air;
  Scarce housed in the circle of this earth:
  Be cabin'd up in words and syllables,
  Which waste with the breath that made 'em.
                          Sooner earth
  Might go round heaven, and the straight girth of Time
  Inswathe the fullness of Eternity,
  Than language grasp the infinite of Love.
  O day, which did enwomb that happy hour,
  Thou art blest in the years, divinest day!
  O Genius of that hour which dost uphold
  Thy coronal of glory like a God,
  Amid thy melancholy mates far-seen,
  Who walk before thee, and whose eyes are dim
  With gazing on the light and depth of thine
  Thy name is ever worshipp'd among hours!
  Had I died then, I had not seem'd to die
  For bliss stood round me like the lights of heaven,
  That cannot fade, they are so burning bright.
  Had I died then, I had not known the death;
  Planting my feet against this mound of time
  I had thrown me on the vast, and from this impulse
  Continuing and gathering ever, ever,
  Agglomerated swiftness, I had lived
  That intense moment thro' eternity.
  Oh, had the Power from whose right hand the light
  Of Life issueth, and from whose left hand floweth
  The shadow of Death, perennial effluences,
  Whereof to all that draw the wholesome air,
  Somewhile the one must overflow the other;
  Then had he stemm'd my day with night and driven
  My current to the fountain whence it sprang--
  Even his own abiding excellence--
  On me, methinks, that shock of gloom had fall'n
  Unfelt, and like the sun I gazed upon,
  Which, lapt in seeming dissolution,
  And dipping his head low beneath the verge,
  Yet bearing round about him his own day,
  In confidence of unabated strength,
  Steppeth from heaven to heaven, from light to light,
  And holding his undimmed forehead far
  Into a clearer zenith, pure of cloud;
  So bearing on thro' Being limitless
  The triumph of this foretaste, I had merged
  Glory in glory, without sense of change.

  We trod the shadow of the downward hill;
  We pass'd from light to dark. On the other side
  Is scooped a cavern and a mountain-hall,
  Which none have fathom'd. If you go far in
  (The country people rumour) you may hear
  The moaning of the woman and the child,
  Shut in the secret chambers of the rock.
  I too have heard a sound--perchance of streams
  Running far-off within its inmost halls,
  The home of darkness, but the cavern mouth,
  Half overtrailed with a wanton weed
  Gives birth to a brawling stream, that stepping lightly
  Adown a natural stair of tangled roots,
  Is presently received in a sweet grove
  Of eglantine, a place of burial
  Far lovelier than its cradle; for unseen
  But taken with the sweetness of the place,
  It giveth out a constant melody
  That drowns the nearer echoes. Lower down
  Spreads out a little lake, that, flooding, makes
  Cushions of yellow sand; and from the woods
  That belt it rise three dark tall cypresses;
  Three cypresses, symbols of mortal woe,
  That men plant over graves.

                   Hither we came,
  And sitting down upon the golden moss
  Held converse sweet and low--low converse sweet,
  In which our voices bore least part. The wind
  Told a love-tale beside us, how he woo'd
  The waters, and the crisp'd waters lisp'd
  The kisses of the wind, that, sick with love,
  Fainted at intervals, and grew again
  To utterance of passion. Ye cannot shape
  Fancy so fair as is this memory.
  Methought all excellence that ever was
  Had drawn herself from many thousand years,
  And all the separate Edens of this earth,
  To centre in this place and time. I listen'd,
  And her words stole with most prevailing sweetness
  Into my heart, as thronged fancies come,
  All unawares, into the poet's brain;
  Or as the dew-drops on the petal hung,
  When summer winds break their soft sleep with sighs,
  Creep down into the bottom of the flower.
  Her words were like a coronal of wild blooms
  Strung in the very negligence of Art,
  Or in the art of Nature, where each rose
  Doth faint upon the bosom of the other,
  Flooding its angry cheek with odorous tears.
  So each with each inwoven lived with each,
  And were in union more than double-sweet.
  What marvel my Camilla told me all?
  It was so happy an hour, so sweet a place,
  And I was as the brother of her blood,
  And by that name was wont to live in her speech,
  Dear name! which had too much of nearness in it
  And heralded the distance of this time.
  At first her voice was very sweet and low,
  As tho' she were afeard of utterance;
  But in the onward current of her speech,
  (As echoes of the hollow-banked brooks
  Are fashioned by the channel which they keep)
  His words did of their meaning borrow sound,
  Her cheek did catch the colour of her words,
  I heard and trembled, yet I could but hear;
  My heart paused,--my raised eyelids would not fall,
  But still I kept my eyes upon the sky.
  I seem'd the only part of Time stood still,
  And saw the motion of all other things;
  While her words, syllable by syllable,
  Like water, drop by drop, upon my ear
  Fell, and I wish'd, yet wish'd her not to speak,
  But she spoke on, for I did name no wish.
  What marvel my Camilla told me all
  Her maiden dignities of Hope and Love,
  'Perchance' she said 'return'd.' Even then the stars
  Did tremble in their stations as I gazed;
  But she spake on, for I did name no wish,
  No wish--no hope. Hope was not wholly dead,
  But breathing hard at the approach of Death,
  Updrawn in expectation of her change--
  Camilla, my Camilla, who was mine
  No longer in the dearest use of mine--
  The written secrets of her inmost soul
  Lay like an open scroll before my view,
  And my eyes read, they read aright, her heart
  Was Lionel's: it seem'd as tho' a link
  Of some light chain within my inmost frame
  Was riven in twain: that life I heeded not
  Flow'd from me, and the darkness of the grave,
  The darkness of the grave and utter night,
  Did swallow up my vision: at her feet,
  Even the feet of her I loved, I fell,
  Smit with exceeding sorrow unto death.

  Then had the earth beneath me yawning given
  Sign of convulsion; and tho' horrid rifts
  Sent up the moaning of unhappy spirits
  Imprison'd in her centre, with the heat
  Of their infolding element; had the angels,
  The watchers at heaven's gate, push'd them apart,
  And from the golden threshold had down-roll'd
  Their heaviest thunder, I had lain as still,
  And blind and motionless as then I lay!
  White as quench'd ashes, cold as were the hopes
  Of my lorn love! What happy air shall woo
  The wither'd leaf fall'n in the woods, or blasted
  Upon this bough? a lightning stroke had come
  Even from that Heaven in whose light I bloom'd
  And taken away the greenness of my life,
  The blossom and the fragrance. Who was cursed
  But I? who miserable but I? even Misery
  Forgot herself in that extreme distress,
  And with the overdoing of her part
  Did fall away into oblivion.
  The night in pity took away my day
  Because my grief as yet was newly born,
  Of too weak eyes to look upon the light,
  And with the hasty notice of the ear,
  Frail life was startled from the tender love
  Of him she brooded over. Would I had lain
  Until the pleached ivy tress had wound
  Round my worn limbs, and the wild briar had driven
  Its knotted thorns thro' my unpaining brows
  Leaning its roses on my faded eyes.
  The wind had blown above me, and the rain
  Had fall'n upon me, and the gilded snake
  Had nestled in this bosomthrone of love,
  But I had been at rest for evermore.
  Long time entrancement held me: all too soon,
  Life (like a wanton too-officious friend
  Who will not hear denial, vain and rude
  With proffer of unwished for services)
  Entering all the avenues of sense,
  Pass'd thro' into his citadel, the brain
  With hated warmth of apprehensiveness:
  And first the chillness of the mountain stream
  Smote on my brow, and then I seem'd to hear
  Its murmur, as the drowning seaman hears,
  Who with his head below the surface dropt,
  Listens the dreadful murmur indistinct
  Of the confused seas, and knoweth not
  Beyond the sound he lists: and then came in
  O'erhead the white light of the weary moon,
  Diffused and molten into flaky cloud.
  Was my sight drunk, that it did shape to me
  Him who should own that name? or had my fancy
  So lethargised discernment in the sense,
  That she did act the step-dame to mine eyes,
  Warping their nature, till they minister'd
  Unto her swift conceits? 'Twere better thus
  If so be that the memory of that sound
  With mighty evocation, had updrawn
  The fashion and the phantasm of the form
  It should attach to. There was no such thing.--
  It was the man she loved, even Lionel,
  The lover Lionel, the happy Lionel,
  All joy; who drew the happy atmosphere
  Of my unhappy sighs, fed with my tears,
  To him the honey dews of orient hope.
  Oh! rather had some loathly ghastful brow,
  Half-bursten from the shroud, in cere cloth bound,
  The dead skin withering on the fretted bone,
  The very spirit of Paleness made still paler
  By the shuddering moonlight, fix'd his eyes on mine
  Horrible with the anger and the heat
  Of the remorseful soul alive within,
  And damn'd unto his loathed tenement.
  Methinks I could have sooner met that gaze!
  Oh, how her choice did leap forth from his eyes!
  Oh, how her love did clothe itself in smiles
  About his lips! This was the very arch-mock
  And insolence of uncontrolled Fate,
  When the effect weigh'd seas upon my head
  To twit me with the cause.
                          Why how was this?
  Could he not walk what paths he chose, nor breathe
  What airs he pleased! Was not the wide world free,
  With all her interchange of hill and plain
  To him as well as me? I know not, faith:
  But Misery, like a fretful, wayward child,
  Refused to look his author in the face,
  Must he come my way too? Was not the South,
  The East, the West, all open, if he had fall'n
  In love in twilight? Why should he come my way,
  Robed in those robes of light I must not wear,
  With that great crown of beams about his brows?
  Come like an angel to a damned soul?
  To tell him of the bliss he had with God;
  Come like a careless and a greedy heir,
  That scarce can wait the reading of the will
  Before he takes possession? Was mine a mood
  To be invaded rudely, and not rather
  A sacred, secret, unapproached woe
  Unspeakable? I was shut up with grief;
  She took the body of my past delight,
  Narded, and swathed and balm'd it for herself,
  And laid it in a new-hewn sepulchre,
  Where man had never lain. I was led mute
  Into her temple like a sacrifice;
  I was the high-priest in her holiest place,
  Not to be loudly broken in upon.
  Oh! friend, thoughts deep and heavy as these well-nigh
  O'erbore the limits of my brain; but he
  Bent o'er me, and my neck his arm upstay'd
  From earth. I thought it was an adder's fold,
  And once I strove to disengage myself,
  But fail'd, I was so feeble. She was there too:
  She bent above me too: her cheek was pale,
  Oh! very fair and pale: rare pity had stolen
  The living bloom away, as tho' a red rose
  Should change into a white one suddenly.
  Her eyes, I saw, were full of tears in the morn,
  And some few drops of that distressful rain
  Being wafted on the wind, drove in my sight,
  And being there they did break forth afresh
  In a new birth, immingled with my own,
  And still bewept my grief. Keeping unchanged
  The purport of their coinage. Her long ringlets,
  Drooping and beaten with the plaining wind,
  Did brush my forehead in their to-and-fro:
  For in the sudden anguish of her heart
  Loosed from their simple thrall they had flowed abroad,
  And onward floating in a full, dark wave,
  Parted on either side her argent neck,
  Mantling her form half way. She, when I woke,
  After my refluent health made tender quest
  Unanswer'd, for I spoke not: for the sound
  Of that dear voice so musically low,
  And now first heard with any sense of pain,
  As it had taken life away before,
  Choked all the syllables that in my throat
  Strove to uprise, laden with mournful thanks,
  From my full heart: and ever since that hour,
  My voice hath somewhat falter'd--and what wonder
  That when hope died, part of her eloquence
  Died with her? He, the blissful lover, too,
  From his great hoard of happiness distill'd
  Some drops of solace; like a vain rich man,
  That, having always prosper'd in the world,
  Folding his hands deals comfortable words
  To hearts wounded for ever; yet, in truth,
  Fair speech was his and delicate of phrase,
  Falling in whispers on the sense, address'd
  More to the inward than the outward ear,
  As rain of the midsummer midnight soft
  Scarce-heard, recalling fragrance and the green
  Of the dead spring--such as in other minds
  Had film'd the margents of the recent wound.
  And why was I to darken their pure love,
  If, as I knew, they two did love each other,
  Because my own was darken'd? Why was I
  To stand within the level of their hopes,
  Because my hope was widow'd, like the cur
  In the child's adage? Did I love Camilla?
  Ye know that I did love her: to this present
  My full-orb'd love hath waned not. Did I love her,
  And could I look upon her tearful eyes?
  Tears wept for me; for me--weep at my grief?
  What had _she_ done to weep--let my heart
  Break rather--whom the gentlest airs of heaven
  Should kiss with an unwonted gentleness.
  Her love did murder mine; what then? she deem'd
  I wore a brother's mind: she call'd me brother:
  She told me all her love: she shall not weep.

  The brightness of a burning thought awhile
  Battailing with the glooms of my dark will,
  Moonlike emerged, lit up unto itself,
  Upon the depths of an unfathom'd woe,
  Reflex of action, starting up at once,
  As men do from a vague and horrid dream,
  And throwing by all consciousness of self,
  In eager haste I shook him by the hand;
  Then flinging myself down upon my knees
  Even where the grass was warm where I had lain,
  I pray'd aloud to God that he would hold
  The hand of blessing over Lionel,
  And her whom he would make his wedded wife,
  Camilla! May their days be golden days,
  And their long life a dream of linked love,
  From which may rude Death never startle them,
  But grow upon them like a glorious vision
  Of unconceived and awful happiness,
  Solemn but splendid, full of shapes and sounds,
  Swallowing its precedent in victory.
  Let them so love that men and boys may say,
  Lo! how they love each other! till their love
  Shall ripen to a proverb unto all,
  Known when their faces are forgot in the land.
  And as for me, Camilla, as for me,
  Think not thy tears will make my name grow green,--
  The dew of tears is an unwholesome dew.
  The course of Hope is dried,--the life o' the plant--
  They will but sicken the sick plant more.
  Deem then I love thee but as brothers do,
  So shalt thou love me still as sisters do;
  Or if thou dream'st aught farther, dream but how
  I could have loved thee, had there been none else
  To love as lovers, loved again by thee.

  Or this, or somewhat like to this, I spoke,
  When I did see her weep so ruefully;
  For sure my love should ne'er induce the front
  And mask of Hate, whom woful ailments
  Of unavailing tears and heart deep moans
  Feed and envenom, as the milky blood
  Of hateful herbs a subtle-fanged snake.
  Shall Love pledge Hatred in her bitter draughts,
  And batten on his poisons? Love forbid!
  Love passeth not the threshold of cold Hate,
  And Hate is strange beneath the roof of Love.
  O Love, if thou be'st Love, dry up these tears
  Shed for the love of Love; for tho' mine image,
  The subject of thy power, be cold in her,
  Yet, like cold snow, it melteth in the source
  Of these sad tears, and feeds their downward flow.
  So Love, arraign'd to judgment and to death,
  Received unto himself a part of blame.
  Being guiltless, as an innocent prisoner,
  Who when the woful sentence hath been past,
  And all the clearness of his fame hath gone
  Beneath the shadow of the curse of men,
  First falls asleep in swoon. Wherefrom awaked
  And looking round upon his tearful friends,
  Forthwith and in his agony conceives
  A shameful sense as of a cleaving crime--
  For whence without some guilt should such grief be?
  So died that hour, and fell into the abysm
  Of forms outworn, but not to be outworn,
  Who never hail'd another worth the Life
  That made it sensible. So died that hour,
  Like odour wrapt into the winged wind
  Borne into alien lands and far away.
  There be some hearts so airy-fashioned,
  That in the death of love, if e'er they loved,
  On that sharp ridge of utmost doom ride highly
  Above the perilous seas of change and chance;
  Nay, more, holds out the lights of cheerfulness;
  As the tall ship, that many a dreary year
  Knit to some dismal sandbank far at sea,
  All through the lifelong hours of utter dark,
  Showers slanting light upon the dolorous wave.
  For me all other Hopes did sway from that
  Which hung the frailest: falling, they fell too,
  Crush'd link on link into the beaten earth,
  And Love did walk with banish'd Hope no more,
  It was ill-done to part ye, Sisters fair;
  Love's arms were wreathed about the neck of Hope,
  And Hope kiss'd Love, and Love drew in her breath
  In that close kiss, and drank her whisper'd tales.
  They said that Love would die when Hope was gone,
  And Love mourned long, and sorrowed after Hope;
  At last she sought out memory, and they trod
  The same old paths where Love had walked with Hope,
  And Memory fed the soul of Love with tears.

  II

  From that time forth I would not see her more,
  But many weary moons I lived alone--
  Alone, and in the heart of the great forest.
  Sometimes upon the hills beside the sea
  All day I watched the floating isles of shade,
  And sometimes on the shore, upon the sands
  Insensibly I drew her name, until
  The meaning of the letters shot into
  My brain: anon the wanton billow wash'd
  Them over, till they faded like my love.
  The hollow caverns heard me--the black brooks
  Of the mid-forest heard me--the soft winds,
  Laden with thistledown and seeds of flowers,
  Paused in their course to hear me, for my voice
  Was all of thee: the merry linnet knew me,
  The squirrel knew me, and the dragon-fly
  Shot by me like a flash of purple fire.
  The rough briar tore my bleeding palms; the hemlock,
  Brow high, did strike my forehead as I pas'd;
  Yet trod I not the wild-flower in my path,
  Nor bruised the wild-bird's egg.
                        Was this the end?
  Why grew we then together i' the same plot?
  Why fed we the same fountain? drew the same sun?
  Why were our mothers branches of one stem?
  Why were we one in all things, save in that
  Where to have been one had been the roof and crown
  Of all I hoped and fear'd? if that same nearness
  Were father to this distance, and that _one_
  Vauntcourier this _double_? If affection
  Living slew Love, and Sympathy hew'd out
  The bosom-sepulchre of Sympathy.

  Chiefly I sought the cavern and the hill
  Where last we roam'd together, for the sound
  Of the loud stream was pleasant, and the wind
  Came wooingly with violet smells. Sometimes
  All day I sat within the cavern-mouth,
  Fixing my eyes on those three cypress-cones
  Which spired above the wood; and with mad hand
  Tearing the bright leaves of the ivy-screen,
  I cast them in the noisy brook beneath,
  And watch'd them till they vanished from my sight
  Beneath the bower of wreathed eglantines:
  And all the fragments of the living rock,
  (Huge splinters, which the sap of earliest showers,
  Or moisture of the vapour, left in clinging,
  When the shrill storm-blast feeds it from behind,
  And scatters it before, had shatter'd from
  The mountain, till they fell, and with the shock
  Half dug their own graves), in mine agony,
  Did I make bear of all the deep rich moss
  Wherewith the dashing runnel in the spring
  Had liveried them all over. In my brain
  The spirit seem'd to flag from thought to thought,
  Like moonlight wandering through a mist: my blood
  Crept like the drains of a marsh thro' all my body;
  The motions of my heart seem'd far within me,
  Unfrequent, low, as tho' it told its pulses;
  And yet it shook me, that my frame did shudder,
  As it were drawn asunder by the rack.
  But over the deep graves of Hope and Fear,
  The wreck of ruin'd life and shatter'd thought,
  Brooded one master-passion evermore,
  Like to a low hung and a fiery sky
  Above some great metropolis, earth shock'd
  Hung round with ragged-rimmed burning folds,
  Embathing all with wild and woful hues--
  Great hills of ruins, and collapsed masses
  Of thunder-shaken columns, indistinct
  And fused together in the tyrannous light.

  So gazed I on the ruins of that thought
  Which was the playmate of my youth--for which
  I lived and breathed: the dew, the sun, the rain,
  Unto the growth of body and of mind;
  The blood, the breath, the feeling and the motion,
  The slope into the current of my years,
  Which drove them onward--made them sensible;
  The precious jewel of my honour'd life,
  Erewhile close couch'd in golden happiness,
  Now proved counterfeit, was shaken out,
  And, trampled on, left to its own decay.




The Lover's Tale

  Sometimes I thought Camilla was no more,
  Some one had told me she was dead, and ask'd me
  If I would see her burial: then I seem'd
  To rise, and thro' the forest-shadow borne
  With more than mortal swiftness, I ran down
  The sleepy sea-bank, till I came upon
  The rear of a procession, curving round
  The silver-sheeted bay: in front of which
  Six stately virgins, all in white, upbare
  A broad earth-sweeping pall of whitest lawn,
  Wreathed round the bier with garlands: in the distance,
  From out the yellow woods, upon the hill,
  Look'd forth the summit and the pinnacles
  Of a grey steeple. All the pageantry,
  Save those six virgins which upheld the bier,
  Were stoled from head to foot in flowing black;
  One walk'd abreast with me, and veiled his brow,
  And he was loud in weeping and in praise
  Of the departed: a strong sympathy
  Shook all my soul: I flung myself upon him
  In tears and cries: I told him all my love,
  How I had loved her from the first; whereat
  He shrunk and howl'd, and from his brow drew back
  His hand to push me from him; and the face
  The very face and form of Lionel,
  Flash'd through my eyes into my innermost brain,
  And at his feet I seemed to faint and fall,
  To fall and die away. I could not rise,
  Albeit I strove to follow. They pass'd on,
  The lordly Phantasms; in their floating folds
  They pass'd and were no more: but I had fall'n
  Prone by the dashing runnel on the grass.

  Always th' inaudible, invisible thought
  Artificer and subject, lord and slave
  Shaped by the audible and visible,
  Moulded the audible and visible;
  All crisped sounds of wave, and leaf and wind,
  Flatter'd the fancy of my fading brain;
  The storm-pavilion'd element, the wood,
  The mountain, the three cypresses, the cave,
  Were wrought into the tissue of my dream.
  The moanings in the forest, the loud stream,
  Awoke me not, but were a part of sleep;
  And voices in the distance, calling to me,
  And in my vision bidding me dream on,
  Like sounds within the twilight realms of dreams,
  Which wander round the bases of the hills,
  And murmur in the low-dropt eaves of sleep,
  But faint within the portals. Oftentimes
  The vision had fair prelude, in the end
  Opening on darkness, stately vestibules
  To cares and shows of Death; whether the mind,
  With a revenge even to itself unknown,
  Made strange division of its suffering
  With her, whom to have suffering view'd had been
  Extremest pain; or that the clear-eyed Spirit,
  Being blasted in the Present, grew at length
  Prophetical and prescient of whate'er
  The Future had in store; or that which most
  Enchains belief, the sorrow of my spirit
  Was of so wide a compass it took in
  All I had loved, and my dull agony.
  Ideally to her transferred, became
  Anguish intolerable.
                 The day waned;
  Alone I sat with her: about my brow
  Her warm breath floated in the utterance
  Of silver-chorded tones: her lips were sunder'd
  With smiles of tranquil bliss, which broke in light
  Like morning from her eyes--her eloquent eyes
  (As I have seen them many hundred times),
  Fill'd all with clear pure fire, thro' mine down rain'd
  Their spirit-searching splendours. As a vision
  Unto a haggard prisoner, iron-stay'd
  In damp and dismal dungeons underground
  Confined on points of faith, when strength is shock'd
  With torment, and expectancy of worse
  Upon the morrow, thro' the ragged walls,
  All unawares before his half-shut eyes,
  Comes in upon him in the dead of night,
  And with th' excess of sweetness and of awe,
  Makes the heart tremble, and the eyes run over
  Upon his steely gyves; so those fair eyes
  Shone on my darkness forms which ever stood
  Within the magic cirque of memory,
  Invisible but deathless, waiting still
  The edict of the will to reassume
  The semblance of those rare realities
  Of which they were the mirrors. Now the light,
  Which was their life, burst through the cloud of thought
  Keen, irrepressible.
                        It was a room
  Within the summer-house of which I spoke,
  Hung round with paintings of the sea, and one
  A vessel in mid-ocean, her heaved prow
  Clambering, the mast bent, and the revin wind
  In her sail roaring. From the outer day,
  Betwixt the closest ivies came a broad
  And solid beam of isolated light,
  Crowded with driving atomies, and fell
  Slanting upon that picture, from prime youth
  Well-known, well-loved. She drew it long ago
  Forth gazing on the waste and open sea,
  One morning when the upblown billow ran
  Shoreward beneath red clouds, and I had pour'd
  Into the shadowing pencil's naked forms
  Colour and life: it was a bond and seal
  Of friendship, spoken of with tearful smiles;
  A monument of childhood and of love,
  The poesy of childhood; my lost love
  Symbol'd in storm. We gazed on it together
  In mute and glad remembrance, and each heart
  Grew closer to the other, and the eye
  Was riveted and charm-bound, gazing like
  The Indian on a still-eyed snake, low crouch'd
  A beauty which is death, when all at once
  That painted vessel, as with inner life,
  'Gan rock and heave upon that painted sea;
  An earthquake, my loud heartbeats, made the ground
  Roll under us, and all at once soul, life,
  And breath, and motion, pass'd and flow'd away
  To those unreal billows: round and round
  A whirlwind caught and bore us; mighty gyves,
  Rapid and vast, of hissing spray wind-driven
  Far through the dizzy dark. Aloud she shriek'd--
  My heart was cloven with pain. I wound my arms
  About her: we whirl'd giddily: the wind
  Sung: but I clasp'd her without fear: her weight
  Shrank in my grasp, and over my dim eyes
  And parted lips which drank her breath, down hung
  The jaws of Death: I, screaming, from me flung
  The empty phantom: all the sway and whirl
  Of the storm dropt to windless calm, and I
  Down welter'd thro' the dark ever and ever.




Index to First Lines


A gate and a field half ploughed
All thoughts, all creeds, all dreams, are true
Angels have talked with him and showed him thrones
As when a man, that sails in a balloon
Blow ye the trumpets, gather from afar
But she tarries in her place
Check every outflash, every ruder sally
Could I outwear my present state of woe
Ere yet my heart was sweet Love's tomb
Every day hath its night
First drink a health, this solemn night
God bless our Prince and Bride
Heaven weeps above the earth all night
Here far away, seen from the topmost cliff
His eyes in eclipse
Home they brought him slain with spears
How much I love this writer's manly style
How often, when a child I lay reclined
I am any man's suitor
I stood on a tower in the wet
I stood upon the Mountain which o'erlooks
I' the glooming light
Me my own fate to lasting sorrow doometh
My Rosalind, my Rosalind
O darling room, my heart's delight
Oh, Beauty, passing beauty! sweetest sweet!
Oh, go not yet, my love
O maiden fresher than the first green leaf
O sad _No more_! O sweet _No more_
O thou whose fringèd lids I gaze upon
Rise, Britons, rise, if manhood be not dead
Sainted Juliet! dearest name
Shall the hag Evil die with the child of Good
Sure never yet was Antelope
The lintwhite and the throstlecock
The Northwind fall'n in the new starréd night
The pallid thunderstricken sigh for gain
There are three things that fill my heart with sighs
Therefore your halls, your ancient colleges
There is no land like England
The varied earth, the moving heaven
Thou, from the first, unborn, undying love
Though Night hath climbed her peak
Two bees within a chrystal flowerbell rockèd
Voice of the summerwind
We have had enough of motion
We know him, out of Shakespeare's art
What time I wasted youthful hours
Where is the Giant of the Sun, which stood
Who can say
Who fears to die? Who fears to die
With roses musky breathed
You cast to ground the hope which once was mine
You did late review my lays
Your ringlets, your ringlets







A Garland for Girls

By Louisa May Alcott

TO R.A. LAWRENCE

THIS LITTLE BOOK IS AFFECTIONATELY INSCRIBED BY HER GRATEFUL FRIEND,

L.M. ALCOTT






CONTENTS





MAY FLOWERS

AN IVY SPRAY AND LADIES' SLIPPERS

PANSIES

WATER-LILIES

POPPIES AND WHEAT

LITTLE BUTTON-ROSE

MOUNTAIN-LAUREL AND MAIDEN-HAIR






PREFACE





These stories were written for my own amusement during a period of
enforced seclusion. The flowers which were my solace and pleasure
suggested titles for the tales and gave an interest to the work.

If my girls find a little beauty or sunshine in these common
blossoms, their old friend will not have made her Garland in vain.

L.M. ALCOTT.

SEPTEMBER, 1887.






MAY FLOWERS





Being Boston girls, of course they got up a club for mental
improvement, and, as they were all descendants of the Pilgrim
Fathers, they called it the Mayflower Club. A very good name, and
the six young girls who were members of it made a very pretty posy
when they met together, once a week, to sew, and read well-chosen
books. At the first meeting of the season, after being separated all
summer, there was a good deal of gossip to be attended to before the
question, "What shall we read?" came up for serious discussion.

Anna Winslow, as president, began by proposing "Happy Dodd;" but a
chorus of "I've read it!" made her turn to her list for another
title.

"'Prisoners of Poverty' is all about workingwomen, very true and
very sad; but Mamma said it might do us good to know something of
the hard times other girls have," said Anna, soberly; for she was a
thoughtful creature, very anxious to do her duty in all ways.

"I'd rather not know about sad things, since I can't help to make
them any better," answered Ella Carver, softly patting the apple
blossoms she was embroidering on a bit of blue satin.

"But we might help if we really tried, I suppose; you know how much
Happy Dodd did when she once began, and she was only a poor little
girl without half the means of doing good which we have," said Anna,
glad to discuss the matter, for she had a little plan in her head
and wanted to prepare a way for proposing it.

"Yes, I'm always saying that I have more than my share of fun and
comfort and pretty things, and that I ought and will share them with
some one. But I don't do it; and now and then, when I hear about
real poverty, or dreadful sickness, I feel so wicked it quite upsets
me. If I knew HOW to begin, I really would. But dirty little
children don't come in my way, nor tipsy women to be reformed, nor
nice lame girls to sing and pray with, as it all happens in books,"
cried Marion Warren, with such a remorseful expression on her merry
round face that her mates laughed with one accord.

"I know something that I COULD do if I only had the courage to begin
it. But Papa would shake his head unbelievingly, and Mamma worry
about its being proper, and it would interfere with my music, and
everything nice that I especially wanted to go to would be sure
to come on whatever day I set for my good work, and I should get
discouraged or ashamed, and not half do it, so I don't begin, but I
know I ought." And Elizabeth Alden rolled her large eyes from one
friend to another, as if appealing to them to goad her to this duty
by counsel and encouragement of some sort.

"Well, I suppose it's right, but I do perfectly hate to go poking
round among poor folks, smelling bad smells, seeing dreadful sights,
hearing woful tales, and running the risk of catching fever, and
diphtheria, and horrid things. I don't pretend to like charity, but
say right out I'm a silly, selfish wretch, and want to enjoy every
minute, and not worry about other people. Isn't it shameful?"

Maggie Bradford looked such a sweet little sinner as she boldly made
this sad confession, that no one could scold her, though Ida
Standish, her bosom friend, shook her head, and Anna said, with a
sigh: "I'm afraid we all feel very much as Maggie does, though we
don't own it so honestly. Last spring, when I was ill and thought I
might die, I was so ashamed of my idle, frivolous winter, that I
felt as if I'd give all I had to be able to live it over and do
better. Much is not expected of a girl of eighteen, I know; but oh!
there were heaps of kind little things I MIGHT have done if I hadn't
thought only of myself. I resolved if I lived I'd try at least to be
less selfish, and make some one happier for my being in the world. I
tell you, girls, it's rather solemn when you lie expecting to die,
and your sins come up before you, even though they are very small
ones. I never shall forget it, and after my lovely summer I mean to
be a better girl, and lead a better life if I can."

Anna was so much in earnest that her words, straight out of a very
innocent and contrite heart, touched her hearers deeply, and put
them into the right mood to embrace her proposition. No one spoke
for a moment, then Maggie said quietly,--

"I know what it is. I felt very much so when the horses ran away,
and for fifteen minutes I sat clinging to Mamma, expecting to be
killed. Every unkind, undutiful word I'd ever said to her came back
to me, and was worse to bear than the fear of sudden death. It
scared a great deal of naughtiness out of me, and dear Mamma and I
have been more to each other ever since."

"Let us begin with 'The Prisoners of Poverty,' and perhaps it will
show us something to do," said Lizzie. "But I must say I never felt
as if shop-girls needed much help; they generally seem so contented
with themselves, and so pert or patronizing to us, that I don't pity
them a bit, though it must be a hard life."

"I think we can't do MUCH in that direction, except set an example
of good manners when we go shopping. I wanted to propose that we
each choose some small charity for this winter, and do it
faithfully. That will teach us how to do more by and by, and we can
help one another with our experiences, perhaps, or amuse with our
failures. What do you say?" asked Anna, surveying her five friends
with a persuasive smile.

"What COULD we do?"

"People will call us goody-goody."

"I haven't the least idea how to go to work"

"Don't believe Mamma will let me."

"We'd better change our names from May Flowers to sisters of
charity, and wear meek black bonnets and flapping cloaks."

Anna received these replies with great composure, and waited for the
meeting to come to order, well knowing that the girls would have
their fun and outcry first, and then set to work in good earnest.

"I think it's a lovely idea, and I'll carry out my plan. But I won't
tell what it is yet; you'd all shout, and say I couldn't do it, but
if you were trying also, that would keep me up to the mark," said
Lizzie, with a decided snap of her scissors, as she trimmed the
edges of a plush case for her beloved music.

"Suppose we all keep our attempts secret, and not let our right hand
know what the left hand does? It's such fun to mystify people, and
then no one can laugh at us. If we fail, we can say nothing; if we
succeed, we can tell of it and get our reward. I'd like that way,
and will look round at once for some especially horrid boot-black,
ungrateful old woman, or ugly child, and devote myself to him, her,
or it with the patience of a saint," cried Maggie, caught by the
idea of doing good in secret and being found out by accident.

The other girls agreed, after some discussion, and then Anna took
the floor again.

"I propose that we each work in our own way till next May, then, at
our last meeting, report what we have done, truly and honestly, and
plan something better for next year. Is it a vote?"

It evidently was a unanimous vote, for five gold thimbles went up,
and five blooming faces smiled as the five girlish voices cried,
"Aye!"

"Very well, now let us decide what to read, and begin at once. I
think the 'Prisoners' a good book, and we shall doubtless get some
hints from it."

So they began, and for an hour one pleasant voice after the other
read aloud those sad, true stories of workingwomen and their hard
lives, showing these gay young creatures what their pretty clothes
cost the real makers of them, and how much injustice, suffering, and
wasted strength went into them. It was very sober reading, but most
absorbing; for the crochet needles went slower and slower, the
lace-work lay idle, and a great tear shone like a drop of dew on the
apple blossoms as Ella listened to "Rose's Story." They skipped the
statistics, and dipped here and there as each took her turn; but
when the two hours were over, and it was time for the club to
adjourn, all the members were deeply interested in that pathetic
book, and more in earnest than before; for this glimpse into other
lives showed them how much help was needed, and made them anxious to
lend a hand,

"We can't do much, being 'only girls,'" said Anna; "but if each does
one small chore somewhere it will pave the way for better work; so
we will all try, at least, though it seems like so many ants trying
to move a mountain."

"Well, ants build nests higher than a man's head in Africa; you
remember the picture of them in our old geographies? And we can do
as much, I'm sure, if each tugs her pebble or straw faithfully. I
shall shoulder mine to-morrow if Mamma is willing," answered Lizzie,
shutting up her work-bag as if she had her resolution inside and was
afraid it might evaporate before she got home.

"I shall stand on the Common, and proclaim aloud, 'Here's a nice
young missionary, in want of a job! Charity for sale cheap! Who'll
buy? who'll buy?'" said Maggie, with a resigned expression, and a
sanctimonious twang to her voice.

"I shall wait and see what comes to me, since I don't know what I'm
fit for;" and Marion gazed out of the window as if expecting to see
some interesting pauper waiting for her to appear.

"I shall ask Miss Bliss for advice; she knows all about the poor,
and will give me a good start," added prudent Ida, who resolved to
do nothing rashly lest she should fail.

"I shall probably have a class of dirty little girls, and teach them
how to sew, as I can't do anything else. They won't learn much, but
steal, and break, and mess, and be a dreadful trial, and I shall get
laughed at and wish I hadn't done it. Still I shall try it, and
sacrifice my fancy-work to the cause of virtue," said Ella,
carefully putting away her satin glove-case with a fond glance at
the delicate flowers she so loved to embroider.

"I have no plans, but want to do so much! I shall have to wait till
I discover what is best. After to-day we won't speak of our work, or
it won't be a secret any longer. In May we will report. Good luck to
all, and good-by till next Saturday."

With these farewell words from their president the girls departed,
with great plans and new ideas simmering in their young heads and
hearts.

It seemed a vast undertaking; but where there is a will there is
always a way, and soon it was evident that each had found "a little
chore" to do for sweet charity's sake. Not a word was said at the
weekly meetings, but the artless faces betrayed all shades of hope,
discouragement, pride, and doubt, as their various attempts seemed
likely to succeed or fail. Much curiosity was felt, and a few
accidental words, hints, or meetings in queer places, were very
exciting, though nothing was discovered.

Marion was often seen in a North End car, and Lizzie in a South End
car, with a bag of books and papers. Ella haunted a certain shop
where fancy articles were sold, and Ida always brought plain sewing
to the club. Maggie seemed very busy at home, and Anna was found
writing industriously several times when one of her friends called.
All seemed very happy, and rather important when outsiders
questioned them about their affairs. But they had their pleasures as
usual, and seemed to enjoy them with an added relish, as if they
realized as never before how many blessings they possessed, and were
grateful for them.

So the winter passed, and slowly something new and pleasant seemed
to come into the lives of these young girls. The listless,
discontented look some of them used to wear passed away; a sweet
earnestness and a cheerful activity made them charming, though they
did not know it, and wondered when people said, "That set of girls
are growing up beautifully; they will make fine women by and by."
The mayflowers were budding under the snow, and as spring came on
the fresh perfume began to steal out, the rosy faces to brighten,
and the last year's dead leaves to fall away, leaving the young
plants green and strong.

On the 15th of May the club met for the last time that season, as
some left town early, and all were full of spring work and summer
plans. Every member was in her place at an unusually early hour that
day, and each wore an air of mingled anxiety, expectation, and
satisfaction, pleasant to behold. Anna called them to order with
three raps of her thimble and a beaming smile.

"We need not choose a book for our reading to-day, as each of us is
to contribute an original history of her winter's work. I know it
will be very interesting, and I hope more instructive, than some of
the novels we have read. Who shall begin?"

"You! you!" was the unanimous answer; for all loved and respected
her very much, and felt that their presiding officer should open the
ball.

Anna colored modestly, but surprised her friends by the composure
with which she related her little story, quite as if used to public
speaking.

"You know I told you last November that I should have to look about
for something that I COULD do. I did look a long time, and was
rather in despair, when my task came to me in the most unexpected
way. Our winter work was being done, so I had a good deal of
shopping on my hands, and found it less a bore than usual, because I
liked to watch the shop-girls, and wish I dared ask some of them if
I could help them. I went often to get trimmings and buttons at
Cotton's, and had a good deal to do with the two girls at that
counter. They were very obliging and patient about matching some jet
ornaments for Mamma, and I found out that their names were Mary and
Maria Porter. I liked them, for they were very neat and plain in
their dress,--not like some, who seem to think that if their waists
are small, and their hair dressed in the fashion, it is no matter
how soiled their collars are, nor how untidy their nails. Well, one
day when I went for certain kinds of buttons which were to be made
for us, Maria, the younger one, who took the order, was not there. I
asked for her, and Mary said she was at home with a lame knee. I was
so sorry, and ventured to put a few questions in a friendly way.
Mary seemed glad to tell her troubles, and I found that 'Ria,' as
she called her sister, had been suffering for a long time, but did
not complain for fear of losing her place. No stools are allowed at
Cotton's, so the poor girls stand nearly all day, or rest a minute
now and then on a half-opened drawer. I'd seen Maria doing it, and
wondered why some one did not make a stir about seats in this place,
as they have in other stores and got stools for the shop women. I
didn't dare to speak to the gentlemen, but I gave Mary the Jack
roses I wore in my breast, and asked if I might take some books or
flowers to poor Maria. It was lovely to see her sad face light up
and hear her thank me when I went to see her, for she was very
lonely without her sister, and discouraged about her place. She did
not lose it entirely, but had to work at home, for her lame knee
will be a long time in getting well. I begged Mamma and Mrs.
Ailingham to speak to Mr. Cotton for her; so she got the mending of
the jet and bead work to do, and buttons to cover, and things of
that sort. Mary takes them to and fro, and Maria feels so happy not
to be idle. We also got stools, for all the other girls in that
shop. Mrs. Allingham is so rich and kind she can do anything, and
now it's such a comfort to see those tired things resting when off
duty that I often go in and enjoy the sight."

Anna paused as cries of "Good! good!" interrupted her tale; but she
did not add the prettiest part of it, and tell how the faces of the
young women behind the counters brightened when she came in, nor how
gladly all served the young lady who showed them what a true
gentlewoman was.

"I hope that isn't all?" said Maggie, eagerly.

"Only a little more. I know you will laugh when I tell you that I've
been reading papers to a class of shop-girls at the Union once a
week all winter."

A murmur of awe and admiration greeted this deeply interesting
statement; for, true to the traditions of the modern Athens in which
they lived, the girls all felt the highest respect for "papers" on
any subject, it being the fashion for ladies, old and young, to read
and discuss every subject, from pottery to Pantheism, at the various
clubs all over the city.

"It came about very naturally," continued Anna, as if anxious to
explain her seeming audacity. "I used to go to see Molly and Ria,
and heard all about their life and its few pleasures, and learned to
like them more and more. They had only each other in the world,
lived in two rooms, worked all day, and in the way of amusement or
instruction had only what they found at the Union in the evening. I
went with them a few times, and saw how useful and pleasant it was,
and wanted to help, as other kind girls only a little older than I
did. Eva Randal read a letter from a friend in Russia one time, and
the girls enjoyed it very much. That reminded me of my brother
George's lively journals, written when he was abroad. You remember
how we used to laugh over them when he sent them home? Well, when I
was begged to give them an evening, I resolved to try one of those
amusing journal-letters, and chose the best,--all about how George
and a friend went to the different places Dickens describes in some
of his funny books. I wish you could have seen how those dear girls
enjoyed it, and laughed till they cried over the dismay of the boys,
when they knocked at a door in Kingsgate Street, and asked if Mrs.
Gamp lived there. It was actually a barber's shop, and a little man,
very like Poll Sweedlepipes, told them 'Mrs. Britton was the nuss as
lived there now.' It upset those rascals to come so near the truth,
and they ran away because they couldn't keep sober."

The members of the club indulged in a general smile as they recalled
the immortal Sairey with "the bottle on the mankle-shelf," the
"cowcuber," and the wooden pippins. Then Anna continued, with an air
of calm satisfaction, quite sure now of her audience and herself,--

"It was a great success. So I went on, and when the journals were
done, I used to read other things, and picked up books for their
library, and helped in any way I could, while learning to know them
better and give them confidence in me. They are proud and shy, just
as we should be but if you REALLY want to be friends and don't mind
rebuffs now and then, they come to trust and like you, and there is
so much to do for them one never need sit idle any more. I won't
give names, as they don't like it, nor tell how I tried to serve
them, but it is very sweet and good for me to have found this work,
and to know that each year I can do it better and better. So I feel
encouraged and am very glad I began, as I hope you all are. Now, who
comes next?"

As Anna ended, the needles dropped and ten soft hands gave her a
hearty round of applause; for all felt that she had done well, and
chosen a task especially fitted to her powers, as she had money,
time, tact, and the winning manners that make friends everywhere.

Beaming with pleasure at their approval, but feeling that they made
too much of her small success, Anna called the club to order by
saying, "Ella looks as if she were anxious to tell her experiences,
so perhaps we had better ask her to hold forth next."

"Hear! hear!" cried the girls; and, nothing loath, Ella promptly
began, with twinkling eyes and a demure smile, for HER story ended
romantically.

"If you are interested in shop-girls, Miss President and ladies, you
will like to know that _I_ am one, at least a silent partner and
co-worker in a small fancy store at the West End."

"No!" exclaimed the amazed club with one voice; and, satisfied with
this sensational beginning Ella went on.

"I really am, and you have bought some of my fancy-work. Isn't that
a good joke? You needn't stare so, for I actually made that
needle-book, Anna, and my partner knit Lizzie's new cloud. This is
the way it all happened. I didn't wish to waste any time, but one
can't rush into the street and collar shabby little girls, and say,
'Come along and learn to sew,' without a struggle, so I thought I'd
go and ask Mrs. Brown how to begin. Her branch of the Associated
Charities is in Laurel Street, not far from our house, you know; and
the very day after our last meeting I posted off to get my 'chore.'
I expected to have to fit work for poor needlewomen, or go to see
some dreadful sick creature, or wash dirty little Pats, and was
bracing up my mind for whatever might come, as I toiled up the hill
in a gale of wind. Suddenly my hat flew off and went gayly skipping
away, to the great delight of some black imps, who only grinned and
cheered me on as I trotted after it with wild grabs and wrathful
dodges. I got it at last out of a puddle, and there I was in a nice
mess. The elastic was broken, feather wet, and the poor thing all
mud and dirt. I didn't care much, as it was my old one,--dressed for
my work, you see. But I couldn't go home bareheaded, and I didn't
know a soul in that neighborhood. I turned to step into a grocery
store at the corner, to borrow a brush or buy a sheet of paper to
wear, for I looked like a lunatic with my battered hat and my hair
in a perfect mop. Luckily I spied a woman's fancy shop on the other
corner, and rushed in there to hide myself, for the brats hooted and
people stared. It was a very small shop, and behind the counter sat
a tall, thin, washed-out-looking woman, making a baby's hood. She
looked poor and blue and rather sour, but took pity on me; and while
she sewed the cord, dried the feather, and brushed off the dirt, I
warmed myself and looked about to see what I could buy in return for
her trouble.

"A few children's aprons hung in the little window, with some knit
lace, balls, and old-fashioned garters, two or three dolls, and a
very poor display of small wares. In a show-case, however, on the
table that was the counter, I found some really pretty things, made
of plush, silk, and ribbon, with a good deal of taste. So I said I'd
buy a needle-book, and a gay ball, and a pair of distracting baby's
shoes, made to look like little open-work socks with pink
ankle-ties, so cunning and dainty, I was glad to get them for Cousin
Clara's baby. The woman seemed pleased, though she had a grim way of
talking, and never smiled once. I observed that she handled my hat
as if used to such work, and evidently liked to do it. I thanked her
for repairing damages so quickly and well, and she said, with my hat
on her hand, as if she hated to part with it, 'I'm used to
millineryin' and never should have give it up, if I didn't have my
folks to see to. I took this shop, hopin' to make things go, as such
a place was needed round here, but mother broke down, and is a sight
of care; so I couldn't leave her, and doctors is expensive, and
times hard, and I had to drop my trade, and fall back on pins and
needles, and so on.'"

Ella was a capital mimic, and imitated the nasal tones of the
Vermont woman to the life, with a doleful pucker of her own blooming
face, which gave such a truthful picture of poor Miss Almira Miller
that those who had seen her recognized it at once, and laughed
gayly.

"Just as I was murmuring a few words of regret at her bad luck,"
continued Ella, "a sharp voice called out from a back room, 'Almiry!
Almiry! come here.' It sounded very like a cross parrot, but it was
the old lady, and while I put on my hat I heard her asking who was
in the shop, and what we were 'gabbin' about.' Her daughter told
her, and the old soul demanded to 'see the gal;' so I went in, being
ready for fun as usual. It was a little, dark, dismal place, but as
neat as a pin, and in the bed sat a regular Grandma Smallweed
smoking a pipe, with a big cap, a snuff-box, and a red cotton
handkerchief. She was a tiny, dried-up thing, brown as a berry, with
eyes like black beads, a nose and chin that nearly met, and hands
like birds' claws. But such a fierce, lively, curious, blunt old
lady you never saw, and I didn't know what would be the end of me
when she began to question, then to scold, and finally to demand
that 'folks should come and trade to Almiry's shop after promisin'
they would, and she havin' took a lease of the place on account of
them lies.' I wanted to laugh, but dared not do it, so just let her
croak, for the daughter had to go to her customers. The old lady's
tirade informed me that they came from Vermont, had 'been wal on 't
till father died and the farm was sold.' Then it seems the women
came to Boston and got on pretty well till 'a stroke of numb-palsy,'
whatever that is, made the mother helpless and kept Almiry at home
to care for her. I can't tell you how funny and yet how sad it was
to see the poor old soul, so full of energy and yet so helpless, and
the daughter so discouraged with her pathetic little shop and no
customers to speak of. I did not know what to say till 'Grammer
Miller,' as the children call her, happened to say, when she took up
her knitting after the lecture, 'If folks who go spendin' money
reckless on redic'lus toys for Christmas only knew what nice things,
useful and fancy, me and Almiry could make ef we had the goods,
they'd jest come round this corner and buy 'em, and keep me out of a
Old Woman's Home and that good, hard-workin' gal of mine out of a
'sylum; for go there she will ef she don't get a boost somehow, with
rent and firin' and vittles all on her shoulders, and me only able
to wag them knittin'-needles.'

"'I will buy things here, and tell all my friends about it, and I
have a drawer full of pretty bits of silk and velvet and plush, that
I will give Miss Miller for her work, if she will let me.' I added
that, for I saw that Almiry was rather proud, and hid her troubles
under a grim look.

"That pleased the old lady, and, lowering her voice, she said, with
a motherly sort of look in her beady eyes: 'Seein' as you are so
friendly, I'll tell you what frets me most, a layin' here, a burden
to my darter. She kep' company with Nathan Baxter, a master
carpenter up to Westminster where we lived, and ef father hadn't a
died suddin' they'd a ben married. They waited a number o' years,
workin' to their trades, and we was hopin' all would turn out wal,
when troubles come, and here we be. Nathan's got his own folks to
see to, and Almiry won't add to HIS load with hern, nor leave me; so
she give him back his ring, and jest buckled to all alone. She don't
say a word, but it's wearin' her to a shadder, and I can't do a
thing to help, but make a few pinballs, knit garters, and kiver
holders. Ef she got a start in business it would cheer her up a
sight, and give her a kind of a hopeful prospeck, for old folks
can't live forever, and Nathan is a waitin', faithful and true.'

"That just finished me, for I am romantic, and do enjoy love stories
with all my heart, even if the lovers are only a skinny spinster and
a master carpenter. So I just resolved to see what I could do for
poor Almiry and the peppery old lady. I didn't promise anything but
my bits, and, taking the things I bought, went home to talk it over
with Mamma. I found she had often got pins and tape, and such small
wares, at the little shop, and found it very convenient, though she
knew nothing about the Millers. She was willing I should help if I
could, but advised going slowly, and seeing what they could do
first. We did not dare to treat them like beggars, and send them
money and clothes, and tea and sugar, as we do the Irish, for they
were evidently respectable people, and proud as poor. So I took my
bundle of odds and ends, and Mamma added some nice large pieces of
dresses we had done with, and gave a fine order for aprons and
holders and balls for our church fair.

"It would have done your hearts good, girls, to see those poor old
faces light up as I showed my scraps, and asked if the work would be
ready by Christmas. Grammer fairly swam in the gay colors I strewed
over her bed, and enjoyed them like a child, while Almiry tried to
be grim, but had to give it up, as she began at once to cut out
aprons, and dropped tears all over the muslin when her back was
turned to me. I didn't know a washed-out old maid COULD be so
pathetic."

Ella stopped to give a regretful sigh over her past blindness, while
her hearers made a sympathetic murmur; for young hearts are very
tender, and take an innocent interest in lovers' sorrows, no matter
how humble.

"Well, that was the beginning of it. I got so absorbed in making
things go well that I didn't look any further, but just 'buckled to'
with Miss Miller and helped run that little shop. No one knew me in
that street, so I slipped in and out, and did what I liked. The old
lady and I got to be great friends; though she often pecked and
croaked like a cross raven, and was very wearing. I kept her busy
with her 'pin-balls and knittin'-work, and supplied Almiry with
pretty materials for the various things I found she could make. You
wouldn't believe what dainty bows those long fingers could tie, what
ravishing doll's hats she would make out of a scrap of silk and
lace, or the ingenious things she concocted with cones and shells
and fans and baskets. I love such work, and used to go and help her
often, for I wanted her window and shop to be full for Christmas,
and lure in plenty of customers. Our new toys and the little cases
of sewing silk sold well, and people began to come more, after I
lent Almiry some money to lay in a stock of better goods. Papa
enjoyed my business venture immensely, and was never tired of joking
about it. He actually went and bought balls for four small black
boys who were gluing their noses to the window one day, spellbound
by the orange, red, and blue treasures displayed there. He liked my
partner's looks, though he teased me by saying that we'd better add
lemonade to our stock, as poor, dear Almiry's acid face would make
lemons unnecessary, and sugar and water were cheap.

"Well, Christmas came, and we did a great business, for Mamma came
and sent others, and our fancy things were as pretty and cheaper
than those at the art stores, so they went well, and the Millers
were cheered up, and I felt encouraged, and we took a fresh start
after the holidays. One of my gifts at New Year was my own
glove-case,--you remember the apple-blossom thing I began last
autumn? I put it in our window to fill up, and Mamma bought it, and
gave it to me full of elegant gloves, with a sweet note, and Papa
sent a check to 'Miller, Warren & Co.' I was so pleased and proud I
could hardly help telling you all. But the best joke was the day you
girls came in and bought our goods, and I peeped at you through the
crack of the door, being in the back room dying with laughter to see
you look round, and praise our 'nice assortment of useful and pretty
articles.'"

"That's all very well, and we can bear to be laughed at if you
succeeded, Miss. But I don't believe you did, for no Millers are
there now. Have you taken a palatial store on Boylston Street for
this year, intending to run it alone? We'll all patronize it, and
your name will look well on a sign," said Maggie, wondering what the
end of Ella's experience had been.

"Ah! I still have the best of it, for my romance finished up
delightfully, as you shall hear. We did well all winter, and no
wonder. What was needed was a little 'boost' in the right direction,
and I could give it; so my Millers were much comforted, and we were
good friends. But in March Grammer died suddenly, and poor Almiry
mourned as if she had been the sweetest mother in the world. The old
lady's last wishes were to be 'laid out harnsome in a cap with a
pale blue satin ribbin, white wasn't becomin', to hev at least three
carriages to the funeral, and be sure a paper with her death in it
was sent to N. Baxter, Westminster, Vermont.'

"I faithfully obeyed her commands, put on the ugly cap myself, gave
a party of old ladies from the home a drive in the hacks, and
carefully directed a marked paper to Nathan, hoping that he HAD
proved 'faithful and true.' I didn't expect he would, so was not
surprised when no answer came. But I WAS rather amazed when Almiry
told me she didn't care to keep on with the store now she was free.
She wanted to visit her friends a spell this spring, and in the fall
would go back to her trade in some milliner's store.

"I was sorry, for I really enjoyed my partnership. It seemed a
little bit ungrateful after all my trouble in getting her customers,
but I didn't say anything, and we sold out to the Widow Bates, who
is a good soul with six children, and will profit by our efforts.

"Almiry bid me good-by with all the grim look gone out of her face,
many thanks, and a hearty promise to write soon. That was in April.
A week ago I got a short letter saying,--

"'DEAR FRIEND,--You will be pleased to hear that I am married to Mr.
Baxter, and shall remain here. He was away when the paper came with
mother's death, but as soon as he got home he wrote. I couldn't make
up my mind till I got home and see him. Now it's all right. and I am
very happy. Many thanks for all you done for me and mother. I shall
never forget it My husband sends respects, and I remain Yours
gratefully, ALMIRA M. BAXTER.'"

"That's splendid! You did well, and next winter you can look up
another sour spinster and cranky old lady and make them happy," said
Anna, with the approving smile all loved to receive from her.

"My adventures are not a bit romantic, or even interesting, and yet
I've been as busy as a bee all winter, and enjoyed my work very
much," began Elizabeth, as the President gave her a nod.

"The plan I had in mind was to go and carry books and papers to the
people in hospitals, as one of Mamma's friends has done for years. I
went once to the City Hospital with her, and it was very
interesting, but I didn't dare to go to the grown people all alone,
so I went to the Children's Hospital, and soon loved to help amuse
the poor little dears. I saved all the picture-books and papers I
could find for them, dressed dolls, and mended toys, and got new
ones, and made bibs and night-gowns, and felt like the mother of a
large family.

"I had my pets, of course, and did my best for them, reading and
singing and amusing them, for many suffered very much. One little
girl was so dreadfully burned she could not use her hands, and would
lie and look at a gay dolly tied to the bedpost by the hour
together, and talk to it and love it, and died with it on her pillow
when I 'sung lullaby' to her for the last time. I keep it among my
treasures, for I learned a lesson in patience from little Norah that
I never can forget.

"Then Jimmy Dolan with hip disease was a great delight to me, for he
was as gay as a lark in spite of pain, and a real little hero in the
way he bore the hard things that had to be done to him. He never can
get well, and he is at home now; but I still see to him, and he is
learning to make toy furniture very nicely, so that by and by, if he
gets able to work at all, he may be able to learn a cabinet-maker's
trade, or some easy work.

"But my pet of pets was Johnny, the blind boy. His poor eyes had to
be taken out, and there he was left so helpless and pathetic, all
his life before him, and no one to help him, for his people were
poor and he had to go away from the hospital since he was incurable.
He seemed almost given to me, for the first time I saw him I was
singing to Jimmy, when the door opened and a small boy came fumbling
in.

"'I hear a pretty voice, I want to find it,' he said, stopping as I
stopped with both hands out as if begging for more.

"'Come on. Johnny, and the lady will sing to you like a bobolink,'
called Jimmy, as proud as Barnum showing off Jumbo.

"The poor little thing came and stood at my knee, without stirring,
while I sang all the nursery jingles I knew. Then he put such a thin
little finger on my lips as if to feel where the music came from,
and said, smiling all over his white face, 'More, please more, lots
of 'em! I love it!'

"So I sang away till I was as hoarse as a crow, and Johnny drank it
all in like water; kept time with his head, stamped when I gave him
'Marching through Georgia,' and hurrahed feebly in the chorus of
'Red, White, and Blue.' It was lovely to see how he enjoyed it, and
I was so glad I had a voice to comfort those poor babies with. He
cried when I had to go, and so touched my heart that I asked all
about him, and resolved to get him into the Blind School as the only
place where he could be taught and made happy."

"I thought you were bound there the day I met you, Lizzie; but you
looked as solemn as if all your friends had lost their sight," cried
Marion.

"I did feel solemn, for if Johnny could not go there he would be
badly off. Fortunately he was ten, and dear Mrs. Russell helped me,
and those good people took him in though they were crowded. 'We
cannot turn one away,' said kind Mr. Parpatharges.

"So there my boy is, as happy as a king with his little mates,
learning all sorts of useful lessons and pretty plays. He models
nicely in clay. Here is one of his little works. Could you do as
well without eyes?" and Lizzie proudly produced a very one-sided
pear with a long straw for a stem. "I don't expect he will ever be a
sculptor, but I hope he will do something with music he loves it so,
and is already piping away on a fife very cleverly. Whatever his
gift may prove, if he lives, he will be taught to be a useful,
independent man, not a helpless burden, nor an unhappy creature
sitting alone in the dark. I feel very happy about my lads, and am
surprised to find how well I get on with them. I shall look up some
more next year, for I really think I have quite a gift that way,
though you wouldn't expect it, as I have no brothers, and always had
a fancy boys were little imps."

The girls were much amused at Lizzie's discovery of her own powers,
for she was a stately damsel, who never indulged in romps, but lived
for her music. Now it was evident that she had found the key to
unlock childish hearts, and was learning to use it, quite
unconscious that the sweet voice she valued so highly was much
improved by the tender tones singing lullabies gave it. The fat pear
was passed round like refreshments, receiving much praise and no
harsh criticism; and when it was safely returned to its proud
possessor, Ida began her tale in a lively tone.

"I waited for MY chore, and it came tumbling down our basement steps
one rainy day in the shape of a large dilapidated umbrella with a
pair of small boots below it. A mild howl made me run to open the
door, for I was at lunch in the dining-room, all alone, and rather
blue because I couldn't go over to see Ella. A very small girl lay
with her head in a puddle at the foot of the steps, the boots waving
in the air, and the umbrella brooding over her like a draggled green
bird.

"'Are you hurt, child?' said I.

"'No, I thank you, ma'am,' said the mite quite calmly, as she sat up
and settled a woman's shabby black hat on her head.

"'Did you come begging?' I asked.

"'No, ma'am, I came for some things Mrs. Grover's got for us. She
told me to. I don't beg.' And up rose the sopping thing with great
dignity.

"So I asked her to sit down, and ran up to call Mrs. Grover. She was
busy with Grandpa just then, and when I went back to my lunch there
sat my lady with her arms folded, water dripping out of the toes of
her old boots as they hung down from the high chair, and the biggest
blue eyes I ever saw fixed upon the cake and oranges on the table. I
gave her a piece, and she sighed with rapture, but only picked at it
till I asked if she didn't like it.

"'Oh yes, 'm, it's elegant! Only I was wishin' I could take it to
Caddy and Tot, if you didn't mind. They never had frostin' in all
their lives, and I did once.'

"Of course I put up a little basket of cake and oranges and figs,
and while Lotty feasted, we talked. I found that their mother washed
dishes all day in a restaurant over by the Albany Station, leaving
the three children alone in the room they have on Berry Street.
Think of that poor thing going off before light these winter
mornings to stand over horrid dishes all day long, and those three
scraps of children alone till night! Sometimes they had a fire, and
when they hadn't they stayed in bed. Broken food and four dollars a
week was all the woman got, and on that they tried to live. Good
Mrs. Grover happened to be nursing a poor soul near Berry Street
last summer, and used to see the three little things trailing round
the streets with no one to look after them.

"Lotty is nine, though she looks about six, but is as old as most
girls of fourteen, and takes good care of 'the babies,' as she calls
the younger ones. Mrs. Grover went to see them, and, though a
hard-working creature, did all she could for them. This winter she
has plenty of time to sew, for Grandpapa needs little done for him
except at night and morning, and that kind woman spent her own
money, and got warm flannel and cotton and stuff, and made each
child a good suit. Lotty had come for hers, and when the bundle was
in her arms she hugged it close, and put up her little face to kiss
Grover so prettily, I felt that I wanted to do something too. So I
hunted up Min's old waterproof and rubbers, and a hood, and sent
Lotty home as happy as a queen, promising to go and see her. I did
go, and there was my work all ready for me. Oh, girls! such a bare,
cold room, without a spark of fire, and no food but a pan of bits of
pie and bread and meat, not fit for any one to eat, and in the bed,
with an old carpet for cover, lay the three children. Tot and Caddy
cuddled in the warmest place, while Lotty, with her little blue
hands, was trying to patch up some old stockings with bits of
cotton. I didn't know how to begin, but Lotty did, and I just took
her orders; for that wise little woman told me where to buy a bushel
of coal and some kindlings, and milk and meal, and all I wanted. I
worked like a beaver for an hour or two, and was so glad I'd been to
a cooking-class, for I could make a fire, with Lotty to do the
grubby part, and start a nice soup with the cold meat and potatoes,
and an onion or so. Soon the room was warm, and full of a nice
smell, and out of bed tumbled 'the babies,' to dance round the stove
and sniff at the soup, and drink milk like hungry kittens, till I
could get bread and butter ready.

"It was great fun! and when we had cleared things up a bit, and I'd
put food for supper in the closet, and told Lotty to warm a bowl of
soup for her mother and keep the fire going, I went home tired and
dirty, but very glad I'd found something to do. It is perfectly
amazing how little poor people's things cost, and yet they can't get
the small amount of money needed without working themselves to
death. Why, all I bought didn't cost more than I often spend for
flowers, or theatre tickets, or lunches, and it made those poor
babies so comfortable I could have cried to think I'd never done it
before."

Ida paused to shake her head remorsefully, then went on with her
story, sewing busily all the while on an unbleached cotton
night-gown which looked about fit for a large doll.

"I have no romantic things to tell, for poor Mrs. Kennedy was a
shiftless, broken-down woman, who could only 'sozzle round,' as Mrs.
Grover said, and rub along with help from any one who would lend a
hand. She had lived out, married young, and had no faculty about
anything; so when her husband died, and she was left with three
little children, it was hard to get on, with no trade, feeble
health, and a discouraged mind. She does her best, loves the girls,
and works hard at the only thing she can find to do; but when she
gives out, they will all have to part,--she to a hospital, and the
babies to some home. She dreads that, and tugs away, trying to keep
together and get ahead. Thanks to Mrs. Grover, who is very sensible,
and knows how to help poor people, we have made things comfortable,
and the winter has gone nicely.

"The mother has got work nearer home, Lotty and Caddy go to school,
and Tot is safe and warm, with Miss Parsons to look after her. Miss
Parsons is a young woman who was freezing and starving in a little
room upstairs, too proud to beg and too shy and sick to get much
work. I found her warming her hands one day in Mrs. Kennedy's room,
and hanging over the soup-pot as if she was eating the smell. It
reminded me of the picture in Punch where the two beggar boys look
in at a kitchen, sniffing at the nice dinner cooking there. One
says, 'I don't care for the meat, Bill, but I don't mind if I takes
a smell at the pudd'n' when it's dished.' I proposed a lunch at
once, and we all sat down, and ate soup out of yellow bowls with
pewter spoons with such a relish it was fun to see. I had on my old
rig; so poor Parsons thought I was some dressmaker or work-girl, and
opened her heart to me as she never would have done if I'd gone and
demanded her confidence, and patronized her, as some people do when
they want to help. I promised her some work, and proposed that she
should do it in Mrs. K.'s room, as a favor, mind you, so that the
older girls could go to school and Tot have some one to look after
her. She agreed, and that saved her fire, and made the K.'s all
right. Sarah (that's Miss P.) tried to stiffen up when she learned
where I lived; but she wanted the work, and soon found I didn't put
on airs, but lent her books, and brought her and Tot my bouquets and
favors after a german, and told her pleasant things as she sat
cooking her poor chilblainy feet in the oven, as if she never could
get thawed out.

"This summer the whole batch are to go to Uncle Frank's farm and
pick berries, and get strong. He hires dozens of women and children
during the fruit season, and Mrs. Grover said it was just what they
all needed. So off they go in June, as merry as grigs, and I shall
be able to look after them now and then, as I always go to the farm
in July. That's all,--not a bit interesting, but it came to me, and
I did it, though only a small chore."

"I'm sure the helping of five poor souls is a fine work, and you may
well be proud of it, Ida. Now I know why you wouldn't go to matinees
with me, and buy every pretty thing we saw as you used to. The
pocket money went for coal and food, and your fancy work was little
clothes for these live dolls of yours. You dear thing! how good you
were to cook, and grub, and prick your fingers rough, and give up
fun, for this kind work!"

Maggie's hearty kiss, and the faces of her friends, made Ida feel
that her humble task had its worth in their eyes, as well as in her
own; and when the others had expressed their interest in her work,
all composed themselves to hear what Marion had to tell.

"I have been taking care of a scarlet runner,--a poor old
frost-bitten, neglected thing; it is transplanted now, and doing
well, I'm happy to say."

"What do you mean?" asked Ella, while the rest looked very curious.

Marion picked up a dropped stitch in the large blue sock she was
knitting, and continued, with a laugh in her eyes: "My dears, that
is what we call the Soldiers' Messenger Corps, with their red caps
and busy legs trotting all day. I've had one of them to care for,
and a gorgeous time of it, I do assure you. But before I exult over
my success, I must honestly confess my failures, for they were sad
ones. I was so anxious to begin my work at once, that I did go out
and collar the first pauper I saw. It was an old man, who sometimes
stands at the corners of streets to sell bunches of ugly paper
flowers. You've seen him, I dare say, and his magenta daisies and
yellow peonies. Well, he was rather a forlorn object, with his poor
old red nose, and bleary eyes, and white hair, standing at the windy
corners silently holding out those horrid flowers. I bought all he
had that day, and gave them to some colored children on my way home,
and told him to come to our house and get an old coat Mamma was
waiting to get rid of. He told a pitiful story of himself and his
old wife, who made the paper horrors in her bed, and how they needed
everything, but didn't wish to beg. I was much touched, and flew
home to look up the coat and some shoes, and when my old Lear came
creeping in the back way, I ordered cook to give him a warm dinner
and something nice for the old woman.

"I was called upstairs while he was mumbling his food, and blessing
me in the most lovely manner; and he went away much comforted, I
flattered myself. But an hour later, up came the cook in a great
panic to report that my venerable and pious beggar had carried off
several of Papa's shirts and pairs of socks out of the clothes-basket
in the laundry, and the nice warm hood we keep for the girl to hang
out clothes in.

"I was VERY angry, and, taking Harry with me, went at once to the
address the old rascal gave me, a dirty court out of Hanover Street
No such person had ever lived there, and my white-haired saint was a
humbug. Harry laughed at me, and Mamma forbade me to bring any more
thieves to the house, and the girls scolded awfully.

"Well, I recovered from the shock, and, nothing daunted, went off to
the little Irishwoman who sells apples on the Common,--not the fat,
tosey one with the stall near West Street, but the dried-up one who
sits by the path, nodding over an old basket with six apples and
four sticks of candy in it. No one ever seems to buy anything, but
she sits there and trusts to kind souls dropping a dime now and
then; she looks so feeble and forlorn, 'on the cold, cold ground.'

"She told me another sad tale of being all alone and unable to work,
and 'as wake as wather-grewl, without a hap-worth av flesh upon me
bones, and for the love of Heaven gimme a thrifle to kape the breath
av loife in a poor soul, with a bitter hard winter over me, and
niver a chick or child to do a hand's turn.' I hadn't much faith in
her, remembering my other humbug, but I did pity the old mummy; so I
got some tea and sugar, and a shawl, and used to give her my odd
pennies as I passed. I never told at home, they made such fun of my
efforts to be charitable. I thought I really was getting on pretty
well after a time, as my old Biddy seemed quite cheered up, and I
was planning to give her some coal, when she disappeared all of a
sudden. I feared she was ill, and asked Mrs. Maloney, the fat woman,
about her.

"'Lord love ye, Miss dear, it's tuk up and sint to the Island for
tree months she is; for a drunken ould crayther is Biddy Ryan, and
niver a cint but goes for whiskey,--more shame to her, wid a fine
bye av her own ready to kape her daycint.'

"Then I WAS discouraged, and went home to fold my hands, and see
what fate would send me, my own efforts being such failures."

"Poor thing, it WAS hard luck!" said Elizabeth, as they sobered down
after the gale of merriment caused by Marion's mishaps, and her
clever imitation of the brogue.

"Now tell of your success, and the scarlet runner," added Maggie.

"Ah! that was SENT, and so I prospered. I must begin ever so far
back, in war times, or I can't introduce my hero properly. You know
Papa was in the army, and fought all through the war till
Gettysburg, where he was wounded. He was engaged just before he
went; so when his father hurried to him after that awful battle,
Mamma went also, and helped nurse him till he could come home. He
wouldn't go to an officer's hospital, but kept with his men in a
poor sort of place, for many of his boys were hit, and he wouldn't
leave them. Sergeant Joe Collins was one of the bravest, and lost
his right arm saving the flag in one of the hottest struggles of
that great fight. He had been a Maine lumberman, and was over six
feet tall, but as gentle as a child, and as jolly as a boy, and very
fond of his colonel.

"Papa left first, but made Joe promise to let him know how he got
on, and Joe did so till he too went home. Then Papa lost sight of
him, and in the excitement of his own illness, and the end of the
war, and being married, Joe Collins was forgotten, till we children
came along, and used to love to hear the story of Papa's battles,
and how the brave sergeant caught the flag when the bearer was shot,
and held it in the rush till one arm was blown off and the other
wounded. We have fighting blood in us, you know, so we were never
tired of that story, though twenty-five years or more make it all
as far away to us as the old Revolution, where OUR ancestor was
killed, at OUR Bunker Hill!

"Last December, just after my sad disappointments, Papa came home to
dinner one day, exclaiming, in great glee: 'I've found old Joe! A
messenger came with a letter to me, and when I looked up to give my
answer, there stood a tall, grizzled fellow, as straight as a
ramrod, grinning from ear to ear, with his hand to his temple,
saluting me in regular style. "Don't you remember Joe Collins,
Colonel? Awful glad to see you, sir," said he. And then it all came
back, and we had a good talk, and I found out that the poor old boy
was down on his luck, and almost friendless, but as proud and
independent as ever, and bound to take care of himself while he had
a leg to stand on. I've got his address, and mean to keep an eye on
him, for he looks feeble and can't make much, I'm sure.'

"We were all very glad, and Joe came to see us, and Papa sent him on
endless errands, and helped him in that way till he went to New
York. Then, in the fun and flurry of the holidays, we forgot all
about Joe, till Papa came home and missed him from his post. I said
I'd go and find him; so Harry and I rummaged about till we did find
him, in a little house at the North End, laid up with rheumatic
fever in a stuffy back room, with no one to look after him but the
washerwoman with whom he boarded.

"I was SO sorry we had forgotten him! but HE never complained, only
said, with his cheerful grin,' I kinder mistrusted the Colonel was
away, but I wasn't goin' to pester him.' He tried to be jolly,
though in dreadful pain; called Harry 'Major,' and was so grateful
for all we brought him, though he didn't want oranges and tea, and
made us shout when I said, like a goose, thinking that was the
proper thing to do, 'Shall I bathe your brow, you are so feverish?'

"'No, thanky, miss, it was swabbed pretty stiddy to the horsepittle,
and I reckon a trifle of tobaccer would do more good and be a sight
more relishin', ef you'll excuse my mentionin' it.'

"Harry rushed off and got a great lump and a pipe, and Joe lay
blissfully puffing, in a cloud of smoke, when we left him, promising
to come again. We did go nearly every day, and had lovely times; for
Joe told us his adventures, and we got so interested in the war that
I began to read up evenings, and Papa was pleased, and fought all
his battles over again for us, and Harry and I were great friends
reading together, and Papa was charmed to see the old General's
spirit in us, as we got excited and discussed all our wars in a
fever of patriotism that made Mamma laugh. Joe said I 'brustled up'
at the word BATTLE like a war-horse at the smell of powder, and I'd
ought to have been a drummer, the sound of martial music made me so
'skittish.'

"It was all new and charming to us young ones, but poor old Joe had
a hard time, and was very ill. Exposure and fatigue, and scanty
food, and loneliness, and his wounds, were too much for him, and it
was plain his working days were over. He hated the thought of the
poor-house at home, which was all his own town could offer him, and
he had no friends to live with, and he could not get a pension,
something being wrong about his papers; so he would have been badly
off, but for the Soldiers' Home at Chelsea. As soon as he was able,
Papa got him in there, and he was glad to go, for that seemed the
proper place, and a charity the proudest man might accept, after
risking his life for his country.

"There is where I used to be going when you saw me, and I was SO
afraid you'd smell the cigars in my basket. The dear old boys always
want them, and Papa says they MUST have them, though it isn't half
so romantic as flowers, and jelly, and wine, and the dainty messes
we women always want to carry. I've learned about different kinds of
tobacco and cigars, and you'd laugh to see me deal out my gifts,
which are received as gratefully as the Victoria Cross, when the
Queen decorates HER brave men. I'm quite a great gun over there, and
the boys salute when I come, tell me their woes, and think that Papa
and I can run the whole concern. I like it immensely, and am as
proud and fond of my dear old wrecks as if I'd been a Rigoletto, and
ridden on a cannon from my babyhood. That's MY story, but I can't
begin to tell how interesting it all is, nor how glad I am that it
led me to look into the history of American wars, in which brave men
of our name did their parts so well."

A hearty round of applause greeted Marion's tale, for her glowing
face and excited voice stirred the patriotic spirit of the Boston
girls, and made them beam approvingly upon her.

"Now, Maggie, dear, last but not least, I'm sure," said Anna, with
an encouraging glance, for SHE had discovered the secret of this
friend, and loved her more than ever for it.

Maggie blushed and hesitated, as she put down the delicate muslin
cap-strings she was hemming with such care. Then, looking about her
with a face in which both humility and pride contended, she said
with an effort, "After the other lively experiences, mine will sound
very flat. In fact, I have no story to tell, for MY charity began at
home, and stopped there."

"Tell it, dear. I know it is interesting, and will do us all good,"
said Anna, quickly; and, thus supported, Maggie went on.

"I planned great things, and talked about what I meant to do, till
Papa said one day, when things were in a mess, as they often are at
our house, 'If the little girls who want to help the world along
would remember that charity be gins at home, they would soon find
enough to do.'

"I was rather taken aback, and said no more, but after Papa had gone
to the office, I began to think, and looked round to see what there
was to be done at that particular moment. I found enough for that
day, and took hold at once; for poor Mamma had one of her bad
headaches, the children could not go out because it rained, and so
were howling in the nursery, cook was on a rampage, and Maria had
the toothache. Well, I began by making Mamma lie down for a good
long sleep. I kept the children quiet by giving them my ribbon box
and jewelry to dress up with, put a poultice on Maria's face, and
offered to wash the glass and silver for her, to appease cook, who
was as cross as two sticks over extra work washing-day. It wasn't
much fun, as you may imagine, but I got through the afternoon, and
kept the house still, and at dusk crept into Mamma's room and softly
built up the fire, so it should be cheery when she waked. Then I
went trembling to the kitchen for some tea, and there found three
girls calling, and high jinks going on; for one whisked a plate of
cake into the table drawer, another put a cup under her shawl, and
cook hid the teapot, as I stirred round in the china closet before
opening the slide, through a crack of which I'd seen, heard, and
smelt 'the party,' as the children call it.

"I was angry enough to scold the whole set, but I wisely held my
tongue, shut my eyes, and politely asked for some hot water, nodded
to the guests, and told cook Maria was better, and would do her work
if she wanted to go out.

"So peace reigned, and as I settled the tray, I heard cook say in
her balmiest tone, for I suspect the cake and tea lay heavy on her
conscience, 'The mistress is very poorly, and Miss takes nice care
of her, the dear.'

"All blarney, but it pleased me and made me remember how feeble poor
Mamma was, and how little I really did. So I wept a repentant weep
as I toiled upstairs with my tea and toast, and found Mamma all
ready for them, and so pleased to find things going well. I saw by
that what a relief it would be to her if I did it oftener, as I
ought, and as I resolved that I would.

"I didn't say anything, but I kept on doing whatever came along, and
before I knew it ever so many duties slipped out of Mamma's hands
into mine, and seemed to belong to me. I don't mean that I liked
them, and didn't grumble to myself; I did, and felt regularly
crushed and injured sometimes when I wanted to go and have my own
fun. Duty is right, but it isn't easy, and the only comfort about it
is a sort of quiet feeling you get after a while, and a strong
feeling, as if you'd found something to hold on to and keep you
steady. I can't express it, but you know?" And Maggie looked
wistfully at the other faces, some of which answered her with a
quick flash of sympathy, and some only wore a puzzled yet respectful
expression, as if they felt they ought to know, but did not.

"I need not tire you with all my humdrum doings," continued Maggie.
"I made no plans, but just said each day, 'I'll take what comes,
and try to be cheerful and contented.' So I looked after the
children, and that left Maria more time to sew and help round. I did
errands, and went to market, and saw that Papa had his meals
comfortably when Mamma was not able to come down. I made calls for
her, and received visitors, and soon went on as if I were the lady
of the house, not 'a chit of a girl,' as Cousin Tom used to call me.

"The best of all were the cosey talks we had in the twilight, Mamma
and I, when she was rested, and all the day's worry was over, and we
were waiting for Papa. Now, when he came, I didn't have to go away,
for they wanted to ask and tell me things, and consult about
affairs, and make me feel that I was really the eldest daughter. Oh,
it was just lovely to sit between them and know that they needed me,
and loved to have me with them! That made up for the hard and
disagreeable things, and not long ago I got my reward. Mamma is
better, and I was rejoicing over it, when she said,' Yes, I really
am mending now, and hope soon to be able to relieve my good girl.
But I want to tell you, dear, that when I was most discouraged my
greatest comfort was, that if I had to leave my poor babies they
would find such a faithful little mother in you.'

"I was SO pleased I wanted to cry, for the children DO love me, and
run to me for everything now, and think the world of Sister, and
they didn't use to care much for me. But that wasn't all. I ought
not to tell these things, perhaps, but I'm so proud of them I can't
help it. When I asked Papa privately, if Mamma was REALLY better and
in no danger of falling ill again, he said, with his arms round me,
and such a tender kiss,--

"'No danger now, for this brave little girl put her shoulder to the
wheel so splendidly, that the dear woman got the relief from care
she needed just at the right time, and now she really rests sure
that we are not neglected. You couldn't have devoted yourself to a
better charity, or done it more sweetly, my darling. God bless
you!'"

Here Maggie's voice gave out, and she hid her face, with a happy
sob, that finished her story eloquently. Marion flew to wipe her
tears away with the blue sock, and the others gave a sympathetic
murmur, looking much touched; forgotten duties of their own rose
before them, and sudden resolutions were made to attend to them at
once, seeing how great Maggie's reward had been.

"I didn't mean to be silly; but I wanted you to know that I hadn't
been idle all winter, and that, though I haven't much to tell, I'm
quite satisfied with my chore," she said, looking up with smiles
shining through the tears till her face resembled a rose in a
sun-shower.

"Many daughters have done well, but thou excellest them all,"
answered Anna, with a kiss that completed her satisfaction.

"Now, as it is after our usual time, and we must break up,"
continued the President, producing a basket of flowers from its
hiding-place, "I will merely say that I think we have all learned a
good deal, and will be able to work better next winter; for I am
sure we shall want to try again, it adds so much sweetness to our
own lives to put even a little comfort into the hard lives of the
poor. As a farewell token, I sent for some real Plymouth mayflowers,
and here they are, a posy apiece, with my love and many thanks for
your help in carrying out my plan so beautifully."

So the nosegays were bestowed, the last lively chat enjoyed, new
plans suggested, and goodbyes said; then the club separated, each
member going gayly away with the rosy flowers on her bosom, and in
it a clearer knowledge of the sad side of life, a fresh desire to
see and help still more, and a sweet satisfaction in the thought
that each had done what she could.






AN IVY SPRAY AND LADIES' SLIPPERS





"IT can't be done! So I may as well give it I up and get a new pair.
I long for them, but I'm afraid my nice little plan for Laura will
be spoilt," said Jessie Delano to herself, as she shook her head
over a pair of small, dilapidated slippers almost past mending.
While she vainly pricked her fingers over them for the last time,
her mind was full of girlish hopes and fears, as well as of
anxieties far too serious for a light-hearted creature of sixteen.

A year ago the sisters had been the petted daughters of a rich man;
but death and misfortune came suddenly, and now they were left to
face poverty alone. They had few relations, and had offended the
rich uncle who offered Jessie a home, because she refused to be
separated from her sister. Poor Laura was an invalid, and no one
wanted her; but Jessie would not leave her, so they clung together
and lived on in the humble rooms where their father died, trying to
earn their bread by the only accomplishments they possessed. Laura
painted well, and after many disappointments was beginning to find a
sale for her dainty designs and delicate flowers. Jessie had a
natural gift for dancing; and her former teacher, a kind-hearted
Frenchwoman, offered her favorite pupil the post of assistant
teacher in her classes for children.

It cost the girl a struggle to accept a place of this sort and be a
humble teacher, patiently twirling stupid little boys and girls
round and round over the smooth floor where she used to dance so
happily when she was the pride of the class and the queen of the
closing balls. But for Laura's sake she gratefully accepted the
offer, glad to add her mite to their small store, and to feel that
she could help keep the wolf from the door. They had seemed to hear
the howl of this dreaded phantom more than once during that year,
and looked forward to the long hard winter with an anxiety which
neither would confess to the other. Laura feared to fall ill if she
worked too hard, and then what would become of this pretty young
sister who loved her so tenderly and would not be tempted to leave
her? And Jessie could do very little except rebel against their hard
fate and make impracticable plans. But each worked bravely, talked
cheerfully, and waited hopefully for some good fortune to befall
them, while doubt and pain and poverty and care made the young
hearts so heavy that the poor girls often fell asleep on pillows wet
with secret tears.

The smaller trials of life beset Jessie at this particular moment,
and her bright wits were trying to solve the problem how to spend
her treasured five dollars on slippers for herself and paints for
Laura. Both were much needed, and she had gone in shabby shoes to
save up money for the little surprise on which she had set her
heart; but now dismay fell upon her when the holes refused to be
cobbled, and the largest of bows would not hide the worn-out toes in
spite of ink and blacking lavishly applied.

"These are the last of my dear French slippers, and I can't afford
any more. I hate cheap things! But I shall have to get them; for my
boots are shabby, and every one has to look at my feet when I lead.
Oh dear, what a horrid thing it is to be poor!" and Jessie surveyed
the shabby little shoes affectionately, as her eyes filled with
tears; for the road looked very rough and steep now. when she
remembered how she used to dance through life as happy as a
butterfly in a garden full of sunshine and flowers.

"Now, Jess, no nonsense, no red eyes to tell tales! Go and do your
errands, and come in as gay as a lark, or Laura will be worried."
And springing up, the girl began to sing instead of sob, as she
stirred about her dismal little room, cleaning her old gloves,
mending her one white dress, and wishing with a sigh of intense
longing that she could afford some flowers to wear, every ornament
having been sold long ago. Then, with a kiss and a smile to her
patient sister, she hurried away to get the necessary slippers and
the much-desired paints, which Laura would not ask for, though her
work waited for want of them.

Having been reared in luxury, poor little Jessie's tastes were all
of the daintiest sort; and her hardest trial, after Laura's feeble
health, was the daily sacrifice of the many comforts and elegances
to which she had been accustomed. Faded gowns, cleaned gloves, and
mended boots cost her many a pang, and the constant temptation of
seeing pretty, useful, and unattainable things was a very hard one.
Laura rarely went out, and so was spared this cross; then she was
three years older, had always been delicate, and lived much in a
happy world of her own. So Jessie bore her trials silently, but
sometimes felt very covetous and resentful to see so much pleasure,
money, and beauty in the world, and yet have so little of it fall to
her lot.

"I feel as if I could pick a pocket to-day and not mind a bit, if it
were a rich person's. It's a shame, when papa was always so
generous, that no one remembers us. If ever I'm rich again, I'll
just hunt up all the poor girls I can find, and give them nice
shoes, if nothing else," she thought, as she went along the crowded
streets, pausing involuntarily at the shop windows to look with
longing eyes at the treasures within.

Resisting the allurements of French slippers with bows and buckles,
she wisely bought a plain, serviceable pair, and trudged away,
finding balm for her wounds in the fact that they were very cheap.
More balm came when she met a young friend, who joined her as she
stood wistfully eying the piles of grapes in a window and longing to
buy some for Laura.

This warm-hearted schoolmate read the wish before Jessie saw her,
and gratified it so adroitly that the girl could accept the pretty
basketful sent to her sister without feeling like a spendthrift or a
beggar. It comforted her very much, and the world began to look
brighter after that little touch of kindness, as it always does when
genuine sympathy makes sunshine in shady places.

At the art store she was told that more of Laura's autumn-flowers
were in demand; and her face was so full of innocent delight and
gratitude it quite touched the old man who sold her the paints, and
gave her more than her money's worth, remembering his own hard times
and pitying the pretty young girl whose father he had known.

So Jessie did not have to pretend very hard at being "as gay as a
lark" when she got home and showed her treasures. Laura was so happy
over the unexpected gifts that the dinner of bread and milk and
grapes was quite a picnic; and Jessie found a smile on her face when
she went to dress for her party.

It was only a child's party at the house of one of Mademoiselle's
pupils, and Jessie was merely invited to help the little people
through their dancing. She did not like to go in this way, as she
was sure to meet familiar faces there, full of the pity, curiosity,
or indifference so hard for a girl to bear. But Mademoiselle asked
it as a favor, and Jessie was grateful; so she went, expecting no
pleasure and certain of much weariness, if not annoyance.

When she was ready,--and it did not take long to slip on the white
woollen dress, brush out the curly dark hair, and fold up slippers
and gloves,--she stood before her glass looking at herself, quite
conscious that she was very pretty, with her large eyes, blooming
cheeks, and the lofty little air which nothing could change. She was
also painfully conscious that her dress was neither fresh nor
becoming without a bit of ribbon or a knot of flowers to give it the
touch of color it needed. She had an artistic eye, and used to
delight in ordering charming costumes for herself in the happy days
when all her wishes were granted as if fairies still lived. She
tossed over her very small store of ribbons in vain; everything had
been worn till neither beauty nor freshness remained.

"Oh dear! where CAN I find something to make me look less like a
nun,--and a very shabby one, too?" she said, longing for the pink
corals she sold to pay Laura's doctor's bill.

The sound of a soft tap, tap, tap, startled her, and she ran to open
the door. No one was there but Laura, fast asleep on the sofa. Tap,
tap, tap! went the invisible hand; and as the sound seemed to come
from the window, Jessie glanced that way, thinking her tame dove had
corne to be fed. Neither hungry dove nor bold sparrow appeared,--only
a spray of Japanese ivy waving in the wind. A very pretty spray it
was, covered with tiny crimson leaves; and it tapped impatiently, as
if it answered her question by saying, "Here is a garland for you;
come and take it."

Jessie's quick eye was caught at once by the fine color, and running
to the window she looked out as eagerly as if a new idea had come
into her head. It was a dull November day, and the prospect of
sheds, ash-barrels, and old brooms was a gloomy one; but the whole
back of the house glowed with the red tendrils of the hardy vine
that clung to and covered the dingy bricks with a royal mantle, as
if eager to cheer the eyes and hearts of all who looked. It preached
a little sermon of courage, aspiration, and content to those who had
the skill to read it, and bade them see how, springing from the
scanty soil of that back yard full of the commonest objects, the
humblest work, it set its little creepers in the crannies of the
stone, and struggled up to find the sun and air, till it grew strong
and beautiful,--making the blank wall green in summer, glorious in
autumn, and a refuge in winter, when it welcomed the sparrows to the
shelter of its branches where the sun lay warmest.

Jessie loved this beautiful neighbor, and had enjoyed it all that
summer,--the first she ever spent in the hot city. She felt the
grace its greenness gave to all it touched, and half unconsciously
imitated it in trying to be brave and bright, as she also climbed up
from the dismal place where she seemed shut away from everything
lovely, till she was beginning to discover that the blue sky was
over all, the sun still shone for her, and heaven's fresh air kissed
her cheeks as kindly as ever. Many a night she had leaned from the
high window when Laura was asleep, dreaming innocent dreams, living
over her short past, or trying to look into the future bravely and
trustfully. The little vine had felt warmer drops than rain or dew
fall on it when things went badly, had heard whispered prayers when
the lonely child asked the Father of the fatherless for help and
comfort, had peeped in to see her sleeping peacefully when the hard
hour was over, and been the first to greet her with a tap on the
window-pane as she woke full of new hope in the morning. It seemed
to know all her moods and troubles, to be her friend and confidante,
and now came with help like a fairy godmother when our Cinderella
wanted to be fine for the little ball.

"Just the thing! Why didn't I think of it? So bright and delicate
and becoming? It will last better than flowers; and no one can think
I'm extravagant, since it costs nothing."

As she spoke, Jessie was gathering long sprays of the rosy vine,
with its glossy leaves so beattifully shaded that it was evident
Jack Frost had done his best for it. Going to her glass, she
fastened a wreath of the smallest leaves about her head, set a
cluster of larger ones in her bosom, and then surveyed herself with
girlish pleasure, as well she might; for the effect of the simple
decoration was charming. Quite satisfied now, she tied on her cloud
and slipped away without waking Laura, little dreaming what good
fortune the ivy spray was to bring them both.

She found the children prancing with impatience to begin their
ballet, much excited by the music, gaslight, and gay dresses, which
made it seem like "a truly ball." All welcomed Jessie, and she soon
forgot the cheap slippers, mended gloves, and old dress, as she
gayly led her troop through the pretty dance with so much grace and
skill that the admiring mammas who lined the walls declared it was
the sweetest thing they ever saw.

"Who is that little person?" asked one of the few gentlemen who
hovered about the doorways.

His hostess told Jessie's story in a few words, and was surprised to
hear him say in a satisfied tone,--

"I'm glad she is poor. I want her head, and now there is some chance
of getting it."

"My dear Mr. Vane, what DO you mean?" asked the lady, laughing.

"I came to study young faces; I want one for a picture, and that
little girl with the red leaves is charming. Please present me."

"No use; you may ask for her hand by-and-by, if you like, but not
for her head. She is very proud, and never would consent to sit as a
model, I'm sure."

"I think I can manage it, if you will kindly give me a start."

"Very well. The children are just going down to supper, and Miss
Delano will rest. You can make your bold proposal now, if you dare."

A moment later, as she stood watching the little ones troop away,
Jessie found herself bowing to the tall gentleman, who begged to
know what he could bring her with as much interest as if she had
been the finest lady in the room. Of course she chose ice-cream, and
slipped into a corner to rest her tired feet, preferring the
deserted parlor to the noisy dining-room,--not being quite sure
where she belonged now.

Mr. Vane brought her a salver full of the dainties girls best love,
and drawing up a table began to eat and talk in such a simple,
comfortable way that Jessie could not feel shy, but was soon quite
at her ease. She knew that he was a famous artist, and longed to
tell him about poor Laura, who admired his pictures so much and
would have enjoyed every moment of this chance interview. He was not
a very young man, nor a handsome one, but he had a genial face, and
the friendly manners which are so charming; and in ten minutes
Jessie was chatting freely, quite unconscious that the artist was
studying her in a mirror all the while. They naturally talked of the
children, and after praising the pretty dance Mr. Vane quietly
added,--

"I've been trying--to find a face among them for a picture I'm
doing; but the little dears are all too young, and I must look
elsewhere for a model for my wood-nymph."

"Are models hard to find?" asked Jessie, eating her ice with the
relish of a girl who does not often taste it.

"What I want is very hard to find. I can get plenty of beggar-girls,
but this must be a refined face, young and blooming, but with poetry
in it; and that does not come without a different training from any
my usual models get. It will be difficult to suit me, for I'm in a
hurry and don't know where to look,"--which last sentence was not
quite true, for the long glass showed him exactly what he wanted.

"I help Mademoiselle with her classes, and she has pupils of all
ages; perhaps you could find some one there."

Jessie looked so interested that the artist felt that he had begun
well, and ventured a step further as he passed the cake-basket for
the third time.

"You are very kind; but the trouble there is, that I fear none of
the young ladies would consent to sit to me if I dared to ask them.
I will confide to you that I HAVE seen a head which quite suits me;
but I fear I cannot get it. Give me your advice, please. Should you
think this pretty creature would be offended, if I made the request
most respectfully?"

"No, indeed; I should think she would be proud to help with one of
your pictures, sir. My sister thinks they are very lovely; and we
kept one of them when we had to sell all the rest," said Jessie, in
her eager, frank way.

"That was a beautiful compliment, and I am proud of it. Please tell
her so, with my thanks. Which was it?"

"The woman's head,--the sad, sweet one people call a Madonna. We
call it Mother, and love it very much, for Laura says it is like our
mother. I never saw her, but my sister remembers the dear face very
well."

Jessie's eyes dropped, as if tears were near; and Mr. Vane said, in
a voice which showed he understood and shared her feeling,--

"I am very glad that anything of mine has been a comfort to you. I
thought of my own mother when I painted that picture years ago; so
you see you read it truly, and gave it the right name. Now, about
the other head; you think I may venture to propose the idea to its
owner, do you?"

"Why not, sir? She would be very silly to refuse, I think."

"Then YOU wouldn't be offended if asked to sit in this way?"

"Oh, no. I've sat for Laura many a time, and she says I make a very
good model. But then, she only paints simple little things that I am
fit for."

"That is just what I want to do. Would you mind asking the young
lady for me? She is just behind you."

Jessie turned with a start, wondering who had come in; but all she
saw was her own curious face in the mirror, and Mr. Vane's smiling
one above it.

"Do you mean me?" she cried, so surprised and pleased and half
ashamed that she could only blush and laugh and look prettier than
ever.

"Indeed I do. Mrs. Murray thought the request would annoy you; but I
fancied you would grant it, you wore such a graceful little garland,
and seemed so interested in the pictures here."

"It is only a bit of ivy, but so pretty I wanted to wear it, as I
had nothing else," said the girl, glad that her simple ornament
found favor in such eyes.

"It is most artistic, and caught my eye at once. I said to myself,'
That is the head I want, and I MUST secure it if possible.' Can I?"
asked Mr. Vane, smiling persuasively as he saw what a frank and
artless young person he had to deal with.

"With pleasure, if Laura doesn't mind. I'll ask her, and if she is
willing I shall be very proud to have even my wreath in a famous
picture," answered Jessie, so full of innocent delight at being thus
honored that it was a pretty sight to see.

"A thousand thanks! Now I can exult over Mrs. Murray, and get my
palette ready. When can we begin? As your sister is an invalid and
cannot come to my studio with you, perhaps you will allow me to make
my sketch at your own house," said Mr. Vane, as pleased with his
success as only a perplexed artist could be.

"Did Mrs. Murray tell you about us?" asked Jessie quickly, as her
smiles faded away and the proud look came into her face; for she was
sure their misfortunes were known, since he spoke of poor Laura's
health.

"A little," began the new friend, with a sympathetic glance.

"I know models are paid for sitting; did you wish to do it with me
because I'm poor?" asked Jessie, with an irrepressible frown and a
glance at the thrice-cleaned dress and the neatly mended gloves.

Mr. Vane knew what thorn pricked the sensitive little girl, and
answered in his friendliest tone,--

"I never thought of such a thing. I wanted YOU to help ME, because I
am poor in what artists so much need,--real grace and beauty. I
hoped you would allow me to give your sister a copy of the sketch as
a token of my gratitude for four great kindness."

The frown vanished and the smile returned as the soft answer turned
away Jessie's wrath and made her hasten to say penitently,--

"I was very rude; but I haven't learned to be humble yet, and often
forget that I am poor. Please come to us any time. Laura will enjoy
seeing you work, and be delighted with anything you give her. So
shall I, though I don't deserve it."

"I won't punish you by painting the frown that quite frightened me
just now, but do my best to keep the happy face, and so heap coals
of fire on your head. They won't burn any more than the pretty red
leaves that brought me this good fortune," answered the artist,
seeing that his peace was made.

"I'm SO glad I wore them!" and as if trying to make amends for her
little flash of temper, Jessie told him about the ivy, and how she
loved it,--unconsciously betraying more of her pathetic little story
than she knew, and increasing her hearer's interest in his new
model.

The children came back in riotous spirits, and Jessie was called to
lead the revels again. But now her heart was as light as her heels;
for she had something pleasant to think of,--a hope of help for
Laura, and the memory of kind words to make hard duties easier. Mr.
Vane soon slipped away, promising to come the next day; and at eight
o'clock Jessie ran home to tell her sister the good news, and to
press the little wreath which had served her so well.

With the sanguine spirit of girlhood, she felt sure that something
delightful would happen, and built fine castles in the air for her
sister, with a small corner for herself, where she could watch Laura
bloom into a healthy woman and a great artist. The desire of
Jessie's heart was to earn eneugh money to enable them to spend a
month or two at the seashore when summer came, as that was the
surest cure for Laura's weak nerves and muscles. She had cherished
the wild idea of being a ballet-girl, as dancing was her delight;
but every one frowned upon that plan, and her own refined nature
told her that it was not the life for a young girl. Mr. Vane's
request for her head suggested a splendid hope; and after getting
angry with him for hinting at her being a model, she suddenly
decided to try it,--with the charming inconsistency of her sex. The
more she thought of it, the better she liked the idea, and resolved
to ask her new friend all about it, fondly hoping that much money
could be made in this way.

She said nothing to her sister, but while she sat patiently to Mr.
Vane when he came next day, she asked many questions; and though
somewhat discouraged by his replies, confided to him her hopes and
begged his advice. Being a wise man as well as a good and kindly
one, he saw at once that this life would not be safe for the pretty,
impulsive, and tenderly reared girl, left so unprotected in a world
full of trials and temptations. So he told her it would not do,
except so far as she would allow him to make several studies of her
head in various characters and pay for them.

She consented, and though much disappointed found some consolation
in hoarding a part of the handsome sum so earned for the desire of
her heart.

The artist seemed in no haste to finish his work, and for some weeks
came often to the sittings in that quiet room; for it grew more and
more attractive to him, and while he painted the younger sister's
changeful face he studied the beautiful nature of the elder and
learned to love it. But no one guessed that secret for a long time;
and Jessie was so busy racking her brain for a way to earn more
money that she was as blind and deaf to much that went on before her
as if she had been a wooden dummy.

Suddenly, when she least expected it, help came, and in such a
delightful way that she long remembered the little episode with
girlish satisfaction. One day as she sat wearily waiting till the
dressing-room was cleared of maids and children after the
dancing-class was over, a former friend came sauntering up to her,
saying In the tone which always nettled Jessie,--

"You poor thing! aren't you tired to death trying to teach these
stupid babies?"

"No; I love to dance, and we had new figures to-day. See! isn't this
pretty?" and Jessie, who knew her own skill and loved to display it,
twirled away as lightly as if her feet were not aching with two
hours of hard work.

"Lovely! I do wish I ever could learn to keep time and not jerk and
bounce. Being plump is a dreadful trial," sighed Fanny Fletcher, as
Jessie came back beaming and breathless.

"Perhaps I can teach you. I think of making this my profession since
I must do something. Mademoiselle earns heaps of money by it," she
said, sitting down to rest, resolved not to be ashamed of her work
or to let Fanny pity her,

"I wish you COULD teach me, for I know I shall disgrace myself at
the Kirmess. You've heard about it, of course? So sorry you can't
take a part, for it's going to be great fun and very splendid. I am
in the Hungarian dance, and it's one of the hardest; but the dress
is lovely, and I would be in it. Mamma is the matron of it; so I had
my way, though I know the girls don't want me, and the boys make fun
of me. Just see if this isn't the queerest step you ever beheld!"

Fanny started bravely across the wide smooth floor, with a stamp, a
slide, and a twirl which was certainly odd, but might have been
lively and graceful if she had not unfortunately been a very plump,
awkward girl, with no more elasticity than a feather-bed. Jessie
found it impossible not to laugh when Fanny ended her display with a
sprawl upon the floor, and sat rubbing her elbows in an attitude of
despair.

"I know that dance! It is the tzardas, and I can show you how it
should be done. Jump up and try it with me!" she said good-naturedly,
running to help her friend up, glad to have a partner of her own
size for once.

Away they went, but soon stopped; for Fanny could not keep step, and
Jessie pulled and stamped and hummed in vain.

"Do it alone; then I can see how it goes, and manage better next
time," panted the poor girl, dropping down upon the velvet seat
which ran round the hall.

Mademoiselle had come in and watched them for a moment. She saw at
once what was needed, and as Mrs. Fletcher was one of her best
patrons, she was glad to oblige the oldest daughter; so she went to
the piano and struck up the proper air just as Jessie, with one arm
on her hip, the other on the shoulder of an invisible partner, went
down the hall with a martial stamp, a quick slide, and a graceful
turn, in perfect time to the stirring music that made her nerves
tingle and her feet fly. To and fro, round and round, with all
manner of graceful gestures, intricate steps, and active bounds went
the happy girl, quite carried away by the music and motion of the
pastime she loved so much.

Fanny clapped her hands with admiration, and Mademoiselle cried,
"Bien, tres bien, charmante, ma cherie!" as she paused at last, rosy
and smiling, with one hand on her heart and the other at her temple
with the salute that closed the dance.

"I MUST learn it! Do come and give me lessons at our house. I called
for Maud and must go now. Will you come, Jessie? I'll be glad to pay
you if you don't mind. I hate to be laughed at; and I know if some
one would just help me alone I should do as well as the rest, for
Professor Ludwig raves at us all."

Fanny seemed in such a sad strait, and Jessie sympathized so
heartily with her, that she could not refuse a request which
flattered her vanity and tempted her with a prospect of some
addition to the "Sister-fund," as she called her little savings. So
she graciously consented, and after a few laborious lessons
prospered so well that her grateful pupil proposed to several other
unsuccessful dancers in the set to invite Jessie to the private
rehearsals held in various parlors as the festival drew near.

Some of these young people knew Jessie Delano, had missed the bright
girl, and gladly welcomed her back when, after much persuasion, she
agreed to go and help them with the difficult figures of the
tzardas. Once among them she felt in her element, and trained the
awkward squad so well that Professor Ludwig complimented them on
their improvement at the public rehearsals, and raved no more, to
the great delight of the timid damsels, who lost their wits when the
fiery little man shouted and wrung his hands over their mistakes.

The young gentlemen needed help also, as several of them looked very
much like galvanized grasshoppers in their efforts to manage long
legs or awkward elbows. Jessie willingly danced with them, and
showed them how to move with grace and spirit, and handle their
partners less like dolls and more like peasant maidens with whom the
martial Hungarians were supposed to be disporting themselves at the
fair. Merry meetings were these; and all enjoyed them, as young
people do whatever is lively, dramatic, and social. Every one was
full of the brilliant Kirmess, which was the talk of the city, and
to which every one intended to go as actor or spectator. Jessie was
sadly tempted to spend three of her cherished dollars for a ticket,
and perhaps would have done so if there had been any one to take
care of her. Laura could not go, and Mr. Vane was away; no other
friend appeared, and no one remembered to invite her, so she bravely
hid her girlish longing, and got all the pleasure out of the
rehearsals that she could.

At the last of these, which was a full-dress affair at Fanny's
house, something happened which not only tried Jessie's temper
sorely, but brought her a reward for many small sacrifices. So much
dancing was very hard upon her slippers, the new pair were worn out
long ago, and a second pair were in a dangerous condition; but
Jessie hoped that they would last that evening, and then she would
indulge in better ones with what Fanny would pay her. She hated to
take it, but her salary at Mademoiselle's was needed at home; all
she could spare from other sources was sacredly kept for Laura's
jaunt, and only now and then did the good little girl buy some very
necessary article for herself. She was learning to be humble, to
love work, and be grateful for her small wages for her sister's
sake; and while she hid her trials, withstood her temptations, and
bravely tugged away at her hard tasks, the kind Providence, who
teaches us the sweetness of adversity, was preparing a more
beautiful and helpful surprise than any she could plan or execute.

That night all were much excited, and great was the energy displayed
as the scarlet, blue, and silver couples went through the rapid
figures with unusual spirit and success. The brass-heeled boots
stamped in perfect time, the furred caps waved, and the braided
jackets glittered as the gay troop swung to and fro or marched to
the barbaric music of an impromptu band. Jessie looked on with such
longing in her eyes that Fanny, who was ill with a bad cold, kindly
begged her to take her place, as motion made her cough, and putting
on the red and silver cap sent her joyfully away to lead them all.

The fun grew rather fast and furious toward the end, and when the
dance broke up there lay in the middle of the floor a shabby little
slipper, burst at the side, trodden down at the heel, and utterly
demoralized as to the bow with a broken buckle in it. Such a
disreputable little shoe was it that no one claimed it when one of
the young men held it up on the point of his sword, exclaiming
gayly,--

"Where is Cinderella? Here's her shoe, and it's quite time she had a
new pair. Glass evidently doesn't wear well now-a-days."

They all laughed and looked about to find the shoeless foot. The
girls with small feet displayed them readily; those less blessed hid
them at once, and no Cinderella appeared to claim the old slipper.
Jessie turned as red as her cap, and glanced imploringly at Fanny as
she slipped through a convenient door and flew up-stairs, knowing
that in a moment all would see that it must be hers, since the other
girls wore red boots as a part of their costume.

Fanny understood; and though awkward and slow with her feet, she was
kind-hearted and quick to spare her friend the mortification which a
poor and proud girl could not help feeling at such a moment. The
unfortunate slipper was flying from hand to hand as the youths
indulged in a boyish game of ball to tease the laughing girls, who
hastened to disclaim all knowledge of "the horrid thing."

"Please give it to me!" cried Fanny, trying to catch it, and glad
Jessie was safe.

"No; Cinderella must come and put it on. Here's the Prince all ready
to help her," said the finder of the shoe, holding it up.

"And here are lots of proud sisters ready to cut off their toes and
heels if they could only get on such a small slipper," added another
young Mygar, enjoying the fun immensely.

"Listen, and let me tell you something. It's Jessie Delano's, and
she has run away because she lost it. Don't laugh and make fun of
it, because it was worn out in helping us. You all know what a hard
time she has had, but you don't know how good and brave and patient
she is, trying to help poor Laura and to earn her living. I asked
her to teach me, and I shall pay her well for it, because I couldn't
have gone on if she hadn't. If any of you feel as grateful as I do,
and as sorry for her, you can show it in any kind way you please,
for it must be dreadful to be so poor."

Fanny had spoken quickly, and at the last Words hid the tremble in
her voice with a cough, being rather scared at what she had done on
the impulse of the moment. But it was a true impulse, and the
generous young hearts were quick to answer it. The old slipper was
respectfully handed to her with many apologies and various penitent
suggestions. None were adopted just then, however, for Fanny ran off
to find Jessie with her things on waiting--for a chance to slip away
unseen. No persuasions would keep her to supper; and at last, with
many thanks, she was allowed to go, while Fanny returned to lay
plans with her guests as they disturbed their digestions with
lobster salad, ice-cream, and strong coffee.

Feeling more than ever like Cinderella as she hurried out into the
winter night, leaving all the good times behind her, Jessie stood
waiting for a car on the windy street-corner, with the ragged
slippers under her arm, tears of weariness and vexation in her eyes,
and a resentful feeling against an unjust fate lying heavy at her
heart. The glimpses of her old gay, easy life, which these
rehearsals had given her, made the real hardship and loneliness of
her present life all the more irksome, and that night she felt as if
she could not bear it much longer. She longed with all a girl's love
of gayety to go to the Kirmess, and no one thought to invite her.
She could not go alone even if she yielded to temptation and spent
her own money. Laura would have to hire a carriage if she ventured
to try it; so it was impossible, for six or seven dollars was a
fortune to the poor girls now. To have been one of the happy
creatures who were to take part in it, to dance on the green in a
dainty costume to the music of a full band,--to see and do and enjoy
all the delights of those two enchanting evenings, would have filled
Jessie's cup to overflowing. But since she might as well cry for the
moon she tried to get some comfort out of imagining it all as she
rumbled home in a snowstorm, and cried herself to sleep after giving
Laura a cheerful account of the rehearsal, omitting the catastrophe.

The sun shone next morning, hope woke again, and as she dressed
Jessie sung to keep her heart up, still trusting that some one would
remember her before the day was over. As she opened her windows the
sparrows welcomed her with shrill chirpings, and the sun turned the
snow-covered vine to a glittering network very beautiful to see as
it hung like a veil of lace over the dingy wall. Jessie smiled as
she saw it, while taking a long breath of the keen air, feeling
cheered and refreshed by these familiar comforters; then with a
brave, bright glance up at the clear blue sky she went away to the
day's duties, little guessing what pleasant surprises were on their
way to reward her for the little sacrifices which were teaching her
strength, patience, and courage for greater ones by-and-by.

All the morning she listened eagerly for the bell, but nothing came;
and at two o'clock she went away to the dancing-class, saying to
herself with a sigh,--

"Every one is so busy, it is no wonder I'm forgotten. I shall hear
about the fun in the papers, and try to be contented with that."

Though she never felt less like dancing, she was very patient with
her little pupils, and when the lesson was over sat resting a
moment, with her head still full of the glories of the Kirmess.
Suddenly Mademoiselle came to her, and in a few kind words gave her
the first of the pleasant surprises by offering her a larger salary,
an older class, and many commendations for her skill and
faithfulness. Of course she gratefully accepted the welcome offer,
and hurried home to tell Laura, forgetting her heavy heart, tired
feet, and disappointed hopes.

At her own door the second surprise stood waiting for her, in the
person of Mrs. Fletcher's servant with a large box and a note from
Miss Fanny. How she ever got herself and her parcel up the long
stairs Jessie never knew, she was in such a frantic hurry to see
what that vast box could contain. She startled her sister by
bursting into the room breathless, flushed, and beaming, with the
mysterious cry of,--

"Scissors! quick, the scissors!"

Off went cords and papers, up flew the cover, and with a shriek of
rapture Jessie saw the well-known Hungarian costume lying there
before her. What it all meant she could not guess, till she tore
open the note and read these delightful words:--

DEAR JESS,--My cold is worse, and the doctor won't let me go
to-night. Isn't it dreadful? Our dance will be ruined unless you
will take my place. I know you will to oblige us, and have a lovely
time. Every one will be glad, you do it so much better than I can.
My dress will fit you, with tucks and reefs here and there; and the
hoots won't be much too large, for though I'm fat I have small feet,
thank goodness! Mamma will call for you at seven, and bring you
safely home; and you must come early to-morrow and tell me all about
it.

In the small box you will find a little token of our gratitude to
you for your kindness in helping us all so much. Yours ever,

FAN.

As soon as Jessie could get her breath and recover from this first
delightful shock, she opened the dainty parcel carefully tied up
with pink ribbons. It proved to be a crystal slipper, apparently
full of rosebuds; but under the flowers lay five-and-twenty shining
gold dollars. A little card with these words was tucked in one
corner, as if, with all their devices to make the offering as
delicate and pretty as possible, the givers feared to offend:--

"We return to our dear Princess the glass slipper which she lost at
the ball, full of thanks and good wishes."

If the kind young persons who sent the fanciful gift could have seen
how it was received, their doubts would soon have been set at rest;
for Jessie laughed and cried as she told the story, counted the
precious coins, and filled the pretty shoe with water that the buds
might keep fresh for Laura. Then, while the needles flew and the gay
garments were fitted, the happy voices talked and the sisters
rejoiced together over this unexpected pleasure as only loving girls
could do.

"The sweetest part of all the splendid surprise is that they
remembered me just at the busiest time, and thanked me in such a
lovely way. I shall keep that glass slipper all my life, if I can,
to remind me not to despair; for just when everything seemed
darkest, all this good luck came," said Jessie, with ecstatic skips
as she clanked the brass heels of her boots and thought of the proud
moment when she would join in the tzardas before all Boston.

Gentle Laura rejoiced and sympathized heartily, sewed like a busy
bee, and sent her happy sister away at seven o'clock with her
sweetest smile, never letting her suspect what tender hopes and
fears were hidden in her own heart, what longing and disappointment
made her days doubly sad and lonely, or how very poor a consolation
all the glories of the Kirmess would be for the loss of a friend who
had grown very near and dear to her.

No need to tell the raptures of that evening to little Jessie, who
enjoyed every moment, played her part well, and was brought home at
midnight ready to begin all over again, so inexhaustible is youth's
appetite for pleasure.

To her great surprise, Laura was up and waiting to welcome her, with
a face so full of a new and lovely happiness that Jessie guessed at
once some good fortune had come to her also. Yes, Laura's
well-earned reward and beautiful surprise had arrived at last; and
she told it all in a few words as she held out her arms
exclaiming,--

"He has come back! He loves me, and I am so happy! Dear little
sister, all your hard times are over now, and you shall have a home
again."

So the dreams came true, as they sometimes do even in this
work-a-day world of ours, when the dreamers strive as well as hope,
and earn their rewards.

Laura had a restful summer at the seaside, with a stronger arm than
Jessie's to lean upon, and more magical medicine to help her back to
health than any mortal doctor could prescribe. Jessie danced again
with a light heart,--for pleasure, not for pay,--and found the new
life all the sweeter for the trials of the old one. In the autumn
there was a quiet wedding, before three very happy people sailed
away to Italy, the artist's heaven on earth.

"No roses for me," said Jessie, smiling at herself in the mirror as
she fastened a spray of rosy ivy-leaves in the bosom of her fresh
white gown that October morning. "I'll be true to my old friend; for
it helped me in my dark days, and now it shall rejoice with me in my
bright ones, and go on teaching me to climb bravely and patiently
toward the light"






PANSIES





They are never alone that are accompanied with noble thoughts.--SIR
PHILIP SIDNEY.

"I'VE finished my book, and now what CAN I do till this tiresome
rain is over?" exclaimed Carrie, as she lay back on the couch with a
yawn of weariness.

"Take another and a better book; the house is full of them, and this
is a rare chance for a feast on the best," answered Alice, looking
over the pile of volumes in her lap, as she sat on the floor before
one of the tall book-cases that lined the room.

"Not being a book-worm like you, I can't read forever, and you
needn't sniff at 'Wanda,' for it's perfectly thrilling!" cried
Carrie, regretfully turning the crumpled leaves of the Seaside
Library copy of that interminable and impossible tale.

"We should read to improve our minds, and that rubbish is only a
waste of time," began Alice, in a warning tone, as she looked up
from "Romola," over which she had been poring with the delight one
feels in meeting an old friend.

"I don't WISH to improve my mind, thank you: I read for amusement in
vacation time, and don't want to see any moral works till next
autumn. I get enough of them in school. This isn't 'rubbish'! It's
full of fine descriptions of scenery--"

"Which you skip by the page, I've seen you do it," said Eva, the
third young girl in the library, as she shut up the stout book on
her knee and began to knit as if this sudden outburst of chat
disturbed her enjoyment of "The Dove in the Eagle's Nest."

"I do at first, being carried away by my interest in the people, but
I almost always go back and read them afterward," protested Carrie.
"You know YOU like to hear about nice clothes, Eva, and Wanda's were
simply gorgeous; white velvet and a rope of pearls is one costume;
gray velvet and a silver girdle another; and Idalia was all a
'shower of perfumed laces,' and scarlet and gold satin mask dresses,
or primrose silk with violets, so lovely! I do revel in 'em!"

Both girls laughed as Carrie reeled off this list of elegances, with
the relish of a French modiste.

"Well, I'm poor and can't have as many pretty things as I want, so
it IS delightful to read about women who wear white quilted satin
dressing-gowns and olive velvet trains with Mechlin lace sweepers to
them. Diamonds as large as nuts, and rivers of opals and sapphires,
and rubies and pearls, are great fun to read of, if you never even
get a look at real ones. I don't believe the love part does me a bit
of harm, for we never see such languid swells in America, nor such
lovely, naughty ladies; and Ouida scolds them all, so of course she
doesn't approve of them, and that's moral, I'm sure."

But Alice shook her head again, as Carrie paused out of breath, and
said in her serious way: "That's the harm of it all. False and
foolish things are made interesting, and we read for that, not for
any lesson there may be hidden under the velvet and jewels and fine
words of your splendid men and women. Now, THIS book is a wonderful
picture of Florence in old times, and the famous people who really
lived are painted in it, and it has a true and clean moral that we
can all see, and one feels wiser and better for reading it. I do
wish you'd leave those trashy things and try something really good."

"I hate George Eliot,--so awfully wise and preachy and dismal! I
really couldn't wade through 'Daniel Deronda,' though 'The Mill on
the Floss' wasn't bad," answered Carrie, with another yawn, as she
recalled the Jew Mordecai's long speeches, and Daniel's meditations.

"I know you'd like this," said Eva, patting her book with an air of
calm content; for she was a modest, common-sense little body, full
of innocent fancies and the mildest sort of romance. "I love dear
Miss Yonge, with her nice, large families, and their trials, and
their pious ways, and pleasant homes full of brothers and sisters,
and good fathers and mothers. I'm never tired of them, and have read
'Daisy Chain' nine times at least."

"I used to like them, and still think them good for young girls,
with our own 'Queechy' and 'Wide, Wide World,' and books of that
kind. Now I'm eighteen I prefer stronger novels, and books by great
men and women, because these are always talked about by cultivated
people, and when I go into society next winter I wish to be able to
listen intelligently, and know what to admire."

"That's all very well for you, Alice; you were always poking over
books, and I dare say you will write them some day, or be a
blue-stocking. But I've got another year to study and fuss over my
education, and I'm going to enjoy myself all I can, and leave the
wise books till I come out."

"But, Carrie, there won't be any time to read them; you'll be so
busy with parties, and beaux, and travelling, and such things. I
WOULD take Alice's advice and read up a little now; it's so nice to
know useful things, and be able to find help and comfort in good
books when trouble comes, as Ellen Montgomery and Fleda did, and
Ethel, and the other girls in Miss Yonge's stories," said Eva,
earnestly, remembering how much the efforts of those natural little
heroines had helped her in her own struggles tor self-control and
the cheerful bearing of the burden which come to all.

"I don't want to be a priggish Ellen, or a moral Fleda, and I do
detest bothering about self-improvement all the time. I know I
ought, but I'd rather wait another year or two, and enjoy my
vanities in peace just a LITTLE longer." And Carrie tucked Wanda
under the sofa pillow, as if a trifle ashamed of her society, with
Eva's innocent eyes upon her own, and Alice sadly regarding her over
the rampart of wise books, which kept growing higher as the eager
girl found more and more treasures in this richly stored library.

A little silence followed, broken only by the patter of the rain
without, the crackle of the wood fire within, and the scratch of a
busy pen from a curtained recess at the end of the long room. In the
sudden hush the girls heard it and remembered that they were not
alone.

"She must have heard every word we said!" and Carrie sat up with a
dismayed face as she spoke in a whisper.

Eva laughed, but Alice shrugged her shoulders, and said tranquilly,
"I don't mind. She wouldn't expect much wisdom from school-girls."

This was cold comfort to Carrie, who was painfully conscious of
having been a particularly silly school-girl just then. So she gave
a groan and lay down again, wishing she had not expressed her
views quite so freely, and had kept Wanda for the privacy of her own
room.

The three girls were the guests of a delightful old lady, who had
know their mothers and was fond of renewing her acquaintance with
them through their daughters. She loved young people, and each
summer invited parties of them to enjoy the delights of her
beautiful country house, where she lived alone now, being the
childless widow of a somewhat celebrated man. She made it very
pleasant for her guests, leaving them free to employ a part of the
day as they liked, providing the best of company at dinner, gay
revels in the evening, and a large house full of curious and
interesting things to examine at their leisure.

The rain had spoiled a pleasant plan, and business letters had made
it necessary for Mrs. Warburton to leave the three to their own
devices after lunch. They had read quietly for several hours, and
their hostess was just finishing her last letter when fragments of
the conversation reached her ear. She listened with amusement,
unconscious that they had forgotten her presence, finding the
different views very characteristic, and easily explained by the
difference of the homes out of which the three friends came.

Alice was the only daughter of a scholarly man and a brilliant
woman; therefore her love of books and desire to cultivate her mind
was very natural, but the danger in her case would be in the neglect
of other things equally important, too varied reading, and a
superficial knowledge of many authors rather than a true
appreciation of a few of the best and greatest. Eva was one of many
children in a happy home, with a busy father, a pious mother, and
many domestic cares, as well as joys, already falling to the dutiful
girl's lot. Her instincts were sweet and unspoiled, and she only
needed to be shown where to find new and better helpers for the real
trials of life, when the childish heroines she loved could no longer
serve her in the years to come.

Carrie was one of the ambitious yet commonplace girls who wish to
shine, without knowing the difference between the glitter of a
candle which attracts moths, and the serene light of a star, or the
cheery glow of a fire round which all love to gather. Her mother's
aims were not high, and the two pretty daughters knew that she
desired good matches for them, educated them for that end, and
expected them to do their parts when the time came. The elder sister
was now at a watering-place with her mother, and Carrie hoped that a
letter would soon come telling her that Mary was settled. During her
stay with Mrs. Warburton she had learned a good deal, and was
unconsciously contrasting the life here with the frivolous one at
home, made up of public show and private sacrifice of comfort,
dignity, and peace. Here were people who dressed simply, enjoyed
conversation, kept up their accomplishments even when old, and were
so busy, lovable, and charming, that poor Carrie often felt vulgar,
ignorant, and mortified among them, in spite of their fine breeding
and kindliness. The society Mrs. Warburton drew about her was the
best, and old and young, rich and poor, wise and simple, all seemed
genuine,---glad to give or receive, enjoy and rest, and then go out
to their work refreshed by the influences of the place and the sweet
old lady who made it what it was. The girls would soon begin life
for themselves, and it was well that they had this little glimpse of
really good society before they left the shelter of home to choose
friends, pleasures, and pursuits for themselves, as all young women
do when once launched.

The sudden silence and then the whispers suggested to the listener
that she had perhaps heard something not meant for her ears; so she
presently emerged with her letters, and said, as she came smiling
toward the group about the fire,--

"How are you getting through this long, dull afternoon, my dears?
Quiet as mice till just now. What woke you up? A battle of the
books? Alice looks as if she had laid in plenty of ammunition, and
you were preparing to besiege her."

The girls laughed, and all rose, for Madam Warburton was a stately
old lady, and people involuntarily treated her with great respect,
even in this mannerless age.

"We were only talking about books," began Carrie, deeply grateful
that Wanda was safely out of sight.

"And we couldn't agree," added Eva, running to ring the bell for the
man to take the letters, for she was used to these little offices at
home, and loved to wait on Madam.

"Thanks, my love. Now let us talk a little, if you are tired of
reading, and if you like to let me share the discussion. Comparing
tastes in literature is always a pleasure, and I used to enjoy
talking over books with my girl friends more than anything else."

As she spoke, Mrs. Warburton sat down in the chair which Alice
rolled up, drew Eva to the cushion at her feet, and nodded to the
others as they settled again, with interested faces, one at the
table where the pile of chosen volumes now lay, the other erect upon
the couch where she had been practising the poses "full of languid
grace," so much affected by her favorite heroines.

"Carrie was laughing at me for liking wise books and wanting to
improve my mind. Is it foolish and a waste of time?" asked Alice,
eager to convince her friend and secure so powerful an ally.

"No, my dear, it is a very sensible desire, and I wish more girls
had it. Only don't be greedy, and read too much; cramming and
smattering is as bad as promiscuous novel-reading, or no reading at
all. Choose carefully, read intelligently, and digest thoroughly
each book, and then you make it your own," answered Mrs. Warburton,
quite in her element now, for she loved to give advice, as most old
ladies do.

"But how can we know WHAT to read if we mayn't follow our tastes?"
said Carrie, trying to be interested and "intelligent" in spite of
her fear that a "school-marmy" lecture was in store for her.

"Ask advice, and so cultivate a true and refined taste. I always
judge people's characters a good deal by the books they like, as
well as by the company they keep; so one should be careful, for this
is a pretty good test. Another is, be sure that whatever will not
bear reading aloud is not fit to read to one's self. Many young
girls ignorantly or curiously take up books quite worthless, and
really harmful, because under the fine writing and brilliant color
lurks immorality or the false sentiment which gives wrong ideas of
life and things which should be sacred. They think, perhaps, that no
one knows this taste of theirs; but they are mistaken, for it shows
itself in many ways, and betrays them. Attitudes, looks, careless
words, and a morbid or foolishly romantic view of certain things,
show plainly that the maidenly instincts are blunted, and harm done
that perhaps can never be repaired."

Mrs. Warburton kept her eyes fixed upon the tall andirons as if
gravely reproving them, which was a great relief to Carrie, whose
cheeks glowed as she stirred uneasily and took up a screen as if to
guard them from the fire. But conscience pricked her sharply, and
memory, like a traitor, recalled many a passage or scene in her
favorite books which she could not have read aloud even to that old
lady, though she enjoyed them in private. Nothing very bad, but
false and foolish, poor food for a lively fancy and young mind to
feed on, as the weariness or excitement which always followed
plainly proved, since one should feel refreshed, not cloyed, with an
intellectual feast.

Alice, with both elbows on the table, listened with wide-awake eyes,
and Eva watched the raindrops trickle clown the pane with an intent
expression, as if asking herself if she had ever done this naughty
thing.

"Then there is another fault," continued Mrs. Warburton, well
knowing that her first shot had hit its mark, and anxious to be
just. "Some book-loving lassies have a mania for trying to read
everything, and dip into works far beyond their powers, or try too
many different kinds of self-improvement at once. So they get a
muddle of useless things into their heads, instead of well-assorted
ideas and real knowledge. They must learn to wait and select; for
each age has its proper class of books, and what is Greek to us at
eighteen may be just what we need at thirty. One can get mental
dyspepsia on meat and wine as well as on ice-cream and frosted cake,
you know."

Alice smiled, and pushed away four of the eight books she had
selected, as if afraid she had been greedy, and now felt that it was
best to wait a little.

Eva looked up with some anxiety in her frank eyes as she said, "Now
it is my turn. Must I give up my dear homely books, and take to
Ruskin, Kant, or Plato?"

Mrs. Warburton laughed, as she stroked the pretty brown head at her
knee.

"Not yet, my love, perhaps never, for those are not the masters you
need, I fancy. Since you like stories about every-day people, try
some of the fine biographies of real men and women about whom you
should know something. You will find their lives full of stirring,
helpful, and lovely experiences, and in reading of these you will
get courage and hope and faith to bear your own trials as they come.
True stories suit you, and are the best, for there we get real
tragedy and comedy, and the lessons all must learn."

"Thank you! I will begin at once if you will kindly give me a list
of such as would be good for me," cried Eva, with the sweet docility
of one eager to be all that is lovable and wise in woman.

"Give us a list, and we will try to improve in the best way. You
know what we need, and love to help foolish girls, or you wouldn't
be so kind and patient with us," said Alice, going to sit beside
Carrie, hoping for much discussion of this, to her, very interesting
subject.

"I will, with pleasure; but I read few modern novels, so I may not
be a good judge there. Most of them seem very poor stuff, and I
cannot waste time even to skim them as some people do. I still like
the old-fashioned ones I read as a girl, though you would laugh at
them. Did any of you ever read 'Thaddeus of Warsaw'?"

"I have, and thought it very funny; so were 'Evelina' and 'Cecilia.'
I wanted to try Smollett and Fielding, after reading some fine
essays about them, but Papa told me I must wait," said Alice.

"Ah, my dears, in my day, Thaddeus was our hero, and we thought the
scene where he and Miss Beaufort are in the Park a most thrilling
one. Two fops ask Thaddeus where he got his boots, and he replies,
with withering dignity, 'Where I got my sword, gentlemen.' I
treasured the picture of that episode for a long time. Thaddeus
wears a hat as full of black plumes as a hearse, Hessian boots with
tassels, and leans over Mary, who languishes on the seat in a short-
waisted gown, limp scarf, poke bonnet, and large bag,--the height of
elegance then, but very funny now. Then William Wallace in 'Scottish
Chiefs.' Bless me! we cried over him as much as you do over your
'Heir of Clifton,' or whatever the boy's name is. You wouldn't get
through it, I fancy; and as for poor, dear, prosy Richardson, his
letter-writing heroines would bore you to death. Just imagine a
lover saying to a friend, 'I begged my angel to stay and sip one
dish of tea. She sipped one dish and flew.'"

"Now, I'm sure that's sillier than anything the Duchess ever wrote
with her five-o'clock teas and flirtations over plum-cake on lawns,"
cried Carrie, as they all laughed at the immortal Lovelace.

"I never read Richardson, but he couldn't be duller than Henry
James, with his everlasting stories, full of people who talk a great
deal and amount to nothing. _I_ like the older novels best, and
enjoy some of Scott's and Miss Edgeworth's better than Howells's, or
any of the modern realistic writers, with their elevators, and
paint-pots, and every-day people," said Alice, who wasted little
time on light literature.

"I'm glad to hear you say so, for I have an old-fashioned fancy that
I'd rather read about people as they were, for that is history, or
as they might and should be, for that helps us in our own efforts;
not as they are, for that we know, and are all sufficiently
commonplace ourselves, to be the better for a nobler and wider view
of life and men than any we are apt to get, so busy are we earning
daily bread, or running after fortune, honor or some other bubble.
But I mustn't lecture, or I shall bore you, and forget that I am
your hostess, whose duty it is to amuse."

As Mrs. Warburton paused, Carrie, anxious to change the subject,
said, with her eyes on a curious jewel which the old lady wore, "I
also like true stories, and you promised to tell us about that
lovely pin some day. This is just the time for it,--please do."

"With pleasure, for the little romance is quite apropos to our
present chat. It is a very simple tale, and rather sad, but it had a
great influence on my life, and this brooch is very dear to me."

As Mrs. Warburton sat silent a moment, the girls all looked with
interest at the quaint pin which clasped the soft folds of muslin
over the black silk dress which was as becoming to the still
handsome woman as the cap on her white hair and the winter roses in
her cheeks. The ornament was in the shape of a pansy; its purple
leaves were of amethyst, the yellow of topaz, and in the middle lay
a diamond drop of dew. Several letters were delicately cut on its
golden stem, and a guard pin showed how much its wearer valued it.

"My sister Lucretia was a good deal older than I, for the three boys
came between," began Mrs. Warburton, still gazing at the fire, as if
from its ashes the past rose up bright and warm again. "She was a
very lovely and superior girl, and I looked up to her with wonder as
well as adoration. Others did the same, and at eighteen she was
engaged to a charming man, who would have made his mark had he
lived. She was too young to marry then, and Frank Lyman had a fine
opening to practise his profession at the South. So they parted for
two years, and it was then that he gave her the brooch, saying to
her, as she whispered how lonely she should be without him, 'This
PENSEE is a happy, faithful THOUGHT of me. Wear it, dearest girl,
and don't pine while we are separated. Read and study, write much to
me, and remember, "They never are alone that are accompanied with
noble thoughts."'"

"Wasn't that sweet?" cried Eva, pleased with the beginning of the
tale.

"So romantic!" added Carrie, recalling the "amber amulet" one of her
pet heroes wore for years, and died kissing, after he had killed
some fifty Arabs in the desert.

"Did she read and study?" asked Alice, with a soft color in her
cheek, and eager eyes, for a budding romance was folded away in the
depths of her maidenly heart, and she liked a love story.

"I'll tell you what she did, for it was rather remarkable at that
day, when girls had little schooling, and picked up accomplishments
as they could. The first winter she read and studied at home, and
wrote much to Mr. Lyman. I have their letters now, and very fine
ones they are, though they would seem old-fashioned to you young
things. Curious love letters,--full of advice, the discussion of
books, report of progress, glad praise, modest gratitude, happy
plans. and a faithful affection that never wavered, though Lucretia
was beautiful and much admired, and the dear fellow a great favorite
among the brilliant Southern women.

"The second spring, Lucretia, anxious to waste no time, and
ambitious to surprise Lyman decided to go and study with old Dr.
Gardener at Portland. He fitted young men for college, was a friend
of our father's, and had a daughter who was a very wise and
accomplished woman. That was a very happy summer, and Lu got on so
well that she begged to stay all winter. It was a rare chance, for
there were no colleges for girls then, and very few advantages to be
had, and the dear creature burned to improve every faculty, that she
might be more worthy of her lover. She fitted herself for college
with the youths there, and did wonders; for love sharpened her wits,
and the thought of that happy meeting spurred her on to untiring
exertion. Lyman was expected in May, and the wedding was to be in
June; but, alas for the poor girl! the yellow-fever came, and he was
one of the first victims. They never met again, and nothing was left
her of all that happy time but his letters, his library, and the
pansy."

Mrs. Warburton paused to wipe a few quiet tears from her eyes, while
the girls sat in sympathetic silence.

"We thought it would kill her, that sudden change from love, hope,
and happiness to sorrow, death, and solitude. But hearts don't
break, my dears, if they know where to go for strength. Lucretia
did, and after the first shock was over found comfort in her books,
saying, with a brave, bright look, and the sweetest resignation, 'I
must go on trying to be more worthy of him, for we shall meet again
in God's good time and he shall see that I do not forget.'

"That was better than tears and lamentation, and the long years that
followed were beautiful and busy ones, full of dutiful care for us
at home after our mother died, of interest in all the good works of
her time, and a steady, quiet effort to improve every faculty of her
fine mind, till she was felt to be one of the noblest women in our
city. Her influence was wide-spread; all the intelligent people
sought her, and when she travelled she was welcome everywhere, for
cultivated persons have a free-masonry of their own, and are
recognized at once."

"Did she ever marry?" asked Carrie, feeling that no life could be
quite successful without that great event.

"Never. She felt herself a widow, and wore black to the day of her
death. Many men asked her hand, but she refused them all, and was
the sweetest 'old maid' ever seen,--cheerful and serene to the very
last, for she was ill a long time, and found her solace and stay
still in the beloved books. Even when she could no longer read them,
her memory supplied her with the mental food that kept her soul
strong while her body failed. It was wonderful to see and hear her
repeating fine lines, heroic sayings, and comforting psalms through
the weary nights when no sleep would come, making friends and
helpers of the poets, philosophers, and saints whom she knew and
loved so well. It made death beautiful, and taught me how victorious
an immortal soul can be over the ills that vex our mortal flesh.

"She died at dawn on Easter Sunday, after a quiet night, when she
had given me her little legacy of letters, books, and the one jewel
she had always worn, repeating her lover's words to comfort me. I
had read the Commendatory Prayer, and as I finished she whispered,
with a look of perfect peace, 'Shut the book, dear, I need study no
more; I have hoped and believed, now I shall know;' and so went
happily away to meet her lover after patient waiting."

The sigh of the wind was the only sound that broke the silence till
the quiet voice went on again, as if it loved to tell the story, for
the thought of soon seeing the beloved sister took the sadness from
the memory of the past.

"I also found my solace in books, for I was very lonely when she was
gone, my father being dead, the brothers married, and home desolate.
I took to study and reading as a congenial employment, feeling no
inclination to marry, and for many years was quite contented among
my books. But in trying to follow in dear Lucretia's footsteps, I
unconsciously fitted myself for the great honor and happiness of my
life, and curiously enough I owed it to a book."

Mrs. Warburton smiled as she took up a shabby little volume from the
table where Alice had laid it, and, quick to divine another romance,
Eva said, like a story-loving child, "Do tell about it! The other
was so sad."

"This begins merrily, and has a wedding in it, as young girls think
all tales should. Well, when I was about thirty-five, I was invited
to join a party of friends on a trip to Canada, that being the
favorite jaunt in my young days. I'd been studying hard for some
years, and needed rest, so I was glad to go. As a good book for an
excursion, I took this Wordsworth in my bag. It is full of fine
passages, you know, and I loved it, for it was one of the books
given to Lucretia by her lover. We had a charming time, and were on
our way to Quebec when my little adventure happened. I was in
raptures over the grand St. Lawrence as we steamed slowly from
Montreal that lovely summer day. I could not read, but sat on the
upper deck, feasting my eyes and dreaming dreams as even staid
maiden ladies will when out on a holiday. Suddenly I caught the
sound of voices in earnest discussion on the lower deck, and,
glancing down, saw several gentlemen leaning against the rail as
they talked over certain events of great public interest at that
moment. I knew that a party of distinguished persons were on
board, as my friend's husband, Dr. Tracy, knew some of them, and
pointed out Mr. Warburton as one of the rising scientific men of the
day. I remembered that my sister had met him years ago, and much
admired him both for his own gifts and because he had known Lyman.
As other people were listening, I felt no delicacy about doing the
same, for the conversation was an eloquent one, and well worth
catching. So interested did I become that I forgot the great rafts
floating by, the picturesque shores, the splendid river, and leaned
nearer and nearer that no word might be lost, till my book slid out
of my lap and fell straight down upon the head of one of the
gentlemen, giving him a smart blow, and knocking his hat overboard."

"Oh, what DID you do?" cried the girls, much amused at this
unromantic catastrophe.

Mrs. Warburton clasped her hands dramatically, as her eyes twinkled
and a pretty color came into her cheeks at the memory of that
exciting moment.

"My dears, I could have dropped with mortification! What COULD I do
but dodge and peep as I waited to see the end of this most untoward
accident? Fortunately I was alone on that side of the deck, so none
of the ladies saw my mishap and, slipping along the seat to a
distant corner, I hid my face behind a convenient newspaper, as I
watched the little flurry of fishing up the hat by a man in a boat
near by, and the merriment of the gentlemen over this assault of
William Wordsworth upon Samuel Warburton. The poor book passed from
hand to hand, and many jokes were made upon the 'fair Helen' whose
name was written on the paper cover which projected it.

"'I knew a Miss Harper once,--a lovely woman, but her name was not
Helen, and she is dead,--God bless her!' I heard Mr. Warburton say,
as he flapped his straw hat to dry it, and rubbed his head, which
fortunately was well covered with thick gray hair at that time.

"I longed to go down and tell him who I was, but I had not the
courage to face all those men. It really was MOST embarrassing; so I
waited for a more private moment to claim my book, as I knew we
should not land till night, so there was no danger of losing it.

"'This is rather unusual stuff for a woman to be reading. Some
literary lady doubtless. Better look her up, Warburton. You'll know
her by the color of her stockings when she comes down to lunch,'
said a jolly old gentlenoan, in a tone that made me 'rouge high,' as
Evelina says.

"'I shall know her by her intelligent face and conversation, if this
book belongs to a lady. It will be an honor and a pleasure to meet a
woman who enjoys Wordsworth, for in my opinion he is one of our
truest poets,' answered Mr. Warburton, putting the book in his
pocket, with a look and a tone that were most respectful and
comforting to me just then.

"I hoped he would examine the volume, for Lucretia's and Lyman's
names were on the fly leaf, and that would be a delightful
introduction for me. So I said nothing and bided my time, feeling
rather foolish when we all filed in to lunch, and I saw the other
party glancing at the ladies at the table. Mr. Warburton's eye
paused a moment as it passed from Mrs. Tracy to me, and I fear I
blushed like a girl, my dears, for Samuel had very fine eyes, and I
remembered the stout gentleman's unseemly joke about the stockings.
Mine were white as snow, for I had a neat foot, and was fond of nice
hose and well-made shoes. I am so still, as you see." Here the old
lady displayed a small foot in a black silk stocking and delicate
slipper, with the artless pride a woman feels, at any age, in one of
her best points. The girls gratified her by a murmur of admiration,
and, decorously readjusting the folds of her gown, she went on with
the most romantic episode of her quiet life.

"I retired to my state-room after lunch to compose myself, and when
I emerged, in the cool of the afternoon, my first glance showed me
that the hour had come, for there on deck was Mr. Warburton, talking
to Mrs. Tracy, with my book in his hand. I hesitated a moment, for
in spite of my age I was rather shy, and really it was not an easy
thing to apologize to a strange gentle-man for dropping books on
his head and spoiling his hat. Men think so much of their hats you
know. I was spared embarrassment, however, for he saw me and came to
me at once, saying, in the most cordial manner, as he showed the
names on the fly leaf of my Wordsworth, 'I am sure we need no other
introduction but the names of these two dear friends of ours. I am
very glad to find that Miss Helen Harper is the little girl I saw
once or twice at your father's house some years ago, and to meet her
so pleasantly again.'

"That made everything easy and delightful, and when I had apologized
and been laughingly assured that he considered it rather an honor
than otherwise to be assaulted by so great a man, we fell to talking
of old times, and soon forgot that we were strangers. He was twenty
years older than I, but a handsome man, and a most interesting and
excellent one, as we all know. He had lost a young wife long ago,
and had lived for science ever since, but it had not made him dry,
or cold, or selfish. He was very young at heart for all his wisdom,
and enjoyed that holiday like a boy out of school. So did I, and
never dreamed that anything would come of it but a pleasant
friendship founded on our love for those now dead and gone. Dear me!
how strangely things turn out in this world of ours, and how the
dropping of that book changed my life! Well, that was our
introduction, and that first long conversation was followed by many
more equally charming, during the three weeks our parties were much
together, as both were taking the same trip, and Dr. Tracy was glad
to meet his old friend.

"I need not tell you how delightful such society was to me, nor how
surprised I was when, on the last day before we parted, Mr.
Warburton, who had answered many questions of mine during these long
chats of ours, asked me a very serious one, and I found that I could
answer it as he wished. It brought me great honor as well as
happiness. I fear I was not worthy of it, but I tried to be, and
felt a tender satisfaction in thinking that I owed it to dear
Lucretia, in part at least; for my effort to imitate her made me
fitter to become a wise man's wife, and thirty years of very sweet
companionship was my reward."

As she spoke, Mrs. Warburton bowed her head before the portrait of a
venerable old man which hung above the mantel-piece.

It was a pretty, old-fashioned expression of wifely pride and
womanly tenderness in the fine old lady, who forgot her own gifts,
and felt only humility and gratitude to the man who had found in her
a comrade in intellectual pursuits, as well as a helpmeet at home
and a gentle prop for his declining years.

The girls looked up with eyes full of something softer than mere
curiosity, and felt in their young hearts how precious and honorable
such a memory must be, how true and beautiful such a marriage was,
and how sweet wisdom might become when it went hand in hand with
love.

Alice spoke first, saying, as she touched the worn cover of the
little book with a new sort of respect, "Thank you very much!
Perhaps I ought not to have taken this from the corner shelves in
your sanctum? I wanted to find the rest of the lines Mr. Thornton
quoted last night, and didn't stop to ask leave."

"You are welcome, my love, for you know how to treat books. Yes,
those in that little case are my precious relics. I keep them all,
from my childish hymn-book to my great-grandfather's brass-bound
Bible, for by and by when I sit 'Looking towards Sunset,' as dear
Lydia Maria Child calls our last days, I shall lose my interest in
other books, and take comfort in these. At the end as at the
beginning of life we are all children again, and love the songs our
mothers sung us, and find the one true Book our best teacher as we
draw near to God."

As the reverent voice paused, a ray of sunshine broke through the
parting clouds, and shone full on the serene old face turned to meet
it, with a smile that welcomed the herald of a lovely sunset.

"The rain is over; there will be just time for a run in the garden
before dinner, girls. I must go and change my cap, for literary
ladies should not neglect to look well after the ways of their
household and keep themseves tidy, no matter how old they may be."
And with a nod Mrs. Warburton left them, wondering what the effect
of the conversation would be on the minds of her young guests.

Alice went away to the garden, thinking of Lucretia and her lover,
as she gathered flowers in the sunshine. Conscientious Eva took the
Life of Mary Somerville to her room, and read diligently for half an
hour, that no time might be lost in her new course of study, Carrie
sent Wanda and her finery up the chimney in a lively blaze, and, as
she watched the book burn, decided to take her blue and gold volume
of Tennyson with her on her next trip to Nahant, in case any
eligible learned or literary man's head should offer itself as a
shining mark. Since a good marriage was the end of life, why not
follow Mrs. Warburton's example, and make a really excellent one?

When they all met at dinner-time the old lady was pleased to see a
nosegay of fresh pansies in the bosoms of her three youngest guests,
and to hear Alice whisper, with grateful eyes,--

"We wear your flower to show you that we don't mean to forget the
lesson you so kindly gave us, and to fortify ourselves with 'noble
thoughts,' as you and she did."






WATER-LILIES





A PARTY of people, young and old, sat on the piazza of a seaside
hotel one summer morning, discussing plans for the day as they
waited for the mail.

"Hullo! here comes Christie Johnstone," exclaimed one of the young
men perched on the railing, who was poisoning the fresh air with the
sickly scent of a cigarette.

"So 'tis, with 'Flucker, the baddish boy,' in tow, as large as
life," added another, with a pleasant laugh as he turned to look.

The new-comers certainly looked somewhat like Charles Reade's
picturesque pair, and every one watched them with idle interest as
they drew nearer. A tall, robust girl of seventeen, with dark eyes
and hair, a fine color on her brown cheek, and vigor in every
movement, came up the rocky path from the beach with a basket of
lobsters on one arm, of fish on the other, and a wicker tray of
water-lilies on her head. The scarlet and silver of the fish
contrasted prettily with the dark blue of her rough dress, and the
pile of water flowers made a fitting crown for this bonny young
fish-wife. A sturdy lad of twelve came lurching after her in a pair
of very large rubber boots, with a dilapidated straw hat on the back
of his head and a pail on either arm.

Straight on went the girl, never turning head or eyes as she passed
the group on the piazza and vanished round the corner, though it was
evident that she heard the laugh the last speech produced, for the
color deepened in her cheeks and her step quickened. The boy,
however, returned the glances bent upon him, and answered the smiles
with such a cheerful grin that the youth with the cigarette called
out,--

"Good-morning, Skipper! Where do you hail from?"

"Island, yender," answered the boy, with a gesture of his thumb over
his shoulder.

"Oh, you are the lighthouse-keeper, are you?"

"No, I ain't; me and Gramper's fishermen now."

"Your name is Flucker Johnstone, and your sister's Christie, I
think?" added the youth, enjoying the amusement of the young ladies
about him.

"It's Sammy Bowen, and hern's Ruth."

"Have you got a Boaz over there for her?"

"No, we've got a devil-fish, a real whacker."

This unexpected reply produced a roar from the gentlemen, while the
boy grinned good-naturedly, though without the least idea what the
joke was. Pretty Miss Ellery, who had been told that she had "a
rippling laugh," rippled sweetly as she leaned over the railing to
ask,

"Are those lilies in your pails? I want some if they are for sale."

"Sister'll fetch 'em round when she's left the lobs. I ain't got
none; this is bait for them fellers." And, as if reminded of
business by the yells of several boys who had just caught sight of
him, Sammy abruptly weighed anchor and ran before the wind toward
the stable.

"Funny lot, these natives! Act as if they owned the place and are as
stupid as their own fish," said the youth in the white yachting
suit, as he flung away his cigarette end.

"Don't agree with you, Fred. I've known people of this sort all my
life and a finer set of honest, hardworking, independent men I never
met,--brave as lions and tender as women in spite of their rough
ways," answered the other young man, who wore blue flannel and had a
gold band on his cap.

"Sailors and soldiers always stand by one another; so of course you
see the best side of these fellows, Captain. The girls are fine
creatures, I grant you; but their good looks don't last long, more's
the pity!"

"Few women's would with the life they lead, so full of hard work,
suspense, and sorrow. No one knows till one is tried, how much
courage and faith it takes to keep young and happy when the men one
loves are on the great sea," said quiet, gray-haired lady, as she
laid her hand on the knee of the young man in blue with a look that
made him smile affectionately at her, with his own brown hand on
hers.

"Shouldn't wonder if Ben Bowen was laid up, since the girl brings
the fish. He's a fine old fellow. I've been to No Man's Land many a
time blue-fishing with him; must ask after him," said an elderly
gentleman who was pacing to and fro yearning for the morning papers.

"We might go over to the island and have a chowder-party or a
fish-fry some moonlight night. I haven't been here for several
years, but it used to be great fun, and I suppose we can do it now,"
suggested Miss Ellery with the laugh.

"By Jove, we will! And look up Christie; ask her when she comes
round," said Mr. Fred, the youthful dude, untwining his languid legs
as if the prospect put a little life into him.

"Of course we pay for any trouble we give; these people will do
anything for money," began Miss Ellery; but Captain John, as they
called the sailor, held up his hand with a warning, "Hush! she's
coming," as Ruth's weather-beaten brown hat turned the corner.

She paused a moment to drop the empty baskets, shake her skirts, and
put up a black braid that had fallen down; then, with the air of one
resolved to do a distasteful task as quickly as possible, she came
up the steps, held out the rough basket cover, and said in a clear
voice,--

"Would any of the ladies like some fresh lilies? Ten cents a bunch."

A murmur from the ladies expressed their admiration of the beautiful
flowers, and the gentlemen pressed forward to buy and present every
bunch with gallant haste. Ruth's eyes shone as the money fell into
her hand, and several voices begged her to bring more lilies while
they lasted.

"I didn't know the darlings would grow in salt water," said Miss
Ellery, as she fondly gazed upon the cluster Mr. Fred had just
offered her.

"They don't. There's a little fresh-water pond on our island, and
they grow there,--only place for miles round;" and Ruth looked at
the delicate girl in ruffled white lawn and a mull hat, with a
glance of mingled pity for her ignorance and admiration for her
beauty.

"How silly of me! I am SUCH a goose;" and Miss Ellery gurgled as she
hid her face behind her red parasol.

"Ask about the fish-fry," whispered Mr. Fred, putting his head
behind the rosy screen to assure the pretty creature that he didn't
know any better himself.

"Oh yes, I will!" and, quite consoled, Miss Ellery called out,
"Girl, will you tell me if we can have chower-parties on your rocks
as we used to a few seasons ago?"

"If you bring your own fish. Grandpa is sick and can't get 'em for
you."

"We will provide them, but who will cook them for us? It's such
horrid work."

"Any one can fry fish! I will if you want me to;" and Ruth half
smiled, remembering that this girl who shuddered at the idea of pork
and a hot frying-pan, used to eat as heartily as any one when the
crisp brown cunners were served up.

"Very good; then we'll engage you as cook, and come over to-night if
it's clear and our fishing prospers. Don't forget a dozen of the
finest lilies for this lady to-morrow morning. Pay you now, may not
be up;" and Mr. Fred dropped a bright silver dollar into the basket
with a patronizing air, intended to impress this rather too
independent young person with a proper sense of inferiority.

Ruth quietly shook the money out upon the door-mat, and said with a
sudden sparkle in her black eyes,--

"It's doubtful if I bring any more. Better wait till I do."

"I'm sorry your grandfather is sick. I'll come over and see him
by-and-by, and bring the papers if he would like some," said the
elderly gentleman as he came up with a friendly nod and real
interest in his face.

"Very much, thank you, sir. He is very feeble now;" and Ruth turned
with a bright smile to welcome kind Mr. Wallace, who had not
forgotten the old man.

"Christie has got a nice little temper of her own, and don't know
how to treat a fellow when he wants to do her a favor," growled Mr.
Fred, pocketing his dollar with a disgusted air.

"She appears to know how to treat a gentleman when HE offers one,"
answered Blue Jacket, with a twinkle of the eye as if he enjoyed the
other's discomfiture.

"Girls of that class always put on airs if they are the least bit
pretty,--so absurd!" said Miss Ellery, pulling up her long gloves as
she glanced at the brown arms of the fisher maiden.

"Girls of any class like to be treated with respect. Modesty in
linsey-woolsey is as sweet as in muslin, my dear, and should be even
more admired, according to my old-fashioned way of thinking," said
the gray-haired lady.

"Hear! hear!" murmured her sailor nephew with an approving nod.

It was evident that Ruth had heard also, as she turned to go, for
with a quick gesture she pulled three great lilies from her hat and
laid them on the old lady's lap, saying with a grateful look, "Thank
you, ma'am."

She had seen Miss Scott hand her bunch to a meek little governess
who had been forgotten, and this was all she had to offer in return
for the kindness which is so sweet to poor girls whose sensitive
pride gets often wounded by trifles like these.

She was going without her baskets when Captain John swung himself
over the railing, and ran after her with them. He touched his cap as
he met her, and was thanked with as bright a smile as that the elder
gentleman had received; for his respectful "Miss Bowen" pleased her
much after the rude "Girl!" and the money tossed to her as if she
were a beggar. When he came back the mail had arrived, and all
scattered at once,--Mr. Fred to spend the dollar in more cigarettes,
and Captain John to settle carefully in his button-hole the
water-lily Aunt Mary gave him, before both young men went off to
play tennis as if their bread depended on it.

As it bid fair to be a moonlight night, the party of a dozen young
people, with Miss Scott and Mr. Wallace to act as matron and admiral
of the fleet, set off to the Island about sunset. Fish in abundance
had been caught, and a picnic supper provided to be eaten on the
rocks when the proper time arrived. They found Sammy, in a clean
blue shirt and a hat less like a Feejee headpiece, willing to do the
honors of the Island, beaming like a freckled young merman as he
paddled out to pull up the boats.

"Fire's all ready for kindlin', and Ruth's slicin' the pertaters.
Hope them fish is cleaned?" he added with a face of deep anxiety;
for that weary task would fall to him if not already done, and the
thought desolated his boyish soul.

"All ready, Sam! Lend a hand with these baskets, and then steer for
the lighthouse; the ladies want to see that first," answered Captain
John, as he tossed a stray cookie into Sammy's mouth with a smile
that caused that youth to cleave to him like a burr all the evening.

The young people scattered over the rocks, and hastened to visit the
points of interest before dark. They climbed the lighthouse tower,
and paid Aunt Nabby and Grandpa a call at the weather-beaten little
house, where the old woman lent them a mammoth coffee-pot, and
promised that Ruth would "dish up them fish in good shape at eight
punctooal." Then they strolled away to see the fresh-water pond
where the lilies grew.

"How curious that such a thing should be here right in the middle of
the salt sea!" said one of the girls, as they stood looking at the
quiet pool while the tide dashed high upon the rocks all about them.

"Not more curious than how it is possible for anything so beautiful
and pure as one of those lilies to grow from the mud at the bottom
of the pond. The ugly yellow ones are not so out of place; but no
one cares for them, and they smell horridly," added another girl in
a reflective tone.

"Instinct sends the white lily straight up to the sun and air, and
the strong slender stem anchors it to the rich earth below, out of
which it has power to draw the nourishment that makes it so lovely
and keeps it spotless--unless slugs and flies and boys spoil it,"
added Miss Scott as she watched Mr, Fred poke and splash with his
cane after a half-closed flower.

"The naughty things have all shut up and spoilt the pretty sight;
I'm so disappointed," sighed Miss Ellery, surveying the green buds
with great disfavor as she had planned to wear some in her hair and
act Undine.

"You must come early in the morning if you want to see them at their
best. I've read somewhere that when the sun first strikes them they
open rapidly, and it is a lovely sight. I shall try to see it some
day if I can get here in time," said Miss Scott.

"How romantic old maids are!" whispered one girl to another.

"So are young ones; hear what Floss Ellery is saying," answered the
other; and both giggled under their big hats as they caught these
words followed by the rippling laugh,--

"All flowers open and show their hearts when the sun shines on them
at the right moment."

"I wish human flowers would," murmured Mr. Fred; and then, as if
rather alarmed at his own remark, he added hastily, "I'll get that
big lily out there and MAKE it bloom for you."

Trusting to an old log that lay in the pond, he went to the end and
bent to pull in the half-shut flower; but this too ardent sun was
not to make it blossom, for his foot slipped and down he went up to
his knees in mud and water.

"Save him! oh, save him!" shrieked Miss Ellery, clutching Captain
John, who was laughing like a boy, while the other lads shouted and
the girls added their shrill merriment as poor Fred scrambled to the
shore a wreck of the gallant craft that had set sail in spotless
white.

"What the deuce shall I do?" he asked in a tone of despair as they
flocked about him to condole even while they laughed.

"Roll up your trousers and borrow Sam's boots. The old lady will dry
your shoes and socks while you are at supper, and have them ready to
wear home," suggested Captain John, who was used to duckings and
made light of them.

The word "supper" made one carnal-minded youth sniff the air and
announce that he smelt "something good;" and at once every one
turned toward the picnic ground, like chickens hurrying to the barn
at feeding-time. Fred vanished into the cottage, and the rest
gathered about the great fire of driftwood fast turning to clear
coals, over which Ruth was beginning her long hot task. She wore a
big apron, a red handkerchief over her head, had her sleeves rolled
up, and was so intent on her work that she merely nodded and smiled
as the new-comers greeted her with varying degrees of courtesy.

"She looks like a handsome gypsy, with her dark face and that red
thing in the firelight. I wish I could paint her," said Miss Scott,
who was very young at heart in spite of her fifty years and gray
head.

"So do I, but we can remember it. I do like to see a girl work with
a will, even at frying fish. Most of 'em dawdle so at the few things
they try to do. There's a piece of energy for you!" and Captain John
leaned forward from his rocky seat to watch Ruth, who just then
caught up the coffee-pot about to boil over, and with the other hand
saved her frying-pan from capsizing on its unsteady bed of coals.

"She is a nice girl, and I'm much interested in her. Mr. Wallace
says he will tell us her story by-and-by if we care to hear it. He
has known the old man a long time."

"Don't forget to remind him, Aunty. I like a yarn after mess;" and
Captain John went off to bring the first plate of fish to the dear
old lady who had been a mother to him for many years.

It was a merry supper, and the moon was up before it ended; for
everything "tasted so good" the hearty young appetites sharpened by
sea air were hard to satisfy. When the last cunner had vanished and
nothing but olives and oyster crackers remained, the party settled
on a sloping rock out of range of the fire, and reposed for a brief
period to recover from the exertions of the feast, having, like the
heroes in the old story, "eaten mightily for the space of an hour."

Mr. Fred in the capacious boots was a never-failing source of
amusement, and consequently somewhat subdued. But Miss Ellery
consoled him, and much food sustained him till his shoes were dry.
Ruth remained to clear up, and Sammy to gorge himself on the
remnants of "sweet cake" which he could not bear to see wasted. So,
when some one proposed telling stories till they were ready to sing,
Mr. Wallace was begged to begin.

"It is only something about this island, but you may like to hear it
just now," said the genial old gentleman, settling his handkerchief
over his bald head for fear of cold, and glancing at the attentive
young faces grouped about him in the moonlight.

"Some twenty years ago there was a wreck over there on those great
rocks; you fellows have heard about it, so I'll only say that a very
brave sailor, a native of the Port here, swam out with a rope and
saved a dozen men and women. I'll call him Sam. Well, one of the
women was an English governess, and when the lady she was with went
on her way after the wreck, this pretty girl (who by the way was a
good deal hurt trying to save the child she had in charge) was left
behind to recover, and--"

"Marry the brave sailor of course," cried one of the girls.

"Exactly! and a very happy pair they were. She had no family who
wanted her at home; her father had been a clergyman, I believe, and
she was well born, but Sam was a fine fellow and earned his living
honestly, fishing off the Banks, as half the men do here. Well, they
were very happy, had two children, and were saving up a bit, when
poor Sam and two brothers were lost in one of the great storms which
now and then make widows and orphans by the dozen. It killed the
wife; but Sam's father, who kept the lighthouse here then, took the
poor children and supported them for ten years. The boy was a mere
baby; the girl a fine creature, brave like her father, handsome like
her mother, and with a good deal of the lady about her, though every
one didn't find it out."

"Ahem!" cried the sharp girl, who began to understand the point of
the story now, but would not spoil it, as the others seemed still in
the dark, though Miss Scott was smiling, and Captain John staring
hard at the old gentleman in the blue silk nightcap.

"Got a fly in your throat?" asked a neighbor; but Kate only laughed
and begged pardon for interrupting.

"There's not much more; only that affair was rather romantic, and
one can't help wondering how the children turned out. Storms seem to
have been their doom, for in the terrible one we had two winters
ago, the old lighthouse keeper had a bad fall on the icy rocks, and
if it had not been for the girl, the light would have gone out and
more ships been lost on this dangerous point. The keeper's mate had
gone ashore and couldn't get back for two days, the gale raged so
fiercely; but he knew Ben could get on without him, as he had the
girl and boy over for a visit. In winter they lived with a friend
and went to school at the Port. It would have been all right if Ben
hadn't broken his ribs. But he was a stout old salt; so he told the
girl what to do, and she did it, while the boy waited on the sick
man. For two days and nights that brave creature lived in the tower,
that often rocked as if it would come down, while the sleet and snow
dimmed the lantern, and sea-birds were beaten to death against the
glass. But the light burned steadily, and people said, 'All is
well,' as ships steered away in time, when the clear light warned
them of danger, and grateful sailors blessed the hands that kept it
burning faithfully."

"I hope she got rewarded," cried an eager voice, as the story-teller
paused for breath.

"'I only did my duty; that is reward enough,' she said, when some of
the rich men at the Port heard of it and sent her money and thanks.
She took the money, however, for Ben had to give up the place, being
too lame to do the work. He earns his living by fishing now, and
puts away most of his pension for the children. He won't last long,
and then they must take care of themselves; for the old woman is no
relation, and the girl is too proud to hunt up the forgetful English
friends, if they have any. But I don't fear for her; a brave lass
like that will make her own way anywhere."

"Is that all?" asked several voices, as Mr. Wallace leaned back and
fanned himself with his hat.

"That's all of the first and second parts; the third is yet to come.
When I know it, I'll tell you; perhaps next summer, if we meet here
again."

"Then you know the girl? What is she doing now?" asked Miss Ellery,
who had lost a part of the story as she sat in a shadowy nook with
the pensive Fred.

"We all know her. She is washing a coffee-pot at this moment, I
believe;" and Mr. Wallace pointed to a figure on the beach,
energetically shaking a large tin article that shone in the
moonlight.

"Ruth? Really? How romantic and interesting!" exclaimed Miss Ellery,
who was just of the age, as were most of the other girls, to enjoy
tales of this sort and imagine sensational denouements.

"There is a great deal of untold romance in the lives of these
toilers of the sea, and I am sure this good girl will find her
reward for the care she takes of the old man and the boy. It costs
her something, I've discovered, for she wants an education, and
could get it if she left this poor place and lived for herself; but
she won't go, and works hard to get money for Grandpa's comfort,
instead of buying the books she longs for. I think, young ladies,
that there is real heroism in cheerfully selling lilies and frying
fish for duty's sake when one longs to be studying, and enjoying a
little of the youth that comes but once," said Mr. Wallace.

"Oh dear, yes, so nice of her! We might take up a contribution for
her when we get home. I'll head the paper with pleasure and give all
I can afford, for it must be so horrid to be ignorant at her age. I
dare say the poor thing can't even read; just fancy!" and Miss
Ellery clasped her hands with a sigh of pity.

"Very few girls can read fit to be heard now-a-days," murmured Miss
Scott.

"Don't let them affront her with their money; she will fling it in
their faces as she did that donkey's dollar. You see to her in your
nice, delicate way, Aunty, and give her a lift if she will let you,"
whispered Captain John in the old lady's ear.

"Don't waste your pity, Miss Florence. Ruth reads a newspaper better
than any woman I ever knew. I've heard her doing it to the old man,
getting through shipping news, money-market, and politics in fine
style. I wouldn't offer her money if I were you, though it is a kind
thought. These people have an honest pride in earning things for
themselves, and I respect them for it," added Mr. Wallace.

"Dear me! I should as soon think of a sand skipper having pride as
one of these fishy folks in this stupid little place," observed Mr.
Fred, moving his legs into the shadow as the creeping moonlight
began to reveal the hideous boots.

"Why not? I think they have more to be proud of, these brave,
honest, independent people, than many who never earn a cent and
swell round on the money their fathers made out of pork, rum,
or--any other rather unpleasant or disreputable business," said
Captain John, with the twinkle in his eye, as he changed the end of
his sentence, for the word "pickles" was on his lips when Aunt
Mary's quick touch checked it. Some saucy girl laughed, and Mr. Fred
squirmed, for it was well known that his respectable grandfather
whom he never mentioned had made his large fortune in a
pickle-factory.

"We all rise from the mud in one sense, and all may be handsome
flowers if we choose before we go back, after blooming, to ripen our
seeds at the bottom of the water where we began," said Miss Scott's
refined voice, sounding softly after the masculine ones.

"I like that idea! Thank you, Aunt Mary, for giving me such a pretty
fancy to add to my love for water-lilies. I shall remember it, and
try to be a lovely one, not a bit ashamed to own that I came from
honest farmer stock," exclaimed the thoughtful girl who had learned
to know and love the sweet, wise woman who was so motherly to all
girls.

"Hear! hear!" cried Captain John, heartily; for he was very proud of
his own brave name kept clean and bright through a long line of
sailor kin.

"Now let us sing or we shall have no time," suggested Miss Ellery,
who warbled as well as rippled, and did not wish to lose this
opportunity of singing certain sentimental songs appropriate to the
hour.

So they tuned their pipes and made "music in the air" for an hour,
to the great delight of Sammy, who joined in every song, and was
easily persuaded to give sundry nautical melodies in a shrill small
voice which convulsed his hearers with merriment.

"Ruth sings awful well, but she won't afore folks," he said, as he
paused after a roaring ditty.

"She will for me;" and Mr. Wallace went slowly up to the rock not
far away, where Ruth sat alone listening to the music as she rested
after her long day's work.

"Such airs!" said Miss Ellery, in a sharp tone; for her "Wind of the
Summer Night" had not gone well, owing to a too copious supper.
"Posing for Lorelei," she added, as Ruth began to sing, glad to
oblige the kind old gentleman. They expected some queer ballad or
droning hymn, and were surprised when a clear sweet voice gave them
"The Three Fishers" and "Mary on the Sands of Dee" with a simple
pathos that made real music-lovers thrill with pleasure, and filled
several pairs of eyes with tears.

"More, please, more!" called Captain John, as she paused; and as if
encouraged by the hearty applause her one gift excited, she sang on
as easily as a bird till her small store was exhausted.

"I call THAT music," said Miss Scott, as she wiped her eyes with a
sigh of satisfaction. "It comes from the heart and goes to the
heart, as it should. Now we don't want anything else, and had better
go home while the spell lasts."

Most of the party followed her example, and went to thank and say
good-night to Ruth, who felt as rich and happy as a queen with the
money Mr. Wallace had slipped into her pocket, and the pleasure
which even this short glimpse of a higher, happier life had brought
her hungry nature.

As the boats floated away, leaving her alone on the shore, she sent
her farewell ringing over the water in the words of the old song, "A
Life on the Ocean Wave;" and every one joined in it with a will,
especially Mr. Wallace and Captain John; and so the evening picnic
ended tunefully and pleasantly for all, and was long remembered by
several.

After that day many "good times" came to Ruth and Sammy; and even
poor old Grandpa had his share, finding the last summer of his life
very smooth sailing as he slowly drifted into port. It seemed quite
natural that Captain John, being a sailor, should like to go and
read and "yarn" with the old fisherman; so no one wondered when he
fell into the way of rowing over to the Island very often with his
pocket full of newspapers, and whiling away the long hours in the
little house as full of sea smells and salt breezes as a shell on
the shore.

Miss Scott also took a fancy to go with her nephew; for, being an
ardent botanist, she discovered that the Island possessed many
plants which she could not find on the rocky point of land where the
hotel and cottages stood. The fresh-water pond was her especial
delight, and it became a sort of joke to ask, when she came home
brown and beaming with her treasures in tin boxes, bottles, and
bunches,--

"Well, Aunt Mary, have you seen the water-lilies bloom yet?" and
she always answered with that wise smile of hers,--

"Not yet, but I'm biding my time, and am watching a very fine one
with especial interest. When the right moment comes, it will bloom
and show its golden heart to me, I hope."

Ruth never quite knew how it came about, but books seemed to find
their way to the Island and stay there, to her great delight. A
demand for lilies sprang up, and when their day was over
marsh-rosemary became the rage. Sammy found a market for all the
shells and gulls' wings he could furnish, and certain old
curiosities brought from many voyages were sold for sums which added
many comforts to the old sailor's last cruise.

Now the daily row to the Point was a pleasure, not a trial, to
Ruth,--for Mr. Wallace was always ready with a kind word or gift,
the ladies nodded as she passed, and asked how the old Skipper was
to-day; Miss Scott often told her to stop at the cottage for some
new book or a moment's chat on her way to the boat, and Captain John
helped Sammy with his fishing so much that the baskets were always
full when they came home.

All this help and friendliness put a wonderful energy and sweetness
into Ruth's hard life, and made her work seem light, her patient
waiting for freedom easier to bear cheerfully. She sang as she stood
over her wash-tub, cheered the long nights of watching with the
precious books, and found the few moments of rest that came to her
when the day's work was done very pleasant, as she sat on her rock,
watching the lights from the Point, catching the sound of gay music
as the young people danced, and thinking over the delightful talks
she had with Miss Scott. Perhaps the presence of a blue jacket in
Grandpa's little bedroom, the sight of a friendly brown face smiling
when she came in, and the sonorous murmur of a man's voice reading
aloud, added a charm to the girl's humdrum life. She was too
innocent and frank to deny that she enjoyed these new friends, and
welcomed both with the same eagerness, saw both go with the same
regret, and often wondered how she ever had got on without them.

But the modest fisher-maiden never dreamed of any warmer feeling
than kindness on the one side and gratitude on the other; and this
unconsciousness was her greatest charm, especially to Captain John,
who hated coquettes, and shunned the silly girls who wasted time in
idle flirtation when they had far better and wholesomer pastimes to
enjoy. The handsome sailor was a favorite, being handy at all sorts
of fun, and the oldest of the young men at the Point. He was very
courteous in his hearty way to every woman he met, from the
stateliest dowager to the dowdiest waiter-girl, but devoted himself
entirely to Aunt Mary, and seemed to have no eyes for younger fairer
faces.

"He must have a sweetheart over the sea somewhere," the damsels said
among themselves, as they watched him pace the long piazzas alone,
or saw him swinging in his hammock with eyes dreamily fixed on the
blue bay before him.

Miss Scott only smiled when curious questions were asked her, and
said she hoped John would find his mate some time, for he deserved
the best wife in the world, having been a good son and an honest boy
for six-and-twenty years.

"What is it, Captain,--a steamer?" asked Mr. Fred, as he came by the
cottage one August afternoon, with his usual escort of girls, all
talking at once about some very interesting affair.

"Only a sail-boat; no steamers to-day," answered Captain John,
dropping the glass from his eye with a start.

"Can you see people on the Island with that thing? We want to know
if Ruth is at home, because if she isn't we can't waste time going
over," said Miss Ellery, with her sweetest smile.

"I think not. That boat is Sammy's, and as there is a speck of red
aboard, I fancy Miss Ruth is with him. They are coming this way, so
you can hail them if you like," answered the sailor, with "a speck
of red" on his own sunburnt cheek if any one had cared to look.

"Then we'll wait here if we may. We ordered her to bring us a
quantity of bulrushes and flowers for our tableaux to-night, and we
want her to be Rebecca at the well. She is so dark, and with her
hair down, and gold bangles and scarlet shawls, I think she would do
nicely. It takes so long to arrange the 'Lily Maid of Astolat' we
MUST have an easy one to come just before that, and the boys are
wild to make a camel of themselves, so we planned this. Won't you be
Jacob or Abraham or whoever the man with the bracelets was?" asked
Miss Ellery, as they all settled on the steps in the free-and-easy
way which prevailed at the Point.

"No, thank you, I don't act. Used to dance hornpipes in my young
days, but gave up that sort of thing some time ago."

"How unfortunate! Every one acts; it's all the fashion," began Miss
Ellery, rolling up her blue eyes imploringly.

"So I see; but I never cared much for theatricals, I like natural
things better."

"How unkind you are! I quite depended on you for that, since you
wouldn't be a corsair."

"Fred's the man for such fun. He's going to startle the crowd with a
regular Captain Kidd rig, pistols and cutlasses enough for a whole
crew, and a terrific beard."

"I know Ruth won't do it, Floss, for she looked amazed when I showed
her my Undine costume, and told her what I wanted the sea-weed for.
'Why, you won't stand before all those folks dressed that way, will
you?' she said, "as much scandalized as if she'd never seen a
low-necked dress and silk stockings before;" and Miss Perry tossed
her head with an air of pity for a girl who could be surprised at
the display of a pretty neck and arms and ankles.

"We'll HIRE her, then; she's a mercenary wretch and will do anything
for money. I won't be scrambled into my boat in a hurry, and we MUST
have Rebecca because I've borrowed a fine pitcher and promised the
boys their camel," said Miss Ellery, who considered herself the
queen of the place and ruled like one, in virtue of being the
prettiest girl there and the richest.

"She has landed, I think, for the boat is off again to the wharf.
Better run down and help her with the bulrushes, Fred, and the rest
of the stuff you ordered," suggested Captain John, longing to go
himself but kept by his duty as host, Aunt Mary being asleep
upstairs.

"Too tired. Won't hurt her; she's used to work, and we mustn't
pamper her up, as old ladies say," answered Mr. Fred, enjoying his
favorite lounge on the grass.

"I wouldn't ask her to act, if you'll allow me to say so," said
Captain John, in his quiet way. "That sort of thing might unsettle
her and make her discontented. She steers that little craft over
there and is happy now; let her shape her own course, and remember
it isn't well to talk to the man at the wheel."

Miss Perry stared; Miss Ray, the sharp girl, nodded, and Miss Ellery
said petulantly,--

"As if it mattered what SHE thought or said or did! It's her place
to be useful if we want her, and we needn't worry about spoiling a
girl like that. She can't be any prouder or more saucy than she is,
and I shall ask her if only to see the airs she will put on."

As she spoke Ruth came up the sandy path from the beach laden with
rushes and weeds, sun-flowers and shells, looking warm and tired
but more picturesque than ever, in her blue gown and the red
handkerchief she wore since her old hat blew away. Seeing the party
on the cottage steps, she stopped to ask if the things were right,
and Miss Ellery at once made her request in a commanding tone which
caused Ruth to grow very straight and cool and sober all at once,
and answer decidedly,--

"I couldn't anyway."

"Why not?"

"Well, one reason is I don't think it's right to act things out of
the Bible just to show off and amuse folks."

"The idea of minding!" and Miss Ellery frowned, adding angrily, "We
will pay you for it. I find people will do anything for money down
here."

"We are poor and need it, and this is our best time to make it. I'd
do most anything to earn a little, but not that;" and Ruth looked as
proud as the young lady herself.

"Then we'll say no more if you are too elegant to do what WE don't
mind at all. I'll pay you for this stuff now, as I ordered it, and
you needn't bring me any more. How much do I owe you?" asked the
offended beauty, taking out her purse in a pet.

"Nothing. I'm gad to oblige the ladies if I can, for they have been
very kind to me. Perhaps if you knew why I want to earn money, you'd
understand me better. Grandpa can't last long, and I don't want the
town to bury him. I'm working and saving so he can be buried
decently, as he wants to be, not like a pauper."

There was something in Ruth's face and voice as she said this,
standing there shabby, tired, and heavy-laden, yet honest, dutiful
and patient for love's sake, that touched the hearts of those who
looked and listened; but she left no time for any answer, for with
the last word she went on quickly, as if to hide the tears that
dimmed her clear eyes and the quiver of her lips.

"Floss, how could you!" cried Miss Ray, and ran to take the sheaf of
bulrushes from Ruth's arms, followed by the rest, all ashamed and
repentant now that a word had shown them the hard life going on
beside their idle, care-free ones.

Captain John longed to follow, but walked into the house, growling
to himself with a grim look,--

"That girl has no more heart than a butterfly, and I'd like to see
her squirm on a pin! Poor Ruth! we'll settle that matter, and bury
old Ben like an admiral, hang me if we don't!"

He was so busy talking the affair over with Aunt Mary that he did
not see the girl flit by to wait for her boat on the beach, having
steadily refused the money offered her, though she accepted the
apologies in the kindest spirit.

The beach at this hour of the day was left to the nurses and maids
who bathed and gossiped while the little people played in the sand
or paddled in the sea. Several were splashing about, and one German
governess was scolding violently because while she was in the
bath-house her charge, a little girl of six, had rashly ventured out
in a flat-bottomed tub, as they called the small boats used by the
gentlemen to reach the yachts anchored in deep water.

Ruth saw the child's danger at a glance, for the tide was going out,
carrying the frail cockleshell rapidly away, while the child risked
an upset every moment by stretching her arms to the women on the
shore and calling them to help her.

None dared to try, but all stood and wrung their hands, screaming
like sea-gulls, till the girl, throwing off shoes and heavy skirt
plunged in, calling cheerily, "Sit still! I'll come and get you,
Milly!"

She could swim like a fish, but encumbered with her clothes and
weary with an unusually hard day's work, she soon found that she did
not gain as rapidly as she expected upon the receding boat. She did
not lose courage, but a thrill of anxiety shot through her as she
felt her breath grow short, her limbs heavy, and the tide sweep her
farther and farther from the shore.

"If they would only stop screaming and go for help, I could keep up
and push the boat in; but the child will be out presently and then
we are lost, for I can't get back with her, I'm afraid."

As these thoughts passed through her mind Ruth was swimming stoutly,
and trying by cheerful words to keep the frightened child from
risking their main chance of safety. A few more strokes and she
would reach the boat, rest a moment, then, clinging to it, push it
leisurely to shore. Feeling that the danger was over, she hurried on
and was just putting up her hands to seize the frail raft and get
her breath when Milly, thinking she was to be taken in her arms,
leaned forward. In rushed the water, down went the boat, and out
splashed the screaming child to cling to Ruth with the desperate
clutch she dreaded.

Both went under for a moment, but rose again; and with all her wits
sharpened by the peril of the moment, Ruth cried, as she kept
herself afloat,--

"On my back, quick! quick! Don't touch my arms; hold tight to my
hair, and keep still."

Not realizing all the danger, and full of faith in Ruth's power to
do anything, after the feats of diving and floating she had seen her
perform, Milly scrambled up as often before, and clung spluttering
and gasping to Ruth's strong shoulders. So burdened, and conscious
of fast-failing strength, Ruth turned toward the shore, and bent
every power of mind and body to her task. How far away it seemed!
how still the women were,--not one even venturing out a little way
to help her, and no man in sight! Her heart seemed to stop beating,
her temples throbbed, her breath was checked by the clinging arms,
and the child, seemed to grow heavier every moment.

"I'll do what I can, but, oh, why don't some one come?"

That was the last thought Ruth was conscious of, as she panted and
ploughed slowly back, with such a set white face and wide eyes fixed
on the flag that fluttered from the nearest cottage, that it was no
wonder the women grew still as they watched her. One good Catholic
nurse fell on her knees to pray; the maids cried, the governess
murmured, "Mein Gott, I am lost if the child go drowned!" and clear
and sweet came the sound of Captain John's whistle as he stood on
his piazza waiting to row Ruth home.

They were nearly in, a few more strokes and she could touch the
bottom, when suddenly all grew black before her eyes, and
whispering, "I'll float. Call, Milly, and don't mind me," Ruth
turned over, still holding the child fast, and with nothing but her
face out of water, feebly struggled on.

"Come and get me! She's going down! Oh, come, quick!" called the
child in a tone of such distress that the selfish German bestirred
herself at last, and began to wade cautiously in. Seeing help at
hand, brave little Milly soon let go, and struck out like an
energetic young frog, while Ruth, quite spent, sank quietly down,
with a dim sense that her last duty was done and rest had come.

The shrill cries of the women when they saw the steady white face
disappear and rise no more, reached Captain John's ear, and sent him
flying down the path, sure that some one was in danger.

"Ruth--gone down--out there!" was all he caught, as many voices
tried to tell the tale; and waiting for no more, he threw off hat
and coat, and dashed into the sea as if ready to search the Atlantic
till he found her.

She was safe in a moment, and pausing only to send one girl flying
for the doctor, he carried his streaming burden straight home to
Aunt Mary, who had her between blankets before a soul arrived, and
was rubbing for dear life while John fired up the spirit lamp for
hot brandy and water, with hands that trembled as he splashed about
like an agitated Newfoundland fresh from a swim.

Ruth was soon conscious, but too much exhausted to do or say
anything, and lay quietly suffering the discomforts of resuscitation
till she fell asleep.

"Is Milly safe?" was all she asked, and being assured that the child
was in her mother's arms, and Sammy had gone to tell Grandpa all
about it, she smiled and shut her eyes with a whispered, "Then it's
all right, thank God!"

All that evening Captain John paced the piazza, and warned away the
eager callers, who flocked down to ask about the heroine of the
hour; for she was more interesting than Undine, the Lily Maid, or
any of the pretty creatures attitudinizing behind the red curtains
in the hot hotel parlor. All that night Aunt Mary watched the deep
sleep that restored the girl, and now and then crept out to tell her
nephew there was nothing to fear for one so strong and healthful.
And all night Ruth dreamed strange dreams, some weird and dim, some
full of pain and fear; but as the fever of reaction passed away,
lovely visions of a happy place came to her, where faces she loved
were near, and rest, and all she longed for was hers at last. So
clear and beautiful was this dream that she waked in the early dawn
to lie and think of it, with such a look of peace upon her face that
Aunt Mary could not but kiss it tenderly when she came in to see if
all was well.

"How are you, dear? Has this nice long sleep set you up again as I
hoped?"

"Oh yes, I'm quite well, thank you, and I must go home. Grandpa will
worry so till he sees me," answered Ruth, sitting up with her wet
hair on her shoulders, and a little shiver of pain as she stretched
her tired arms.

"Not yet, my dear; rest another hour or two and have some breakfast.
Then, if you like, John shall take you home before any one comes to
plague you with idle questions. I'm not going to say a word, except
that I'm proud of my brave girl, and mean to take care of her if she
will let me."

With that and a motherly embrace, the old lady bustled away to stir
up her maid and wakt John from his first nap with the smell of
coffee. a most unromantic but satisfying perfume to all the weary
watchers in the house.

An hour later, dressed in Miss Scott's gray wrapper and rose-colored
shawl, Ruth came slowly to the beach leaning on Captain John's arm,
while Aunt Mary waved her napkin from the rocks above, and sent kind
messages after them as they pushed off.

It was the loveliest hour of all the day. The sun had not yet risen,
but sea and sky were rosy with the flush of dawn; the small waves
rippled up the sand, the wind blew fresh and fragrant from hayfields
far away, and in the grove the birds were singing, as they only sing
at peep of day. A still, soft, happy time before the work and worry
of the world began, the peaceful moment which is so precious to
those who have learned to love its balm and consecrate its beauty
with their prayers.

Ruth sat silent, looking about her as if she saw a new heaven and
earth, and had no words in which to tell the feeling that made her
eyes so soft, sent the fresh color back into her cheeks, and touched
her lips with something sweeter than a smile.

Captain John rowed very slowly, watching her with a new expression
in his face; and when she drew a long breath, a happy sort of sigh,
he leaned forward to ask, as if he knew what brought it,--

"You are glad to be alive, Ruth?"

"Oh, so glad! I didn't want to die; life's very pleasant now," she
answered, with her frank eyes meeting his so gratefully.

"Even though it's hard?"

"It's easier lately; you and dear Miss Mary have helped so much, I
see my way clear, and mean to go right on, real brave and cheerful,
sure I'll get my wish at last."

"So do I!" and Captain John laughed a queer, happy laugh, as he bent
to his oars again, with the look of a man who knew where he was
going and longed to get there as soon as possible.

"I hope you will. I wish I could help anyway to pay for all you've
done for me. I know you don't want to be thanked for fishing me up,
but I mean to do it all the same, if I can, some time;" and Ruth's
voice was full of tender energy as she looked down into the deep
green water where her life would have ended but for him.

"What did you think of when you went down so quietly? Those women
said you never called for help once."

"I had no breath to call. I knew you were near, I hoped you'd come,
and I thought of poor Grandpa and Sammy as I gave up and seemed to
go to sleep."

A very simple answer, but it made Captain John beam with delight;
and the morning red seemed to glow all over his brown face as he
rowed across the quiet bay, looking at Ruth sitting opposite, so
changed by the soft becoming colors of her dress, the late danger,
and the dreams that still lingered in her mind, making it hard to
feel that she was the same girl who went that way only a day ago.

Presently the Captain spoke again in a tone that was both eager and
anxious,--

"I'm glad my idle summer hasn't been quite wasted. It's over now,
and I'm off in a few days for a year's cruise, you know."

"Yes, Miss Mary told me you were going soon. I'll miss you both, but
maybe you'll come next year?"

"I will, please God!"

"So will I; for even if I get away this fall, I'd love to come again
in summer and rest a little while, no matter what I find to do."

"Come and stay with Aunt Mary if this home is gone. I shall want
Sammy next time. I've settled that with the Skipper, you know, and
I'll take good care of the little chap. He's not much younger than I
was when I shipped for my first voyage. You'll let him go?"

"Anywhere with you. He's set his heart on being a sailor, and
Grandpa likes it. All our men are, and I'd be one if I were a boy. I
love the sea so, I couldn't be happy long away from it."

"Even though it nearly drowned you?"

"Yes, I'd rather die that way than any other. But it was my fault; I
shouldn't have failed if I hadn't been so tired. I've often swum
farther; but I'd been three hours in the marsh getting those things
for the girls, and it was washing-day, and I'd been up nearly all
night with Grandpa; so don't blame the sea, please, Captain John."

"You should have called me; I was waiting for you, Ruth."

"I didn't know it. I'm used to doing things myself. It might have
been too late for Milly if I'd waited."

"Thank God, I wasn't too late for you."

The boat was at the shore now; and as he spoke Captain John held out
his hands to help Ruth down, for, encumbered with her long dress,
and still weak from past suffering, she could not spring to land as
she used to do in her short gown. For the first time the color
deepened in her cheek as she looked into the face before her and
read the meaning of the eyes that found her beautiful and dear, and
the lips that thanked God for her salvation so fervently.

She did not speak, but let him lift her down, draw her hand through
his arm, and lead her up the rocky slope to the little pool that lay
waiting for the sun's first rays to wake from its sleep. He paused
there, and with his hand on hers said quietly,--

"Ruth, before I go I want to tell you something, and this is a good
time and place. While Aunt Mary watched the flowers, I've watched
you, and found the girl I've always wanted for my wife. Modest and
brave, dutiful and true, that's what I love; could you give me all
this, dear, for the little I can offer, and next year sail with
Sammy and a very happy man if you say yes?"

"I'm not half good and wise enough for that! Remember what I am,"
began Ruth, bending her head as if the thought were more than she
could bear.

"I do remember, and I'm proud of it! Why, dear heart, I've worked my
way up from a common sailor, and am the better for it. Now I've got
my ship, and I want a mate to make a home for me aboard and ashore.
Look up and tell me that I didn't read those true eyes wrong."

Then Ruth lifted up her face, and the sunshine showed him all he
asked to know, as she answered with her heart in her voice and the
"true eyes" fixed on his,--

"I tried not to love you, knowing what a poor ignorant girl I am;
but you were so kind to me, how could I help it, John?"

That satisfied him, and he sealed his happy thanks on the innocent
lips none had kissed but the little brother, the old man, and the
fresh winds of the sea.

One can imagine the welcome they met at the small brown house, and
what went on inside as Grandpa blessed the lovers, and Sammy so
overflowed with joy at his enchanting prospects, that he was obliged
to vent his feelings in ecstatic jigs upon the beach, to the great
amazement of the gulls and sandpipers at breakfast there.

No one at the Point, except a certain dear old lady, knew the
pleasant secret, though many curious or friendly visitors went to
the Island that day to see the heroine and express their wonder,
thanks, and admiration. All agreed that partial drowning seemed to
suit the girl, for a new Ruth had risen like Venus from the sea. A
softer beauty was in her fresh face now, a gentler sort of pride
possessed her, and a still more modest shrinking from praise and
publicity became her well. No one guessed the cause, and she was
soon forgotten; for the season was over, the summer guests departed,
and the Point was left to the few cottagers who loved to linger into
golden September.

Miss Mary was one of these, and Captain John another; for he
remained as long as he dared, to make things comfortable for the old
man, and to sit among the rocks with Ruth when her day's work was
done, listening while his "Mermaid," as he called her, sang as she
had never sung before, and let him read the heart he had made his
own, for the lily was wide open now, and its gold all his.

With the first frosts Grandpa died, and was carried to his grave by
his old comrades, owing no man a cent, thanks to his dutiful
granddaughter and the new son she had given him. Then the little
house was deserted, and all winter Ruth was happy with Aunt Mary,
while Sammy studied bravely, and lived on dreams of the joys in
store for him when the Captain came sailing home again.

Another summer brought the happy day when the little brown house was
set in order for a sailor's honeymoon, when the flag floated gayly
over Miss Mary's cottage, and Ruth in a white gown with her chosen
flowers in her hair and bosom, shipped with her dear Captain for the
long cruise which had its storms and calms, but never any shipwreck
of the love that grew and blossomed with the water-lilies by the
sea.






POPPIES AND WHEAT





AS the great steamer swung round into the stream the cloud of white
handkerchiefs waving on the wharf melted away, the last good-byes
grew fainter, and those who went and those who stayed felt that the
parting was over,--

"It may be for years, and it may be forever,"

as the song says.

With only one of the many groups on the deck need we concern
ourselves, and a few words will introduce our fellow-travellers. A
brisk middle-aged lady leaned on the arm of a middle-aged gentleman
in spectacles, both wearing the calmly cheerful air of people used
to such scenes, and conscious only of the relief change of place
brings to active minds and busy lives.

Before them stood two girls, evidently their charges, and as
evidently not sisters, for in all respects they were a great
contrast. The younger was a gay creature of seventeen, in an
effective costume of navy-blue and white, with bright hair blowing
in the wind, sparkling eyes roving everywhere, lively tongue going,
and an air of girlish excitement pleasant to see. Both hands were
full of farewell bouquets, which she surveyed with more pride than
tenderness as she glanced at another group of girls less blessed
with floral offerings.

Her companion was a small, quiet person, some years older than
herself, very simply dressed, laden with wraps, and apparently
conscious just then of nothing but three dark specks on the wharf,
as she still waved her little white flag, and looked shoreward with
eyes too dim for seeing. A sweet, modest face it was, with
intelligent eyes, a firm mouth, and the look of one who had early
learned self-reliance and self-control.

The lady and gentleman watched the pair with interest and amusement;
for both liked young people, and were anxious to know these two
better, since they were to be their guides and guardians for six
months. Professor Homer was going abroad to look up certain
important facts for his great historical work, and as usual took his
wife with him; for they had no family, and the good lady was ready
to march to any quarter of the globe at short notice. Fearing to be
lonely while her husband pored over old papers in foreign libraries,
Mrs. Homer had invited Ethel Amory, a friend's daughter, to
accompany her. Of course the invitation was gladly accepted, for it
was a rare opportunity to travel in such company, and Ethel was wild
with delight at the idea. One thorn, however, vexed her, among
the roses with which her way seemed strewn. Mamma would not let her
take a French maid, but preferred a young lady as companion; for,
three being an awkward number, a fourth party would be not only
convenient, but necessary on the girl's account, since she was not
used to take care of herself and Mrs. Homer could only be expected
to act as chaperone.

"Jane Bassett is just the person I want, and Jane shall go. She
needs a change after teaching all these years; it will do her a
world of good, for she will improve and enjoy every moment, and the
salary I shall offer her will make it worth her while," said Mrs.
Amory, as she discussed the plan with her daughter.

"She is only three years older than I am, and I hate to be taken
care of, and watched, and fussed over. I can order a maid round, but
a companion is worse than a governess; such people are always
sensitive and proud, and hard to get on with. Every one takes a
maid, and I'd set my heart on that nice Marie who wants to go home,
and talks such lovely French. Do let me have her, Mamma!" begged
Ethel, who was a spoiled child and usually got her own way.

But for once Mamma stood firm, having a strong desire to benefit her
daughter by the society of better companions than the gay girls of
her own set, also to give a great pleasure to good little Jane
Bassett, who had been governessing ever since she was sixteen, with
very few vacations in her hard, dutiful life.

"No, darling, I have asked Jane, and if her mother can spare her,
Jane it shall be. She is just what you need,--sensible and kind,
intelligent and capable; not ashamed to do anything for you, and
able to teach you a great deal in a pleasant way. Mrs. Homer
approves of her, and I am sure you will be glad by-and-by; for
travelling is not all 'fun,' as you expect, and I don't want you to
be a burden on our friends. You two young things can take care of
each other while the Professor and his wife are busy with their own
affairs; and Jane is a far better companion for you than that
coquettish French woman, who will probably leave you in the lurch as
soon as you reach Paris. I shouldn't have a moment's peace if you
were left with her, but I have entire confidence in Jane Bassett
because she is faithful, discreet, and a true lady in all things."

There was no more to be said, and Ethel pouted in vain. Jane
accepted the place with joy; and after a month of delightful hurry
they were off, one all eagerness for the new world, the other full
of tender regret for the dear souls left behind. How they got on,
and what they learned, remains to be told.

"Come, Miss Bassett, we can't see them any longer, so we may as well
begin to enjoy ourselves. You might take those things down below,
and settle the stateroom a bit; I'm going to walk about and get my
bearings before lunch. You will find me somewhere round."

Ethel spoke with a little tone of command, having made up her mind
to be mistress and keep Jane Bassett in her place, though she did
know three languages and sketched much better than Miss Amory.

Jenny, as we who are going to be her bosom friends will call her,
nodded cheerfully, and looked about for the stairway; for, never
having been on a steamer before, she was rather bewildered.

"I'll show you the way, my dear. I always get my things settled at
once, as one never knows when one may have to turn in. The Professor
will go with you, Ethel; it is not proper for you to roam about
alone;" and with that hint Mrs. Homer led the way below, privately
wondering how these young persons were going to get on together.

Jane swallowed her "heimweh" in silence, and bestirred herself so
well that soon the stateroom looked very cosy with the wrappers laid
ready, the hanging bags tacked up, and all made ship-shape for the
ten days' trip.

"But where are YOUR comforts? You have given Ethel all the room, the
lower berth, and the best of everything," said Mrs. Homer, popping
in her head to see how her quiet neighbor got on.

"Oh, I live in my trunk; I didn't bring half as many little luxuries
as Ethel did, so I don't need as much room. I'm used to living in
corners like a mouse, and I get on very well," answered Jane,
looking very like a mouse just then, as she peeped out of the upper
berth, with her gray gown, bright eyes, and quick nod of
contentment.

"Well, my dear, I've just one word of advice to give you. Don't let
that child tyrannize over you. She means well, but is wilful and
thoughtless, and it is NOT your duty to be made a slave of. Assert
yourself and she will obey and respect you, and you will help her a
great deal. I know all about it; I was a companion in my youth, and
had a hard time of it till I revolted and took my proper place. Now
let us go up and enjoy the fine air while we can."

"Thank you, I will remember;" and Jane offered the good lady her
arm, with a feeling of gratitude for such friendliness, all being
new and strange to her, and many doubts of her own fitness for the
position lying heavy at her heart.

But soon all was forgotten as she sat on deck watching the islands,
lighthouses, ships, and shores glide by as she went swiftly out to
sea that bright June day. Here was the long-cherished desire of her
life come to pass at last, and now the parting with mother and
sisters was over, nothing but pleasure remained, and a very earnest
purpose to improve this unexpected opportunity to the uttermost.
The cares of life had begun early for little Jane, she being the
eldest of the three girls, and her mother a widow. First came hard
study, then a timid beginning as nursery governess; and as year by
year the teaching of others taught her, she ventured on till here
she was companion to a fine young lady "going abroad," where every
facility for acquiring languages, studying history, seeing the best
pictures, and enjoying good society would all be hers. No wonder the
quiet face under the modest gray hat beamed, as it turned wistfully
toward the unknown world before her, and that her thoughts were so
far away, she was quite unconscious of the kind eyes watching her,
as Mrs. Homer sat placidly knitting beside her.

"I shall like the Mouse, I'm quite sure. Hope Lemuel will be as well
satisfied. Ethel is charming when she chooses, but will need looking
after, that's plain," thought the lady as she glanced down the deck
to where her husband stood talking with several gentlemen, while his
charge was already making friends with the gay girls who were to be
her fellow-passengers.

"Daisy Millers, I fear," went on Mrs. Homer, who had a keen eye for
character, and was as fond of studying the people about her as the
Professor was of looking up dead statesmen, kings, and warriors. The
young ladies certainly bore some resemblance to the type of American
girl which one never fails to meet in travelling. They were dressed
in the height of the fashion, pretty with the delicate evanescent
beauty of too many of our girls, and all gifted with the loud
voices, shrill laughter, and free-and-easy manners which so astonish
decorous English matrons and maids. Ethel was evidently impressed
with their style, as they had a man and maid at their beck and call,
and every sign of ostentatious wealth about them. A stout papa, a
thin mamma, evidently worn out with the cares of the past winter,
three half-grown girls, and a lad of sixteen made up the party; and
a very lively one it was, as the Professor soon found, for he
presently bowed himself away, and left Ethel to her new friends,
since she smilingly refused to leave them.

"Ought I to go to her?" asked Jenny, waking from her happy reverie
to a sudden sense of duty as the gentleman sat down beside her.

"Oh dear, no, she is all right. Those are the Sibleys of New York.
Her father knows them, and she will find them a congenial refuge
when she tires of us quiet folk; and you too, perhaps?" added the
Professor as he glanced at the girl.

"I think not. I should not be welcome to them, nor are they the sort
of people I like. I shall be very happy with the 'quiet folk,' if
they won't let me be in the way," answered Jenny, in the cheerful
voice that reminded one of the chirp of a robin.

"We won't; we'll toss you overboard as soon as you begin to scream
and bounce in that style," he answered, laughing at the idea of this
demure young person's ever dreaming of such a thing. Jenny laughed
also, and ran to pick up Mrs. Homer's ball, as it set out for a roll
into the lee-scuppers. As she brought it back she found the
Professor examining the book she left behind her.

"Like all young travellers you cling to your 'Baedeker,' I see, even
in the first excitement of the start. He is a useful fellow, but I
know my Europe so well now, I don't need him."

"I thought it would be wise to read up our route a little, then I
needn't ask questions. They must be very tiresome to people who know
all about it," said Jenny, regarding him with an expression of deep
respect for she considered him a sort of walking encyclopaedia of
universal knowledge.

It pleased the learned man, who was kindly as well as wise, and
loved to let his knowledge overflow into any thirsty mind, however
small the cup might be. He liked the intelligent face before him,
and a timid question or two set him off on his favorite hobby at a
pleasant amble, with Jenny on the pillion behind, as it were. She
enjoyed it immensely, and was deep in French history, when the lunch
gong recalled her from Francis I. and his sister Margaret to chops
and English ale.

Ethel came prancing back to her own party, full of praises of the
Sibleys, and the fun they meant to have together.

"They are going to the Langham; so we shall be able to go about with
them, and they know all the best shops, and some lords and ladies,
and expect to be in Paris when we are, and that will be a great help
with our dresses and things."

"But we are not going to shop and have new dresses till we are on
our way home, you know. Now we haven't time for such things, and
can't trouble the Homers with more trunks," answered Jenny, as they
followed their elders to the table.

"I shall buy what I like, and have ten trunks if it suits me. I'm
not going to poke round over old books and ruins, and live in a
travelling-dress all the time. You can do as you like; it's
different with me, and _I_ know what is proper."

With which naughty speech Ethel took her seat first at the table,
and began to nod and smile at the Sibleys opposite. Jenny set her
lips and made no answer, but ate her lunch with what appetite she
could, trying to forget her troubles in listening to the chat going
on around her.

All that afternoon Ethel left her to herself, and enjoyed the more
congenial society of the new acquaintances. Jenny was tired, and
glad to read and dream in the comfortable seat Mrs. Homer left her
when she went for her nap.

By sunset the sea grew rough and people began to vanish below. There
were many empty places at dinner-time, and those who appeared seemed
to have lost their appetites suddenly. The Homers were, good
sailors, but Jenny looked pale, and Ethel said her head ached,
though both kept up bravely till nine o'clock, when the Sibleys
precipitately retired after supper, and Ethel thought she might as
well go to bed early to be ready for another pleasant day to-morrow.

Jenny had a bad night, but disturbed no one. Ethel slept soundly,
and sprang up in the morning, eager to be the first on deck. But a
sudden lurch sent her and her hair-brush into a corner: and when she
rose, everything in the stateroom seemed to be turning somersaults,
while a deathly faintness crept over her.

"Oh, wake up, Jane! We are sinking! What is it? Help me, help me!"
and with a dismal wail Ethel tumbled into her berth in the first
anguish of seasickness.

We will draw the curtain for three days, during which rough weather
and general despair reigned. Mrs. Homer took care of the girls till
Jenny was able to sit up and amuse Ethel; but the latter had a hard
time of it, for a series of farewell lunches had left her in a bad
state for a sea-voyage, and the poor girl could not lift her head
for days. The new-made friends did not trouble themselves about her
after a call of condolence, but faithful Jenny sat by her hour after
hour, reading and talking by day, singing her to sleep at night, and
often creeping from her bed on the sofa to light her little candle
and see that her charge was warmly covered and quite comfortable.
Ethel was used to being petted, so she was not very grateful; but
she felt the watchful care about her, and thought Jane almost as
handy a person as a maid, and told her so.

Jenny thanked her and said nothing of her own discomforts; but Mrs.
Homer saw them, and wrote to Mrs. Amory that so far the companion
was doing admirably and all that could be desired. A few days later
she added more commendations to the journal-letters she kept for the
anxious mothers at home, and this serio-comical event was the cause
of her fresh praises.

The occupants of the deck staterooms were wakened in the middle of
the night by a crash and a cry, and starting up found that the
engines were still, and something was evidently the matter
somewhere. A momentary panic took place; ladies screamed, children
cried, and gentlemen in queer costumes burst out of their rooms,
excitedly demanding, "What is the matter?"

As no lamps are allowed in the rooms at night, darkness added to the
alarm, and it was some time before the real state of the case was
known. Mrs. Homer went at once to the frightened girls, and found
Ethel clinging to Jenny, who was trying to find the life-preservers
lashed to the wall.

"We've struck! Don't leave me! Let us die together! Oh, why did I
come? why did I come?" she wailed; while the other girl answered
with a brave attempt at cheerfulness, as she put over Ethel's head
the only life-preserver she could find,--.

"I will! I will! Be calm, dear! I guess there is no immediate
danger. Hold fast to this while I try to find something warm for you
to put on."

In a moment Jenny's candle shone like a star of hope in the gloom,
and by the time the three had got into wrappers and shawls, a peal
of laughter from the Professor assured them that the danger could
not be great. Other sounds of merriment, as well as Mrs. Sibley's
voice scolding violently, was heard; and presently Mr. Homer came to
tell them to be calm, for the stoppage was only to cool the engines,
and the noise was occasioned by Joe Sibley's tumbling out of his
berth in a fit of nightmare caused by Welsh rarebits and poached
eggs at eleven at night.

Much relieved, and a little ashamed now of their fright, every one
subsided; but Ethel could not sleep, and clung to Jenny in an
hysterical state till a soft voice began to sing "Abide with me" so
sweetly that more than one agitated listener blessed the singer and
fell asleep before the comforting hymn ended.

Ethel was up next day, and lay on the Professor's bearskin rug on
deck, looking pale and interesting, while the Sibleys sat by her
talking over the exciting event of the night, to poor Joe's great
disgust. Jenny crept to her usual corner. and sat with a book on her
lap, quietly reviving in the fresh air till she was able to enjoy
the pleasant chat of the Homers, who established themselves near by
and took care of her, learning each day to love and respect the
faithful little soul who kept her worries to herself, and looked
brightly forward no matter how black the sky might be.

Only one other incident of the voyage need be told; but as that
marked a change in the relations between the two girls it is worth
recording.

As she prepared for bed late one evening, Mrs. Homer heard Jenny say
in a tone never used before,--

"My dear, I must say something to you or I shall not feel as if I
were doing my duty. I promised your mother that you should keep
early hours, as you are not very strong and excitement is bad for
you. Now, you WON'T come to bed at ten, as I ask you to every night,
but stay up playing cards or sitting on deck till nearly every one
but the Sibleys is gone. Mrs. Homer waits for us, and is tired, and
it is very rude to keep her up. Will you PLEASE do as you ought, and
not oblige me to say you must?"

Ethel was sleepy and cross, and answered pettishly, as she held out
her foot to have her boot unbuttoned,--for Jenny, anxious to please,
refused no service asked of her,--

"I shall do as I like, and you and Mrs. Homer needn't trouble
yourselves about me. Mamma wished me to have a good time, and I
shall! There is no harm in staying up to enjoy the moonlight, and
sing and tell stories. Mrs. Sibley knows what is proper better than
you do."

"I don't think she does, for she goes to bed and leaves the girls to
flirt with those officers in a way that I know is NOT proper,"
answered Jenny, firmly. "I should be very sorry to hear them say of
you as they did of the Sibley girls, 'They are a wild lot, but great
fun.'"

"Did they say that? How impertinent!" and Ethel bridled up like a
ruffled chicken, for she was not out yet, and had not lost the
modest instincts that so soon get blunted when a frivolous
fashionable life begins.

"I heard them, and I know that the well-bred people on board do not
like the Sibleys' noisy ways and bad manners. Now, you, my dear, are
young and unused to this sort of life; so you cannot be too careful
what you say and do, and with whom you go."

"Good gracious! any one would think YOU were as wise as Solomon and
as old as the hills. YOU are young, and YOU haven't travelled, and
don't know any more of the world than I do,--not so much of some
things; so you needn't preach."

"I'm not wise nor old, but I DO know more of the world than you, for
I began to take care of myself and earn my living at sixteen, and
four years of hard work have taught me a great deal. I am to watch
over you, and I intend to do it faithfully, no matter what you say,
nor how hard you make it for me; because I promised, and I shall
keep my word. We are not to trouble Mrs. Homer with our little
worries, but try to help each other and have a really good time. I
will do anything for you that I can, but I shall NOT let you do
things which I wouldn't allow my own sisters to do, and if you
refuse to mind me, I shall write to your mother and ask to go home.
My conscience won't let me take money and pleasure unless I earn
them and do my duty."

"Well, upon my word!" cried Ethel, much impressed by such a decided
speech from gentle Jane, and dismayed at the idea of being taken
home in disgrace.

"We won't talk any more now, because we may get angry and say what
we should be sorry for. I am sure you will see that I am right when
you think it over quietly. So good-night, dear."

"Good-night," was all the reply Ethel gave, and a long silence
followed.

Mrs. Homer could not help hearing as the staterooms were close
together, and the well-ventilated doors made all conversation
beyond a whisper audible.

"I didn't think Jane had the spirit to talk like that. She has taken
my hint and asserted herself, and I'm very glad, for Ethel must be
set right at once or we shall have no peace. She will respect and
obey Jane after this, or I shall be obliged to say MY word."

Mrs. Homer was right, and before her first nap set in she heard a
meek voice say,--

"Are you asleep, Miss Bassett?"

"No, dear."

"Then I want to say, I've thought it over. Please DON'T write to
mamma. I'll be good. I'm sorry I was rude to you; do forgive--"

The sentence was not ended, for a sudden rustle, a little sob, and
several hearty kisses plainly told that Jenny had flown to pardon,
comfort, and caress her naughty child, and that all was well.

After that Ethel's behavior was painfully decorous for the rest of
the voyage, which, fortunately for her good resolutions, ended at
Queenstown, much to her regret. The Homers thought a glimpse at
Ireland and Scotland would be good for the girls; and as the
Professor had business in Edinburgh this was the better route for
all parties. But Ethel longed for London, and refused to see any
beauty in the Lakes of Killarney, turned up her nose at
jaunting-cars, and pronounced Dublin a stupid place.

Scotland suited her better, and she could not help enjoying the fine
scenery with such companions as the Homers; for the Professor knew
all about the relics and ruins, and his wife had a memory richly
stored with the legends, poetry, and romance which make dull facts
memorable and history enchanting.

But Jenny's quiet rapture was pleasant to behold. She had not
scorned Scott's novels as old-fashioned, and she peopled the
cottages and castles with his heroes and heroines; she crooned
Burns's sweet songs to herself as she visited his haunts, and went
about in a happy sort of dream, with her head full of Highland Mary,
Tam o' Shanter, field-mice and daisies, or fought terrific battles
with Fitz-James and Marmion, and tried if "the light harebell" would
"raise its head, elastic from her airy tread," as it did from the
Lady of the Lake's famous foot.

Ethel told her she was "clean daft;" but Jenny said, "Let me enjoy
it while I can. I've dreamed of it so long I can hardly realize that
it has come, and I cannot lose a minute of it;" so she absorbed
Scotch poetry and romance with the mist and the keen air from the
moors, and bloomed like the bonnie heather which she loved to wear.

"What shall we do this rainy day in this stupid place?" said Ethel,
one morning when bad weather kept them from an excursion to Stirling
Castle.

"Write our journals and read up for the visit; then we shall know
all about the castle, and need not tire people with our questions,"
answered Jenny, already established in a deep window-seat of their
parlor at the hotel with her books and portfolio.

"I don't keep a journal, and I hate to read guide-books; it's much
easier to ask, though there is very little I care for about these
mouldy old places," said Ethel with a yawn, as she looked out into
the muddy street.

"How can you say so? Don't you care for poor Mary, and Prince
Charlie, and all the other sad and romantic memories that haunt the
country? Why, it seems as real to me as if it happened yesterday,
and I never can forget anything about the place or the people now.
Really, dear, I think you ought to take more interest and improve
this fine chance. Just see how helpful and lovely Mrs. Homer is,
with a quotation for every famous spot we see. It adds so much to
our pleasure, and makes her so interesting. I'm going to learn some
of the fine bits in this book of hers, and make them my own, since I
cannot buy the beautiful little set this Burns belongs to. Don't you
want to try it, and while away the dull day by hearing each other
recite and talking over the beautiful places we have seen?"

"No, thank you; no study for me. It is to be all play now. Why tire
my wits with that Scotch stuff when Mrs. Homer is here to do it for
me?" and lazy Ethel turned to the papers on the table for amusement
more to her taste.

"But we shouldn't think only of our own pleasure, you know. It is so
sweet to be able to teach, amuse, or help others in any way. I'm
glad to learn this new accomplishment, so that I may be to some one
by-and-by what dear Mrs. Homer is to us now, if I ever can. Didn't
you see how charmed those English people were at Holyrood when she
was reciting those fine lines to us? The old gentleman bowed and
thanked her, and the handsome lady called her 'a book of elegant
extracts.' I thought it was such a pretty and pleasant thing that I
described it all to mother and the girls."

"So it was; but did you know that the party was Lord Cumberland and
his family? The guide told me afterward. I never guessed they were
anybody, in such plain tweed gowns and thick boots; did you?"

"I knew they were ladies and gentlemen by their manners and
conversation; did you expect they would travel in coronets and
ermine mantles?" laughed Jenny.

"I'm not such a goose! But I'm glad we met them, because I can tell
the Sibleys of it. They think so much of titles, and brag about Lady
Watts Barclay, whose husband is only a brewer knighted. I shall buy
a plaid like the one the lord's daughter wore, and wave it in the
faces of those girls; they do put on SUCH airs because they have
been in Europe before."

Jenny was soon absorbed in her books; so Ethel curled herself up in
the window-seat with an illustrated London paper full of some royal
event, and silence reigned for an hour. Neither had seen the
Professor's glasses rise like two full moons above his paper now and
then to peep at them as they chatted at the other end of the room;
neither saw him smile as he made a memorandum in his note-book, nor
guessed how pleased he was at Jenny's girlish admiration of his
plain but accomplished and excellent wife. It was one of the trifles
which went to form his opinion of the two lasses, and in time to
suggest a plan which ended in great joy for one of them.

"Now the real fun begins, and I shall be perfectly contented," cried
Ethel as they rolled through the London streets towards the dingy
Langham Hotel, where Americans love to congregate.

Jenny's eyes were sparkling also, and she looked as if quite ready
for the new scenes and excitements which the famous old city
promised them, though she had private doubts as to whether anything
could be more delightful than Scotland.

The Sibleys were at the hotel; and the ladies of both parties at
once began a round of shopping and sightseeing, while the gentlemen
went about their more important affairs. Joe was detailed for escort
duty; and a fine time the poor lad had of it, trailing about with
seven ladies by day and packing them into two cabs at night for the
theatres and concerts they insisted on trying to enjoy in spite of
heat and weariness.

Mrs. Homer and Jenny were soon tired of this "whirl of gayety," as
they called it, and planned more quiet excursions with some hours
each day for rest and the writing and reading which all wise
tourists make a part of their duty and pleasure. Ethel rebelled, and
much preferred the "rabble," as Joe irreverently called his troop of
ladies, never losing her delight in Regent Street shops, the parks
at the fashionable hour, and the evening shows in full blast
everywhere during the season. She left the sober party whenever she
could escape, and with Mrs. Sibley as chaperone, frolicked about
with the gay girls to her heart's content. It troubled Jenny, and
made her feel as if she were not doing her duty; but Mrs. Homer
consoled her by the fact that a month was all they could give to
London, and soon the parties would separate, for the Sibleys were
bound for Paris, and the Professor for Switzerland and Germany,
through August and September.

So little Jane gave herself up to the pleasures she loved, and with
the new friends, whose kindness she tried to repay by every small
service in her power, spent happy days among the famous haunts they
knew so well, learning much and storing away all she saw and heard
for future profit and pleasure. A few samples of the different ways
in which our young travellers improved their opportunities will
sufficiently illustrate this new version of the gay grasshopper and
the thrifty ant.

When they visited Westminster Abbey, Ethel was soon tired of tombs
and chapels, and declared that the startling tableau of the skeleton
Death peeping out of the half-opened door of the tomb to throw his
dart at Mrs. Nightingale, and the ludicrous has-relief of some great
earl in full peer's robes and coronet being borne to heaven in the
arms of fat cherubs puffing under their load, were the only things
worth seeing.

Jenny sat spellbound in the Poets' Corner, listening while Mrs.
Homer named the illustrious dead around them; followed the verger
from chapel to chapel with intelligent interest as he told the story
of each historical or royal tomb, and gave up Madam Tussaud's
wax-work to spend several happy hours sketching the beautiful
cloisters in the Abbey to add to her collection of water-colors,
taken as she went from place to place, to serve as studies for her
pupils at home.

At the Tower she grew much excited over the tragic spots she visited
and the heroic tales she heard of the kings and queens, the noble
hearts and wise heads, that pined and perished there. Ethel "hated
horrors," she said, and cared only for the crown jewels, the faded
effigies in the armor gallery, and the queer Highlanders skirling on
the bagpipes in the courtyard.

At Kew Jenny revelled in the rare flowers, and was stricken with
amazement at the Victoria Regia, the royal water-lily, so large that
a child could sit on one of its vast leaves as on a green island.
Her interest and delight so touched the heart of the crusty keeper
that he gave her a nosegay of orchids, which excited the envy of
Ethel and the Sibley girls, who were of the party, but had soon
wearied of plants and gone off to order tea in Flora's Bower,--one
of the little cottages where visitors repose and refresh themselves
with weak tea and Bath buns in such tiny rooms that they have to put
their wraps in the fireplace or out of the window while they feast.

At the few parties to which they went,--for the Homers' friends were
of the grave, elderly sort,--Jenny sat in a corner taking notes of
the gay scene, while Ethel yawned. But the Mouse got many a crumb of
good conversation as she nestled close to Mrs. Homer, drinking in
the wise and witty chat that went on between the friends who came to
pay their respects to the Professor and his interesting wife. Each
night Jenny had new and famous names to add to the list in her
journal, and the artless pages were rich in anecdotes, descriptions,
and comments on the day's adventures.

But the gem of her London collection of experiences was found in a
most unexpected way, and not only gave her great pleasure, but made
the young gadabouts regard her with sudden respect as one come to
honor.

"Let me stay and wait upon you; I'd much rather than go to the
Crystal Palace, for I shouldn't enjoy it at all with you lying here
in pain and alone," said Jenny one lovely morning when the girls
came down ready for the promised excursion, to find Mrs. Homer laid
up with a nervous headache.

"No, dear, you can do nothing for me, thanks. Quiet is all I need,
and my only worry is that I am not able to write up my husband's
notes for him. I promised to have them ready last night, but was so
tired I could not do it," answered Mrs. Homer, as Jenny leaned over
her full of affectionate anxiety.

"Let me do them! I'd be so proud to help; and I can, for I did copy
some one day, and he said it was well done. Please let me; I should
enjoy a quiet morning here much better than the noisy party we shall
have, since the Sibleys are to go."

With some reluctance the invalid consented; and when the rest were
gone with hasty regrets, Jenny fell to work so briskly that in an
hour or two the task was done. She was looking wistfully out of the
window wondering where she could go alone, since Mrs. Homer was
asleep and no one needed her, when the Professor came in to see how
his wife was before he went to the British Museum to consult certain
famous books and parchments.

He was much pleased to find his notes in order, and after a glance
at the sleeping lady, told Jenny she was to come with him for a
visit to a place which SHE would enjoy, though most young people
thought it rather dull.

Away they went; and being given in charge to a pleasant old man,
Jenny roamed over the vast Museum where the wonders of the world are
collected, enjoying every moment, till Mr. Homer called her away, as
his day's work was done. It was late now, but she never thought of
time, and came smiling up from the Egyptian Hall ready for the lunch
the Professor proposed. They were just going out when a gentleman
met them, and recognizing the American stopped to greet him
cordially. Jenny's heart beat when she was presented to Mr.
Gladstone, and she listened with all her ears to the silvery
un-English voice, and stared with all her eyes at the weary yet wise
and friendly face of the famous man.

"I'm so glad! I wanted to see him very much, and I feel so grand to
think I've really had a bow and a smile all to myself from the
Premier of England," said Jenny in a flutter of girlish delight when
the brief interview was over.

"You shall go to the House of Commons with me and hear him speak
some day; then your cup will be full, since you have already seen
Browning, heard Irving, taken tea with Jean Ingelow, and caught a
glimpse of the royal family," said the Professor, enjoying her keen
interest in people and places.

"Oh, thanks! that will be splendid. I do love to see famous persons,
because it gives me a true picture of them, and adds to my desire to
know more of them, and admire their virtues or shun their faults."

"Yes, that sort of mental picture-gallery is a good thing to have,
and we will add as many fine portraits as we can. Now you shall ride
in a Hansom, and see how you like that."

Jenny was glad to do so, for ladies do not use these vehicles when
alone, and Ethel had put on great airs after a spin in one with Joe.
Jenny was girl enough to like to have her little adventures to boast
of, and that day she was to have another which eclipsed all that her
young companions ever knew.

A brisk drive, a cosy lunch at a famous chop-house where Johnson
had drunk oceans of tea, was followed by a stroll in the Park; for
the Professor liked his young comrade, and was grateful for the
well-written notes which helped on his work.

As they leaned against the railing to watch the splendid equipages
roll by, one that seemed well known, though only conspicuous by its
quiet elegance, stopped near them, and the elder of the two ladies
in it bowed and beckoned to Professor Homer. He hastened forward to
be kindly greeted and invited to drive along the Ladies' Mile.
Jenny's breath was nearly taken away when she was presented to the
Duchess of S--, and found herself sitting in a luxurious carriage
opposite her Grace and her companion, with a white-wigged coachman
perched aloft and two powdered footmen erect behind. Secretly
rejoicing that she had made herself especially nice for her trip
with the Professor, and remembering that young English girls are
expected to efface themselves in the company of their elders, she
sat mute and modest, stealing shy glances from under her hat-brim at
the great lady, who was talking in the simplest way with her guest
about his work, in which, as a member of one of the historical
houses of England, she took much interest. A few gracious words fell
to Jenny's share before they were set down at the door of the hotel,
to the great admiration of the porter, who recognized the liveries
and spread the news.

"This is a good sample of the way things go in Vanity Fair. We
trudge away to our daily work afoot, we treat ourselves to a humble
cab through the mud, pause in the park to watch the rich and great,
get whisked into a ducal carriage, and come home in state, feeling
rather exalted, don't we?" asked the Professor as they went
upstairs, and he observed the new air of dignity which Jane
unconsciously assumed as an obsequious waiter flew before to open
the door.

"I think we do," answered honest Jane, laughing as she caught the
twinkle of his eyes behind the spectacles. "I like splendor, and I
AM rather set up to think I've spoken to a live duchess; but I think
I like her beautiful old face and charming manners more than her
fine coach or great name. Why, she was much more simply dressed than
Mrs. Sibley, and talked as pleasantly as if she did not feel a bit
above us. Yet one couldn't forget that she was noble, and lived in a
very different world from ours."

"That is just it, my dear; she IS a noble woman in every sense of
the word, and has a right to her title. Her ancestors were
kingmakers, and she is Lady-in-waiting to the Queen; yet she leads
the charities of London, and is the friend of all who help the world
along. I'm glad you have met her, and seen so good a sample of a
true aristocrat. We Americans affect to scorn titles, but too many
of us hanker for them in secret, and bow before very poor imitations
of the real thing. Don't fill your journal with fine names, as some
much wiser folk do, but set down only the best, and remember, 'All
that glitters is not gold.'"

"I will, sir." And Jenny put away the little sermon side by side
with the little adventure, saying nothing of either till Mrs. Homer
spoke of it, having heard the story from her husband.

"How I wish I'd been there, instead of fagging round that great
palace full of rubbish! A real Duchess! Won't the Sibleys stare? We
shall hear no more of Lady Watts Barclay after this, I guess, and
you will be treated with great respect; see if you are not!" said
Ethel, much impressed with her companion's good fortune and eager to
tell it.

"If things of that sort affect them, their respect is not worth
having," answered Jane, quietly accepting the arm Ethel offered her
as they went to dinner,--a very unusual courtesy, the cause of which
she understood and smiled at.

Ethel looked as if she felt the reproof, but said nothing, only set
an example of greater civility to her companion, which the other
girls involuntarily followed, after they had heard of Jenny's
excursion with the Professor.

The change was very grateful to patient Jane, who had borne many
small slights in proud silence; but it was soon over, for the
parties separated, and our friends left the city far behind them, as
they crossed the channel, and sailed up the Rhine to Schwalbach,
where Mrs. Homer was to try the steel springs for her rheumatism
while the Professor rested after his London labors.

A charming journey, and several very happy weeks followed as the
girls roamed about the Little Brunnen, gay with people from all
parts of Europe, come to try the famous mineral waters, and rest
under the lindens.

Jenny found plenty to sketch here, and was busy all day booking
picturesque groups as they sat in the Allee Saal, doing pretty
woodland bits as they strolled among the hills, carefully copying
the arches and statues in St. Elizabeth's Chapel, or the queer old
houses in the Jews' Quarter of the town. Even the pigs went into the
portfolio, with the little swineherd blowing his horn in the morning
to summon each lazy porker from its sty to join the troop that
trotted away to eat acorns in the oak wood on the hill till sunset
called them home again.

Ethel's chief amusement was buying trinkets at the booths near the
Stahlbrunnen. A tempting display of pretty crystal, agate, and steel
jewelry was there, with French bonbons, Swiss carvings, German
embroidery and lace-work, and most delectable little portfolios of
views of fine scenery or illustrations of famous books. Ethel spent
much money here, and added so greatly to her store of souvenirs that
a new trunk was needed to hold the brittle treasures she accumulated
in spite of the advice given her to wait till she reached Paris,
where all could be bought much cheaper and packed safely for
transportation.

Jenny contented herself with a German book, Kaulbach's Goethe
Gallery, and a set of ornaments for each sister; the purple, pink,
and white crystals being cheap and pretty trinkets for young girls.
She felt very rich with her generous salary to draw upon when she
liked; but having made a list of proper gifts, she resisted
temptation and saved her money, remembering how much every penny was
needed at home.

Driving from the ruins of Hohenstein one lovely afternoon, the girls
got out to walk up a long hill, and amused themselves gathering
flowers by the way. When they took their places again, Ethel had a
great bouquet of scarlet poppies, Jenny a nosegay of blue
corn-flowers for Mrs. Homer, and a handful of green wheat for
herself.

"You look as if you had been gleaning," said the Professor, as he
watched the girls begin to trim their rough straw hats with the gay
coquelicots and the bearded ears.

"I feel as if I were doing that every day, sir, and gathering in a
great harvest of pleasure, if nothing else," answered Jenny, turning
her bright eyes full of gratitude from one kind face to the other.

"My poppies are much prettier than that stiff stuff. Why didn't you
get some?" asked Ethel, surveying her brilliant decoration with
great satisfaction.

"They don't last; but my wheat will, and only grow prettier as it
ripens in my hat," answered Jenny, contentedly settling the graceful
spires in the straw cord that bound the pointed crown.

"Then the kernels will all drop out and leave the husks; that won't
be nice, I'm sure," laughed Ethel.

"Well, some hungry bird will pick them up and be glad of them. The
husks will last a long time and remind me of this happy day; your
poppies are shedding their leaves already, and the odor is not
pleasant. I like my honest breadmaking wheat better than your opium
flowers," said Jenny, with her thoughtful smile, as she watched the
scarlet petals float away leaving the green seed-vessels bare.

"Oh, I shall get some artificial ones at my little milliner's, and
be fine as long as I like; so you are welcome to your useful,
bristly old wheat," said Ethel, rather nettled by the look that
passed between the elders.

Nothing more was said; but both girls remembered that little talk
long afterward, for those two wayside nosegays served to point the
moral of this little tale, if not to adorn it.

We have no space to tell all the pleasant wanderings of our
travellers as they went from one interesting place to another, till
they paused for a good rest at Geneva.

Here Ethel quite lost her head among the glittering display of
jewelry, and had to be watched lest she rashly spend her last penny.
They were obliged almost forcibly to carry her out of the enchanting
shops; and no one felt safe till she was either on the lake, or
driving to Chamouni, or asleep in her bed.

Jenny bought a watch, a very necessary thing for a teacher, and this
was the best place to get a good one. It was chosen with care and
much serious consultation with the Professor; and Mrs. Homer added a
little chain and seal, finding Jenny about to content herself with a
black cord.

"It is only a return for many daughterly services, my dear; and my
husband wishes me to offer these with thanks to the patient
secretary who has often helped him so willingly," she said, as she
came to wake Jenny with a kiss on the morning of her twenty-first
birthday.

A set of little volumes like those she had admired was the second
gift, and Jenny was much touched to be so kindly remembered. Ethel
gave her some thread lace which she had longed to buy for her mother
at Brussels, but did not, finding it as costly as beautiful. It was
a very happy day, though quietly spent sitting by the lake enjoying
the well-chosen extracts from Shakspeare, Wordsworth, Byron, Burns,
Scott, and other descriptive poets, and writing loving letters home,
proudly stamped with the little seal.

After that, while Ethel haunted the brilliant shops, read novels in
the hotel-garden, or listlessly followed the sight-seers, Jenny,
with the help of her valuable little library, her industrious
pencil, and her accomplished guides, laid up a store of precious
souvenirs as they visited the celebrated spots that lie like a
necklace of pearls around the lovely lake, with Mont Blanc as the
splendid opal that fitly clasps the chain. Calvin and Geneva,
Voltaire and Ferney, De Stael and Coppet, Gibbon's garden at
Lausanne, Byron's Prisoner at Chillon, Rousseau's chestnut grove at
Clarens, and all the legends, relics, and memories of Switzerland's
heroes, romancers, poets, and philosophers, were carefully studied,
recorded, and enjoyed; and when at last they steamed away toward
Paris, Jenny felt as if her head and her heart and one little trunk
held richer treasures than all the jewelry in Geneva.

At Lyons her second important purchase was made; for when they
visited one of the great manufactories to execute several
commissions given to Mrs. Homer, Jenny proudly bought a nice black
silk for her mother. This, with the delicate lace, would make the
dear woman presentable for many a day, and the good girl beamed with
satisfaction as she pictured the delight of all at home when this
splendid gift appeared to adorn the dear parent-bird, who never
cared how shabby she was if her young were well feathered.

It was a trial to Jenny, when they reached Paris, to spend day after
day shopping, talking to dressmakers, and driving in the Bois to
watch the elegant world on parade, when she longed to be living
through the French Revolution with Carlyle, copying the quaint
relics at Hotel Cluny, or revelling in the treasures of the Louvre.

"Why DO you want to study and poke all the time?" asked Ethel, as
they followed Mrs. Homer and a French acquaintance round the Palais
Royal one day with its brilliant shops, cafes, and crowds.

"My dream is to be able to take a place as teacher of German and
history in a girl's school next year. It is a fine chance, and I am
promised it if I am fitted; so I must work when I can to be ready.
That is why I like Versailles better than Rue de Rivoli, and enjoy
talking with Professor Homer about French kings and queens more than
I do buying mock diamonds and eating ices here," answered Jenny,
looking very tired of the glitter, noise, and dust of the gay place
when her heart was in the Conciergerie with poor Marie Antoinette,
or the Invalides, where lay the great Napoleon still guarded by his
faithful Frenchmen.

"What a dismal prospect! I should think you'd rather have a jolly
time while you could, and trust to luck for a place by-and-by, if
you must go on teaching," said Ethel, stopping to admire a window
full of distracting bonnets.

"No; it is a charming prospect to me, for I love to teach, and I
can't leave anything to luck. God helps those who help themselves,
mother says, and I want to give the girls an easier time than I have
had; so I shall get my tools ready, and fit myself to do good work
when the job comes to me," answered Jenny, with such a decided air
that the French lady glanced back at her, wondering if a quarrel was
going on between the demoiselles.

"What do you mean by tools?" asked Ethel, turning from the gay
bonnets to a ravishing display of bonbons in the next window.

"Professor Homer said one day that a well-stored mind was a
tool-chest with which one could carve one's way. Now, my tools are
knowledge, memory, taste, the power of imparting what I know, good
manners, sense, and--patience," added Jenny, with a sigh, as she
thought of the weary years spent in teaching little children the
alphabet.

Ethel took the sigh to herself, well knowing that she had been a
trial, especially of late, when she had insisted on Jane's company
because her own French was so imperfect as to be nearly useless,
though at home she had flattered herself that she knew a good deal.
Her own ignorance of many things had been unpleasantly impressed
upon her lately, for at Madame Dene's Pension there were several
agreeable English and French ladies, and much interesting
conversation went on at the table, which Jenny heartily enjoyed,
though she modestly said very little. But Ethel, longing to
distinguish herself before the quiet English girls, tried to talk
and often made sad mistakes because her head was a jumble of new
names and places, and her knowledge of all kinds very superficial.
Only the day before she had said in a patronizing tone to a French
lady,--

"Of course we remember our obligations to your Lamartine during our
Revolution, and the other brave Frenchmen who helped us."

"You mean Lafayette, dear," whispered Jenny quickly, as the lady
smiled and bowed bewildered by the queerly pronounced French, but
catching the poet's name.

"I know what I mean; you needn't trouble yourself to correct and
interrupt me when I'm talking," answered Ethel, in her pert way,
annoyed by a smile on the face of the girl opposite, and Jenny's
blush at her rudeness and ingratitude. She regretted both when Jane
explained the matter afterward, and wished that she had at once
corrected what would then have passed as a slip of the tongue. Now
it was too late; but she kept quiet and gave Miss Cholmondeley no
more chances to smile in that aggravatingly superior way, though it
was very natural, as she was a highly educated girl.

Thinking of this, and many other mistakes of her own from which Jane
tried to save her, Ethel felt a real remorse, and walked silently
on, wondering how she could reward this kind creature who had served
her so well and was so anxious to get on in her hard, humble way.
The orders were all given now, the shopping nearly done, and
Mademoiselle Campan, the elderly French lady who boarded at their
Pension, was always ready to jaunt about and be useful; so why not
give Jane a holiday, and let her grub and study for the little while
left them in Paris? In a fortnight Uncle Sam was to pick up the
girls and take them home, while the Homers went to Rome for the
winter. It would be well to take Miss Bassett back in a good humor,
so that her report would please Mamma, and appease Papa if he were
angry at the amount of money spent by his extravagant little
daughter. Ethel saw now, as one always does when it is too late to
repair damages, many things left undone which she ought to have
done, and regretted living for herself instead of putting more
pleasure into the life of this good girl, whose future seemed so
uninviting to our young lady with her first season very near.

It was a kind plan, and gratified Jenny very much when it was
proposed and proved to her that no duty would be neglected if she
went about with the Homers and left her charge to the excellent lady
who enjoyed chiffons as much as Ethel did, and was glad to receive
pretty gifts in return for her services.

But alas for Ethel's good resolutions and Jenny's well-earned
holiday! Both came to nothing, for Ethel fell ill from too much
pastry, and had a sharp bilious attack which laid her up till the
uncle arrived.

Every one was very kind, and there was no danger; but the days were
long, the invalid very fretful, and the nurse very tired, before the
second week brought convalescence and a general cheering and
clearing up took place. Uncle Sam was amusing himself very
comfortably while he waited for his niece to be able to travel, and
the girls were beginning to pack by degrees, for the accumulation of
Ethel's purchases made her share a serious task.

"There! All are in now, and only the steamer trunk is left to pack
at the last moment," said Jenny, folding her tired arms after a
protracted struggle with half a dozen new gowns, and a perplexing
medley of hats, boots, gloves, and perfumery. Two large trunks stood
in the ante-room ready to go; the third was now done, and nothing
remained but the small one and Jenny's shabby portmanteau.

"How nicely you have managed! I ought to have helped, only you
wouldn't let me and I should have spoilt my wrapper. Come and rest
and help me sort out this rubbish," said Ethel, who would have been
dressed and out if the arrival of a new peignoir had not kept her in
to enjoy the lovely pink and blue thing, all lace and ribbon and
French taste.

"You will never get them into that box, dear," answered Jenny,
gladly sitting down beside her on the sofa, which was strewn with
trinkets of all sorts, more or less damaged by careless handling,
and the vicissitudes of a wandering trunk.

"I don't believe they are worth fussing over. I'm tired of them, and
they look very mean and silly after seeing real jewels here. I'd
throw them away if I hadn't spent so much money on them," said
Ethel, turning over the tarnished filigree, mock pearl, and
imitation coral necklaces, bracelets, and brooches that were
tumbling out of the frail boxes in which they came.

"They will look pretty to people at home who have not been seeing so
many as we have. I'll sew up the broken cases, and rub up the
silver, and string the beads, and make all as good as new, and you
will find plenty of girls at home glad to get them, I am sure,"
answered Jenny, rapidly bringing order out of chaos with those
skilful hands of hers.

Ethel leaned back and watched her silently for a few minutes. During
this last week our young lady had been thinking a good deal, and was
conscious of a strong desire to tell Jane Bassett how much she loved
and thanked her for all her patient and faithful care during the six
months now nearly over. But she was proud, and humility was hard to
learn; self-will was sweet, and to own one's self in the wrong a
most distasteful task. The penitent did not know how to begin, so
waited for an opportunity, and presently it came.

"Shall you be glad to get home, Jenny?" she asked in her most
caressing tone, as she hung her prettiest locket round her friend's
neck; for during this illness all formality and coolness had melted
away, and "Miss Bassett" was "Jenny dear" now.

"I shall be very, very glad to see my precious people again, and
tell them all about my splendid holiday; but I can't help wishing
that we were to stay till spring, now that we are here, and I have
no teaching, and may never get such another chance. I'm afraid it
seems ungrateful when I've had so much; but to go back without
seeing Rome is a trial, I confess," answered honest Jane, rubbing
away at a very dull paste bandeau.

"So it is; but I don't mind so much, because I shall come again
by-and-by, and I mean to be better prepared to enjoy things properly
than I am now. I'll really study this winter, and not be such a
fool. Jenny, I've a plan in my head. I wonder if you'd like it? I
should immensely, and I'm going to propose it to Mamma the minute I
get home," said Ethel, glad to seize this opening.

"What is it, deary?"

"Would you like to be my governess and teach me all you know,
quietly, at home this winter? I don't want to begin school again
just for languages and a few finishing things, and I really think
you would do more for me than any one else, because you know what I
need, and are so patient with your bad, ungrateful, saucy girl.
Could you? would you come?" and Ethel put her arms round Jenny's
neck with a little sob and a kiss that was far more precious to Jane
than the famous diamond necklace of Marie Antoinette, which she had
been reading about.

"I could and I would with all my heart, if you want me, darling! I
think we know and love each other now, and can be happy and helpful
together, and I'll come so gladly if your mother asks me," answered
Jenny, quick to understand what underlay this sudden tenderness, and
glad to accept the atonement offered her for many trials which she
would never have told even to her own mother.

Ethel was her best self now, and her friend felt well rewarded for
the past by this promise of real love and mutual help in the future.
So they talked over the new plan in great spirits till Mrs. Homer
came to bring them their share of a packet of home letters just
arrived. She saw that something unusual was going on, but only
smiled, nodded, and went away saying,--

"I have good news in MY letters, and hope yours will make you
equally happy, girls."

Silence reigned for a time, as they sat reading busily; then a
sudden exclamation from Ethel seemed to produce a strange effect
upon Jenny, for with a cry of joy she sprang up and danced all over
the room, waving her letter wildly as she cried out,--

"I'm to go! I'm to go! I can't believe it--but here it is! How
kind, how very kind, every one is to me!" and down she went upon her
own little bed to hide her face and laugh and cry till Ethel ran to
rejoice with her.

"Oh, Jenny, I'm so glad! You deserve it, and it's like Mrs. Homer to
make all smooth before she said a word. Let me read what Mamma
writes to you. Here's my letter; see how sweetly she speaks of you,
and how grateful they are for all you've done for me."

The letters changed hands; and sitting side by side in an
affectionate bunch, the girls read the happy news that granted the
cherished wish of one and gave the other real unselfish pleasure in
another's happiness.

Jane was to go to Rome with the Homers for the winter, and perhaps
to Greece in the spring. A year of delight lay before her, offered
in such a friendly way, and with such words of commendation, thanks,
and welcome, that the girl's heart was full, and she felt that every
small sacrifice of feeling, every lonely hour, and distasteful duty
was richly repaid by this rare opportunity to enjoy still further
draughts of the wisdom, beauty, and poetry of the wonderful world
now open to her.

She flew off presently to try to thank her good friends, and came
back dragging a light new trunk, in which she nearly buried her
small self as she excitedly explained its appearance, while rattling
out the trays and displaying its many conveniences.

"That dear woman says I'm to send my presents home in the old one by
you, and take this to fill up in Rome. Think of it! A lovely new
French trunk, and Rome full of pictures, statues, St. Peter's, and
the Colosseum. It takes my breath away and makes my head spin."

"So I see. It's a capital box, but it won't hold even St. Peter's,
dear; so you'd better calm down and pack your treasures. I'll help,"
cried Ethel, sweeping about in her gay gown, almost as wild as Jane,
who was quite upset by this sudden delicious change in her
prospects.

How happily she laid away in the old trunk the few gifts she had
ventured to buy, and those given her,--the glossy silk, the dainty
lace, the pretty crystals, the store of gloves, the flask of
cologne, the pictures and books, and last of all the sketches which
illustrated the journal kept so carefully for those at home.

"Now, when my letter is written and the check with all that is left
of my salary put in, I am done. There's room for more, and I wish
I'd got something else, now I feel so rich. But it is foolish to buy
gowns to pay duties on, when I don't know what the girls need. I
feel so rich now, I shall fly out and pick up some more little
pretties for the dears. They have so few, anything will be charming
to them," said Jenny, proudly surveying her box, and looking about
for some foreign trifle with which to fill up the corners.

"Then let me put these in, and so be rid of them. I shall go to see
your people and tell them all about you, and explain how you came to
send so much rubbish."

As she spoke Ethel slipped in several Swiss carvings, the best of
the trinkets, and a parcel of dainty Parisian ties and sashes which
would gladden the hearts of the poor, pretty girls, just beginning
to need such aids to their modest toilets. A big box of bonbons
completed her contribution, and left but one empty corner.

"I'll tuck in my old hat to keep all steady; the girls will like it
when they dress up, and I'm fond of it, because it recalls some of
my happiest days," said Jenny, as she took up the well-worn hat and
began to dust it. A shower of grain dropped into her hand, for the
yellow wheat still kept its place and recalled the chat at
Schwalbach. Ethel glanced at her own hat with its faded artificial
flowers; and as her eye went from the small store of treasures so
carefully and happily gathered to the strew of almost useless finery
on her bed, she said soberly,--

"You were right, Jenny. My poppies are worthless, and my harvest a
very poor one. Your wheat fell in good ground, and you will glean a
whole stack before you go home. Well, I shall keep MY old hat to
remind me of you: and when I come again, I hope I shall have a wiser
head to put into a new one."






LITTLE BUTTON-ROSE





"If you please, I've come," said a small girl, as she walked into a
large room where three ladies sat at work.

One of the ladies was very thin, one very stout, and the youngest
very pretty. The eldest put on her glasses, the stout one dropped
her sewing, and the pretty one exclaimed,--

"Why, it must be little Rosamond!"

"Yes, I've come; the man is taking my trunk upstairs, and I've got a
letter for Cousin Penelope," said the child, with the sweet
composure of one always sure of a welcome.

The stout lady held out her hand for the letter; but the little
girl, after a keen look at the three faces, went to the old lady,
who received her with a kiss, saying,--

"That's right; but how did you know, dear?"

"Oh, Papa said Cousin Penny is old, Cousin Henny fat, and Cousin
Cicely rather pretty; so I knew in one minute," replied Rosamond, in
a tone of innocent satisfaction at her own cleverness, and quite
unconscious of the effect of her speech.

Miss Penelope hastily retired behind the letter. Miss Henrietta
frowned so heavily that the gold-rimmed eye-glasses flew off her
nose with a clash, and Cicely laughed outright, as she exclaimed,--

"I'm afraid we have got an enfant terrible among us, though I can't
complain of my share of the compliments."

"I never expected to find Clara's child well mannered, and I see I
was quite right. Take your hat off, Rosamond, and sit down. It tires
Sister to lean on her in that way," said Miss Henny in a severe
tone, with no offer of any warmer welcome.

Seeing that something was amiss, the child quietly obeyed, and
perching herself in an ancient arm-chair crossed her short legs,
folded her plump hands over the diminutive travelling-bag she
carried, and sat looking about the room with a pair of very large
blue eyes, quite unabashed, though rather pensive, as if the memory
of some tender parting were still fresh in her little heart.

While Miss Penny slowly reads the letter, Miss Henny works daisies
on a bit of canvas with pettish jerks of her silk, and Miss Cicely
leans in the sofa-corner, staring at the newcomer, we will briefly
introduce our small heroine. Her father was cousin to the elder
ladies, and being called suddenly across the water on business, took
his wife with him, leaving the little girl to the care of these
relatives, thinking her too young for so long a journey. Cicely, an
orphan niece who lived with the old ladies, was to have the care of
Rosy; and a summer in the quiet country town would do her good,
while change of scene would console her for this first separation
from her mother. How she fared remains to be seen; and we need only
add that the child had been well trained, made the companion of a
sweet and tender woman, and was very anxious to please the parents
whom she passionately loved, by keeping the promises she had made
them, and being "as brave as Papa, as patient and kind as dear
Mamma."

"Well, what do you think of it, Missy?" asked Cicely, as the blue
eyes came back to her, after roving round the spacious,
old-fashioned, and rather gloomy room.

"It's a pretty large, dark place for a little girl to be all alone
in;" and there was a suspicious quiver in the childish voice, as
Rosy opened her bag to produce a very small handkerchief, evidently
feeling that she might have sudden need of it if some one did not
speak to her very soon.

"We keep it dark on account of Sister's eyes. When _I_ was a little
girl, it wasn't considered polite to say rude things about other
people's houses, especially if they were very handsome ones," said
Miss Henny, with a stern glance over the eye-glasses at the young
offender, whose second remark was even more unfortunate than her
first.

"I didn't mean to be rude, but I MUST tell the truth. Little girls
like bright places. I'm sorry about Cousin Penny's eyes. I will read
to her; I do to Mamma, and she says it is very well for a child only
eight years old."

The gentle answer and the full eyes seemed to calm Miss Henny's
wrath, for her size was her tender point, and the old house her
especial pride; so she dropped the awe-inspiring glasses, and said
more kindly,--

"There is a nice little room ready for you upstairs, and a garden to
play in. Cicely will hear you read every day, and I will teach you
to sew, for of course that MOST useful part of your education has
been neglected."

"No, ma'am, I sew my four patches every day, and make little wee
stitches, and I can hem Papa's hank'chifs, and I was learning to
darn his socks with a big needle when--when they went away."

Rosy paused with a sudden choke; but too proud to break down, she
only wiped two drops off her cheek with the long ends of her little
gray silk glove, set her lips, and remained mistress of herself,
privately planning to cry all she liked when she was safely in the
"nice little room" promised her.

Cicely, though a lazy, selfish young lady, was touched by the
child's pathetic face, and said in a friendly tone, as she patted
the couch where she lay,--

"Come here, dear, and sit by me, and tell me what kind of a kitten
you'd like best. I know of a sweet yellow one, and two grays. Our
Tabby is too old to play with you; so you will want a kitty, I'm
sure."

"Oh yes, if I may!" and Rosy skipped to the new seat with a smile
which plainly proved that this sort of welcome was just what she
liked.

"Now, Cicely, why will you put such an idea into Rosamond's head
when you know we can't have kittens round the house for Sister to
stumble over, not to mention the mischief the horrid things always
do? Tabby is all the child needs, with her doll. Of course you have
a doll?" and Miss Henny asked the question as solemnly as if she had
said, "Have you a soul?"

"Oh yes, I have nine in my trunk, and two little ones in my bag, and
Mamma is going to send me a big, big one from London, as soon as she
gets there, to sleep with me and be my little comfort," cried Rosy,
rapidly producing from her bag a tiny bride and groom, three seed-
cakes, a smelling-bottle, and a purse out of which fell a shower of
bright cents, also crumbs all over the immaculate carpet.

"Mercy on us, what a mess! Pick it all up, child, and don't unpack
any more in the parlor. One doll is quite enough for me," said Miss
Henny, with a sigh of resignation as if asking patience to bear this
new calamity.

Rosy echoed the sigh as she crept about reclaiming her precious
pennies, and eating the crumbs as the only way of disposing of them.

"Never mind, it's only her way; the heat makes her a little cross,
you see," whispered Cicely, bending down to hold the bag, into which
Rosy bundled her treasures in hot haste.

"I thought fat people were always pleasant. I'm glad YOU ain't fat,"
answered the little girl, in a tone which was perfectly audible.

What would have happened I tremble to think, if Miss Penny had not
finished the letter at that moment and handed it to her sister,
saying as she held out her arms to the child,--

"Now I know all about it, and you are to be my baby; so come and
give me some sweet kisses, darling."

Down dropped the bag, and with a little sob of joy the child nestled
close to the kind old heart that welcomed her so tenderly at last.

"Papa calls me his button-rose, 'cause I'm so small and pink and
sweet, and thorny too sometimes," she said, looking up brightly,
after a few moments of the fond and foolish cuddling all little
creatures love and need so much when they leave the nest, and miss
the brooding of motherly wings.

"We'll call you anything you like, darling; but Rosamond is a pretty
old name, and I'm fond of it, for it was your grandmamma's, and a
sweeter woman never lived," said Miss Penny, stroking the fresh
cheeks, where the tears shone like dew on pink rose-leaves.

"I shall call you Chicken Little, because we have Henny and Penny;
and the girls and Tab downstairs can be Goosey-Loosey, Turkey-Lurkey,
and Cocky-Locky. I'll be Ducky-Lucky, and I'm sure Foxy-Loxy lives
next door," said Cicely, laughing at her own wit, while Miss Henny
looked up, saying, with the first smile Rosy had seen,--

"That's true enough! and I hope Chicken Little will keep out of his
way, no matter if the sky does fall."

"Who is it? A truly fox? I never saw one. Could I peep at him
sometimes?" cried the child, much interested at once.

"No, dear; it's only a neighbor of ours who has treated us badly, at
least we think so, and we don't speak, though we used to be good
friends some years ago. It's sad to live so, but we don't quite see
how to help it yet. We are ready to do our part; but Mr. Dover
should take the first step, as he was in the wrong."

"Please tell about it. I have horrid quarrels with Mamie Parsons
sometimes, but we always kiss and make up, and feel all happy again.
Can't you, Cousin Penny?" asked the child, softly touching the
little white curls under the lace cap.

"Well, no, dear; grown people cannot settle differences in that
pretty way. We must wait till he apologizes, and then we shall
gladly be friends again. You see Mr. Dover was a missionary in India
for many years, and we were very intimate with his mother. Our
gardens join, and a gate in our fence led across their field to the
back street, and was most convenient when we wanted to walk by the
river or send the maids on errands in a hurry. The old lady was very
neighborly, and we were quite comfortable till Thomas came home and
made trouble. He'd lost his wife and children, poor man, and his
liver was out of order, and living among the heathen so long had
made him melancholy and queer; so he tried to amuse himself with
gardening and keeping hens."

"I'm glad! I love flowers and biddies," murmured Rosy, listening
with deep interest to this delightful mixture of quarrels and
heathen, sorrow, poultry, mysterious diseases, and gardens.

"He had no right to shut up our gate and forbid our crossing that
little field, and no GENTLEMAN would have DARED to do it after all
our kindness to his mother," exclaimed Miss Henny, so suddenly and
violently that Rosamond nearly fell off the old lady's lap with the
start she gave.

"No, sister, I don't agree there. Mr. Thomas had a perfect RIGHT to
do as he liked with his own land; but I think we should have had no
trouble if you had been willing to sell him the corner of our garden
where the old summer-house is, for his hens," began Miss Penny in a
mild tone.

"Sister! you know the tender memories connected with that bower, and
how terrible it would have been to ME to see it torn down, and noisy
fowls clucking and pecking where I and my poor Calvin once sat
together," cried Miss Henny, trying to look sentimental, which was
an impossible feat for a stout lady in a flowery muslin gown, and a
fly-away cap full of blue ribbons, on a head once flaxen and now
gray.

"We won't discuss the point, Henrietta," said the elder lady with
dignity; whereupon the other returned to the letter, bridling and
tossing her head in a way which caused Rosy to stare, and resolve to
imitate it when she played be a proud princess with her dolls.

"Well, dear, that was the beginning of the trouble," continued Miss
Penny; "and now we don't speak, and the old lady misses us, I'm
sure, and I often long to run in and see her, and I'm so sorry you
can't enjoy the wonders of that house, for it's full of beautiful
and curious things, most instructive for children to observe. Mr.
Thomas has been a great traveller, and has a tiger skin in the
parlor so natural it's quite startling to behold; also spears, and
bows and arrows, and necklaces of shark's teeth, from the Cannibal
Islands, and the loveliest stuffed birds, my dear, all over the
place, and pretty shells and baskets, and ivory toys, and odd
dresses, and no end of wonderful treasures. Such a sad pity you
can't see them!" and Miss Penny looked quite distressed at the
child's loss.

"Oh, but I guess I will see 'em! Every one is good to me, and old
gentlemen like little girls. Papa says so, and HE always does what I
want when I say 'Please' with my wheedulin smile, as he calls it,"
said Rosy, giving them a sample of the most engaging sort.

"You funny little thing, do try it, and soften the heart of that
tiresome man! He has the finest roses in town and the most delicious
fruit, and we never get any, though he sends quantities everywhere
else. Such a fuss over an old ear-wiggy arbor! It is perfectly
provoking, when we might enjoy so much over there; and who knows
what might happen!"

As Cicely spoke, she smoothed her brown curls and glanced at the
mirror, quite conscious that a very pretty young lady of twenty was
wasting her sweetness in the great gloomy house, with two elderly
spinsters.

"I'll get some for you," answered Rosy, with a nod of such calm
conviction of her own power, that Cicely laughed again, and proposed
that she should go at once and view the battle-field.

"Could I RUN in the garden? I'd love to, after riding so long,"
asked Rosy, eager to be off; for her active legs ached for exercise,
and the close, shady room oppressed her.

"Yes, dear; but don't get into mischief, or worry Tabby, or pick the
flowers. Of course you wouldn't touch green fruit, or climb trees,
or soil your little frock. I'll ring the bell for you to come in and
be dressed for tea when it is time."

With these directions and a kiss, Miss Penny, as Cicely did not
stir, let the child out at the back door of the long hall, and
watched her walk demurely down the main path of the prim old garden,
where no child had played for years, and even the toads and fat
robins behaved in the most decorous manner.

"It's pretty dull, but it's better than the parlor with all the
staring pictures," said Rosy to herself, after a voyage of discovery
had shown her the few charms of the place. The sight of a large
yellow cat reposing in the sun cheered her eyes at that moment, and
she hastened to scrape acquaintance with the stately animal; for the
snails were not social, and the toads stared even more fixedly at
her than the painted eyes of her respected ancestors.

But Tabby disliked children as much as her mistress, and after
submitting ungraciously to a few caresses from the eager little
hands, she rose and retired majestically to a safer perch on the top
of the high wall which enclosed the garden. Being too lazy to jump,
she walked up the shelves of an old flower-stand moulding in a
corner, and by so doing, gave Rosy a brilliant idea, which she at
once put into action by following Tabby's example. Up this new sort
of ladder she went, and peeped over the wall, delighted at this
unexpected chance to behold the enemy's territory.

"Oh, what a pretty place!" she cried, clasping her grubby little
hands with rapture, as the beauties of the forbidden land burst upon
her view.

It was indeed a paradise to a child's eyes,--for flowers bloomed
along the winding paths; ripening fruit lay rosy and tempting in the
beds below; behind the wire walls that confined them clucked and
strutted various sorts of poultry; cages of gay birds hung on the
piazza; and through the open windows of the house one caught
glimpses of curious curtains, bright weapons, and mysterious objects
in the rooms beyond.

A gray-headed gentleman in a queer nankeen coat lay asleep on a
bamboo lounge under the great cherry-tree, with a purple silk
handkerchief half over his face.

"That's the missionary man, I s'pose. He doesn't look cross at all.
If I could only get down there, I'd go and wake him with a softly
kiss, as I do Papa, and ask to see his pretty things."

Being quite unconscious of fear, Rosy certainly would have carried
out her daring plan, had it been possible; but no way of descending
on the other side appeared, so she sighed and sat gazing wistfully,
till Cousin Henny appeared for a breath of fresh air, and ordered
her down at once.

"Come and see if my balsam-seeds have started yet. I keep planting
them, but they WON'T come up," she said, pointing out a mound of
earth newly dug and watered.

Rosy obediently scrambled up, and was trying to decide whether some
green sprouts were chickweed or the dilatory balsams when a sudden
uproar in the next garden made her stop to listen, while Miss Henny
said in a tone of great satisfaction, as the cackle of hens arose,--

"Some trouble with those horrid fowls of his. I detest them, crowing
in the night, and waking us at dawn with their noise. I wish some
thief would steal every one of them. Nobody has a right to annoy
their neighbors with troublesome pets."

Before Rosy could describe the beauties of the white bantams or the
size of the big golden cock, a loud voice cried,--

"You rascal! I'll hang you if I catch you here again. Go home
quicker than you came, and tell your mistress to teach you better
manners, if she values your life."

"It's that man! Such language! I wonder who he's caught? That bad
boy who steals our plums, perhaps."

The words were hardly out of Miss Henny's mouth when her question
was answered in a sudden and dreadful way; for over the wall, hurled
by a strong arm, flew Tabby, high in the air, to fall with a thump
directly in the middle of the bed where they stood. Miss Henny
uttered a shrill scream, caught up her stunned treasure, and rushed
into the house as fast as her size and flounces permitted, leaving
Rosy breathless with surprise and indignation.

Burning to resent this terrible outrage, she climbed quickly up the
steps, and astonished the irate old gentleman on the other side by
the sudden apparition of a golden head, a red childish face, and a
dirty little finger pointed sternly at him, as this small avenging
angel demanded,--

"Missionary man, how COULD you kill my cousin's cat?"

"Bless my soul! who are you?" said the old gentleman, staring at
this unexpected actor on the field of battle.

"I'm Button-Rose, and I hate cruel people! Tabby's dead, and now
there isn't any one to play with over here."

This sad prospect made the blue eyes fill with sudden tears; and the
application of the dirty fingers added streaks of mud to the red
cheeks, which much damaged the appearance of the angel, thought it
added pathos to the child's reproach.

"Cats have nine lives, and Tabby's used to being chucked over the
wall. I've done it several times, and it seems to agree with her,
for she comes back to kill my chicks as bold as brass. See that!"
and the old gentleman held up a downy dead chicken, as proof of
Tabby's sin.

"Poor little chicky!" groaned Rosy, yearning to mourn over the dear
departed and bury it with tender care. "It WAS very naughty of Tab;
but, sir, you know cats are made to catch things, and they can't
help it."

"They will have to help it, or I'll drown the lot. This is a rare
breed, and I've but two left after all my trouble, thanks to that
rascal of yours! What are you going to do about it?" demanded Mr.
Dover, in a tone that made Rosy feel as if she had committed the
murder herself.

"I'll talk to Tabby and try to make her good, and I'll shut her up
in the old rabbit-house over here; then I hope she will be sorry and
never do it any more," she said, in such a remorseful tone that the
old gentleman relented at once, ashamed to afflict such a tender
little soul.

"Try it," he said, with a smile that made his yellow face pleasant
all at once. Then, as if ready to change the subject, he asked,
looking curiously at the little figure perched on the wall,--

"Where did you come from? Never saw any children over there before.
They don't allow 'em."

Rosy introduced herself in a few words, and seeing that her new
acquaintance seemed interested, she added with the wheedling smile
Papa found so engaging,--

"It's pretty lonely here, I guess; so p'r'aps you'll let me peep at
your nice garden sometimes if it doesn't trouble you, sir?"

"Poor little soul! it must be desperately dull with those three
tabbies," he said to himself, as he stroked the dead chicken in his
hand, and watched the little face bent toward him.

"Peep as much as you like, child; or, better still, come over and
run about. _I_ like little girls," he added aloud, with a nod and a
wave of welcome.

"I told 'em I was sure you did! I'd love to come, but they wouldn't
let me, I know. I'm so sorry about the fight. Couldn't you make it
up, and be pleasant again?" asked Rosy, clasping her hands with a
beseeching gesture as her bright face grew sad and serious
remembering the feud.

"So they've told you that nonsense already, have they? Nice
neighbors THEY are," said the old gentleman, frowning as if ill
pleased at the news.

"I'm glad I know; p'r'aps I can be a peace-maker. Mamma says they
are good to have in families, and I'd like to be one if I could.
Would you mind if I tried to peace-make a little, so I could come
over? I do want to see the red birds and the tiger skin awfully, if
you please."

"What do you know about 'em?" asked the old gentleman, sitting down
on a garden chair, as if he didn't mind continuing the chat with
this new neighbor.

Nearly tumbling off the wall in her earnestness, Rosy repeated all
that Cousin Penny had said; and something in the reasonable words,
the flattering description of his treasures, and the sincere regret
of the old lady seemed to have a good effect upon Mr. Dover, for
when Rosy paused out of breath, he said in such an altered tone that
it was evident the peacemaking had already begun,--

"Miss Carey is a gentlewoman! I always thought so. You tell her,
with my compliments, that I'd be glad to see you any time if she has
no objection. I'll put my step-ladder there, and you can come over
instead of the cat. But mind you don't meddle, or I might give you a
toss like Tabby."

"I'm not afraid," laughed Rosy. "I'll go and ask right away, and I
won't touch a thing, and I know you'll like me for a friend. Papa
says I'm a dear little one. Thank you very much, sir. Good-by till I
come again;" and with a kiss of the hand, the yellow head sunk out
of sight like the sun going down, leaving a sense of darkness behind
when the beaming little face disappeared, though fresh stains of
green mould from the wall made it rather like the tattooed
countenances Mr. Dover used to see among his cannibal friends in
Africa.

He sat musing with the dead chicken in his hand, forgetful of time,
till a ring of his own door-bell called him in to receive a note
from Miss Penelope, thanking him for his invitation to little
Rosamond, but declining it in the most polite and formal words.

"I expected it! Bless the silly old souls! why can't they be
reasonable, and accept the olive branch when I offer it? I'll be
hanged if I do again! The fat one is at the bottom of this. Miss Pen
would give in if that absurd Henrietta didn't hold her back. Well,
I'm sorry for the child, but that's not my fault;" and throwing down
the note, he went out to water his roses.

For a week or two, Button-Rose hardly dared glance toward the
forbidden spot from her window, as she was ordered to play in the
front garden, and sent to take sober walks with Cicely, who loved to
stop and gossip with her friends, while the poor child waited
patiently till the long tales were told.

Nursing Tabby was her chief consolation; and so kind was she, that
the heart of the old cat softened to her, and she actually purred
her thanks at last, for all the saucers of cream, bits of chicken,
soft pats, and tender words bestowed upon her by the little girl.

"Well, I declare! Tab won't do that even for me," said Miss Henny,
one day when she came upon the child sitting alone in the hall with
a picture-book and the cat comfortably asleep in her lap.

"Ammals always love me, if people don't," answered Button-Rose,
soberly; for she had not yet forgiven the stout lady for denying her
the delights offered by the "missionary man."

"That's because AN-I-MALS can't see how naughty you are sometimes,"
said Miss Henny tartly, not having recovered her temper even after
many days.

"I shall make EVERY one love me before I go away. Mamma told me to,
and I shall. I know how;" and Button smiled with a wise little nod
that was pretty to see, as she proudly cuddled her first conquest.

"We shall see;" and Miss Henny ponderously departed, wondering what
odd fancy the little thing would take into her head next.

It was soon evident; for when she came down from her long nap, later
in the afternoon, Miss Henny found Rosamond reading aloud to her
sister in the great dim parlor. They made a curious contrast,--the
pale, white-haired, feeble old lady, with her prim dress, high cap,
knitting, and shaded eyes; and the child, rosy and round, quaint and
sweet, a pretty little ornament for the old-fashioned room, as she
sat among the tea-poys and samplers, ancient china and furniture,
with the portraits of great grandfathers and grandmothers simpering
and staring at her, as if pleased and surprised to see such a
charming little descendant among them.

"Bless the baby! what is she at now?" asked Miss Henny, feeling more
amiable after her sleep.

"I'm reading to Cousin Penny, 'cause no one else does, and her poor
eyes hurt her, and she likes stories, and so do I," answered Button,
with one chubby finger on the place in her book, and eyes full of
pride at the grown-up employment she had found for herself.

"So kind of the little dear! She found me alone and wanted to amuse
me; so I proposed a story to suit us both, and she does very well
with a little help now and then. I haven't read 'Simple Susan' for
years, and really enjoy it. Maria Edgeworth was always a favorite of
mine, and I still think her far superior to any modern writer for
the young," said Miss Penny, looking quite animated and happy in the
new entertainment provided for her.

"Go on, child; let me hear how well you can read;" and Miss Henny
settled herself in the sofa-corner with her embroidery.

So Button started bravely on, and tried so hard that she was soon
out of breath. As she paused, she said with a gasp,--

"Isn't Susan a dear girl? She gives ALL the best things to other
people, and is kind to the old harper. She didn't send him away, as
you did the music-man to-day, and tell him to be still."

"Organs are a nuisance, and I never allow them here. Go on, and
don't criticise your elders, Rosamond."

"Mamma and I always talk over stories, and pick out the morals of
'em. SHE likes it;" with which remark, made sweetly not pertly,
Button went on to the end, with an occasional lift over a long word;
and the old ladies were interested, in spite of themselves, in the
simple tale read in that childish voice.

"Thank you, dear, it is very nice, and we will have one every day.
Now, what can I do for you?" asked Miss Penny, as the little girl
pushed the curls off her forehead, with a sigh of mingled weariness
and satisfaction.

"Let me go in the back garden and peep through the knot-hole at the
pretty roses. I do long to see if the moss ones are out, and the
cherries ripe," said Rosy, clasping her hands imploringly.

"It can do no harm, Henrietta. Yes, dear, run away and get some
catnip for Tabby, and see if the balsams are up yet."

That last suggestion won Miss Henny's consent; and Button was off at
once, skipping like a young colt all over the garden, which now
seemed delightful to her.

At the back of the summer-house was a narrow space between it and
the fence where certain plump toads lived; peeping in to watch them,
Rosy had spied a large knot-hole in the old boards, and through it
found she could get a fine view of several rose-bushes, a tree, and
one window of the "missionary man's" house. She had longed for
another peep since the flower-stand was gone, and climbing trees
forbidden; now with joy she slipped into the damp nook, regardless
of the speckled gentlemen who stared at her with dismay, and took a
good look at the forbidden paradise beyond.

Yes, the "moss ones" were in bloom, the cherries quite red, and at
the window was the gray head of Mr. Dover, as he sat reading in his
queer yellow dressing-gown.

Button yearned to get in, and leaned so hard against the hateful
fence that the rotten board cracked, a long bit fell out, and she
nearly went after it, as it dropped upon the green bank below. Now
the full splendor of the roses burst upon her, and a delightful
gooseberry bush stood close by with purplish berries temptingly
bobbing within reach. This obliging bush hid the hole, but left fine
openings to see through; so the child popped her curly head out, and
gazed delightedly at the chickens, the flowers, the fruit, and the
unconscious old gentleman not far away.

"I'll have it for my secret; or maybe I'll tell Cousin Penny, and
beg her to let me peep if I truly promise never to go in," thought
Button, knowing well who her best friend was.

At bedtime, when the dear old lady came to give the good-night kiss,
which the others forgot, Rosy, as Miss Penny called her, made her
request; and it was granted, for Miss Penny had a feeling that the
little peacemaker would sooner or later heal the breach with her
pretty magic, and so she was very ready to lend a hand in a quiet
way.

Next day at play-time, Button was hurrying down her last bit of
gingerbread, which she was obliged to eat properly in the
dining-room, instead of enjoying out-of-doors, when she heard a
sudden flurry in the garden, and running to the window saw Roxy the
maid chasing a chicken to and fro, while Miss Henny stood flapping
her skirts on the steps, and crying, "Shoo!" till she was red in the
face.

"It's the white banty, and it must have come in my hole! Oh dear, I
hope they won't catch it! Cousin Henny said she'd wring the neck of
the first one that flied over the wall."

Away went Rosy, to join in the hunt; for Miss Henny was too fat to
run, and Roxy found the lively fowl too much for her. It was a long
and hard chase; feathers flew, the maid lost her breath, Rosy
tumbled down, and Miss Henny screamed and scolded till she was
forced to sit down and watch in silence.

At last poor, hunted Banty ran into the arbor, for its clipped wings
would not lift it over the wall. Button rushed after it, and dismal
squalls plainly proclaimed that the naughty chicken was caught.

Miss Henny waddled down the path, declaring that she WOULD wring its
neck; and Roxy went puffing after her, glad to rest. But the old
summer-house was empty. No little girl, no ruffled bantam, appeared.
Both had vanished like magic; and mistress and maid stared at each
other in amazement, till they saw that the long-disused window was
open, and a gleam of light came in from the narrow opening behind.

"My patience! if that child hasn't crept out there, and bolted
through that hole in the fence! Did you ever, Miss?" exclaimed Roxy,
trying not to look pleased at being spared the distasteful task of
killing the poor chicken.

"Naughty girl!" began Miss Henny, when the sound of voices made both
listen. "Slip in there, and see what is going on," said the
mistress, well knowing that her stout person never could be squeezed
into the small space between house and fence.

Roxy, being thin, easily obeyed, and in a whisper telephoned what
went on beyond the hole, causing Miss Henny much vexation, surprise,
and at last real pleasure, as the child performed her little part in
the mission she had undertaken.

"Oh, please, it's all my fault! I kept the hole open, Mr. Thomas,
and so Banty flied in. But it isn't hurt a bit, and I've brought it
home all safe, 'cause I know you love your chickies, and Tabby ate
lots of 'em," said the childish voice in its most conciliatory tone.

"Why didn't you fling it over the wall, as I did the cat?" asked Mr.
Dover, smiling, as he shut up the truant fowl, and turned to look at
the rosy, breathless child, whose pink frock bore the marks of many
a tumble on grass and gravel.

"It would hurt Banty's feelings, and yours too, and not be polite.
So I came myself, to make some pollygies, and say it was my fault.
But, please, could I keep the hole to peep through, if I always put
up a board when I go away? It is so dull in there, and SO sweet in
here!"

"Don't you think a little gate would be nicer,--one just big enough
for you, with a hook to fasten it? We'll call it a button-hole,"
laughed Mr. Dover. "Then you could peep; or perhaps the ladies will
think better of it, and show that they pardon my ill treatment of
Tabby by letting you come in and pick some cherries and roses now
and then."

This charming proposal caused the little girl to clasp her hands and
cry aloud,--

"That would be perfully sp'endid! I know Cousin Penny would like it,
and let me. P'r'aps she'd come herself; she's so thin, she could,
and she loves your mother and wants to see her. Only, Cousin Henny
won't let us be nice and friendly. S'pose you send HER some
cherries; she loves good things to eat, and maybe she will say yes,
if you send lots."

Mr. Dover laughed at this artless proposal, and Miss Henny smiled at
the prospect of a gift of the luscious black-heart cherries she had
been longing for. Roxy wisely repeated only the agreeable parts of
the conversation; so nothing ruffled the lady's temper. Now, whether
Mr. Dover's sharp eye caught a glimpse of the face among the
gooseberry bushes, and suspected eavesdroppers, or whether the
child's earnest desire to make peace touched him, who shall say?
Certain it is that his eyes twinkled like a boy's, as he said rather
loudly, in his most affable tone,--

"I shall be most happy to send Miss Henrietta a basket of fruit. She
used to be a charming young woman. It's a pity she shuts herself up
so much; but that sad little romance of hers has darkened her life,
I suppose. Ah, well, I can sympathize with her!"

Rosy stared at the sudden change in his manner, and was rather
bewildered by his grown-up way of talking to her. But being intent
on securing something nice to carry home, she stuck to the cherries,
which she DID understand, and pointing to the piazza said with a
business-like air,--

"There's a basket; so we might pick 'em right away. I love to go up
in trees and throw 'em down; and I know Cousin Henny will like
cherries ever so much, and not scold a bit when I take some to her."

"Then come on," cried Mr. Thomas, relapsing into the hearty manner
she liked so much; and away he went, quite briskly, down the path,
with his yellow skirts waving in the wind, and Button skipping after
him in great glee.

"They actually ARE a-picking cherries, Miss, up in the tree like a
couple of robins a-chirpin' and laughin' as gay as can be," reported
Roxy, from her peep-hole.

"Rip off the rest of that board, then I can see," whispered Miss
Henny, quivering with interest now; for she had heard Mr. Dover's
words, and her wrath was appeased by that flattering allusion to
herself.

Off came the rest of the board, and from the window, half hidden in
woodbine, she could now see over the bushes into the next garden.
The peep-hole commanded the tree, and she watched with eager eyes
the filling of the basket to be sent her, planning the while a
charming note of thanks.

"Do look, Miss; they are resting now, and she's on his knee. Ain't
it a pretty picter?" whispered Roxy, unmindful of the earwigs, ants,
and daddy-long-legs promenading over her as she crouched in her
mouldy corner, intent on the view beyond.

"Very pretty! He lost several children in India and I suppose Rosy
reminds him of them. Ah, poor man! I can sympathize with him, for
_I_ too have loved and lost," sighed Miss Henny, pensively surveying
the group on the rustic seat.

They were playing cherry-bob; and the child's laughter made pleasant
music in the usually quiet place, while the man's face lost its sad,
stern look, and was both gay and tender, as he held the little
creature close, and popped the ripe fruit into the red, laughing
mouth.

As the last sweet morsel disappeared Rosy said, with a long breath
of perfect content,--

"It's ALMOST as good as having Papa to play with. I do hope the
cousins WILL let me come again! If they don't, I think my heart will
break, 'cause I get so homesick over there, and have so many trials,
and no one but Cousin Penny ever cuddles me."

"Bless her heart! We'll send her some flowers for that. You tell her
that Mrs. Dover is poorly, and would like very much to see her; and
so would Mr. Thomas, who enjoys her little niece immensely. Can you
remember that?"

"Every word! SHE is very nice to me, and I love her, and I guess she
will be glad to come. She likes MOSS-roses, and so do I," added the
unblushing little beggar, as Mr. Dover took out his knife and began
to make the bouquet which was to be Miss Penny's bribe. He could not
bear to give up his little playmate, and was quite ready to try
again, with this persistent and charming ally to help him heal the
breach.

"Shall you send anything to Cis? You needn't mind about it, 'cause
she can't keep me at home, but it might please her, and make her
stop rapping my head with her thimble when I ask questions, and
slapping my fingers when I touch any of her pretty things,"
suggested Button, as the flowers were added to the fruit, making
a fine display.

"I never send presents to YOUNG ladies," said Mr. Thomas shortly,
adding, with both hands out, and his most inviting smile, "But I
ALWAYS kiss nice little girls if they will allow me?"

Button threw both arms about his neck and gave him a shower of
grateful kisses, which were sweeter to the lonely old man than all
the cherries that ever grew, or the finest flowers in his garden.
Then Miss Rosamond proudly marched home, finding no trace of the
watchers, for both had fled while the "cuddling" went on. Roxy was
soberly setting the dinner-table, and Miss Henny in the parlor
breathing hard behind a newspaper. Miss Penny and Cicely were
spending the day out, so the roses had to wait; but the basket was
most graciously received, also the carefully delivered message, and
the child's heart was rejoiced by free permission to go and see "our
kind neighbor now and then, if Sister does not object."

Rosy was in great spirits, and prattled away as they sat at dinner,
emboldened by the lady's unusual amiability to ask all sorts of
questions, some of which proved rather embarrassing to Miss Henny,
and very amusing to Roxy, listening in the china-closet.

"I wish _I_ had 'spepsia," was the abrupt remark of the small person
as her plate of drum-sticks was removed and the pudding appeared,
accompanied by the cherries.

"Why, dear?" asked Miss Henny, busily arranging the small dish of
delicate tidbits, which left little but the skeleton of the roast
fowl for the kitchen.

"Then I could have the nicest bits of chicken, and heaps of sauce on
my pudding, and the butteryest slices of toast, and ALL the cream
for my tea, as you do. It isn't a VERY bad pain, is it?" asked Rosy,
in such perfect good faith that Miss Henny's sudden flush and Roxy's
hasty dive into the closet never suggested to her that this innocent
speech was bringing the old lady's besetting sin to light in the
most open manner.

"Yes, child, it is VERY bad, and you may thank your stars that I try
to keep you from it by feeding you on plain food. At my age, and
suffering as I do, the best of everything is needed to keep up my
strength," said Miss Henny, tartly. But the largest plate of
pudding, with "heaps of sauce," went to the child this day, and when
the fruit was served, an unusually small portion was put away for
the invalid, who was obliged to sustain nature with frequent lunches
through the day and evening.

"I'm s'prised that you suffer much, Cousin Henny. How brave you must
be, not to cry about it, and go round in horrid pain, as you do, and
dress so nicely, and see people, and work 'broidering, and make
calls! I hope I shall be brave if I ever DO have 'spepsia; but I
guess I shan't, you take such care to give me small pieces every
time."

With which cheerful remark Rosy closed that part of the conversation
and returned to the delights of her new friend's garden. But from
that day, among other changes which began about this time, the
child's cup and plate were well filled, and the dread of adding to
her own sufferings seemed to curb the dyspeptic's voracious
appetite. "A cheild was amang them takin' notes," and every one
involuntarily dreaded those clear eyes and that frank tongue, so
innocently observing and criticising all that went on. Cicely had
already been reminded of a neglected duty by Rosy's reading to Miss
Penny, and tried to be more faithful in that, as in other services
which she owed the old lady. So the little missionary was evidently
getting on, though quite unconscious of her work at home, so
absorbed was she in her foreign mission; for, like many another
missionary, the savage over the way was more interesting than the
selfish, slothful, or neglected souls at home.

Miss Penny was charmed with her flowers and the friendly message
sent her, and to Rosy's great delight went next day, in best bonnet
and gown, to make a call upon the old lady "who was poorly," for
that appeal could not be resisted. Rosy also, in honor of the great
occasion, wore HER best hat, and a white frock so stiff that she
looked like a little opera dancer as the long black legs skipped
along the street; for it was far too grand a visit to be paid
through a hole in the wall.

In the basket were certain delicacies for the old lady, and a card
had been prepared, with the names of Miss Carey and Miss Rosamond
Carey beautifully written on it by Cis, who was dying to go, but
dared not after Rosy had told her Mr. Dover's remark about young
ladies.

As the procession of two paused at the door, both the young and the
old heart fluttered a little, for this was the first decided step
toward reconciliation, and any check might spoil it all. The maid
stared, but civilly led these unexpected guests in and departed with
the card. Miss Penny settled herself in a large chair and looked
about with pensive interest at the familiar room. But Rosy made a
bee-line for the great tiger-skin, and regardless of her clean
frock lay down on it to examine the head, which glared at her with
yellow eyes, showing all its sharp teeth in the most delightfully
natural manner.

Mr. Dover came in with a formal bow, but Miss Penny put out both
hands, and said in her sweet old voice,--

"Let us be friends again for the sake of your mother."

That settled the matter at once, and Mr. Thomas was so eager to do
his part that he not only shook the hands heartily, but kept them in
his as he said like an honest man,--

"My dear neighbor, I beg your pardon! _I_ was wrong, but I'm not too
proud to own it and say I'm glad to let by-gones be by-gones for the
sake of all. Now come and see my mother; she is longing for you."

What went on in the next room Rosy never knew or cared, for Mr.
Thomas soon returned, and amused her so well, showing his treasures,
that she forgot where she was till the maid came to say tea was
ready.

"Are we going to stay?" cried the little girl, beaming from under a
Feejee crown of feathers, which produced as comical an effect upon
her curly head as did the collar of shark's teeth round her plump
neck or the great Japanese war-fan in her hand.

"Yes, we have tea at five; come and turn it out. I've ordered the
little cups especially for you," said her host, as he changed the
small Amazon to a pretty child again and led her away to preside at
the table, where the quaint china and silver, and the dainty cake
and bread and butter proved much more attractive than the little old
lady in a big cap who patted her head and smiled at her.

Never had Rosy enjoyed such a delicious meal; for the rapture of
pouring real tea out of a pot shaped like a silver melon, into cups
as thin as egg-shells, and putting in sugar with tongs like claws,
not to mention much thick cream, also spicy, plummy cakes that
melted in one's mouth, was too great for words.

The little maid was so absorbed in her new duties that she never
minded what the elders talked about, till the plates were empty, the
pot ran dry, and no one could be prevailed on to have any more tea.
Then she leaned back in her chair and remarked with an air of calm
satisfaction, as she looked from one to the other, and smiled that
engaging smile of hers,--

"Isn't being friends a great deal nicer than fighting and throwing
cats over walls and calling bad names?"

It was impossible not to laugh, and that cheerful sound seemed to
tune every one to the sweetest harmony, while the little peacemaker
was passed round as if a last course of kisses was absolutely
necessary.

Then the party broke up, and Mr. Dover escorted his guests to their
own gate, to the great amazement of the neighbors and the very
visible pride of Miss Button-Rose, who went up the walk with her
head as high as if the wreath of daisies on her little hat had been
a conqueror's crown.

Now that the first step had been taken, all would have gone smoothly
if Cicely, offended because Mr. Thomas took no notice of HER, had
not put it into Miss Henny's head that as the original quarrel began
between her and their neighbor, it would not be dignified to give in
till Mr. Dover had come and begged pardon of HER as well as of Miss
Penny. This suited the foolish old lady, who never could forget
certain plain words spoken in the heat of battle, though the kindly
ones lately heard had much softened her heart toward the offender.

"No, I shall not forget my dignity nor humble myself by going over
there to apologize as Penelope has. SHE can do as she likes; and now
that he has asked to be forgiven, there is perhaps no harm in HER
seeing the old lady. But with me it is different. _I_ was insulted,
and till Thomas Dover conies here and solemnly asks my pardon I will
NOT cross his threshold, no matter what bribes he sends," said Miss
Henny, with an air of heroic firmness.

But it did cost her a pang when her sister went every now and then
to take tea with the old lady and came home full of pleasant news;
while Rosy prattled of the fine things she saw, the nice things she
had to eat, and never failed to bring some gift to share, or to
display to the exiles from Paradise. They ate the "bribes," however,
as they called the fruit, admired the pretty trinkets and toys, and
longed to share in the mild festivities of the pleasant house over
the way, but stood firm in spite of all Rosy's wiles, till something
unexpected happened to touch their hearts, conquer their foolish
pride, and crown the little peacemaker's efforts with success.

One August afternoon Cicely was discontentedly looking over her
small store of ornaments as she made ready for a party. She loved
gayety, and went about a great deal, leaving many duties undone, or
asking the little girl to attend to them for her, neglecting,
however, to show any gratitude for these small services so
cheerfully done.

As she sat tossing over her boxes, Button-Rose came in looking
tired and listless, for it was a hot day, and she had been out twice
to do errands for Cicely, besides trotting busily up and down to
wait on the old ladies while the young one put fresh ribbons on her
dress and curled her hair for the evening.

"Could I lie on your sofa, please, Cis? My head aches, and my legs
are SO tired," said little Button, when her tap had been answered by
a sharp "What do you want, child?"

"No, I'm going to lie there myself and have a nap as soon as I'm
done here. It's cooler than the bed, and I must be fresh for
to-night," said Cicely, too intent on her own affairs to see how
used up Rosy looked.

"Then could I look at your pretty things if I don't touch 'em?"
asked the child, longing to peep into the interesting boxes
scattered on the table.

"No, you can't! I'm busy, and don't want you asking questions and
meddling. Go away and let me alone."

Cicely spoke crossly, and waved her hand with a warning gesture,
thereby upsetting the tray which held the beads of the necklace she
had decided to wear for want of something better.

"There, now see what you've done! Pick up every one, and be quick,
for I'm in a hurry."

"But I didn't touch 'em," began poor Button, as she crept about
hunting for the black and white beads that looked like very ugly
marbles.

"Don't talk; pick them up and then scamper; you are always in
mischief!" scolded Cis, vexed with herself, and the heat, and the
accident, and the whole world just then.

Rosy said no more, but several great tears dropped on the carpet as
she groped in corners, under the bed, and behind the chairs for the
run-aways; and when the last was found she put it in her tyrant's
hand, saying, with a wistful look,--

"I'm very sorry I troubled you. Seems to me if _I_ had a little
cousin, I'd love to have her play with my things, and I wouldn't be
cross to her. Now I'll go and try to AMOOSE myself with Bella; SHE
is always good to me."

"Run along then. Thank goodness that doll came when it did, for I'm
tired of 'amoosing' small girls as well as old ladies," said Cis,
busy with her beads, yet sorry she had been so petulant with patient
little Button, who seldom reproached her, being a cheery child, and
blessed with a sweet temper.

Rosy felt too languid to play; so when she had told Bella, the
London doll, her trials, and comforted herself with some kisses on
the waxen cheeks, she roamed away to the summer-house, which was
cool and quiet, longing for some one to caress her; for the little
heart was homesick and the little head ached badly.

The "button-hole" had been made, the alley swept out, to the great
dismay of the spiders, earwigs, and toads, who had fled to quieter
quarters, and Rosy had leave to go and come when she liked if Mr.
Dover did not object. He never did; and it was her greatest delight
to walk in the pretty garden at her own sweet will, always with the
hope of meeting its kindly owner, for now they were firm friends.
She had been too busy for a run there that day; and now, as she
peeped in, it looked so shady and inviting, and it seemed so natural
to turn to her dear "missionary man" for entertainment, that she
went straight up to his study window and peeped in.

He too seemed out of sorts that hot afternoon, for he sat leaning
his head on both hands at the desk strewn with piles of old letters.
Button-Rose's tender heart yearned over him at once, and stepping
quietly in at the long open window she went to him, saying in her
tenderest tone,--

"Does your head ache, sir? Let me soft it as I do Papa's; he says
that always makes it more better. Please let me? I'd love to
dearly."

"Ah, my darling, I wish you could. But the pain is in my heart, and
nothing will ever cure it," sighed Mr. Thomas, as he drew her close
and put his wrinkled yellow cheek to her soft one, which looked more
like a damask rose than usual.

"You have trials too, I s'pose. Mine trouble me to-day, so I came
over to see you. Shall I go away?" asked Rosy with a sigh and the
wistful look again.

"No, stay, and we will comfort each other. Tell me your troubles,
Button, and perhaps I can help them," the kind old gentleman said as
he took her on his knee and stroked the curly head with a paternal
touch.

So Rosy told her latest grief, and never saw the smile that crept
about the lips that asked in a tone of deep interest,--

"Well, what do you mean to do to that unkind Cicely?"

"For a minute I wanted to slap her back when she tried to spat my
hands. Then I 'membered that Mamma said a kiss for a blow was a good
thing, so I picked up the beads and planned to do it; but Cis looked
SO cross I couldn't. If I had a pretty necklace I'd go and give it
to her, and then maybe she'd love me better."

"My dear little missionary, you SHALL have beads to win the heart of
YOUR heathen, if that is all you need. See here; take anything you
like, and give it with the kiss."

As he spoke, Mr. Dover pulled open a drawer in the desk and
displayed a delightful collection of pretty, quaint, and curious
trinkets picked up in foreign lands, and kept for keepsakes, since
no little daughters of his own lived to wear them.

"How perf'ly dorgeous!" cried Rosy, who often fell into baby talk
when excited; and plunging in her hands, she revelled for some
minutes in sandal-wood cases, carved ivory fans, silver bangles,
barbaric brooches, and necklaces of coral, shells, amber, and golden
coins, that jingled musically.

"What SHALL I take for her?" cried the little maid, bewildered by
such a mine of wealth. "You pick out one, Mr. Thomas, that will
please her so much, 'cause you never send her anything, and she
don't like it," said Rosy, fearing that her own taste was not to be
trusted, as she liked the shells and shark's teeth ornaments best.

"No, I'll give YOU one, and you shall do as you like about giving it
to her. This, now, is really valuable and pretty, and any young lady
would like to wear it. It makes me think of you, my Button, for it
is like sunshine, and the word cut on the little heart means peace."

Mr. Dover held up a string of amber beads with its carved amulet,
and swung it to and fro where the light shone through it till each
bead looked like a drop of golden wine.

"Yes, that is lovely, and it smells nice, too. She will be so
s'prised and pleased; I'll go and take it to her right away," cried
Rosy, forgetting to ask anything for herself, in her delight at this
fine gift for Cis.

But as she lifted her head after he had fastened the clasp about her
neck, something in his face recalled the look it wore when she first
came in, and putting both hands upon his shoulders, she said in her
sweet little way,--

"You've made my troubles go away, can't I make yours? You are SO
kind to me, I'd love to help you if I could."

"You do, my child, more than you know; for when I get you in my arms
it seems as if one of my poor babies had come back to me, and for a
minute I forget the three little graves far away in India."

"Three!" cried Button, like a sad, soft echo; and she clung to the
poor man as if trying to fill the empty arms with the love and pity
that over-flowed the childish soul in her small body.

This was the comfort Mr. Thomas wanted, and for a few moments he
just cradled her on his hungry heart, crooning a Hindostanee
lullaby, while a few slow tears came dropping down upon the yellow
head, so like those hidden for years under the Indian flowers.
Presently he seemed to come back from the happy past to which the
old letters had carried him. He wiped his eyes, and Rosy's also,
with the big purple silk handkerchief, and pressing some very
grateful kisses on the hot cheeks, said cheerfully again,--

"God bless you, child, that's done me good! But don't let it sadden
you, dear; forget all about it, and tell no one what a sentimental
old fool I am."

"I never truly will! Only when you feel sorry about the poor little
babies, let me come and give you cuddlings. They always make people
feel more better, and I love 'em, and don't get any now my dear
people are away."

So the two made a tender little plan to comfort each other when
hearts were heavy with longings for the absent, and parted at the
small gate, both much cheered, and faster friends than ever.

Rosy hastened in with her peace-offering, forgetful now of headache
or loneliness as she sat patiently in the wide entry window-seat
listening till some sound in Cicely's room should show that she was
awake. Before that happened, however, poor Button fell asleep
herself, lulled by the quiet of the house,--for every one was
napping,--and dreamed that Mr. Dover stood waving a rainbow over
his head, while several Indian gods and three little girls were
dancing round him, hand in hand, to the tune of "Ring around a
rosy."

A loud yawn roused her, and there was Cis peeping out of her door to
see what time it was by the old-fashioned clock on the landing. Up
scrambled the child, feeling dizzy and heavy-eyed, but so eager to
give pleasure that she lost no time in saying, as she swung the
necklace in the sunshine,--

"See! this is for you, if you like it more better than the
thunder-and-lightning marbles, as Cousin Penny calls the one you
were going to wear."

"How lovely! Where DID you get it, child?" cried Cis, wide awake at
once, as she ran to the glass to try the effect of the new ornament
on her white neck.

"My dear Mr. Thomas gave it to me; but he said I could give it away
if I liked, and I want you to have it, 'cause it's ever so much
prettier than any you've got."

"That's very kind of you, Chicken, but why not keep it yourself? You
like nice things as well as I do," said Cicely, much impressed by
the value of the gift, for it was real amber, and the clasp of gold.

"Well, I've talked with Mr. Thomas about missionarying a great deal,
and he told me how he made the savinges good by giving them beads,
and things to eat, and being patient and kind to them. So I thought
I'd play be a missionary, and call this house Africa, and try to
make the people here behave more better," answered Rosy, with such
engaging earnestness, as well as frankness, that Cis laughed, and
exclaimed,--

"You impertinent monkey, to call us heathen and try to convert us!
How do you expect to do it?"

"Oh, I'm getting on pretty well, only you don't CONVERT as quick as
some of the savinges did. I'll tell you about it;" and Button went
on eagerly. "Cousin Penny is the good old one, but rather fussy and
slow, so I'm kind and patient, and now she loves me and lets me do
things I like. She is my best one. Cousin Henny is my cannybel,
'cause she eats so much, and I please HER by bringing nice things
and getting her cushions ready. You are my baddest one, who is cross
to me, and fights, and raps my head, and slaps my hands; so I
thought some beads would be nice for you, and I bringed these
beauties. Mr. Thomas gave 'em to me when I told him my trials."

Cicely looked angry, amused, and ashamed, as she listened to the
funny yet rather pathetic little play with which the lonely child
had tried to cheer herself and win the hearts of those about her.
She had the grace to blush, and offer back the necklace, saying in a
self-reproachful tone,--

"Keep your beads, little missionary, I'll be converted without them,
and try to be kinder to you. I AM a selfish wretch, but you shall
play be my little sister, and not have to go to strangers for
comfort in your trials any more. Come, kiss me, dear, and we'll
begin now."

Rosy was in her arms at once, and clung there, saying with a face
all smiles,--

"That's what I wanted! I thought I'd make a good savinge of you if I
tried VERY hard. Please be kind to me just till Mamma comes back,
and I'll be the best little sister that ever was."

"Why didn't you tell me all about it before?" asked Cicely,
smoothing the tired head on her shoulder with a new gentleness; for
this last innocent confession had touched her heart as well as her
conscience.

"You never seemed to care about my plays, and always said, 'Don't
chatter, child; run away and take care of yourself.' So I did; but
it was pretty dull, with only Tabby to tell secrets to and Bella to
kiss. Mr. Thomas said people over here didn't like children very
well, and I found they didn't. HE does, dearly, so I went to him;
but I like you now, you are so soft and kind to me."

"How hot your cheeks are! Come and let me cool them, and brush your
hair for tea," said Cis, as she touched the child's feverish skin,
and saw how heavy her eyes were.

"I'm all burning up, and my head is SO funny. I don't want any tea.
I want to lie on your sofa and go to sleep again. Can I?" asked
Rosy, with a dizzy look about the room, and a shiver at the idea of
eating.

"Yes, dear, I'll put on your little wrapper, and make you all
comfortable, and bring you some ice-water, for your lips are very
dry."

As she spoke, Cicely bustled about the room, and soon had Rosy
nicely settled with her best cologne-bottle and a fan; then she
hastened down to report that something was wrong, with a fear in her
own heart that if any harm did come to the child it would be her
fault. Some days before Cicely had sent Button-Rose with a note to a
friend's house where she knew some of the younger children were ill.
Since then she had heard that it was scarlet fever; but though Rosy
had waited some time for an answer to the note, and seen one of the
invalids, Cis had never mentioned the fact, being ashamed to confess
her carelessness, hoping no harm was done. Now she felt that it HAD
come, and went to tell gentle Cousin Penny with tears of vain
regret.

Great was the lamentation when the doctor, who was sent for in hot
haste, pronounced it scarlet fever; and deep was the self-reproach
of the two older women for their blindness in not before remarking
the languid air and want of appetite in the child. But Cicely was
full of remorse; for every quick word, every rap of the hateful
thimble, every service accepted without thanks, weighed heavily on
her conscience now, as such things have an inconvenient way of doing
when it is too late to undo them. Every one was devoted to the
child, even lazy Miss Henny gave up her naps to sit by her at all
hours, Miss Penny hovered over the little bed like a grandmother,
and Cicely refused to think of pleasure till the danger was over.

For soon Button-Rose was very ill, and the old house haunted by the
dreadful fear that death would rob them of the little creature who
grew so precious when the thought of losing her made their hearts
stand still. How could they live without the sound of that sweet
voice chirping about the house, the busy feet tripping up and down,
the willing hands trying to help, the sunny face smiling at every
one, and going away into corners to hide the tears that sometimes
came to dim its brightness? What would comfort the absent mother for
such a loss as this, and how could they answer to the father for the
carelessness that risked the child's life for a girl's errand? No
one dared to think, and all prayed heartily for Rosy's life, as they
watched and waited by the little bed where she lay so patiently,
till the fever grew high and she began to babble about many things.
Her childish trials were all told, her longings for Mamma, whose
place no one could fill, her quaint little criticisms upon those
about her, and her plans for making peace. These innocent
revelations caused many tears, and wrought some changes in those who
heard; for Miss Penny quite forgot her infirmities to live in the
sick-room as the most experienced nurse and tenderest watcher. Miss
Henny cooked her daintiest gruel, brewed her coolest drinks, and
lost many pounds in weight by her indefatigable trotting up and down
to minister to the invalid's least caprice. Cicely was kept away for
fear of infection, but HER penance was to wander about the great
house, more silent than ever now, to answer the inquiries and listen
to the sad forebodings of the neighbors, who came to offer help and
sympathy; for all loved little Button-Rose, and grieved to think of
any blight falling on the pretty blossom. To wile away the long
hours, Cicely fell to dusting the empty rooms, setting closets and
drawers to rights, and keeping all fresh and clean, to the great
relief of the old cousins, who felt that everything would go to
destruction in their absence. She read and sewed now, having no
heart for jaunting about; and as she made the long neglected white
pinafores, for Rosy, she thought much of the little girl who might
never live to wear them.

Meantime the fever took its course, and came at last to the fateful
day when a few hours would settle the question of life or death. The
hot flush died out of the cheeks that had lost their soft roundness
now, the lips were parched, the half-shut eyes looked like sick
violets, and all the pretty curls were tangled on the pillow. Rosy
no longer sung to Bella, talked of "three dear little girls" and Mr.
Thomas, tigers and bangles, Cis and necklaces, hens and gates. She
ceased to call for Mamma, asked no more why her "missionary man"
never came, and took no notice of the anxious old faces bending over
her. She lay in a stupor, and the doctor held the little wasted
hand, and tried to see the face of his watch with dim eyes as he
counted the faint pulse, whispering solemnly,--

"We can only hope and wait now. Sleep alone can save her."

As the sisters sat, one on either side the narrow bed that day, and
Cicely walked restlessly up and down the long hall below, where both
doors stood open to let in the cool evening air, as the sun went
down, a quick but quiet step came up the steps, and Mr. Dover walked
in without ringing. He had been away, and coming home an hour ago,
heard the sad news. Losing not a moment, he hurried to ask about his
little Button, and his face showed how great his love and fear were,
as he said in a broken whisper,--

"Will she live? My mother never told me how serious it was, or I
should have returned at once."

"We hope so, sir, but--" And there Cicely's voice failed, as she hid
her face and sobbed.

"My dear girl, don't give way. Keep up your heart, hope, pray, will
that the darling SHALL live, and that may do some good. We can't let
her go! we won't let her go! Let me see her; I know much of fevers
far worse than this, and might be able to suggest something," begged
Mr. Dover, throwing down his hat, and waving an immense fan with
such an air of resolution and cheery good-will that tired Cis felt
comforted at once, and led the way upstairs entirely forgetting the
great feud, as he did.

At the threshold of the door he paused, till the girl had whispered
his name. Miss Penny, always a gentlewoman, rose at once and went
to meet him, but Miss Henny did not even seem to see him, for just
then, as if dimly feeling that her friend was near, Rosy stirred,
and gave a long sigh.

Silently the three stood and looked at the beloved little creature
lying there in the mysterious shadow of death, and they so helpless
to keep her if the hour for departure had come.

"God help us!" sighed pious Miss Penny, folding her old hands, as if
they did that often now.

"Drifting away, I fear;" and Miss Henny's plump face looked almost
beautiful, with the tears on it, as she leaned nearer to listen to
the faint breath at the child's lips.

"No; we will keep her, please the Lord! If we can make her sleep
quietly for the next few hours she is safe. Let me try. Fan slowly
with this, Miss Henrietta, and you, dear lady, pray that the
precious little life may be given us."

As he spoke, Mr. Dover gave the great fan to Miss Henny, took the
small cold hands in his, and sitting on the bedside held them close
in his large warm ones, as if trying to pour life and strength into
the frail body, as his eyes, fixed on the half-opened ones, seemed
to call back the innocent soul hovering on the threshold of its
prison, like the butterfly poised upon the chrysalis before it soars
away.

Miss Penny knelt down near by, and laying her white head on the
other pillow, again besought God to spare this treasure to the
father and mother over the sea. How long they remained so none of
them ever knew, silent and motionless but for the slow waving of the
noiseless fan, which went to and fro like the wing of a great white
bird, as if Miss Henny's stout arm could never tire. Miss Penny was
so still she seemed to be asleep. Mr. Dover never stirred, but grew
paler as the minutes passed; and Cicely, creeping now and then to
look in and steal away, saw strange power in the black eyes that
seemed to hold the fluttering spirit of the little child by the love
and longing that made them both tender and commanding.

A level ray of sunlight stole through the curtain at last and turned
the tangles of bright hair to pure gold. Miss Henny rose to shut it
out, and as if her movement broke the spell, Rosy took a long full
breath, turned on the pillow, and putting one hand under her cheek,
seemed to fall asleep as naturally as she used to do when well. Miss
Penny looked up, touched the child's forehead, and whispered, with a
look of gratitude as bright as if the sunshine had touched her
also,--

"It is moist! this is real sleep! Oh, my baby! oh, my baby!" And the
old head went down again with a stifled sob, for her experienced eye
told her that the danger was passing by and Rosy would live.

"The prayers of the righteous avail much," murmured Mr. Dover,
turning to the other lady, who stood beside her sister looking down
at the little figure now lying so restfully between them.

"How can we thank you?" she whispered, offering her hand, with the
smile which had once made her pretty, and still touched the old face
with something better than beauty.

Mr. Dover took the hand and answered, with an eloquent look at the
child,--

"Let not the sun go down upon our wrath. Forgive me and be friends
again, for her sake."

"I will!" And the plump hands gave the thin ones a hearty shake as
the great feud ended forever over the bed of the little peacemaker
whose childish play had turned to happy earnest.






MOUNTAIN-LAUREL AND MAIDEN-HAIR





Here's your breakfast, miss. I hope it's right. Your mother showed
me how to fix it, and said I'd find a cup up here."

"Take that blue one. I have not much appetite, and can't eat if
things are not nice and pretty. I like the flowers. I've been
longing for some ever since I saw them last night."

The first speaker was a red-haired, freckle-faced girl, in a brown
calico dress and white apron, with a tray in her hands and an air of
timid hospitality in her manner; the second a pale, pretty creature,
in a white wrapper and blue net, sitting in a large chair, looking
about her with the languid interest of an invalid in a new place.
Her eyes brightened as they fell upon a glass of rosy laurel and
delicate maidenhair fern that stood among the toast and eggs,
strawberries and cream, on the tray.

"Our laurel is jest in blow, and I'm real glad you come in time to
see it. I'll bring you a lot, as soon's ever I get time to go for
it."

As she spoke, the plain girl replaced the ugly crockery cup and
saucer with the pretty china ones pointed out to her, arranged the
dishes, and waited to see if anything else was needed.

"What is your name, please?" asked the pretty girl, refreshing
herself with a draught of new milk.

"Rebecca. Mother thought I'd better wait on you; the little girls
are so noisy and apt to forget. Wouldn't you like a piller to your
back? you look so kind of feeble seems as if you wanted to be
propped up a mite."

There was so much compassion and good-will in the face and voice,
that Emily accepted the offer, and let Rebecca arrange a cushion
behind her; then, while the one ate daintily, and the other stirred
about an inner room, the talk went on,--for two girls are seldom
long silent when together.

"I think the air is going to suit me, for I slept all night and
never woke till Mamma had been up ever so long and got things all
nicely settled," said Emily, graciously, when the fresh strawberries
had been enjoyed, and the bread and butter began to vanish.

"I'm real glad you like it; most folks do, if they don't mind it
being plain and quiet up here. It's gayer down at the hotel, but the
air ain't half so good, and delicate folks generally like our old
place best," answered Becky, as she tossed over a mattress and shook
out the sheet with a brisk, capable air pleasant to see.

"I wanted to go to the hotel, but the doctor said it would be too
noisy for me, so Mamma was glad to find rooms here. I didn't think a
farm-house COULD be so pleasant. That view is perfectly splendid!"
and Emily sat up to gaze delightedly out of the window, below which
spread the wide intervale, through which the river ran with
hay-fields on either side, while along the green slopes of the hills
lay farm-houses with garden plots, and big barns waiting for the
harvest; and beyond, the rocky, wooded pastures dotted with cattle
and musical with cow-bells, brooks, and birds.

A balmy wind kissed a little color into the pale cheeks, the
listless eyes brightened as they looked, and the fretful lines
vanished from lips that smiled involuntarily at the sweet welcome
Nature gave the city child come to rest and play and grow gay and
rosy in her green lap.

Becky watched her with interest, and was glad to see how soon the
new-comer felt the charm of the place, for the girl loved her
mountain home, and thought the old farm-house the loveliest spot in
the world.

"When you get stronger I can show you lots of nice views round here.
There's a woodsy place behind the house that's just lovely. Down by
the laurel bushes is MY favorite spot, and among the rocks is a cave
where I keep things handy when I get a resting-spell now and then,
and want to be quiet. Can't get much at home, when there's boarders
and five children round in vacation time."

Becky laughed as she spoke, and there was a sweet motherly look in
her plain face, as she glanced at the three little red heads bobbing
about the door-yard below, where hens cackled, a pet lamb fed, and
the old white dog lay blinking in the sun.

"I like children; we have none at home, and Mamma makes such a baby
of me I'm almost ashamed sometimes. I want her to have a good rest
now, for she has taken care of me all winter and needs it. You shall
be my nurse, if I need one; but I hope to be so well soon that I can
see to myself. It's so tiresome to be ill!" and Emily sighed as she
leaned back among her pillows, with a glance at the little glass
which showed her a thin face and shorn head.

"It must be! I never was sick, but I have taken care of sick folks,
and have a sight of sympathy for 'em. Mother says I make a pretty
good nurse, being strong and quiet," answered Becky, plumping up
pillows and folding towels with a gentle despatch which was very
grateful to the invalid, who had dreaded a noisy, awkward
serving-maid.

"Never ill! how nice that must be! I'm always having colds and
headaches, and fusses of some kind. What do you do to keep well,
Rebecca?" asked Emily, watching her with interest, as she came in to
remove the tray.

"Nothing but work; I haven't time to be sick, and when I'm tuckered
out, I go and rest over yonder. Then I'm all right, and buckle to
again, as smart as ever;" and every freckle in Becky's rosy face
seemed to shine with cheerful strength and courage.

"I'm 'tuckered out' doing nothing," said Emily, amused with the new
expression, and eager to try a remedy which showed such fine results
in this case. "I shall visit your pet places and do a little work as
soon as I am able, and see if it won't set me up. Now I can only
dawdle, doze, and read a little. Will you please put those books
here on the table? I shall want them by-and-by."

Emily pointed to a pile of blue and gold volumes lying on a trunk,
and Becky dusted her hands as she took them up with an air of
reverence, for she read on the backs of the volumes names which made
her eyes sparkle.

"Do you care for poetry?" asked Emily, surprised at the girl's look
and manner.

"Guess I do! don't get much except the pieces I cut out of papers,
but I love 'em, and stick 'em in an old ledger, and keep it down in
my cubby among the rocks. I do love THAT man's pieces. They seem to
go right to the spot somehow;" and Becky smiled at the name of
Whittier as if the sweetest of our poets was a dear old friend of
hers.

"I like Tennyson better. Do you know him?" asked Emily, with a
superior air, for the idea of this farmer's daughter knowing
anything about poetry amused her.

"Oh yes, I've got a number of his pieces in my book, and I'm fond of
'em. But this man makes things so kind of true and natural I feel at
home with HIM. And this one I've longed to read, though I guess I
can't understand much of it. His 'Bumble Bee' was just lovely; with
the grass and columbines and the yellow breeches of the bee. I'm
never tired of that;" and Becky's face woke up into something like
beauty as she glanced hungrily at the Emerson while she dusted the
delicate cover that hid the treasures she coveted.

"I don't care much for him, but Mamma does. I like romantic poems,
and ballads, and songs; don't like descriptions of clouds and
fields, and bees, and farmers," said Emily, showing plainly that
even Emerson's simplest poems were far above her comprehension as
yet, because she loved sentiment more than Nature.

"I do, because I know 'em better than love and the romantic stuff
most poetry tells about. But I don't pretend to judge, I'm glad of
anything I can get. Now if you don't want me I'll pick up my dishes
and go to work."

With that Becky went away, leaving Emily to rest and dream with her
eyes on the landscape which was giving her better poetry than any
her books held. She told her mother about the odd girl, and was sure
she would be amusing if she did not forget her place and try to be
friends.

"She is a good creature, my dear, her mother's main stay, and works
beyond her strength, I am sure. Be kind to the poor girl, and put a
little pleasure into her life if you can," answered Mrs. Spenser, as
she moved about, settling comforts and luxuries for her invalid.

"I shall HAVE to talk to her, as there is no other person of my age
in the house. How are the school marms? shall you get on with them,
Mamma? It will be so lonely here for us both, if we don't make
friends with some one."

"Most intelligent and amiable women all three, and we shall have
pleasant times together, I am sure. You may safely cultivate Becky;
Mrs. Taylor told me she was a remarkably bright girl, though she may
not look it."

"Well, I'll see. But I do hate freckles and big red hands, and round
shoulders. She can't help it, I suppose, but ugly things fret me."

"Remember that she has no time to be pretty, and be glad she is so
neat and willing. Shall we read, dear? I'm ready now."

Emily consented, and listened for an hour or two while the pleasant
voice beside her conjured away all her vapors with some of Mrs.
Ewing's charming tales.

"The grass is dry now, and I want to stroll on that green lawn
before lunch. You rest, Mamma dear, and let me make discoveries all
alone," proposed Emily, when the sun shone warmly, and the instinct
of all young creatures for air and motion called her out.

So, with her hat and wrap, and book and parasol, she set forth to
explore the new land in which she found herself.

Down the wide, creaking stairs and out upon the door-stone she went,
pausing there for a moment to decide where first to go. The sound of
some one singing in the rear of the house led her in that direction,
and turning the corner she made her first pleasant discovery. A hill
rose steeply behind the farm-house, and leaning from the bank was an
old apple-tree, shading a spring that trickled out from the rocks
and dropped into a mossy trough below. Up the tree had grown a wild
grape-vine, making a green canopy over the great log which served as
a seat, and some one had planted maidenhair ferns about both seat
and spring to flourish beautifully in the damp, shady spot.

"Oh, how pretty! I'll go and sit there. It looks clean, and I can
see what is going on in that big kitchen, and hear the singing. I
suppose it's Becky's little sisters by the racket."

Emily established herself on the lichen-covered log with her feet
upon a stone, and sat enjoying the musical tinkle of the water, with
her eyes on the delicate ferns stirring in the wind, and the lively
jingle of the multiplication-table chanted by childish voices in her
ear.

Presently two little girls with a great pan of beans came to do
their work on the back doorstep, a third was seen washing dishes at
a window, and Becky's brown-spotted gown flew about the kitchen as
if a very energetic girl wore it. A woman's voice was heard giving
directions, as the speaker was evidently picking chickens somewhere
out of sight.

A little of the talk reached Emily and both amused and annoyed her,
for it proved that the country people were not as stupid as they
looked.

"Oh, well, we mustn't mind if she IS notional and kind of wearing;
she's been sick, and it will take time to get rid of her fretty
ways. Jest be pleasant, and take no notice, and that nice mother of
hers will make it all right," said the woman's voice.

"How anybody with every mortal thing to be happy with CAN be
out-of-sorts passes me. She fussed about every piller, chair, trunk,
and mite of food last night, and kept that poor tired lady trotting
till I was provoked. She's right pleasant this morning though, and
as pretty as a picture in her ruffled gown and that blue thing on
her head," answered Becky from the pantry, as she rattled out the
pie-board, little dreaming who sat hidden behind the grape-vine
festoons that veiled the corner by the spring.

"Well, she's got redder hair 'n' we have, so she needn't be so grand
and try to hide it with blue nets," added one little voice.

"Yes, and it's ever so much shorter 'n' ours, and curls all over her
head like Daisy's wool. I should think such a big girl would feel
real ashamed without no braids," said the other child, proudly
surveying the tawny mane that hung over her shoulders,--for like
most red-haired people all the children were blessed with luxuriant
crops of every shade from golden auburn to regular carrots.

"I think it's lovely. Suppose it had to be cut off when she had the
fever. Wish I could get rid of my mop, it's such a bother;" and
Becky was seen tying a clean towel over the great knot that made her
head look very like a copper kettle.

"Now fly round, deary, and get them pies ready. I'll have these
fowls on in a minute, and then go to my butter. You run off and see
if you can't find some wild strawberries for the poor girl, soon's
ever you are through with them beans, children. We must kind of
pamper her up for a spell till her appetite comes back," said the
mother.

Here the chat ended, and soon the little girls were gone, leaving
Becky alone rolling out pie-crust before the pantry window. As she
worked her lips moved, and Emily, still peeping through the leaves,
wondered what she was saying, for a low murmur rose and fell,
emphasized now and then with a thump of the rolling-pin.

"I mean to go and find out. If I stand on that wash-bench I can look
in and see her work. I'll show them all that _I_'m NOT 'fussy,' and
can be 'right pleasant' if I like."

With this wise resolution Emily went down the little path, and after
pausing to examine the churn set out to dry, and the row of pans
shining on a neighboring shelf, made her way to the window, mounted
the bench while Becky's back was turned, and pushing away the
morning-glory vines and scarlet beans that ran up on either side
peeped in with such a smiling face that the crossest cook could not
have frowned on her as an intruder.

"May I see you work? I can't eat pies, but I like to watch people
make them. Do you mind?"

"Not a bit. I'd ask you to come in, but it's dreadful hot here, and
not much room," answered Becky, crimping round the pastry before she
poured in the custard. "I'm going to make a nice little pudding for
you; your mother said you liked 'em; or would you rather have
whipped cream with a mite of jelly in it?" asked Becky, anxious to
suit her new boarder.

"Whichever is easiest to make. I don't care what I eat. Do tell me
what you were saying. It sounded like poetry," said Emily, leaning
both elbows on the wide ledge with a pale pink morning-glory kissing
her cheek, and a savory odor reaching her nose.

"Oh, I was mumbling some verses. I often do when I work, it sort of
helps me along; but it must sound dreadfully silly," and Becky
blushed as if caught in some serious fault.

"I do it, and it's a great comfort when I lie awake. I should think
you WOULD want something to help you along, you work so hard. Do you
like it, Becky?"

The familiar name, the kind tone, made the plain face brighten with
pleasure as its owner said, while she carefully filled a pretty bowl
with a golden mixture rich with fresh eggs and country milk--

"No, I don't, but I ought to. Mother isn't as strong as she used to
be, and there's a sight to do, and the children to be brought up,
and the mortgage to be paid off; so if _I_ don't fly round, who
will? We are doing real well now, for Mr. Walker manages the farm
and gives us our share, so our living is all right; then boarders in
summer and my school in winter helps a deal, and every year the boys
can do more, so I'd be a real sinner to complain if I do have to
step lively all day."

Becky smiled as she spoke, and straightened her bent shoulders as if
settling her burden for another trudge along the path of duty.

"Do you keep school? Why, how old are you, Becky?" asked Emily, much
impressed by this new discovery.

"I'm eighteen. I took the place of a teacher who got sick last fall,
and I kept school all winter. Folks seemed to like me, and I'm going
to have the same place this year. I'm so glad, for I needn't go away
and the pay is pretty good, as the school is large and the children
do well. You can see the school-house down the valley, that red
brick one where the roads meet;" and Becky pointed a floury finger,
with an air of pride that was pleasant to see.

Emily glanced at the little red house where the sun shone hotly in
summer, and all the winds of heaven must rage wildly in winter time,
for it stood, as country schools usually do, in the barest, most
uninviting spot for miles around.

"Isn't it awful down there in winter?" she asked, with a shiver at
the idea of spending days shut up in that forlorn place, with a
crowd of rough country children.

"Pretty cold, but we have plenty of wood, and we are used to snow
and gales up here. We often coast down, the whole lot of us, and
that is great fun. We take our dinners and have games noon-spells,
and so we get on first rate; some of my boys are big fellows, older
than I am; they clear the roads and make the fire and look after us,
and we are real happy together."

Emily found it so impossible to imagine happiness under such
circumstances that she changed the subject by asking in a tone which
had unconsciously grown more respectful since this last revelation
of Becky's abilities,--

"If you do so well here, why don't you try for a larger school in a
better place?"

"Oh, I couldn't leave mother yet; I hope to some day, when the girls
are older, and the boys able to get on alone. But I can't go now,
for there's a sight of things to do, and mother is always laid up
with rheumatism in cold weather. So much butter-making down cellar
is bad for her; but she won't let me do that in summer, so I take
care of her in winter. I can see to things night and morning, and
through the day she's quiet, and sits piecing carpet-rags and
resting up for next spring. We made and wove all the carpets in the
house, except the parlor one. Mrs. Taylor gave us that, and the
curtains, and the easy-chair. Mother takes a sight of comfort in
that."

"Mrs. Taylor is the lady who first came to board here, and told us
and others about it," said Emily.

"Yes, and she's the kindest lady in the world! I'll tell you all
about her some day, it's real interesting; now I must see to my
pies, and get the vegetables on," answered Becky, glancing at the
gay clock in the kitchen with an anxious look.

"Then I won't waste any more of your precious time. May I sit in
that pretty place; or is it your private bower?" asked Emily, as she
dismounted from the wash-bench.

"Yes, indeed you may. That's mother's resting-place when work is
done. Father made the spring long ago, and I put the ferns there.
She can't go rambling round, and she likes pretty things, so we
fixed it up for her, and she takes comfort there nights."

Becky bustled off to the oven with her pies, and Emily roamed away
to the big barn to lie on the hay, enjoying the view down the
valley, as she thought over what she had seen and heard, and very
naturally contrasted her own luxurious and tenderly guarded life
with this other girl's, so hard and dull and narrow. Working all
summer and teaching all winter in that dismal little school-house,
with no change but home cares and carpet-weaving! It looked horrible
to pleasure-loving Emily, who led the happy, care-free life of
girls of her class, with pleasures of all sorts, and a future of
still greater luxury, variety, and happiness, opening brightly
before her.

It worried her to think of any one being contented with such a
meagre share of the good things of life, when she was unsatisfied in
spite of the rich store showered upon her. She could not understand
it, and fell asleep wishing every one could be comfortable,--it was
so annoying to see them grubbing in kitchens, teaching in bleak
school-houses among snow-drifts, and wearing ugly calico gowns.

A week or two of quiet, country fare and the bracing mountain air
worked wonders for the invalid, and every one rejoiced to see the
pale cheeks begin to grow round and rosy, the languid eyes to
brighten, and the feeble girl who used to lie on her sofa half the
day now go walking about with her alpenstock, eager to explore all
the pretty nooks among the hills. Her mother blessed Mrs. Taylor for
suggesting this wholesome place. The tired "school marms," as Emily
called the three young women who were their fellow-boarders,
congratulated her as well as themselves on the daily improvement in
strength and spirits all felt; and Becky exulted in the marvellous
effects of her native air, aided by mother's good cookery and the
cheerful society of the children, whom the good girl considered the
most remarkable and lovable youngsters in the world.

Emily felt like the queen of this little kingdom, and was regarded
as such by every one, for with returning health she lost her fretful
ways, and living with simple people, soon forgot her girlish airs
and vanities, becoming very sweet and friendly with all about her.
The children considered her a sort of good fairy who could grant
wishes with magical skill, as various gifts plainly proved. The boys
were her devoted servants, ready to run errands, "hitch up" and take
her to drive at any hour, or listen in mute delight when she sang to
her guitar in the summer twilight.

But to Becky she was a special godsend and comfort, for before the
first month had gone they were good friends, and Emily had made a
discovery which filled her head with brilliant plans for Becky's
future, in spite of her mother's warnings, and the sensible
girl's own reluctance to be dazzled by enthusiastic prophecies and
dreams.

It came about in this way. Some three weeks after the two girls met,
Emily went one evening to their favorite trysting-place,--Becky's
bower among the laurels. It was a pretty nook in the shadow of a
great gray bowlder near the head of the green valley which ran down
to spread into the wide intervale below. A brook went babbling among
the stones and grass and sweet-ferns, while all the slope was rosy
with laurel-flowers in their times, as the sturdy bushes grew
thickly on the hill-side, down the valley, and among the woods that
made a rich background for these pink and white bouquets arranged
with Nature's own careless grace.

Emily liked this spot, and ever since she had been strong enough to
reach it, loved to climb up and sit there with book and work,
enjoying the lovely panorama before her. Floating mists often gave
her a constant succession of pretty pictures; now a sunny glimpse of
the distant lake, then the church spire peeping above the hill, or a
flock of sheep feeding in the meadow, a gay procession of young
pilgrims winding up the mountain, or a black cloud heavy with a
coming storm, welcome because of the glorious rainbow and its shadow
which would close the pageant.

Unconsciously the girl grew to feel not only the beauty but the
value of these quiet hours, to find a new peace, refreshment, and
happiness, bubbling up in her heart as naturally as the brook gushed
out among the mossy rocks, and went singing away through hayfields
and gardens, and by dusty roads, till it met the river and rolled on
to the sea. Something dimly stirred in her, and the healing spirit
that haunts such spots did its sweet ministering till the innocent
soul began to see that life was not perfect without labor as well as
love, duty as well as happiness, and that true contentment came from
within, not from without.

On the evening we speak of, she went to wait for Becky, who would
join her as soon as the after-supper chores were done. In the little
cave which held a few books, a dipper, and a birch-bark basket for
berries, Emily kept a sketching block and a box of pencils, and
often amused herself by trying to catch some of the lovely scenes
before her. These efforts usually ended in a humbler attempt, and a
good study of an oak-tree, a bit of rock, or a clump of ferns was
the result. This evening the sunset was so beautiful she could not
draw, and remembering that somewhere in Becky's scrap-book there was
a fine description of such an hour by some poet, she pulled out the
shabby old volume, and began to turn over the leaves.

She had never cared to look at it but once, having read all the best
of its contents in more attractive volumes, so Becky kept it tucked
away in the farther corner of her rustic closet, and evidently
thought it a safe place to conceal a certain little secret which
Emily now discovered. As she turned the stiff pages filled with all
sorts of verses, good, bad, and indifferent, a sheet of paper
appeared on which was scribbled these lines in school-girl
handwriting:--






MOUNTAIN--LAUREL





  My bonnie flower, with truest joy
    Thy welcome face I see,
  The world grows brighter to my eyes,
    And summer comes with thee.
  My solitude now finds a friend,
    And after each hard day,
  I in my mountain garden walk,
    To rest, or sing, or pray.

  All down the rocky slope is spread
    Thy veil of rosy snow,
  And in the valley by the brook,
    Thy deeper blossoms grow.
  The barren wilderness grows fair,
    Such beauty dost thou give;
  And human eyes and Nature's heart
    Rejoice that thou dost live.

  Each year I wait thy coming, dear,
    Each year I love thee more,
  For life grows hard, and much I need
    Thy honey for my store.
  So, like a hungry bee, I sip
    Sweet lessons from thy cup,
  And sitting at a flower's feet,
    My soul learns to look up.

  No laurels shall I ever win,
     No splendid blossoms bear,
  But gratefully receive and use
   God's blessed sun and air;
  And, blooming where my lot is cast,
   Grow happy and content,
  Making some barren spot more fair,
   For a humble life well spent.

"She wrote it herself! I can't believe it!" said Emily, as she put
down the paper, looking rather startled, for she DID believe it, and
felt as if she had suddenly looked into a fellow-creature's heart.
"I thought her just an ordinary girl, and here she is a poet,
writing verses that make me want to cry! I don't suppose they ARE
very good, but they seem to come right out of her heart, and touch
me with the longing and the patience or the piety in them. Well, I
AM surprised!" and Emily read the lines again, seeing the faults
more plainly than before, but still feeling that the girl put
herself into them, vainly trying to express what the wild flower was
to her in the loneliness which comes to those who have a little
spark of the divine fire burning in their souls.

"Shall I tell her I've found it out? I must! and see if I can't get
her verses printed. Of course she has more tucked away somewhere.
That is what she hums to herself when she's at work, and won't tell
me about when I ask. Sly thing! to be so bashful and hide her gift.
I'll tease her a bit and see what she says. Oh dear, I wish _I_
could do it! Perhaps she'll be famous some day, and then I'll have
the glory of discovering her."

With that consolation Emily turned over the pages of the ledger and
found several more bits of verse, some very good for an untaught
girl, others very faulty, but all having a certain strength of
feeling and simplicity of language unusual in the effusions of young
maidens at the sentimental age.

Emily had a girlish admiration for talent of any kind, and being
fond of poetry, was especially pleased to find that her humble
friend possessed the power of writing it. Of course she exaggerated
Becky's talent, and as she waited for her, felt sure that she had
discovered a feminine Burns among the New Hampshire hills, for all
the verses were about natural and homely objects, touched into
beauty by sweet words or tender sentiment. She had time to build a
splendid castle in the air and settle Becky in it with a crown of
glory on her head, before the quiet figure in a faded sunbonnet came
slowly up the slope with the glow of sunset on a tired but tranquil
face.

"Sit here and have a good rest, while I talk to you," said Emily,
eager to act the somewhat dramatic scene she had planned. Becky sunk
upon the red cushion prepared for her, and sat looking down at the
animated speaker, as Emily, perched on a mossy stone before her,
began the performance.

"Becky, did you ever hear of the Goodale children? They lived in the
country and wrote poetry and grew to be famous."

"Oh yes, I've read their poems and like 'em very much. Do you know
'em?" and Becky looked interested at once.

"No, but I once met a girl who was something like them, only she
didn't have such an easy time as they did, with a father to help,
and a nice Sky-farm, and good luck generally. I've tried to write
verses myself, but I always get into a muddle, and give it up. This
makes me interested in other girls who CAN do it, and I want to help
my friend. I'm SURE she has talent, and I'd so like to give her a
lift in some way. Let me read you a piece of hers and see what you
think of it."

"Do!" and Beck threw off the sunbonnet, folded her hands round her
knees, and composed herself to listen with such perfect
unconsciousness of what was coming that Emily both laughed at the
joke and blushed at the liberty she felt she was taking with the
poor girl's carefully hidden secret.

Becky was sure now that Emily was going to read something of her own
after this artful introduction, and began to smile as the paper was
produced and the first four lines read in a tone that was half
timid, half triumphant. Then with a cry she seized and crumpled up
the paper, exclaiming almost fiercely,--

"It's mine! Where did you get it? How dar'st you touch it?"

Emily fell upon her knees with a face and voice so full of
penitence, pleasure, sympathy, and satisfaction, that Becky's wrath
was appeased before her friend's explanation ended with these
soothing and delightful words,--

"That's all, dear, and I beg your pardon. But I'm sure you will be
famous if you keep on, and I shall yet see a volume of poems by
Rebecca Moore of Rocky Nook, New Hampshire."

Becky hid her face as if shame, surprise, wonder, and joy filled her
heart too full and made a few happy tears drop on the hands so worn
with hard work, when they ached to be holding a pen and trying to
record the fancies that sung in her brain as ceaselessly as the soft
sough of the pines or the ripple of the brook murmured in her ear
when she sat here alone. She could not express the vague longings
that stirred in her soul; she could only feel and dimly strive to
understand and utter them, with no thought of fame or fortune,--for
she was a humble creature, and never knew that the hardships of her
life were pressing out the virtues of her nature as the tread of
careless feet crush the sweet perfume from wild herbs.

Presently she looked up, deeply touched by Emily's words and
caresses, and her blue eyes shone like stars as her face beamed with
something finer than mere beauty, for the secrets of her innocent
heart were known to this friend now, and it was very sweet to accept
the first draught of confidence and praise.

"I don't mind much, but I was scared for a minute. No one knows but
Mother, and she laughs at me, though she don't care if it makes me
happy. I'm glad you like my scribbling, but really I never think or
hope of being anybody. I couldn't, you know! but it's real nice to
have you say I MIGHT and to make believe for a while."

"But why not, Becky? The Goodale girls did, and half the poets in
the world were poor, ignorant people at first, you know. It only
needs time and help, and the gift will grow, and people see it; and
then the glory and the money will come," cried Emily, quite carried
away by her own enthusiasm and good-will.

"Could I get any money by these things?" asked Becky, looking at the
crumpled paper lying under a laurel-bush.

"Of course you could, dear! Let me have some of them, and I'll show
you that I know good poetry when I see it. You will believe if some
bank-bills come with the paper the verses appear in, I hope?"

Blind to any harm she might do by exciting vain hopes in her
eagerness to cheer and help, Emily made this rash proposal in all
good faith. meaning to pay for the verses herself if no editor was
found to accept them.

Becky looked half bewildered by this brilliant prospect, and took a
long breath, as if some hand had lifted a heavy burden a little way
from her weary back, for stronger than ambition for herself was love
for her family, and the thought of help for them was sweeter than
any dream of fame.

"Yes, I would! oh, if I only COULD, I'd be the happiest girl in the
world! But I can't believe it, Emily. I heard Mrs. Taylor say that
only the VERY BEST poetry paid, and mine is poor stuff, I know well
enough."

"Of course it needs polishing and practice and all that; but I'm
sure it is oceans better than half the sentimental twaddle we see in
the papers, and I KNOW that some of those pieces ARE paid for,
because I have a friend who is in a newspaper office, and he told me
so. Yours are quaint and simple and some very original. I'm sure
that ballad of the old house is lovely, and I want to send it to
Whittier. Mamma knows him; it's the sort he likes, and he is so kind
to every one, he will criticise it, and be interested when she tells
him about you. Do let me!"

"I never could in the world! It would be so bold, Mother would think
I was crazy. I love Mr. Whittier, but I wouldn't dar'st to show him
my nonsense, though reading his beautiful poetry helps me ever so
much."

Becky looked and spoke as if her breath had been taken away by this
audacious proposal; and yet a sudden delicious hope sprung up in her
heart that there might, perhaps, be a spark of real virtue in the
little fire which burned within her, warming and brightening her
dull life.

"Let us ask Mamma; she will tell us what is best to do first, for
she knows all sorts of literary people, and won't say any more than
you want her to. I'm bent on having my way, Becky, and the more
modest you are, the surer I am that you are a genius. Real geniuses
always ARE shy; so you just make up your mind to give me the best of
your pieces, and let me prove that I'm right."

It was impossible to resist such persuasive words, and Becky soon
yielded to the little siren who was luring her out of her safe,
small pool into the deeper water that looks so blue and smooth till
the venturesome paper boats get into the swift eddies, or run
aground upon the rocks and sandbars.

The greatest secrecy was to be preserved, and no one but Mrs.
Spenser was to know what a momentous enterprise was afoot. The girls
sat absorbed in their brilliant plans till it was nearly dark, then
groped their way home hand in hand, leaving another secret for the
laurels to keep and dream over through their long sleep, for blossom
time was past, and the rosy faces turning pale in the July sun.

Neither of the girls forgot the talk they had that night in Emily's
room, for she led her captive straight to her mother, and told her
all their plans and aspirations without a moment's delay.

Mrs. Spenser much regretted her daughter's well-meant enthusiasm,
but fearing harm might be done, very wisely tried to calm the
innocent excitement of both by the quiet matter-of-fact way in which
she listened to the explanation Emily gave her, read the verses
timidly offered by Becky, and then said, kindly but firmly:--

"This is not poetry, my dear girls, though the lines run smoothly
enough, and the sentiment is sweet. It would bring neither fame nor
money, and Rebecca puts more real truth, beauty, and poetry into her
dutiful daily life than in any lines she has written."

"We had such a lovely plan for Becky to come to town with me, and
see the world, and write, and be famous. How can you spoil it all?"

"My foolish little daughter, I must prevent you from spoiling this
good girl's life by your rash projects. Becky will see that I am
wise, though you do not, and SHE will understand this verse from my
favorite poet, and lay it to heart:--

  "So near is grandeur to our Dust,
   So nigh is God to man,
   When Duty whispers low, 'Thou must!'
    The youth replies, 'I can!'"

"I do! I will! please go on," and Becky's troubled eyes grew clear
and steadfast as she took the words home to herself, resolving to
live up to them.

"Oh, mother!" cried Emily, thinking her very cruel to nip their
budding hopes in this way.

"I know you won't believe it now, nor be able to see all that I mean
perhaps, but time will teach you both to own that I am right, and to
value the substance more than the shadow," continued Mrs. Spenser.
"Many girls write verses and think they are poets; but it is only a
passing mood, and fortunately for the world, and for them also, it
soon dies out in some more genuine work or passion. Very few have
the real gift, and those to whom it IS given wait and work and
slowly reach the height of their powers. Many delude themselves, and
try to persuade the world that they can sing; but it is waste of
time, and ends in disappointment, as the mass of sentimental rubbish
we all see plainly proves. Write your little verses, my dear, when
the spirit moves,--it is a harmless pleasure, a real comfort, and a
good lesson for you; but do not neglect higher duties or deceive
yourself with false hopes and vain dreams. 'First live, then write,'
is a good motto for ambitious young people. A still better for us
all is, 'Do the duty that lies nearest;' and the faithful
performance of that, no matter how humble it is, will be the best
help for whatever talent may lie hidden in us, ready to bloom when
the time comes. Remember this, and do not let my enthusiastic girl's
well-meant but unwise prophecies and plans unsettle you, and unfit
you for the noble work you are doing."

"Thank you, ma'am! I WILL remember; I know you are right, and I
won't be upset by foolish notions. I never imagined before that I
COULD be a poet; but it sounded so sort of splendid, I thought maybe
it MIGHT happen to me, by-and-by, as it does to other folks. I
won't lot on it, but settle right down and do my work cheerful."

As she listened, Becky's face had grown pale and serious, even a
little sad; but as she answered, her eyes shone, her lips were firm,
and her plain face almost beautiful with the courage and confidence
that sprung up within her. She saw the wisdom of her friend's
advice, felt the kindness of showing her the mistake frankly, and
was grateful for it,--conscious in her own strong, loving heart that
it was better to live and work for others than to dream and strive
for herself alone.

Mrs. Spenser was both surprised and touched by the girl's look,
words, and manner, and her respect much increased by the courage and
good temper with which she saw her lovely castle in the air vanish
like smoke, leaving the hard reality looking harder than ever, after
this little flight into the fairy regions of romance.

She talked long with the girls, and gave them the counsel all eager
young people need, yet are very slow to accept till experience
teaches them its worth. As the friend of many successful literary
people, Mrs. Spenser was constantly receiving the confidences of
unfledged scribblers, each of whom was sure that he or she had
something valuable to add to the world's literature. Her advice was
always the same, "Work and wait;" and only now and then was a young
poet or author found enough in earnest to do both, and thereby prove
to themselves and others that either they DID possess power, or did
not, and so settle the question forever. "First live, then write,"
proved a quietus for many, and "Do the duty that lies nearest"
satisfied the more sincere that they could be happy without fame.
So, thanks to this wise and kindly woman, a large number of worthy
youths and maidens ceased dreaming and fell to work, and the world
was spared reams of feeble verse and third-rate romances.

After that night Becky spent fewer spare hours in her nest, and more
in reading with Emily, who lent her books and helped her to
understand them,--both much assisted by Mrs. Spenser, who marked
passages, suggested authors, and explained whatever puzzled them.
Very happy bits of time were these, and very precious to both, as
Emily learned to see and appreciate the humbler, harder side of
life, and Becky got delightful glimpses into the beautiful world of
art, poetry, and truth, which gave her better food for heart and
brain than sentimental musings or blind efforts to satisfy the
hunger of her nature with verse-writing.

Their favorite places were in the big barn, on the front porch, or
by the spring. This last was Emily's schoolroom, and she both taught
and learned many useful lessons there.

One day as Becky came to rest a few minutes and shell peas, Emily
put down her book to help; and as the pods flew, she said, nodding
toward the delicate ferns that grew thickly all about the trough,
the rock, and the grassy bank,--

"We have these in our greenhouse, but I never saw them growing wild
before, and I don't find them anywhere up here. How did you get such
beauties, and make them do so well?"

"Oh, they grow in nooks on the mountain hidden under the taller
ferns, and in sly corners. But they don't grow like these, and die
soon unless transplanted and taken good care of. They always make me
think of you,--so graceful and delicate, and just fit to live with
tea-roses in a hot-house, and go to balls in beautiful ladies'
bokays," answered Becky, smiling at her new friend, always so
dainty, and still so delicate in spite of the summer's rustication.

"Thank you! I suppose I shall never be very strong or able to do
much; so I AM rather like a fern, and do live in a conservatory all
winter, as I can't go out a great deal. An idle thing, Becky!" and
Emily sighed, for she was born frail, and even her tenderly guarded
life could not give her the vigor of other girls. But the sigh
changed to a smile as she added,--

"If I am like the fern, you are like your own laurel,--strong, rosy,
and able to grow anywhere. I want to carry a few roots home, and see
if they won't grow in my garden. Then you will have me, and I you. I
only hope YOUR plant will do as well as mine does here."

"It won't! ever so many folks have taken roots away, but they never
thrive in gardens as they do on the hills where they belong. So I
tell 'em to leave the dear bushes alone, and come up here and enjoy
'em in their own place. You might keep a plant of it in your
hot-house, and it would blow I dare say; but it would never be half
so lovely as my acres of them, and I guess it would only make you
sad, seeing it so far from home, and pale and pining," answered
Becky, with her eyes on the green slopes where the mountain-laurel
braved the wintry snow, and came out fresh and early in the spring.

"Then I'll let it alone till I come next summer. But don't you take
any of the fern into the house in the cold weather? I should think
it would grow in your sunny windows," said Emily, pleased by the
fancy that it resembled herself.

"I tried it, but it needs a damp place, and our cold nights kill it.
No, it won't grow in our old house; but I cover it with leaves, and
the little green sprouts come up as hearty as can be out here. The
shade, the spring, the shelter of the rock, keep it alive, you see,
so it's no use trying to move it."

Both sat silent for a few minutes, as their hands moved briskly and
they thought of their different lots. An inquisitive ray of sunshine
peeped in at them, touching Becky's hair till it shone like red
gold. The same ray dazzled Emily's eyes; she put up her hand to pull
her hat-brim lower, and touched the little curls on her forehead.
This recalled her pet grievance, and made her say impatiently, as
she pushed the thick short locks under her net,--

"My hair is SUCH a plague! I don't know what I am to do when I go
into society by-and-by. This crop is so unbecoming, and I can't
match my hair anywhere, it is such a peculiar shade of golden-auburn."

"It's a pretty color, and I think the curls much nicer than a
boughten switch," said Becky, quite unconscious that her own
luxuriant locks were of the true Titian red, and would be much
admired by artistic eyes.

"I don't! I shall send to Paris to match it, and then wear a braid
round my head as you do sometimes. I suppose it will cost a fortune,
but I WON'T have a strong-minded crop. A friend of mine got a lovely
golden switch for fifty dollars."

"My patience! do folks pay like that for false hair?" asked Becky,
amazed.

"Yes, indeed. White hair costs a hundred, I believe, if it is long.
Why, you could get ever so much for yours if you ever wanted to sell
it. I'll take part of it, for in a little while mine will be as
dark, and I'd like to wear your hair, Becky."

"Don't believe Mother would let me. She is very proud of our red
heads. If I ever do cut it, you shall have some. I may be hard up
and glad to sell it perhaps. My sakes! I smell the cake burning!"
and off flew Becky to forget the chat in her work.

Emily did not forget it, and hoped Becky would be tempted, for she
really coveted one of the fine braids, but felt shy about asking the
poor girl for even a part of her one beauty.

So July and August passed pleasantly and profitably to both girls,
and in September they were to part. No more was said about poetry;
and Emily soon became so interested in the busy, practical life
about her that her own high-flown dreams were quite forgotten, and
she learned to enjoy the sweet prose of daily labor.

One breezy afternoon as she and her mother sat resting from a stroll
on the way-side bank among the golden-rod and asters, they saw Becky
coming up the long hill with a basket on her arm. She walked slowly,
as if lost in thought, yet never missed pushing aside with a decided
gesture of her foot every stone that lay in her way. There were many
in that rocky path, but Becky left it smoother as she climbed, and
paused now and then to send some especially sharp or large one
spinning into the grassy ditch beside the road.

"Isn't she a curious girl, Mamma? so tired after her long walk to
town, yet so anxious not to leave a stone in the way," said Emily,
as they watched her slow approach.

"A very interesting one to me, dear, because under that humble
exterior lies a fine, strong character. It is like Becky to clear
her way, even up a dusty hill where the first rain will wash out
many more stones. Let us ask her why she does it. I've observed the
habit before, and always meant to ask," replied Mrs. Spenser.

"Here we are! Come and rest a minute, Becky, and tell us if you mend
roads as well as ever so many other things;" called Emily, beckoning
with a smile, as the girl looked up and saw them.

"Oh, it's a trick of mine; I caught it of Father when I was a little
thing, and do it without knowing it half the time," said Becky,
sinking down upon a mossy rock, as if rest were welcome.

"Why did he do it?" asked Emily, who knew that her friend loved to
talk of her father.

"Well, it's a family failing I guess, for his father did the same,
only HE began with his farm and let the roads alone. The land used
to be pretty much all rocks up here, you know, and farmers had to
clear the ground if they wanted crops. It was a hard fight, and took
a sight of time and patience to grub out roots and blast rocks and
pick up stones that seemed to grow faster than anything else. But
they kept on, and now see!"

As she spoke, Becky pointed proudly to the wide, smooth fields lying
before them, newly shorn of grass or grain, waving with corn, or
rich in garden crops ripening for winter stores. Here and there were
rocky strips unreclaimed, as if to show what had been done; and
massive stone walls surrounded pasture, field, and garden.

"A good lesson in patience and perseverance, my dear, and does great
honor to the men who made the wilderness blossom like the rose,"
said Mrs. Spenser.

"Then you can't wonder that they loved it and we want to keep it. I
guess it would break Mother's heart to sell this place, and we are
all working as hard as ever we can to pay off the mortgage. Then
we'll be just the happiest family in New Hampshire," said Becky,
fondly surveying the old farm-house, the rocky hill, and the
precious fields won from the forest.

"You never need fear to lose it; we will see to that if you will let
us," began Mrs. Spenser, who was both a rich and a generous woman.

"Oh, thank you! but we won't need help I guess; and if we should,
Mrs. Taylor made us promise to come to her," cried Becky. "She found
us just in our hardest time, and wanted to fix things then; but we
are proud in our way, and Mother said she'd rather work it off if
she could. Then what did that dear lady do but talk to the folks
round here, and show 'em how a branch railroad down to Peeksville
would increase the value of the land, and how good this valley would
be for strawberries and asparagus and garden truck if we could only
get it to market. Some of the rich men took up the plan, and we hope
it will be done this fall. It will be the making of us, for our land
is first-rate for small crops, and the children can help at that,
and with a deepot close by it would be such easy work. That's what I
call helping folks to help themselves. Won't it be grand?"

Becky looked so enthusiastic that Emily could not remain
uninterested, though market-gardening did not sound very romantic.

"I hope it will come, and next year we shall see you all hard at it.
What a good woman Mrs. Taylor is!"

"Ain't she? and the sad part of it is, she can't do and enjoy all
she wants to, because her health is so poor. She was a country girl,
you know, and went to work in the city as waiter in a boarding-house.
A rich man fell in love with her and married her, and she took care
of him for years, and he left her all his money. She was quite broken
down, but she wanted to make his name loved and honored after his
death, as he hadn't done any good while he lived; so she gives away
heaps, and is never tired of helping poor folks and doing all sorts
of grand things to make the world better. I call that splendid!"

"So do I, yet it is only what you are doing in a small way, Becky,"
said Mrs. Spenser, as the girl paused out of breath. "Mrs. Taylor
clears the stones out of people's paths, making their road easier to
climb than hers has been, and leaving behind her fruitful fields for
others to reap. This is a better work than making verses, for it is
the real poetry of life, and brings to those who give themselves to
it, no matter in what humble ways, something sweeter than fame and
more enduring than fortune."

"So it does! I see that now, and know why we love Father as we do,
and want to keep what he worked so hard to give us. He used to say
every stone cleared away was just so much help to the boys; and he
used to tell me his plans as I trotted after him round the farm,
helping all I could, being the oldest, and like him, he said."

Becky paused with full eyes, for not even to these good friends
could she ever tell the shifts and struggles in which she had
bravely borne her part during the long hard years that had wrested
the little homestead from the stony-hearted hills.

The musical chime of a distant clock reminded her that supper time
was near, and she sprang up as if much refreshed by this pleasant
rest by the way-side. As she pulled out her handkerchief, a little
roll of pale blue ribbon fell from her pocket, and Emily caught it
up, exclaiming mischievously, "Are you going to make yourself fine
next Sunday, when Moses Pennel calls, Becky?"

The girl laughed and blushed as she said, carefully folding up the
ribbon,--

"I'm going to do something with it that I like a sight better than
that. Poor Moses won't come any more, I guess. I'm not going to
leave Mother till the girls can take my place, and only then to
teach, if I can get a good school somewhere near."

"We shall see!" and Emily nodded wisely.

"We shall!" and Becky nodded decidedly, as she trudged on up the
steep hill beside Mrs. Spenser, while Emily walked slowly behind,
poking every stone she saw into the grass, unmindful of the
detriment to her delicate shoes, being absorbed in a new and
charming idea of trying to follow Mrs. Taylor's example in a small
way.

A week later the last night came, and just as they were parting for
bed, in rushed one of the boys with the exciting news that the
railroad surveyors were in town, the folks talking about the grand
enterprise, and the fortune of the place made forever.

Great was the rejoicing in the old farm-house; the boys cheered, the
little girls danced, the two mothers dropped a happy tear as they
shook each other's hands, and Emily embraced Becky, tenderly
exclaiming,--"There, you dear thing, is a great stone shoved out of
YOUR way, and a clear road to fortune at last; for I shall tell all
my friends to buy your butter and eggs, and fruit and pigs, and
everything you send to market on that blessed railroad."

"A keg of our best winter butter is going by stage express to-morrow
anyway; and when our apples come, we shan't need a railroad to get
'em to you, my darling dear," answered Becky, holding the delicate
girl in her arms with a look and gesture half sisterly, half
motherly, wholly fond and grateful.

When Emily got to her room, she found that butter and apples were
not all the humble souvenirs offered in return for many comfortable
gifts to the whole family.

On the table, in a pretty birch-bark cover, lay several of Becky's
best poems neatly copied, as Emily had expressed a wish to keep
them; and round the rustic volume, like a ring of red gold, lay a
great braid of Becky's hair, tied with the pale blue ribbon she had
walked four miles to buy, that her present might look its best.

Of course there were more embraces and kisses, and thanks and loving
words, before Emily at last lulled herself to sleep planning a
Christmas box, which should supply every wish and want of the entire
family if she could find them out.

Next morning they parted; but these were not mere summer friends,
and they did not lose sight of one another, though their ways lay
far apart. Emily had found a new luxury to bring more pleasure into
life, a new medicine to strengthen soul and body; and in helping
others, she helped herself wonderfully.

Becky went steadily on her dutiful way, till the homestead was free,
the lads able to work the farm alone, the girls old enough to fill
her place, and the good mother willing to rest at last among her
children. Then Becky gave herself to teaching,--a noble task, for
which she was well fitted, and in which she found both profit and
pleasure, as she led her flock along the paths from which she
removed the stumbling-blocks for their feet, as well as for her
own. She put her poetry into her life, and made of it "a grand sweet
song" in which beauty and duty rhymed so well that the country girl
became a more useful, beloved, and honored woman than if she had
tried to sing for fame which never satisfies.

So each symbolical plant stood in its own place, and lived its
appointed life. The delicate fern grew in the conservatory among
tea-roses and camelias, adding grace to every bouquet of which it
formed a part, whether it faded in a ball-room, or was carefully
cherished by some poor invalid's bed-side,--a frail thing, yet with
tenacious roots and strong stem, nourished by memories of the rocky
nook where it had learned its lesson so well. The mountain-laurel
clung to the bleak hillside, careless of wintry wind and snow, as
its sturdy branches spread year by year, with its evergreen leaves
for Christmas cheer, its rosy flowers for spring-time, its fresh
beauty free to all as it clothed the wild valley with a charm that
made a little poem of the lovely spot where the pines whispered,
woodbirds sang, and the hidden brook told the sweet message it
brought from the mountain-top where it was born.


The End.





A Modern Cinderella

or The Little Old Shoe

And Other Stories


by

LOUISA MAY ALCOTT




CONTENTS

  A MODERN CINDERELLA: OR, THE LITTLE OLD SHOE
  DEBBY'S DEBUT
  BROTHERS
  NELLY'S HOSPITAL




A MODERN CINDERELLA

OR,

THE LITTLE OLD SHOE


HOW IT WAS LOST

Among green New England hills stood an ancient house, many-gabled,
mossy-roofed, and quaintly built, but picturesque and pleasant to the
eye; for a brook ran babbling through the orchard that encompassed it
about, a garden-plat stretched upward to the whispering birches on the
slope, and patriarchal elms stood sentinel upon the lawn, as they had
stood almost a century ago, when the Revolution rolled that way and
found them young.

One summer morning, when the air was full of country sounds, of mowers
in the meadow, black-birds by the brook, and the low of kine upon the
hill-side, the old house wore its cheeriest aspect, and a certain
humble history began.

"Nan!"

"Yes, Di."

And a head, brown-locked, blue-eyed, soft-featured, looked in at the
open door in answer to the call.

"Just bring me the third volume of 'Wilhelm Meister,' there's a dear.
It's hardly worth while to rouse such a restless ghost as I, when I'm
once fairly laid."

As she spoke, Di PUlled up her black braids, thumped the pillow of the
couch where she was lying, and with eager eyes went down the last page
of her book.

"Nan!"

"Yes, Laura," replied the girl, coming back with the third volume for
the literary cormorant, who took it with a nod, still too content upon
the "Confessions of a Fair Saint" to remember the failings of a certain
plain sinner.

"Don't forget the Italian cream for dinner. I depend upon it; for it's
the only thing fit for me this hot weather."

And Laura, the cool blonde, disposed the folds of her white gown more
gracefully about her, and touched up the eyebrow of the Minerva she was
drawing.

"Little daughter!"

"Yes, father."

"Let me have plenty of clean collars in my bag, for I must go at once;
and some of you bring me a glass of cider in about an hour;--I shall be
in the lower garden."

The old man went away into his imaginary paradise, and Nan into that
domestic purgatory on a summer day,--the kitchen.  There were vines
about the windows, sunshine on the floor, and order everywhere; but it
was haunted by a cooking-stove, that family altar whence such varied
incense rises to appease the appetite of household gods, before which
such dire incantations are pronounced to ease the wrath and woe of the
priestess of the fire, and about which often linger saddest memories of
wasted temper, time, and toil.

Nan was tired, having risen with the birds,--hurried, having many cares
those happy little housewives never know,--and disappointed in a hope
that hourly "dwindled, peaked, and pined." She was too young to make
the anxious lines upon her forehead seem at home there, too patient to
be burdened with the labor others should have shared, too light of
heart to be pent up  when earth and sky were keeping a blithe holiday.
But she was one of that meek sisterhood who, thinking humbly of
themselves, believe they are honored by being spent in the service of
less conscientious souls, whose careless thanks seem quite reward
enough.

To and fro she went, silent and diligent, giving the grace of
willingness to every humble or distasteful task the day had brought
her; but some malignant sprite seemed to have taken possession of her
kingdom, for rebellion broke out everywhere. The kettles would boil
over most obstreperously,--the mutton refused to cook with the meek
alacrity to be expected from the nature of a sheep,--the stove, with
unnecessary warmth of temper, would glow like a fiery furnace,--the
irons would scorch,--the linens would dry,--and spirits would fail,
though patience never.

Nan tugged on, growing hotter and wearier, more hurried and more
hopeless, till at last the crisis came; for in one fell moment she tore
her gown, burnt her hand, and smutched the collar she was preparing to
finish in the most unexceptionable style.  Then, if she had been a
nervous woman, she would have scolded; being a gentle girl, she only
"lifted up her voice and wept."

"Behold, she watereth her linen with salt tears, and bewaileth herself
because of much tribulation. But, lo! Help cometh from afar: a strong
man bringeth lettuce wherewith to stay her, plucketh berries to comfort
her withal, and clasheth cymbals that she may dance for joy."

The voice came from the porch, and, with her hope fulfilled, Nan looked
up to greet John Lord, the house-friend, who stood there with a basket
on his arm; and as she saw his honest eyes, kind lips, and helpful
hands, the girl thought this plain young man the comeliest, most
welcome sight she had beheld that day.

"How good of you, to come through all this heat, and not to laugh at my
despair!" she said, looking up like a grateful child, as she led him in.

"I only obeyed orders, Nan; for a certain dear old lady had a motherly
presentiment that you had got into a domestic whirlpool, and sent me as
a sort of life-preserver. So I took the basket of consolation, and came
to fold my feet upon the carpet of contentment in the tent of
friendship."

As he spoke, John gave his own gift in his mother's name, and bestowed
himself in the wide window-seat, where morning-glories nodded at him,
and the old butternut sent pleasant shadows dancing to and fro.

His advent, like that of Orpheus in hades, seemed to soothe all
unpropitious powers with a sudden spell. The Fire began to slacken, the
kettles began to lull, the meat began to cook, the irons began to cool,
the clothes began to behave, the spirits began to rise, and the collar
was finished off with most triumphant success.  John watched the
change, and, though a lord of creation, abased himself to take
compassion on the weaker vessel, and was seized with a great desire to
lighten the homely tasks that tried her strength of body and soul.  He
took a comprehensive glance about the room; then, extracting a dish
from he closet, proceeded to imbrue his hands in the strawberries'
blood.

"Oh,  John, you needn't do that; I shall have time when I've turned the
meat, made the pudding and done these things.  See, I'm getting on
finely now:--you're a judge of such matters; isn't that nice?"

As she spoke, Nan offered the polished absurdity for inspection with
innocent pride.

"Oh that I were a collar, to sit upon that hand!" sighed John,--adding,
argumentatively,

"As to the berry question, I might answer it with a gem from Dr. Watts,
relative to 'Satan' and idle hands,' but will merely say, that, as a
matter of public safety, you'd better leave me alone; for such is the
destructiveness of my nature, that I shall certainly eat something
hurtful, break something valuable, or sit upon something crushable,
unless you let me concentrate my energies by knocking on these young
fellows' hats, and preparing them for their doom."

Looking at the matter in a charitable light, Nan consented, and went
cheerfully on with her work, wondering how she could have thought
ironing an infliction, and been so ungrateful for the blessings of her
lot.

"Where's Sally?" asked John, looking vainly for the functionary who
usually pervaded that region like a domestic police-woman, a terror to
cats, dogs, and men.

"She has gone to her cousin's funeral, and won't be back till Monday.
There seems to be a great fatality among her relations; for one dies,
or comes to grief in some way, about once a month. But I don't blame
poor Sally for wanting to get away from this place now and then.  I
think I could find it in my heart to murder an imaginary friend or two,
if I had to stay here long."

And Nan laughed so blithely, it was a pleasure to hear her.

"Where's Di?" asked John, seized with a most unmasculine curiosity all
at once.

"She is in Germany with 'Wilhelm Meister'; but, though 'lost to sight,
to memory clear'; for I was just thinking, as I did her things, how
clever she is to like all kinds of books that I don't understand at
all, and to write things that make me cry with pride and delight.  Yes,
she's a talented dear, though she hardly knows a needle from a crowbar,
and will make herself one great blot some of these days, when the
'divine afflatus' descends upon her, I'm afraid."

And Nan rubbed away with sisterly zeal at Di's forlorn hose and inky
pocket-handkerchiefs.

"Where is Laura?" proceeded the inquisitor.

"Well, I might say that she was in Italy; for she is copying some fine
thing of Raphael's or Michael Angelo's, or some great creatures or
other; and she looks so picturesque in her pretty gown, sitting before
her easel, that it's really a sight to behold, and I've peeped two or
three times to see how she gets on."

And Nan bestirred herself to prepare the dish Wherewith her picturesque
sister desired to prolong her artistic existence.

"Where is your father?" John asked again, checking off each answer with
a nod and a little frown.

"He is down in the garden, deep in some plan about melons, the
beginning of which seems to consist in stamping the first proposition
in Euclid all over the bed, and then poking a few seeds into the middle
of each.  Why, bless the dear man!  I forgot it was time for the cider.
Wouldn't you like to take it to him, John? He'd love to consult you;
and the lane is so cool, it does one's heart good to look at it."

John glanced from the steamy kitchen to the shadowy path, and answered
with a sudden assumption of immense industry,--

"I couldn't possibly go, Nan,--I've so much on my hands.  You'll have
to do it yourself.  'Mr. Robert of Lincoln' has something for your
private ear; and the lane is so cool, it will do one's heart good to
see you in it.  Give my regards to your father, and, in the words of
'Little Mabel's' mother, with slight variation,--

  'Tell the dear old body
  This day I cannot run,
  For the pots are boiling over
  And the mutton isn't done.'"

"I will; but please, John, go in to the girls and be comfortable; for I
don't like to leave you here," said Nan.

"You insinuate that I should pick at the pudding or invade the cream,
do you?  Ungrateful girl, leave me!" And, with melodramatic sternness,
John extinguished her in his broad-brimmed hat, and offered the glass
like a poisoned goblet.

Nan took it, and went smiling away.  But the lane might have been the
Desert of Sahara, for all she knew of it; and she would have passed her
father as unconcernedly as if he had been an apple-tree, had he not
called out,--

"Stand and deliver, little woman!"

She obeyed the venerable highwayman, and followed him to and fro,
listening to his plans and directions with a mute attention that quite
won his heart.

"That hop-pole is really an ornament now, Nan; this sage-bed needs
weeding,--that's good work for you girls; and, now I think of it, you'd
better water the lettuce in the cool of the evening, after I'm gone."

To all of which remarks Nan gave her assent; the hop-pole took the
likeness of a tall figure she had seen in the porch, the sage-bed,
curiously enough, suggested a strawberry ditto, the lettuce vividly
reminded her of certain vegetable productions a basket had brought, and
the bobolink only sung in his cheeriest voice, "Go home, go home! he is
there!"

She found John--he having made a free-mason of himself, by assuming her
little apron--meditating over the partially spread table, lost in amaze
at its desolate appearance; one half its proper paraphernalia having
been forgotten, and the other half put on awry.  Nan laughed till the
tears ran over her cheeks, and John was gratified at the efficacy of
his treatment; for her face had brought a whole harvest of sunshine
from the garden, and all her cares seemed to have been lost in the
windings of the lane.

"Nan, are you in hysterics?" cried Di, appearing, book in hand. "John,
you absurd man, what are you doing?"

"I'm helpin' the maid of all work, please marm." And John dropped a
curtsy with his limited apron.

Di looked ruffled, for the merry words were a covert reproach; and with
her usual energy of manner and freedom of speech she tossed "Wilhelm"
out of the window, exclaiming, irefully.--

"That's always the way; I'm never where I ought to be, and never think
of anything till it's too late; but it's all Goethe's fault.  What does
he write books full of smart 'Phillinas' and interesting 'Meisters'
for?  How can I be expected to remember that Sally's away, and people
must eat, when I'm hearing the 'Harper' and little 'Mignon?' John, how
dare you come here and do my work, instead of shaking me and telling me
to do it myself?  Take that toasted child away, and fan her like a
Chinese mandarin, while I dish up this dreadful dinner."

John and Nan fled like chaff before the wind, while Di, full of
remorseful zeal, charged at the kettles, and wrenched off the potatoes'
jackets, as if she were revengefully pulling her own hair. Laura had a
vague intention of going to assist; but, getting lost among the lights
and shadows of Minerva's helmet, forgot to appear till dinner had been
evoked from chaos and peace was restored.

At three o'clock, Di performed the coronation ceremony with her
father's best hat; Laura retied his old-fashioned neckcloth, and
arranged his white locks with an eye to saintly effect; Nan appeared
with a beautifully written sermon, and suspicious ink-stains on the
fingers that slipped it into his pocket; John attached himself to the
bag; and the patriarch was escorted to the door of his tent with the
triumphal procession which usually attended his out-goings and
in-comings.  Having kissed the female portion of his tribe, he ascended
the venerable chariot, which received him with audible lamentation, as
its rheumatic joints swayed to and fro.

"Good-bye, my dears! I shall be back early on Monday morning; so take
care of yourselves, and be sure you all go and hear Mr. Emerboy preach
to-morrow.  My regards to your mother. John.  Come, Solon!"

But Solon merely cocked one ear, and remained a fixed fact; for long
experience had induced the philosophic beast to take for his motto the
Yankee maxim, "Be sure you're right, then go ahead! He knew things were
not right; therefore he did not go ahead.

"Oh, by the way, girls, don't forget to pay Tommy Mullein for bringing
up the cow: he expects it to-night.  And Di, don't sit up till
daylight, nor let Laura stay out in the dew.  Now, I believe I'm off.
Come, Solon!"

But Solon only cocked the other ear, gently agitated his mortified
tail, as premonitory symptoms of departure, and never stirred a hoof,
being well aware that it always took three "comes" to make a "go."

"Bless me! I've forgotten my spectacles. They are probably shut up in
that volume of Herbert on my table.  Very awkward to find myself
without them ten miles away.  Thank you, John.  Don't neglect to water
the lettuce, Nan, and don't overwork yourself, my little 'Martha.'
Come--"

At this juncture Solon suddenly went off, like "Mrs. Gamp," in a sort
of walking swoon, apparently deaf and blind to all mundane matters,
except the refreshments awaiting him ten miles away; and the benign old
pastor disappeared, humming "Hebron" to the creaking accompaniment of
the bulgy chaise.

Laura retired to take her siesta; Nan made a small carbonaro of herself
by sharpening her sister's crayons, and Di, as a sort of penance for
past sins, tried her patience over a piece of knitting, in which she
soon originated a somewhat remarkable pattern, by dropping every third
stitch, and seaming ad libitum.  If John bad been a gentlemanly
creature, with refined tastes, he would have elevated his feet and made
a nuisance of himself by indulging in a "weed;" but being only an
uncultivated youth, with a rustic regard for pure air and womankind in
general, he kept his head uppermost, and talked like a man, instead of
smoking like a chimney.

"It will probably be six months before I sit here again, tangling your
threads and maltreating your needles, Nan.  How glad you must feel to
hear it!" he said, looking up from a thoughtful examination of the
hard-working little citizens of the Industrial Community settled in
Nan's work-basket.

"No, I'm very sorry; for I like to see you coming and going as you used
to, years ago, and I miss you very much when you are gone, John,"
answered truthful Nan, whittling away in a sadly wasteful manner, as
her thoughts flew back to the happy times when a little lad rode a
little lass in a big wheelbarrow, and never spilt his load,--when two
brown heads bobbed daily side by side to school, and the favorite play
was "Babes in the Wood," with Di for a somewhat peckish robin to cover
the small martyrs with any vegetable substance that lay at hand. Nan
sighed, as she thought of these things, and John regarded the battered
thimble on his finger-tip with increased benignity of aspect as he
heard the sound.

"When are you going to make your fortune, John, and get out of that
disagreeable hardware concern?" demanded Di, pausing after an exciting
"round," and looking almost as much exhausted as if it had been a
veritable pugilistic encounter.

"I intend to make it by plunging still deeper into 'that disagreeable
hardware concern;' for, next year, if the world keeps rolling, and John
Lord is alive, he will become a partner, and then--and then--"

The color sprang up into the young man's cheek, his eyes looked out
with a sudden shine, and his hand seemed involuntarily to close, as if
he saw and seized some invisible delight.

"What will happen then, John?" asked Nan, with a wondering glance.

"I'll tell you in a year, Nan, wait till then." and John's strong hand
unclosed, as if the desired good were not to be his yet.

Di looked at him, with a knitting-needle stuck into her hair, saying,
like a sarcastic unicorn,--

"I really thought you had a soul above pots and kettles, but I see you
haven't; and I beg your pardon for the injustice I have done you."

Not a whit disturbed, John smiled, as if at some mighty pleasant fancy
of his own, as he replied,--

"Thank you, Di; and as a further proof of the utter depravity of my
nature, let me tell you that I have the greatest possible respect for
those articles of ironmongery.  Some of the happiest hours of my life
have been spent in their society; some of my pleasantest associations
are connected with them; some of my best lessons have come to me among
them; and when my fortune is made, I intend to show my gratitude by
taking three flat-irons rampant for my coat of arms."

Nan laughed merrily, as she looked at the burns on her hand; but Di
elevated the most prominent feature of her brown countenance, and
sighed despondingly,--

"Dear, dear, what a disappointing world this is! I no sooner build a
nice castle in Spain, and settle a smart young knight therein, than
down it comes about my ears; and the ungrateful youth, who might fight
dragons, if he chose, insists on quenching his energies in a saucepan,
and making a Saint Lawrence of himself by wasting his life on a series
of gridirons.  Ah, if I were only a man, I would do something better
than that, and prove that heroes are not all dead yet. But, instead of
that, I'm only a woman, and must sit rasping my temper with absurdities
like this." And Di wrestled with her knitting as if it were Fate, and
she were paying off the grudge she owed it.

John leaned toward her, saying, with a look that made his plain face
handsome,--

"Di, my father began the world as I begin it, and left it the richer
for the useful years he spent here,--as I hope I may leave it some
half-century hence.  His memory makes that dingy shop a pleasant place
to me; for there he made an honest name, led an honest life and
bequeathed to me his reverence for honest work.  That is a sort of
hardware, Di, that no rust can corrupt, and which will always prove a
better fortune than any your knights can achieve with sword and shield.
I think I am not quite a clod, or quite without some aspirations above
money-getting; for I sincerely desire that courage that makes daily
life heroic by self-denial and cheerfulness of heart; I am eager to
conquer my own rebellious nature, and earn the confidence of innocent
and upright souls; I have a great ambition to become as good a man and
leave as good a memory behind me as old John Lord."

Di winked violently, and seamed five times in perfect silence; but
quiet Nan had the gift of knowing when to speak, and by a timely word
saved her sister from a thunder-shower and her stocking from
destruction.

"John, have you seen Philip since you wrote about your last meeting
with him?"

The question was for John, but the soothing tone was for Di, who
gratefully accepted it, and perked up again with speed.

"Yes; and I meant to have told you about it," answered John, plunging
into the subject at once.

"I saw him a few days before I came home, and found him more
disconsolate than ever,--' just ready to go to the Devil,' as he
forcibly expressed himself. I consoled the poor lad as well as I could,
telling him his wisest plan was to defer his proposed expedition, and
go on as steadily as he had begun,--thereby proving the injustice of
your father's prediction concerning his want of perseverance, and the
sincerity of his affection.  I told him the change in Laura's health
and spirits was silently working in his favor, and that a few more
months of persistent endeavor would conquer your father's prejudice
against him, and make him a stronger man for the trial and the pain.  I
read him bits about Laura from your own and Di's letters, and he went
away at last as patient as Jacob ready to serve another 'seven years'
for his beloved Rachel."

"God bless you for it, John!" cried a fervent voice; and, looking up,
they saw the cold, listless Laura transformed into a tender girl, all
aglow with love and longing, as she dropped her mask, and showed a
living countenance eloquent with the first passion and softened by the
first grief of her life.

John rose involuntarily in the presence of an innocent nature whose
sorrow needed no interpreter to him.  The girl read sympathy in his
brotherly regard, and found comfort in the friendly voice that asked,
half playfully, half seriously,--

"Shall I tell him that he is not forgotten, even for an Apollo? that
Laura the artist has not conquered Laura the woman? and predict that
the good daughter will yet prove the happy wife?"

With a gesture full of energy, Laura tore her Minerva from top to
bottom, while two great tears rolled down the cheeks grown wan with
hope deferred.

"Tell him I believe all things, hope all things, and that I never can
forget."

Nan went to her and held her fast, leaving the prints of two loving but
grimy hands upon her shoulders; Di looked on approvingly, for, though
stony-hearted regarding the cause, she fully appreciated the effect;
and John, turning to the window, received the commendations of a robin
swaying on an elm-bough with sunshine on its ruddy breast.

The clock struck five, and John declared that he must go; for, being an
old-fashioned soul, he fancied that his mother had a better right to
his last hour than any younger woman in the land,--always remembering
that "she was a widow, and he her only son."

Nan ran away to wash her hands, and came back with the appearance of
one who had washed her face also: and so she had; but there was a
difference in the water.

"Play I'm your father, girls, and remember that it will be six months
before 'that John' will trouble you again."

With which preface the young man kissed his former playfellows as
heartily as the boy had been wont to do, when stern parents banished
him to distant schools, and three little maids bemoaned his fate.  But
times were changed now; for Di grew alarmingly rigid during the
ceremony; Laura received the salute like a graceful queen; and Nan
returned it with heart and eyes and tender lips, making such an
improvement on the childish fashion of the thing that John was moved to
support his paternal character by softly echoing her father's
words,--"Take care of yourself, my little 'Martha.'"

Then they all streamed after him along the garden-path, with the
endless messages and warnings girls are so prone to give; and the young
man, with a great softness at his heart, went away, as many another
John has gone, feeling better for the companionship of innocent
maidenhood, and stronger to wrestle with temptation, to wait and hope
and work.

"Let's throw a shoe after him for luck, as dear old 'Mrs.  Gummage' did
after 'David' and the 'willin' Barkis!' Quick, Nan! you always have old
shoes on; toss one, and shout, 'Good luck!'" cried Di, with one of her
eccentric inspirations.

Nan tore off her shoe, and threw it far along the dusty road, with a
sudden longing to become that auspicious article of apparel, that the
omen might not fail.

Looking backward from the hill-top, John answered the meek shout
cheerily, and took in the group with a lingering glance: Laura in the
shadow of the elms, Di perched on the fence, and Nan leaning far over
the gate with her hand above her eyes and the sunshine touching her
brown hair with gold.  He waved his hat and turned away; but the music
seemed to die out of the blackbird's song, and in all the summer
landscape his eyes saw nothing but the little figure at the gate.

"Bless and save us! here's a flock of people coming; my hair is in a
toss, and Nan's without her shoe; run! fly, girls! or the Philistines
will be upon us!" cried Di, tumbling off her perch in sudden alarm.

Three agitated young ladies, with flying draperies and countenances of
mingled mirth and dismay, might have been seen precipitating themselves
into a respectable mansion with unbecoming haste; but the squirrels
were the only witnesses of this "vision of sudden flight," and, being
used to ground-and-lofty tumbling, didn't mind it.

When the pedestrians passed, the door was decorously closed, and no one
visible but a young man, who snatched something out of the road, and
marched away again, whistling with more vigor of tone than accuracy of
tune, "Only that, and nothing more."



HOW IT WAS FOUND.

Summer ripened into autumn, and something fairer than

  "Sweet-peas and mignonette
  In Annie's garden grew."

Her nature was the counterpart of the hill-side grove, where as a child
she had read her fairy tales, and now as a woman turned the first pages
of a more wondrous legend still. Lifted above the many-gabled roof, yet
not cut off from the echo of human speech, the little grove seemed a
green sanctuary, fringed about with violets, and full of summer melody
and bloom.  Gentle creatures haunted it, and there was none to make
afraid; wood-pigeons cooed and crickets chirped their shrill
roundelays, anemones and lady-ferns looked up from the moss that kissed
the wanderer's feet. Warm airs were all afloat, full of vernal odors
for the grateful sense, silvery birches shimmered like spirits of the
wood, larches gave their green tassels to the wind, and pines made airy
music sweet and solemn, as they stood looking heavenward through veils
of summer sunshine or shrouds of wintry snow.

Nan never felt alone now in this charmed wood; for when she came into
its precincts, once so full of solitude, all things seemed to wear one
shape, familiar eyes looked at her from the violets in the grass,
familiar words sounded in the whisper of the leaves, grew conscious
that an unseen influence filled the air with new delights, and touched
earth and sky with a beauty never seen before.  Slowly these Mayflowers
budded in her maiden heart, rosily they bloomed and silently they
waited till some lover of such lowly herbs should catch their fresh
aroma, should brush away the fallen leaves, and lift them to the sun.

Though the eldest of the three, she had long been overtopped by the
more aspiring maids.  But though she meekly yielded the reins of
government, whenever they chose to drive, they were soon restored to
her again; for Di fell into literature, and Laura into love.  Thus
engrossed, these two forgot many duties which even bluestockings and
inamoratos are expected to perform, and slowly all the homely humdrum
cares that housewives know became Nan's daily life, and she accepted it
without a thought of discontent.  Noiseless and cheerful as the
sunshine, she went to and fro, doing the tasks that mothers do, but
without a mother's sweet reward, holding fast the numberless slight
threads that bind a household tenderly together, and making each day a
beautiful success.

Di, being tired of running, riding, climbing, and boating, decided at
last to let her body rest and put her equally active mind through what
classical collegians term "a course of sprouts."  Having undertaken to
read and know everything, she devoted herself to the task with great
energy, going from Sue to Swedenborg with perfect impartiality, and
having different authors as children have sundry distempers, being
fractious while they lasted, but all the better for them when once
over.  Carlyle appeared like scarlet-fever, and raged violently for a
time; for, being anything but a "passive bucket," Di became prophetic
with Mahomet, belligerent with Cromwell, and made the French Revolution
a veritable Reign of Terror to her family.  Goethe and Schiller
alternated like fever and ague; Mephistopheles became her hero, Joan of
Arc her model, and she turned her black eyes red over Egmont and
Wallenstein. A mild attack of Emerson followed, during which she was
lost in a fog, and her sisters rejoiced inwardly when she emerged
informing them that

  "The Sphinx was drowsy,
  Her wings were furled."

Poor Di was floundering slowly to her proper place; but she splashed up
a good deal of foam by getting out of her depth, and rather exhausted
herself by trying to drink the ocean dry.

Laura, after the "midsummer night's dream" that often comes to girls of
seventeen, woke up to find that youth and love were no match for age
and common sense.  Philip had been flying about the world like a
thistle-down for five-and-twenty years, generous-hearted, frank, and
kind, but with never an idea of the serious side of life in his
handsome head.  Great, therefore, were the wrath and dismay of the
enamored thistle-down, when the father of his love mildly objected to
seeing her begin the world in a balloon with a very tender but very
inexperienced aeronaut for a guide.

"Laura is too young to 'play house' yet, and you are too unstable to
assume the part of lord and master, Philip.  Go and prove that you have
prudence, patience, energy, and enterprise, and I will give you my
girl,--but not before. I must seem cruel, that I may be truly kind;
believe this, and let a little pain lead you to great happiness, or
show you where you would have made a bitter blunder."

The lovers listened, owned the truth of the old man's words, bewailed
their fate, and yielded,--Laura for love of her father, Philip for love
of her. He went away to build a firm foundation for his castle in the
air, and Laura retired into an invisible convent, where she cast off
the world, and regarded her sympathizing sisters through a grate of
superior knowledge and unsharable grief. Like a devout nun, she
worshipped "St. Philip," and firmly believed in his miraculous powers.
She fancied that her woes set her apart from common cares, and slowly
fell into a dreamy state, professing no interest in any mundane matter,
but the art that first attracted Philip. Crayons, bread-crusts, and
gray paper became glorified in Laura's eyes; and her one pleasure was
to sit pale and still before her easel, day after day, filling her
portfolios with the faces he had once admired. Her sisters observed
that every Bacchus, Piping Faun, or Dying Gladiator bore some likeness
to a comely countenance that heathen god or hero never owned; and
seeing this, they privately rejoiced that she had found such solace for
her grief.

Mrs. Lord's keen eye had read a certain newly written page in her son's
heart,--his first chapter of that romance, begun in paradise, whose
interest never flags, whose beauty never fades, whose end can never
come till Love lies dead. With womanly skill she divined the secret,
with motherly discretion she counselled patience, and her son accepted
her advice, feeling that, like many a healthful herb, its worth lay in
its bitterness.

"Love like a man, John, not like a boy, and learn to know yourself
before you take a woman's happiness into your keeping.  You and Nan
have known each other all your lives; yet, till this last visit, you
never thought you loved her more than any other childish friend.  It is
too soon to say the words so often spoken hastily,--so hard to be
recalled. Go back to your work, dear, for another year; think of Nan in
the light of this new hope: compare her with comelier, gayer girls; and
by absence prove the truth of your belief.   Then, if distance only
makes her dearer, if time only strengthens your affection, and no doubt
of your own worthiness disturbs you, come back and offer her what any
woman should be glad to take,--my boy's true heart."

John smiled at the motherly pride of her words, but answered with a
wistful look.

"It seems very long to wait, mother.  If I could just ask her for a
word of hope, I could be very patient then."

"Ah, my dear, better bear one year of impatience now than a lifetime of
regret hereafter. Nan is happy; why disturb her by a word which will
bring the tender cares and troubles that come soon enough to such
conscientious creatures as herself? If she loves you, time will prove
it; therefore, let the new affection spring and ripen as your early
friendship has done, and it will be all the stronger for a summer's
growth.  Philip was rash, and has to bear his trial now, and Laura
shares it with him. Be more generous, John; make your trial, bear your
doubts alone, and give Nan the happiness without the pain.  Promise me
this, dear,--promise me to hope and wait."

The young man's eye kindled, and in his heart there rose a better
chivalry, a truer valor, than any Di's knights had ever known.

"I'll try, mother," was all he said; but she was satisfied, for John
seldom tried in vain.

"Oh, girls, how splendid you are!  It does my heart good to see my
handsome sisters in their best array," cried Nan, one mild October
night, as she put the last touches to certain airy raiment fashioned by
her own skilful hands, and then fell back to survey the grand effect.

"Di and Laura were preparing to assist at an event of the season," and
Nan, with her own locks fallen on her shoulders, for want of sundry
combs promoted to her sisters' heads and her dress in unwonted
disorder, for lack of the many pins extracted in exciting crises of the
toilet, hovered like an affectionate bee about two very full-blown
flowers.

"Laura looks like a cool Undine, with the ivy-wreaths in her shining
hair; and Di has illuminated herself to such an extent with those
scarlet leaves that I don't know what great creature she resembles
most," said Nan, beaming with sisterly admiration.

"Like Juno, Zenobia, and Cleopatra simmered into one, with a touch of
Xantippe by way of spice. But, to my eye, the finest woman of the three
is the dishevelled young person embracing the bed-post: for she stays
at home herself, and gives her time and taste to making homely people
fine,--which is a waste of good material, and an imposition on the
public."

As Di spoke, both the fashion-plates looked affectionately at the
gray-gowned figure; but, being works of art, they were obliged to nip
their feelings in the bud, and reserve their caresses till they
returned to common life.

"Put on your bonnet, and we'll leave you at Mrs. Lord's on our way.  It
will do you good, Nan; and perhaps there may be news from John," added
Di, as she bore down upon the door like a man-of-war under full sail.

"Or from Philip," sighed Laura, with a wistful look.

Whereupon Nan persuaded herself that her strong inclination to sit down
was owing to want of exercise, and the heaviness of her eyelids a freak
of imagination; so, speedily smoothing her ruffled plumage, she ran
down to tell her father of the new arrangement.

"Go, my dear, by all means. I shall be writing; and you will be lonely
if you stay.  But I must see my girls; for I caught glimpses of certain
surprising phantoms flitting by the door."

Nan led the way, and the two pyramids revolved before him with the
rapidity of lay-figures, much to the good man's edification: for with
his fatherly pleasure there was mingled much mild wonderment at the
amplitude of array.

"Yes, I see my geese are really swans, though there is such a cloud
between us that I feel a long way off, and hardly know them.  But this
little daughter is always available, always my 'cricket on the hearth.'"

As he spoke, her father drew Nan closer, kissed her tranquil face, and
smiled content.

"Well, if ever I see picters, I see 'em now, and I declare to goodness
it's as interestin' as playactin', every bit.  Miss Di with all them
boughs in her head, looks like the Queen of Sheby, when she went
a-visitin' What's-his-name; and if Miss Laura ain't as sweet as a
lally-barster figger, I should like to know what is."

In her enthusiasm, Sally gambolled about the girls, flourishing her
milk-pan like a modern Miriam about to sound her timbrel for excess of
joy.

Laughing merrily, the two Mont Blancs bestowed themselves in the family
ark, Nan hopped up beside Patrick, and Solon, roused from his lawful
slumbers, morosely trundled them away. But, looking backward with a
last "Good-night!" Nan saw her father still standing at the door with
smiling countenance, and the moonlight falling like a benediction on
his silver hair.

"Betsey shall go up the hill with you, my dear, and here's a basket of
eggs for your father.  Give him my love, and be sure you let me know
the next time he is poorly," Mrs. Lord said, when her guest rose to
depart, after an hour of pleasant chat.

But Nan never got the gift; for, to her great dismay, her hostess
dropped the basket with a crash, and flew across the room to meet a
tall shape pausing in the shadow of the door.  There was no need to ask
who the new-comer was; for, even in his mother's arms, John looked over
her shoulder with an eager nod to Nan, who stood among the ruins with
never a sign of weariness in her face, nor the memory of a care at her
heart.--for they all went out when John came in.

"Now tell us how and why and when you came. Take off your coat, my
dear!  And here are the old slippers.  Why didn't you let us know you
were coming so soon?  How have you been? and what makes you so late
to-night?  Betsey, you needn't put on your bonnet.  And--oh, my dear
boy, have you been to supper yet?"

Mrs. Lord was a quiet soul, and her flood of questions was purred
softly in her son's ear; for, being a woman, she must talk, and, being
a mother, must pet the one delight of her life, and make a little
festival when the lord of the manor came home. A whole drove of fatted
calves were metaphorically killed, and a banquet appeared with speed.

John was not one of those romantic heroes who can go through three
volumes of hair-breadth escapes without the faintest hint of that
blessed institution, dinner; therefore, like "Lady Letherbridge," he
partook, copiously of everything, while the two women beamed over each
mouthful with an interest that enhanced its flavor, and urged upon him
cold meat and cheese, pickles and pie, as if dyspepsia and nightmare
were among the lost arts.

Then he opened his budget of news and fed them.

"I was coming next month, according to custom; but Philip fell upon and
so tempted me, that I was driven to sacrifice myself to the cause of
friendship, and up we came to-night.  He would not let me come here
till we had seen your father, Nan; for the poor lad was pining for
Laura, and hoped his good behavior for the past year would satisfy his
judge and secure his recall.  We had a fine talk with your father; and,
upon my life, Philip seemed to have received the gift of tongues, for
he made a most eloquent plea, which I've stored away for future use, I
assure you.  The dear old gentleman was very kind, told Phil he was
satisfied with the success of his probation, that he should see Laura
when he liked, and, if all went well, should receive his reward in the
spring. It must be a delightful sensation to know you have made a
fellow-creature as happy as those words made Phil to-night."

John paused, and looked musingly at the matronly tea-pot, as if he saw
a wondrous future in its shine.

Nan twinkled off the drops that rose at the thought of Laura's joy, and
said, with grateful warmth,--

"You say nothing of your own share in the making of that happiness,
John; but we know it, for Philip has told Laura in his letters all that
you have been to him, and I am sure there was other eloquence beside
his own before father granted all you say he has.  Oh, John, I thank
you very much for this!"

Mrs. Lord beamed a whole midsummer of delight upon her son, as she saw
the pleasure these words gave him, though he answered simply,--

"I only tried to be a brother to him, Nan; for he has been most kind to
me.  Yes, I said my little say to-night, and gave my testimony in
behalf of the prisoner at the bar; a most merciful judge pronounced his
sentence, and he rushed straight to Mrs. Leigh's to tell Laura the
blissful news. Just imagine the scene when he appears, and how Di will
open her wicked eyes and enjoy the spectacle of the dishevelled lover,
the bride-elect's tears, the stir, and the romance of the thing.
She'll cry over it to-night, and caricature it to-morrow."

And John led the laugh at the picture he had conjured up, to turn the
thoughts of Di's dangerous sister from himself.

At ten Nan retired into the depths of her old bonnet with a far
different face from the one she brought out of it, and John, resuming
his hat, mounted guard.

"Don't stay late, remember, John!" And in Mrs. Lord's voice there was a
warning tone that her son interpreted aright.

"I'll not forget, mother."

And he kept his word; for though Philip's happiness floated temptingly
before him, and the little figure at his side had never seemed so dear,
he ignored the bland winds, the tender night, and set a seal upon his
lips, thinking manfully within himself. "I see many signs of promise in
her happy face; but I will wait and hope a little longer for her sake."

"Where is father, Sally?" asked Nan, as that functionary appeared,
blinking owlishly, but utterly repudiating the idea of sleep.

"He went down the garding, miss, when the gentlemen cleared, bein' a
little flustered by the goin's on.  Shall I fetch him in?" asked Sally,
as irreverently as if her master were a bag of meal.

"No, we will go ourselves." And slowly the two paced down the
leaf-strewn walk.

Fields of yellow grain were waving on the hill-side, and sere corn
blades rustled in the wind, from the orchard came the scent of ripening
fruit, and all the garden-plots lay ready to yield up their humble
offerings to their master's hand.  But in the silence of the night a
greater Reaper had passed by, gathering in the harvest of a righteous
life, and leaving only tender memories for the gleaners who had come so
late.

The old man sat in the shadow of the tree his own hands planted; its
fruit boughs shone ruddily, and its leaves still whispered the low
lullaby that hushed him to his rest.

"How fast he sleeps! Poor father! I should have come before and made it
pleasant for him."

As she spoke, Nan lifted up the head bent down upon his breast, and
kissed his pallid cheek.

"Oh, John, this is not sleep."

"Yes, dear, the happiest he will ever know."

For a moment the shadows flickered over three white faces and the
silence deepened solemnly. Then John reverently bore the pale shape in,
and Nan dropped down beside it, saying, with a rain of grateful tears,--

"He kissed me when I went, and said a last good-night!'"

For an hour steps went to and fro about her, many voices whispered near
her, and skilful hands touched the beloved clay she held so fast; but
one by one the busy feet passed out, one by one the voices died away,
and human skill proved vain.

Then Mrs. Lord drew the orphan to the shelter of her arms, soothing her
with the mute solace of that motherly embrace.

"Nan, Nan! here's Philip! come and see!" The happy call re-echoed
through the house, and Nan sprang up as if her time for grief were past.

"I must tell them. Oh, my poor girls, how will they bear it?--they have
known so little sorrow!"

But there was no need for her to speak; other lips had spared her the
hard task.  For, as she stirred to meet them, a sharp cry rent the air,
steps rang upon the stairs, and two wild-eyed creatures came into the
hush of that familiar room, for the first time meeting with no welcome
from their father's voice.

With one impulse, Di and Laura fled to Nan, and the sisters clung
together in a silent embrace, more eloquent than words. John took his
mother by the hand, and led her from the room, closing the door upon
the sacredness of grief.

"Yes, we are poorer than we thought; but when everything is settled, we
shall get on very well.  We can let a part of this great house, and
live quietly together until spring; then Laura will be married, and Di
can go on their travels with them, as Philip wishes her to do.  We
shall be cared for; so never fear for us, John."

Nan said this, as her friend parted from her a week later, after the
saddest holiday he had ever known.

"And what becomes of you, Nan?" he asked, watching the patient eyes
that smiled when others would have wept.

"I shall stay in the dear old house; for no other place would seem like
home to me.  I shall find some little child to love and care for, and
be quite happy till the girls come back and want me."

John nodded wisely, as he listened, and went away prophesying within
himself,--

"She shall find something more than a child to love; and, God willing,
shall be very happy till the girls come home and--cannot have her."

Nan's plan was carried into effect.  Slowly the divided waters closed
again, and the three fell back into their old life.  But the touch of
sorrow drew them closer; and, though invisible, a beloved presence
still moved among them, a familiar voice still spoke to them in the
silence of their softened hearts.  Thus the soil was made ready, and in
the depth of winter the good seed was sown, was watered with many
tears, and soon sprang up green with a promise of a harvest for their
after years.

Di and Laura consoled themselves with their favorite employments,
unconscious that Nan was growing paler, thinner, and more silent, as
the weeks went by, till one day she dropped quietly before them, and it
suddenly became manifest that she was utterly worn out with many cares
and the secret suffering of a tender heart bereft of the paternal love
which had been its strength and stay.

"I'm only tired, dear girls.  Don't be troubled, for I shall be up
to-morrow," she said cheerily, as she looked into the anxious faces
bending over her.

But the weariness was of many months' growth, and it was weeks before
that "to-morrow" came.

Laura installed herself as nurse, and her devotion was repaid
four-fold; for, sitting at her sister's bedside, she learned a finer
art than that she had left.  Her eye grew clear to see the beauty of a
self-denying life, and in the depths of Nan's meek nature she found the
strong, sweet virtues that made her what she was.

Then remembering that these womanly attributes were a bride's best
dowry, Laura gave herself to their attainment, that she might become to
another household the blessing Nan had been to her own; and turning
from the worship of the goddess Beauty, she gave her hand to that
humbler and more human teacher, Duty,--learning her lessons with a
willing heart, for Philip's sake.

Di corked her inkstand, locked her bookcase, and went at housework as
if it were a five-barred gate; of course she missed the leap, but
scrambled bravely through, and appeared much sobered by the exercise.
Sally had departed to sit under a vine and fig-tree of her own, so Di
had undisputed sway; but if dish-pans and dusters had tongues, direful
would have been the history of that crusade against frost and fire,
indolence and inexperience. But they were dumb, and Di scorned to
complain, though her struggles were pathetic to behold, and her sisters
went through a series of messes equal to a course of "Prince
Benreddin's" peppery tarts. Reality turned Romance out of doors; for,
unlike her favorite heroines in satin and tears, or helmet and shield,
Di met her fate in a big checked apron and dust-cap, wonderful to see;
yet she wielded her broom as stoutly as "Moll Pitcher" shouldered her
gun, and marched to her daily martyrdom in the kitchen with as heroic a
heart as the "Maid of Orleans" took to her stake.

Mind won the victory over matter in the end, and Di was better all her
days for the tribulations and the triumphs of that time; for she
drowned her idle fancies in her wash-tub, made burnt-offerings of
selfishness and pride, and learned the worth of self-denial, as she
sang with happy voice among the pots and kettles of her conquered realm.

Nan thought of John, and in the stillness of her sleepless nights
prayed Heaven to keep him safe, and make her worthy to receive and
strong enough to bear the blessedness or pain of love.

Snow fell without, and keen winds howled among the leafless elms, but
"herbs of grace" were blooming beautifully in the sunshine of sincere
endeavor, and this dreariest season proved the most fruitful of the
year; for love taught Laura, labor chastened Di, and patience fitted
Nan for the blessing of her life.

Nature, that stillest, yet most diligent of housewives, began at last
that "spring cleaning" which she makes so pleasant that none find the
heart to grumble as they do when other matrons set their premises
a-dust.  Her hand-maids, wind and rain and sun, swept, washed, and
garnished busily, green carpets were unrolled, apple-boughs were hung
with draperies of bloom, and dandelions, pet nurslings of the year,
came out to play upon the sward.

From the South returned that opera troupe whose manager is never in
despair, whose tenor never sulks, whose prima donna never fails, and in
the orchard bona fide matinees were held, to which buttercups and
clovers crowded in their prettiest spring hats, and verdant young
blades twinkled their dewy lorgnettes, as they bowed and made way for
the floral belles.

May was bidding June good-morrow, and the roses were just dreaming that
it was almost time to wake, when John came again into the quiet room
which now seemed the Eden that contained his Eve. Of course there was a
jubilee; but something seemed to have befallen the whole group, for
never had they appeared in such odd frames of mind.  John was restless,
and wore an excited look, most unlike his usual serenity of aspect.

Nan the cheerful had fallen into a well of silence and was not to be
extracted by any Hydraulic power, though she smiled like the June sky
over her head.  Di's peculiarities were out in full force, and she
looked as if she would go off like a torpedo at a touch; but through
all her moods there was a half-triumphant, half-remorseful expression
in the glance she fixed on John.  And Laura, once so silent, now sang
like a blackbird, as she flitted to and fro; but her fitful song was
always, "Philip, my king."

John felt that there had come a change upon the three, and silently
divined whose unconscious influence had wrought the miracle.  The
embargo was off his tongue, and he was in a fever to ask that question
which brings a flutter to the stoutest heart; but though the "man" had
come, the "hour" had not.  So, by way of steadying his nerves, he paced
the room, pausing often to take notes of his companions, and each pause
seemed to increase his wonder and content.

He looked at Nan.  She was in her usual place, the rigid little chair
she loved, because it once was large enough to hold a curly-headed
playmate and herself.  The old work-basket was at her side, and the
battered thimble busily at work; but her lips wore a smile they had
never worn before, the color of the unblown roses touched her cheek,
and her downcast eyes were full of light.

He looked at Di.  The inevitable book was on her knee, but its leaves
were uncut; the strong-minded knob of hair still asserted its supremacy
aloft upon her head, and the triangular jacket still adorned her
shoulders in defiance of all fashions, past, present, or to come; but
the expression of her brown countenance had grown softer, her tongue
had found a curb, and in her hand lay a card with "Potts, Kettel & Co."
inscribed thereon, which she regarded with never a scornful word for
the "Co."

He looked at Laura.  She was before her easel as of old; but the pale
nun had given place to a blooming girl, who sang at her work, which was
no prim Pallas, but a Clytie turning her human face to meet the sun.

"John, what are you thinking of?"

He stirred as if Di's voice had disturbed his fancy at some pleasant
pastime, but answered with his usual sincerity,--

"I was thinking of a certain dear old fairy tale called 'Cinderella.'"

"Oh!" said Di; and her "Oh" was a most impressive monosyllable.  "I see
the meaning of your smile now; and though the application of the story
is not very complimentary to all parties concerned, it is very just and
very true."

She paused a moment, then went on with softened voice and earnest
mien:--

"You think I am a blind and selfish creature. So I am, but not so blind
and selfish as I have been; for many tears have cleared my eyes, and
much sincere regret has made me humbler than I was. I have found a
better book than any father's library can give me, and I have read it
with a love and admiration that grew stronger as I turned the leaves.
Henceforth I take it for my guide and gospel, and, looking back upon
the selfish and neglectful past, can only say, Heaven bless your dear
heart, Nan!"

Laura echoed Di's last words; for, with eyes as full of tenderness, she
looked down upon the sister she had lately learned to know, saying,
warmly,--

"Yes, 'Heaven bless your dear heart, Nan!' I never can forget all you
have been to me; and when I am far away with Philip, there will always
be one countenance more beautiful to me than any pictured face I may
discover, there will be one place more dear to me than Rome.  The face
will be yours, Nan, always so patient, always so serene; and the dearer
place will be this home of ours, which you have made so pleasant to me
all these years by kindnesses as numberless and noiseless as the drops
of dew."

"Dear girls, what have I ever done, that you should love me so?" cried
Nan, with happy wonderment, as the tall heads, black and golden, bent
to meet the lowly brown one, and her sisters' mute lips answered her.

Then Laura looked up, saying, playfully,--

"Here are the good and wicked sisters;-where shall we find the Prince?"

"There!" cried Di, pointing to John; and then her secret went off like
a rocket; for, with her old impetuosity, she said,--

"I have found you out, John, and am ashamed to look you in the face,
remembering the past. Girls, you know when father died, John sent us
money, which he said Mr. Owen had long owed us and had paid at last?
It was a kind lie, John, and a generous thing to do; for we needed it,
but never would have taken it as a gift.  I know you meant that we
should never find this out; but yesterday I met Mr. Owen returning from
the West, and when I thanked him for a piece of justice we had not
expected of him, he gruffly told me he had never paid the debt, never
meant to pay it, for it was outlawed, and we could not claim a
farthing.  John, I have laughed at you, thought you stupid, treated you
unkindly; but I know you now, and never shall forget the lesson you
have taught me.  I am proud as Lucifer, but I ask you to forgive me,
and I seal my real repentance so--and so."

With tragic countenance, Di rushed across the room, threw both arms
about the astonished young man's neck and dropped an energetic kiss
upon his cheek.  There was a momentary silence; for Di finally
illustrated her strong-minded theories by crying like the weakest of
her sex.  Laura, with "the ruling passion strong in death," still tried
to draw, but broke her pet crayon, and endowed her Clytie with a
supplementary orb, owing to the dimness of her own.  And Nan sat with
drooping eyes, that shone upon her work, thinking with tender
pride,--"They know him now, and love him for his generous heart."

Di spoke first, rallying to her colors, though a little daunted by her
loss of self-control.

"Don't laugh, John,--I couldn't help it; and don't think I'm not
sincere, for I am,--I am; and I will prove it by growing good enough to
be your friend.  That debt must all be paid, and I shall do it; for
I'll turn my books and pen to some account, and write stories full of
clear old souls like you and Nan; and some one, I know, will like and
buy them, though they are not 'works of Shakespeare.' I've thought of
this before, have felt I had the power in me; now I have the motive,
and now I'll do it."

If Di had Proposed to translate the Koran, or build a new Saint Paul's,
there would have been many chances of success; for, once moved, her
will, like a battering-ram, would knock down the obstacles her wits
could not surmount.  John believed in her most heartily, and showed it,
as he answered, looking into her resolute face,--

"I know you will, and yet make us very proud of our 'Chaos,' Di.  Let
the money lie, and when you have a fortune, I'll claim it with enormous
interest; but, believe me, I feel already doubly repaid by the esteem
so generously confessed, so cordially bestowed, and can only say, as we
used to years ago,--'Now let's forgive and so forget."

But proud Di would not let him add to her obligation, even by returning
her impetuous salute; she slipped away, and, shaking off the last
drops, answered with a curious mixture of old freedom and new respect,--

"No more sentiment, please, John.  We know each other now; and when I
find a friend, I never let him go.  We have smoked the pipe of peace;
so let us go back to our wigwams and bury the feud.  Where were we when
I lost my head? and what were we talking about?"

"Cinderella and the Prince."

As she spoke, John's eye kindled, and, turning, he looked down at Nan,
who sat diligently ornamenting with microscopic stitches a great patch
going on, the wrong side out.

"Yes,--so we were; and now taking pussy for the godmother, the
characters of the story are well personated,--all but the slipper,"
said Di, laughing, as she thought of the many times they had played it
together years ago.

A sudden movement stirred John's frame, a sudden purpose shone in his
countenance, and a sudden change befell his voice, as he said,
producing from some hiding-place a little wornout shoe,--

"I can supply the slipper;--who will try it first?"

Di's black eyes opened wide, as they fell on the familiar object; then
her romance-loving nature saw the whole plot of that drama which needs
but two to act it. A great delight flushed up into her face, as she
promptly took her cue, saying--

"No need for us to try it, Laura; for it wouldn't fit us, if our feet
were as small as Chinese dolls; our parts are played out; therefore
'Exeunt wicked sisters to the music of the wedding-bells.'"

And pouncing upon the dismayed artist, she swept her out and closed the
door with a triumphant bang.

John went to Nan, and, dropping on his knee as reverently as the herald
of the fairy tale, he asked, still smiling, but with lips grown
tremulous,--

"Will Cinderella try the little shoe, and--if it fits--go with the
Prince?"

But Nan only covered up her face, weeping happy tears, while all the
weary work strayed down upon the floor, as if it knew her holiday had
come.

John drew the hidden face still closer, and while she listened to his
eager words, Nan heard the beating of the strong man's heart, and knew
it spoke the truth.

"Nan, I promised mother to be silent till I was sure I loved you
wholly,--sure that the knowledge would give no pain when I should tell
it, as I am trying to tell it now.  This little shoe has been mv
comforter through this long year, and I have kept it as other lovers
keep their fairer favors. It has been a talisman more eloquent to me
than flower or ring; for, when I saw how worn it was, I always thought
of the willing feet that came and went for others' comfort all day
long; when I saw the little bow you tied, I always thought of the hands
so diligent in serving any one who knew a want or felt a pain; and when
I recalled the gentle creature who had worn it last, I always saw her
patient, tender, and devout,--and tried to grow more worthy of her,
that I might one day dare to ask if she would walk beside me all my
life and be my 'angel in the house.' Will you, dear?  Believe me, you
shall never know a weariness or grief I have the power to shield you
from."

Then Nan, as simple in her love as in her life, laid her arms about his
neck, her happy face against his own, and answered softly,--

"Oh, John, I never can be sad or tired any more!"



DEBBY'S DEBUT.

On a cheery June day Mrs. Penelope Carroll and her niece Debby Wilder,
were whizzing along on their way to a certain gay watering-place, both
in the best of humors with each other and all the world beside.  Aunt
Pen was concocting sundry mild romances, and laying harmless plots for
the pursuance of her favorite pastime, match-making; for she had
invited her pretty relative to join her summer jaunt, ostensibly that
the girl might see a little of fashionable life, but the good lady
secretly proposed to herself to take her to the beach and get her a
rich husband, very much as she would have proposed to take her to
Broadway and get her a new bonnet: for both articles she considered
necessary, but somewhat difficult for a poor girl to obtain.

Debby was slowly getting her poise, after the excitement of a first
visit to New York; for ten days of bustle had introduced the young
philosopher to a new existence, and the working-day world seemed to
have vanished when she made her last pat of butter in the dairy at
home.  For an hour she sat thinking over the good-fortune which had
befallen her, and the comforts of this life which she had suddenly
acquired. Debby was a true girl, with all a girl's love of ease and
pleasure; it must not be set down against her that she surveyed her
pretty travelling-suit with much complacency, rejoicing inwardly that
she could use her hands without exposing fractured gloves, that her
bonnet was of the newest mode, needing no veil to hide a faded ribbon
or a last year's shape, that her dress swept the ground with
fashionable untidiness, and her boots were guiltless of a patch,--that
she was the possessor of a mine of wealth in two of the eight trunks
belonging to her aunt, that she was travelling like any lady of the
land with man- and maid-servant at her command, and that she was
leaving work and care behind her for a month or two of novelty and rest.

When these agreeable facts were fully realized, and Aunt Pen had fallen
asleep behind her veil, Debby took out a book, and indulged in her
favorite luxury, soon forgetting past, present, and future in the
inimitable history of Martin Chuzzlewit. The sun blazed, the cars
rattled, children cried, ladies nodded, gentlemen longed for the solace
of prohibited cigars, and newspapers were converted into sun-shades,
nightcaps, and fans; but Debby read on, unconscious of all about her,
even of the pair of eves that watched her from the Opposite corner of
the car.  A Gentleman with a frank, strong-featured face sat therein,
and amused himself by scanning with thoughtful gaze the countenances of
his fellow-travellers.  Stout Aunt Pen, dignified even in her sleep,
was a "model of deportment" to the rising generation; but the student
of human nature found a more attractive subject in her companion, the
girl with an apple-blossom face and merry brown eyes, who sat smiling
into her book, never heeding that her bonnet was awry, and the wind
taking unwarrantable liberties with her ribbons and her hair.

Innocent Debby turned her pages, unaware that her fate sat opposite in
the likeness of a serious, black-bearded gentleman, who watched the
smiles rippling from her lips to her eyes with an interest that
deepened as the minutes passed.  If his paper had been full of anything
but "Bronchial Troches" and "Spalding's Prepared Glue," he would have
found more profitable employment; but it wasn't, and with the usual
readiness of idle souls he fell into evil ways, and permitted
curiosity, that feminine sin, to enter in and take possession of his
manly mind. A great desire seized him to discover what book his pretty
neighbor; but a cover hid the name, and he was too distant to catch it
on the fluttering leaves. Presently a stout Emerald-Islander, with her
wardrobe oozing out of sundry paper parcels, vacated the seat behind
the two ladies; and it was soon quietly occupied by the individual for
whom Satan was finding such indecorous employment.  Peeping round the
little gray bonnet, past a brown braid and a fresh cheek, the young
man's eye fell upon the words the girl was reading, and forgot to look
away again.  Books were the desire of his life; but an honorable
purpose and an indomitable will kept him steady at his ledgers till he
could feel that he had earned the right to read.  Like wine to many
another was an open page to his; he read a line, and, longing for more,
took a hasty sip from his neighbor's cup, forgetting that it was a
stranger's also.

Down the page went the two pairs of eyes, and the merriment from
Debby's seemed to light up the sombre ones behind her with a sudden
shine that softened the whole face and made it very winning.  No wonder
they twinkled, for Elijah Pogram spoke, and "Mrs. Hominy, the mother of
the modern Gracchi, in the classical blue cap and the red cotton
pocket-handkerchief, came down the room in a procession of one." A low
laugh startled Debby, though it was smothered like the babes in the
Tower; and, turning, she beheld the trespasser scarlet with confusion,
and sobered with a tardy sense of his transgression. Debby was not a
starched young lady of the "prune and prism" school, but a frank,
free-hearted little body, quick to read the sincerity of others, and to
take looks and words at their real value.  Dickens was her idol; and
for his sake she could have forgiven a greater offence than this.

The stranger's contrite countenance and respectful apology won her
good-will at once; and with a finer courtesy than any Aunt Pen would
have taught, she smilingly bowed her pardon, and, taking another book
from her basket, opened it, saying, pleasantly,--

"Here is the first volume if you like it, Sir.  I can recommend it as
an invaluable consolation for the discomforts of a summer day's
journey, and it is heartily at your service."

As much surprised as gratified, the gentleman accepted the book, and
retired behind it with the sudden discovery that wrongdoing has its
compensation in the pleasurable sensation of being forgiven. Stolen
delights are well known to be specially saccharine: and much as this
pardoned sinner loved books, it seemed to him that the interest of the
story flagged, and that the enjoyment of reading was much enhanced by
the proximity of a gray bonnet and a girlish profile. But Dickens soon
proved more powerful than Debby, and she was forgotten, till, pausing
to turn a leaf, the young man met her shy glance, as she asked, with
the pleased expression of a child who has shared an apple with a
playmate,--

"Is it good?"

"Oh, very!"--and the man looked as honestly grateful for the book as
the boy would have done for the apple.

Only five words in the conversation, but Aunt Pen woke, as if the
watchful spirit of propriety had roused her to pluck her charge from
the precipice on which she stood.

"Dora, I'm astonished at you! Speaking to strangers in that free manner
is a most unladylike thing.  How came you to forget what I have told
you over and over again about a proper reserve?" The energetic whisper
reached the gentleman's ear, and he expected to be annihilated with a
look when his offence was revealed; but he was spared that ordeal, for
the young voice answered, softly,--

"Don't faint, Aunt Pen: I only did as I'd be done by; for I had two
books, and the poor man looked so hungry for something to read that I
couldn't resist sharing my 'goodies.' He will see that I'm a
countrified little thing in spite of my fine feathers, and won't be
shocked at my want of rigidity and frigidity; so don't look dismal, and
I'll be prim and proper all the rest of the way,--if I don't forget it."

"I wonder who he is; may belong to some of our first families, and in
that case it might be worth while to exert ourselves, you know. Did you
learn his name, Dora?" whispered the elder lady.

Debby shook her head, and murmured, "Hush!"--but Aunt Pen had heard of
matches being made in cars as well as in heaven; and as an experienced
general, it became her to reconnoitre, when one of the enemy approached
her camp. Slightly altering her position, she darted an
all-comprehensive glance at the invader, who seemed entirely absorbed,
for not an eyelash stirred during the scrutiny. It lasted but an
instant, yet in that instant he was weighed and found wanting; for that
experienced eye detected that his cravat was two inches wider than
fashion ordained, that his coat was not of the latest style, that his
gloves were mended, and his handkerchief neither cambric nor silk.
That was enough, and sentence was passed forthwith,--"Some respectable
clerk, good-looking, but poor, and not at all the thing for Dora"; and
Aunt Pen turned to adjust a voluminous green veil over her niece's
bonnet, "To shield it from the dust, dear," which process also shielded
the face within from the eye of man.

A curious smile, half mirthful, half melancholy, passed over their
neighbor's lips; but his peace of mind seemed undisturbed, and he
remained buried in his book Till they reached -----, at dusk.  As he
returned it, he offered his services in procuring a carriage or
attending to luggage; but Mrs. Carroll, with much dignity of aspect,
informed him that her servants would attend to those matters, and,
bowing gravely, he vanished into the night.

As they rolled away to the hotel, Debby was wild to run down to the
beach whence came the solemn music of the sea, making the twilight
beautiful.  But Aunt Pen was too tired to do anything but sup in her
own apartment and go early to bed; and Debby might as soon have
proposed to walk up the great Pyramid as to make her first appearance
without that sage matron to mount guard over her; so she resigned
herself to pie and patience, and fell asleep, wishing it were to-morrow.

At five, a. m., a nightcapped head appeared at one of the myriad
windows of the ----- Hotel, and remained there as if fascinated by the
miracle of sunrise over the sea.  Under her simplicity of character and
girlish merriment Debby possessed a devout spirit and a nature full of
the real poetry of life, two gifts that gave her dawning womanhood its
sweetest charm, and made her what she was. As she looked out that
summer dawn upon the royal marriage of the ocean and the sun, all petty
hopes and longings faded out of sight, and her young face grew luminous
with thoughts too deep for words.  Her day was happier for that silent
hour, her life richer for the aspirations that uplifted her like
beautiful strong angels, and left a blessing when they went.  The smile
of the June sky touched her lips, the morning red seemed to linger on
her cheek, and in her eye arose a light kindled by the shimmer of that
broad sea of gold; for Nature rewarded her young votary well, and gave
her beauty, when she offered love.  How long she leaned there Debby did
not know; steps from below roused her from her reverie, and led her
back into the world again.  Smiling at herself, She stole to bed, and
lay wrapped in waking dreams as changeful as the shadows, dancing on
her chamber-wall.

The advent of her aunt's maid, Victorine, some two hours later, was the
signal to be "up and doing"; and she meekly resigned herself into the
hands of that functionary, who appeared to regard her in the light of
an animated pin-cushion, as she performed the toilet-ceremonies with an
absorbed aspect, which impressed her subject with a sense of the
solemnity of the occasion.

"Now, Mademoiselle, regard yourself, and pronounce that you are
ravishing," Victorine said at length, folding her hands with a sigh of
satisfaction, as she fell back in an attitude of serene triumph.

Debby obeyed, and inspected herself with great interest and some
astonishment; for there was a sweeping amplitude of array about the
young lady whom she beheld in the much-befrilled gown and embroidered
skirts, which somewhat alarmed her as to the navigation of a vessel
"with such a spread of sail," while a curious sensation of being
somebody else pervaded her from the crown of her head, with its shining
coils of hair, to the soles of the French slippers, whose energies
seemed to have been devoted to the production of marvellous rosettes.

"Yes, I look very nice, thank you; and yet I feel like a doll, helpless
and fine, and fancy I was more of a woman in my fresh gingham, with a
knot of clovers in my hair, than I am now.  Aunt Pen was very kind to
get me all these pretty things; but I'm afraid my mother would look
horrified to see me in such a high state of flounce externally and so
little room to breath internally."

"Your mamma would not flatter me, Mademoiselle; but come now to Madame;
she is waiting to behold you, and I have yet her toilet to make "; and,
with a pitying shrug, Victorine followed Debby to her aunt's room.

"Charming! really elegant!" cried that lady, emerging from her towel
with a rubicund visage.

"Drop that braid half an inch lower, and pull the worked end of her
handkerchief out of the right-hand pocket, Vic.  There! Now, Dora,
don't run about and get rumpled, but sit quietly down and practice
repose till I am ready."

Debby obeyed, and sat mute, with the air of a child in its Sunday-best
on a week-day, pleased with the novelty, but somewhat oppressed with
the responsibility of such unaccustomed splendor, and utterly unable to
connect any ideas of repose with tight shoes and skirts in a rampant
state of starch.


"Well, you see, I bet on Lady Gay against Cockadoodle, and if you'll
believe me--Hullo! there's Mrs. Carroll, and deuse take me if she
hasn't got a girl with her!  Look, Seguin!"--and Joe Leavenworth, a
"man of the world," aged twenty, paused in his account of an exciting
race to make the announcement.

Mr. Seguin, his friend and Mentor, as much his, senior in worldly
wickedness as in years, tore himself from his breakfast long enough to
survey the new-comers, and then returned to it, saying, briefly,--

"The old lady is worth cultivating,--gives good suppers, and thanks you
for eating them. The girl is well got up, but has no style, and blushes
like a milkmaid.  Better fight shy of her, Joe."

"Do you think so?  Well, now I rather fancy that kind of thing.  She's
new, you see, and I get on with that sort of girl the best, for the old
ones are so deused knowing that a fellow has no chance of a--By the
Lord Harry, she's eating bread and milk!"

Young Leavenworth whisked his glass into his eye, and Mr. Seguin put
down his roll to behold the phenomenon.  Poor Debby! her first step had
been a wrong one.

All great minds have their weak points.  Aunt Pen's was her breakfast,
and the peace of her entire day depended upon the success of that meal.
Therefore, being down rather late, the worthy lady concentrated her
energies upon the achievement of a copious repast, and, trusting to
former lessons, left Debby to her own resources for a few fatal
moments. After the flutter occasioned by being scooped into her seat by
a severe-nosed waiter, Debby had only courage enough left to refuse tea
and coffee and accept milk.  That being done, she took the first
familiar viand that appeared, and congratulated herself upon being able
to get her usual breakfast. With returning composure, she looked about
her and began to  enjoy the buzz of voices, the clatter of knives and
forks, and the long lines of faces all intent upon the business of the
hour; but her peace was of short duration. Pausing for a fresh relay of
toast, Aunt Pen glanced toward her niece with the comfortable
conviction that her appearance was highly creditable; and her dismay
can be imagined, when she beheld that young lady placidly devouring a
great cup of brown-bread and milk before the eyes of the assembled
multitude.  The poor lady choked in her coffee, and between her gasps
whispered irefully behind her napkin,--

"For Heaven's sake, Dora, put away that mess! The Ellenboroughs are
directly opposite, watching everything you do.  Eat that omelet, or
anything respectable, unless you want me to die of mortification."

Debby dropped her spoon, and, hastily helping herself from the dish her
aunt pushed toward her, consumed the leathery compound with as much
grace as she could assume, though unable to repress a laugh at Aunt
Pen's disturbed countenance. There was a slight lull in the clatter,
and the blithe sound caused several heads to turn toward the quarter
whence it came, for it was as unexpected and pleasant a sound as a
bobolink's song in a cage of shrill-voiced canaries.

"She's a jolly little thing and powerful pretty, so deuse take me if I
don't make up to the old lady and find out who the girl is.  I've been
introduced to Mrs. Carroll at our house: but I suppose she won't
remember me till I remind her."

The "deuse" declining to accept of his repeated offers (probably
because there was still too much honor and honesty in the boy,) young
Leavenworth sought out Mrs. Carroll on the Piazza, as she and Debby
were strolling there an hour later.

"Joe Leavenworth, my dear, from one of our first families,--very
wealthy,--fine match,--pray, be civil,--smooth your hair, hold back
your shoulders, and put down your parasol," murmured Aunt Pen, as the
gentleman approached with as much pleasure in his countenance as it was
consistent with manly dignity to express upon meeting two of the
inferior race.

"My niece, Miss Dora Wilder.  This is her first season at the beach,
and we must endeavor to make it pleasant for her, or she will be
getting homesick and running away to mamma," said Aunt Pen, in her
society-tone, after she had returned his greeting, and perpetrated a
polite fiction, by declaring that she remembered him perfectly, for he
was the image of his father.

Mr. Leavenworth brought the heels of his varnished boots together with
a click, and executed the latest bow imported, then stuck his glass in
his eye and stared till it fell out, (the glass, not the eye,) upon
which he fell into step with them, remarking,--

"I shall be most happy to show the lions: they are deused tame ones, so
you needn't be alarmed. Miss Wilder."

Debby was good-natured enough to laugh; and, elated with that success,
he proceeded to pour forth his stores of wit and learning in true
collegian style, quite unconscious that the "jolly little thing" was
looking him through and through with the smiling eyes that were
producing such pleasurable sensations under the mosaic studs.  They
strolled toward the beach, and, meeting an old acquaintance, Aunt Pen
fell behind, and beamed upon the young pair as if her prophetic eye
even at this early stage beheld them walking altarward in a proper
state of blond white vest and bridal awkwardness.

"Can you skip a stone, Mr. Leavenworth? asked Debby, possessed with a
mischievous desire to shock the piece of elegance at her side.

"Eh? what's that?" he inquired, with his head on one side, like an
inquisitive robin.

Debby repeated her question, and illustrated it by sending a stone
skimming over the water in the most scientific manner.  Mr. Joe was
painfully aware that this was not at all "the thing," that his sisters
never did so, and that Seguin would laugh confoundedly, if he caught
him at it; but Debby looked so irresistibly fresh and pretty under her
rose-lined parasol that he was moved to confess that he had done such a
thing, and to sacrifice his gloves by poking in the sand, that he might
indulge in a like unfashionable pastime.

"You'll be at the hop to-night, I hope, Miss Wilder," he observed,
introducing a topic suited to a young lady's mental capacity.

"Yes, indeed; for dancing is one of the joys of my life, next to
husking and making hay"; and Debby polked a few steps along the beach,
much to the edification of a pair of old gentlemen, serenely taking
their first constitutional.

"Making what?" cried Mr. Joe, poking after her.

"Hay; ah, that is the pleasantest fun in the world,--and better
exercise, my mother says, for soul and body, than dancing till dawn in
crowded rooms, with everything in a state of unnatural excitement.  If
one wants real merriment, let him go into a new-mown field, where all
the air is full of summer odors, where wild-flowers nod along the
walls, where blackbirds make finer music than any band, and sun and
wind and cheery voices do their part, while windrows rise, and great
loads go rumbling through the lanes with merry brown faces atop.  Yes,
much as I like dancing, it is not to be compared with that; for in the
one case we shut out the lovely world, and in the other we become a
part of it, till by its magic labor turns to poetry, and we harvest
something better than dried buttercups and grass."

As she spoke, Debby looked up, expecting to meet a glance of
disapproval; but something in the simple earnestness of her manner had
recalled certain boyish pleasures as innocent as they were hearty,
which now contrasted very favorably with the later pastimes in which
fast horses, and that lower class of animals, fast men, bore so large a
part.  Mr. Joe thoughtfully punched five holes in the sand, and for a
moment Debby liked the expression of his face; then the old
listlessness returned, and, looking up, he said, with an air of ennui
that was half sad, half ludicrous, in one so young and so generously
endowed with youth, health, and the good gifts of this life,--

"I used to fancy that sort of thing years ago, but I'm afraid I should
find it a little slow now, though you describe it in such an inviting
manner that I would be tempted to try it, if a hay-cock came in my way;
for, upon my life, it's deused heavy work loafing about at these
watering-places all summer.  Between ourselves, there's a deal of
humbug about this kind of life, as you will find, when you've tried it
as long as I have."

"Yes, I begin to think so already; but perhaps you can give me a few
friendly words of warning from the stones of your experience, that I
may be spared the pain of saying what so many look,--'Grandma, the
world is hollow; my doll is stuffed with sawdust; and I should 'like to
go into a convent, if you please.'"

Debby's eyes were dancing with merriment; but they were demurely
down-cast, and her voice was perfectly serious.

The milk of human kindness had been slightly curdled for Mr. Joe by
sundry college-tribulations; and having been "suspended," he very
naturally vibrated between the inborn jollity of his temperament and
the bitterness occasioned by his wrongs.

He had lost at billiards the night before, had been hurried at
breakfast, had mislaid his cigar-case, and splashed his boots;
consequently the darker mood prevailed that morning, and when his
counsel was asked, he gave it like one who bad known the heaviest
trials of this "Piljin Projiss of a wale."

"There's no justice in the world, no chance for us young people to
enjoy ourselves, without some penalty to pay, some drawback to worry us
like these confounded 'all-rounders.' Even here, where all seems free
and easy, there's no end of gossips and spies who tattle and watch till
you feel as if you lived in a lantern. 'Every one for himself, and the
Devil take the hindmost'; that's the principle they go on, and you have
to keep your wits about you in the most exhausting manner, or you are
done for before you know it.  I've seen a good deal of this sort of
thing, and hope you'll get on better than some do, when it's known that
you are the rich Mrs. Carroll's niece; though you don't need that fact
to enhance your charms,--upon my life, you don't."

Debby laughed behind her parasol at this burst of candor; but her
independent nature prompted her to make a fair beginning, in spite of
Aunt Pen's polite fictions and well-meant plans.

"Thank you for your warning, but I don't apprehend much annoyance of
that kind," she said, demurely.  "Do you know, I think, if young ladies
were truthfully labelled when they went into society, it would be a
charming fashion, and save a world of trouble? Something in this
style:--'Arabella Marabout, aged nineteen, fortune $100,000, temper
warranted'; 'Laura Eau-de-Cologne, aged twenty-eight, fortune $30,000,
temper slightly damaged'; Deborah Wilder, aged eighteen, fortune, one
pair of hands, one head, indifferently well filled, one heart, (not in
the market,) temper decided, and no expectations.' There, you see, that
would do away with much of the humbug you lament, and we poor souls
would know at once whether we were sought for our fortunes or
ourselves, and that would be so comfortable!"

Mr. Leavenworth turned away, with a convicted sort of expression, as
she spoke, and, making a spyglass of his hand, seemed to be watching
something out at sea with absorbing interest.  He had been guilty of a
strong desire to discover whether Debby was an heiress, but had not
expected to be so entirely satisfied on that important subject, and was
dimly conscious that a keen eye had seen his anxiety, and a quick wit
devised a means of setting it at rest forever.  Somewhat disconcerted,
he suddenly changed the conversation, and, like many another distressed
creature, took to the water, saying briskly,--

"By-the-by, Miss Wilder, as I've engaged to do the honors, shall I have
the pleasure of bathing with you when the fun begins?  As you are fond
of hay-making, I suppose you intend to pay your respects to the old
gentleman with the three-pronged pitchfork?"

"Yes, Aunt Pen means to put me through a course of salt water, and any
instructions in the art of navigation will be gratefully received; for
I never saw the ocean before, and labor under a firm conviction, that,
once in, I never shall come out again till I am brought, like Mr.
Mantilini, a 'damp, moist, unpleasant body.'"

As Debby spoke, Mrs. Carroll hove in sight, coming down before the wind
with all sails set, and signals of distress visible long before she
dropped anchor and came along-side.  The devoted woman had been
strolling slowly for the girl's sake, though oppressed with a mournful
certainty that her most prominent feature was fast becoming a fine
copper-color; yet she had sustained herself like a Spartan matron, till
it suddenly occurred to her that her charge might be suffering a like

  "sea-change
  Into something rich and strange."

Her fears, however, were groundless, for Debby met her without a
freckle, looking all the better for her walk; and though her feet were
wet with chasing the waves, and her pretty gown the worse for salt
water, Aunt Pen never chid her for the destruction of her raiment, nor
uttered a warning word against an unladylike exuberance of spirits, but
replied to her inquiry most graciously,--

"Certainly, my love, we shall bathe at eleven, and there will be just
time to get Victorine and our dresses; so run on to the house, and I
will join you as soon as I have finished what I am saying to Mrs.
Earl,"--then added, in a stage-aside, as she put a fallen lock off the
girl's forehead, "You are doing beautifully!  He is evidently struck;
make yourself interesting, and don't burn your nose, I beg of you."

Debby's bright face clouded over, and she walked on with so much
stateliness that her escort wondered "what the deuse the old lady had
done to her," and exerted himself to the utmost to recall her merry
mood, but with indifferent success.


"Now I begin to feel more like myself, for this is getting back to
first principles, though I fancy I look like the little old woman who
fell asleep on the king's highway and woke up with abbreviated drapery;
and you look funnier still, Aunt Pen," said Debby, as she tied on her
pagoda-hat, and followed Mrs. Carroll, who walked out of her
dressing-room an animated bale of blue cloth surmounted by a gigantic
sun-bonnet.

Mr. Leavenworth was in waiting, and so like a blond-headed lobster in
his scarlet suit that Debby could hardly keep her countenance as they
joined the groups of bathers gathering along the breezy shore.

For an hour each day the actors and actresses who played their
different roles at the ----- Hotel with such precision and success put
off their masks and dared to be themselves.  The ocean wrought the
change, for it took old and young into its arms, and for a little while
they played like children in their mother's lap.  No falsehood could
withstand its rough sincerity; for the waves washed paint and powder
from worn faces, and left a fresh bloom there.  No ailment could
entirely resist its vigorous cure; for every wind brought healing on
its wings, endowing many a meagre life with another year of health.  No
gloomy spirit could refuse to listen to its lullaby, and the spray
baptized it with the subtile benediction of a cheerier mood.  No rank
held place there; for the democratic sea toppled down the greatest
statesman in the land, and dashed over the bald pate of a millionnaire
with the same white-crested wave that stranded a poor parson on the
beach and filled a fierce reformer's mouth with brine.  No fashion
ruled, but that which is as old as Eden,--the beautiful fashion of
simplicity.  Belles dropped their affectations with their hoops, and
ran about the shore blithe-hearted girls again. Young men forgot their
vices and their follies, and were not ashamed of the real courage,
strength, and skill they had tried to leave behind them with their
boyish plays.  Old men gathered shells with the little Cupids dancing
on the sand, and were better for that innocent companionship; and young
mothers never looked so beautiful as when they rocked their babies on
the bosom of the sea.

Debby vaguely felt this charm, and, yielding to it, splashed and sang
like any beach-bird, while Aunt Pen bobbed placidly up and down in a
retired corner, and Mr. Leavenworth swam to and fro, expressing his
firm belief in mermaids, sirens, and the rest of the aquatic
sisterhood, whose warbling no manly ear can resist.

"Miss Wilder, you must learn to swim.  I've taught quantities of young
ladies, and shall be delighted to launch the 'Dora,' if you'll accept
me as a pilot.  Stop a bit; I'll get a life-preserver," and leaving
Debby to flirt with the waves, the scarlet youth departed like a flame
of fire.

A dismal shriek interrupted his pupil's play, and looking up, she saw
her aunt beckoning wildly with one hand, while she was groping in the
water with the other. Debby ran to her, alarmed at her tragic
expression, and Mrs. Carroll, drawing the girl's face into the privacy
of her big bonnet, whispered one awful word, adding, distractedly,--

"Dive for them! oh, dive for them! I shall be perfectly helpless, if
they are lost!"

"I can't dive, Aunt Pen; but there is a man, let us ask him," said
Debby, as a black head appeared to windward.

But Mrs. Carroll's "nerves" had received a shock, and, gathering up her
dripping garments, she fled precipitately along the shore and vanished
into her dressing-room.

Debby's keen sense of the ludicrous got the better of her respect, and
peal after peal of laughter broke from her lips, till a splash behind
her put an end to her merriment, and, turning, she found that this
friend in need was her acquaintance of the day before.  The gentleman
seemed pausing for permission to approach, with much the appearance of
a sagacious Newfoundland, wistful and wet.

"Oh, I'm very glad it's you, Sir!" was Debby's cordial greeting, as she
shook a drop off the end of her nose, and nodded, smiling.

The new-comer immediately beamed upon her like an amiable Triton,
saying, as they turned shoreward,--

"Our first interview opened with a laugh on my side, and our second
with one on yours.  I accept the fact as a good omen.  Your friend
seemed in trouble; allow me to atone for my past misdemeanors by
offering my services now.  But first let me introduce myself; and as I
believe in the fitness of things, let me present you with an
appropriate card"; and, stooping, the young man wrote "Frank Evan" on
the hard sand at Debby's feet.

The girl liked his manner, and, entering into the spirit of the thing,
swept as grand a curtsy as her limited drapery would allow saying,
merrily,--

"I am Debby Wilder, or Dora, as aunt prefers to call me; and instead of
laughing, I ought to be four feet under water, looking for something we
have lost; but I can't dive, and my distress is dreadful, as you see."

"What have you lost?  I will look for it, and bring it back in spite of
the kelpies, if it is a human possibility," replied Mr. Evan, pushing
his wet locks out of his eyes, and regarding the ocean with a
determined aspect.

Debby leaned toward him, whispering with solemn countenance,--

"It is a set of teeth, Sir."

Mr. Evan was more a man of deeds than words, therefore he disappeared
at once with a mighty splash, and after repeated divings and much
laughter appeared bearing the chief ornament of Mrs. Penelope Carroll's
comely countenance.  Debby looked very pretty and grateful as she
returned her thanks, and Mr.  Evan was guilty of a secret wish that all
the worthy lady's features were at the bottom of the sea, that he might
have the satisfaction of restoring them to her attractive niece; but
curbing this unnatural desire, he bowed, saying, gravely,--

"Tell your aunt, if you please, that this little accident will remain a
dead secret, so far as I am concerned, and I am very glad to have been
of service at such a critical moment."

Whereupon Mr. Evan marched again into the briny deep, and Debby trotted
away to her aunt, whom she found a clammy heap of blue flannel and
despair. Mrs. Carroll's temper was ruffled, and though she joyfully
rattled in her teeth, she said, somewhat testily, when Debby's story
was done,--

"Now that man will have a sort of claim on us, and we must be civil,
whoever he is. Dear! dear! I wish it had been Joe Leavenworth instead.
Evan,--I don't remember any of our first families with connections of
that name, and I dislike to be under obligations to a person of that
sort, for there's no knowing how far he may presume; so, pray, be
careful, Dora."

"I think you are very ungrateful, Aunt Pen; and if Mr. Evan should
happen to be poor, it does not become me to turn up my nose at him, for
I'm nothing but a make-believe myself just now. I don't wish to go down
upon my knees to him, but I do intend to be as kind to him as I should
to that conceited Leavenworth boy; yes, kinder even; for poor people
value such things more, as I know very well."

Mrs. Carroll instantly recovered her temper, changed the subject, and
privately resolved to confine her prejudices to her own bosom, as they
seemed to have an aggravating effect upon the youthful person whom she
had set her heart on disposing of to the best advantage.

Debby took her swimming-lesson with much success, and would have
achieved her dinner with composure, if white-aproned gentlemen had not
effectually taken away her appetite by whisking bills-of-fare into her
hands, and awaiting her orders with a fatherly interest, which induced
them to congregate mysterious dishes before her, and blandly rectify
her frequent mistakes. She survived the ordeal, however, and at four
p.m. went to drive with "that Leavenworth boy" in the finest turnout
----- could produce.  Aunt Pen then came off guard, and with a sigh of
satisfaction subsided into a peaceful doze, still murmuring, even in
her sleep,--

"Propinquity, my love, propinquity works wonders."



"Aunt Pen, are you a modest woman?" asked the young crusader against
established absurdities, as she came into the presence-chamber that
evening ready for the hop.

"Bless the child, what does she mean?" cried Mrs. Carroll, with a start
that twitched her back-hair out of Victorine's hands.

"Would you like to have a daughter of yours go to a party looking as I
look?" continued her niece, spreading her airy dress, and standing very
erect before her astonished relative.

"Why, of course I should, and be proud to own such a charming
creature," regarding the slender white shape with much
approbation,--adding, with a smile, as she met the girl's eye,--

"Ah, I see the difficulty, now; you are disturbed because there is not
a bit of lace over these pretty shoulders of yours.  Now don't be
absurd, Dora; the dress is perfectly proper, or Madame Tiphany never
would have sent it home. It is the fashion, child; and many a girl with
such a figure would go twice as decolletee, and think nothing of it, I
assure you."

Debby shook her head with an energy that set the pink heather-bells
a-tremble in her hair, and her color deepened beautifully as she said,
with reproachful eyes,--

"Aunt Pen, I think there is a better fashion in every young girl's
heart than any Madame Tiphany can teach.  I am very grateful for all
you have done for me, but I cannot go into public in such an undress as
this; my mother would never allow it, and father never forgive it.
Please don't ask me to, for indeed I cannot do it even for you."

Debby looked so pathetic that both mistress and maid broke into a laugh
which somewhat reassured the young lady, who allowed her determined
features to relax into a smile, as she said,--

"Now, Aunt Pen, you want me to look pretty and be a credit to you; but
how would you like to see my face the color of those geraniums all the
evening?"

"Why, Dora, you are out of your mind to ask such a thing, when you know
it's the desire of my life to keep your color down and make you look
more delicate," said her aunt, alarmed at the fearful prospect of a
peony-faced protegee.

"Well, I should be anything but that, if I wore this gown in its
present waistless condition; so here is a remedy which will prevent
such a calamity and ease my mind."

As she spoke, Debby tied on her little blonde fichu with a gesture
which left nothing more to be said.

Victorine scolded, and clasped her hands; but Mrs. Carroll, fearing to
push her authority too far, made a virtue of necessity, saying,
resignedly,--

"Have your own way, Dora, but in return oblige me by being agreeable to
such persons as I may introduce to you; and some day, when I ask a
favor, remember how much I hope to do for you, and grant it cheerfully."

"Indeed I will, Aunt Pen, if it is anything I can do without disobeying
mother's 'notions' as you call them.  Ask me to wear an orange-colored
gown, or dance with the plainest, poorest man in the room, and I'll do
it; for there never was a kinder aunt than mine in all the world,"
cried Debby, eager to atone for her seeming wilfulness, and really
grateful for her escape from what seemed to her benighted mind a very
imminent peril.

Like a clover-blossom in a vase of camellias little Debby looked that
night among the dashing or languid women who surrounded her; for she
possessed the charm they had lost,--the freshness of her youth.
Innocent gayety sat smiling in her eyes, healthful roses bloomed upon
her cheek, and maiden modesty crowned her like a garland. She was the
creature that she seemed, and, yielding to the influence of the hour,
danced to the music of her own blithe heart. Many felt the spell whose
secret they had lost the power to divine, and watched the girlish
figure as if it were a symbol of their early aspirations dawning
freshly from the dimness of their past. More than one old man thought
again of some little maid whose love made his boyish days a pleasant
memory to him now. More than one smiling fop felt the emptiness of his
smooth speech, when the truthful eyes looked up into his own; and more
than one pale woman sighed regretfully with herself, "I, too, was a
happy-hearted creature once!"

"That Mr. Evan does not seem very anxious to claim our acquaintance,
after all, and I think better of him on that account.  Has he spoken to
you to-night, Dora?" asked Mrs. Carroll, as Debby dropped down beside
her after a "splendid polka."

"No, ma'am, he only bowed.  You see some people are not so presuming as
other people thought they were; for we are not the most attractive
beings on the planet; therefore a gentleman can be polite and then
forget us without breaking any of the Ten Commandments.  Don't be
offended with him yet, for he may prove to be some great creature with
a finer pedigree than any of your first families.' Mr. Leavenworth, as
you know everybody, perhaps you can relieve Aunt Pen's mind, by telling
her something about the tall, brown man standing behind the lady with
salmon-colored hair."

Mr. Joe, who was fanning the top of Debby's head with the best
intentions in life, took a survey, and answered readily,--

"Why, that's Frank Evan.  I know him, and a deused good fellow he
is,--though he don't belong to our set, you know."

"Indeed! pray, tell us something about him, Mr. Leavenworth.  We met in
the cars, and he did us a favor or two.  Who and what is the man?"
asked Mrs. Carroll, relenting at once toward a person who was favorably
spoken of by one who did belong to her "set."

"Well, let me see," began Mr. Joe, whose narrative powers were not
great. "He is a bookkeeper in my Uncle Josh Loring's importing concern,
and a powerful smart man, they say.  There's some kind of clever story
about his father's leaving a load of debts, and Frank's working a
deused number of years till they were paid.  Good of him, wasn't it?
Then, just as he was going to take things easier and enjoy life a bit,
his mother died, and that rather knocked him up, you see.  He fell
sick, and came to grief generally, Uncle Josh said; so he was ordered
off to get righted, and here he is, looking like a tombstone. I've a
regard for Frank, for he took care of me through the smallpox a year
ago, and I don't forget things of that sort; so, if you wish to be
introduced, Mrs. Carroll, I'll trot him out with pleasure, and make a
proud man of him."

Mrs. Carroll glanced at Debby, and as that young lady was regarding Mr.
Joe with a friendly aspect, owing to the warmth of his words, she
graciously assented, and the youth departed on his errand.  Mr. Evan
went through the ceremony with a calmness wonderful to behold,
considering the position of one lady and the charms of the other, and
soon glided into the conversation with the ease of a most accomplished
courtier.

"Now I must tear myself away, for I'm engaged to that stout Miss
Bandoline for this dance. She's a friend of my sister's, and I must do
the civil, you know; powerful slow work it is, too, but I pity the poor
soul,--upon my life, I do;" and Mr. Joe assumed the air of a martyr.

Debby looked up with a wicked smile in her eyes, as she said,--

"Ah, that sounds very amiable here; but in five minutes you'll be
murmuring in Miss Bandoline's earm--'I've been pining to come to you
this half hour, but I was obliged to take out that Miss Wilder, you
see--countrified little thing enough, but not bad-looking, and has a
rich aunt; so I've done my duty to her, but deuse take me if I can
stand it any longer."

Mr. Evan joined in Debby's merriment; but Mr. Joe was so appalled at
the sudden attack that he could only stammer a remonstrance and beat a
hasty retreat, wondering how on earth she came to know that his
favorite style of making himself agreeable to one young lady was by
decrying another.

"Dora, my love, that is very rude, and 'Deuse' is not a proper
expression for a woman's lips. Pray, restrain your lively tongue, for
strangers may not understand that it is nothing but the sprightliness
of your disposition which sometimes runs away with you."

"It was only a quotation, and I thought you would admire anything Mr.
Leavenworth said, Aunt Pen," replied Debby, demurely.

Mrs. Carroll trod on her foot, and abruptly changed the conversation,
by saying, with an appearance of deep interest,--

"Mr. Evan, you are doubtless connected with the Malcoms of Georgia; for
they, I believe, are descended from the ancient Evans of Scotland. They
are a very wealthy and aristocratic family, and I remember seeing their
coat-of-arms once: three bannocks and a thistle."

Mr. Evan had been standing before them with a composure which impressed
Mrs. Carroll with a belief in his gentle blood, for she remembered her
own fussy, plebeian husband, whose fortune had never been able to
purchase him the manners of a gentleman.  Mr. Evan only grew a little
more erect, as he replied, with an untroubled mien,--

"I cannot claim relationship with the Malcoms of Georgia or the Evans
of Scotland, I believe, Madam.  My father was a farmer, my grandfather
a blacksmith, and beyond that my ancestors may have been
street-sweepers, for anything I know; but whatever they were, I fancy
they were honest men, for that has always been our boast, though, like
President Jackson's, our coat-of-arms is nothing but 'a pair of
shirt-sleeves.'"

From Debby's eyes there shot a bright glance of admiration for the
young man who could look two comely women in the face and serenely own
that he was poor.  Mrs. Carroll tried to appear at ease, and, gliding
out of personalities, expatiated on the comfort of "living in a land
where fame and fortune were attainable by all who chose to earn them,"
and the contempt she felt for those "who had no sympathy with the
humbler classes, no interest in the welfare of the race," and many more
moral reflections as new and original as the Multiplication-Table or
the Westminster Catechism. To all of which Mr. Evan listened with
polite deference, though there was something in the keen intelligence
of his eye that made Debby blush for shallow Aunt Pen, and rejoice when
the good lady got out of her depth and seized upon a new subject as a
drowning mariner would a hen-coop.

"Dora, Mr. Ellenborough is coming this way; you have danced with him
but once, and he is a very desirable partner; so, pray, accept, if he
asks you," said Mrs. Carroll, watching a far-off individual who seemed
steering his zigzag course toward them.

"I never intend to dance with Mr. Ellenborough again, so please don't
urge me, Aunt Pen;" and Debby knit her brows with a somewhat irate
expression.

"My love, you astonish me!  He is a most agreeable and accomplished
young man,--spent three years in Paris, moves in the first circles, and
is considered an ornament to fashionable society.

"What can be your objection, Dora?" cried Mrs. Carroll, looking as
alarmed as if her niece had suddenly announced her belief in the Koran.

"One of his accomplishments consists in drinking champagne till he is
not a 'desirable partner' for any young lady with a prejudice in favor
of decency.  His moving in 'circles' is just what I complain of; and if
he is an ornament, I prefer my society undecorated.  Aunt Pen, I cannot
make the nice distinctions you would have me, and a sot in broadcloth
is as odious as one in rags. Forgive me, but I cannot dance with that
silver-labelled decanter again."

Debby was a genuine little piece of womanhood; and though she tried to
speak lightly, her color deepened, as she remembered looks that had
wounded her like insults, and her indignant eyes silenced the excuses
rising to her aunt's lips.  Mrs. Carroll began to rue the hour she ever
undertook the guidance of Sister Deborah's headstrong child, and for an
instant heartily wished she had left her to bloom unseen in the shadow
of the parsonage; but she concealed her annoyance, still hoping to
overcome the girl's absurd resolve, by saying, mildly,--

"As you please, dear; but if you refuse Mr. Ellenborough, you will be
obliged to sit through the dance, which is your favorite, you know."

Debby's countenance fell, for she had forgotten that, and the Lancers
was to her the crowning rapture of the night.  She paused a moment, and
Aunt Pen brightened; but Debby made her little sacrifice to principle
as heroically as many a greater one had been made, and, with a wistful
look down the long room, answered steadily, though her foot kept time
to the first strains as she spoke,--

"Then I will sit, Aunt Pen; for that is preferable to staggering about
the room with a partner who has no idea of the laws of gravitation."

"Shall I have the honor of averting either calamity?" said Mr. Evan,
coming to the rescue with a devotion beautiful to see; for dancing was
nearly a lost art with him, and the Lancers to a novice is equal to a
second Labyrinth of Crete.

"Oh, thank you!" cried Debby, tumbling fan, bouquet, and handkerchief
into Mrs. Carroll's lap, with a look of relief that repaid him fourfold
for the trials he was about to undergo.  They went merrily away
together, leaving Aunt Pen to wish that it was according to the laws of
etiquette to rap officious gentlemen over the knuckles, when they
introduce their fingers into private pies without permission from the
chief cook.  How the dance went Debby hardly knew, for the conversation
fell upon books, and in the interest of her favorite theme she found
even the "grand square" an impertinent interruption, while her own
deficiences became almost as great as her partner's; yet, when the
music ended with a flourish, and her last curtsy was successfully
achieved, she longed to begin all over again, and secretly regretted
that she was engaged four deep.

"How do you like our new acquaintance, Dora?" asked Aunt Pen, following
Joe Leavenworth with her eye, as the "yellow-haired laddie" whirled by
with the ponderous Miss Flora.

"Very much; and I'm glad we met as we did, for it makes things free and
easy, and that is so agreeable in this ceremonious place," replied
Debby, looking in quite an opposite direction.

"Well, I'm delighted to hear you say so, dear, for I was afraid you had
taken a dislike to him, and he is really a very charming young man,
just the sort of person to make a pleasant companion for a few weeks.
These little friendships are part of the summer's amusement, and do no
harm; so smile away. Dora, and enjoy yourself while you may."

"Yes, Aunt, I certainly will, and all the more because I have found a
sensible soul to talk to. Do you know, he is very witty and well
informed, though he says he never had much time for self-cultivation?
But I think trouble makes people wise, and he seems to have had a good
deal, though he leaves it for others to tell of.  I am glad you are
willing I should know him, for I shall enjoy talking about my pet
heroes with him as a relief from the silly chatter I must keep up most
of the time."

Mrs. Carroll was a woman of one idea; and though a slightly puzzled
expression appeared in her face, she listened approvingly, and
answered, with a gracious smile,--

"Of course, I should not object to your knowing such a person, my love;
but I'd no idea Joe Leavenworth was a literary man, or had known much
trouble, except his father's death and his sister Clementina's
runaway-marriage with her drawing-master."

Debby opened her brown eyes very wide, and hastily picked at the down
on her fan, but had no time to correct her aunt's mistake, for the real
subject of her commendations appeared at that moment, and Mrs. Caroll
was immediately absorbed in the consumption of a large pink ice.

"That girl is what I call a surprise-party, now," remarked Mr. Joe
confidentially to his cigar, as he pulled off his coat and stuck his
feet up in the privacy of his own apartment. "She looks as mild as
strawberries and cream till you come to the complimentary, then she
turns on a fellow with that deused satirical look of hers, and makes
him feel like a fool.  I'll try the moral dodge to-morrow and see what
effect that will have; for she is mighty taking, and I must amuse
myself somehow, you know."

"How many years will it take to change that fresh-hearted little girl
into a fashionable belle, I wonder?" thought Frank Evan, as he climbed
the four flights that led to his "sky-parlor."

"What a curious world this is!" mused Debby, with her nightcap in her
hand.  "The right seems odd and rude, the wrong respectable and easy,
and this sort of life a merry-go-round, with no higher aim than
pleasure.  Well, I have made my Declaration of Independence, and Aunt
Pen must be ready for a Revolution if she taxes me too heavily."

As she leaned her hot cheek on her arm, Debby's eye fell on the quaint
little cap made by the motherly hands that never were tired of working
for her.  She touched it tenderly, and love's simple magic swept the
gathering shadows from her face, and left it clear again, as her
thoughts flew home like birds into the shelter of their nest.

"Good night, mother! I'll face temptation steadily. I'll try to take
life cheerily, and do nothing that shall make your dear face a
reproach, when it looks into my own again."

Then Debby said her prayers like any pious child, and lay down to dream
of pulling buttercups with Baby Bess, and singing in the twilight on
her father's knee.



The history of Debby's first day might serve as a sample of most that
followed, as week after week went by with varying pleasures and
increasing interest to more than one young debutante.

Mrs. Carroll did her best, but Debby was too simple for a belle, too
honest for a flirt, too independent for a fine lady; she would be
nothing but her sturdy little self, open as daylight, gay as a lark,
and blunt as any Puritan.  Poor Aunt Pen was in despair, till she
observed that the girl often "took" with the very peculiarities which
she was lamenting; this somewhat consoled her, and she tried to make
the best of the pretty bit of homespun which would not and could not
become velvet or brocade.  Seguin, Ellenborough, & Co. looked with
lordly scorn upon her, as a worm blind to their attractions.  Miss
MacRimsy and her "set" quizzed her unmercifully behind her back, after
being worsted in several passages of arms; and more than one successful
mamma condoled with Aunt Pen upon the terribly defective education of
her charge, till that stout matron could have found it in her heart to
tweak off their caps and walk on them, like the irascible Betsey
Trotwood.

But Debby had a circle of admirers who loved her with a sincerity few
summer queens could boast; for they were real friends, won by gentle
arts, and retained by the gracious sweetness of her nature.  Moon-faced
babies crowed and clapped their chubby hands when she passed by their
wicker-thrones; story-loving children clustered round her knee, and
never were denied; pale invalids found wild-flowers on their pillows;
and forlorn papas forgot the state of the moneymarket when she sang for
them the homely airs their daughters had no time to learn.  Certain
plain young ladies poured their woes into her friendly ear, and were
comforted; several smart Sophomores fell into a state of chronic
stammer, blush, and adoration, when she took a motherly interest in
their affairs; and a melancholy old Frenchman blessed her with the
enthusiasm of his nation, because she put a posy in the button-hole of
his rusty coat, and never failed to smile and bow as he passed by.  Yet
Debby was no Edgworth heroine preternaturally prudent, wise, and
untemptable; she had a fine crop of piques, vanities, and dislikes
growing up under this new style of cultivation. She loved admiration,
enjoyed her purple and fine linen, hid new-born envy, disappointed
hope, and wounded pride behind a smiling face, and often thought with a
sigh of the humdrum duties that awaited her at home.  But under the
airs and graces Aunt Pen cherished with such sedulous care, under the
flounces and furbelows Victorine daily adjusted with groans, under the
polish which she acquired with feminine ease, the girl's heart still
beat steadfast and strong, and conscience kept watch and ward that no
traitor should enter in to surprise the citadel which mother-love had
tried to garrison so well.

In pursuance of his sage resolve,  Mr. Joe tried the "moral dodge," as
he elegantly expressed it, and, failing in that, followed it up with
the tragic, religious, negligent, and devoted ditto; but acting was not
his forte, so Debby routed him in all; and at last, when he was at his
wit's end for an idea, she suggested one, and completed her victory by
saying pleasantly,--

"You took me behind the curtain too soon, and now the paste-diamonds
and cotton-velvet don't impose upon me a bit.  Just be your natural
self, and we shall get on nicely, Mr. Leavenworth."

The novelty of the proposal struck his fancy, and after a few relapses
it was carried into effect and thenceforth, with Debby, he became the
simple, good-humored lad Nature designed him to be, and, as a proof of
it, soon fell very sincerely in love.

Frank Evan, seated in the parquet of society, surveyed the dress-circle
with much the same expression that Debby had seen during Aunt Pen's
oration; but he soon neglected that amusement to watch several actors
in the drama going on before his eyes, while a strong desire to perform
a part therein slowly took possession of his mind.

Debby always had a look of welcome when he came, always treated him
with the kindness of a generous woman who has had an opportunity to
forgive, and always watched the serious, solitary man with a great
compassion for his loss, a growing admiration for his upright life.
More than once the beach-birds saw two figures pacing the sands at
sunrise with the peace of early day upon their faces and the light of a
kindred mood shining in their eyes.  More than once the friendly ocean
made a third in the pleasant conversation, and its low undertone came
and went between the mellow bass and silvery treble of the human voices
with a melody that lent another charm to interviews which soon grew
wondrous sweet to man and maid.  Aunt Pen seldom saw the twain
together, seldom spoke of Evan; and Debby held her peace, for, when she
planned to make her innocent confessions, she found that what seemed
much to her was nothing to another ear  and scarcely worth the telling;
so, unconscious as yet whither the green path led, she went on her way,
leading two lives, one rich and earnest, hoarded deep within herself,
the other frivolous and gay for all the world to criticize.  But those
venerable spinsters, the Fates, took the matter into their own hands,
and soon got the better of those short-sighted matrons, Mesdames Grundy
and Carroll; for, long before they knew it, Frank and Debby had begun
to read together a book greater than Dickens ever wrote, and when they
had come to the fairest part of the sweet story Adam first told Eve,
they looked for the name upon the title-page, and found that it was
"Love."

Fight weeks came and went,--eight wonderfully happy weeks to Debby and
her friend; for "propinquity" had worked more wonders than poor Mrs.
Carroll knew, as the only one she saw or guessed was the utter
captivation of Joe Leavenworth. He had become "himself" to such an
extent that a change of identity would have been a relief; for the
object of his adoration showed no signs of relenting, and he began to
fear, that, as Debby said, her heart was "not in the market." She was
always friendly, but never made those interesting betrayals of regard
which are so encouraging to youthful gentlemen "who fain would climb,
yet fear to fall." She never blushed when he pressed her hand, never
fainted or grew pale when he appeared with a smashed trotting-wagon and
black eye, and actually slept through a serenade that would have won
any other woman's soul out of her body with its despairing quavers.
Matters were getting desperate; for horses lost their charms, "flowing
bowls" palled upon his lips, ruffled shirt-bosoms no longer delighted
him, and hops possessed no soothing power to allay the anguish of his
mind.  Mr. Seguin, after unavailing ridicule and pity, took compassion
on him, and from his large experience suggested a remedy, just as he
was departing for a more congenial sphere.

"Now don't be an idiot, Joe, but, if you want to keep your hand in and
go through a regular chapter of flirtation, just right about face, and
devote yourself to some one else.  Nothing like jealousy to teach
womankind their own minds, and a touch of it will bring little Wilder
round in a jiffy.  Try it, my boy, and good luck to you!"--with which
Christian advice Mr. Seguin slapped his pupil on the shoulder, and
disappeared, like a modern Mephistopheles, in a cloud of cigar-smoke.

"I'm glad he's gone, for in my present state of mind he's not up to my
mark at all.  I'll try his plan, though, and flirt with Clara West;
she's engaged, so it won't damage her affections; her lover isn't here,
so it won't disturb his; and, by Jove!  I must do something, for I
can't stand this suspense."

Debby was infinitely relieved by this new move, and infinitely amused
as she guessed the motive that prompted it; but the more contented she
seemed, the more violently Mr. Joe flirted with her rival, till at last
weak-minded Miss Clara began to think her absent George the most
undesirable of lovers, and to mourn that she ever said "Yes" to a
merchant's clerk, when she might have said it to a merchant's son.
Aunt Pen watched and approved this stratagem, hoped for the best
results, and believed the day won when Debby grew pale and silent, and
followed with her eyes the young couple who were playing battledore and
shuttle-cock with each other's hearts, as if she took some interest in
the game. But Aunt Pen clashed her cymbals too soon; for Debby's
trouble had a better source than jealousy, and in the silence of the
sleepless nights that stole her bloom she was taking counsel of her own
full heart, and resolving to serve another woman as she would herself
be served in a like peril, though etiquette was outraged and the
customs of polite society turned upside down.



"Look, Aunt Pen! what lovely shells and moss I've got! Such a splendid
scramble over the rocks as I've had with Mrs. Duncan's boys! It seemed
so like home to run and sing with a troop of topsy-turvy children that
it did me good; and I wish you had all been there to see." cried Debby,
running into the drawing-room, one day, where Mrs. Carroll and a circle
of ladies sat enjoying a dish of highly flavored scandal, as they
exercised their eyesight over fancy-work.

"My dear Dora, spare my nerves; and if you have any regard for the
proprieties of life, don't go romping in the sun with a parcel of noisy
boys.  If you could see what an object you are, I think you would try
to imitate Miss Clara, who is always a model of elegant repose."

Miss West primmed up her lips, and settled a fold in her ninth flounce,
as Mrs. Carroll spoke, while the whole group fixed their eyes with
dignified disapproval on the invader of their refined society.  Debby
had come like a fresh wind into a sultry room; but no one welcomed the
healthful visitant, no one saw a pleasant picture in the bright-faced
girl with windtossed hair and rustic hat heaped with moss and
many-tinted shells; they only saw that her gown was wet, her gloves
forgotten, and her scarf trailing at her waist in a manner no well-bred
lady could approve.  The sunshine faded out of Debby's face, and there
was a touch of bitterness in her tone, as she glanced at the circle of
fashion-plates, saying with an earnestness which caused Miss West to
open her pale eyes to their widest extent,--

"Aunt Pen, don't freeze me yet,--don't take away my faith in simple
things, but let me be a child a little longer,--let me play and sing
and keep my spirit blithe among the dandelions and the robins while I
can; for trouble comes soon enough, and all my life will be the richer
and the better for a happy youth."

Mrs. Carroll had nothing at hand to offer in reply to this appeal, and
four ladies dropped their work to stare; but Frank Evan looked in from
the piazza, saying, as he beckoned like a boy,--

"I'll play with you, Miss Dora; come and make sand pies upon the shore.
Please let her, Mrs. Carroll; we'll be very good, and not wet our
pinafores or feet."

Without waiting for permission, Debby poured her treasures into the lap
of a certain lame Freddy, and went away to a kind of play she had never
known before.  Quiet as a chidden child, she walked beside her
companion, who looked down at the little figure, longing to take it on
his knee and call the sunshine back again.  That he dared not do; but
accident, the lover's friend, performed the work, and did him a good
turn beside.  The old Frenchman was slowly approaching, when a
frolicsome wind whisked off his hat and sent it skimming along the
beach.  In spite of her late lecture, away went Debby, and caught the
truant chapeau just as a wave was hurrying up to claim it. This
restored her cheerfulness, and when she returned, she was herself again.

"A thousand thanks; but does Mademoiselle remember the forfeit I might
demand to add to the favor she has already done me?" asked the gallant
old gentleman, as Debby took the hat off her own head, and presented it
with a martial salute.

"Ah, I had forgotten that; but you may claim [text missing in original
copy] do something more to give you pleasure;" and Debby looked up into
the withered face which had grown familiar to her, with kind eyes, full
of pity and respect.

Her manner touched the old man very much; he bent his gray head before
her, saying, gratefully,--

"My child, I am not good enough to salute these blooming checks; but I
shall pray the Virgin to reward you for the compassion you bestow on
the poor exile, and I shall keep your memory very green through all my
life."

He kissed her hand, as if it were a queen's, and went on his way,
thinking of the little daughter whose death left him childless in a
foreign land.

Debby softly began to sing, "Oh, come unto the yellow sands!" but
stopped in the middle of a line, to say,--

"Shall I tell you why I did what Aunt Pen would call a very unladylike
and improper thing, Mr. Evans?"

"If you will be so kind;" and her companion looked delighted at the
confidence about to be reposed in him.

"Somewhere across this great wide sea I hope I have a brother," Debby
said, with softened voice and a wistful look into the dim horizon.
"Five years ago he left us, and we have never heard from him since,
except to know that he landed safely in Australia.  People tell us he
is dead; but I believe he will yet come home; and so I love to help and
pity any man who needs it, rich or poor, young or old, hoping that as I
do by them some tender-hearted woman far away will do by Brother Will."

As Debby spoke, across Frank Evan's face there passed the look that
seldom comes but once to any young man's countenance; for suddenly the
moment dawned when love asserted its supremacy, and putting pride,
doubt, and fear underneath its feet, ruled the strong heart royally and
bent it to its will.  Debby's thoughts had floated across the sea; but
they came swiftly back when her companion spoke again, steadily and
slow, but with a subtile change in tone and manner which arrested them
at once.

"Miss Dora, if you should meet a man who had known a laborious youth, a
solitary manhood, who had no sweet domestic ties to make home beautiful
and keep his nature warm, who longed most ardently to be so blessed,
and made it the aim of his life to grow more worthy the good gift,
should it ever come,--if you should learn that you possessed the power
to make this fellow-creature's happiness, could you find it in your
gentle heart to take compassion on him for the love of 'Brother Will'?"

Debby was silent, wondering why heart and nerves and brain were stirred
by such a sudden thrill, why she dared not look up, and why, when she
desired so much to speak, she could only answer, in a voice that
sounded strange to her own ears,--

"I cannot tell."

Still, steadily and slow, with strong emotion deepening and softening
his voice, the lover at her side went on,--

"Will you ask yourself this question in some quiet hour?  For such a
man has lived in the sunshine of your presence for eight happy weeks,
and now, when his holiday is done, he finds that the old solitude will
be more sorrowful than ever, unless he can discover whether his summer
dream will change into a beautiful reality.  Miss Dora, I have very
little to offer you; a faithful heart to cherish you, a strong arm to
work for you, an honest name to give into your keeping,--these are all;
but if they have any worth in your eyes, they are most truly yours
forever."

Debby was steadying her voice to reply, when a troop of bathers came
shouting down the bank, and she took flight into her dressing-room,
there to sit staring at the wall, till the advent of Aunt Pen forced
her to resume the business of the hour by assuming her aquatic attire
and stealing shyly down into the surf.

Frank Evan, still pacing in the footprints they had lately made,
watched the lithe figure tripping to and fro, and, as he looked,
murmured to himself the last line of a ballad Debby sometimes sang,--

  "Dance light! for my heart it lies under your feet, love!"

Presently a great wave swept Debby up, and stranded her very near him,
much to her confusion and his satisfaction. Shaking the spray out of
her eyes, she was hurrying away, when Frank said,--

"You will trip, Miss Dora; let me tie these strings for you;" and,
suiting the action to the word, he knelt down and began to fasten the
cords of her bathing shoe.

Debby stood Looking down at the tall head bent before her, with a
curious sense of wonder that a look from her could make a strong man
flush and pale, as he had done; and she was trying to concoct some
friendly speech, when Frank, still fumbling at the knots, said, very
earnestly and low,--

"Forgive me, if I am selfish in pressing for an answer; but I must go
to-morrow, and a single word will change my whole future for the better
or the worse.  Won't you speak it, Dora?"

If they had been alone, Debby would have put her arms about his neck,
and said it with all her heart; but she had a presentiment that she
should cry, if her love found vent; and here forty pairs of eyes were
on them, and salt water seemed superfluous.  Besides, Debby had not
breathed the air of coquetry so long without a touch of the infection;
and the love of power, that lies dormant in the meekest woman's breast,
suddenly awoke and tempted her.

"If you catch me before I reach that rock, perhaps I will say 'Yes,'"
was her unexpected answer; and before her lover caught her meaning, she
was floating leisurely away.

Frank was not in bathing-costume, and Debby never dreamed that he would
take her at her word; but she did not know the man she had to deal
with; for, taking no second thought, he flung hat and coat away, and
dashed into the sea.  This gave a serious aspect to Debby's foolish
jest.  A feeling of dismay seized her, when she saw a resolute face
dividing the waves behind her, and thought of the rash challenge she
had given; but she had a spirit of her own, and had profited well by
Mr. Joe's instructions: so she drew a long breath, and swam as if for
life, instead of love. Evan was incumbered by his clothing, and Debby
had much the start of him; but, like a second Leander, he hoped to win
his Hero, and, lending every muscle to the work, gained rapidly upon
the little hat which was his beacon through the foam.  Debby heard the
deep breathing drawing nearer and nearer, as her pursuer's strong arms
cleft the water and sent it rippling past her lips, something like
terror took possession of her; for the strength seemed going out of her
limbs, and the rock appeared to recede before her; but the
unconquerable blood of the Pilgrims was in her veins, and "Nil
desperandum" her motto; so, setting her teeth, she muttered,
defiantly,--

"I'll not be beaten, if I go to the bottom!"

A great splashing arose, and when Evan recovered the use of his eyes,
the pagoda-hat had taken a sudden turn, and seemed making for the
farthest point of the goal. "I am sure of her now," thought Frank; and,
like a gallant seagod, he bore down upon his prize, clutching it with a
shout of triumph.  But the hat was empty, and like a mocking echo came
Debby's laugh, as she climbed, exhausted, to a cranny in the rock.

"A very neat thing, by Jove! Deuse take me if you a'n't 'an honor to
your teacher, and a terror to the foe,' Miss Wilder," cried Mr. Joe, as
he came up from a solitary cruise and dropped anchor at her side.
"Here, bring along the hat, Evan; I'm going to crown the victor with
appropriate what-d'ye-call-'ems," he continued, pulling a handful of
sea-weed that looked like well-boiled greens.

Frank came up, smiling; but his lips were white, and in his eye a look
Debby could not meet; so, being full of remorse, she naturally assumed
an air of gayety, and began to sing the merriest air she knew, merely
because she longed to throw herself upon the stones and cry violently.

"It was 'most as exciting as a regatta, and you pulled well, Evan; but
you had too much ballast aboard, and Miss Wilder ran up false colors
just in time to save her ship.  What was the wager?" asked the lively
Joseph, complacently surveying his marine millinery, which would have
scandalized a fashionable mermaid.

"Only a trifle," answered Debby, knotting up her braids with a
revengeful jerk.

"It's taken the wind out of your sails, I fancy, Evan, for you look
immensely Byronic with the starch minus in your collar and your hair in
a poetic toss.  Come, I'll try a race with you; and Miss Wilder will
dance all the evening with the winner.  Bless the man, what's he doing
down there?  Burying sunfish, hey?"

Frank had been sitting below them on a narrow strip of sand, absently
piling up a little mound that bore some likeness to a grave.  As his
companion spoke, he looked at it, and a sudden flush of feeling swept
across his face, as he replied,--

"No, only a dead hope."

"Deuse take it, yes, a good many of that sort of craft founder in these
waters, as I know to my sorrow;" and, sighing tragically.  Mr. Joe
turned to help Debby from her perch, but she had glided silently into
the sea, and was gone.

For the next four hours the poor girl suffered the sharpest pain she
had ever known; for now she clearly saw the strait her folly had
betrayed her into. Frank Evan was a proud man, and would not ask her
love again, believing she had tacitly refused it; and how could she
tell him that she had trifled with the heart she wholly loved and
longed to make her own?  She could not confide in Aunt Pen, for that
worldly lady would have no sympathy to bestow. She longed for her
mother; but there was no time to write, for Frank was going on the
morrow,--might even then be gone; and as this fear came over her, she
covered up her face and wished that she were dead.  Poor Debby! her
last mistake was sadder than her first, and she was reaping a bitter
harvest from her summer's sowing.  She sat and thought till her cheeks
burned and her temples throbbed; but she dared not ease her pain with
tears.  The gong sounded like a Judgment-Day trump of doom, and she
trembled at the idea of confronting many eyes with such a telltale
face; but she could not stay behind, for Aunt Pen must know the cause.
She tried to play her hard part well; but wherever she looked, some
fresh anxiety appeared, as if every fault and folly of those months had
blossomed suddenly within the hour. She saw Frank Evan more sombre and
more solitary than when she met him first, and cried regretfully within
herself, "How could I so forget the truth I owed him?"--She saw Clara
West watching with eager eyes for the coming of young Leavenworth, and
sighed,--"This is the fruit of my wicked vanity!" She saw Aunt Pen
regarded her with an anxious face, and longed to say, "Forgive me, for
I have not been sincere!" At last, as her trouble grew, she resolved to
go away and have a quiet "think,"--a remedy which had served her in
many a lesser perplexity; so, stealing out, she went to a grove of
cedars usually deserted at that hour.  But in ten minutes Joe
Leavenworth appeared at the door of the summer house, and, looking in,
said, with a well-acted start of pleasure and surprise,--

"Beg pardon, I thought there was no one here, My dear Miss Wilder, you
look contemplative; but I fancy it wouldn't do to ask the subject of
your meditations, would it?"

He paused with such an evident intention of remaining that Debby
resolved to make use of the moment, and ease her conscience of one care
that burdened it; therefore she answered his question with her usual
directness,--

"My meditations were partly about you."

Mr. Joe was guilty of the weakness of blushing violently and looking
immensely gratified; but his rapture was of short duration, for Debby
went on very earnestly,--

"I believe I am going to do what you may consider a very impertinent
thing; but I would rather be unmannerly than unjust to others or untrue
to my own sense of right.  Mr. Leavenworth, if you were an older man, I
should not dare to say this to you; but I have brothers of my own, and,
remembering how many unkind things they do for want of thought, I
venture to remind you that a woman's heart is a perilous plaything, and
too tender to be used for a selfish purpose or an hour's pleasure.  I
know this kind of amusement is not considered wrong; but it is wrong,
and I cannot shut my eyes to the fact, or sit silent while another
woman is allowed to deceive herself and wound the heart that trusts
her. Oh, if you love your own sisters, be generous, be just, and do not
destroy that poor girl's happiness, but go away before your sport
becomes a bitter pain to her!"

Joe Leavenworth had stood staring at Debby with a troubled countenance,
feeling as if all the misdemeanors of his life were about to be paraded
before him; but, as he listened to her plea, the womanly spirit that
prompted it appealed more loudly than her words, and in his really
generous heart he felt regret for what had never seemed a fault before.
Shallow as he was, nature was stronger than education, and he admired
and accepted what many a wiser, worldlier man would have resented with
anger or contempt.  He loved Debby with all his little might; he meant
to tell her so, and graciously present his fortune and himself for her
acceptance; but now, when the moment came, the well-turned speech he
had prepared vanished from his memory, and with the better eloquence of
feeling he blundered out his passion like a very boy.

"Miss Dora, I never meant to make trouble between Clara and her lover;
upon my soul, I didn't, and wish Seguin had not put the notion into my
head, since it has given you pain.  I only tried to pique you into
showing some regret, when I neglected you; but you didn't, and then I
got desperate and didn't care what became of any one. Oh, Dora, if you
knew how much I loved you, I am sure you'd forgive it, and let me prove
my repentance by giving up everything that you dislike. I mean what I
say; upon my life I do; and I'll keep my word, if you will only let me
hope."

If Debby had wanted a proof of her love for Frank Evan, she might have
found it in the fact that she had words enough at her command now, and
no difficulty in being sisterly pitiful toward her second suitor.

"Please get up," she said; for Mr. Joe, feeling very humble and very
earnest, had gone down upon his knees, and sat there entirely
regardless of his personal appearance.

He obeyed; and Debby stood looking up at him with her kindest aspect,
as she said, more tenderly than she had ever spoken to him before,--

"Thank you for the affection you offer me, but I cannot accept it, for
I have nothing to give you in return but the friendliest regard, the
most sincere good-will.  I know you will forgive me, and do for your
own sake the good things you would have done for mine, that I may add
to my esteem a real respect for one who has been very kind to me."

"I'll try,--indeed, I will, Miss Dora, though it will be powerful hard
without yourself for a help and a reward."

Poor Joe choked a little, but called up an unexpected manliness, and
added, stoutly,--

"Don't think I shall be offended at your speaking so or saying 'No' to
me,--not a bit; it's all right, and I'm much obliged to you.  I might
have known you couldn't care for such a fellow as I am, and don't blame
you, for nobody in the world is good enough for you.  I'll go away at
once, I'll try to keep my promise, and I hope you'll be very happy all
your life."

He shook Debby's bands heartily, and hurried down the steps, but at the
bottom paused and looked back. Debby stood upon the threshold with
sunshine dancing on her winsome face, and kind words trembling on her
lips; for the moment it seemed impossible to part, and, with an
impetuous gesture, he cried to her,--

"Oh, Dora, let me stay and try to win you! for everything is possible
to love, and I never knew how dear you were to me till now!"

There were sudden tears in the young man's eyes, the flush of a genuine
emotion on his cheek, the tremor of an ardent longing in his voice,
and, for the first time, a very true affection strengthened his whole
countenance.  Debby's heart was full of penitence; she had given so
much pain to more than one that she longed to atone for it--longed to
do some very friendly thing, and soothe some trouble such as she
herself had known.  She looked into the eager face uplifted to her own
and thought of Will, then stooped and touched her lover's forehead with
the lips that softly whispered, "No."

If she had cared for him, she never would have done it; poor Joe knew
that, and murmuring an incoherent "Thank you!" he rushed away, feeling
very much as he remembered to have felt when his baby sister died and
he wept his grief away upon his mother's neck.  He began his
preparations for departure at once, in a burst of virtuous energy quite
refreshing to behold, thinking within himself, as he flung his
cigar-case into the grate, kicked a billiard-ball into a corner, and
suppressed his favorite allusion to the Devil,--

"This is a new sort of thing to me, but I can bear it, and upon my life
I think I feel the better for it already."

And so he did; for though he was no Augustine to turn in an hour from
worldly hopes and climb to sainthood through long years of inward
strife, yet in aftertimes no one knew how many false steps had been
saved, how many small sins repented of, through the power of the memory
that far away a generous woman waited to respect him, and in his secret
soul he owned that one of the best moments of his life was that in
which little Debby Wilder whispered "No," and kissed him.

As he passed from sight, the girl leaned her head upon her hand,
thinking sorrowfully to herself,--

"What right had I to censure him, when my own actions are so far from
true?  I have done a wicked thing, and as an honest girl I should undo
it, if I can.  I have broken through the rules of a false propriety for
Clara's sake; can I not do as much for Frank's?  I will. I'll find him,
if I search the house,--and tell him all, though I never dare to look
him in the face again, and Aunt Pen sends me home to-morrow."

Full of zeal and courage, Debby caught up her hat and ran down the
steps, but, as she saw Frank Evan coming up the path, a sudden panic
fell upon her, and she could only stand mutely waiting his approach.

It is asserted that Love is blind; and on the strength of that popular
delusion novel heroes and heroines go blundering through three volumes
of despair with the plain truth directly under their absurd noses: but
in real life this theory is not supported; for to a living man the
countenance of a loving woman is more eloquent than any language, more
trustworthy than a world of proverbs, more beautiful than the sweetest
love-lay ever sung.

Frank looked at Debby, and "all her heart stood up in her eyes," as she
stretched her hands to him, though her lips only whispered very low,--

"Forgive me, and let me say the 'Yes' I should have said so long ago."

Had she required any assurance of her lover's truth, or any reward for
her own, she would have found it in the change that dawned so swiftly
in his face, smoothing the lines upon his forehead, lighting the gloom
of his eye, stirring his firm lips with a sudden tremor, and making his
touch as soft as it was strong.  For a moment both stood very still,
while Debby's tears streamed down like summer rain; then Frank drew her
into the green shadow of the grove, and its peace soothed her like a
mother's voice, till she looked up smiling with a shy delight her
glance had never known before.  The slant sunbeams dropped a
benediction on their heads, the robins peeped, and the cedars
whispered, but no rumor of what further passed ever went beyond the
precincts of the wood; for such hours are sacred, and Nature guards the
first blossoms of a human love as tenderly as she nurses May-flowers
underneath the leaves.



Mrs. Carroll had retired to her bed with a nervous headache, leaving
Debby to the watch and ward of friendly Mrs. Earle, who performed her
office finely by letting her charge entirely alone. In her dreams Aunt
Pen was just imbibing a copious draught of champagne at the
wedding-breakfast of her niece, "Mrs. Joseph Leavenworth," when she was
roused by the bride elect, who passed through the room with a lamp and
a shawl in her hand.

"What time is it, and where are you going, dear?" she asked, dozily
wondering if the carriage for the wedding-tour was at the door so soon.

"It's only nine, and I am going for a sail, Aunt Pen."

As Debby spoke, the light flashed full into her face, and a sudden
thought into Mrs. Carroll's mind.  She rose up from her pillow, looking
as stately in her night-cap as Maria Theresa is said to have done in
like unassuming head-gear.

"Something has happened, Dora!  What have you done?  What have you
said?  I insist upon knowing immediately," she demanded, with somewhat
startling brevity.

"I have said 'No' to Mr. Leavenworth and 'Yes' to Mr. Evan; and I
should like to go home to-morrow, if you please," was the equally
concise reply.

Mrs. Carroll fell flat in her bed, and lay there stiff and rigid as
Morlena Kenwigs.  Debby gently drew the curtains, and stole away
leaving Aunt Pen's wrath to effervesce before morning.

The moon was hanging luminous and large on the horizon's edge, sending
shafts of light before her till the melancholy ocean seemed to smile,
and along that shining pathway happy Debby and her lover floated into
that new world where all things seem divine.



THE BROTHERS.

Doctor Franck came in as I sat sewing up the rents in an old shirt,
that Tom might go tidily to his grave.  New shirts were needed for the
living, and there was no wife or mother to "dress him handsome when he
went to meet the Lord," as one woman said, describing the fine funeral
she had pinched herself to give her son.

"Miss Dane, I'm in a quandary," began the Doctor, with that expression
of countenance which says as plainly as words, "I want to ask a favor,
but I wish you'd save me the trouble."

"Can I help you out of it?

"Faith!  I don't like to propose it, but you certainly can, if you
please."

"Then give it a name, I beg."

"You see a Reb has just been brought in crazy with typhoid; a bad case
every way; a drunken, rascally little captain somebody took the trouble
to capture, but whom nobody wants to take the trouble to cure.  The
wards are full, the ladies worked to death, and willing to be for our
own boys, but rather slow to risk their lives for a Reb. Now you've had
the fever, you like queer patients, your mate will see to your ward for
a while, and I will find you a good attendant.  The fellow won't last
long, I fancy; but he can't die without some sort of care, you know.
I've put him in the fourth story of the west wing, away from the rest.
It is airy, quiet, and comfortable there. I'm on that ward, and will do
my best for you in every way. Now, then, will you go?"

"Of course I will, out of perversity, if not common charity; for some
of these people think that because I'm an abolitionist I am also a
heathen, and I should rather like to show them, that, though I cannot
quite love my enemies, I am willing to take care of them."

"Very good; I thought you'd go; and speaking of abolition reminds me
that you can have a contraband for servant, if you like. It is that
fine mulatto fellow who was found burying his Rebel master after the
fight, and, being badly cut over the head, our boys brought him along.
Will you have him?"

"By all means,--for I'll stand to my guns on that point, as on the
other; these black boys are far more faithful and handy than some of
the white scamps given me to serve, instead of being served by. But is
this man well enough?"

"Yes, for that sort of work, and I think you'll like him.  He must have
been a handsome fellow before he got his face slashed; not much darker
than myself; his master's son, I dare say, and the white blood makes
him rather high and haughty about some things.  He was in a bad way
when he came in, but vowed he'd die in the street rather than turn in
with the black fellows below; so I put him up in the west wing, to be
out of the way, and he's seen to the captain all the morning. When can
you go up?"

"As soon as Tom is laid out, Skinner moved, Haywood washed, Marble
dressed, Charley rubbed, Downs taken up, Upham laid down, and the whole
forty fed."

We both laughed, though the Doctor was on his way to the dead-house and
I held a shroud on my lap.  But in a hospital one learns that
cheerfulness is one's salvation; for, in an atmosphere of suffering and
death, heaviness of heart would soon paralyze usefulness of hand, if
the blessed gift of smiles had been denied us.

In an hour I took possession of my new charge, finding a
dissipated-looking boy of nineteen or twenty raving in the solitary
little room, with no one near him but the contraband in the room
adjoining. Feeling decidedly more interest in the black man than in the
white, yet remembering the Doctor's hint of his being "high and
haughty," I glanced furtively at him as I scattered chloride of lime
about the room to purify the air, and settled matters to suit myself.
I had seen many contrabands, but never one so attractive as this.  All
colored men are called "boys," even if their heads are white; this boy
was five-and-twenty at least, strong-limbed and manly, and had the look
of one who never had been cowed by abuse or worn with oppressive labor.
He sat on his bed doing nothing; no book, no pipe, no pen or paper
anywhere appeared, yet anything less indolent or listless than his
attitude and expression I never saw.  Erect he sat with a hand on
either knee, and eyes fixed on the bare wall opposite, so rapt in some
absorbing thought as to be unconscious of my presence, though the door
stood wide open and my movements were by no means noiseless.  His face
was half averted, but I instantly approved the Doctor's taste, for the
profile which I saw possessed all the attributes of comeliness
belonging to his mixed race. He was more quadroon than mulatto, with
Saxon features, Spanish complexion darkened by exposure, color in lips
and cheek, waving hair, and an eye full of the passionate melancholy
which in such men always seems to utter a mute protest against the
broken law that doomed them at their birth.  What could he be thinking
of? The sick boy cursed and raved, I rustled to and fro, steps passed
the door, bells rang, and the steady rumble of army-wagons came up from
the street, still he never stirred.  I had seen colored people in what
they call "the black sulks," when, for days, they neither smiled nor
spoke, and scarcely ate.  But this was something more than that; for
the man was not dully brooding over some small grievance,--he seemed to
see an all-absorbing fact or fancy recorded on the wall, which was a
blank to me. I wondered if it were some deep wrong or sorrow, kept
alive by memory and impotent regret; if he mourned for the dead master
to whom he had been faithful to the end; or if the liberty now his were
robbed of half its sweetness by the knowledge that some one near and
dear to him still languished in the hell from which he had escaped.  My
heart quite warmed to him at that idea; I wanted to know and comfort
him; and, following the impulse of the moment, I went in and touched
him on the shoulder.

In an instant the man vanished and the slave appeared.  Freedom was too
new a boon to have wrought its blessed changes yet, and as he started
up, with his hand at his temple and an obsequious "Yes, Ma'am," any
romance that had gathered round him fled away, leaving the saddest of
all sad facts in living guise before me.  Not only did the manhood seem
to die out of him, but the comeliness that first attracted me; for, as
he turned, I saw the ghastly wound that had laid open cheek and
forehead. Being partly healed, it was no longer bandaged, but held
together with strips of that transparent plaster which I never see
without a shiver and swift recollections of scenes with which it is
associated in my mind. Part of his black hair had been shorn away, and
one eye was nearly closed; pain so distorted, and the cruel sabre-cut
so marred that portion of his face, that, when I saw it, I felt as if a
fine medal had been suddenly reversed, showing me a far more striking
type of human suffering and wrong than Michel Angelo's bronze prisoner.
By one of those inexplicable processes that often teach us how little
we understand ourselves, my purpose was suddenly changed, and though I
went in to offer comfort as a friend, I merely gave an order as a
mistress.

"Will you open these windows? this man needs more air."

He obeyed at once, and, as he slowly urged up the unruly sash, the
handsome profile was again turned toward me, and again I was possessed
by my first impression so strongly that I involuntarily said,--

"Thank you, Sir."

Perhaps it was fancy, but I thought that in the look of mingled
surprise and something like reproach which he gave me there was also a
trace of grateful pleasure. But he said, in that tone of spiritless
humility these poor souls learn so soon,--

"I ain't a white man, Ma'am, I'm a contraband."

"Yes, I know it; but a contraband is a free man, and I heartily
congratulate you."

He liked that; his face shone, he squared his shoulders, lifted his
head, and looked me full in the eye with a brisk--

"Thank ye, Ma'am; anything more to do fer yer?"

"Doctor Franck thought you would help me with this man, as there are
many patients and few nurses or attendants.  Have you had the fever?"

"No, Ma'am."

"They should have thought of that when they put him here; wounds and
fevers should not be together. I'll try to get you moved."

He laughed a sudden laugh,--if he had been a white man, I should have
called it scornful; as he was a few shades darker than myself, I
suppose it must be considered an insolent, or at least an unmannerly
one.

"It don't matter, Ma'am. I'd rather be up here with the fever than down
with those niggers; and there ain't no other place fer me."

Poor fellow! that was true.  No ward in all the hospital would take him
in to lie side by side with the most miserable white wreck there.  Like
the bat in Aesop's fable, he belonged to neither race; and the pride of
one, the helplessness of the other, kept him hovering alone in the
twilight a great sin has brought to overshadow the whole land.

"You shall stay, then; for I would far rather have you than any lazy
Jack.  But are you well and strong enough?"

"I guess I'll do, Ma'am."

He spoke with a passive sort of acquiescence,--as if it did not much
matter, if he were not able, and no one would particularly rejoice, if
he were.

"Yes, I think you will.  By what name shall I call you?"

"Bob, Ma'am."

Every woman has her pet whim; one of mine was to teach the men
self-respect by treating them respectfully.  Tom, Dick, and Harry would
pass, when lads rejoiced in those familiar abbreviations; but to
address men often old enough to be my father in that style did not suit
my old-fashioned ideas of propriety.  This "Bob" would never do; I
should have found it as easy to call the chaplain "Gus" as my
tragical-looking contraband by a title so strongly associated with the
tail of a kite.

"What is your other name?" I asked. "I like to call my attendants by
their last names rather than by their first."

"I've got no other, Ma'am; we have our masters' names, or do without.
Mine's dead, and I won't have anything of his about me."

"Well, I'll call you Robert, then, and you may fill this pitcher for
me, if you will be so kind."

He went; but, through all the tame, obedience years of servitude had
taught him, I could see that the proud spirit his father gave him was
not yet subdued, for the look and gesture with which he repudiated his
master's name were a more effective declaration of independence than
any Fourth-of-July orator could have prepared.

We spent a curious week together.  Robert seldom left his room, except
upon my errands; and I was a prisoner all day, often all night, by the
bedside of the Rebel.  The fever burned itself rapidly away, for there
seemed little vitality to feed it in the feeble frame of this old young
man, whose life had been none of the most righteous, judging from the
revelations made by his unconscious lips; since more than once Robert
authoritatively silenced him, when my gentler bushings were of no
avail, and blasphemous wanderings or ribald camp-songs made my cheeks
burn and Robert's face assume an aspect of disgust.  The captain was a
gentleman in the world's eye, but the contraband was the gentleman in
mine;--I was a fanatic, and that accounts for such depravity of taste,
I hope. I never asked Robert of himself, feeling that somewhere there
was a spot still too sore to bear the lightest touch; but, from his
language, manner, and intelligence, I inferred that his color had
procured for him the few advantages within the reach of a quick-witted,
kindly treated slave.  Silent, grave, and thoughtful, but most
serviceable, was my contraband; glad of the books I brought him,
faithful in the performance of the duties I assigned to him, grateful
for the friendliness I could not but feel and show toward him.  Often I
longed to ask what purpose was so visibly altering his aspect with such
daily deepening gloom.  But I never dared, and no one else had either
time or desire to pry into the past of this specimen of one branch of
the chivalrous "F.F.Vs."

On the seventh night, Dr. Franck suggested that it would be well for
some one, besides the general watchman of the ward, to be with the
captain, as it might be his last.  Although the greater part of the two
preceding nights had been spent there, of course I offered to
remain,--for there is a strange fascination in these scenes, which
renders one careless of fatigue and unconscious of fear until the
crisis is passed.

"Give him water as long as he can drink, and if he drops into a natural
sleep, it may save him. I'll look in at midnight, when some change will
probably take place. Nothing but sleep or a miracle will keep him now.
Good night."

Away went the Doctor; and, devouring a whole mouthful of grapes, I
lowered the lamp, wet the captain's head, and sat down on a hard stool
to begin my watch.  The captain lay with his hot, haggard face turned
toward me, filling the air with his poisonous breath, and feebly
muttering, with lips and tongue so parched that the sanest speech would
have been difficult to understand. Robert was stretched on his bed in
the inner room, the door of which stood ajar, that a fresh draught from
his open window might carry the fever-fumes away through mine.  I could
just see a long, dark figure, with the lighter outline of a face, and,
having little else to do just then, I fell to thinking of this curious
contraband, who evidently prized his freedom highly, yet seemed in no
haste to enjoy it. Doctor Franck had offered to send him on to safer
quarters, but he had said, "No, thank yer, Sir, not yet," and then had
gone away to fall into one of those black moods of his, which began to
disturb me, because I had no power to lighten them.  As I sat listening
to the clocks from the steeples all about us, I amused myself with
planning Robert's future, as I often did my own, and had dealt out to
him a generous hand of trumps wherewith to play this game of life which
hitherto had gone so cruelly against him, when a harsh, choked voice
called,--

"Lucy!"

It was the captain, and some new terror seemed to have gifted him with
momentary strength.

"Yes, here's Lucy," I answered, hoping that by following the fancy I
might quiet him,--for his face was damp with the clammy moisture, and
his frame shaken with the nervous tremor that so often precedes death.
His dull eye fixed upon me, dilating with a bewildered look of
incredulity and wrath, till he broke out fiercely.--

"That's a lie! she's dead,--and so's Bob, damn him!"

Finding speech a failure, I began to sing the quiet tune that had often
soothed delirium like this; but hardly had the line,

  "See gentle patience smile on pain,"

passed my lips, when he clutched me by the wrist, whispering like one
in mortal fear,--

"Hush! she used to sing that way to Bob, but she never would to me. I
swore I'd whip the Devil out of her, and I did; but you know before she
cut her throat she said she'd haunt me, and there she is!"

He pointed behind me with an aspect of such pale dismay, that I
involuntarily glanced over my shoulder and started as if I had seen a
veritable ghost; for, peering from the gloom of that inner room, I saw
a shadowy face, with dark hair all about it, and a glimpse of scarlet
at the throat. An instant showed me that it was only Robert leaning
from his bed's-foot, wrapped in a gray army-blanket, with his red shirt
just visible above it, and his long hair disordered by sleep.  But what
a strange expression was on his face!  The unmarred side was toward me,
fixed and motionless as when I first observed it,--less absorbed now,
but more intent.  His eye glittered, his lips were apart like one who
listened with every sense, and his whole aspect reminded me of a hound
to which some wind had brought the scent of unsuspected prey.

"Do you know him, Robert?  Does he mean you?"

"Lord, no, Ma'am; they all own half a dozen Bobs: but hearin' my name
woke me; that's all."

He spoke quite naturally, and lay down again, while I returned to my
charge, thinking that this paroxysm was probably his last.  But by
another hour I perceived a hopeful change, for the tremor had subsided,
the cold dew was gone, his breathing was more regular, and Sleep, the
healer, had descended to save or take him gently away. Doctor Franck
looked in at midnight, bade me keep all cool and quiet, and not fail to
administer a certain draught as soon as the captain woke. Very much
relieved, I laid my head on my arms, uncomfortably folded on the little
table, and fancied I was about to perform one of the feats which
practice renders possible,--"sleeping with one eye open," as we say: a
half-and-half doze, for all senses sleep but that of hearing; the
faintest murmur, sigh, or motion will break it, and give one back one's
wits much brightened by the permission to "stand at ease." On this
night, the experiment was a failure, for previous vigils, confinement,
and much care had rendered naps a dangerous indulgence, Having roused
half a dozen times in an hour to find all quiet, I dropped my heavy
head on my arms, and, drowsily resolving to look up again in fifteen
minutes, fell fast asleep.

The striking of a deep-voiced clock woke me with a start.  "That is
one," thought I, but, to my dismay, two more strokes followed; and in
remorseful haste I sprang up to see what harm my long oblivion had
done.  A strong hand put me back into my seat, and held me there.  It
was Robert.  The instant my eye met his my heart began to beat, and all
along my nerves tingled that electric flash which foretells a danger
that we cannot see.  He was very pale, his mouth grim, and both eyes
full of sombre fire,--for even the wounded one was open now, all the
more sinister for the deep scar above and below.  But his touch was
steady, his voice quiet, as he said,--

"Sit still, Ma'am; I won't hurt yer, nor even scare yer, if I can help
it, but yer waked too soon."

"Let me go, Robert,--the captain is stirring,--I must give him
something."

"No, Ma'am, yer can't stir an inch.  Look here!"

Holding me with one hand, with the other he took up the glass in which
I had left the draught, and showed me it was empty.

"Has he taken it?" I asked, more and more bewildered.

"I flung it out o' winder, Ma'am; he'll have to do without."

"But why, Robert? why did you do it?"

"Because I hate him!"

Impossible to doubt the truth of that; his whole face showed it, as he
spoke through his set teeth, and launched a fiery glance at the
unconscious captain.  I could only hold my breath and stare blankly at
him, wondering what mad act was coming next.  I suppose I shook and
turned white, as women have a foolish habit of doing when sudden danger
daunts them; for Robert released my arm, sat down upon the bedside just
in front of me, and said, with the ominous quietude that made me cold
to see and hear,--

"Don't yer be frightened, Ma'am: don't try to run away, fer the door's
locked an' the key in my pocket; don't yer cry out, fer yer'd have to
scream a long while, with my hand on yer mouth, before yer was heard.
Be still, an' I'll tell yer what I'm goin' to do."

"Lord help us! he has taken the fever in some sudden, violent way, and
is out of his head.  I must humor him till some one comes"; in
pursuance of which swift determination, I tried to say, quite
composedly,--

"I will be still and hear you; but open the window.  Why did you shut
it?"

"I'm sorry I can't do it, Ma'am; but yer'd jump out, or call, if I did,
an' I'm not ready yet. I shut it to make yer sleep, an' heat would do
it quicker'n anything else I could do."

The captain moved, and feebly muttered, "Water!" Instinctively I rose
to give it to him, but the heavy hand came down upon my shoulder, and
in the same decided tone Robert said,-=

"The water went with the physic; let him call."

"Do let me go to him! he'll die without care!"

"I mean he shall;--don't yer interfere, if yer please, Ma'am."

In spite of his quiet tone and respectful manner, I saw murder in his
eyes, and turned faint with fear; yet the fear excited me, and, hardly
knowing what I did, I seized the hands that had seized me, crying,--

"No, no, you shall not kill him! it is base to hurt a helpless man.
Why do you hate him? He is not your master?"

"He's my brother."

I felt that answer from head to foot, and seemed to fathom what was
coming, with a prescience vague, but unmistakable.  One appeal was left
to me, and I made it.

"Robert, tell me what it means? Do not commit a crime and make me
accessory to it--There is a better way of righting wrong than by
violence;--let me help you find it."

My voice trembled as I spoke, and I heard the frightened flutter of my
heart; so did he, and if any little act of mine had ever won affection
or respect from him, the memory of it served me then.  He looked down,
and seemed to put some question to himself; whatever it was, the answer
was in my favor, for when his eyes rose again, they were gloomy, but
not desperate.

"I will tell you, Ma'am; but mind, this makes no difference; the boy is
mine.  I'll give the Lord a chance to take him fust; if He don't, I
shall."

"Oh, no! remember, he is your brother."

An unwise speech; I felt it as it passed my lips, for a black frown
gathered on Robert's face, and his strong hands closed with an ugly
sort of grip. But he did not touch the poor soul gasping there before
him, and seemed content to let the slow suffocation of that stifling
room end his frail life.

"I'm not like to forget that, Ma'am, when I've been thinkin' of it all
this week.  I knew him when they fetched him in, an' would 'a' done it
long 'fore this, but I wanted to ask where Lucy was; he knows,--he told
to-night,--an' now he's done for."

"Who is Lucy?" I asked hurriedly, intent on keeping his mind busy with
any thought but murder.

With one of the swift transitions of a mixed temperament like this, at
my question Robert's deep eyes filled, the clenched hands were spread
before his face, and all I heard were the broken words,--

"My wife,--he took her--"

In that instant every thought of fear was swallowed up in burning
indignation for the wrong, and a perfect passion of pity for the
desperate man so tempted to avenge an injury for which there seemed no
redress but this. He was no longer slave or contraband, no drop of
black blood marred him in my sight, but an infinite compassion yearned
to save, to help, to comfort him. Words seemed so powerless I offered
none, only put my hand on his poor head, wounded, homeless, bowed down
with grief for which I had no cure, and softly smoothed the long
neglected hair, pitifully wondering the while where was the wife who
must have loved this tender-hearted man so well.

The captain moaned again, and faintly whispered, "Air!" but I never
stirred.  God forgive me! just then I hated him as only a woman
thinking of a sister woman's wrong could hate.  Robert looked up; his
eyes were dry again, his mouth grim.  I saw that, said, "Tell me more,"
and he did,--for sympathy is a gift the poorest may give, the proudest
stoop to receive.

"Yer see, Ma'am, his father,--I might say ours, if I warn't ashamed of
both of 'em,--his father died two years ago, an' left us all to Marster
Ned,--that's him here, eighteen then.   He always hated me, I looked so
like old Marster: he don't--only the light skin an' hair.  Old Marster
was kind to all of us, me 'specially, an' bought Lucy off the next
plantation down there in South Car'lina, when he found I liked her.  I
married her, all I could, Ma'am; it warn't much, but we was true to one
another till Marster Ned come home a year after an' made hell fer both
of us. He sent my old mother to be used up in his rice swamp in Georgy;
he found me with my pretty Lucy, an' though young Miss cried, an' I
prayed to him on my knees, an' Lucy run away, he wouldn't have no
mercy; he brought her back, an'--took her, Ma'am."

"Oh! what did you do?" I cried, hot with helpless pain and passion.

How the man's outraged heart sent the blood flaming up into his face
and deepened the tones of his impetuous voice, as he stretched his arm
across the bed, saying, with a terribly expressive gesture,--

"I half murdered him, an' to-night I'll finish."

"Yes, yes,--but go on now; what came next?"

He gave me a look that showed no white man could have felt a deeper
degradation in remembering and confessing these last acts of brotherly
oppression.

"They whipped me till I couldn't stand, an' then they sold me further
South. Yer thought I was a white man once;--look here!"

With a sudden wrench he tore the shirt from neck to waist, and on his
strong brown shoulders showed me furrows deeply ploughed, wounds which,
though healed, were ghastlier to me than any in that house.  I could
not speak to him, and, with the pathetic dignity a great grief lends
the humblest sufferer, he ended his brief tragedy by simply saying,--

"That's all.  Ma'am.  I've never seen her since, an' now I never shall
in this world,--maybe not in t' other."

"But, Robert, why think her dead?  The captain was wandering when he
said those sad things; perhaps he will retract them when he is sane.
Don't despair; don't give up yet."

"No, Ma'am, I guess he's right; she was too proud to bear that long.
It's like her to kill herself.  I told her to, if there was no other
way; an' she always minded me, Lucy did.  My poor girl!  Oh, it warn't
right! No, by God, it warn't!"

As the memory of this bitter wrong, this double bereavement, burned in
his sore heart, the devil that lurks in every strong man's blood leaped
up; he put his hand upon his brother's throat, and, watching the white
face before him, muttered low between his teeth,--

"I'm lettin' him go too easy; there's no pain in this; we a'n't even
yet.  I wish he knew me. Marster Ned! it's Bob; where's Lucy?"

From the captain's lips there came a long faint sigh, and nothing but a
flutter of the eyelids showed that he still lived.  A strange stillness
filled the room as the elder brother held the younger's life suspended
in his hand, while wavering between a dim hope and a deadly hate.  In
the whirl of thoughts that went on in my brain, only one was clear
enough to act upon.  I must prevent murder, if I could,--but how?  What
could I do up there alone, locked in with a dying man and a
lunatic?--for any mind yielded utterly to any unrighteous impulse is
mad while the impulse rules it. Strength I had not, nor much courage,
neither time nor wit for stratagem, and chance only could bring me help
before it was too late.  But one weapon I possessed,--a tongue,--often
a woman's best defence: and sympathy, stronger than fear, gave me power
to use it.  What I said Heaven only knows, but surely Heaven helped me;
words burned on my lips, tears streamed from my eyes, and some good
angel prompted me to use the one name that had power to arrest my
hearer's hand and touch his heart. For at that moment I heartily
believed that Lucy lived, and this earnest faith roused in him a like
belief.

He listened with the lowering look of one in whom brute instinct was
sovereign for the time,--a look that makes the noblest countenance
base. He was but a man,--a poor, untaught, outcast, outraged man.  Life
had few joys for him; the world offered him no honors, no success, no
home, no love.  What future would this crime mar? and why should he
deny himself that sweet, yet bitter morsel called revenge?  How many
white men, with all New England's freedom, culture, Christianity, would
not have felt as he felt then? Should I have reproached him for a human
anguish, a human longing for redress, all now left him from the ruin of
his few poor hopes?  Who had taught him that self-control,
self-sacrifice, are attributes that make men masters of the earth and
lift them nearer heaven?  Should I have urged the beauty of
forgiveness, the duty of devout submission? He had no religion, for he
was no saintly "Uncle Tom," and Slavery's black shadow seemed to darken
all the world to him and shut out God.  Should I have warned him of
penalties, of judgments, and the potency of law?  What did he know of
justice, or the mercy that should temper that stern virtue, when every
law, human and divine, had been broken on his hearthstone? Should I
have tried to touch him by appeals to filial duty, to brotherly love?
How had his appeals been answered? What memories had father and brother
stored up in his heart to plead for either now?  No,--all these
influences, these associations, would have proved worse than useless,
had I been calm enough to try them.  I was not; but instinct, subtler
than reason, showed me the one safe clue by which to lead this troubled
soul from the labyrinth in which it groped and nearly fell. When I
paused, breathless, Robert turned to me, asking, as if human assurances
could strengthen his faith in Divine Omnipotence,--

"Do you believe, if I let Marster Ned live, the Lord will give me back
my Lucy?"

"As surely as there is a Lord, you will find her here or in the
beautiful hereafter, where there is no black or white, no master and no
slave."

He took his hand from his brother's throat, lifted his eyes from my
face to the wintry sky beyond, as if searching for that blessed
country, happier even than the happy North.  Alas, it was the darkest
hour before the dawn!--there was no star above, no light below but the
pale glimmer of the lamp that showed the brother who had made him
desolate.  Like a blind man who believes there is a sun, yet cannot see
it, he shook his head, let his arms drop nervously upon his knees, and
sat there dumbly asking that question which many a soul whose faith is
firmer fixed than his has asked in hours less dark than this,--

"Where is God?" I saw the tide had turned, and strenuously tried to
keep this rudderless lifeboat from slipping back into the whirlpool
wherein it had been so nearly lost.

"I have listened to you, Robert; now hear me, and heed what I say,
because my heart is full of pity for you, full of hope for your future,
and a desire to help you now.  I want you to go away from here, from
the temptation of this place, and the sad thoughts that haunt it.  You
have conquered yourself once, and I honor you for it, because, the
harder the battle, the more glorious the victory; but it is safer to
put a greater distance between you and this man.  I will write you
letters, give you money, and send you to good old Massachusetts to
begin your new life a freeman,--yes, and a happy man; for when the
captain is himself again, I will learn where Lucy is, and move heaven
and earth to find and give her back to you.  Will you do this, Robert?"

Slowly, very slowly, the answer came; for the purpose of a week,
perhaps a year, was hard to relinquish in an hour.

"Yes, Ma'am, I will."

"Good! Now you are the man I thought you, and I'll work for you with
all my heart.  You need sleep, my poor fellow; go, and try to forget.
The captain is still alive, and as yet you are spared the sin.  No,
don't look there; I'll care for him. Come, Robert, for Lucy's sake."

Thank Heaven for the immortality of love! for when all other means of
salvation failed, a spark of this vital fire softened the man's iron
will until a woman's hand could bend it.  He let me take from him the
key, let me draw him gently away and lead him to the solitude which now
was the most healing balm I could bestow.  Once in his little room, he
fell down on his bed and lay there as if spent with the sharpest
conflict of his life. I slipped the bolt across his door, and unlocked
my own, flung up the window, steadied myself with a breath of air, then
rushed to Doctor Franck. He came; and till dawn we worked together,
saving one brother's life, and taking earnest thought how best to
secure the other's liberty.  When the sun came up as blithely as if it
shone only upon happy homes, the Doctor went to Robert.  For an hour I
heard the murmur of their voices; once I caught the sound of heavy
sobs, and for a time a reverent hush, as if in the silence that good
man were ministering to soul as well as sense.  When he departed he
took Robert with him, pausing to tell me he should get him off as soon
as possible, but not before we met again.

Nothing more was seen of them all day; another surgeon came to see the
captain, and another attendant came to fill the empty place.  I tried
to rest, but could not, with the thought of poor Lucy tugging at my
heart, and was soon back at my post again, anxiously hoping that my
contraband had not been too hastily spirited away. Just as night fell
there came a tap, and opening, I saw Robert literally "clothed and in
his right mind." The Doctor had replaced the ragged suit with tidy
garments, and no trace of that tempestuous night remained but deeper
lines upon the forehead, and the docile look of a repentant child.  He
did not cross the threshold, did not offer me his hand,--only took off
his cap, saying, with a traitorous falter in his voice,--

"God bless you, Ma'am!  I'm goin'."

I put out both my hands, and held his fast.

"Good-bye, Robert! Keep up good heart, and when I come home to
Massachusetts we'll meet in a happier place than this.  Are you quite
ready, quite comfortable for your journey?

"Yes, Ma'am, Yes; the Doctor's fixed everything; I'm goin' with a
friend of his; my papers are all right, an' I'm as happy as I can be
till I find,--"

He stopped there; then went on, with a glance into the room,--

"I'm glad I didn't do it, an' I thank yer, Ma'am, fer hinderin'
me,--thank yer hearty; but I'm afraid I hate him jest the same."

Of course he did; and so did I; for these faulty hearts of ours cannot
turn perfect in a night, but need frost and fire, wind and rain, to
ripen and make them ready for the great harvest-home. Wishing to divert
his mind, I put my poor mite into his hand, and, remembering the magic
of a certain little book, I gave him mine, on whose dark cover whitely
shone the Virgin Mother and the Child, the grand history of whose life
the book contained.  The money went into Robert's pocket with a
grateful murmur, the book into his bosom with a long took and a
tremulous--

"I never saw my baby, Ma'am."

I broke down then; and though my eyes were too dim to see, I felt the
touch of lips upon my hands, heard the sound of departing feet, and
knew my contraband was gone.

When one feels an intense dislike, the less one says about the subject
of it the better; therefore I shall merely record that the captain
lived,--in time was exchanged; and that, whoever the other party was, I
am convinced the Government got the best of the bargain.  But long
before this occurred, I had fulfilled my promise to Robert; for as soon
as my patient recovered strength of memory enough to make his answer
trustworthy, I asked, without any circumlocution,--

"Captain Fairfax, where is Lucy?"

And too feeble to be angry, surprised, or insincere, he straightway
answered,--

"Dead, Miss Dane."

"And she killed herself, when you sold Bob?"

"How the Devil did you know that?" he muttered, with an expression
half-remorseful, half-amazed; but I was satisfied, and said no more.

Of course, this went to Robert, waiting far away there in a lonely
home,--waiting, working, hoping for his Lucy.  It almost broke my heart
to do it; but delay was weak, deceit was wicked; so I sent the heavy
tidings, and very soon the answer came,--only three lines; but I felt
that the sustaining power of the man's life was gone.

"I thought I'd never see her any more; I'm glad to know she's out of
trouble.  I thank yer, Ma'am; an' if they let us, I'll fight fer yer
till I'm killed, which I hope will be 'fore long."

Six months later he had his wish, and kept his word.

Every one knows the story of the attack on Fort Wagner; but we should
not tire yet of recalling how our Fifty-Fourth, spent with three
sleepless nights, a day's fast, and a march under the July sun, stormed
the fort as night fell, facing death in many shapes, following their
brave leaders through a fiery rain of shot and shell, fighting
valiantly for God and Governor Andrew,--how the regiment that went into
action seven hundred strong came out having had nearly half its number
captured, killed, or wounded, leaving their young commander to be
buried, like a chief of earlier times, with his body-guard around him,
faithful to the death. Surely, the insult turns to honor, and the wide
grave needs no monument but the heroism that consecrates it in our
sight; surely, the hearts that held him nearest see through their tears
a noble victory in the seeming sad defeat; and surely, God's
benediction was bestowed, when this loyal soul answered, as Death
called the roll, "Lord, here I am, with the brothers Thou hast given
me!"

The future must show how well that fight was fought; for though Fort
Wagner still defies us, public prejudice is down; and through the
cannon smoke of that black night the manhood of the colored race shines
before many eyes that would not see, rings in many ears that would not
hear, wins many hearts that would not hitherto believe.

When the news came that we were needed, there was none so glad as I to
leave teaching contrabands, the new work I had taken up, and go to
nurse "our boys," as my dusky flock so proudly called the wounded of
the Fifty-Fourth. Feeling more satisfaction, as I assumed my big apron
and turned up my cuffs, than if dressing for the President's levee, I
fell to work on board the hospital-ship in Hilton-Head harbor.  The
scene was most familiar, and yet strange; for only dark faces looked up
at me from the pallets so thickly laid along the floor, and I missed
the sharp accent of my Yankee boys in the slower, softer voices calling
cheerily to one another, or answering my questions with a stout, "We'll
never give it up, Ma'am, till the last Reb's dead," or, "If our
people's free, we can afford to die."

Passing from bed to bed, intent on making one pair of hands do the work
of three, at least, I gradually washed, fed, and bandaged my way down
the long line of sable heroes, and coming to the very last, found that
he was my contraband. So old, so worn, so deathly weak and wan, I never
should have known him but for the deep scar on his cheek.  That side
lay uppermost, and caught my eye at once; but even then I doubted, such
an awful change had come upon him, when, turning to the ticket just
above his head, I saw the name, "Robert Dane." That both assured and
touched me, for, remembering that he had no name, I knew that he had
taken mine.  I longed for him to speak to me, to tell how he had fared
since I lost sight of him, and let me perform some little service for
him in return for many he had done for me; but he seemed asleep; and as
I stood re-living that strange night again, a bright lad, who lay next
him softly waving an old fan across both beds, looked up and said,--

"I guess you know him, Ma'am?"

"You are right.  Do you?"

"As much as any one was able to, Ma'am."

"Why do you say 'was,' as if the man were dead and gone?"

"I s'pose because I know he'll have to go. He's got a bad jab in the
breast, an' is bleedin' inside, the Doctor says. He don't suffer any,
only gets weaker 'n' weaker every minute.  I've been fannin' him this
long while, an' he's talked a little; but he don't know me now, so he's
most gone, I guess."

There was so much sorrow and affection in the boy's face, that I
remembered something, and asked, with redoubled interest,--

"Are you the one that brought him off?  I was told about a boy who
nearly lost his life in saving that of his mate."

I dare say the young fellow blushed, as any modest lad might have done;
I could not see it, but I heard the chuckle of satisfaction that
escaped him, as he glanced from his shattered arm and bandaged side to
the pale figure opposite.

"Lord, Ma'am, that's nothin'; we boys always stan' by one another, an'
I warn't goin' to leave him to be tormented any more by them cussed
Rebs.  He's been a slave once, though he don't look half so much like
it as me, an' was born in Boston."

He did not; for the speaker was as black as the ace of spades,--being a
sturdy specimen, the knave of clubs would perhaps be a fitter
representative,--but the dark freeman looked at the white slave with
the pitiful, yet puzzled expression I have so often seen on the faces
of our wisest men, when this tangled question of Slavery presents
itself, asking to be cut or patiently undone.

"Tell me what you know of this man; for, even if he were awake, he is
too weak to talk."

"I never saw him till I joined the regiment, an' no one 'peared to have
got much out of him.  He was a shut-up sort of feller, an' didn't seem
to care for anything but gettin' at the Rebs.  Some say he was the fust
man of us that enlisted; I know he fretted till we were off, an' when
we pitched into old Wagner, he fought like the Devil."

"Were you with him when he was wounded? How was it?"

"Yes, Ma'am.  There was somethin' queer about it; for he 'peared to
know the chap that killed him, an' the chap knew him.  I don't dare to
ask, but I rather guess one owned the other some time,--for, when they
clinched, the chap sung out, 'Bob!' an' Dane, 'Marster Ned! then they
went at it."

I sat down suddenly, for the old anger and compassion struggled in my
heart, and I both longed and feared to hear what was to follow.

"You see, when the Colonel--Lord keep an' send him back to us!--it
a'n't certain yet,  you know, Ma'am, though it's two days ago we lost
him--well, when the Colonel shouted, 'Rush on, boys, rush on!' Dane
tore away as if he was goin' to take the fort alone; I was next him,
an' kept close as we went through the ditch an' up the wall. Hi! warn't
that a rusher!" and the boy flung up his well arm with a whoop, as if
the mere memory of that stirring moment came over him in a gust of
irrepressible excitement.

"Were you afraid?" I said,--asking the question women often put, and
receiving the answer they seldom fail to get.

"No, Ma'am!"--emphasis on the "Ma'am,"--"I never thought of anything
but the damn Rebs, that scalp, slash, an' cut our ears off, when they
git us.  I was bound to let daylight into one of 'em at least, an' I
did.  Hope he liked it!"

"It is evident that you did, and I don't blame you in the least.  Now
go on about Robert, for I should be at work."

"He was one of the fust up; I was just behind, an' though the whole
thing happened in a minute. I remember how it was, for all I was
yellin' an' knockin' round like mad.  Just where we were, some sort of
an officer was wavin' his sword an' cheerin' on his men; Dane saw him
by a big flash that come by; he flung away his gun, give a leap, an'
went at that feller as if he was Jeff, Beauregard, an' Lee, all in one.
I scrabbled after as quick as I could, but was only up in time to see
him git the sword straight through him an' drop into the ditch.  You
needn't ask what I did next, Ma'am, for I don't quite know myself; all
I 'm clear about is, that I managed somehow to pitch that Reb into the
fort as dead as Moses, git hold of Dane, an' bring him off.  Poor old
feller! we said we went in to live or die; he said he went in to die,
an' he 's done it."

I had been intently watching the excited speaker; but as he regretfully
added those last words I turned again, and Robert's eyes met
mine,--those melancholy eyes, so full of an intelligence that proved he
had heard, remembered, and reflected with that preternatural power
which often outlives all other faculties. He knew me, yet gave no
greeting; was glad to see a woman's face, yet had no smile wherewith to
welcome it; felt that he was dying, yet uttered no farewell.  He was
too far across the river to return or linger now; departing thought,
strength, breath, were spent in one grateful look, one murmur of
submission to the last pang he could ever feel.  His lips moved, and,
bending to them, a whisper chilled my cheek, as it shaped the broken
words,--

"I would have done it,--but it 's better so,--I'm satisfied."

Ah! well he might be,--for, as he turned his face from the shadow of
the life that was, the sunshine of the life to be touched it with a
beautiful content, and in the drawing of a breath my contraband found
wife and home, eternal liberty and God.



NELLY'S HOSPITAL

Nelly sat beside her mother picking lint; but while her fingers flew,
her eyes often looked wistfully out into the meadow, golden with
buttercups, and bright with sunshine.  Presently she said, rather
bashfully, but very earnestly, "Mamma, I want to tell you a little plan
I've made, if you'll please not laugh."

"I think I can safely promise that, my dear," said her mother, putting
down her work that she might listen quite respectfully.

Nelly looked pleased, and went on confidingly,

"Since brother Will came home with his lame foot, and I've helped you
tend him, I've heard a great deal about hospitals, and liked it very
much. To-day I said I wanted to go and be a nurse, like Aunt Mercy; but
Will laughed, and told me I'd better begin by nursing sick birds and
butterflies and pussies before I tried to take care of men.  I did not
like to be made fun of, but I've been thinking that it would be very
pleasant to have a little hospital all my own, and be a nurse in it,
because, if I took pains, so many pretty creatures might be made well,
perhaps.  Could I, mamma?"

Her mother wanted to smile at the idea, but did not, for Nelly looked
up with her heart and eyes so full of tender compassion, both for the
unknown men for whom her little hands had done their best, and for the
smaller sufferers nearer home, that she stroked the shining head, and
answered readily: "Yes, Nelly, it will be a proper charity for such a
young Samaritan, and you may learn much if you are in earnest.  You
must study how to feed and nurse your little patients, else your pity
will do no good, and your hospital become a prison.  I will help you,
and Tony shall be your surgeon."

"O mamma, how good you always are to me! Indeed, I am in truly earnest;
I will learn, I will be kind, and may I go now and begin?"

"You may, but tell me first where will you have your hospital?"

"In my room, mamma; it is so snug and sunny, and I never should forget
it there," said Nelly.

"You must not forget it anywhere.  I think that plan will not do.  How
would you like to find caterpillars walking in your bed, to hear sick
pussies mewing in the night, to have beetles clinging to your clothes,
or see mice, bugs, and birds tumbling downstairs whenever the door was
open?" said her mother.

Nelly laughed at that thought a minute, then clapped her hands, and
cried: "Let us have the old summer-house!  My doves only use the upper
part, and it would be so like Frank in the storybook. Please say yes
again, mamma."

Her mother did say yes, and, snatching up her hat, Nelly ran to find
Tony, the gardener's son, a pleasant lad of twelve, who was Nelly's
favorite playmate. Tony pronounced the plan a "jolly" one, and, leaving
his work, followed his young mistress to the summer-house, for she
could not wait one minute.

"What must we do first?" she asked, as they stood looking in at the
dusty room, full of garden tools, bags of seeds, old flower-pots, and
watering-cans.

"Clear out the rubbish, miss," answered Tony.

"Here it goes, then," and Nelly began bundling everything out in such
haste that she broke two flower-pots, scattered all the squash-seeds,
and brought a pile of rakes and hoes clattering down about her ears.

"Just wait a bit, and let me take the lead, miss.  You hand me things,
I'll pile 'em in the barrow and wheel 'em off to the barn; then it will
save time, and be finished up tidy."

Nelly did as he advised, and very soon nothing but dust remained.

"What next?" she asked, not knowing in the least.

"I'll sweep up while you see if Polly can come and scrub the room out.
It ought to be done before you stay here, let alone the patients."

"So it had," said Nelly, looking very wise all of a sudden. "Will says
the wards--that means the rooms, Tony--are scrubbed every day or two,
and kept very clean, and well venti-something--I can't say it; but it
means having a plenty of air come in.  I can clean windows while Polly
mops, and then we shall soon be done." Away she ran, feeling very busy
and important. Polly came, and very soon the room looked like another
place. The four latticed windows were set wide open, so the sunshine
came dancing through the vines that grew outside, and curious roses
peeped in to see what frolic was afoot.  The walls shone white again,
for not a spider dared to stay; the wide seat which encircled the room
was dustless now,--the floor as nice as willing hands could make it;
and the south wind blew away all musty odors with its fragrant breath.

"How fine it looks!" cried Nelly, dancing on the doorstep, lest a
foot-print should mar the still damp floor.

"I'd almost like to fall sick for the sake of staying here," said Tony,
admiringly.  "Now, what sort of beds are you going to have, miss?

"I suppose it won't do to put butterflies and toads and worms into beds
like the real soldiers where Will was?" answered Nelly, looking anxious.

Tony could hardly help shouting at the idea; but, rather than trouble
his little mistress, he said very soberly: "I'm afraid they wouldn't
lay easy, not being used to it.  Tucking up a butterfly would about
kill him; the worms would be apt to get lost among the bed-clothes; and
the toads would tumble out the first thing."

"I shall have to ask mamma about it.  What will you do while I'm gone?"
said Nelly, unwilling that a moment should be lost.

"I'll make frames for nettings to the windows, else the doves will come
in and eat up the sick people.

"I think they will know that it is a hospital, and be too kind to hurt
or frighten their neighbors," began Nelly; but as she spoke, a plump
white dove walked in, looked about with its red-ringed eyes, and
quietly pecked up a tiny bug that had just ventured out from the crack
where it had taken refuge when the deluge came.

"Yes, we must have the nettings.  I'll ask mamma for some lace," said
Nelly, when she saw that; and, taking her pet dove on her shoulder,
told it about her hospital as she went toward the house; for, loving
all little creatures as she did, it grieved her to have any harm befall
even the least or plainest of them. She had a sweet child-fancy that
her playmates understood her language as she did theirs, and that
birds, flowers, animals, and insects felt for her the same affection
which she felt for them. Love always makes friends, and nothing seemed
to fear the gentle child; but welcomed her like a little sun who shone
alike on all, and never suffered an eclipse.

She was gone some time, and when she came back her mind was full of new
plans, one hand full of rushes, the other of books, while over her head
floated the lace, and a bright green ribbon hung across her arm.

"Mamma says that the best beds will be little baskets, boxes, cages,
and any sort of thing that suits the patients; for each will need
different care and food and medicine. I have not baskets enough, so, as
I cannot have pretty white beds, I am going to braid pretty green nests
for my patients, and, while I do it, mamma thought you'd read to me the
pages she has marked, so that we may begin right."

"Yes, miss; I like that.  But what is the ribbon for?" asked Tony.

"O, that's for you.  Will says that, if you are to be an army surgeon,
you must have a green band on your arm; so I got this to tie on when we
play hospital."

Tony let her decorate the sleeve of his gray jacket, and when the
nettings were done, the welcome books were opened and enjoyed. It was a
happy time, sitting in the sunshine, with leaves pleasantly astir all
about them, doves cooing overhead, and flowers sweetly gossiping
together through the summer afternoon.  Nelly wove her smooth, green
rushes.  Tony pored over his pages, and both found something better
than fairy legends in the family histories of insects, birds, and
beasts. All manner of wonders appeared, and were explained to them,
till Nelly felt as if a new world had been given her, so full of
beauty, interest, and pleasure that she never could be tired of
studying it. Many of these things were not strange to Tony, because,
born among plants, he had grown up with them as if they were brothers
and sisters, and the sturdy, brown-faced boy had learned many lessons
which no poet or philosopher could have taught him, unless he had
become as child-like a s himself, and studied from the same great book.

When the baskets were done, the marked pages all read, and the sun
began to draw his rosy curtains round him before smiling "Good night,"
Nelly ranged the green beds round the room, Tony put in the screens,
and the hospital was ready. The little nurse was so excited that she
could hardly eat her supper, and directly afterwards ran up to tell
Will how well she had succeeded with the first part of her enterprise.
Now brother Will was a brave young officer, who had fought stoutly and
done his duty like a man.  But when lying weak and wounded at home, the
cheerful courage which had led him safely through many dangers seemed
to have deserted him, and he was often gloomy, sad, or fretful, because
he longed to be at his post again, and time passed very slowly. This
troubled his mother, and made Nelly wonder why he found lying in a
pleasant room so much harder than fighting battles or making weary
marches. Anything that interested and amused him was very welcome, and
when Nelly, climbing on the arm of his sofa, told her plans, mishaps,
and successes, he laughed out more heartily than he had done for many a
day, and his thin face began to twinkle with fun as it used to do so
long ago.  That pleased Nelly, and she chatted like any affectionate
little magpie, till Will was really interested; for when one is ill,
small things amuse.

"Do you expect your patients to come to you, Nelly?" he asked.

"No, I shall go and look for them. I often see poor things suffering in
the garden, and the wood, and always feel as if they ought to be taken
care of, as people are."

"You won't like to carry insane bugs, lame toads, and convulsive
kittens in your hands, and they would not stay on a stretcher if you
had one. You should have an ambulance and be a branch of the Sanitary
Commission," said Will.

Nelly had often heard the words, but did not quite understand what they
meant.  So Will told her of that great never-failing charity, to which
thousands owe their lives; and the child listened with lips apart, eyes
often full, and so much love and admiration in her heart that she could
find no words in which to tell it.  When her brother paused, she said
earnestly: "Yes, I will be a Sanitary. This little cart of mine shall
be my amb'lance, and I'll never let my water-barrels go empty, never
drive too fast, or be rough with my poor passengers, like some of the
men you tell about.  Does this look like an ambulance, Will?"

"Not a bit, but it shall, if you and mamma like to help me.  I want
four long bits of cane, a square of white cloth, some pieces of thin
wood, and the gum-pot," said Will, sitting up to examine the little
cart, feeling like a boy again as he took out his knife and began to
whittle. Upstairs and downstairs ran Nelly till all necessary materials
were collected, and almost breathlessly she watched her brother arch
the canes over the cart, cover them with the cloth, and fit an upper
shelf of small compartments, each lined with cotton-wool to serve as
beds for wounded insects, lest they should hurt one another or jostle
out.  The lower part was left free for any larger creatures which Nelly
might find.  Among her toys she had a tiny cask which only needed a peg
to be water-tight; this was filled and fitted in before, because, as
the small sufferers needed no seats, there was no place for it behind,
and, as Nelly was both horse and driver, it was more convenient in
front.  On each side of it stood a box of stores. In one were minute
rollers, as bandages are called, a few bottles not yet filled, and a
wee doll's jar of cold-cream, because Nelly could not feel that her
outfit was complete without a medicine-chest. The other box was full of
crumbs, bits of sugar, bird-seed, and grains of wheat and corn, lest
any famished stranger should die for want of food before she got it
home.  Then mamma painted "U.S. San. Com." in bright letters on the
cover, and Nelly received her charitable plaything with a long sigh of
satisfaction.

"Nine o'clock already.  Bless me, what a short evening this has been,"
exclaimed Will, as Nelly came to give him her good-night kiss.

"And such a happy one," she answered.

"Thank you very, very much, dear Will.  I only wish my little amb'lance
was big enough for you to go in,--I'd so like to give you the first
ride."

"Nothing I should like better, if it were possible, though I've a
prejudice against ambulances in general.  But as I cannot ride, I'll
try and hop out to your hospital to-morrow, and see how you get
on,"--which was a great deal for Captain Will to say, because he had
been too listless to leave his sofa for several days.

That promise sent Nelly happily away to bed, only stopping to pop her
head out of the window to see if it was likely to be a fair day
to-morrow, and to tell Tony about the new plan as he passed below.

"Where shall you go to look for your first load of sick folks, miss?"
he asked.

"All round the garden first, then through the grove, and home across
the brook.  Do you think I can find any patients so?" said Nelly.

"I know you will.  Good night, miss," and Tony walked away with a merry
look on his face, that Nelly would not have understood if she had seen
it.

Up rose the sun bright and early, and up rose Nurse Nelly almost as
early and as bright.  Breakfast was taken in a great hurry, and before
the dew was off the grass this branch of the S. C. was all astir.
Papa, mamma, big brother and baby sister, men and maids, all looked out
to see the funny little ambulance depart, and nowhere in all the summer
fields was there a happier child than Nelly, as she went smiling down
the garden path, where tall flowers kissed her as she passed and every
blithe bird seemed singing a "Good speed!"

"How I wonder what I shall find first," she thought, looking sharply on
all sides as she went. Crickets chirped, grasshoppers leaped, ants
worked busily at their subterranean houses, spiders spun shining webs
from twig to twig, bees were coming for their bags of gold, and
butterflies had just begun their holiday.  A large white one alighted
on the top of the ambulance, walked over the inscription as if spelling
it letter by letter, then floated away from flower to flower, like one
carrying the good news far and wide.

"Now every one will know about the hospital and be glad to see me
coming," thought Nelly. And indeed it seemed so, for just then a
black-bird, sitting on a garden wall, burst out with a song full of
musical joy, Nelly's kitten came running after to stare at the wagon
and rub her soft side against it, a bright-eyed toad looked out from
his cool bower among the lily-leaves, and at that minute Nelly found
her first patient.  In one of the dewy cobwebs hanging from a shrub
near by sat a fat black and yellow spider, watching a fly whose
delicate wings were just caught in the net.  The poor fly buzzed
pitifully, and struggled so hard that the whole web shook: but the more
he struggled, the more he entangled himself, and the fierce spider was
preparing to descend that it might weave a shroud about its prey, when
a little finger broke the threads and lifted the fly safely into the
palm of a hand, where he lay faintly humming his thanks.

Nelly had heard much about contrabands, knew who they were, and was
very much interested in them; so, when she freed the poor black fly she
played he was her contraband, and felt glad that her first patient was
one that needed help so much.  Carefully brushing away as much of the
web as she could, she left small Pompey, as she named him, to free his
own legs, lest her clumsy fingers should hurt him; then she laid him in
one of the soft beds with a grain or two of sugar if he needed
refreshment, and bade him rest and recover from his fright, remembering
that he was at liberty to fly away whenever he liked, because she had
no wish to male a slave of him.

Feeling very happy over this new friend, Nelly went on singing softly
as she walked, and presently she found a pretty caterpillar dressed in
brown fur, although the day was warm. He lay so still she thought him
dead, till he rolled himself into a ball as she touched him.

"I think you are either faint from the heat of this thick coat of
yours, or that you are going to make a cocoon of yourself, Mr. Fuzz,"
said Nelly.

"Now I want to see you turn into a butterfly, so I shall take you, and
if get lively again I will let you go. I shall play that you have given
out on a march, as the soldiers sometimes do, and been left behind for
the Sanitary people to see to."

In went sulky Mr. Fuzz, and on trundled the ambulance till a golden
green rose-beetle was discovered, lying on his back kicking as if in a
fit.

"Dear me, what shall I do for him?" thought Nelly. "He acts as baby did
when she was so ill, and mamma put her in a warm bath.  I haven't got
my little tub here, or any hot water, and I'm afraid the beetle would
not like it if I had.  Perhaps he has pain in his stomach; I'll turn
him over, and pat his back, as nurse does baby's when she cries for
pain like that."

She set the beetle on his legs, and did her best to comfort him; but he
was evidently in great distress, for he could not walk, and instead of
lifting his emerald overcoat, and spreading the wings that lay
underneath, be turned over again, and kicked more violently than
before.  Not knowing what to do,  Nelly put him into one of her soft
nests for Tony to cure if possible.  She found no more patients in the
garden except a dead bee, which she wrapped in a leaf, and took home to
bury.  When she came to the grove, it was so green and cool she longed
to sit and listen to the whisper of the pines, and watch the
larch-tassels wave in the wind.  But, recollecting her charitable
errand, she went rustling along the pleasant path till she came to
another patient, over which she stood considering several minutes
before she could decide whether it was best to take it to her hospital,
because it was a little gray snake, with bruised tail.  She knew it
would not hurt her, yet she was afraid of it; she thought it pretty,
yet could not like it: she pitied its pain, yet shrunk from helping it,
for it had a fiery eye, and a keep quivering tongue, that looked as if
longing to bite.

"He is a rebel, I wonder if I ought to be good to him," thought Nelly,
watching the reptile writhe with pain.  "Will said there were sick
rebels in his hospital, and one was very kind to him.  It says, too, in
my little book, 'Love your enemies.' I think snakes are mine, but I
guess I'll try and love him because God made him.  Some boy will kill
him if I leave him here, and then perhaps his mother will be very sad
about it.  Come, poor worm, I wish to help you, so be patient, and
don't frighten me."

Then Nelly laid her little handkerchief on the ground, and with a stick
gently lifted the wounded snake upon it, and, folding it together, laid
it in the ambulance. She was thoughtful after that, and so busy
puzzling her young head about the duty of loving those who hate us, and
being kind to those who are disagreeable or unkind, that she went
through the rest of the wood quite forgetful of her work.  A soft
"Queek, queek!" made her look up and listen. The sound came from the
long meadow-grass, and, bending it carefully back, she found a
half-fledged bird, with one wing trailing on the ground, and its eyes
dim with pain or hunger.

"You darling thing, did you fall out of your nest and hurt your wing?"
cried Nelly, looking up into the single tree that stood near by.  No
nest was to be seen, no parent birds hovered overhead, and little Robin
could only tell its troubles in that mournful "Queek, queek, queek!"

Nelly ran to get both her chests, and, sitting down beside the bird,
tried to feed it. To her joy it ate crumb after crumb, as if it were
half starved, and soon fluttered nearer a confiding fearlessness that
made her very proud. Soon baby Robin seemed quite comfortable, his eye
brightened, he "queeked" no more, and but for the drooping wing would
have been himself again.  With one of her bandages Nelly bound both
wings closely to his sides for fear he should hurt himself by trying to
fly; and though he seemed amazed at her proceedings, he behaved very
well, only staring at her, and ruffling up his few feathers in a funny
way that made her laugh. Then she had to discover some way of
accommodating her two larger patients so that neither should hurt nor
alarm the other.  A bright thought came to her after much pondering.
Carefully lifting the handkerchief, she pinned the two ends to the roof
of the cart, and there swung little Forked-tongue, while Rob lay easily
below.

By this time, Nelly began to wonder how it happened that she found so
many more injured things than ever before.  But it never entered her
innocent head that Tony had searched the wood and meadow before she was
up, and laid most of these creatures ready to her hands, that she might
not be disappointed.  She had not yet lost her faith in fairies, so she
fancied they too belonged to her small sisterhood, and presently it did
really seem impossible to doubt that the good folk had been at work.

Coming to the bridge that crossed the brook, she stopped a moment to
watch the water ripple over the bright pebbles, the ferns bend down to
drink, and the funny tadpoles frolic in quieter nooks, where the sun
shone, and the dragon-flies swung among the rushes.  When Nelly turned
to go on, her blue eyes opened wide, and the handle of the ambulance
dropped with a noise that caused a stout frog to skip into the water
heels over head. Directly in the middle of the bridge was a pretty
green tent, made of two tall burdock leaves. The stems were stuck into
cracks between the boards, the tips were pinned together with a thorn,
and one great buttercup nodded in the doorway like a sleepy sentinel.
Nelly stared and smiled, listened, and looked about on every side.
Nothing was seen but the quiet meadow and the shady grove, nothing was
heard but the babble of the brook and the cheery music of the bobolinks.

"Yes," said Nelly softly to herself, "that is a fairy tent, and in it I
may find a baby elf sick with whooping-cough or scarlet-fever.  How
splendid it would be! only I could never nurse such a dainty thing."

Stooping eagerly, she peeped over the buttercup's drowsy head, and saw
what seemed a tiny cock of hay. She had no time to feel disappointed,
for the haycock began to stir, and, looking nearer, she beheld two
silvery gray mites, who wagged wee tails, and stretched themselves as
if they had just waked up.  Nelly knew that they were young field-mice,
and rejoiced over them, feeling rather relieved that no fairy had
appeared, though she still believed them to have had a hand in the
matter.

"I shall call the mice my Babes in the Wood, because they are lost and
covered up with leaves," said Nelly, as she laid them in her snuggest
bed, where they nestled close together, and fell fast asleep again.

Being very anxious to get home, that she might tell her adventures, and
show how great was the need of a sanitary commission in that region,
Nelly marched proudly up the avenue, and, having displayed her load,
hurried to the hospital, where another applicant was waiting for her.
On the step of the door lay a large turtle, with one claw gone, and on
his back was pasted a bit of paper, with his name,--"Commodore Waddle,
U.S.N." Nelly knew this was a joke of Will's, but welcomed the ancient
mariner, and called Tony to help her get him in.

All that morning they were very busy settling the new-comers, for both
people and books had to be consulted before they could decide what diet
and treatment was best for each.  The winged contraband had taken Nelly
at her word, and flown away on the journey home.  Little Rob was put in
a large cage, where he could use his legs, yet not injure his lame
wing.  Forked-tongue lay under a wire cover, on sprigs of fennel, for
the gardener said that snakes were fond of it. The Babes in the Wood
were put to bed in one of the rush baskets, under a cotton-wool
coverlet. Greenback, the beetle, found ease for his unknown aches in
the warm heart of a rose, where he sunned himself all day. The
Commodore was made happy in a tub of water, grass, and stones, and Mr.
Fuzz was put in a well-ventilated glass box to decide whether he would
be a cocoon or not.

Tony had not been idle while his mistress was away, and he showed her
the hospital garden he had made close by, in which were cabbage,
nettle, and mignonette plants for the butterflies, flowering herbs for
the bees, chick-weed and hemp for the birds, catnip for the pussies,
and plenty of room left for whatever other patients might need.  In the
afternoon, while Nelly did her task at lint-picking, talking busily to
Will as she worked, and interesting him in her affairs, Tony cleared a
pretty spot in the grove for the burying-ground, and made ready some
small bits of slate on which to write the names of those who died.  He
did not have it ready an hour too soon, for at sunset two little graves
were needed, and Nurse Nelly shed tender tears for her first losses as
she laid the motherless mice in one smooth hollow, and the gray-coated
rebel in the other. She had learned to care for him already, and when
she found him dead, was very glad she had been kind to him, hoping that
he knew it, and died happier in her hospital than all alone in the
shadowy wood.

The rest of Nelly's patients prospered, and of the many added afterward
few died, because of Tony's skilful treatment and her own faithful
care. Every morning when the day proved fair the little ambulance went
out upon its charitable errand; every afternoon Nelly worked for the
human sufferers whom she loved; and every evening brother Will read
aloud to her from useful books, showed her wonders with his microscope,
or prescribed remedies for the patients, whom he soon knew by name and
took much interest in.  It was Nelly's holiday; but, though she studied
no lessons, she learned much, and unconsciously made her pretty play
both an example and a rebuke for others.

At first it seemed a childish pastime, and people laughed.  But there
was something in the familiar words "sanitary," "hospital" and
"ambulance" that made them pleasant sounds to many ears.  As reports of
Nelly's work went through the neighborhood, other children came to see
and copy her design. Rough lads looked ashamed when in her wards they
found harmless creatures hurt by them, and going out they said among
themselves, "We won't stone birds, chase butterflies, and drown the
girls' little cats any more, though we won't tell them so." And most of
the lads kept their word so well that people said there never had been
so many birds before as all that summer haunted wood and field.
Tender-hearted playmates brought their pets to be cured; even busy
farmers bad a friendly word for the small charity, which reminded them
so sweetly of the great one which should never be forgotten; lonely
mothers sometimes looked out with wet eyes as the little ambulance went
by, recalling thoughts or absent sons who might be journeying painfully
to some far-off hospital, where brave women waited to tend them with
hands as willing, hearts as tender, as those the gentle child gave to
her self-appointed task.

At home the charm worked also.  No more idle days for Nelly, or fretful
ones for Will, because the little sister would not neglect the helpless
creatures so dependent upon her, and the big brother was ashamed to
complain after watching the patience of these lesser sufferers, and
merrily said he would try to bear his own wound as quietly and bravely
as the "Commodore" bore his.  Nelly never knew how much good she had
done Captain Will till he went away again in the early autumn.  Then he
thanked her for it, and though she cried for joy and sorrow she never
forgot it, because he left something behind him which always pleasantly
reminded her of the double success her little hospital had won.

When Will was gone and she had prayed softly in her heart that God
would keep him safe and bring him home again, she dried her tears and
went away to find comfort in the place where he had spent so many happy
hours with her.  She had not been there before that day, and when she
reached the door she stood quite still and wanted very much to cry
again, far something beautiful had happened.  She had often asked Will
for a motto for her hospital, and he had promised to find her one.  She
thought he had forgotten it; but even in the hurry of that busy day he
had found time to do more than keep his word, while Nelly sat indoors,
lovingly brightening the tarnished buttons on the blue coat that had
seen so many battles.

Above the roof, where the doves cooed in the sun, now rustled a white
flag with the golden "S.C." shining on it as the wind tossed it to and
fro.  Below, on the smooth panel of the door, a skilful pencil had
drawn two arching ferns, in whose soft shadow, poised upon a mushroom,
stood a little figure of Nurse Nelly, and underneath it another of Dr.
Tony bottling medicine, with spectacles upon his nose.  Both hands of
the miniature Nelly were outstretched, as if beckoning to a train of
insects, birds and beasts, which was so long that it not only circled
round the lower rim of this fine sketch, but dwindled in the distance
to mere dots and lines.  Such merry conceits as one found there!  A
mouse bringing the tail it had lost in some cruel trap, a dor-bug with
a shade over its eyes, an invalid butterfly carried in a tiny litter by
long-legged spiders, a fat frog with gouty feet hopping upon crutches,
Jenny Wren sobbing in a nice handkerchief, as she brought dear dead
Cock Robin to be restored to life.  Rabbits, lambs, cats, calves, and
turtles, all came trooping up to be healed by the benevolent little
maid who welcomed them so heartily.

Nelly laughed at these comical mites till the tears ran down her
cheeks, and thought she never could be tired of looking at them.  But
presently she saw four lines clearly printed underneath her picture,
and her childish face grew sweetly serious as she read the words of a
great poet, which Will had made both compliment and motto:--

  "He prayeth best who loveth best
  All things, both great and small;
  For the dear God who loveth us,
  He made and loveth all."







AN OLD-FASHIONED GIRL

By Louisa M. Alcott




Preface

AS a preface is the only place where an author can with propriety
explain a purpose or apologize for shortcomings, I venture to avail
myself of the privilege to make a statement for the benefit of my
readers.

As the first part of "An Old-Fashioned Girl" was written in 1869, the
demand for a sequel, in beseeching little letters that made refusal
impossible, rendered it necessary to carry my heroine boldly forward
some six or seven years into the future. The domestic nature of the
story makes this audacious proceeding possible; while the lively fancies
of my young readers will supply all deficiencies, and overlook all
discrepancies.

This explanation will, I trust, relieve those well-regulated minds,
who cannot conceive of such literary lawlessness, from the bewilderment
which they suffered when the same experiment was tried in a former book.

The "Old-Fashioned Girl" is not intended as a perfect model, but as
a possible improvement upon [Page] the Girl of the Period, who seems
sorrowfully ignorant or ashamed of the good old fashions which make
woman truly beautiful and honored, and, through her, render home what
it should be,-a happy place, where parents and children, brothers and
sisters, learn to love and know and help one another.

If the history of Polly's girlish experiences suggests a hint or
insinuates a lesson, I shall feel that, in spite of many obstacles, I
have not entirely neglected my duty toward the little men and women, for
whom it is an honor and a pleasure to write, since in them I have always
found my kindest patrons, gentlest critics, warmest friends.

L. M. A.




Contents

     Chapter 1. Polly Arrives
     Chapter 2. New Fashions
     Chapter 3. Polly's Troubles
     Chapter 4. Little Things
     Chapter 5. Scrapes
     Chapter 6. Grandma
     Chapter 7. Good-by
     Chapter 8. Six Years Afterward
     Chapter 9. Lessons
     Chapter 10. Brothers and Sisters
     Chapter 11. Needles and Tongues
     Chapter 12. Forbidden Fruit
     Chapter 13. The Sunny Side
     Chapter 14. Nipped in the Bud
     Chapter 15. Breakers Ahead
     Chapter 16. A Dress Parade
     Chapter 17. Playing Grandmother
     Chapter 18. The Woman Who Did Not Dare
     Chapter 19. Tom's Success




An Old-fashioned Girl




CHAPTER I. POLLY ARRIVES


"IT 'S time to go to the station, Tom."

"Come on, then."

"Oh, I 'm not going; it 's too wet. Should n't have a crimp left if I
went out such a day as this; and I want to look nice when Polly comes."

"You don't expect me to go and bring home a strange girl alone, do you?"
And Tom looked as much alarmed as if his sister had proposed to him to
escort the wild woman of Australia.

"Of course I do. It 's your place to go and get her; and if you was n't
a bear, you 'd like it."

"Well, I call that mean! I supposed I 'd got to go; but you said you 'd
go, too. Catch me bothering about your friends another time! No, sir!"
And Tom rose from the sofa with an air of indignant resolution, the
impressive effect of which was somewhat damaged by a tousled head, and
the hunched appearance of his garments generally.

"Now, don't be cross; and I 'll get mamma to let you have that horrid
Ned Miller, that you are so fond of, come and make you a visit after
Polly 's gone," said Fanny, hoping to soothe his ruffled feelings.

"How long is she going to stay?" demanded Tom, making his toilet by a
promiscuous shake.

"A month or two, maybe. She 's ever so nice; and I shall keep her as
long as she 's happy."

"She won't stay long then, if I can help it," muttered Tom, who regarded
girls as a very unnecessary portion of creation. Boys of fourteen are
apt to think so, and perhaps it is a wise arrangement; for, being fond
of turning somersaults, they have an opportunity of indulging in a good
one, metaphorically speaking, when, three or four years later, they
become the abject slaves of "those bothering girls."

"Look here! how am I going to know the creature? I never saw her, and
she never saw me. You 'll have to come too, Fan," he added, pausing on
his way to the door, arrested by the awful idea that he might have to
address several strange girls before he got the right one.

"You 'll find her easy enough; she 'll probably be standing round
looking for us. I dare say she 'll know you, though I 'm not there,
because I 've described you to her."

"Guess she won't, then;" and Tom gave a hasty smooth to his curly pate
and a glance at the mirror, feeling sure that his sister had n't done
him justice. Sisters never do, as "we fellows" know too well.

"Do go along, or you 'll be too late; and then, what will Polly think
of me?" cried Fanny, with the impatient poke which is peculiarly
aggravating to masculine dignity.

"She 'll think you cared more about your frizzles than your friends, and
she 'll be about right, too."

Feeling that he said rather a neat and cutting thing, Tom sauntered
leisurely away, perfectly conscious that it was late, but bent on not
being hurried while in sight, though he ran himself off his legs to make
up for it afterward.

"If I was the President, I 'd make a law to shut up all boys till they
were grown; for they certainly are the most provoking toads in the
world," said Fanny, as she watched the slouchy figure of her brother
strolling down the street. She might have changed her mind, however,
if she had followed him, for as soon as he turned the corner, his whole
aspect altered; his hands came out of his pockets, he stopped whistling,
buttoned his jacket, gave his cap a pull, and went off at a great pace.

The train was just in when he reached the station, panting like a
race-horse, and as red as a lobster with the wind and the run.

"Suppose she 'll wear a top-knot and a thingumbob, like every one else;
and however shall I know her? Too bad of Fan to make me come alone!"
thought Tom, as he stood watching the crowd stream through the depot,
and feeling rather daunted at the array of young ladies who passed. As
none of them seemed looking for any one, he did not accost them, but
eyed each new batch with the air of a martyr. "That 's her," he said
to himself, as he presently caught sight of a girl in gorgeous array,
standing with her hands folded, and a very small hat perched on the top
of a very large "chig-non," as Tom pronounced it. "I suppose I 've got
to speak to her, so here goes;" and, nerving himself to the task, Tom
slowly approached the damsel, who looked as if the wind had blown her
clothes into rags, such a flapping of sashes, scallops, ruffles, curls,
and feathers was there.

"I say, if you please, is your name Polly Milton?" meekly asked Tom,
pausing before the breezy stranger.

"No, it is n't," answered the young lady, with a cool stare that utterly
quenched him.

"Where in thunder is she?" growled Tom, walking off in high dudgeon. The
quick tap of feet behind him made him turn in time to see a fresh-faced
little girl running down the long station, and looking as if she rather
liked it. As she smiled, and waved her bag at him, he stopped and waited
for her, saying to himself, "Hullo! I wonder if that 's Polly?"

Up came the little girl, with her hand out, and a half-shy, half-merry
look in her blue eyes, as she said, inquiringly, "This is Tom, is n't
it?"

"Yes. How did you know?" and Tom got over the ordeal of hand-shaking
without thinking of it, he was so surprised.

"Oh, Fan told me you 'd got curly hair, and a funny nose, and kept
whistling, and wore a gray cap pulled over your eyes; so I knew you
directly." And Polly nodded at him in the most friendly manner, having
politely refrained from calling the hair "red," the nose "a pug," and
the cap "old," all of which facts Fanny had carefully impressed upon her
memory.

"Where are your trunks?" asked Tom, as he was reminded of his duty by
her handing him the bag, which he had not offered to take.

"Father told me not to wait for any one, else I 'd lose my chance of a
hack; so I gave my check to a man, and there he is with my trunk;" and
Polly walked off after her one modest piece of baggage, followed by Tom,
who felt a trifle depressed by his own remissness in polite attentions.
"She is n't a bit of a young lady, thank goodness! Fan did n't tell me
she was pretty. Don't look like city girls, nor act like 'em, neither,"
he thought, trudging in the rear, and eyeing with favor the brown curls
bobbing along in front.

As the carriage drove off, Polly gave a little bounce on the springy
seat, and laughed like a delighted child. "I do like to ride in these
nice hacks, and see all the fine things, and have a good time, don't
you?" she said, composing herself the next minute, as if it suddenly
occurred to her that she was going a-visiting.

"Not much," said Tom, not minding what he said, for the fact that he was
shut up with the strange girl suddenly oppressed his soul.

"How 's Fan? Why did n't she come, too?" asked Polly, trying to look
demure, while her eyes danced in spite of her.

"Afraid of spoiling her crinkles;" and Tom smiled, for this base
betrayal of confidence made him feel his own man again.

"You and I don't mind dampness. I 'm much obliged to you for coming to
take care of me."

It was kind of Polly to say that, and Tom felt it; for his red crop was
a tender point, and to be associated with Polly's pretty brown curls
seemed to lessen its coppery glow. Then he had n't done anything for her
but carry the bag a few steps; yet, she thanked him. He felt grateful,
and in a burst of confidence, offered a handful of peanuts, for his
pockets were always supplied with this agreeable delicacy, and he might
be traced anywhere by the trail of shells he left behind him.

As soon as he had done it, he remembered that Fanny considered them
vulgar, and felt that he had disgraced his family. So he stuck his
head out of the window, and kept it there so long, that Polly asked if
anything was the matter. "Pooh! who cares for a countrified little thing
like her," said Tom manfully to himself; and then the spirit of mischief
entered in and took possession of him.

"He 's pretty drunk; but I guess he can hold his horses," replied this
evil-minded boy, with an air of calm resignation.

"Is the man tipsy? Oh, dear! let 's get out! Are the horses bad? It 's
very steep here; do you think it 's safe?" cried poor Polly, making a
cocked hat of her little beaver, by thrusting it out of the half-open
window on her side.

"There 's plenty of folks to pick us up if anything happens; but perhaps
it would be safer if I got out and sat with the man;" and Tom quite
beamed with the brilliancy of this sudden mode of relief.

"Oh, do, if you ain't afraid! Mother would be so anxious if anything
should happen to me, so far away!" cried Polly, much distressed.

"Don't you be worried. I 'll manage the old chap, and the horses too;"
and opening the door, Tom vanished aloft, leaving poor victimized Polly
to quake inside, while he placidly revelled in freedom and peanuts
outside, with the staid old driver.

Fanny came flying down to meet her "darling Polly," as Tom presented
her, with the graceful remark, "I 've got her!" and the air of a
dauntless hunter, producing the trophies of his skill. Polly was
instantly whisked up stairs; and having danced a double-shuffle on the
door-mat, Tom retired to the dining-room, to restore exhausted nature
with half a dozen cookies.

"Ain't you tired to death? Don't you want to lie down?" said Fanny,
sitting on the side of the bed in Polly's room, and chattering hard,
while she examined everything her friend had on.

"Not a bit. I had a nice time coming, and no trouble, except the tipsy
coachman; but Tom got out and kept him in order, so I was n't much
frightened," answered innocent Polly, taking off her rough-and-ready
coat, and the plain hat without a bit of a feather.

"Fiddlestick! he was n't tipsy; and Tom only did it to get out of the
way. He can't bear girls," said Fanny, with a superior air.

"Can't he? Why, I thought he was very pleasant and kind!" and Polly
opened her eyes with a surprised expression.

"He 's an awful boy, my dear; and if you have anything to do with
him, he 'll torment you to death. Boys are all horrid; but he 's the
horridest one I ever saw."

Fanny went to a fashionable school, where the young ladies were so busy
with their French, German, and Italian, that there was no time for
good English. Feeling her confidence much shaken in the youth, Polly
privately resolved to let him alone, and changed the conversation, by
saying, as she looked admiringly about the large, handsome room, "How
splendid it is! I never slept in a bed with curtains before, or had such
a fine toilet-table as this."

"I 'm glad you like it; but don't, for mercy sake, say such things
before the other girls!" replied Fanny, wishing Polly would wear
ear-rings, as every one else did.

"Why not?" asked the country mouse of the city mouse, wondering what
harm there was in liking other people's pretty things, and saying
so. "Oh, they laugh at everything the least bit odd, and that is n't
pleasant." Fanny did n't say "countrified," but she meant it, and Polly
felt uncomfortable. So she shook out her little black silk apron with
a thoughtful face, and resolved not to allude to her own home, if she
could help it.

"I 'm so poorly, mamma says I need n't go to school regularly, while you
are here, only two or three times a week, just to keep up my music and
French. You can go too, if you like; papa said so. Do, it 's such fun!"
cried Fanny, quite surprising her friend by this unexpected fondness for
school.

"I should be afraid, if all the girls dress as finely as you do, and
know as much," said Polly, beginning to feel shy at the thought.

"La, child! you need n't mind that. I 'll take care of you, and fix you
up, so you won't look odd."

"Am I odd?" asked Polly, struck by the word and hoping it did n't mean
anything very bad.

"You are a dear, and ever so much prettier than you were last summer,
only you 've been brought up differently from us; so your ways ain't
like ours, you see," began Fanny, finding it rather hard to explain.

"How different?" asked Polly again, for she liked to understand things.

"Well, you dress like a little girl, for one thing."

"I am a little girl; so why should n't I?" and Polly looked at her
simple blue merino frock, stout boots, and short hair, with a puzzled
air.

"You are fourteen; and we consider ourselves young ladies at that age,"
continued Fanny, surveying, with complacency, the pile of hair on the
top of her head, with a fringe of fuzz round her forehead, and a wavy
lock streaming down her back; likewise, her scarlet-and-black suit, with
its big sash, little pannier, bright buttons, points, rosettes, and,
heaven knows what. There was a locket on her neck, ear-rings tinkling
in her ears, watch and chain at her belt, and several rings on a pair of
hands that would have been improved by soap and water.

Polly's eye went from one little figure to the other, and she thought
that Fanny looked the oddest of the two; for Polly lived in a quiet
country town, and knew very little of city fashions. She was rather
impressed by the elegance about her, never having seen Fanny's home
before, as they got acquainted while Fanny paid a visit to a friend who
lived near Polly. But she did n't let the contrast between herself and
Fan trouble her; for in a minute she laughed and said, contentedly, "My
mother likes me to dress simply, and I don't mind. I should n't know
what to do rigged up as you are. Don't you ever forget to lift your sash
and fix those puffy things when you sit down?"

Before Fanny could answer, a scream from below made both listen. "It
's only Maud; she fusses all day long," began Fanny; and the words were
hardly out of her mouth, when the door was thrown open, and a little
girl, of six or seven, came roaring in. She stopped at sight of Polly,
stared a minute, then took up her roar just where she left it, and cast
herself into Fanny's lap, exclaiming wrathfully, "Tom 's laughing at me!
Make him stop!"

"What did you do to set him going? Don't scream so, you 'll frighten
Polly!" and Fan gave the cherub a shake, which produced an explanation.

"I only said we had cold cweam at the party, last night, and he
laughed!"

"Ice-cream, child!" and Fanny followed Tom's reprehensible example.

"I don't care! it was cold; and I warmed mine at the wegister, and then
it was nice; only, Willy Bliss spilt it on my new Gabwielle!" and Maud
wailed again over her accumulated woes.

"Do go to Katy! You 're as cross as a little bear to-day!" said Fanny,
pushing her away.

"Katy don't amoose me; and I must be amoosed, 'cause I 'm fwactious;
mamma said I was!" sobbed Maud, evidently laboring under the delusion
that fractiousness was some interesting malady.

"Come down and have dinner; that will amuse you;" and Fanny got up,
pluming herself as a bird does before its flight.

Polly hoped the "dreadful boy" would not be present; but he was, and
stared at her all dinner-time, in a most trying manner. Mr. Shaw, a
busy-looking gentleman, said, "How do you do, my dear? Hope you 'll
enjoy yourself;" and then appeared to forget her entirely. Mrs. Shaw, a
pale, nervous woman, greeted her little guest kindly, and took care that
she wanted for nothing. Madam Shaw, a quiet old lady, with an imposing
cap, exclaimed on seeing Polly, "Bless my heart! the image of her mother
a sweet woman how is she, dear?" and kept peering at the new-comer over
her glasses, till, between Madam and Tom, poor Polly lost her appetite.

Fanny chatted like a magpie, and Maud fidgeted, till Tom proposed to put
her under the big dish-cover, which produced such an explosion, that the
young lady was borne screaming away, by the much-enduring Katy. It was
altogether an uncomfortable dinner, and Polly was very glad when it was
over. They all went about their own affairs; and after doing the honors
of the house, Fan was called to the dressmaker, leaving Polly to amuse
herself in the great drawing-room.

Polly was glad to be alone for a few minutes; and, having examined all
the pretty things about her, began to walk up and down over the soft,
flowery carpet, humming to herself, as the daylight faded, and only the
ruddy glow of the fire filled the room. Presently Madam came slowly in,
and sat down in her arm-chair, saying, "That 's a fine old tune; sing it
to me, my dear. I have n't heard it this many a day." Polly did n't like
to sing before strangers, for she had had no teaching but such as her
busy mother could give her; but she had been taught the utmost respect
for old people, and having no reason for refusing, she directly went to
the piano, and did as she was bid.

"That 's the sort of music it 's a pleasure to hear. Sing some more,
dear," said Madam, in her gentle way, when she had done.

Pleased with this praise, Polly sang away in a fresh little voice, that
went straight to the listener's heart and nestled there. The sweet
old tunes that one is never tired of were all Polly's store; and her
favorites were Scotch airs, such as, "Yellow-Haired Laddie," "Jock o'
Hazeldean," "Down among the Heather," and "Birks of Aberfeldie." The
more she sung, the better she did it; and when she wound up with "A
Health to King Charlie," the room quite rung with the stirring music
made by the big piano and the little maid.

"By George, that 's a jolly tune! Sing it again, please," cried Tom's
voice; and there was Tom's red head bobbing up over the high back of the
chair where he had hidden himself.

It gave Polly quite a turn, for she thought no one was hearing her but
the old lady dozing by the fire. "I can't sing any more; I 'm tired,"
she said, and walked away to Madam in the other room. The red head
vanished like a meteor, for Polly's tone had been decidedly cool.

The old lady put out her hand, and drawing Polly to her knee, looked
into her face with such kind eyes, that Polly forgot the impressive cap,
and smiled at her confidingly; for she saw that her simple music had
pleased her listener, and she felt glad to know it.

"You must n't mind my staring, dear," said Madam, softly pinching her
rosy cheek. "I have n't seen a little girl for so long, it does my old
eyes good to look at you."

Polly thought that a very odd speech, and could n't help saying, "Are
n't Fan and Maud little girls, too?"

"Oh, dear, no! not what I call little girls. Fan has been a young
lady this two years, and Maud is a spoiled baby. Your mother 's a very
sensible woman, my child."

"What a very queer old lady!" thought Polly; but she said "Yes 'm"
respectfully, and looked at the fire.

"You don't understand what I mean, do you?" asked Madam, still holding
her by the chin.

"No 'm; not quite."

"Well, dear, I 'll tell you. In my day, children of fourteen and fifteen
did n't dress in the height of the fashion; go to parties, as nearly
like those of grown people as it 's possible to make them; lead idle,
giddy, unhealthy lives, and get blasé at twenty. We were little folks
till eighteen or so; worked and studied, dressed and played, like
children; honored our parents; and our days were much longer in the land
than now, it seems to, me."

The old lady appeared to forget Polly at the end of her speech; for she
sat patting the plump little hand that lay in her own, and looking up at
a faded picture of an old gentleman with a ruffled shirt and a queue.

"Was he your father, Madam?

"Yes, dear; my honored father. I did up his frills to the day of his
death; and the first money I ever earned was five dollars which
he offered as a prize to whichever of his six girls would lay the
handsomest darn in his silk stockings."

"How proud you must have been!" cried Polly, leaning on the old lady's
knee with an interested face.

"Yes, and we all learned to make bread, and cook, and wore little
chintz gowns, and were as gay and hearty as kittens. All lived to be
grandmothers and fathers; and I 'm the last, seventy, next birthday,
my dear, and not worn out yet; though daughter Shaw is an invalid at
forty."

"That 's the way I was brought up, and that 's why Fan calls me
old-fashioned, I suppose. Tell more about your papa, please; I like it,"
said Polly.

"Say 'father.' We never called him papa; and if one of my brothers had
addressed him as 'governor,' as boys do now, I really think he 'd have
him cut off with a shilling."

Madam raised her voice in saying this, and nodded significantly; but a
mild snore from the other room seemed to assure her that it was a waste
of shot to fire in that direction.

Before she could continue, in came Fanny with the joyful news that
Clara Bird had invited them both to go to the theatre with her that very
evening, and would call for them at seven o'clock. Polly was so excited
by this sudden plunge into the dissipations of city life, that she flew
about like a distracted butterfly, and hardly knew what happened, till
she found herself seated before the great green curtain in the brilliant
theatre. Old Mr. Bird sat on one side, Fanny on the other, and both let
her alone, for which she was very grateful, as her whole attention was
so absorbed in the scene around her, that she could n't talk.

Polly had never been much to the theatre; and the few plays she had
seen were the good old fairy tales, dramatized to suit young beholders,
lively, bright, and full of the harmless nonsense which brings the laugh
without the blush. That night she saw one of the new spectacles which
have lately become the rage, and run for hundreds of nights, dazzling,
exciting, and demoralizing the spectator by every allurement French
ingenuity can invent, and American prodigality execute. Never mind what
its name was, it was very gorgeous, very vulgar, and very fashionable;
so, of course, it was much admired, and every one went to see it. At
first, Polly thought she had got into fairy-land, and saw only the
sparkling creatures who danced and sung in a world of light and beauty;
but, presently, she began to listen to the songs and conversation, and
then the illusion vanished; for the lovely phantoms sang negro melodies,
talked slang, and were a disgrace to the good old-fashioned elves whom
she knew and loved so well.

Our little girl was too innocent to understand half the jokes, and often
wondered what people were laughing at; but, as the first enchantment
subsided, Polly began to feel uncomfortable, to be sure her mother
would n't like to have her there, and to wish she had n't come. Somehow,
things seemed to get worse and worse, as the play went on; for our small
spectator was being rapidly enlightened by the gossip going on all
about her, as well as by her own quick eyes and girlish instincts.
When four-and-twenty girls, dressed as jockeys, came prancing on to the
stage, cracking their whips, stamping the heels of their topboots, and
winking at the audience, Polly did not think it at all funny, but
looked disgusted, and was glad when they were gone; but when another
set appeared in a costume consisting of gauze wings, and a bit of gold
fringe round the waist, poor unfashionable Polly did n't know what to
do; for she felt both frightened and indignant, and sat with her eyes on
her play-bill, and her cheeks getting hotter and hotter every minute.

"What are you blushing so for?" asked Fanny, as the painted sylphs
vanished.

"I 'm so ashamed of those girls," whispered Polly, taking a long breath
of relief.

"You little goose, it 's just the way it was done in Paris, and the
dancing is splendid. It seems queer at first; but you 'll get used to
it, as I did."

"I 'll never come again," said Polly, decidedly; for her innocent nature
rebelled against the spectacle, which, as yet, gave her more pain than
pleasure. She did not know how easy it was to "get used to it," as Fanny
did; and it was well for her that the temptation was not often offered.
She could not explain the feeling; but she was glad when the play was
done, and they were safe at home, where kind grandma was waiting to see
them comfortably into bed.

"Did you have a good time, dear?" she asked, looking at Polly's feverish
cheeks and excited eyes.

"I don't wish to be rude, but I did n't," answered Polly. "Some of it
was splendid; but a good deal of it made me want to go under the seat.
People seemed to like it, but I don't think it was proper."

As Polly freed her mind, and emphasized her opinion with a decided rap
of the boot she had just taken off, Fanny laughed, and said, while
she pirouetted about the room, like Mademoiselle Therese, "Polly was
shocked, grandma. Her eyes were as big as saucers, her face as red as
my sash, and once I thought she was going to cry. Some of it was rather
queer; but, of course, it was proper, or all our set would n't go. I
heard Mrs. Smythe Perkins say, 'It was charming; so like dear Paris;'
and she has lived abroad; so, of course, she knows what is what."

"I don't care if she has. I know it was n't proper for little girls
to see, or I should n't have been so ashamed!" cried sturdy Polly,
perplexed, but not convinced, even by Mrs. Smythe Perkins.

"I think you are right, my dear; but you have lived in the country, and
have n't yet learned that modesty has gone out of fashion." And with a
good-night kiss, grandma left Polly to dream dreadfully of dancing in
jockey costume, on a great stage; while Tom played a big drum in the
orchestra; and the audience all wore the faces of her father and mother,
looking sorrowfully at her, with eyes like saucers, and faces as red as
Fanny's sash.




CHAPTER II. NEW FASHIONS


"I 'M going to school this morning; so come up and get ready," said
Fanny, a day or two after, as she left the late breakfast-table.

"You look very nice; what have you got to do?" asked Polly, following
her into the hall.

"Prink half an hour, and put on her wad," answered the irreverent Tom,
whose preparations for school consisted in flinging his cap on to his
head, and strapping up several big books, that looked as if they were
sometimes used as weapons of defence.

"What is a wad?" asked Polly, while Fanny marched up without deigning
any reply.

"Somebody's hair on the top of her head in the place where it ought not
to be;" and Tom went whistling away with an air of sublime indifference
as to the state of his own "curly pow."

"Why must you be so fine to go to school?" asked Polly, watching Fan
arrange the little frizzles on her forehead, and settle the various
streamers and festoons belonging to her dress.

"All the girls do; and it 's proper, for you never know who you may
meet. I 'm going to walk, after my lessons, so I wish you 'd wear your
best hat and sack," answered Fanny, trying to stick her own hat on at an
angle which defied all the laws of gravitation.

"I will, if you don't think this is nice enough. I like the other best,
because it has a feather; but this is warmer, so I wear it every day."
And Polly ran into her own room, to prink also, fearing that her friend
might be ashamed of her plain costume. "Won't your hands be cold in kid
gloves?" she said, as they went down the snowy street, with a north wind
blowing in their faces.

"Yes, horrid cold; but my muff is so big, I won't carry it. Mamma won't
have it cut up, and my ermine one must be kept for best;" and Fanny
smoothed her Bismark kids with an injured air.

"I suppose my gray squirrel is ever so much too big; but it 's nice and
cosy, and you may warm your hands in it if you want to," said Polly,
surveying her new woollen gloves with a dissatisfied look, though she
had thought them quite elegant before.

"Perhaps I will, by and by. Now, Polly, don't you be shy. I 'll only
introduce two or three of the girls; and you need n't mind old Monsieur
a bit, or read if you don't want to. We shall be in the anteroom; so you
'll only see about a dozen, and they will be so busy, they won't mind
you much."

"I guess I won't read, but sit and look on. I like to watch people,
everything is so new and queer here."

But Polly did feel and look very shy, when she was ushered into a room
full of young ladies, as they seemed to her, all very much dressed, all
talking together, and all turning to examine the new-comer with a cool
stare which seemed to be as much the fashion as eye-glasses. They nodded
affably when Fanny introduced her, said something civil, and made room
for her at the table round which they sat waiting for Monsieur. Several
of the more frolicsome were imitating the Grecian Bend, some were
putting their heads together over little notes, nearly all were eating
confectionery, and the entire twelve chattered like magpies. Being
politely supplied with caramels, Polly sat looking and listening,
feeling very young and countrified among these elegant young ladies.

"Girls, do you know that Carrie has gone abroad? There has been so much
talk, her father could n't bear it, and took the whole family off. Is
n't that gay?" said one lively damsel, who had just come in.

"I should think they 'd better go. My mamma says, if I 'd been going to
that school, she 'd have taken me straight away," answered another girl,
with an important air.

"Carrie ran away with an Italian music-teacher, and it got into the
papers, and made a great stir," explained the first speaker to Polly,
who looked mystified.

"How dreadful!" cried Polly.

"I think it was fun. She was only sixteen, and he was perfectly
splendid; and she has plenty of money, and every one talked about it;
and when she went anywhere, people looked, you know, and she liked it;
but her papa is an old poke, so he 's sent them all away. It 's too bad,
for she was the jolliest thing I ever knew."

Polly had nothing to say to lively Miss Belle; but Fanny observed, "I
like to read about such things; but it 's so inconvenient to have it
happen right here, because it makes it harder for us. I wish you could
have heard my papa go on. He threatened to send a maid to school with me
every day, as they do in New York, to be sure I come all right. Did you
ever?" "That 's because it came out that Carrie used to forge excuses in
her mamma's name, and go promenading with her Oreste, when they thought
her safe at school. Oh, was n't she a sly minx?" cried Belle, as if she
rather admired the trick.

"I think a little fun is all right; and there 's no need of making a
talk, if, now and then, some one does run off like Carrie. Boys do
as they like; and I don't see why girls need to be kept so dreadfully
close. I 'd like to see anybody watching and guarding me!" added another
dashing young lady.

"It would take a policeman to do that, Trix, or a little man in a tall
hat," said Fanny, slyly, which caused a general laugh, and made Beatrice
toss her head coquettishly.

"Oh, have you read 'The Phantom Bride'? It 's perfectly thrilling! There
's a regular rush for it at the library; but some prefer 'Breaking a
Butterfly.' Which do you like best?" asked a pale girl of Polly, in one
of the momentary lulls which occurred.

"I have n't read either."

"You must, then. I adore Guy Livingston's books, and Yates's. 'Ouida's'
are my delight, only they are so long, I get worn out before I 'm
through."

"I have n't read anything but one of the Muhlbach novels since I came. I
like those, because there is history in them," said Polly, glad to have
a word to say for herself.

"Those are well enough for improving reading; but I like real exciting
novels; don't you?"

Polly was spared the mortification of owning that she had never read
any, by the appearance of Monsieur, a gray-headed old Frenchman, who
went through his task with the resigned air of one who was used to being
the victim of giggling school-girls. The young ladies gabbled over the
lesson, wrote an exercise, and read a little French history. But it did
not seem to make much impression upon them, though Monsieur was very
ready to explain; and Polly quite blushed for her friend, when, on
being asked what famous Frenchman fought in our Revolution, she answered
Lamartine, instead of Lafayette.

The hour was soon over; and when Fan had taken a music lesson in another
room, while Polly looked on, it was time for recess. The younger girls
walked up and down the court, arm in arm, eating bread an butter; others
stayed in the school-room to read and gossip; but Belle, Trix, and
Fanny went to lunch at a fashionable ice-cream saloon near by, and Polly
meekly followed, not daring to hint at the ginger-bread grandma had put
in her pocket for luncheon. So the honest, brown cookies crumbled away
in obscurity, while Polly tried to satisfy her hearty appetite on one
ice and three macaroons.

The girls seemed in great spirits, particularly after they were joined
by a short gentleman with such a young face that Polly would have called
him a boy, if he had not worn a tall beaver. Escorted by this impressive
youth, Fanny left her unfortunate friends to return to school, and went
to walk, as she called a slow promenade down the most crowded
streets. Polly discreetly fell behind, and amused herself looking
into shop-windows, till Fanny, mindful of her manners, even at such an
interesting time, took her into a picture gallery, and bade her enjoy
the works of art while they rested. Obedient Polly went through the room
several times, apparently examining the pictures with the interest of a
connoisseur, and trying not to hear the mild prattle of the pair on the
round seat. But she could n't help wondering what Fan found so absorbing
in an account of a recent German, and why she need promise so solemnly
not to forget the concert that afternoon.

When Fanny rose at last, Polly's tired face reproached her; and taking
a hasty leave of the small gentleman, she turned homeward, saying,
confidentially, as she put one hand in Polly's muff, "Now, my dear, you
must n't say a word about Frank Moore, or papa will take my head off. I
don't care a bit for him, and he likes Trix; only they have quarrelled,
and he wants to make her mad by flirting a little with me. I scolded him
well, and he promised to make up with her. We all go to the afternoon
concerts, and have a gay time, and Belle and Trix are to be there
to-day; so just keep quiet, and everything will be all right."

"I 'm afraid it won't," began Polly, who, not being used to secrets,
found it very hard to keep even a small one.

"Don't worry, child. It 's none of our business; so we can go and enjoy
the music, and if other people flirt, it won't be our fault," said
Fanny, impatiently.

"Of course not; but, then, if your father don't like you to do so, ought
you to go?"

"I tell mamma, and she don't care. Papa is fussy, and grandma makes a
stir about every blessed thing I do. You will hold your tongue, won't
you?"

"Yes; I truly will; I never tell tales." And Polly kept her word,
feeling sure Fan did n't mean to deceive her father, since she told her
mother everything.

"Who are you going with?" asked Mrs. Shaw, when Fanny mentioned that it
was concert-day, just before three o'clock.

"Only Polly; she likes music, and it was so stormy I could n't go last
week, you know," answered Fan; adding, as they left the house again, "If
any one meets us on the way, I can't help it, can I?"

"You can tell them not to, can't you?"

"That 's rude. Dear me! here 's Belle's brother Gus he always goes. Is
my hair all right, and my hat?"

Before Polly could answer, Mr. Gus joined them as a matter of course,
and Polly soon found herself trotting on behind, feeling that things
were not "all right," though she did n't know how to mend them. Being
fond of music, she ignorantly supposed that every one else went for that
alone, and was much disturbed by the whispering that went on among the
young people round her. Belle and Trix were there in full dress; and, in
the pauses between different pieces, Messrs. Frank and Gus, with several
other "splendid fellows," regaled the young ladies with college gossip,
and bits of news full of interest, to judge from the close attention
paid to their eloquent remarks. Polly regarded these noble beings with
awe, and they recognized her existence with the condescension of their
sex; but they evidently considered her only "a quiet little thing," and
finding her not up to society talk, blandly ignored the pretty child,
and devoted themselves to the young ladies. Fortunately for Polly, she
forgot all about them in her enjoyment of the fine music, which she felt
rather than understood, and sat listening with such a happy face, that
several true music-lovers watched her smilingly, for her heart gave a
blithe welcome to the melody which put the little instrument in tune.
It was dusk when they went out, and Polly was much relieved to find the
carriage waiting for them, because playing third fiddle was not to her
taste, and she had had enough of it for one day.

"I 'm glad those men are gone; they did worry me so talking, when I
wanted to hear," said Polly, as they rolled away.

"Which did you like best?" asked Fanny, with a languid air of
superiority.

"The plain one, who did n't say much; he picked up my muff when it
tumbled down, and took care of me in the crowd; the others did n't mind
anything about me."

"They thought you were a little girl, I suppose."

"My mother says a real gentleman is as polite to a little girl as to a
woman; so I like Mr. Sydney best, because he was kind to me."

"What a sharp child you are, Polly. I should n't have thought you 'd
mind things like that," said Fanny, beginning to understand that there
may be a good deal of womanliness even in a little girl.

"I 'm used to good manners, though I do live in the country," replied
Polly, rather warmly, for she did n't like to be patronized even by her
friends.

"Grandma says your mother is a perfect lady, and you are just like her;
so don't get in a passion with those poor fellows, and I 'll see that
they behave better next time. Tom has no manners at all, and you don't
complain of him," added Fan, with a laugh.

"I don't care if he has n't; he 's a boy, and acts like one, and I can
get on with him a great deal better than I can with those men."

Fanny was just going to take Polly to task for saying "those men"
in such a disrespectful tone, when both were startled by a smothered
"Cock-a-doodle-doo!" from under the opposite seat.

"It 's Tom!" cried Fanny; and with the words out tumbled that
incorrigible boy, red in the face, and breathless with suppressed
laughter. Seating himself, he surveyed the girls as if well satisfied
with the success of his prank, and waiting to be congratulated upon it.
"Did you hear what we were saying?" demanded Fanny, uneasily.

"Oh, did n't I, every word?" And Tom exulted over them visibly.

"Did you ever see such a provoking toad, Polly? Now, I suppose you 'll
go and tell papa a great story."

"P'r'aps I shall, and p'r'aps I shan't. How Polly did hop when I crowed!
I heard her squeal, and saw her cuddle up her feet."

"And you heard us praise your manners, did n't you?" asked Polly, slyly.

"Yes, and you liked 'em; so I won't tell on you," said Tom, with a
re-assuring nod.

"There 's nothing to tell."

"Ain't there, though? What do you suppose the governor will say to you
girls going on so with those dandies? I saw you."

"What has the Governor of Massachusetts to do with us?" asked Polly,
trying to look as if she meant what she said.

"Pooh! you know who I mean; so you need n't try to catch me up, as
grandma does."

"Tom, I 'll make a bargain with you," cried Fanny, eagerly. "It was
n't my fault that Gus and Frank were there, and I could n't help their
speaking to me. I do as well as I can, and papa need n't be angry; for I
behave ever so much better than some of the girls. Don't I, Polly?"

"Bargain?" observed Tom, with an eye to business.

"If you won't go and make a fuss, telling what you 'd no right to hear
it was so mean to hide and listen; I should think you 'd be ashamed
of it! I 'll help you tease for your velocipede, and won't say a word
against it, when mamma and granny beg papa not to let you have it."

"Will you?" and Tom paused to consider the offer in all its bearings.

"Yes, and Polly will help; won't you?"

"I 'd rather not have anything to do with it; but I 'll be quiet, and
not do any harm."

"Why won't you?" asked Tom, curiously.

"Because it seems like deceiving."

"Well, papa need n't be so fussy," said Fan, petulantly.

"After hearing about that Carrie, and the rest, I don't wonder he is
fussy. Why don't you tell right out, and not do it any more, if he don't
want you to?" said Polly, persuasively.

"Do you go and tell your father and mother everything right out?"

"Yes, I do; and it saves ever so much trouble."

"Ain't you afraid of them?"

"Of course I 'm not. It 's hard to tell sometimes; but it 's so
comfortable when it 's over."

"Let 's!" was Tom's brief advice.

"Mercy me! what a fuss about nothing!" said Fanny, ready to cry with
vexation.

"T is n't nothing. You know you are forbidden to go gallivanting round
with those chaps, and that 's the reason you 're in a pucker now. I
won't make any bargain, and I will tell," returned Tom, seized with a
sudden fit of moral firmness.

"Will you if I promise never, never to do so any more?" asked Fanny,
meekly; for when Thomas took matters into his own hands, his sister
usually submitted in spite of herself.

"I 'll think about it; and if you behave, maybe I won't do it at all. I
can watch you better than papa can; so, if you try it again, it 's
all up with you, miss," said Tom, finding it impossible to resist the
pleasure of tyrannizing a little when he got the chance.

"She won't; don't plague her any more, and she will be good to you when
you get into scrapes," answered Polly, with her arm round Fan.

"I never do; and if I did, I should n't ask a girl to help me out."

"Why not? I 'd ask you in a minute, if I was in trouble," said Polly, in
her confiding way.

"Would you? Well, I 'd put you through, as sure as my name 's Tom Shaw.
Now, then, don't slip, Polly," and Mr. Thomas helped them out with
unusual politeness, for that friendly little speech gratified him. He
felt that one person appreciated him; and it had a good effect upon
manners and temper made rough and belligerent by constant snubbing and
opposition.

After tea that evening, Fanny proposed that Polly should show her how
to make molasses candy, as it was cook's holiday, and the coast would
be clear. Hoping to propitiate her tormentor, Fan invited Tom to join in
the revel, and Polly begged that Maud might sit up and see the fun;
so all four descended to the big kitchen, armed with aprons, hammers,
spoons, and pans, and Polly assumed command of the forces. Tom was set
to cracking nuts, and Maud to picking out the meats, for the candy was
to be "tip-top." Fan waited on Polly cook, who hovered over the kettle
of boiling molasses till her face was the color of a peony. "Now, put
in the nuts," she said at last; and Tom emptied his plate into the
foamy syrup, while the others watched with deep interest the mysterious
concoction of this well-beloved sweetmeat. "I pour it into the buttered
pan, you see, and it cools, and then we can eat it," explained Polly,
suiting the action to the word.

"Why, it 's all full of shells!" exclaimed Maud, peering into the pan.

"Oh, thunder! I must have put 'em in by mistake, and ate up the meats
without thinking," said Tom, trying to conceal his naughty satisfaction,
as the girls hung over the pan with faces full of disappointment and
despair.

"You did it on purpose, you horrid boy! I 'll never let you have
anything to do with my fun again!" cried Fan, in a passion, trying to
catch and shake him, while he dodged and chuckled in high glee.

Maud began to wail over her lost delight, and Polly gravely poked at the
mess, which was quite spoilt. But her attention was speedily diverted
by the squabble going on in the corner; for Fanny, forgetful of her
young-ladyism and her sixteen years, had boxed Tom's ears, and Tom,
resenting the insult, had forcibly seated her in the coal-hod, where he
held her with one hand while he returned the compliment with the
other. Both were very angry, and kept twitting one another with every
aggravation they could invent, as they scolded and scuffled, presenting
a most unlovely spectacle.

Polly was not a model girl by any means, and had her little pets and
tempers like the rest of us; but she did n't fight, scream, and squabble
with her brothers and sisters in this disgraceful way, and was much
surprised to see her elegant friend in such a passion. "Oh, don't!
Please, don't! You 'll hurt her, Tom! Let him go, Fanny! It 's no matter
about the candy; we can make some more!" cried Polly, trying to part
them, and looking so distressed, that they stopped ashamed, and in a
minute sorry that she should see such a display of temper.

"I ain't going to be hustled round; so you 'd better let me alone, Fan,"
said Tom, drawing off with a threatening wag of the head, adding, in
a different tone, "I only put the shells in for fun, Polly. You cook
another kettleful, and I 'll pick you some meats all fair. Will you?"

"It 's pretty hot work, and it 's a pity to waste things; but I 'll try
again, if you want me to," said Polly, with a patient sigh, for her arms
were tired and her face uncomfortably hot.

"We don't want you; get away!" said Maud, shaking a sticky spoon at him.

"Keep quiet, cry-baby. I 'm going to stay and help; may n't I, Polly?"

"Bears like sweet things, so you want some candy, I guess. Where is
the molasses? We 've used up all there was in the jug," said Polly,
good-naturedly, beginning again.

"Down cellar; I 'll get it;" and taking the lamp and jug, Tom departed,
bent on doing his duty now like a saint.

The moment his light vanished, Fanny bolted the door, saying,
spitefully, "Now, we are safe from any more tricks. Let him thump and
call, it only serves him right; and when the candy is done, we 'll let
the rascal out."

"How can we make it without molasses?" asked Polly, thinking that would
settle the matter.

"There 's plenty in the store-room. No; you shan't let him up till I 'm
ready. He 's got to learn that I 'm not to be shaken by a little chit
like him. Make your candy, and let him alone, or I 'll go and tell papa,
and then Tom will get a lecture."

Polly thought it was n't fair; but Maud clamored for her candy, and
finding she could do nothing to appease Fan, Polly devoted her mind to
her cookery till the nuts were safely in, and a nice panful set in the
yard to cool. A few bangs at the locked door, a few threats of vengeance
from the prisoner, such as setting the house on fire, drinking up the
wine, and mashing the jelly-pots, and then all was so quiet that the
girls forgot him in the exciting crisis of their work.

"He can't possibly get out anywhere, and as soon we 've cut up the
candy, we 'll unbolt the door and run. Come and get a nice dish to put
it in," said Fan, when Polly proposed to go halves with Tom, lest he
should come bursting in somehow, and seize the whole.

When they came down with the dish in which to set forth their treat,
and opened the back-door to find it, imagine their dismay on discovering
that it was gone, pan, candy, and all, utterly and mysteriously gone!

A general lament arose, when a careful rummage left no hopes; for
the fates had evidently decreed at candy was not to prosper on this
unpropitious night.

"The hot pan has melted and sunk in the snow perhaps," said Fanny,
digging into the drift where it was left.

"Those old cats have got it, I guess," suggested Maud, too much
overwhelmed by this second blow to howl as usual.

"The gate is n't locked, and some beggar has stolen it. I hope it will
do him good," added Polly, turning from her exploring expedition.

"If Tom could get out, I should think he 'd carried it off; but not
being a rat, he can't go through the bits of windows; so it was n't
him," said Fanny, disconsolately, for she began to think this double
loss a punishment for letting angry passions rise, "Let 's open the door
and tell him about it," proposed Polly.

"He 'll crow over us. No; we 'll open it and go to bed, and he can come
out when he likes. Provoking boy! if he had n't plagued us so, we should
have had a nice time."

Unbolting the cellar door, the girls announced to the invisible captive
that they were through, and then departed much depressed. Half-way up
the second flight, they all stopped as suddenly as if they had seen
a ghost; for looking over the banisters was Tom's face, crocky but
triumphant, and in either hand a junk of candy, which he waved above
them as he vanished, with the tantalizing remark, "Don't you wish you
had some?"

"How in the world did he get out?" cried Fanny, steadying herself after
a start that nearly sent all three tumbling down stairs.

"Coal-hole!" answered a spectral voice from the gloom above.

"Good gracious! He must have poked up the cover, climbed into the
street, stole the candy, and sneaked in at the shed-window while we were
looking for it."

"Cats got it, did n't they?" jeered the voice in a tone that made Polly
sit down and laugh till she could n't laugh any longer.

"Just give Maud a bit, she 's so disappointed. Fan and I are sick of it,
and so will you be, if you eat it all," called Polly, when she got her
breath.

"Go to bed, Maudie, and look under your pillow when you get there," was
the oracular reply that came down to them, as Tom's door closed after a
jubilant solo on the tin pan.

The girls went to bed tired out; and Maud slumbered placidly, hugging
the sticky bundle, found where molasses candy is not often discovered.
Polly was very tired, and soon fell asleep; but Fanny, who slept with
her, lay awake longer than usual, thinking about her troubles, for her
head ached, and the dissatisfaction that follows anger would not let her
rest with the tranquillity that made the rosy face in the little round
nightcap such a pleasant sight to see as it lay beside her. The gas was
turned down, but Fanny saw a figure in a gray wrapper creep by her door,
and presently return, pausing to look in. "Who is it?" she cried, so
loud that Polly woke.

"Only me, dear," answered grandma's mild voice. "Poor Tom has got a
dreadful toothache, and I came down to find some creosote for him. He
told me not to tell you; but I can't find the bottle, and don't want to
disturb mamma."

"It 's in my closet. Old Tom will pay for his trick this time," said
Fanny, in a satisfied tone.

"I thought he 'd get enough of our candy," laughed Polly; and then they
fell asleep, leaving Tom to the delights of toothache and the tender
mercies of kind old grandma.




CHAPTER III. POLLY'S TROUBLES


POLLY soon found that she was in a new world, a world where the manners
and customs were so different from the simple ways at home, that she
felt like a stranger in a strange land, and often wished that she had
not come. In the first place, she had nothing to do but lounge and
gossip, read novels, parade the streets, and dress; and before a week
was gone, she was as heartily sick of all this, as a healthy person
would be who attempted to live on confectionery. Fanny liked it, because
she was used to it, and had never known anything better; but Polly
had, and often felt like a little wood-bird shut up in a gilded cage.
Nevertheless, she was much impressed by the luxuries all about her,
enjoyed them, wished she owned them, and wondered why the Shaws were not
a happier family. She was not wise enough to know where the trouble lay;
she did not attempt to say which of the two lives was the right one; she
only knew which she liked best, and supposed it was merely another of
her "old-fashioned" ways.

Fanny's friends did not interest her much; she was rather afraid of
them, they seemed so much older and wiser than herself, even those
younger in years. They talked about things of which she knew nothing and
when Fanny tried to explain, she did n't find them interesting; indeed,
some of them rather shocked and puzzled her; so the girls let her alone,
being civil when they met, but evidently feeling that she was too "odd"
to belong to their set. Then she turned to Maud for companionship, for
her own little sister was excellent company, and Polly loved her dearly.
But Miss Maud was much absorbed in her own affairs, for she belonged
to a "set" also; and these mites of five and six had their "musicals,"
their parties, receptions, and promenades, as well as their elders; and,
the chief idea of their little lives seemed to be to ape the fashionable
follies they should have been too innocent to understand. Maud had her
tiny card-case, and paid calls, "like mamma and Fan"; her box of dainty
gloves, her jewel-drawer, her crimping-pins, as fine and fanciful a
wardrobe as a Paris doll, and a French maid to dress her. Polly could
n't get on with her at first, for Maud did n't seem like a child, and
often corrected Polly in her conversation and manners, though little
mademoiselle's own were anything but perfect. Now and then, when Maud
felt poorly, or had a "fwactious" turn, for she had "nerves" as well as
mamma, she would go to Polly to "be amoosed," for her gentle ways and
kind forbearance soothed the little fine lady better than anything else.
Polly enjoyed these times, and told stories, played games, or went
out walking, just as Maud liked, slowly and surely winning the child's
heart, and relieving the whole house of the young tyrant who ruled it.

Tom soon got over staring at Polly, and at first did not take much
notice of her, for, in his opinion, "girls did n't amount to much,
anyway"; and, considering, the style of girl he knew most about, Polly
quite agreed with him. He occasionally refreshed himself by teasing her,
to see how she 'd stand it, and caused Polly much anguish of spirit, for
she never knew where he would take her next. He bounced out at her from
behind doors, booed at her in dark entries, clutched her feet as she
went up stairs, startled her by shrill whistles right in her ear, or
sudden tweaks of the hair as he passed her in the street; and as sure as
there was company to dinner, he fixed his round eyes on her, and never
took them off till she was reduced to a piteous state of confusion and
distress. She used to beg him not to plague her; but he said he did
it for her good; she was too shy, and needed toughening like the other
girls. In vain she protested that she did n't want to be like the other
girls in that respect; he only laughed in her face, stuck his red hair
straight up all over his head, and glared at her, till she fled in
dismay.

Yet Polly rather liked Tom, for she soon saw that he was neglected,
hustled out of the way, and left to get on pretty much by himself. She
often wondered why his mother did n't pet him as she did the girls;
why his father ordered him about as if he was a born rebel, and took so
little interest in his only son. Fanny considered him a bear, and was
ashamed of him; but never tried to polish him up a bit; and Maud and
he lived together like a cat and dog who did not belong to a "happy
family." Grandma was the only one who stood by poor old Tom; and Polly
more than once discovered him doing something kind for Madam, and
seeming very much ashamed when it was found out. He was n't respectful
at all; he called her "the old lady," and told her he "would n't be
fussed over"; but when anything was the matter, he always went to "the
old lady," and was very grateful for the "fussing." Polly liked him for
this, and often wanted to speak of it; but she had a feeling that it
would n't do, for in praising their affection, she was reproaching
others with neglect; so she held her tongue, and thought about it all
the more. Grandma was rather neglected, too, and perhaps that is
the reason why Tom and she were such good friends. She was even more
old-fashioned than Polly; but people did n't seem to mind it so much in
her, as her day was supposed to be over, and nothing was expected of her
but to keep out of everybody's way, and to be handsomely dressed when
she appeared "before people." Grandma led a quiet, solitary life in her
own rooms, full of old furniture, pictures, books, and relics of a past
for which no one cared but herself. Her son went up every evening for a
little call, was very kind to her, and saw that she wanted nothing money
could buy; but he was a busy man, so intent on getting rich that he
had no time to enjoy what he already possessed. Madam never complained,
interfered, or suggested; but there was a sad sort of quietude about
her, a wistful look in her faded eyes, as if she wanted something which
money could not buy, and when children were near, she hovered about
them, evidently longing to cuddle and caress them as only grandmothers
can. Polly felt this; and as she missed the home-petting, gladly showed
that she liked to see the quiet old face brighten, as she entered the
solitary room, where few children came, except the phantoms of little
sons and daughters, who, to the motherly heart that loved them, never
faded or grew up. Polly wished the children would be kinder to grandma;
but it was not for her to tell them so, although it troubled her a good
deal, and she could only try to make up for it by being as dutiful and
affectionate as if their grandma was her own.

Another thing that disturbed Polly was the want of exercise. To dress
up and parade certain streets for an hour every day, to stand talking in
doorways, or drive out in a fine carriage, was not the sort of exercise
she liked, and Fan would take no other. Indeed, she was so shocked,
when Polly, one day, proposed a run down the mall, that her friend never
dared suggest such a thing again. At home, Polly ran and rode, coasted
and skated, jumped rope and raked hay, worked in her garden and rowed
her boat; so no wonder she longed for something more lively than a daily
promenade with a flock of giddy girls, who tilted along in high-heeled
boots, and costumes which made Polly ashamed to be seen with some of
them. So she used to slip out alone sometimes, when Fanny was absorbed
in novels, company, or millinery, and get fine brisk walks round the
park, on the unfashionable side, where the babies took their airings; or
she went inside, to watch the boys coasting, and to wish she could coast
too, as she did at home. She never went far, and always came back rosy
and gay.

One afternoon, just before dinner, she felt so tired of doing nothing,
that she slipped out for a run. It had been a dull day; but the sun was
visible now, setting brightly below the clouds. It was cold but still
and Polly trotted down the smooth, snow-covered mall humming to herself,
and trying not to feel homesick. The coasters were at it with all their
might, and she watched them, till her longing to join the fun grew
irresistible. On the hill, some little girls were playing with their
sleds, real little girls, in warm hoods and coats, rubber boots and
mittens, and Polly felt drawn toward them in spite of her fear of Fan.

"I want to go down, but I dars n't, it 's so steep," said one of these
"common children," as Maud called them.

"If you 'll lend me your sled, and sit in my lap, I 'll take you down
all nice," answered Polly, in a confidential tone.

The little girls took a look at her, seemed satisfied, and accepted
her offer. Polly looked carefully round to see that no fashionable eye
beheld the awful deed, and finding all safe, settled her freight, and
spun away down hill, feeling all over the delightsome excitement of
swift motion which makes coasting such a favorite pastime with the more
sensible portion of the child-world. One after another, she took
the little girls down the hill and dragged them up again, while they
regarded her in the light of a gray-coated angel, descended for their
express benefit. Polly was just finishing off with one delicious "go"
all by herself, when she heard a familiar whistle behind her, and before
she could get off, up came Tom, looking as much astonished as if he had
found her mounted, on an elephant.

"Hullo, Polly! What 'll Fan say to you?" was his polished salutation.

"Don't know, and don't care. Coasting is no harm; I like it, and I 'm
going to do it, now I 've got a chance; so clear the lul-la!" And
away went independent Polly, with her hair blowing in the wind, and an
expression of genuine enjoyment, which a very red nose did n't damage in
the least.

"Good for you, Polly!" And casting himself upon his sled, with the most
reckless disregard for his ribs, off whizzed Tom after her, and came
alongside just as she reined up "General Grant" on the broad path below.
"Oh, won't you get it when we go home?" cried the young gentleman, even
before he changed his graceful attitude.

"I shan't, if you don't go and tell; but of course you will," added
Polly, sitting still, while an anxious expression began to steal over
her happy face.

"I just won't, then," returned Tom, with the natural perversity of his
tribe.

"If they ask me, I shall tell, of course; if they don't ask, I think
there 's no harm in keeping still. I should n't have done it, if I had
n't known my mother was willing; but I don't wish to trouble your mother
by telling of it. Do you think it was very dreadful of me?" asked Polly,
looking at him.

"I think it was downright jolly; and I won't tell, if you don't want me
to. Now, come up and have another," said Tom, heartily.

"Just one more; the little girls want to go, this is their sled."

"Let 'em take it, it is n't good for much; and you come on mine.
Mazeppa's a stunner; you see if he is n't."

So Polly tucked herself up in front, Tom hung on behind in some
mysterious manner, and Mazeppa proved that he fully merited his master's
sincere if inelegant praise. They got on capitally now, for Tom was in
his proper sphere, and showed his best side, being civil and gay in the
bluff boy-fashion that was natural to him; while Polly forgot to be shy,
and liked this sort of "toughening" much better than the other. They
laughed and talked, and kept taking "just one more," till the sunshine
was all gone, and the clocks struck dinner-time.

"We shall be late; let 's run," said Polly, as they came into the path
after the last coast.

"You just sit still, and I 'll get you home in a jiffy;" and before she
could unpack herself, Tom trotted off with her at a fine pace.

"Here 's a pair of cheeks! I wish you 'd get a color like this, Fanny,"
said Mr. Shaw, as Polly came into the dining-room after smoothing her
hair.

"Your nose is as red as that cranberry sauce," answered Fan, coming out
of the big chair where she had been curled up for an hour or two, deep
in "Lady Audley's Secret."

"So it is," said Polly, shutting one eye to look at the offending
feature. "Never mind; I 've had a good time, anyway," she added, giving
a little prance in her chair.

"I don't see much fun in these cold runs you are so fond of taking,"
said Fanny, with a yawn and a shiver.

"Perhaps you would if you tried it;" and Polly laughed as she glanced at
Tom.

"Did you go alone, dear?" asked grandma, patting the rosy cheek beside
her.

"Yes 'm; but I met Tom, and we came home together." Polly's eyes
twinkled when she said that, and Tom choked in his soup.

"Thomas, leave the table!" commanded Mr. Shaw, as his incorrigible son
gurgled and gasped behind his napkin.

"Please don't send him away, sir. I made him laugh," said Polly,
penitently.

"What's the joke?" asked Fanny, waking up at last.

"I should n't think you 'd make him laugh, when he 's always making you
cwy," observed Maud, who had just come in.

"What have you been doing now, sir?" demanded Mr. Shaw, as Tom emerged,
red and solemn, from his brief obscurity.

"Nothing but coast," he said, gruffly, for papa was always lecturing
him, and letting the girls do just as they liked.

"So 's Polly; I saw her. Me and Blanche were coming home just now, and
we saw her and Tom widing down the hill on his sled, and then he dwagged
her ever so far!" cried Maud, with her mouth full.

"You did n't?" and Fanny dropped her fork with a scandalized face.

"Yes, I did, and liked it ever so much," answered Polly, looking anxious
but resolute.

"Did any one see you?" cried Fanny.

"Only some little girls, and Tom."

"It was horridly improper; and Tom ought to have told you so, if you did
n't know any better. I should be mortified to death if any of my friends
saw you," added Fan, much disturbed.

"Now, don't you scold. It 's no harm, and Polly shall coast if she wants
to; may n't she, grandma?" cried Tom, gallantly coming to the rescue,
and securing a powerful ally.

"My mother lets me; and if I don't go among the boys, I can't see what
harm there is in it," said Polly, before Madam could speak.

"People do many things in the country that are not proper here," began
Mrs. Shaw, in her reproving tone.

"Let the child do it if she likes, and take Maud with her. I should be
glad to have one hearty girl in my house," interrupted Mr. Shaw, and
that was the end of it.

"Thank you, sir," said Polly, gratefully, and nodded at Tom, who
telegraphed back "All right!" and fell upon his dinner with the appetite
of a young wolf.

"Oh, you sly-boots! you 're getting up a flirtation with Tom, are you?"
whispered Fanny to her friend, as if much amused.

"What!" and Polly looked so surprised and indignant, that Fanny was
ashamed of herself, and changed the subject by telling her mother she
needed some new gloves.

Polly was very quiet after that, and the minute dinner was over, she
left the room to go and have a quiet "think" about the whole matter.
Before she got half-way up stairs, she saw Tom coming after, and
immediately sat down to guard her feet. He laughed, and said, as he
perched himself on the post of the banisters, "I won't grab you, honor
bright. I just wanted to say, if you 'll come out to-morrow some time,
we 'll have a good coast."

"No," said Polly, "I can't come."

"Why not? Are you mad? I did n't tell." And Tom looked amazed at the
change which had come over her.

"No; you kept your word, and stood by me like a good boy. I 'm not mad,
either; but I don't mean to coast any more. Your mother don't like it."

"That is n't the reason, I know. You nodded to me after she 'd freed her
mind, and you meant to go then. Come, now, what is it?"

"I shan't tell you; but I 'm not going," was Polly's determined answer.

"Well, I did think you had more sense than most girls; but you have n't,
and I would n't give a sixpence for you."

"That 's polite," said Polly, getting ruffled.

"Well, I hate cowards."

"I ain't a coward."

"Yes, you are. You 're afraid of what folks will say; ain't you, now?"

Polly knew she was, and held her peace, though she longed to speak; but
how could she?

"Ah, I knew you 'd back out." And Tom walked away with an air of scorn
that cut Polly to the heart.

"It 's too bad! Just as he was growing kind to me, and I was going to
have a good time, it 's all spoilt by Fan's nonsense. Mrs. Shaw don't
like it, nor grandma either, I dare say. There 'll be a fuss if I go,
and Fan will plague me; so I 'll give it up, and let Tom think I 'm
afraid. Oh, dear! I never did see such ridiculous people."

Polly shut her door hard, and felt ready to cry with vexation, that her
pleasure should be spoilt by such a silly idea; for, of all the silly
freaks of this fast age, that of little people playing at love is about
the silliest. Polly had been taught that it was a very serious and
sacred thing; and, according to her notions, it was far more improper to
flirt with one boy than to coast with a dozen. She had been much amazed,
only the day before, to hear Maud say to her mother, "Mamma, must I have
a beau? The girls all do, and say I ought to have Fweddy Lovell; but I
don't like him as well as Hawry Fiske."

"Oh, yes; I 'd have a little sweetheart, dear, it 's so cunning,"
answered Mrs. Shaw. And Maud announced soon after that she was engaged
to "Fweddy, 'cause Hawry slapped her" when she proposed the match.

Polly laughed with the rest at the time; but when she thought of it
afterward, and wondered what her own mother would have said, if little
Kitty had put such a question, she did n't find it cunning or funny, but
ridiculous and unnatural. She felt so now about herself; and when her
first petulance was over, resolved to give up coasting and everything
else, rather than have any nonsense with Tom, who, thanks to his
neglected education, was as ignorant as herself of the charms of this
new amusement for school-children. So Polly tried to console herself
by jumping rope in the back-yard, and playing tag with Maud in the
drying-room, where she likewise gave lessons in "nas-gim-nics," as Maud
called it, which did that little person good. Fanny came up sometimes
to teach them a new dancing step, and more than once was betrayed into
a game of romps, for which she was none the worse. But Tom turned a cold
shoulder to Polly, and made it evident, by his cavalier manner that he
really did n't think her "worth a sixpence."

Another thing that troubled Polly was her clothes, for, though no one
said anything, she knew they were very plain; and now and then she
wished that her blue and mouse colored merinos were rather more trimmed,
her sashes had bigger bows, and her little ruffles more lace on them.
She sighed for a locket, and, for the first time in her life, thought
seriously of turning up her pretty curls and putting on a "wad." She
kept these discontents to herself, however, after she had written to ask
her mother if she might have her best dress altered like Fanny's, and
received this reply: "No, dear; the dress is proper and becoming as it
is, and the old fashion of simplicity the best for all of us. I don't
want my Polly to be loved for her clothes, but for herself; so wear the
plain frocks mother took such pleasure in making for you, and let the
panniers go. The least of us have some influence in this big world;
and perhaps my little girl can do some good by showing others that a
contented heart and a happy face are better ornaments than any Paris can
give her. You want a locket, deary; so I send one that my mother gave me
years ago. You will find father's face on one side, mine on the other;
and when things trouble you, just look at your talisman, and I think the
sunshine will come back again."

Of course it did, for the best of all magic was shut up in the quaint
little case that Polly wore inside her frock, and kissed so tenderly
each night and morning. The thought that, insignificant as she was, she
yet might do some good, made her very careful of her acts and words, and
so anxious to keep head contented and face happy, that she forgot her
clothes, and made others do the same. She did not know it, but that good
old fashion of simplicity made the plain gowns pretty, and the grace of
unconsciousness beautified their little wearer with the charm that
makes girlhood sweetest to those who truly love and reverence it. One
temptation Polly had already yielded to before the letter came, and
repented heartily of afterward.

"Polly, I wish you 'd let me call you Marie," said Fanny one day, as
they were shopping together.

"You may call me Mary, if you like; but I won't have any ie put on to my
name. I 'm Polly at home and I 'm fond of being called so; but Marie is
Frenchified and silly."

"I spell my own name with an ie, and so do all the girls."

"And what a jumble of Netties, Nellies, Hatties, and Sallies there is.
How 'Pollie' would look spelt so!"

"Well, never mind; that was n't what I began to say. There 's one thing
you must have, and that is, bronze boots," said Fan, impressively.

"Why must I, when I 've got enough without?"

"Because it 's the fashion to have them, and you can't be finished off
properly without. I 'm going to get a pair, and so must you."

"Don't they cost a great deal?"

"Eight or nine dollars, I believe. I have mine charged; but it don't
matter if you have n't got the money. I can lend you some."

"I 've got ten dollars to do what I like with; but it 's meant to get
some presents for the children." And Polly took out her purse in an
undecided way.

"You can make presents easy enough. Grandma knows all sorts of nice
contrivances. They 'll do just as well; and then you can get your
boots."

"Well; I 'll look at them," said Polly, following Fanny into the store,
feeling rather rich and important to be shopping in this elegant manner.

"Are n't they lovely? Your foot is perfectly divine in that boot, Polly.
Get them for my party; you 'll dance like a fairy," whispered Fan.

Polly surveyed the dainty, shining boot with the scalloped top, the
jaunty heel, and the delicate toe, thought her foot did look very well
in it, and after a little pause, said she would have them. It was all
very delightful till she got home, and was alone; then, on looking into
her purse, she saw one dollar and the list of things she meant to get
for mother and the children. How mean the dollar looked all alone! and
how long the list grew when there was nothing to buy the articles.

"I can't make skates for Ned, nor a desk for Will; and those are what
they have set their hearts upon. Father's book and mother's collar are
impossible now; and I 'm a selfish thing to go and spend all my
money for myself. How could I do it?" And Polly eyed the new boots
reproachfully, as they stood in the first position as if ready for the
party. "They are lovely; but I don't believe they will feel good, for
I shall be thinking about my lost presents all the time," sighed Polly,
pushing the enticing boots out of sight. "I 'll go and ask grandma what
I can do; for if I 've got to make something for every one, I must begin
right away, or I shan't get done;" and off she bustled, glad to forget
her remorse in hard work.

Grandma proved equal to the emergency, and planned something for every
one, supplying materials, taste, and skill in the most delightful
manner. Polly felt much comforted; but while she began to knit a pretty
pair of white bed-socks, to be tied with rose-colored ribbons, for
her mother, she thought some very sober thoughts upon the subject of
temptation; and if any one had asked her just then what made her sigh,
as if something lay heavy on her conscience, she would have answered,
"Bronze boots."




CHAPTER IV. LITTLE THINGS


"IT 'S so wainy, I can't go out, and evwybody is so cwoss they won't
play with me," said Maud, when Polly found her fretting on the stairs,
and paused to ask the cause of her wails.

"I 'll play with you; only don't scream and wake your mother. What shall
we play?"

"I don't know; I 'm tired of evwything, 'cause my toys are all bwoken,
and my dolls are all sick but Clawa," moaned Maud, giving a jerk to the
Paris doll which she held upside down by one leg in the most unmaternal
manner.

"I 'm going to dress a dolly for my little sister; would n't you like
to see me do it?" asked Polly, persuasively, hoping to beguile the cross
child and finish her own work at the same time.

"No, I should n't, 'cause she 'll look nicer than my Clawa. Her clothes
won't come off; and Tom spoilt 'em playing ball with her in the yard."

"Would n't you like to rip these clothes off, and have me show you how
to make some new ones, so you can dress and undress Clara as much as you
like?"

"Yes; I love to cut." And Maud's, face brightened; for destructiveness
is one of the earliest traits of childhood, and ripping was Maud's
delight.

Establishing themselves in the deserted dining-room, the children fell
to work; and when Fanny discovered them, Maud was laughing with all
her heart at poor Clara, who, denuded of her finery, was cutting up all
sorts of capers in the hands of her merry little mistress.

"I should think you 'd be ashamed to play with dolls, Polly. I have n't
touched one this ever so long," said Fanny, looking down with a superior
air.

"I ain't ashamed, for it keeps Maud happy, and will please my sister
Kitty; and I think sewing is better than prinking or reading silly
novels, so, now." And Polly stitched away with a resolute air, for she
and Fanny had had a little tiff; because Polly would n't let her friend
do up her hair "like other folks," and bore her ears.

"Don't be cross, dear, but come and do something nice, it 's so dull
to-day," said Fanny, anxious to be friends again, for it was doubly dull
without Polly.

"Can't; I 'm busy."

"You always are busy. I never saw such a girl. What in the world do you
find to do all the time?" asked Fanny, watching with interest the set of
the little red merino frock Polly was putting on to her doll.

"Lots of things; but I like to be lazy sometimes as much as you do; just
lie on the sofa, and read fairy stories, or think about nothing. Would
you have a white-muslin apron or a black silk?" added Polly, surveying
her work with satisfaction.

"Muslin, with pockets and tiny blue bows. I 'll show you how." And
forgetting her hate and contempt for dolls, down sat Fanny, soon getting
as much absorbed as either of the others.

The dull day brightened wonderfully after that, and the time flew
pleasantly, as tongues and needles went together. Grandma peeped in, and
smiled at the busy group, saying, "Sew away, my dears; dollies are safe
companions, and needlework an accomplishment that 's sadly neglected
nowadays. Small stitches, Maud; neat button-holes, Fan; cut carefully,
Polly, and don't waste your cloth. Take pains; and the best needlewoman
shall have a pretty bit of white satin for a doll's bonnet."

Fanny exerted herself, and won the prize, for Polly helped Maud, and
neglected her own work; but she did n't care much, for Mr. Shaw said,
looking at the three bright faces at the tea-table, "I guess Polly has
been making sunshine for you to-day." "No, indeed, sir, I have n't done
anything, only dress Maud's doll."

And Polly did n't think she had done much; but it was one of the little
things which are always waiting to be done in this world of ours, where
rainy days come so often, where spirits get out of tune, and duty won't
go hand in hand with pleasure. Little things of this sort are especially
good work for little people; a kind little thought, an unselfish little
act, a cheery little word, are so sweet and comfortable, that no one can
fail to feel their beauty and love the giver, no matter how small they
are. Mothers do a deal of this sort of thing, unseen, unthanked, but
felt and remembered long afterward, and never lost, for this is the
simple magic that binds hearts together, and keeps home happy. Polly had
learned this secret.

She loved to do the "little things" that others did not see, or were too
busy to stop for; and while doing them, without a thought of thanks, she
made sunshine for herself as well as others. There was so much love
in her own home, that she quickly felt the want of it in Fanny's, and
puzzled herself to find out why these people were not kind and patient
to one another. She did not try to settle the question, but did her
best to love and serve and bear with each, and the good will, the gentle
heart, the helpful ways and simple manners of our Polly made her dear
to every one, for these virtues, even in a little child, are lovely and
attractive.

Mr. Shaw was very kind to her, for he liked her modest, respectful
manners; and Polly was so grateful for his many favors, that she soon
forgot her fear, and showed her affection in all sorts of confiding
little ways, which pleased him extremely. She used to walk across the
park with him when he went to his office in the morning, talking busily
all the way, and saying "Good-by" with a nod and a smile when they
parted at the great gate. At first, Mr. Shaw did not care much about
it; but soon he missed her if she did not come, and found that
something fresh and pleasant seemed to brighten all his day, if a small,
gray-coated figure, with an intelligent face, a merry voice, and a
little hand slipped confidingly into his, went with him through the
wintry park. Coming home late, he liked to see a curly, brown head
watching at the window; to find his slippers ready, his paper in its
place, and a pair of willing feet, eager to wait upon him. "I wish my
Fanny was more like her," he often said to himself, as he watched the
girls, while they thought him deep in politics or the state of the money
market. Poor Mr. Shaw had been so busy getting rich, that he had not
found time to teach his children to love him; he was more at leisure
now, and as his boy and girls grew up, he missed something. Polly was
unconsciously showing him what it was, and making child-love so sweet,
that he felt he could not do without it any more, yet did n't quite
know how to win the confidence of the children, who had always found him
busy, indifferent, and absentminded.

As the girls were going to bed one night, Polly kissed grandma, as
usual, and Fanny laughed at her, saying, "What a baby you are! We are
too old for such things now."

"I don't think people ever are too old to kiss their fathers and
mothers," was the quick answer.

"Right, my little Polly;" and Mr. Shaw stretched out his hand to her
with such a kindly look, that Fanny stared surprised, and then said,
shyly, "I thought you did n't care about it, father." "I do, my dear:"
And Mr. Shaw put out the other hand to Fanny, who gave him a daughterly
kiss, quite forgetting everything but the tender feeling that sprung up
in her heart at the renewal of the childish custom which we never need
outgrow.

Mrs. Shaw was a nervous, fussy invalid, who wanted something every five
minutes; so Polly found plenty of small things to do for her and did,
them so cheerfully, that the poor lady loved to have the quiet, helpful
child near, to wait upon her, read to her, run errands, or hand the
seven different shawls which were continually being put on or off.

Grandma, too, was glad to find willing hands and feet to serve her; and
Polly passed many happy hours in the quaint rooms, learning all sorts
of pretty arts, and listening to pleasant chat, never dreaming how much
sunshine she brought to the solitary old lady.

Tom was Polly's rock ahead for a long time, because he was always
breaking out in a new place, and one never knew where to find him. He
tormented yet amused her; was kind one day, and a bear the next; at
times she fancied he was never going to be bad again, and the next thing
she knew he was deep in mischief, and hooted at the idea of repentance
and reformation. Polly gave him up as a hard case; but was so in the
habit of helping any one who seemed in trouble, that she was good to him
simply because she could n't help it.

"What 's the matter? Is your lesson too hard for you?" she asked one
evening, as a groan made her look across the table to where Tom sat
scowling over a pile of dilapidated books, with his hands in his hair,
as if his head was in danger of flying asunder with the tremendous
effort he was making.

"Hard! Guess it is. What in thunder do I care about the old
Carthaginians? Regulus was n't bad; but I 'm sick of him!" And Tom dealt
"Harkness's Latin Reader" a thump, which expressed his feelings better
than words.

"I like Latin, and used to get on well when I studied it with Jimmy.
Perhaps I can help you a little bit," said Polly, as Tom wiped his hot
face and refreshed himself with a peanut.

"You? pooh! girls' Latin don't amount to much anyway," was the grateful
reply.

But Polly was used to him now, and, nothing daunted, took a look at the
grimy page in the middle of which Tom had stuck. She read it so well,
that the young gentleman stopped munching to regard her with respectful
astonishment, and when she stopped, he said, suspiciously, "You are a
sly one, Polly, to study up so you can show off before me. But it won't
do, ma'am; turn over a dozen pages, and try again."

Polly obeyed, and did even better than before, saying, as she looked up,
with a laugh, "I 've been through the whole book; so you won't catch me
that way, Tom."

"I say, how came you to know such a lot?" asked Tom, much impressed.

"I studied with Jimmy, and kept up with him, for father let us be
together in all our lessons. It was so nice, and we learned so fast!"

"Tell me about Jimmy. He 's your brother, is n't he?"

"Yes; but he 's dead, you know. I 'll tell about him some other time;
you ought to study now, and perhaps I can help you," said Polly, with a
little quiver of the lips.

"Should n't wonder if you could." And Tom spread the book between them
with a grave and business-like air, for he felt that Polly had got the
better of him, and it behooved him to do his best for the honor of his
sex. He went at the lesson with a will, and soon floundered out of his
difficulties, for Polly gave him a lift here and there, and they went
on swimmingly, till they came to some rules to be learned. Polly had
forgotten them, so they, both committed them to memory; Tom, with
hands in his pockets, rocked to and fro, muttering rapidly, while Polly
twisted the little curl on her forehead and stared at the wall, gabbling
with all her might.

"Done!" cried Tom, presently.

"Done!" echoed Polly; and then they heard each other recite till both
were perfect "That 's pretty good fun," said Tom, joyfully, tossing poor
Harkness away, and feeling that the pleasant excitement of companionship
could lend a charm even to Latin Grammar.

"Now, ma'am, we 'll take a turn at algibbera. I like that as much as I
hate Latin."

Polly accepted the invitation, and soon owned that Tom could beat her
here. This fact restored his equanimity; but he did n't crow over her,
far from it; for he helped her with a paternal patience that made
her eyes twinkle with suppressed fun, as he soberly explained and
illustrated, unconsciously imitating Dominie Deane, till Polly found it
difficult to keep from laughing in his face.

"You may have another go at it any, time you like," generously remarked
Tom, as he shied the algebra after the Latin Reader.

"I 'll come every evening, then. I 'd like to, for I have n't studied a
bit since I came. You shall try and make me like algebra, and I 'll try
and make you like Latin, will you?"

"Oh, I 'd like it well enough, if there was any one explain it to me.
Old Deane puts us through double-quick, and don't give a fellow time to
ask questions when we read."

"Ask your father; he knows."

"Don't believe he does; should n't dare to bother him, if he did."

"Why not?"

"He 'd pull my ears, and call me a 'stupid,' or tell me not to worry
him."

"I don't think he would. He 's very kind to me, and I ask lots of
questions."

"He likes you better than he does me."

"Now, Tom! it 's wrong of you to say so. Of course he loves you ever so
much more than he does me," cried Polly, reprovingly.

"Why don't he show it then?" muttered Tom, with a half-wistful,
half-defiant glance toward the library door, which stood ajar.

"You act so, how can he?" asked Polly, after a pause, in which she put
Tom's question to herself, and could find no better reply than the one
she gave him.

"Why don't he give me my velocipede? He said, if I did well at school
for a month, I should have it; and I 've been pegging away like fury for
most six weeks, and he don't do a thing about it. The girls get their
duds, because they tease. I won't do that anyway; but you don't catch me
studying myself to death, and no pay for it."

"It is too bad; but you ought to do it because it 's right, and
never mind being paid," began Polly, trying to be moral, but secretly
sympathizing heartily with poor Tom.

"Don't you preach, Polly. If the governor took any notice of me, and
cared how I got on, I would n't mind the presents so much; but he don't
care a hang, and never even asked if I did well last declamation day,
when I 'd gone and learned 'The Battle of Lake Regillus,' because he
said he liked it."

"Oh, Tom! Did you say that? It 's splendid! Jim and I used to say
Horatius together, and it was such fun. Do speak your piece to me, I do
so like 'Macaulay's Lays.'"

"It 's dreadful long," began Tom; but his face brightened, for Polly's
interest soothed his injured feelings, and he was glad to prove his
elocutionary powers. He began without much spirit; but soon the martial
ring of the lines fired him, and before he knew it, he was on his legs
thundering away in grand style, while Polly listened with kindling
face and absorbed attention. Tom did declaim well, for he quite forgot
himself, and delivered the stirring ballad with an energy that
made Polly flush and tingle with admiration and delight, and quite
electrified a second listener, who had heard all that went on, and
watched the little scene from behind his newspaper.

As Tom paused, breathless, and Polly clapped her hands enthusiastically,
the sound was loudly echoed from behind him. Both whirled round, and
there was Mr. Shaw, standing in the doorway, applauding with all his
might.

Tom looked much abashed, and said not a word; Polly ran to Mr. Shaw, and
danced before him, saying, eagerly, "Was n't it splendid? Did n't he do
well? May n't he have his velocipede now?"

"Capital, Tom; you 'll be an orator yet. Learn another piece like that,
and I 'll come and hear you speak it. Are you ready for your velocipede,
hey?"

Polly was right; and Tom owned that "the governor" was kind, did like
him and had n't entirely forgotten his promise. The boy turned red with
pleasure, and picked at the buttons on his jacket, while listening to
this unexpected praise; but when he spoke, he looked straight up in his
father's face, while his own shone with pleasure, as he answered, in one
breath, "Thankee, sir. I 'll do it, sir. Guess I am, sir!"

"Very good; then look out for your new horse tomorrow, sir." And Mr.
Shaw stroked the fuzzy red head with a kind hand, feeling a fatherly
pleasure in the conviction that there was something in his boy after
all.

Tom got his velocipede next day, named it Black Auster, in memory of the
horse in "The Battle of Lake Regillus," and came to grief as soon as he
began to ride his new steed.

"Come out and see me go it," whispered Tom to Polly, after three days'
practice in the street, for he had already learned to ride in the rink.

Polly and Maud willingly went, and watched his struggles, with
deep interest, till he got an upset, which nearly put an end to his
velocipeding forever.

"Hi, there! Auster's coming!" shouted Tom, as came rattling down the
long, steep street outside the park.

They stepped aside, and he whizzed by, arms and legs going like mad,
with the general appearance of a runaway engine. It would have been a
triumphant descent, if a big dog had not bounced suddenly through one of
the openings, and sent the whole concern helter-skelter into the gutter.
Polly laughed as she ran to view the ruin, for Tom lay flat on his back
with the velocipede atop him, while the big dog barked wildly, and his
master scolded him for his awkwardness. But when she saw Tom's face,
Polly was frightened, for the color had all gone out of it, his eyes
looked strange and dizzy, and drops of blood began to trickle from a
great cut on his forehead. The man saw it, too, and had him up in a
minute; but he could n't stand, and stared about him in a dazed sort of
way, as he sat on the curbstone, while Polly held her handkerchief to
his forehead, and pathetically begged to know if he was killed.

"Don't scare mother, I 'm all right. Got upset, did n't I?" he asked,
presently, eyeing the prostrate velocipede with more anxiety about its
damages than his own.

"I knew you 'd hurt yourself with that horrid thing just let it be, and
come home, for your head bleeds dreadfully, and everybody is looking
at us," whispered Polly, trying to tie the little handkerchief over the
ugly cut.

"Come on, then. Jove! how queer my head feels! Give us a boost, please.
Stop howling, Maud, and come home. You bring the machine, and I 'll pay
you, Pat." As he spoke, Tom slowly picked himself and steadying himself
by Polly's shoulder, issued commands, and the procession fell into
line. First, the big dog, barking at intervals; then the good-natured
Irishman, trundling "that divil of a whirligig," as he disrespectfully
called the idolized velocipede; then the wounded hero, supported by the
helpful Polly; and Maud brought up the rear in tears, bearing Tom's cap.

Unfortunately, Mrs. Shaw was out driving with grandma, and Fanny was
making calls; so that there was no one but Polly to stand by Tom, for
the parlor-maid turned faint at the sight of blood, and the chamber-maid
lost her wits in the flurry. It was a bad cut, and must be sewed up
at once, the doctor said, as soon as he came. "Somebody must hold his
head;" he added, as he threaded his queer little needle.

"I 'll keep still, but if anybody must hold me, let Polly. You ain't
afraid, are you?" asked Tom, with imploring look, for he did n't like
the idea of being sewed a bit.

Polly was just going to shrink away, saying, "Oh I can't!" when she
remembered that Tom once called her a coward. Here was a chance to prove
that she was n't; besides, poor Tom had no one else to help him; so she
came up to the sofa where he lay, and nodded reassuringly, as she put a
soft little hand on either side of the damaged head.

"You are a trump, Polly," whispered Tom. Then he set his teeth, clenched
his hands, lay quite still, and bore it like a man. It was all over in
a minute or two, and when he had had a glass of wine, and was nicely
settled on his bed, he felt pretty comfortable, in spite of the pain in
his head; and being ordered to keep quiet, he said, "Thank you ever so
much, Polly," and watched her with a grateful face as she crept away.

He had to keep the house for a week, and laid about looking very
interesting with a great black patch on his forehead. Every one 'petted
him;' for the doctor said, that if the blow had been an inch nearer
the temple, it would have been fatal, and the thought of losing him so
suddenly made bluff old Tom very precious all at once. His father asked
him how he was a dozen times a day; his mother talked continually of
"that dear boy's narrow escape"; and grandma cockered him up with every
delicacy she could invent; and the girls waited on him like devoted
slaves. This new treatment had an excellent effect; for when neglected
Tom got over his first amazement at this change of base, he blossomed
out delightfully, as sick people do sometimes, and surprised his family
by being unexpectedly patient, grateful, and amiable. Nobody ever knew
how much good it did him; for boys seldom have confidences of this sort
except with their mothers, and Mrs. Shaw had never found the key to her
son's heart. But a little seed was sowed then that took root, and though
it grew very slowly, it came to something in the end. Perhaps Polly
helped it a little. Evening was his hardest time, for want of exercise
made him as restless and nervous as it was possible for a hearty lad to
be on such a short notice.

He could n't sleep so the girls amused him; Fanny played and read aloud;
Polly sung, and told stories; and did the latter so well, that it got
to be a regular thing for her to begin as soon as twilight came, and Tom
was settled in his favorite place on grandma's sofa.

"Fire away, Polly," said the young sultan, one evening, as his little
Scheherazade sat down in her low chair, after stirring up the fire till
the room was bright and cosy.

"I don't feel like stories to-night, Tom. I 've told all I know, and
can't make up any more," answered Polly, leaning her head on her hand
with a sorrowful look that Tom had never seen before. He watched her a
minute, and then asked, curiously, "What were you thinking about, just
now, when you sat staring at the fire, and getting soberer and soberer
every minute?

"I was thinking about Jimmy."

"Would you mind telling about him? You know, you said you would some
time; but don't, if you 'd rather not," said Tom, lowering his rough
voice respectfully.

"I like to talk about him; but there is n't much to tell," began Polly,
grateful for his interest. "Sitting here with you reminded me of the
way I used to sit with him when he was sick. We used to have such happy
times, and it 's so pleasant to think about them now."

"He was awfully good, was n't he?"

"No, he was n't; but he tried to be, and mother says that is half the
battle. We used to get tired of trying; but we kept making resolutions,
and working hard to keep 'em. I don't think I got on much; but Jimmy
did, and every one loved him."

"Did n't you ever squabble, as we do?"

"Yes, indeed, sometimes; but we could n't stay mad, and always made it
up again as soon as we could. Jimmy used to come round first, and say,
'All serene, Polly,' so kind and jolly, that I could n't help laughing
and being friends right away."

"Did he not know a lot?"

"Yes, I think he did, for he liked to study, and wanted to get on, so
he could help father. People used to call him a fine boy, and I felt so
proud to hear it; but they did n't know half how wise he was, because
he did n't show off a bit. I suppose sisters always are grand of their
brothers; but I don't believe many girls had as much right to be as I
had."

"Most girls don't care two pins about their brothers; so that shows you
don't know much about it."

"Well, they ought to, if they don't; and they would if the boys were as
kind to them as Jimmy was to me."

"Why, what did he do?"

"Loved me dearly, and was n't ashamed to show it," cried Polly, with a
sob in her voice, that made her answer very eloquent.

"What made him die, Polly?" asked Tom, soberly, after little pause.

"He got hurt coasting, last winter; but he never told which boy did
it, and he only lived a week. I helped take care of him; and he was so
patient, I used to wonder at him, for he was in dreadful pain all time.
He gave me his books, and his dog, and his speckled hens, and his big
knife, and said, 'Good-by, Polly,' and kissed me the last thing and then
O Jimmy! Jimmy! If he only could come back!"

Poor Polly's eyes had been getting fuller and fuller, lips trembling
more and more, as she went on; when she came to that "good-by," she
could n't get any further, but covered up her face, and cried as her
heart would break. Tom was full of sympathy, but did n't know how to
show it; so he sat shaking up the camphor bottle, and trying to think of
something proper and comfortable to say, when Fanny came to the rescue,
and cuddled Polly in her arms, with soothing little pats and whispers
and kisses, till the tears stopped, and Polly said, she "did n't mean
to, and would n't any more. I 've been thinking about my dear boy all
the evening, for Tom reminds me of him," she added, with a sigh.

"Me? How can I, when I ain't a bit like him?" cried Tom, amazed.

"But you are in some ways."

"Wish I was; but I can't be, for he was good, you know."

"So are you, when you choose. Has n't he been good and patient, and
don't we all like to pet him when he 's clever, Fan?"' said Polly, whose
heart was still aching for her brother, and ready for his sake to find
virtues even in tormenting Tom.

"Yes; I don't know the boy lately; but he 'll be as bad as ever when
he 's well," returned Fanny, who had n't much faith in sick-bed
repentances.

"Much you know about it," growled Tom, lying down again, for he had sat
bolt upright when Polly made the astounding declaration that he was
like the well-beloved Jimmy. That simple little history had made a deep
impression on Tom, and the tearful ending touched the tender spot
that most boys hide so carefully. It is very pleasant to be loved and
admired, very sweet to think we shall be missed and mourned when we die;
and Tom was seized with a sudden desire to imitate this boy, who had n't
done anything wonderful, yet was so dear to his sister, that she cried
for him a whole year after he was dead; so studious and clever, the
people called him "a fine fellow"; and so anxious to be good, that he
kept on trying, till he was better even than Polly, whom Tom privately
considered a model of virtue, as girls go.

"I just wish I had a sister like you," he broke out, all of a sudden.

"And I just wish I had a brother like Jim," cried Fanny, for she felt
the reproach in Tom's words, and knew she deserved it.

"I should n't think you 'd envy anybody, for you 've got one another,"
said Polly, with such a wistful look, that it suddenly set Tom and Fanny
to wondering why they did n't have better times together, and enjoy
themselves, as Polly and Jim did.

"Fan don't care for anybody but herself," said Tom.

"Tom is such a bear," retorted Fanny.

"I would n't say such things, for if anything should happen to either of
you, the other one would feel so sorry. Every cross word I ever said to
Jimmy comes back now, and makes me wish I had n't."

Two great tears rolled down Polly's cheeks, and were quietly wiped away;
but I think they watered that sweet sentiment, called fraternal love,
which till now had been neglected in the hearts of this brother and
sister. They did n't say anything then, or make any plans, or confess
any faults; but when they parted for the night, Fanny gave the wounded
head a gentle pat (Tom never would have forgiven her if she had kissed
him), and said, in a whisper, "I hope you 'll have a good sleep, Tommy,
dear."

And Tom nodded back at her, with a hearty "Same to you, Fan."

That was all; but it meant a good deal, for the voices were kind,
and the eyes met full of that affection which makes words of little
consequence. Polly saw it; and though she did n't know that she had
made the sunshine, it shone back upon her so pleasantly, that she fell
happily asleep, though her Jimmy was n't there to say "good-night."




CHAPTER V. SCRAPES


AFTER being unusually good, children are apt to turn short round and
refresh themselves by acting like Sancho. For a week after Tom's mishap,
the young folks were quite angelic, so much so that grandma said she was
afraid "something was going to happen to them." The dear old lady need
n't have felt anxious, for such excessive virtue does n't last long
enough to lead to translation, except with little prigs in the goody
story-books; and no sooner was Tom on his legs again, when the whole
party went astray, and much tribulation was the consequence.

It all began with "Polly's stupidity," as Fan said afterward. Just as
Polly ran down to meet Mr. Shaw one evening, and was helping him off
with his coat, the bell rang, and a fine bouquet of hothouse flowers was
left in Polly's hands, for she never could learn city ways, and opened
the door herself.

"Hey! what's this? My little Polly is beginning early, after all," said
Mr. Shaw, laughing, as he watched the girl's face dimple and flush, as
she smelt the lovely nosegay, and glanced at a note half hidden in the
heliotrope.

Now, if Polly had n't been "stupid," as Fan said, she would have had
her wits about her, and let it pass; but, you see, Polly was an honest
little soul and it never occurred to her that there was any need of
concealment, so she answered in her straightforward way, "Oh, they ain't
for me, sir; they are for Fan; from Mr. Frank, I guess. She 'll be so
pleased."

"That puppy sends her things of this sort, does he?" And Mr. Shaw looked
far from pleased as he pulled out the note, and coolly opened it.

Polly had her doubts about Fan's approval of that "sort of thing," but
dared not say a word, and stood thinking how she used to show her father
the funny valentines the boys sent her, and how they laughed over them
together. But Mr. Shaw did not laugh when he had read the sentimental
verses accompanying the bouquet, and his face quite scared Polly, as he
asked, angrily, "How long has this nonsense been going on?"

"Indeed, sir, I don't know. Fan does n't mean any harm. I wish I had n't
said anything!" stammered Polly, remembering the promise given to Fanny
the day of the concert. She had forgotten all about it and had become
accustomed to see the "big boys," as she called Mr. Frank and his
friends, with the girls on all occasions. Now, it suddenly occurred to
her that Mr. Shaw did n't like such amusements, and had forbidden Fan to
indulge in them. "Oh, dear! how mad she will be. Well, I can't help it.
Girls should n't have secrets from their fathers, then there would n't
be any fuss," thought Polly, as she watched Mr. Shaw twist up the pink
note and poke it back among the flowers which he took from her, saying,
shortly, "Send Fanny to me in the library."

"Now you 've done it, you stupid thing!" cried Fanny, both angry and
dismayed, when Polly delivered the message.

"Why, what else could I do?" asked Polly, much disturbed.

"Let him think the bouquet was for you; then there'd have been no
trouble."

"But that would have been doing a lie, which is most as bad as telling
one."

"Don't be a goose. You 've got me into a scrape, and you ought to help
me out."

"I will if I can; but I won't tell lies for anybody!" cried Polly,
getting excited.

"Nobody wants you to just hold, your tongue, and let me manage."

"Then I 'd better not go down," began Polly, when a stern voice from
below called, like Bluebeard, "Are you coming down?"

"Yes, sir," answered a meek voice; and Fanny clutched Polly, whispering,
"You must come; I 'm frightened out of my wits when he speaks like that.
Stand by me, Polly; there 's a dear."

"I will," whispered "sister Ann"; and down they went with fluttering
hearts.

Mr. Shaw stood on the rug, looking rather grim; the bouquet lay on the
table, and beside it a note, directed to "Frank Moore, Esq.," in a very
decided hand, with a fierce-looking flourish after the "Esq." Pointing
to this impressive epistle, Mr. Shaw said, knitting his black eyebrows
as he looked at Fanny, "I 'm going to put a stop to this nonsense
at once; and if I see any more of it, I 'll send you to school in a
Canadian convent."

This awful threat quite took Polly's breath away; but Fanny had heard it
before, and having a temper of her own, said, pertly, "I 'm sure I have
n't done anything so very dreadful. I can't help it if the boys send me
philopena presents, as they do to the other girls."

"There was nothing about philopenas in the note. But that 's not the
question. I forbid you to have anything to do with this Moore. He 's not
a boy, but a fast fellow, and I won't have him about. You knew this, and
yet disobeyed me."

"I hardly ever see him," began Fanny.

"Is that true?" asked Mr. Shaw, turning suddenly to Polly.

"Oh, please, sir, don't ask me. I promised I would n't that is Fanny
will tell you," cried Polly, quite red with distress at the predicament
she was in.

"No matter about your promise; tell me all you know of this absurd
affair. It will do Fanny more good than harm." And Mr. Shaw sat down
looking more amiable, for Polly's dismay touched him.

"May I?" she whispered to Fanny.

"I don't care," answered Fan, looking both angry and ashamed, as she
stood sullenly tying knots in her handkerchief.

So Polly told, with much reluctance and much questioning, all she knew
of the walks, the lunches, the meetings, and the notes. It was n't much,
and evidently less serious than Mr. Shaw expected; for, as he listened,
his eyebrows smoothed themselves out, and more than once his lips
twitched as if he wanted to laugh, for after all, it was rather comical
to see how the young people aped their elders, playing the new-fashioned
game, quite unconscious of its real beauty, power, and sacredness.

"Oh, please, sir, don't blame Fan much, for she truly is n't half as
silly as Trix and the other, girls. She would n't go sleigh-riding,
though Mr. Frank teased, and she wanted to ever so much. She 's sorry,
I know, and won't forget what you say any more, if you 'll forgive her
this once," cried Polly, very earnestly, when the foolish little story
was told.

"I don't see how I can help it, when you plead so well for her. Come
here, Fan, and mind this one thing; drop all this nonsense, and attend
to your books, or off you go; and Canada is no joke in winter time, let
me tell you."

As he spoke, Mr. Shaw stroked his sulky daughter's cheek, hoping to see
some sign of regret; but Fanny felt injured, and would n't show that
she was sorry, so she only said, pettishly, "I suppose I can have my
flowers, now the fuss is over."

"They are going straight back where they came from, with a line from me,
which will keep that puppy from ever sending you any more." Ringing
the bell, Mr. Shaw despatched the unfortunate posy, and then turned to
Polly, saying, kindly but gravely, "Set this silly child of mine a good
example and do your best for her, won't you?"

"Me? What can I do, sir?" asked Polly, looking ready, but quite ignorant
how to begin.

"Make her as like yourself as possible, my dear; nothing would please me
better. Now go, and let us hear no more of this folly."

They went without a word, and Mr. Shaw heard no more of the affair; but
poor Polly did, for Fan scolded her, till Polly thought seriously of
packing up and going home next day. I really have n't the heart to
relate the dreadful lectures she got, the snubs she suffered, or the
cold shoulders turned upon her for several days after this. Polly's
heart was full, but she told no one, and bore her trouble silently,
feeling her friend's ingratitude and injustice deeply.

Tom found out what the matter was, and sided with Polly, which
proceeding led to scrape number two.

"Where 's Fan?" asked the young gentleman, strolling into his sister's
room, where Polly lay on the sofa, trying to forget her troubles in an
interesting book.

"Down stairs, seeing company."

"Why did n't you go, too?"

"I don't like Trix, and I don't know her fine New York friends."

"Don't want to, neither, why don't you say?"

"Not polite."

"Who cares? I say, Polly, come and have some fun."

"I 'd rather read."

"That is n't polite."

Polly laughed, and turned a page. Tom whistled a minute, then sighed
deeply, and put his hand to his forehead, which the black plaster still
adorned.

"Does your head ache?" asked Polly.

"Awfully."

"Better lie down, then."

"Can't; I 'm fidgety, and want to be 'amoosed' as Pug says."

"Just wait till I finish my chapter, and then I 'll come," said pitiful
Polly.

"All right," returned the perjured boy, who had discovered that a broken
head was sometimes more useful than a whole one, and exulting in his
base stratagem, he roved about the room, till Fan's bureau arrested him.
It was covered with all sorts of finery, for she had dressed in a hurry,
and left everything topsy-turvy. A well-conducted boy would have let
things alone, or a moral brother would have put things to rights; being
neither, Tom rummaged to his hearts content, till Fan's drawers looked
as if some one had been making hay in them. He tried the effect of
ear-rings, ribbons, and collars; wound up the watch, though it was n't
time; burnt his inquisitive nose with smelling-salts; deluged his grimy
handkerchief with Fan's best cologne; anointed his curly crop with her
hair-oil; powdered his face with her violet-powder; and finished off
by pinning on a bunch of false ringlets, which Fanny tried, to keep a
profound secret. The ravages committed by this bad boy are beyond
the power of language to describe, as he revelled in the interesting
drawers, boxes, and cases, which held his sister's treasures.

When the curls had been put on, with much pricking of fingers, and a
blue ribbon added, la Fan, he surveyed himself with satisfaction, and
considered the effect so fine, that he was inspired to try a still
greater metamorphosis. The dress Fan had taken off lay on a chair,
and into it got Tom, chuckling with suppressed laughter, for Polly
was absorbed, and the bed-curtains hid his iniquity. Fan's best velvet
jacket and hat, ermine muff, and a sofa-pillow for pannier, finished off
the costume, and tripping along with elbows out, Tom appeared before
the amazed Polly just as the chapter ended. She enjoyed the joke so
heartily, that Tom forgot consequences, and proposed going down into the
parlor to surprise, the girls.

"Goodness, no! Fanny never would forgive us if you showed her curls and
things to those people. There are gentlemen among them, and it would n't
be proper," said Polly, alarmed at the idea.

"All the more fun. Fan has n't treated you well, and it will serve her
right if you introduce me as your dear friend, Miss Shaw. Come on, it
will be a jolly lark."

"I would n't for the world; it would be so mean. Take 'em off, Tom, and
I 'll play anything else you like."

"I ain't going to dress up for nothing; I look so lovely, someone must
admire me. Take me down, Polly, and see if they don't call me 'a sweet
creature.'"

Tom looked so unutterably ridiculous as he tossed his curls and pranced,
that Polly went off into another gale of merriment; but even while she
laughed, she resolved not to let him mortify his sister.

"Now, then, get out of the way if you won't come; I 'm going down," said
Tom.

"No, you 're not."

"How will you help it, Miss Prim?"

"So." And Polly locked the door, put the key in her pocket, and nodded
at him defiantly.

Tom was a pepper-pot as to temper, and anything like opposition always
had a bad effect. Forgetting his costume, he strode up to Polly, saying,
with a threatening wag of the head, "None of that. I won't stand it."

"Promise not to plague Fan, and I 'll let you out."

"Won't promise anything. Give me that key, or I 'll make you."

"Now, Tom, don't be savage. I only want to keep you out of a scrape, for
Fan will be raging if you go. Take off her things, and I 'll give up."

Tom vouchsafed no reply, but marched to the other door, which was fast,
as Polly knew, looked out of the three-story window, and finding no
escape possible, came back with a wrathful face. "Will you give me that
key?"

"No, I won't," said Polly, valiantly.

"I 'm stronger than you are; so you 'd better hand over."

"I know you are; but it 's cowardly for a great boy like you to rob a
girl."

"I don't want to hurt you; but, by George! I won't stand this!"

Tom paused as Polly spoke, evidently ashamed of himself; but his temper
was up, and he would n't give in. If Polly had cried a little just
here, he would have yielded; unfortunately she giggled, for Tom's fierce
attitude was such a funny contrast to his dress that she could n't help
it. That settled the matter. No girl that ever lived should giggle at
him, much less lock him up like a small child. Without a word, he made
a grab at Polly's arm, for the hand holding the key was still in her,
pocket. With her other hand she clutched her frock, and for a minute
held on stoutly. But Tom's strong fingers were irresistible; rip went
the pocket, out came the hand, and with a cry of pain from Polly, the
key fell on the floor.

"It 's your own fault if you 're hurt. I did n't mean to," muttered Tom,
as he hastily departed, leaving Polly to groan over her sprained wrist.
He went down, but not into the parlor, for somehow the joke seemed to
have lost its relish; so he made the girls in the kitchen laugh, and
then crept up the back way, hoping to make it all right with Polly. But
she had gone to grandma's room, for, though the old lady was out, it
seemed a refuge. He had just time to get things in order, when Fanny
came up, crosser than ever; for Trix had been telling her of all sorts
of fun in which she might have had a share, if Polly had held her
tongue.

"Where is she?" asked Fan, wishing to vent her vexation on her friend.

"Moping in her room, I suppose," replied Tom, who was discovered reading
studiously.

Now, while this had been happening, Maud had been getting into hot
water also; for when her maid left her, to see a friend below, Miss Maud
paraded into Polly's room, and solaced herself with mischief. In an evil
hour Polly had let her play boat in her big trunk, which stood empty.
Since then Polly had stored some of her most private treasures in the
upper tray, so that she might feel sure they were safe from all eyes.
She had forgotten to lock the trunk, and when Maud raised the lid to
begin her voyage, several objects of interest met her eyes. She was deep
in her researches when Fan came in and looked over her shoulder, feeling
too cross with Polly to chide Maud.

As Polly had no money for presents, she had exerted her ingenuity
to devise all sorts of gifts, hoping by quantity to atone for any
shortcomings in quality. Some of her attempts were successful, others
were failures; but she kept them all, fine or funny, knowing the
children at home would enjoy anything new. Some of Maud's cast-off toys
had been neatly mended for Kitty; some of Fan's old ribbons and laces
were converted into dolls' finery; and Tom's little figures, whittled
out of wood in idle minutes, were laid away to show Will what could be
done with a knife.

"What rubbish!" said Fanny.

"Queer girl, is n't she?" added Tom, who had followed to see what was
going on.

"Don't you laugh at Polly's things. She makes nicer dolls than you, Fan;
and she can wite and dwar ever so much better than Tom," cried Maud.
"How do you know? I never saw her draw," said Tom.

"Here 's a book with lots of pictures in it. I can't wead the witing;
but the pictures are so funny."

Eager to display her friend's accomplishments, Maud pulled out a fat
little book, marked "Polly's Journal," and spread it in her lap.

"Only the pictures; no harm in taking a look at 'em," said Tom.

"Just one peep," answered Fanny; and the next minute both were laughing
at a droll sketch of Tom in the gutter, with the big dog howling over
him, and the velocipede running away. Very rough and faulty, but so
funny, that it was evident Polly's sense of humor was strong. A few
pages farther back came Fanny and Mr. Frank, caricatured; then grandma,
carefully done; Tom reciting his battle-piece; Mr. Shaw and Polly in
the park; Maud being borne away by Katy; and all the school-girls turned
into ridicule with an unsparing hand.

"Sly little puss, to make fun of us behind our backs," said Fan, rather
nettled by Polly's quiet retaliation for many slights from herself and
friends.

"She does draw well," said Tom, looking critically at the sketch of a
boy with a pleasant face, round whom Polly had drawn rays like the sun,
and under which was written, "My dear Jimmy."

"You would n't admire her, if you knew what she wrote here about you,"
said Fanny, whose eyes had strayed to the written page opposite, and
lingered there long enough to read something that excited her curiosity.

"What is it?" asked Tom, forgetting his honorable resolves for a minute.

"She says, 'I try to like Tom, and when he is pleasant we do very well;
but he don't stay so long. He gets cross and rough, and disrespectful to
his father and mother, and plagues us girls, and is so horrid I almost
hate him. It 's very wrong, but I can't help it.' How do you like that?"
asked Fanny.

"Go ahead, and see how she comes down on you, ma'am," retorted Tom, who
had read on a bit.

"Does she?" And Fanny continued, rapidly: "As for Fan, I don't think
we can be friends any more; for she told her father a lie, and won't
forgive me for not doing so too. I used to think her a very fine girl;
but I don't now. If she would be as she was when I first knew her, I
should love her just the same; but she is n't kind to me; and though she
is always talking about politeness, I don't think it is polite to treat
company as she does me. She thinks I am odd and countrified, and I dare
say I am; but I should n't laugh at a girl's clothes because she was
poor, or keep her out of the way because she did n't do just as other
girls do here. I see her make fun of me, and I can't feel as I did; and
I 'd go home, only it would seem ungrateful to Mr. Shaw and grandma, and
I do love them dearly."

"I say, Fan, you 've got it now. Shut the book and come away," cried
Tom, enjoying this broadside immensely, but feeling guilty, as well he
might.

"Just one bit more," whispered Fanny, turning on a page or two, and
stopping at a leaf that was blurred here and there as if tears had
dropped on it.

"Sunday morning, early. Nobody is up to spoil my quiet time, and I must
write my journal, for I 've been so bad lately, I could n't bear to do
it. I 'm glad my visit is most done, for things worry me here, and there
is n't any one to help me get right when I get wrong. I used to envy
Fanny; but I don't now, for her father and mother don't take care of her
as mine do of me. She is afraid of her father, and makes her mother do
as she likes. I 'm glad I came though, for I see money don't give
people everything; but I 'd like a little all the same, for it is so
comfortable to buy nice things. I read over my journal just now, and
I 'm afraid it 's not a good one; for I have said all sorts of things
about the people here, and it is n't kind. I should tear it out, only I
promised to keep my diary, and I want to talk over things that puzzle me
with mother. I see now that it is my fault a good deal; for I have n't
been half as patient, and pleasant as I ought to be. I will truly try
for the rest of the time, and be as good and grateful as I can; for I
want them to like me, though I 'm only 'an old-fashioned country girl.'"

That last sentence made Fanny shut the book, with a face full of
self-reproach; for she had said those words herself, in a fit of
petulance, and Polly had made no answer, though her eyes filled and her
cheeks burned. Fan opened her lips to say something, but not a sound
followed, for there stood Polly looking at them with an expression they
had never seen before.

"What are you doing with my things?" she demanded, in a low tone, while
her eyes kindled and her color changed.

"Maud showed us a book she found, and we were just looking at the
pictures," began Fanny, dropping it as if it burnt her fingers.

"And reading my journal, and laughing at my presents, and then putting
the blame on Maud. It 's the meanest thing I ever saw; and I 'll never
forgive you as long as I live!"

Polly said, this all in one indignant breath, and then as if afraid
of saying too much, ran out of the room with such a look of mingled
contempt, grief, and anger, that the three culprits stood dumb with
shame. Tom had n't even a whistle at his command; Maud was so scared at
gentle Polly's outbreak, that she sat as still as a mouse; while
Fanny, conscience stricken, laid back the poor little presents with a
respectful hand, for somehow the thought of Polly's poverty came over
her as it never had done before; and these odds and ends, so carefully
treasured up for those at home, touched Fanny, and grew beautiful in her
eyes. As she laid by the little book, the confessions in it reproached
her more sharply that any words Polly could have spoken; for she had
laughed at her friend, had slighted her sometimes, and been unforgiving
for an innocent offence. That last page, where Polly took the blame on
herself, and promised to "truly try" to be more kind and patient, went
to Fanny's heart, melting all the coldness away, and she could only lay
her head on the trunk, sobbing, "It was n't Polly's fault; it was all
mine."

Tom, still red with shame at being caught in such a scrape, left Fanny
to her tears, and went manfully away to find the injured Polly, and
confess his manifold transgressions. But Polly could n't be found. He
searched high and low in every room, yet no sign of the girt appeared,
and Tom began to get anxious. "She can't have run away home, can she?"
he said to himself, as he paused before the hat-tree. There was the
little round hat, and Tom gave it a remorseful smooth, remembering how
many times he had tweaked it half off, or poked it over poor Polly's
eyes. "Maybe she 's gone down to the office, to tell pa. 'T is n't a bit
like her, though. Anyway, I 'll take a look round the corner."

Eager to get his boots, Tom pulled open the door of a dark closet under
the stairs, and nearly tumbled over backward with surprise; for there,
on the floor, with her head pillowed on a pair of rubbers, lay Polly
in an attitude of despair. This mournful spectacle sent Tom's penitent
speech straight out of his head, and with an astonished "Hullo!" he
stood and stared in impressive silence. Polly was n't crying, and lay
so still, that Tom began to think she might be in a fit or a faint,
and bent anxiously down to inspect the pathetic bunch. A glimpse of wet
eyelashes, a round cheek redder than usual, and lips parted by quick,
breathing, relieved his mind upon that point; so, taking courage, he sat
down on the boot-jack, and begged pardon like a man.

Now, Polly was very angry, and I think she had a right to be; but she
was not resentful, and after the first flash was over, she soon began to
feel better about it. It was n't easy to forgive; but, as she listened
to Tom's honest voice, getting gruff with remorse now and then, she
could n't harden her heart against him, or refuse to make up when he so
frankly owned that it "was confounded mean to read her book that way."
She liked his coming and begging pardon at once; it was a handsome thing
to do; she appreciated it, and forgave him in her heart some time before
she did with her lips; for, to tell the truth, Polly had a spice of
girlish malice, and rather liked to see domineering Tom eat humble-pie,
just enough to do him good, you know. She felt that atonement was
proper, and considered it no more than just that Fan should drench a
handkerchief or two with repentant tears, and that Tom should sit on
a very uncomfortable seat and call himself hard names for five or ten
minutes before she relented.

"Come, now, do say a word to a fellow. I 'm getting the worst of it,
anyway; for there 's Fan, crying her eyes out upstairs, and here are
you stowed away in a dark closet as dumb as a fish, and nobody but me to
bring you both round. I 'd have cut over to the Smythes and got ma home
to fix things, only it looked like backing out of the scrape; so I did
n't," said Tom, as a last appeal.

Polly was glad to hear that Fan was crying. It would do her good; but
she could n't help softening to Tom, who did seem in a predicament
between two weeping damsels. A little smile began to dimple the cheek
that was n't hidden, and then a hand came slowly out from under the
curly head, and was stretched toward him silently. Tom was just going
to give it a hearty shake, when he saw a red mark on the wrist, and knew
what made it. His face changed, and he took the chubby hand so gently,
that Polly peeped to see what it meant.

"Will you forgive that, too?" he asked, in a whisper, stroking the red
wrist.

"Yes, it don't hurt much now." And Polly drew her hand away, sorry he
had seen it.

"I was a beast, that 's what I was!" said Tom, in a tone of great
disgust. And just at that awkward minute down tumbled his father's
old beaver over his head and face, putting a comical quencher on his
self-reproaches. Of course, neither could help laughing at that; and
when he emerged, Polly was sitting up, looking as much better for her
shower as he did for his momentary eclipse.

"Fan feels dreadfully. Will you kiss and be friends, if I trot her
down?" asked Tom, remembering his fellow-sinner.

"I 'll go to her." And Polly whisked out of the closet as suddenly as
she had whisked in, leaving Tom sitting on the boot-jack, with a radiant
countenance.

How the girls made it up no one ever knew. But after much talking and
crying, kissing and laughing, the breach was healed, and peace declared.
A slight haze still lingered in the air after the storm, for Fanny
was very humble and tender that evening; Tom a trifle pensive, but
distressingly polite, and Polly magnanimously friendly to every one; for
generous natures like to forgive, and Polly enjoyed the petting after
the insult, like a very human girl.

As she was brushing her hair at bedtime there came a tap on her door
and, opening it, she beheld nothing but a tall black bottle, with a
strip of red flannel tied round it like a cravat, and a cocked-hat note
on the cork. Inside were these lines, written in a sprawling hand with
very black ink:

DEAR POLLY, Opydilldock is first-rate for sprains. You put a lot on the
flannel and do up your wrist, and I guess it will be all right in the
morning. Will you come a sleigh-ride tomorrow? I 'm awful sorry I hurt
you.

TOM




CHAPTER VI. GRANDMA


"WHERE 'S Polly?" asked Fan one snowy afternoon, as she came into the
dining-room where Tom was reposing on the sofa with his boots in the
air, absorbed in one of those delightful books in which boys are cast
away on desert islands, where every known fruit, vegetable and flower
is in its prime all the year round; or, lost in boundless forests, where
the young heroes have thrilling adventures, kill impossible beasts, and,
when the author's invention gives out, suddenly find their way home,
laden with tiger skins, tame buffaloes and other pleasing trophies of
their prowess.

"Dun no," was Tom's brief reply, for he was just escaping from an
alligator of the largest size.

"Do put down that stupid book, and let 's do something," said Fanny,
after a listless stroll round the room.

"Hi, they 've got him!" was the only answer vouchsafed by the absorbed
reader.

"Where 's Polly?" asked Maud, joining the party with her hands full of
paper dolls all suffering for ball-dresses.

"Do get along, and don't bother me," cried Tom exasperated at the
interruption.

"Then tell us where she is. I 'm sure you know, for she was down here a
little while ago," said Fanny.

"Up in grandma's room, maybe."

"Provoking thing! you knew it all the time, and did n't tell, just to
plague us," scolded Maud.

But Tom was now under water stabbing his alligator, and took no notice
of the indignant departure of the young ladies.

"Polly 's always poking up in grandma's room. I don't see what fun there
is in it," said Fanny as they went up stairs.

"Polly 's a verwy queer girl, and gwandma pets her a gweat deal more
than she does me," observed Maud, with an injured air.

"Let 's peek and see what they are doing," whispered Fan, pausing at the
half-open door.

Grandma was sitting before a quaint old cabinet, the doors of which
stood wide open, showing glimpses of the faded relics treasured there.
On a stool, at the old lady's feet, sat Polly, looking up with intent
face and eager eyes, quite absorbed in the history of a high-heeled
brocade shoe which lay in her lap.

"Well, my dear," grandma was saying, "she had it on the very day that
Uncle Joe came in as she sat at work, and said, 'Dolly, we must be
married at once.' 'Very well, Joe,' says Aunt Dolly, and down she went
to the parlor, where the minister was waiting, never stopping to change
the dimity dress she wore, and was actually married with her scissors
and pin-ball at her side, and her thimble on. That was in war times,
1812, my dear, and Uncle Joe was in the army, so he had to go, and he
took that very little pin-ball with him. Here it is with the mark of
a bullet through it, for he always said his Dolly's cushion saved his
life."

"How interesting that is!" cried Polly, as she examined the faded
cushion with the hole in it.

"Why, grandma, you never told me that story," said Fanny, hurrying in,
finding the prospect was a pleasant one for a stormy afternoon.

"You never asked me to tell you anything, my dear, so I kept my old
stories to myself," answered grandma, quietly.

"Tell some now, please. May we stay and see the funny things?" said Fan
and Maud, eyeing the open cabinet with interest.

"If Polly likes; she is my company, and I am trying to entertain
her, for I love to have her come," said grandma, with her old-time
politeness.

"Oh, yes! do let them stay and hear the stories. I 've often told them
what good times we have up here, and teased them to come, but they think
it 's too quiet. Now, sit down, girls, and let grandma go on. You see I
pick out something in the cabinet that looks interesting, and then
she tells me about it," said Polly, eager to include the girls in her
pleasures, and glad to get them interested in grandma's reminiscences,
for Polly knew how happy it made the lonely old lady to live over her
past, and to have the children round her.

"Here are three drawers that have not been opened yet; each take one,
and choose something from it for me to tell about," said Madam, quite
excited at the unusual interest in her treasures.

So the girls each opened a drawer and turned over the contents till they
found something they wanted to know about. Maud was ready first, and
holding up an oddly shaped linen bag, with a big blue F embroidered on
it, demanded her story. Grandma smiled as she smoothed the old thing
tenderly, and began her story with evident pleasure.

"My sister Nelly and I went to visit an aunt of ours, when we were
little girls, but we did n't have a very good time, for she was
extremely strict. One afternoon, when she had gone out to tea, and old
Debby, the maid, was asleep in her room, we sat on the doorstep, feeling
homesick, and ready for any thing to amuse us.

"'What shall we do?' said Nelly.

"Just as she spoke, a ripe plum dropped bounce on the grass before us,
as if answering her question. It was all the plum's fault, for if it
had n't fallen at that minute, I never should have had the thought which
popped into my mischievous mind.

"'Let 's have as many as we want, and plague Aunt Betsey, to pay her for
being so cross,' I said, giving Nelly half the great purple plum.

"'It would be dreadful naughty,' began Nelly, 'but I guess we will,' she
added, as the sweet mouthful slipped down her throat.

"'Debby 's asleep. Come on, then, and help me shake,' I said, getting
up, eager for the fun.

"We shook and shook till we got red in the face, but not one dropped,
for the tree was large, and our little arms were not strong enough
to stir the boughs. Then we threw stones, but only one green and one
half-ripe one came down, and my last stone broke the shed window, so
there was an end of that.

"'It 's as provoking as Aunt Betsey herself,' said Nelly, as we sat
down, out of breath.

"'I wish the wind would come and blow 'em down for us,' panted I,
staring up at the plums with longing eyes.

"'If wishing would do any good, I should wish 'em in my lap at once,'
added Nelly.

"'You might as well wish 'em in your mouth and done with it, if you are
too lazy to pick 'em up. If the ladder was n't too heavy we could try
that,' said I, determined to have them.

"'You know we can't stir it, so what is the use of talking about it? You
proposed getting the plums, now let 's see you do it,' answered Nelly,
rather crossly, for she had bitten the green plum, and it puckered her
mouth.

"'Wait a minute, and you will see me do it,' cried I, as a new thought
came into my naughty head.

"'What are you taking your shoes and socks off for? You can't climb the
tree, Fan.'" 'Don't ask questions, but be ready to pick 'em up when they
fall, Miss Lazybones.' "With this mysterious speech I pattered into
the house bare-footed and full of my plan. Up stairs I went to a window
opening on the shed roof. Out I got, and creeping carefully along till
I came near the tree, I stood up, and suddenly crowed like the little
rooster. Nelly looked up, and stared, and laughed, and clapped her hands
when she saw what I was going to do.

"'I 'm afraid you 'll slip and get hurt.'" 'Don't care if I do; I 'll
have those plums if I break my neck doing it,' and half sliding, half
walking I went down the sloping roof, till the boughs of the tree were
within my reach.

"Hurrah!" cried Nelly, dancing down below, as my first shake sent a
dozen plums rattling round her.

"'Hurrah!" cried I, letting go one branch and trying to reach another.
But as I did so my foot slipped, I tried to catch something to hold by,
but found nothing, and with a cry, down I fell, like a very big plum on
the grass below.

"Fortunately the shed was low, the grass was thick and the tree broke my
fall, but I got a bad bump and a terrible shaking. Nelly thought I was
killed, and began to cry with her mouth full. But I picked myself up in
a minute, for I was used to such tumbles; and did n't mind the pain half
as much as the loss of the plums.

"'Hush! Debby will hear and spoil all the fun. I said I 'd get 'em and I
have. See what lots have come down with me.'" So there had, for my fall
shook the tree almost as much as it did me, and the green and purple
fruit lay all about us.

"By the time the bump on my forehead had swelled as big as a nut, our
aprons were half full, and we sat down to enjoy ourselves. But we did
n't. O dear, no! for many of the plums were not ripe, some were hurt by
the birds, some crushed in falling, and many as hard as stones. Nelly
got stung by a wasp, my head began to ache, and we sat looking at one
another rather dismally, when Nelly had a bright idea.

"'Let 's cook 'em, then they 'll be good, and we can put some away in
our little pails for to-morrow.'" 'That will be splendid! There 's a
fire in the kitchen, Debby always leaves the kettle on, and we can use
her saucepan, and I know where the sugar is, and we 'll have a grand
time.' "In we went, and fell to work very quietly. It was a large,
open fire-place, with the coals nicely covered up, and the big kettle
simmering on the hook. We raked open the fire, put on the saucepan, and
in it the best of our plums, with water enough to spoil them. But we did
n't know that, and felt very important as we sat waiting for it to boil,
each armed with a big spoon, while the sugar box stood between us ready
to be used.

"How slow they were, to be sure! I never knew such obstinate things, for
they would n't soften, though they danced about in the boiling water,
and bobbed against the cover as if they were doing their best.

"The sun began to get low, we were afraid Debby would come down, and
still those dreadful plums would n't look like sauce. At last they began
to burst, the water got a lovely purple, we put lots of sugar in, and
kept tasting till our aprons and faces were red, and our lips burnt with
the hot spoons.

"'There 's too much juice,' said Nelly, shaking her head wisely. 'It
ought to be thick and nice like mamma's.' "'I 'll pour off some of the
juice, and we can drink it,' said I, feeling that I 'd made a mistake in
my cooking.

"So Nelly got a bowl, and I got a towel and lifted the big saucepan
carefully off. It was heavy and hot, and I was a little afraid of it,
but did n't like to say so. Just as I began to pour, Debby suddenly
called from the top of the stairs, 'Children, what under the sun are you
doing?' It startled us both. Nelly dropped the bowl and ran. I dropped
the saucepan and did n't run, for a part of the hot juice splashed upon
my bare feet, and ankles, and made me scream with dreadful pain.

"Down rushed Debby to find me dancing about the kitchen with a great
bump on my forehead, a big spoon in my hand, and a pair of bright purple
feet. The plums were lying all over the hearth, the saucepan in the
middle of the room, the basin was broken, and the sugar swimming about
as if the bowl had turned itself over trying to sweeten our mess for us.

"Debby was very good to me, for she never stopped to scold, but laid
me down on the old sofa, and bound up my poor little feet with oil and
cotton wool. Nelly, seeing me lie white and weak, thought I was dying,
and went over to the neighbor's for Aunt Betsey, and burst in upon the
old ladies sitting primly at, their tea, crying, distractedly, 'Oh, Aunt
Betsey, come quick! for the saucepan fell off the shed, and Fan's feet
are all boiled purple!' Nobody laughed at this funny message, and Aunt
Betsey ran all the way home with a muffin in her hand and her ball in
her pocket, though the knitting was left behind.

"I suffered a great deal, but I was n't sorry afterward, for I learned
to love Aunt Betsey, who nursed me tenderly, and seemed to forget her
strict ways in her anxiety for me.

"This bag was made for my special comfort, and hung on the sofa where I
lay all those weary days. Aunt kept it full of pretty patchwork or, what
I liked better, ginger-nuts, and peppermint drops, to amuse me, though
she did n't approve of cosseting children up, any more than I do now."

"I like that vewy well, and I wish I could have been there," was Maud's
condescending remark, as she put back the little bag, after a careful
peep inside, as if she hoped to find an ancient ginger-nut, or a
well-preserved peppermint drop still lingering in some corner.

"We had plums enough that autumn, but did n't seem to care much about
them, after all, for our prank became a household joke, and, for years,
we never saw the fruit, but Nelly would look at me with a funny face,
and whisper, 'Purple stockings, Fan!'"

"Thank you, ma'am," said Polly. "Now, Fan, your turn next."

"Well, I 've a bundle of old letters, and I 'd like to know if there
is any story about them," answered Fanny, hoping some romance might be
forthcoming.

Grandma turned over the little packet tied up with a faded pink ribbon;
a dozen yellow notes written on rough, thick paper, with red wafers
still adhering to the folds, showing plainly that they were written
before the day of initial note-paper and self-sealing envelopes.

"They are not love-letters, deary, but notes from my mates after I left
Miss Cotton's boarding-school. I don't think there is any story about
them," and grandma turned them over with spectacles before the dim eyes,
so young and bright when they first read the very same notes.

Fanny was about to say, "I 'll choose again," when grandma began to
laugh so heartily that the girls felt sure she had caught some merry old
memory which would amuse them.

"Bless my heart, I have n't thought of that frolic this forty years.
Poor, dear, giddy Sally Pomroy, and she 's a great-grandmother now!"
cried the old lady, after reading one of the notes, and clearing the
mist off her glasses.

"Now, please tell about her; I know it 's something funny to make you
laugh so," said Polly and Fan together.

"Well, it was droll, and I 'm glad I remembered it for it 's just the
story to tell you young things.

"It was years ago," began grandma, briskly, "and teachers were very much
stricter than they are now. The girls at Miss Cotton's were not allowed
lights in their rooms after nine o'clock, never went out alone, and were
expected to behave like models of propriety from morning till night.

"As you may imagine, ten young girls, full of spirits and fun, found
these rules hard to keep, and made up for good behavior in public by all
sorts of frolics in private.

"Miss Cotton and her brother sat in the back parlor after school was
over, and the young ladies were sent to bed. Mr. John was very deaf,
and Miss Priscilla very near-sighted, two convenient afflictions for the
girls on some occasions, but once they proved quite the reverse, as you
shall hear.

"We had been very prim for a week, and our bottled up spirits could no
longer be contained; so we planed a revel after our own hearts, and set
our wits to work to execute it.

"The first obstacle was surmounted in this way. As none of us could get
out alone, we resolved to lower Sally from the window, for she was light
and small, and very smart.

"With our combined pocket-money she was to buy nuts and candy, cake and
fruit, pie, and a candle, so that we might have a light, after Betsey
took ours away as usual. We were to darken the window of the inner
chamber, set a watch in the little entry, light up, and then for a good
time.

"At eight o'clock on the appointed evening, several of us professed
great weariness, and went to our room, leaving the rest sewing
virtuously with Miss Cotton, who read Hannah More's Sacred Dramas aloud,
in a way that fitted the listeners for bed as well as a dose of opium
would have done.

"I am sorry to say I was one of the ringleaders; and as soon as we got
up stairs, produced the rope provided for the purpose, and invited Sally
to be lowered. It was an old-fashioned house, sloping down behind, and
the closet window chosen by us was not many feet from the ground.

"It was a summer evening, so that at eight o'clock it was still light;
but we were not afraid of being seen, for the street was a lonely one,
and our only neighbors two old ladies, who put down their curtains at
sunset, and never looked out till morning.

"Sally had been bribed by promises of as many 'goodies' as she could
eat, and being a regular madcap, she was ready for anything.

"Tying the rope round her waist she crept out, and we let her safely
down, sent a big basket after her, and saw her slip round the corner in
my big sun bonnet and another girl's shawl, so that she should not be
recognized.

"Then we put our night-gowns over our dresses, and were laid peacefully
in bed when Betsey came up, earlier than usual; for it was evident that
Miss Cotton felt a little suspicious at our sudden weariness.

"For half an hour we lay laughing and whispering, as we waited for the
signal from Sally. At last we heard a cricket chirp shrilly under the
window, and flying up, saw a little figure below in the twilight.

"'O, quick! quick!' cried Sally, panting with haste. 'Draw up the basket
and then get me in, for I saw Mr. Cotton in the market, and ran all
the way home, so that I might get in before he came.' Up came the heavy
basket, bumping and scraping on the way, and smelling, O, so nice!
Down went the rope, and with a long pull, a strong pull, and a pull all
together, we hoisted poor Sally half-way up to the window, when, sad to
tell, the rope slipped and down she fell, only being saved from broken
bones by the hay-cock under the window.

"'He 's coming! he 's coming! O pull me up, for mercy sake!' cried
Sally, scrambling to her feet unhurt, but a good deal shaken.

"We saw a dark figure approaching, and dragged her in with more bumping
and scraping, and embraced her with rapture, for we had just escaped
being detected by Mr. John, whose eyes were as sharp as his ears were
dull.

"We heard the front-door shut, then a murmur of voices, and then
Betsey's heavy step coming up stairs.

"Under the bed went the basket, and into the beds went the conspirators,
and nothing could have been more decorous than the appearance of the
room when Betsey popped her head in.

"'Master's an old fidget to send me travelling up again, just because
he fancied he saw something amiss at the window. Nothing but a curtain
flapping, or a shadder, for the poor dears is sleeping like lambs.' We
heard her say this to herself, and a general titter agitated the white
coverlets as she departed.

"Sally was in high feather at the success of her exploit, and danced
about like an elf, as she put her night-gown on over her frock, braided
her hair in funny little tails all over her head, and fastened the great
red pin-cushion on her bosom for a breast-pin in honor of the feast.

"The other girls went to their rooms as agreed upon, and all was soon
dark and still up stairs, while Miss Cotton began to enjoy herself
below, as she always did when 'her young charges' were safely disposed
of.

"Then ghosts began to walk, and the mice scuttled back to their holes
in alarm, for white figures glided from room to room, till all were
assembled in the little chamber.

"The watch was set at the entry door, the signal agreed upon, the candle
lighted, and the feast spread forth upon a newspaper on the bed, with
the coverlet arranged so that it could be whisked over the refreshments
at a moment's notice.

"How good everything was, to be sure! I don't think I 've eaten any
pies since that had such a delicious flavor as those broken ones, eaten
hastily, in that little oven of a room, with Sally making jokes and the
others enjoying stolen sweets with true girlish relish. Of course it was
very wicked, but I must tell the truth.

"We were just beginning on the cake when the loud scratching of a rat
disturbed us.

"'The signal! fly! run! hide! Hush, don't laugh!' cried several voices,
and we scuttled into bed as rapidly and noiselessly as possible, with
our mouths and hands full.

"A long pause, broken by more scratching; but as no one came, we decided
on sending to inquire what it meant. I went and found Mary, the picket
guard half asleep, and longing for her share of the feast.

"'It was a real rat; I 've not made a sound. Do go and finish; I 'm
tired of this,' said Mary, slapping away at the mosquitoes.

"Back I hurried with the good news. Every one flew up, briskly. We
lighted the candle again, and returned to our revel. The refreshments
were somewhat injured by Sally's bouncing in among them, bit we did n't
care, and soon finished the cake.

"'Now let 's have the nuts,' I said, groping for the paper bag.

"'They are almonds and peanuts, so we can crack them with our teeth. Be
sure you get the bag by the right end,' said Sally.

"'I know what I 'm about,' and to show her that it was all right, I
gave the bag a little shake, when out flew the nuts, rattling like a
hail-storm all over the uncarpeted floor.

"'Now you 've done it,' cried Sally, as Mary scratched like a mad rat,
and a door creaked below, for Miss Cotton was not deaf.

"Such a flurry as we were in! Out went the candle, and each one rushed
away with as much of the feast as she could seize in her haste. Sally
dived into her bed, recklessly demolishing the last pie, and scattering
the candy far and wide.

"Poor Mary was nearly caught for Miss Cotton was quicker than Betsey,
and our guard had to run for her life.

"Our room was the first, and was in good order, though the two flushed
faces on the pillows were rather suspicious. Miss Cotton stood staring
about her, looking so funny, without her cap, that my bedfellow would
have gone off in a fit of laughter, if I had not pinched her warningly.

"'Young ladies, what is this unseemly noise?' No answer from us but
a faint snore. Miss Cotton marched into the next room, put the same
question and received the same reply.

"In the third chamber lay Sally, and we trembled as the old lady went
in. Sitting up, we peeped and listened breathlessly.

"'Sarah, I command you to tell me what this all means?' But Sally only
sighed in her sleep, and muttered, wickedly, 'Ma, take me home. I 'm
starved at Cotton's.' 'Mercy on me! is the child going to have a fever?'
cried the old lady, who did not observe the tell tale nuts at her feet.

"'So dull, so strict! O take me home!' moaned Sally, tossing her arms
and gurgling, like a naughty little gypsy.

"That last bit of acting upset the whole concern, for as she tossed her
arms she showed the big red cushion on her breast. Near-sighted as she
was, that ridiculous object could not escape Miss Cotton, neither did
the orange that rolled out from the pillow, nor the boots appearing at
the foot of the bed.

"With sudden energy the old lady plucked off the cover, and there lay
Sally with her hair dressed, la Topsy, her absurd breast-pin and her
dusty boots, among papers of candy, bits of pie and cake, oranges and
apples, and a candle upside down burning a hole in the sheet.

"At the sound of Miss Cotton's horrified exclamation Sally woke up, and
began laughing so merrily that none of us could resist following her
example, and the rooms rang with merriment far many minutes. I really
don't know when we should have stopped if Sally had not got choked with
the nut she had in her mouth, and so frightened us nearly out of our
wits."

"What became of the things, and how were you punished?" asked Fan, in
the middle of her laughter.

"The remains of the feast went to the pig, and we were kept on bread and
water for three days."

"Did that cure you?"

"Oh, dear, no! we had half a dozen other frolics that very summer; and
although I cannot help laughing at the remembrance of this, you must not
think, child, that I approve of such conduct, or excuse it. No, no, my
dear, far from it."

"I call that a tip-top story! Drive on, grandma, and tell one about
boys," broke in a new voice, and there was Tom astride of a chair
listening and laughing with all his might, for his book had come to an
end, and he had joined the party unobserved.

"Wait for your turn, Tommy. Now, Polly, dear, what will you have?"
said grandma, looking, so lively and happy, that it was very evident
"reminiscing" did her good.

"Let mine come last, and tell one for Tom next," said Polly, looking
round, and beckoning him nearer.

He came and sat himself cross-legged on the floor, before the lower
drawer of the cabinet, which grandma opened for him, saying, with a
benign stroke of the curly head, "There, dear, that 's where I keep the
little memorials of my brother Jack. Poor lad, he was lost at sea, you
know. Well, choose anything you like, and I 'll try to remember a story
about it."

Tom made a rapid rummage, and fished up a little broken pistol.

"There, that 's the chap for me! Wish it was n't spoilt, then we 'd have
fun popping away at the cats in the yard. Now, then, grandma."

"I remember one of Jack's pranks, when that was used with great effect,"
said grandma, after a thoughtful pause, during which Tom teased the
girls by snapping the lock of the pistol in their faces.

"Once upon a time," continued Madam, much flattered by the row of
interested faces before her, "my father went away on business, leaving
mother, aunt, and us girls to Jack's care. Very proud he was, to be
sure, of the responsibility, and the first thing he did was to load that
pistol and keep it by his bed, in our great worriment, for we feared he
'd kill himself with it. For a week all went well; then we were startled
by the news that robbers were about. All sorts of stories flew through
the town (we were living in the country then); some said that certain
houses were marked with a black cross, and those were always robbed;
others, that there was a boy in the gang, for windows, so small that
they were considered safe, were entered by some little rogue. At one
place the thieves had a supper, and left ham and cake in the front yard.
Mrs. Jones found Mrs. Smith's shawl in her orchard, with a hammer and
an unknown teapot near it. One man reported that some one tapped at
his window, in the night, saying, softly, 'Is anyone here?' and when he
looked out, two men were seen to run down the road.

"We lived just out of town, in a lonely place; the house was old, with
convenient little back windows, and five outside doors. Jack was the
only man about the place, and he was barely thirteen. Mother and aunt
were very timid, and the children weren't old enough to be of any
use, so Jack and I were the home-guard, and vowed to defend the family
manfully."

"Good for you! Hope the fellows came!" cried Tom, charmed with this
opening.

"One day, an ill-looking man came in and asked for food," continued
grandma, with a mysterious nod; "and while he ate, I saw him glance
sharply about from the wooden buttons on the back-doors, to the silver
urn and tankards on the dining-room sideboard. A strong suspicion took
possession of me, and I watched him as a cat does a mouse.

"'He came to examine the premises, I 'm sure of it, but we will be ready
for him,' I said, fiercely, as I told the family about him.

"This fancy haunted us all, and our preparations were very funny. Mother
borrowed a rattle, and kept it under her pillow. Aunt took a big bell
to bed with her; the children had little Tip, the terrier, to sleep in
their room; while Jack and I mounted guard, he with the pistol, and I
with a hatchet, for I did n't like fire-arms. Biddy, who slept in the
attic, practised getting out on the shed roof, so that she might run
away at the first alarm. Every night we arranged pit-falls for the
robbers, and all filed up to bed, bearing plate, money, weapons, and
things to barricade with, as if we lived in war times.

"We waited a week and no one came, so we began to feel rather slighted,
for other people got 'a scare,' as Tom says, and after all our
preparations we really felt a trifle disappointed that we had had no
chance to show our courage. At last a black mark was found upon our
door, and a great panic ensued, for we felt that now our time had come.

"That night we put a tub of water at the bottom of the back-stairs, and
a pile of tin pans at the top of the front stairs, so that any attempt
to come up would produce a splash or a rattle. Bells were hung on door
handles, sticks of wood piled up in dark corners for robbers to fall
over, and the family retired, all armed and all provided with lamps and
matches.

"Jack and I left our doors open, and kept asking one another if we did
n't hear something, till he fell asleep. I was wakeful and lay listening
to the crickets till the clock struck twelve; then I got drowsy, and
was just dropping off when the sound of steps outside woke me up staring
wide awake. Creeping to the window I was in time to see by the dim
moonlight a shadow glide round the corner and disappear. A queer little
thrill went over me, but I resolved to keep quiet till I was sure
something was wrong, for I had given so many false alarms, I did n't
want Jack to laugh at me again. Popping my head out of the door, I
listened, and presently heard a scraping sound near the shed.

"'There they are; but I won't rouse the house till the bell rings or the
pans fall. The rogues can't go far without a clatter of some sort, and
if we could only catch one of them we should get the reward and a deal
of glory,' I said to myself, grasping my hatchet firmly.

"A door closed softly below, and a step came creeping towards the
back-stairs. Sure now of my prey, I was just about to scream 'Jack!'
when something went splash into the tub at the foot of the back-stairs.

"In a minute every one was awake and up, for Jack fired his pistol
before he was half out of bed, and roared 'Fire!' so loud it roused the
house. Mother sprung her rattle, aunt rang her bell, Jip barked like
mad, and we all screamed, while from below came up a regular Irish howl.

"Some one brought a lamp, and we peeped anxiously down, to see our own
stupid Biddy sitting in the tub wringing her hands and wailing dismally.

"'Och, murther, and it 's kilt I am! The saints be about us! how iver
did I come forninst this say iv wather, just crapin in quiet afther
a bit iv sthroll wid Mike Mahoney, me own b'y, that 's to marry me
intirely, come Saint Patrick's day nixt.' We laughed so we could hardly
fish the poor thing up, or listen while she explained that she had
slipped out of her window for a word with Mike, and found it fastened
when she wanted to come back, so she had sat on the roof, trying to
discover the cause of this mysterious barring out, till she was
tired, when she prowled round the house till she found a cellar window
unfastened, after all our care, and got in quite cleverly, she thought;
but the tub was a new arrangement which she knew nothing about; and when
she fell into the 'say,' she was bewildered and could only howl.

"This was not all the damage either, for aunt fainted with the fright,
mother cut her hand with a broken lamp, the children took cold hopping
about on the wet stairs, Jip barked himself sick, I sprained my ankle,
and Jack not only smashed a looking-glass with his bullets, but spoilt
his pistol by the heavy charge put in it. After the damages were
repaired and the flurry was well over, Jack confessed that he had marked
the door for fun, and shut Biddy out as a punishment for 'gallivanting,'
of which he did n't approve. Such a rogue as that boy was!'"

"But did n't the robbers ever come?" cried Tom, enjoying the joke, but
feeling defrauded of the fight.

"Never, my dear; but we had our 'scare,' and tested our courage, and
that was a great satisfaction, of course," answered grandma, placidly.

"Well, I think you were the bravest of the lot. I 'd like to have seen
you flourishing round there with your hatchet," added Tom, admiringly,
and the old lady looked as much pleased with the compliment as if she
had been a girl.

"I choose this," said Polly, holding up a long white kid glove, shrunken
and yellow with time, but looking as if it had a history.

"Ah, that now has a story worth telling!" cried grandma; adding,
proudly, "Treat that old glove respectfully, my children, for
Lafayette's honored hand has touched it."

"Oh, grandma, did you wear it? Did you see him? Do tell us all about it,
and that will be the best of the whole," cried Polly, who loved history,
and knew a good deal about the gallant Frenchman and his brave life.

Grandma loved to tell this story, and always assumed her most imposing
air to do honor to her theme. Drawing herself up, therefore, she folded
her hands, and after two or three little "hems," began with an absent
look, as if her eyes beheld a far-away time, which brightened as she
gazed.

"The first visit of Lafayette was before my time, of course, but I heard
so much about it from my grandfather that I really felt as if I 'd seen
it all. Our Aunt Hancock lived in the Governor's house, on Beacon Hill,
at that time." Here the old lady bridled up still more, for she was very
proud of "our aunt." "Ah, my dears, those were the good old times!" she
continued, with a sigh. "Such dinners and tea parties, such damask
table cloths and fine plate, such solid, handsome furniture and elegant
carriages; aunt's was lined with red silk velvet, and when the coach
was taken away from her at the Governor's death, she just ripped out
the lining, and we girls had spencers made of it. Dear heart, how well
I remember playing in aunt's great garden, and chasing Jack up and down
those winding stairs; and my blessed father, in his plum-colored coat
and knee buckles, and the queue I used to tie up for him every day,
handing aunt in to dinner, looking so dignified and splendid."

Grandma seemed to forget her story for a minute, and become a little
girl again, among the playmates dead and gone so many years. Polly
motioned the others to be quiet, and no one spoke till the old lady,
with a long sigh, came back to the present, and went on.

"Well, as I was saying, the Governor wanted to give a breakfast to the
French officers, and Madam, who was a hospitable soul, got up a splendid
one for them. But by some mistake, or accident, it was discovered at the
last minute that there was no milk.

"A great deal was needed, and very little could be bought or borrowed,
so despair fell upon the cooks and maids, and the great breakfast would
have been a failure, if Madam, with the presence of mind of her sex, had
not suddenly bethought herself of the cows feeding on the Common.

"To be sure, they belonged to her neighbors, and there was no time to
ask leave, but it was a national affair; our allies must be fed; and
feeling sure that her patriotic friends would gladly lay their cows on
the altar of their country, Madam Hancock covered herself with glory,
by calmly issuing the command, 'Milk 'em!' It was done, to the great
astonishment of the cows, and the entire satisfaction of the guests,
among whom was Lafayette.

"This milking feat was such a good joke, that no one seems to have
remembered much about the great man, though one of his officers, a
count, signalized himself by getting very tipsy, and going to bed with
his boots and spurs on, which caused the destruction of aunt's best
yellow damask coverlet, for the restless sleeper kicked it into rags by
morning.

"Aunt valued it very much, even in its tattered condition, and kept it a
long while, as a memorial of her distinguished guests.

"The time when I saw Lafayette was in 1825, and there were no tipsy
counts then. Uncle Hancock (a sweet man, my dears, though some call him
mean now-a-days) was dead, and aunt had married Captain Scott.

"It was not at all the thing for her to do; however, that 's neither
here nor there. She was living in Federal Street at the time, a most
aristocratic street then, children, and we lived close by.

"Old Josiah Quincy was mayor of the city, and he sent aunt word that the
Marquis Lafayette wished to pay his respects to her.

"Of course she was delighted, and we all flew about to make ready for
him. Aunt was an old lady, but she made a grand toilet, and was as
anxious to look well as any girl."

"What did she wear?" asked Fan, with interest.

"She wore a steel-colored satin, trimmed with black lace, and on her cap
was pinned a Lafayette badge of white satin.

"I never shall forget how b-e-a-utifully she looked as she sat in state
on the front parlor sophy, right under a great portrait of her first
husband; and on either side of her sat Madam Storer and Madam Williams,
elegant to behold, in their stiff silks, rich lace, and stately turbans.
We don't see such splendid old ladies now-a-days."

"I think we do sometimes," said Polly, slyly.

Grandma shook her head, but it pleased her very much to be admired, for
she had been a beauty in her day.

"We girls had dressed the house with flowers; old Mr. Coolidge sent in a
clothes-basket full. Joe Joy provided the badges, and aunt got out some
of the Revolutionary wine from the old Beacon Street cellar.

"I wore my green and white palmyrine, my hair bowed high, the beautiful
leg-o'-mutton sleeves that were so becoming, and these very gloves.

"Well, by-and-by the General, escorted by the Mayor, drove up. Dear me,
I see him now! a little old man in nankeen trousers and vest, a long
blue coat and ruffled shirt, leaning on his cane, for he was lame, and
smiling and bowing like a true Frenchman.

"As he approached, the three old ladies rose, and courtesied with the
utmost dignity. Lafayette bowed first to the Governor's picture, then to
the Governor's widow, and kissed her hand.

"That was droll; for on the back of her glove was stamped Lafayette's
likeness, and the gallant old gentleman kissed his own face.

"Then some of the young ladies were presented, and, as if to escape any
further self-salutations, the marquis kissed the pretty girls on the
cheek.

"Yes, my dears, here is just the spot where the dear old man saluted me.
I 'm quite as proud of it now as I was then, for he was a brave, good
man, and helped us in our trouble.

"He did not stay long, but we were very merry, drinking his health,
receiving his compliments, and enjoying the honor he did us.

"Down in the street there was a crowd, of course, and when he left they
wanted to take out the horses and drag him home in triumph. But he did
n't wish it; and while that affair was being arranged, we girls had been
pelting him with the flowers which we tore from the vases, the walls,
and our own topknots, to scatter over him.

"He liked that, and laughed, and waved his hand to us, while we ran, and
pelted, and begged him to come again.

"We young folks quite lost our heads that night, and I have n't a very
clear idea of how I got home. The last thing I remember was hanging out
of the window with a flock of girls, watching the carriage roll away,
while the crowd cheered as if they were mad.

"Bless my heart, it seems as if I heard 'em now! 'Hurrah for Lafayette
and Mayor Quincy! Hurrah for Madam Hancock and the pretty girls! Hurrah
for Col. May!' 'Three cheers for Boston! Now, then! Hurrah! Hurrah!
Hurrah!'"

And here the old lady stopped, out of breath, with her cap askew, her
spectacles on the end of her nose, and her knitting much the worse for
being waved enthusiastically in the air, while she hung over the arm of
her chair, shrilly cheering an imaginary Lafayette. The girls clapped
their hands, and Tom hurrahed with all his might, saying, when he got
his breath, "Lafayette was a regular old trump; I always liked him."

"My dear! what a disrespectful way to speak of that great man," said
grandma, shocked at Young America's irreverence.

"Well, he was a trump, anyway, so why not call him one?" asked Tom,
feeling that the objectionable word was all that could be desired.

"What queer gloves you wore then," interrupted Fanny, who had been
trying on the much-honored glove, and finding it a tight fit.

"Much better and cheaper than we have now," returned grandma, ready
to defend "the good old times" against every insinuation. "You are an
extravagant set now-a-days, and I really don't know what you are coming
to. By the way, I 've got somewhere two letters written by two young
ladies, one in 1517, and the other in 1868. The contrast between the two
will amuse you, I think."

After a little search, grandma produced an old portfolio, and selecting
the papers, read the following letter, written by Anne Boleyn before
her marriage to Henry VIII, and now in the possession of a celebrated
antiquarian:

DEAR MARY, I have been in town almost a month, yet I cannot say I have
found anything in London extremely agreeable. We rise so late in the
morning, seldom before six o'clock, and sit up so late at night, being
scarcely in bed before ten, that I am quite sick of it; and was it not
for the abundance of fine things I am every day getting I should be
impatient of returning into the country.

My indulgent mother bought me, yesterday, at a merchant's in Cheapside,
three new shifts, that cost fourteen pence an ell, and I am to have a
pair of new stuff shoes, for my Lord of Norfolk's ball, which will be
three shillings.

The irregular life I have led since my coming to this place has quite
destroyed my appetite. You know I could manage a pound of bacon and a
tankard of good ale for my breakfast, in the country, but in London I
find it difficult to get through half the quantity, though I must own
I am generally eager enough for the dinner hour, which is here delayed
till twelve, in your polite society.

I played at hot cockles, last night, at my Lord of Leicester's. The Lord
of Surrey was there, a very elegant young man, who sung a song of
his own composition, on the "Lord of Kildare's Daughter." It was much
approved, and my brother whispered me that the fair Geraldine, for so my
Lord of Surrey calls his sweetheart, is the finest woman of the age. I
should be glad to see her, for I hear she is good as she is beautiful.

Pray take care of the poultry during my absence. Poor things! I always
fed them myself; and if Margery has knitted me the crimson worsted
mittens, I should be glad if they were sent up the first opportunity.

Adieu, dear Mary. I am just going to mass, and you shall speedily have
the prayers, as you have now the kindest love of your own ANNE BOLEYN.

"Up before six, and think it late to go to bed at ten! What a
countrified thing Anne must have been. Bacon and ale for breakfast, and
dinner at twelve; how very queer to live so!" cried Fanny. "Lord Surrey
and Lord Leicester sound fine, but hot cockles, and red mittens, and
shoes for three shillings, are horrid."

"I like it," said Polly, thoughtfully, "and I 'm glad poor Anne had a
little fun before her troubles began. May I copy that letter some time,
grandma?"

"Yes, dear, and welcome. Now, here 's the other, by a modern girl on her
first visit to London. This will suit you better, Fan," and grandma
read what a friend had sent her as a pendant to Anne's little picture of
London life long ago:

MY DEAREST CONSTANCE, After three months of intense excitement I snatch
a leisure moment to tell you how much I enjoy my first visit to London.
Having been educated abroad, it really seems like coming to a strange
city. At first the smoke, dirt and noise were very disagreeable, but
I soon got used to these things, and now find all I see perfectly
charming.

We plunged at once into a whirl of gayety and I have had no time to
think of anything but pleasure. It is the height of the season, and
every hour is engaged either in going to balls, concerts, theatres,
fetes and church, or in preparing for them. We often go to two or three
parties in an evening, and seldom get home till morning, so of course
we don't rise till noon next day. This leaves very little time for our
drives, shopping, and calls before dinner at eight, and then the evening
gayeties begin again.

At a ball at Lady Russell's last night, I saw the Prince of Wales, and
danced in the set with him. He is growing stout, and looks dissipated. I
was disappointed in him, for neither in appearance nor conversation was
he at all princely. I was introduced to a very brilliant and delightful
young gentleman from America. I was charmed with him, and rather
surprised to learn that he wrote the poems which were so much admired
last season, also that he is the son of a rich tailor. How odd these
Americans are, with their money, and talent, and independence!

O my dear, I must not forget to tell you the great event of my first
season. I am to be presented at the next Drawing Room! Think how
absorbed I must be in preparation for this grand affair. Mamma is
resolved that I shall do her credit, and we have spent the last two
weeks driving about from milliners to mantua-makers, from merchants to
jewellers. I am to wear white satin and plumes, pearls and roses. My
dress will cost a hundred pounds or more, and is very elegant.

My cousins and friends lavish lovely things upon me, and you will open
your unsophisticated eyes when I display my silks and laces, trinkets
and French hats, not to mention billet deux, photographs, and other
relics of a young belle's first season.

You ask if I ever think of home. I really have n't time, but I do
sometimes long a little for the quiet, the pure air and the girlish
amusements I used to enjoy so much. One gets pale, and old, and sadly
fagged out, with all this dissipation, pleasant as it is. I feel quite
blasé already.

If you could send me the rosy cheeks, bright eyes, and gay spirits I
always had at home, I 'd thank you. As you cannot do that, please send
me a bottle of June rain water, for my maid tells me it is better than
any cosmetic for the complexion, and mine is getting ruined by late
hours.

I fancy some fruit off our own trees would suit me, for I have no
appetite, and mamma is quite desolate about me. One cannot live on
French cookery without dyspepsia, and one can get nothing simple here,
for food, like everything else, is regulated by the fashion.

Adieu, ma chere, I must dress for church. I only wish you could see my
new hat and go with me, for Lord Rockingham promised to be there.

Adieu, yours eternally, FLORENCE.

"Yes, I do like that better, and I wish I had been in this girl's place,
don't you, Polly?" said Fan, as grandma took off her glasses.

"I should love to go to London, and have a good time, but I don't think
I should care about spending ever so much money, or going to Court.
Maybe I might when I got there, for I do like fun and splendor," added
honest Polly, feeling that pleasure was a very tempting thing.

"Grandma looks tired; let 's go and play in the dwying-woom," said Maud,
who found the conversation getting beyond her depth.

"Let us all kiss and thank grandma, for amusing us so nicely, before
we go," whispered Polly. Maud and Fanny agreed, and grandma looked so
gratified by their thanks, that Tom followed suit, merely waiting till
"those girls" were out of sight, to give the old lady a hearty hug, and
a kiss on the very cheek Lafayette had saluted.

When he reached the play-room Polly was sitting in the swing, saying,
very earnestly, "I always told you it was nice up in grandma's room, and
now you see it is. I wish you 'd go oftener; she admires to have you,
and likes to tell stories and do pleasant things, only she thinks you
don't care for her quiet sort of fun. I do, anyway, and I think she 's
the kindest, best old lady that ever lived, and I love her dearly!"

"I did n't say she was n't, only old people are sort of tedious and
fussy, so I keep out of their way," said Fanny.

"Well, you ought not to, and you miss lots of pleasant times. My mother
says we ought to be kind and patient and respectful to all old folks
just because they are old, and I always mean to be."

"Your mother 's everlastingly preaching," muttered Fan, nettled by the
consciousness of her own shortcomings with regard to grandma.

"She don't preach!" cried Polly, firing up like a flash; "she only
explains things to us, and helps us be good, and never scolds, and I
'd rather have her than any other mother in the world, though she don't
wear velvet cloaks and splendid bonnets, so now!"

"Go it, Polly!" called Tom, who was gracefully hanging head downward
from the bar put up for his special benefit.

"Polly 's mad! Polly 's mad!" sung Maud, skipping rope round the room.

"If Mr. Sydney could see you now he would n't think you such an angel
any more," added Fanny, tossing a bean-bag and her head at the same
time.

Polly was mad, her face was very red, her eyes very bright and her lips
twitched, but she held her tongue and began to swing as hard as she
could, fearing to say something she would be sorry for afterward. For a
few minutes no one spoke, Tom whistled and Maud hummed but Fan and Polly
were each soberly thinking of something, for they had reached an
age when children, girls especially, begin to observe, contrast, and
speculate upon the words, acts, manners, and looks of those about them.
A good deal of thinking goes on in the heads of these shrewd little
folks, and the elders should mind their ways, for they get criticised
pretty sharply and imitated very closely.

Two little things had happened that day, and the influence of a few
words, a careless action, was still working in the active minds of the
girls.

Mr. Sydney had called, and while Fanny was talking with him she saw his
eye rest on Polly, who sat apart watching the faces round her with the
modest, intelligent look which many found so attractive. At that minute
Madam Shaw came in, and stopped to speak to the little girl. Polly rose
at once, and remained standing till the old lady passed on.

"Are you laughing at Polly's prim ways?" Fanny had asked, as she saw Mr.
Sydney smile.

"No, I am admiring Miss Polly's fine manners," he answered in a grave,
respectful tone, which had impressed Fanny very much, for Mr. Sydney
was considered by all the girls as a model of good breeding, and that
indescribable something which they called "elegance."

Fanny wished she had done that little thing, and won that approving
look, for she valued the young man's good opinion, because it was
so hard to win, by her set at least. So, when Polly talked about old
people, it recalled this scene and made Fan cross.

Polly was remembering how, when Mrs. Shaw came home that day in her fine
visiting costume, and Maud ran to welcome her with unusual affection,
she gathered up her lustrous silk and pushed the little girl away
saying, impatiently, "Don't touch me, child, your hands are dirty."
Then the thought had come to Polly that the velvet cloak did n't cover
a right motherly heart, that the fretful face under the nodding purple
plumes was not a tender motherly face, and that the hands in the
delicate primrose gloves had put away something very sweet and precious.
She thought of another woman, whose dress never was too fine for little
wet cheeks to lie against, or loving little arms to press; whose face,
in spite of many lines and the gray hairs above it, was never sour or
unsympathetic when children's eyes turned towards it; and whose hands
never were too busy, too full or too nice to welcome and serve the
little sons and daughters who freely brought their small hopes and
fears, sins and sorrows, to her, who dealt out justice and mercy with
such wise love. "Ah, that 's a mother!" thought Polly, as the memory
came warm into her heart, making her feel very rich, and pity Maud for
being so poor.

This it was that caused such sudden indignation at Fanny's dreadful
speech, and this it was that made quick-tempered Polly try to calm her
wrath before she used toward Fanny's mother the disrespectful tone she
so resented toward her own. As the swing came down after some dozen
quick journeys to and fro, Polly seemed to have found a smile somewhere
up aloft, for she looked toward Fan, saying pleasantly, as she paused
a little in her airy exercise, "I 'm not mad now, shall I come and toss
with you?"

"No, I 'll come and swing with you," answered Fanny, quick to feel the
generous spirit of her friend.

"You are an angel, and I 'll never be so rude again," she added, as
Polly's arm came round her, and half the seat was gladly offered.

"No, I ain't; but if I ever get at all like one, it will be 'mother's
preaching' that did it," said Polly, with a happy laugh.

"Good for you, Polly Peacemaker," cried Tom, quoting his father, and
giving them a grand push as the most appropriate way of expressing his
approbation of the sentiment.

Nothing more was said; but from that day there slowly crept into the
family more respect for grandma, more forbearance with her infirmities,
more interest in her little stories, and many a pleasant gossip did the
dear old lady enjoy with the children as they gathered round her fire,
solitary so long.




CHAPTER VII. GOOD-BY


"OH, dear! Must you really go home Saturday?" said Fan, some days after
what Tom called the "grand scrimmage."

"I really must; for I only came to stay a month and here I 've been
nearly six weeks," answered Polly, feeling as if she had been absent a
year.

"Make it two months and stay over Christmas. Come, do, now," urged Tom,
heartily.

"You are very kind; but I would n't miss Christmas at home for anything.
Besides, mother says they can't possibly do without me."

"Neither can we. Can't you tease your mother, and make up your mind to
stay?" began Fan.

"Polly never teases. She says it 's selfish; and I don't do it now
much," put in Maud, with a virtuous air.

"Don't you bother Polly. She 'd rather go, and I don't wonder. Let 's be
just as jolly as we can while she stays, and finish up with your party,
Fan," said Tom, in a tone that settled the matter.

Polly had expected to be very happy in getting ready for the party; but
when the time came, she was disappointed; for somehow that naughty thing
called envy took possession of her, and spoiled her pleasure. Before she
left home, she thought her new white muslin dress, with its fresh blue
ribbons, the most elegant and proper costume she could have; but
now, when she saw Fanny's pink silk, with a white tarlatan tunic, and
innumerable puffings, bows, and streamers, her own simple little
toilet lost all its charms in her eyes, and looked very babyish and
old-fashioned.

Even Maud was much better dressed than herself, and looked very splendid
in her cherry-colored and white suit, with a sash so big she could
hardly carry it, and little white boots with red buttons. They both
had necklaces and bracelets, ear-rings and brooches; but Polly had no
ornament, except the plain locket on a bit of blue velvet. Her sash was
only a wide ribbon, tied in a simple bow, and nothing but a blue snood
in the pretty curls. Her only comfort was the knowledge that the modest
tucker drawn up round the plump shoulders was real lace, and that her
bronze boots cost nine dollars.

Poor Polly, with all her efforts to be contented, and not to mind
looking unlike other people, found it hard work to keep her face bright
and her voice happy that night. No one dreamed what was going an under
the muslin frock, till grandma's wise old eyes spied out the little
shadow on Polly's spirits, and guessed the cause of it. When dressed,
the three girls went up to show themselves to the elders, who were in
grandma's room, where Tom was being helped into an agonizingly stiff
collar.

Maud pranced like a small peacock, and Fan made a splendid courtesy as
every one turned to survey them; but Polly stood still, and her eyes
went from face to face, with an anxious, wistful air, which seemed to
say, "I know I 'm not right; but I hope I don't look very bad."

Grandma read the look in a minute; and when Fanny said, with a satisfied
smile, "How do we look?" she answered, drawing Polly toward her so
kindly.

"Very like the fashion-plates you got the patterns of your dresses from.
But this little costume suits me best."

"Do you really think I look nice?" and Polly's face brightened, for she
valued the old lady's opinion very much.

"Yes, my dear; you look just as I like to see a child of your age look.
What particularly pleases me is that you have kept your promise to your
mother, and have n't let anyone persuade you to wear borrowed finery.
Young things like you don't need any ornaments but those you wear
to-night, youth, health, intelligence, and modesty."

As she spoke, grandma gave a tender kiss that made Polly glow like a
rose, and for a minute she forgot that there were such things as pink
silk and coral ear-rings in the world. She only said, "Thank you,
ma'am," and heartily returned the kiss; but the words did her good, and
her plain dress looked charming all of a sudden.

"Polly 's so pretty, it don't matter what she wears," observed Tom,
surveying her over his collar with an air of calm approval.

"She has n't got any bwetelles to her dwess, and I have," said Maud,
settling her ruffled bands over her shoulders, which looked like
cherry-colored wings on a stout little cherub.

"I did wish she 'd just wear my blue set, ribbon is so very plain; but,
as Tom says, it don't much matter;" and Fanny gave an effective touch to
the blue bow above Polly's left temple.

"She might wear flowers; they always suit young girls," said Mrs. Shaw,
privately thinking that her own daughters looked much the best, yet
conscious that blooming Polly had the most attractive face. "Bless me!
I forgot my posies in admiring the belles. Hand them out, Tom;" and Mr.
Shaw nodded toward an interesting looking box that stood on the table.

Seizing them wrong side-up, Tom produced three little bouquets, all
different in color, size, and construction.

"Why, papa! how very kind of you," cried Fanny, who had not dared to
receive even a geranium leaf since the late scrape.

"Your father used to be a very gallant young gentleman, once upon a
time," said Mrs. Shaw, with a simper.

"Ah, Tom, it 's a good sign when you find time to think of giving
pleasure to your little girls!" And grandma patted her son's bald head
as if he was n't more than eighteen.

Thomas Jr. had given a somewhat scornful sniff at first; but when
grandma praised his father, the young man thought better of the matter,
and regarded the flowers with more respect, as he asked, "Which is for
which?"

"Guess," said Mr. Shaw, pleased that his unusual demonstration had
produced such an effect.

The largest was a regular hothouse bouquet, of tea-rosebuds, scentless
heath, and smilax; the second was just a handful of sweet-peas and
mignonette, with a few cheerful pansies, and one fragrant little rose in
the middle; the third, a small posy of scarlet verbenas, white feverfew,
and green leaves.

"Not hard to guess. The smart one for Fan, the sweet one for Polly, and
the gay one for Pug. Now, then, catch hold, girls." And Tom proceeded
to deliver the nosegays, with as much grace as could be expected from a
youth in a new suit of clothes and very tight boots.

"That finishes you off just right, and is a very pretty attention of
papa's. Now run down, for the bell has rung; and remember, not to dance
too often, Fan; be as quiet as you can, Tom; and Maud, don't eat too
much supper. Grandma will attend to things, for my poor nerves won't
allow me to come down."

With that, Mrs. Shaw dismissed them, and the four descended to receive
the first batch of visitors, several little girls who had been asked
for the express purpose of keeping Maud out of her sister's way. Tom
had likewise been propitiated, by being allowed to bring his three bosom
friends, who went by the school-boy names of Rumple, Sherry, and Spider.

"They will do to make up sets, as gentlemen are scarce; and the party is
for Polly, so I must have some young folks on her account," said Fanny,
when sending out her invitations.

Of course, the boys came early, and stood about in corners, looking as
if they had more arms and legs than they knew what to do with. Tom did
his best to be a good host; but ceremony oppressed his spirits, and he
was forced to struggle manfully with the wild desire to propose a game
of leap-frog, for the long drawing-rooms, cleared for dancing, tempted
him sorely.

Polly sat where she was told, and suffered bashful agonies as Fan
introduced very fine young ladies and very stiff young gentlemen, who
all said about the same civil things, and then appeared to forget all
about her. When the first dance was called, Fanny cornered Tom, who had
been dodging her, for he knew what she wanted, and said, in an earnest
whisper: "Now, Tom, you must dance this with Polly. You are the young
gentleman of the house, and it 's only proper that you should ask your
company first."

"Polly don't care for manners. I hate dancing; don't know how. Let go
my jacket, and don't bother, or I 'll cut away altogether," growled Tom,
daunted by the awful prospect of opening the ball with Polly.

"I 'll never forgive you if you do. Come, be clever, and help me, there
's a dear. You know we both were dreadfully rude to Polly, and agreed
that we 'd be as kind and civil to her as ever we could. I shall keep
my word, and see that she is n't slighted at my party, for I want her to
love me, and go home feeling all right."

This artful speech made an impression on the rebellious Thomas, who
glanced at Polly's happy face, remembered his promise, and, with a
groan, resolved to do his duty.

"Well, I 'll take her; but I shall come to grief, for I don't know
anything about your old dances."

"Yes, you do. I 've taught you the steps a dozen times. I 'm going to
begin with a redowa, because the girls like it, and it 's better fun
than square dances. Now, put on your gloves, and go and ask Polly like a
gentleman."

"Oh, thunder!" muttered Tom. And having split the detested gloves in
dragging them on, he nerved himself for the effort, walked up to Polly,
made a stiff bow, stuck out his elbow, and said, solemnly, "May I have
the pleasure, Miss Milton?"

He did it as much like the big fellows as he could, and expected that
Polly would be impressed. But she was n't a bit; for after a surprised
look she laughed in his face, and took him by the hand, saying,
heartily, "Of course you may; but don't be a goose, Tommy."

"Well, Fan told me to be elegant, so I tried to," whispered Tom, adding,
as he clutched his partner with a somewhat desperate air, "Hold on
tight, and we 'll get through somehow."

The music struck up, and away they went; Tom hopping one way and Polly
the other, in a most ungraceful manner.

"Keep time to the music," gasped Polly.

"Can't; never could," returned Tom.

"Keep step with me, then, and don't tread on my toes," pleaded Polly.

"Never mind; keep bobbing, and we 'll come right by and by," muttered
Tom, giving his unfortunate partner a sudden whisk, which nearly landed
both on the floor.

But they did not "get right by and by"; for Tom, In his frantic efforts
to do his duty, nearly annihilated poor Polly. He tramped, he bobbed, he
skated, he twirled her to the right, dragged her to the left, backed her
up against people and furniture, trod on her feet, rumpled her dress,
and made a spectacle of himself generally. Polly was much disturbed;
but as everyone else was flying about also, she bore it as long as
she could, knowing that Tom had made a martyr of himself, and feeling
grateful to him for the sacrifice.

"Oh, do stop now; this is dreadful!" cried Polly, breathlessly, after a
few wild turns.

"Is n't it?" said Tom, wiping his red face with such an air of intense
relief, that Polly had not the heart to scold him, but said, "Thank
you," and dropped into a chair exhausted.

"I know I 've made a guy of myself; but Fan insisted on it, for fear
you 'd be offended if I did n't go the first dance with you," said Tom,
remorsefully, watching Polly as she settled the bow of her crushed sash,
which Tom had used as a sort of handle by which to turn and twist her;
"I can do the Lancers tip-top; but you won't ever want to dance with me
any more," he added, as he began to fan her so violently, that her hair
flew about as if in a gale of wind.

"Yes, I will. I 'd like to; and you shall put your name down here on
the sticks of my fan. That 's the way, Trix says, when you don't have a
ball-book."

Looking much gratified, Tom produced the stump of a lead-pencil, and
wrote his name with a flourish, saying, as he gave it back, "Now I 'm
going to get Sherry, or some of the fellows that do the redowa well, so
you can have a real good go before the music stops."

Off went Tom; but before he could catch any eligible partner, Polly was
provided with the best dancer in the room. Mr. Sydney had seen and heard
the whole thing; and though he had laughed quietly, he liked honest Tom
and good-natured Polly all the better for their simplicity. Polly's foot
was keeping time to the lively music, and her eyes were fixed wistfully
on the smoothly-gliding couples before her, when Mr. Sydney came to
her, saying, in the pleasant yet respectful way she liked so much, "Miss
Polly, can you give me a turn?"

"Oh, yes; I 'm dying for another." And Polly jumped up, with both hands
out, and such a grateful face, that Mr. Sydney resolved she should have
as many turns as she liked.

This time all went well; and Tom, returning from an unsuccessful search,
was amazed to behold Polly circling gracefully about the room, guided by
a most accomplished partner.

"Ah, that 's something like," he thought, as he watched the bronze boots
retreating and advancing in perfect time to the music. "Don't see how
Sydney does the steering so well; but it must be fun; and, by Jupiter! I
'll learn it!" added Shaw, Jr., with an emphatic gesture which burst the
last button off his gloves.

Polly enjoyed herself till the music stopped; and before she had time to
thank Mr. Sydney as warmly as she wished, Tom came up to say, with his
most lordly air, "You dance splendidly, Polly. Now, you just show me any
one you like the looks of, and I 'll get him for you, no matter who he
is."

"I don't want any of the gentlemen; they are so stiff, and don't care
to dance with me; but I like those boys over there, and I 'll dance with
any of them if they are willing," said Polly, after a survey.

"I 'll trot out the whole lot." And Tom gladly brought up his friends,
who all admired Polly immensely, and were proud to be chosen instead of
the "big fellows."

There was no sitting still for Polly after that, for the lads kept her
going at a great pace; and she was so happy, she never saw or suspected
how many little manoeuvres, heart-burnings, displays of vanity,
affectation, and nonsense were going on all round her. She loved
dancing, and entered into the gayety of the scene with a heartiness that
was pleasant to see. Her eyes shone, her face glowed, her lips smiled,
and the brown curls waved in the air, as she danced, with a heart as
light as her feet.

"Are you enjoying yourself, Polly?" asked Mr. Shaw, who looked in, now
and then, to report to grandma that all was going well.

"Oh, such a splendid time!" cried Polly, with an enthusiastic little
gesture, as she chassed into the corner where he stood.

"She is a regular belle among the boys," said Fanny, as she promenaded
by.

"They are so kind in asking me and I 'm not afraid of them," explained
Polly, prancing, simply because she could n't keep still.

"So you are afraid of the young gentlemen, hey?" and Mr. Shaw held her
by one curl.

"All but Mr. Sydney. He don't put on airs and talk nonsense; and, oh! he
does 'dance like an angel,' as Trix says."

"Papa, I wish you 'd come and waltz with me. Fan told me not to go near
her, 'cause my wed dwess makes her pink one look ugly; and Tom won't;
and I want to dwedfully."

"I 've forgotten how, Maudie. Ask Polly; she 'll spin you round like a
teetotum." "Mr. Sydney's name is down for that," answered Polly, looking
at her fan with a pretty little air of importance. "But I guess he would
n't mind my taking poor Maud instead. She has n't danced hardly any,
and I 've had more than my share. Would it be very improper to change
my mind?" And Polly looked up at her tall partner with eye which plainly
showed that the change was a sacrifice.

"Not a bit. Give the little dear a good waltz, and we will look on,"
answered Mr. Sydney, with a nod and smile.

"That is a refreshing little piece of nature," said Mr. Shaw, as Polly
and Maud whirled away.

"She will make a charming little woman, if she is n't spoilt."

"No danger of that. She has got a sensible mother."

"I thought so." And Sydney sighed, for he had lately lost his own good
mother.

When supper was announced, Polly happened to be talking, or trying to
talk, to one of the "poky" gentlemen whom Fan had introduced. He took
Miss Milton down, of course, put her in a corner, and having served her
to a dab of ice and one macaroon, he devoted himself to his own supper
with such interest, that Polly would have fared badly, if Tom had not
come and rescued her.

"I 've been looking everywhere for you. Come with me, and don't sit
starving here," said Tom, with a scornful look from her empty plate to
that of her recreant escort, which was piled with good things.

Following her guide, Polly was taken to the big china closet, opening
from the dining-room to the kitchen, and here she found a jovial little
party feasting at ease. Maud and her bosom friend, "Gwace," were seated
on tin cake-boxes; Sherry and Spider adorned the refrigerator; while Tom
and Rumple foraged for the party.

"Here 's fun," said Polly, as she was received with a clash of spoons
and a waving of napkins.

"You just perch on that cracker-keg, and I 'll see that you get enough,"
said Tom, putting a dumbwaiter before her, and issuing his orders with a
fine air of authority.

"We are a band of robbers in our cave, and I 'm the captain; and we
pitch into the folks passing by, and go out and bring home plunder. Now,
Rumple, you go and carry off a basket of cake, and I 'll watch here till
Katy comes by with a fresh lot of oysters; Polly must have some. Sherry,
cut into the kitchen, and bring a cup of coffee. Spider, scrape up the
salad, and poke the dish through the slide for more. Eat away, Polly,
and my men will be back with supplies in a jiffy."

Such fun as they had in that closet; such daring robberies of jelly-pots
and cake-boxes; such successful raids into the dining-room and kitchen;
such base assaults upon poor Katy and the colored waiter, who did his
best, but was helpless in the hands of the robber horde. A very harmless
little revel; for no wine was allowed, and the gallant band were so
busy skirmishing to supply the ladies, that they had not time to eat
too much. No one missed them; and when they emerged, the feast was over,
except for a few voracious young gentlemen, who still lingered among the
ruins.

"That 's the way they always do; poke the girls in corners, give 'em
just one taste of something, and then go and stuff like pigs," whispered
Tom, with a superior air, forgetting certain private banquets of his
own, after company had departed.

The rest of the evening was to be devoted to the German; and, as Polly
knew nothing about it, she established herself in a window recess to
watch the mysteries. For a time she enjoyed it, for it was all new to
her, and the various pretty devices were very charming; but, by and by,
that bitter weed, envy, cropped up again, and she could not feel happy
to be left out in the cold, while the other girls were getting gay
tissue-paper suits, droll bonbons, flowers, ribbons, and all manner of
tasteful trifles in which girlish souls delight. Everyone was absorbed;
Mr. Sydney was dancing; Tom and his friends were discussing base-ball on
the stairs; and Maud's set had returned to the library to play.

Polly tried to conquer the bad feeling; but it worried her, till she
remembered something her mother once said to her, "When you feel out
of sorts, try to make some one else happy, and you will soon be so
yourself."

"I will try it," thought Polly, and looked round to see what she could
do. Sounds of strife in the library led her to enter. Maud and the young
ladies were sitting on the sofa, talking about each other's clothes, as
they had seen their mammas do.

"Was your dress imported?" asked Grace.

"No; was yours?" returned Blanche.

"Yes; and it cost oh, ever so much."

"I don't think it is as pretty as Maud's."

"Mine was made in New York," said Miss Shaw, smoothing her skirts
complacently.

"I can't dress much now, you know, 'cause mamma's in black for
somebody," observed Miss Alice Lovett, feeling the importance which
affliction conferred upon her when it took the form of a jet necklace.

"Well, I don't care if my dress is n't imported; my cousin had three
kinds of wine at her party; so, now," said Blanche.

"Did she?" And all the little girls looked deeply impressed, till Maud
observed, with a funny imitation of her father's manner, "My papa said
it was scan-dill-us; for some of the little boys got tipsy, and had to
be tooked home. He would n't let us have any wine; and gwandma said it
was vewy impwoper for childwen to do so."

"My mother says your mother's coup, is n't half so stylish as ours," put
in Alice.

"Yes, it is, too. It 's all lined with gween silk, and that 's nicer
than old wed cloth," cried Maud, ruffling up like an insulted chicken.

"Well, my brother don't wear a horrid old cap, and he 's got nice hair.
I would n't have a brother like Tom. He 's horrid rude, my sister says,"
retorted Alice.

"He is n't. Your brother is a pig."

"You 're a fib!"

"So are you!"

Here, I regret to say, Miss Shaw slapped Miss Lovett, who promptly
returned the compliment, and both began to cry.

Polly, who had paused to listen to the edifying chat, parted the
belligerents, and finding the poor things tired, cross, and sleepy,
yet unable to go home till sent for, proposed to play games. The
young ladies consented, and "Puss in the corner" proved a peacemaker.
Presently, in came the boys; and being exiles from the German,
gladly joined in the games, which soon were lively enough to wake the
sleepiest. "Blind-man's-buff" was in full swing when Mr. Shaw peeped in,
and seeing Polly flying about with band-aged eyes, joined in the fun to
puzzle her. He got caught directly; and great merriment was caused by
Polly's bewilderment, for she could n't guess who he was, till she felt
the bald spot on his head.

This frolic put every one in such spirits, that Polly forgot her
trouble, and the little girls kissed each other good-night as
affectionately as if such things as imported frocks, coups, and rival
brothers did n't exist "Well, Polly, do you like parties?" asked Fan
when the last guest was gone.

"Very much; but I don't think it would be good for me to go to many,"
answered Polly, slowly.

"Why not?"

"I should n't enjoy them if I did n't have a fine dress, and dance all
the time, and be admired, and all the rest of it."

"I did n't know you cared for such things," cried Fanny, surprised.

"Neither did I till to-night; but I do; and as I can't have 'em, it 's
lucky I 'm going home tomorrow."

"Oh, dear! So you are! What shall I do without my 'sweet P.,' as Sydney
calls you?" sighed Fanny, bearing Polly away to be cuddled.

Every one echoed the exclamation next day; and many loving eyes followed
the little figure in the drab frock as it went quietly about, doing for
the last time the small services which would help to make its absence
keenly felt. Polly was to go directly after an early dinner, and having
packed her trunk, all but one tray, she was told to go and take a run
while grandma finished. Polly suspected that some pleasant surprise
was going to be put in; for Fan did n't offer to go with her, Maud kept
dodging about with something under her apron, and Tom had just whisked
into his mother's room in a mysterious manner. So Polly took the hint
and went away, rejoicing in the thought of the unknown treasures she was
to carry home.

Mr. Shaw had not said he should come home so early, but Polly thought he
might, and went to meet him. Mr. Shaw did n't expect to see Polly, for
he had left her very busy, and now a light snow was falling; but, as he
turned into the mall there was the round hat, and under it the bright
face, looking all the rosier for being powdered with snow-flakes, as
Polly came running to meet him.

"There won't be any one to help the old gentleman safely home
to-morrow," he said, as Polly took his hand in both hers with an
affectionate squeeze.

"Yes, there will; see if there is n't," cried Polly, nodding and
smiling, for Fan had confided to her that she meant to try it after her
friend had gone.

"I 'm glad of it. But, my dear, I want you to promise that you will
come and make us a visit every winter, a good long one," said Mr. Shaw,
patting the blue mittens folded round his hand.

"If they can spare me from home, I 'd love to come dearly."

"They must lend you for a little while, because you do us all good, and
we need you."

"Do I? I don't see how; but I 'm glad to hear you say so," cried Polly,
much touched.

"I can't tell you how, exactly; but you brought something into my house
that makes it warmer and pleasanter, and won't quite vanish, I hope,
when you go away, my child."

Polly had never heard Mr. Shaw speak like that before, and did n't know
what to say, she felt so proud and happy at this proof of the truth of
her mother's words, when she said that "even a little girl could exert
an influence, and do some good in this big, busy world." She only gave
her friend a grateful look sweeter than any words, and they went on
together, hand in hand, through the "soft-falling snow."

If Polly could have seen what went into that top tray, she would have
been entirely overcome; for Fanny had told grandma about the poor little
presents she had once laughed at, and they had all laid their heads
together to provide something really fine and appropriate for every
member of the Milton family. Such a mine of riches! and so much
good-will, affection, and kindly forethought was packed away in the
tempting bundles, that no one could feel offended, but would find an
unusual charm about the pretty gifts that made them doubly welcome. I
only know that if Polly had suspected that a little watch was ticking
away in a little case, with her name on it, inside that trunk, she never
could have left it locked as grandma advised, or have eaten her dinner
so quietly. As it was, her heart was very full, and the tears rose to
her eyes more than once, everyone was so kind, and so sorry to have her
go.

Tom did n't need any urging to play escort now; and both Fan and Maud
insisted on going too. Mrs. Shaw forgot her nerves, and put up some
ginger-bread with her own hands; Mr. Shaw kissed Polly as if she had
been his dearest daughter; and grandma held her close, whispering in a
tremulous tone, "My little comfort, come again soon"; while Katy waved
her apron from the nursery window, crying, as they drove, away, "The
saints bless ye, Miss Polly, dear, and sind ye the best of lucks!"

But the crowning joke of all was Tom's good-by, for, when Polly was
fairly settled in the car, the last "All aboard!" uttered, and the train
in motion, Tom suddenly produced a knobby little bundle, and thrusting
it in at the window, while he hung on in some breakneck fashion, said,
with a droll mixture of fun and feeling in his face, "It 's horrid;
but you wanted it, so I put it in to make you laugh. Good-by, Polly;
good-by, good-by!"

The last adieu was a trifle husky, and Tom vanished as it was uttered,
leaving Polly to laugh over his parting souvenir till the tears ran down
her cheeks. It was a paper bag of peanuts, and poked down at the very
bottom a photograph of Tom. It was "horrid," for he looked as if taken
by a flash of lightning, so black, wild, and staring was it; but Polly
liked it, and whenever she felt a little pensive at parting with her
friends, she took a peanut, or a peep at Tom's funny picture, which made
her merry again.

So the short journey came blithely to an end, and in the twilight she
saw a group of loving faces at the door of a humble little house, which
was more beautiful than any palace in her eyes, for it was home.




CHAPTER VIII. SIX YEARS AFTERWARD


"WHAT do you think Polly is going to do this winter?" exclaimed Fanny,
looking up from the letter she had been eagerly reading.

"Going to deliver lectures on Woman's Rights," said the young gentleman
who was carefully examining his luxuriant crop of decidedly auburn hair,
as he lounged with both elbows on the chimney-piece.

"Going to set her cap for some young minister and marry him in the
spring," added Mrs. Shaw, whose mind ran a good deal upon match-making
just now.

"I think she is going to stay at home, and do all the work, 'cause
servants cost so much; it would be just like her," observed Maud, who
could pronounce the letter R now.

"It 's my opinion she is going to open a school, or something of that
sort, to help those brothers of hers along," said Mr. Shaw, who had put
down his paper at the sound of Polly's name.

"Every one of you wrong, though papa comes nearest the truth," cried
Fanny; "she is going to give music lessons, and support herself, so that
Will may go to college. He is the studious one, and Polly is very proud
of him. Ned, the other brother, has a business talent, and don't care
for books, so he has gone out West, and will make his own way anywhere.
Polly says she is n't needed at home now, the family is so small, and
Kitty can take her place nicely; so she is actually going to earn her
own living, and hand over her share of the family income to Will. What a
martyr that girl does make of herself," and Fanny looked as solemn as if
Polly had proposed some awful self-sacrifice.

"She is a sensible, brave-hearted girl, and I respect her for doing it,"
said Mr. Shaw, emphatically. "One never knows what may happen, and it
does no harm for young people to learn to be independent."

"If she is as pretty as she was last time I saw her, she 'll get pupils
fast enough. I would n't mind taking lessons myself," was the gracious
observation of Shaw, Jr., as he turned from the mirror, with the
soothing certainty that his objectionable hair actually was growing
darker.

"She would n't take you at any price," said Fanny, remembering Polly's
look of disappointment and disapproval when she came on her last visit
and found him an unmistakable dandy.

"You just wait and see," was the placid reply.

"If Polly does carry out her plan, I wish Maud to take lessons of her;
Fanny can do as she likes, but it would please me very much to have one
of my girls sing as Polly sings. It suits old people better than your
opera things, and mother used to enjoy it so much."

As he spoke, Mr. Shaw's eye turned toward the corner of the fire where
grandma used to sit. The easy-chair was empty now, the kind old face was
gone, and nothing but a very tender memory remained.

"I 'd like to learn, papa, and Polly is a splendid teacher, I know; she
's always so patient, and makes everything so pleasant. I do hope she
will get scholars enough to begin right away," said Maud.

"When is she coming?" asked Mrs. Shaw, quite willing to help Polly,
but privately resolving that Maud should be finished off by the most
fashionable master in the city.

"She does n't say. She thanks me for asking her here, as usual, but says
she shall go right to work and had better begin with her own little room
at once. Won't it seem strange to have Polly in town, and yet not with
us?"

"We 'll get her somehow. The little room will cost something, and she
can stay with us just as well as not, even if she does teach. Tell her I
say so," said Mr. Shaw.

"She won't come, I know; for if she undertakes to be independent, she
'll do it in the most thorough manner," answered Fanny, and Mrs. Shaw
sincerely hoped she would. It was all very well to patronize the little
music-teacher, but it was not so pleasant to have her settled in the
family.

"I shall do what I can for her among my friends, and I dare say she will
get on very well with young pupils to begin with. If she starts right,
puts her terms high enough, and gets a few good names to give her the
entre into our first families, I don't doubt she will do nicely, for I
must say Polly has the manners of a lady," observed Mrs. Shaw.

"She 's a mighty taking little body, and I 'm glad she 's to be in town,
though I 'd like it better if she did n't bother about teaching, but
just stayed here and enjoyed herself," said Tom, lazily.

"I 've no doubt she would feel highly honored to be allowed to devote
her time to your amusement; but she can't afford expensive luxuries, and
she don't approve of flirting, so you will have to let her go her own
way, and refresh herself with such glimpses of you as her engagements
permit," answered Fanny, in the sarcastic tone which was becoming
habitual to her.

"You are getting to be a regular old maid, Fan; as sharp as a lemon, and
twice as sour," returned Tom, looking down at her with an air of calm
superiority.

"Do be quiet, children; you know I can't bear anything like contention.
Maud, give me my Shetland shawl, and put a cushion at my back."

As Maud obeyed her mother, with a reproving look at her erring brother
and sister, a pause followed, for which every one seemed grateful. They
were sitting about the fire after dinner, and all looked as if a little
sunshine would do them good. It had been a dull November day, but all of
a sudden the clouds lifted, and a bright ray shot into the room. Every
one turned involuntarily to welcome it, and every one cried out, "Why,
Polly!" for there on the threshold stood a bright-faced girl, smiling as
if there was no such thing as November weather in the world.

"You dear thing, when did you come?" cried Fanny, kissing both the
blooming checks with real affection, while the rest hovered near,
waiting for a chance.

"I came yesterday, and have been getting my nest in order; but I could
n't keep away any longer, so I ran up to say 'How do you do?'" answered
Polly, in the cheery voice that did one's heart good to hear.

"My Polly always brings the sunshine with her," and Mr. Shaw held out
his hands to his little friend, for she was his favorite still.

It was good to see her put both arms about his neck, and give him a
tender kiss, that said a great deal, for grandma had died since Polly
met him last and she longed to comfort him, seeing how gray and old he
had grown.

If Tom had had any thoughts of following his father's example, something
in Polly's manner made him change his mind, and shake hands with a
hearty "I 'm very glad to see you, Polly," adding to himself, as he
looked at the face in the modest little bonnet: "Prettier than ever, by
Jove!"

There was something more than mere prettiness in Polly's face, though
Tom had not learned to see it yet. The blue eyes were clear and steady,
the fresh mouth frank and sweet, the white chin was a very firm one in
spite of the dimple, and the smooth forehead under the little curls
had a broad, benevolent arch; while all about the face were those
unmistakable lines and curves which can make even a plain countenance
comely, by breathing into it the beauty of a lovely character. Polly had
grown up, but she had no more style now than in the days of the round
hat and rough coat, for she was all in gray, like a young Quakeress,
with no ornament but a blue bow at the throat and another in the hair.
Yet the plain suit became her excellently, and one never thought of the
dress, looking at the active figure that wore it, for the freedom of her
childhood gave to Polly that good gift, health, and every movement was
full of the vigor, grace, and ease, which nothing else can so surely
bestow. A happy soul in a healthy body is a rare sight in these days,
when doctors flourish and every one is ill, and this pleasant union was
the charm which Polly possessed without knowing it.

"It does seem so good to have you here again," said Maud, cuddling
Polly's cold hand, as she sat at her feet, when she was fairly
established between Fanny and Mr. Shaw, while Tom leaned on the back of
his mother's chair, and enjoyed the prospect.

"How do you get on? When do you begin? Where is your nest? Now tell all
about it," began Fanny, who was full of curiosity about the new plan.

"I shall get on very well, I think, for I 've got twelve scholars to
begin with, all able to pay a good price, and I shall give my first
lesson on Monday."

"Don't you dread it?" asked Fanny.

"Not much; why should I?" answered Polly, stoutly.

"Well, I don't know; it 's a new thing, and must be a little bit hard at
first," stammered Fanny, not liking to say that working for one's living
seemed a dreadful hardship to her.

"It will be tiresome, of course, but I shall get used to it; I shall
like the exercise, and the new people and places I must see will amuse
me. Then the independence will be delightful, and if I can save a little
to help Kitty along with, that will be best of all."

Polly's face shone as if the prospect was full of pleasure instead of
work, and the hearty good will with which she undertook the new task,
seemed to dignify her humble hopes and plans, and make them interesting
in the sight of others.

"Who have you got for pupils?" asked Mrs. Shaw, forgetting her nerves
for a minute.

Polly named her list, and took a secret satisfaction in seeing the
impression which certain names made upon her hearers.

"How in the world did you get the Davenports and the Greys, my dear?"
said Mrs. Shaw, sitting erect in her surprise.

"Mrs. Davenport and mother are relations, you know."

"You never told us that before!" "The Davenports have been away some
years, and I forgot all about them. But when I was making my plan, I
knew I must have a good name or two to set me going, so I just wrote
and asked Mrs. D. if she would help me. She came and saw us and was very
kind, and has got these pupils for me, like a dear, good woman as she
is."

"Where did you learn so much worldly wisdom, Polly?" asked Mr. Shaw,
as his wife fell back in her chair, and took out her salts, as if this
discovery had been too much for her.

"I learnt it here, sir," answered Polly, laughing. "I used to think
patronage and things of that sort very disagreeable and not worth
having, but I 've got wiser, and to a certain extent I 'm glad to use
whatever advantages I have in my power, if they can be honestly got."

"Why did n't you let us help you in the beginning? We should have been
very glad to, I 'm sure," put in Mrs. Shaw, who quite burned to be known
as a joint patroness with Mrs. Davenport.

"I know you would, but you have all been so kind to me I did n't want
to trouble you with my little plans till the first steps were taken.
Besides, I did n't know as you would like to recommend me as a teacher,
though you like me well enough as plain Polly."

"My dear, of course I would, and we want you to take Maud at once,
and teach her your sweet songs. She has a fine voice, and is really
suffering for a teacher."

A slight smile passed over Polly's face as she returned her thanks for
the new pupil, for she remembered a time when Mrs. Shaw considered her
"sweet songs" quite unfit for a fashionable young lady's repertoire.
"Where is your room?" asked Maud.

"My old friend Miss Mills has taken me in, and I am nicely settled.
Mother did n't like the idea of my going to a strange boarding-house,
so Miss Mills kindly made a place for me. You know she lets her rooms
without board, but she is going to give me my dinners, and I 'm to get
my own breakfast and tea, quite independently. I like that way, and it
's very little trouble, my habits are so simple; a bowl of bread and
milk night and morning, with baked apples or something of that sort, is
all I want, and I can have it when I like."

"Is your room comfortably furnished? Can't we lend you anything, my
dear? An easy-chair now, or a little couch, so necessary when one comes
in tired," said Mrs. Shaw, taking unusual interest in the affair.

"Thank you, but I don't need anything, for I brought all sorts of home
comforts with me. Oh, Fan, you ought to have seen my triumphal entry
into the city, sitting among my goods and chattels, in a farmer's cart."
Polly's laugh was so infectious that every one smiled and forgot to be
shocked at her performance. "Yes," she added, "I kept wishing I could
meet you, just to see your horrified face when you saw me sitting on
my little sofa, with boxes and bundles all round me, a bird-cage on one
side, a fishing basket, with a kitten's head popping in and out of the
hole, on the other side, and jolly old Mr. Brown, in his blue frock,
perched on a keg of apples in front. It was a lovely bright day, and I
enjoyed the ride immensely, for we had all sorts of adventures."

"Oh, tell about it," begged Maud, when the general laugh at Polly's
picture had subsided.

"Well, in the first place, we forgot my ivy, and Kitty came running
after me, with it. Then we started again, but were soon stopped by a
great shouting, and there was Will racing down the hill, waving a pillow
in one hand and a squash pie in the other. How we did laugh when he
came up and explained that our neighbor, old Mrs. Dodd, had sent in a
hop-pillow for me, in case of headache, and a pie to begin housekeeping
with. She seemed so disappointed at being too late that Will promised
to get them to me, if he ran all the way to town. The pillow was easily
disposed of, but that pie! I do believe it was stowed in every part of
the wagon, and never staid anywhere. I found it in my lap, then on the
floor, next, upside down among the books, then just on the point
of coasting off a trunk into the road, and at last it landed in my
rocking-chair. Such a remarkable pie as it was, too, for in spite of all
its wanderings, it never got spilt or broken, and we finally ate it for
lunch, in order to be left in peace. Next, my kitty got away, and I
had a chase over walls and brooks before I got her, while Mr. Brown
sat shaking with fun, to see me run. We finished off by having the
book-shelves tumble on our heads as we went down a hill, and losing
my chair off behind, as we went up a hill. A shout made us pause, and,
looking back, there was the poor little chair rocking all by itself in
the middle of the road, while a small boy sat on the fence and whooped.
It was great fun, I do assure you."

Polly had run on in her lively way, not because she thought her
adventures amounted to much, but from a wish to cheer up her friends,
who had struck her as looking rather dull and out of sorts, especially
Mr. Shaw; and when she saw him lean back in his chair with the old
hearty laugh, she was satisfied, and blessed the unlucky pie for amusing
him.

"Oh, Polly, you do tell such interesting things!" sighed Maud, wiping
her eyes.

"I wish I 'd met you, I 'd have given you three cheers and a tiger, for
it must have been an imposing spectacle," said Tom.

"No, you would n't; you 'd have whisked round the corner when you saw me
coming or have stared straight before you, utterly unconscious of the
young woman in the baggage wagon."

Polly laughed in his face just as she used to do, when she said that,
and, in spite of the doubt cast upon his courtesy, Tom rather liked it,
though he had nothing to say for himself but a reproachful, "Now, Polly,
that 's too bad."

"True, nevertheless. You must come and see my pets, Maud, for my cat
and bird live together as happily as brother and sister," said Polly,
turning to Maud, who devoured every word she said.

"That 's not saying much for them," muttered Tom, feeling that Polly
ought to address more of her conversation to him.

"Polly knows what she 's talking about; her brothers appreciate their
sisters," observed Fanny, in her sharp tone.

"And Polly appreciates her brothers, don't forget to add that, ma'am,"
answered Tom.

"Did I tell you that Will was going to college?" broke in Polly, to
avert the rising storm.

"Hope he 'll enjoy himself," observed Tom, with the air of a man who
had passed through all the mysteries, and reached that state of sublime
indifference which juniors seem to pride themselves upon.

"I think he will, he is so fond of study, and is so anxious to improve
every opportunity. I only hope he won't overwork and get sick, as so
many boys do," said simple Polly, with such a respectful belief in the
eager thirst for knowledge of collegians as a class, that Tom regarded
the deluded girl with a smile of lofty pity, from the heights of his
vast and varied experience.

"Guess he won't hurt himself. I 'll see that he don't study too hard."
And Tom's eyes twinkled as they used to do, when he planned his boyish
pranks.

"I 'm afraid you can't be trusted as a guide, if various rumors I
've heard are true," said Polly, looking up at him with a wistful
expression, that caused his face to assume the sobriety of an owl's.

"Base slanders; I 'm as steady as a clock, an ornament to my class, and
a model young man, ain't I, mother?" And Tom patted her thin cheek with
a caressing hand, sure of one firm friend in her; for when he ceased to
be a harum-scarum boy, Mrs. Shaw began to take great pride in her son,
and he, missing grandma, tried to fill her place with his feeble mother.

"Yes, dear, you are all I could ask," and Mrs. Shaw looked up at him
with such affection and confidence in her eyes, that Polly gave Tom the
first approving look she had vouchsafed him since she came.

Why Tom should look troubled and turn grave all at once, she could
n't understand, but she liked to see him stroke his mother's cheek so
softly, as he stood with his head resting on the high back of her chair,
for Polly fancied that he felt a man's pity for her weakness, and was
learning a son's patient love for a mother who had had much to bear with
him.

"I 'm so glad you are going to be here all winter, for we are to be
very gay, and I shall enjoy taking you round with me," began Fanny,
forgetting Polly's plan for a moment.

Polly shook her head decidedly. "It sounds very nice, but it can't be
done, Fan, for I 've come to work, not play; to save, not spend; and
parties will be quite out of the question for me."

"You don't intend to work all the time, without a bit of fun, I hope,"
cried Fanny, dismayed at the idea.

"I mean to do what I 've undertaken, and not to be tempted away from
my purpose by anything. I should n't be fit to give lessons if I was
up late, should I? And how far would my earnings go towards dress,
carriages, and all the little expenses which would come if I set up for
a young lady in society? I can't do both, and I 'm not going to try,
but I can pick up bits of fun as I go along, and be contented with free
concerts and lectures, seeing you pretty often, and every Sunday Will is
to spend with me, so I shall have quite as much dissipation as is good
for me."

"If you don't come to my parties, I 'll never forgive you," said Fanny,
as Polly paused, while Tom chuckled inwardly at the idea of calling
visits from a brother "dissipation."

"Any small party, where it will do to wear a plain black silk, I can
come to; but the big ones must n't be thought of, thank you."

It was charming to see the resolution of Polly's face when she said
that; for she knew her weakness, and beyond that black silk she had
determined not to go. Fanny said no more, for she felt quite sure that
Polly would relent when the time came, and she planned to give her
a pretty dress for a Christmas present, so that one excuse should be
removed.

"I say, Polly, won't you give some of us fellows music lessons?
Somebody wants me to play, and I 'd rather learn of you than any Senor
Twankydillo," said Tom, who did n't find the conversation interesting.

"Oh, yes; if any of you boys honestly want to learn, and will behave
yourselves, I 'll take you; but I shall charge extra," answered Polly,
with a wicked sparkle of the eye, though her face was quite sober, and
her tone delightfully business-like.

"Why, Polly, Tom is n't a boy; he 's twenty, and he says I must treat
him with respect. Besides, he 's engaged, and does put on such airs,"
broke in Maud who regarded her brother as a venerable being.

"Who is the little girl?" asked Polly taking the news as a joke.

"Trix; why, did n't you know it?" answered Maud, as if it had been an
event of national importance.

"No! is it true, Fan?" and Polly turned to her friend with a face full
of surprise, while Tom struck an imposing attitude, and affected absence
of mind.

"I forgot to tell you in my last letter; it 's just out, and we don't
like it very well," observed Fanny, who would have preferred to be
engaged first herself.

"It 's a very nice thing, and I am perfectly satisfied," announced Mrs.
Shaw, rousing from a slight doze.

"Polly looks as if she did n't believe it. Have n't I the appearance
of 'the happiest man alive'?" asked Tom, wondering if it could be pity
which he saw in the steady eyes fixed on him.

"No, I don't think you have," she said, slowly.

"How the deuce should a man look, then?" cried Tom, rather nettled at
her sober reception of the grand news.

"As if he had learned to care for some one a great deal more than for
himself," answered Polly, with sudden color in her cheeks, and a sudden
softening of the voice, as her eyes turned away from Tom, who was the
picture of a complacent dandy, from the topmost curl of his auburn head
to the tips of his aristocratic boots.

"Tommy 's quenched; I agree with you, Polly; I never liked Trix, and
I hope it 's only a boy-and-girl fancy, that will soon die a natural
death," said Mr. Shaw, who seemed to find it difficult to help falling
into a brown study, in spite of the lively chatter going on about him.

Shaw, Jr., being highly incensed at the disrespectful manner in
which his engagement was treated, tried to assume a superb air of
indifference, and finding that a decided failure, was about to stroll
out of the room with a comprehensive nod, when his mother called after
him: "Where are you going, dear?"

"To see Trix, of course. Good-by, Polly," and Mr. Thomas departed,
hoping that by the skillful change of tone, from ardent impatience to
condescending coolness, he had impressed one hearer at least with the
fact that he regarded Trix as the star of his existence, and Polly as a
presuming little chit.

If he could have heard her laugh, and Fanny's remarks, his wrath would
have boiled over; fortunately he was spared the trial, and went away
hoping that the coquetries of his Trix would make him forget Polly's
look when she answered his question.

"My dear, that boy is the most deluded creature you ever saw," began
Fanny, as soon as the front door banged. "Belle and Trix both tried to
catch him, and the slyest got him; for, in spite of his airs, he is
as soft-hearted as a baby. You see Trix has broken off two engagements
already, and the third time she got jilted herself. Such a fuss as she
made! I declare, it really was absurd. But I do think she felt it very
much, for she would n't go out at all, and got thin, and pale, and blue,
and was really quite touching. I pitied her, and had her here a good
deal, and Tom took her part; he always does stand up for the crushed
ones, and that 's good of him, I allow. Well, she did the forsaken very
prettily; let Tom amuse her, and led him on till the poor fellow lost
his wits, and finding her crying one day (about her hat, which was n't
becoming), he thought she was mourning for Mr. Banks, and so, to comfort
her, the goose proposed. That was all she wanted; she snapped him up at
once, and there he is in a nice scrape; for since her engagement she is
as gay as ever, flirts awfully with any one who comes along, and keeps
Tom in a fume all the time. I really don't think he cares for her half
as much as he makes believe, but he 'll stand by her through thick and
thin, rather than do as Banks did."

"Poor Tom!" was all Polly said, when Fan had poured the story into her
ear, as they sat whispering in the sofa corner.

"My only consolation is that Trix will break off the affair before
spring; she always does, so that she may be free for the summer
campaign. It won't hurt Tom, but I hate to have him make a fool of
himself out of pity, for he is more of a man than he seems, and I don't
want any one to plague him."

"No one but yourself," said Polly, smiling.

"Well, that 's all fair; he is a torment sometimes, but I 'm rather fond
of him in spite of it. I get so tired of the other fellows, they are
such absurd things and when Tom is in his good mood he is very nice and
quite refreshing."

"I 'm glad to hear it," said Polly, making a mental note of the fact.

"Yes, and when grandma was ill he was perfectly devoted. I did n't know
the boy had so much gentleness in him. He took her death sadly to heart,
for, though he did n't say much, he was very grave and steady for a long
time. I tried to comfort him, and we had two or three real sweet little
talks together, and seemed to get acquainted for the first time. It was
very nice, but it did n't last; good times never do with us. We soon got
back into the old way, and now we hector one another just as before."

Fanny sighed, then yawned, and fell into her usual listless attitude, as
if the brief excitement of Polly's coming had begun to subside.

"Walk home with me and see my funny little room. It 's bright now, and
the air will do you good. Come, both of you, and have a frolic as we
used to," said Polly, for the red sunset now burning in the west seemed
to invite them out.

They agreed, and soon the three were walking briskly away to Polly's new
home, in a quiet street, where a few old trees rustled in the summer,
and the morning sun shone pleasantly in winter time.

     "The way into my parlor
     Is up a winding stair,"

sang Polly, running up two flights of broad, old-fashioned steps, and
opening the door of a back room, out of which streamed the welcome glow
of firelight.

"These are my pets, Maud," she added, pausing on the threshold, and
beckoning the girls to look in quietly.

On the rug, luxuriously basking in the warmth, lay a gray kitten, and
close by, meditatively roosting on one leg, stood a plump canary, who
cocked his bright eye at the new-comers, gave a loud chirp as if to wake
his comrade, and then flew straight to Polly's shoulder, where he broke
into a joyful song to welcome his mistress home.

"Allow me to introduce my family," said Polly; "this noisy little chap
the boys named Nicodemus; and this dozy cat is called Ashputtel, because
the joy of her life is to get among the cinders. Now, take off your
things, and let me do the honors, for you are to stop to tea, and the
carriage is to come for you at eight. I arranged it with your mother
while you were upstairs."

"I want to see everything," said Maud, when the hats were off, and the
hands warmed.

"So you shall; for I think my housekeeping arrangements will amuse you."

Then Polly showed her kingdom, and the three had a merry time over it.
The big piano took up so much room there was no place for a bed; but
Polly proudly displayed the resources of her chintz-covered couch, for
the back let down, the seat lifted up, and inside were all the pillows
and blankets. "So convenient, you see, and yet out of the way in the
daytime, for two or three of my pupils come to me," explained Polly.

Then there was a bright drugget over the faded carpet, the little
rocking-chair and sewing-table stood at one window, the ivy ran all over
the other, and hid the banqueting performances which went on in that
corner. Book-shelves hung over the sofa, a picture or two on the
walls, and a great vase of autumn leaves and grasses beautified the low
chimney-piece. It was a very humble little room, but Polly had done her
best to make it pleasant, and it already had a home-like look, with the
cheery fire, and the household pets chirping and purring confidingly on
the rug.

"How nice it is!" exclaimed Maud, as she emerged from the big closet
where Polly kept her stores. "Such a cunning teakettle and saucepan,
and a tete-a-tete set, and lots of good things to eat. Do have toast for
tea, Polly, and let me make it with the new toasting fork; it 's such
fun to play cook."

Fanny was not so enthusiastic as her sister, for her eyes saw many
traces of what seemed like poverty to her; but Polly was so gay, so
satisfied with her small establishment, so full of happy hopes and
plans, that her friend had not the heart to find a fault or suggest an
improvement, and sat where she was told, laughing and talking while the
others got tea.

"This will be a country supper, girls," said Polly, bustling about.
"Here is real cream, brown bread, home-made cake, and honey from my own
beehives. Mother fitted me out with such a supply, I 'm glad to have a
party, for I can't eat it all quick enough. Butter the toast, Maudie,
and put that little cover over it. Tell me when the kettle boils, and
don't step on Nicodemus, whatever you do."

"What a capital house-keeper you will make some day," said Fanny, as she
watched Polly spread her table with a neatness and despatch which was
pleasant to behold.

"Yes, it 's good practice," laughed Polly, filling her tiny teapot, and
taking her place behind the tray, with a matronly air, which was the
best joke of the whole.

"This is the most delicious party I ever went to," observed Maud, with
her mouth full of honey, when the feast was well under way. "I do wish
I could have a nice room like this, and a cat and a bird that would n't
eat each other up, and a dear little teakettle, and make just as much
toast as I like."

Such a peal of laughter greeted Maud's pensive aspiration, that Miss
Mills smiled over her solitary cup of tea, and little Nick burst into a
perfect ecstasy of song, as he sat on the sugar-bowl helping himself.

"I don't care for the toast and the kettle, but I do envy you your good
spirits, Polly," said Fanny, as the merriment subsided. "I 'm so tired
of everybody and everything, it seems sometimes as if I should die of
ennui. Don't you ever feel so?"

"Things worry me sometimes, but I just catch up a broom and sweep, or
wash hard, or walk, or go at something with all my might, and I usually
find that by the time I get through the worry is gone, or I 've got
courage enough to bear it without grumbling," answered Polly, cutting
the brown loaf energetically.

"I can't do those things, you know; there 's no need of it, and I
don't think they 'd cure my worrying," said Fanny, languidly feeding
Ashputtel, who sat decorously beside her, at the table, winking at the
cream pot.

"A little poverty would do you good, Fan; just enough necessity to keep
you busy till you find how good work is; and when you once learn that,
you won't complain of ennui any more," returned Polly, who had taken
kindly the hard lesson which twenty years of cheerful poverty had taught
her.

"Mercy, no, I should hate that; but I wish some one would invent a new
amusement for rich people. I 'm dead sick of parties, and flirtations,
trying to out-dress my neighbors, and going the same round year after
year, like a squirrel in a cage."

Fanny's tone was bitter as well as discontented, her face sad as well as
listless, and Polly had an instinctive feeling that some trouble, more
real than any she had ever known before, was lying heavy at her friend's
heart. That was not the time to speak of it, but Polly resolved to stand
ready to offer sympathy, if nothing more, whenever the confidential
minute came; and her manner was so kind, so comfortable, that Fanny felt
its silent magic, grew more cheerful in the quiet atmosphere of that
little room, and when they said good-night, after an old-time gossip by
the fire, she kissed her hostess warmly, saying, with a grateful look,
"Polly, dear, I shall come often, you do me so much good."




CHAPTER IX. LESSONS


THE first few weeks were hard ones, for Polly had not yet outgrown her
natural shyness and going among so many strangers caused her frequent
panics. But her purpose gave her courage, and when the ice was once
broken, her little pupils quickly learned to love her. The novelty soon
wore off, and though she thought she was prepared for drudgery, she
found it very tedious to go on doing the same thing day after day. Then
she was lonely, for Will could only come once a week, her leisure hours
were Fanny's busiest, and the "bits of pleasure" were so few and far
between that they only tantalized her. Even her small housekeeping lost
its charms, for Polly was a social creature, and the solitary meals were
often sad ones. Ashputtel and Nick did their best to cheer her, but
they too, seemed to pine for country freedom and home atmosphere. Poor
Puttel, after gazing wistfully out of the window at the gaunt city cats
skulking about the yard, would retire to the rug, and curl herself up as
if all hope of finding congenial society had failed; while little Nick
would sing till he vibrated on his perch, without receiving any response
except an inquisitive chirp from the pert sparrows, who seemed to twit
him with his captivity. Yes, by the time the little teakettle had lost
its brightness, Polly had decided that getting one's living was no
joke, and many of her brilliant hopes had shared the fate of the little
kettle.

If one could only make the sacrifice all at once, and done with it, then
it would seem easier; but to keep up a daily sacrifice of one's wishes,
tastes, and pleasures, is rather a hard task, especially when one is
pretty, young, and gay. Lessons all day, a highly instructive lecture,
books over a solitary fire, or music with no audience but a sleepy
cat and a bird with his head tucked under his wing, for evening
entertainment, was not exactly what might be called festive; so,
in spite of her brave resolutions, Polly did long for a little fun
sometimes, and after saying virtuously to herself at nine: "Yes, it is
much wiser and better for me to go to bed early, and be ready for work
tomorrow," she would lie awake hearing the carriages roll to and fro,
and imagining the gay girls inside, going to party, opera, or play, till
Mrs. Dodd's hop pillow might as well have been stuffed with nettles, for
any sleep it brought, or any use it was, except to catch and hide the
tears that dropped on it when Polly's heart was very full.

Another thorn that wounded our Polly in her first attempt to make her
way through the thicket that always bars a woman's progress, was the
discovery that working for a living shuts a good many doors in one's
face even in democratic America. As Fanny's guest she had been, in spite
of poverty, kindly received wherever her friend took her, both as child
and woman. Now, things were changed; the kindly people patronized, the
careless forgot all about her, and even Fanny, with all her affection,
felt that Polly the music teacher would not be welcome in many places
where Polly the young lady had been accepted as "Miss Shaw's friend."

Some of the girls still nodded amiably, but never invited her to visit
them; others merely dropped their eyelids, and went by without speaking,
while a good many ignored her as entirely as if she had been invisible.
These things hurt Polly more than she would confess, for at home every
one worked, and every one was respected for it. She tried not to care,
but girls feel little slights keenly, and more than once Polly was
severely tempted to give up her plan, and run away to the safe shelter
at home.

Fanny never failed to ask her to every sort of festivity in the Shaw
mansion; but after a few trials, Polly firmly declined everything but
informal visits when the family were alone. She soon found that even
the new black silk was n't fine enough for Fanny's smallest party, and,
after receiving a few of the expressive glances by which women convey
their opinion of their neighbor's toilet, and overhearing a joke or two
"about that inevitable dress," and "the little blackbird," Polly folded
away the once treasured frock, saying, with a choke in her voice: "I
'll wear it for Will, he likes it, and clothes can't change his love for
me."

I am afraid the wholesome sweetness of Polly's nature was getting a
little soured by these troubles; but before lasting harm was done, she
received, from an unexpected source, some of the real help which teaches
young people how to bear these small crosses, by showing them the
heavier ones they have escaped, and by giving them an idea of the higher
pleasures one may earn in the good, old-fashioned ways that keep hearts
sweet, heads sane, hands busy.

Everybody has their days of misfortune like little Rosamond, and Polly
was beginning to think she had more than her share. One of these ended
in a way which influenced her whole life, and so we will record it. It
began early; for the hard-hearted little grate would n't behave itself
till she had used up a ruinous quantity of kindlings. Then she scalded
poor Puttel by upsetting her coffee-pot; and instead of a leisurely,
cosy meal, had to hurry away uncomfortably, for everything went wrong
even to the coming off of both bonnet strings in the last dreadful
scramble. Being late, she of course forgot her music, and hurrying back
for it, fell into a puddle, which capped the climax of her despair.

Such a trying morning as that was! Polly felt out of tune herself, and
all the pianos seemed to need a tuner as much as she did. The pupils
were unusually stupid, and two of them announced that their mamma was
going to take them to the South, whither she was suddenly called. This
was a blow, for they had just begun, and Polly had n't the face to send
in a bill for a whole quarter, though her plans and calculations were
sadly disturbed by the failure of that sum.

Trudging home to dinner, tired and disappointed, poor Polly received
another blow, which hurt her more than the loss of all her pupils. As
she went hurrying along with a big music book in one hand and a paper
bag of rolls for tea in the other, she saw Tom and Trix coming. As she
watched them while they slowly approached, looking so gay and handsome
and happy, it seemed to Polly as if all the sunshine and good walking
was on their side of the street, all the wintry wind and mud on hers.
Longing to see a friendly face and receive a kind word, she crossed
over, meaning to nod and smile at least. Trix saw her first, and
suddenly became absorbed in the distant horizon. Tom apparently did not
see her, for his eyes were fixed on a fine horse just prancing by.
Polly thought that he had seen her, and approached with a curious little
flutter at her heart, for if Tom cut her she felt that her cup would be
full.

On they came, Trix intent on the view, Tom staring at the handsome
horse, and Polly, with red checks, expectant eyes, and the brown bundle,
in full sight. One dreadful minute as they came parallel, and no one
spoke or bowed, then it was all over, and Polly went on, feeling as if
some one had slapped her in the face. "She would n't have believed it
of Tom; it was all the doings of that horrid Trix; well, she would n't
trouble him any more, if he was such a snob as to be ashamed of her just
because she carried bundles and worked for her bread." She clutched the
paper bag fiercely as she said this to herself, then her eyes filled,
and her lips trembled, as she added, "How could he do it, before her,
too?"

Now Tom was quite guiltless of this offence, and had always nodded to
Polly when they met; but it so happened he had always been alone till
now, and that was why it cut so deeply, especially as Polly never had
approved of Trix. Before she could clear her eyes or steady her face,
a gentleman met her, lifted his hat, smiled, and said pleasantly, "Good
morning, Miss Polly, I 'm glad to meet you." Then, with a sudden change
of voice and manner, he added, "I beg pardon is anything the matter can
I be of service?"

It was very awkward, but it could n't be helped, and all Polly could do
was to tell the truth and make the best of it.

"It 's very silly, but it hurts me to be cut by my old friends. I shall
get used to it presently, I dare say."

Mr. Sydney glanced back, recognized the couple behind them, and
turned round with a disgusted expression. Polly was fumbling for her
handkerchief, and without a word he took both book and bundle from her,
a little bit of kindness that meant a good deal just then. Polly felt
it, and it did her good; hastily wiping the traitorous eyes, she laughed
and said cheerfully, "There, I 'm all right again; thank you, don't
trouble yourself with my parcels."

"No trouble, I assure you, and this book reminds me of what I was about
to say. Have you an hour to spare for my little niece? Her mother wants
her to begin, and desired me to make the inquiry."

"Did she, really?" and Polly looked up at him, as if she suspected him
of inventing the whole thing, out of kindness.

Mr. Sydney smiled, and taking a note from his pocket, presented it,
saying, with a reproachful look, "Behold the proof of my truth, and
never doubt again."

Polly begged pardon, read the note from the little girl's mother, which
was to have been left at her room if she was absent, and gave the
bearer a very grateful look as she accepted this welcome addition to her
pupils. Well pleased at the success of his mission, Sydney artfully led
the conversation to music, and for a time Polly forgot her woes, talking
enthusiastically on her favorite theme. As she reclaimed her book and
bag, at her own door, she said, in her honest way, "Thank you very much
for trying to make me forget my foolish little troubles."

"Then let me say one thing more; though appearances are against him,
I don't believe Tom Shaw saw you. Miss Trix is equal to that sort of
thing, but it is n't like Tom, for with all his foppery he is a good
fellow at heart."

As Mr. Sydney said this, Polly held out her hand with a hearty "Thank
you for that." The young man shook the little hand in the gray woollen
glove, gave her exactly the same bow which he did the Honorable Mrs.
Davenport, and went away, leaving Polly to walk up stairs and address
Puttel with the peculiar remark, "You are a true gentleman! so kind
to say that about Tom. I 'll think it 's so, anyway; and won't I teach
Minnie in my very best style!"

Puttel purred, Nick chirped approvingly, and Polly ate her dinner with
a better appetite than she had expected. But at the bottom of her heart
there was a sore spot still, and the afternoon lessons dragged dismally.
It was dusk when she got home, and as she sat in the firelight eating
her bread and milk, several tears bedewed the little rolls, and even the
home honey had a bitter taste.

"Now this won't do," she broke out all at once; "this is silly and
wicked, and can't be allowed. I 'll try the old plan and put myself
right by doing some little kindness to somebody. Now what shall it be?
O, I know! Fan is going to a party to-night; I 'll run up and help her
dress; she likes to have me, and I enjoy seeing the pretty things. Yes,
and I 'll take her two or three clusters of my daphne, it 's so sweet."

Up got Polly, and taking her little posy, trotted away to the Shaws',
determined to be happy and contented in spite of Trix and hard work.

She found Fanny enduring torment under the hands of the hair-dresser,
who was doing his best to spoil her hair, and distort her head with
a mass of curls, braids, frizzles, and puffs; for though I discreetly
refrain from any particular description, still, judging from the present
fashions, I think one may venture to predict that six years hence they
would be something frightful.

"How kind of you, Polly; I was just wishing you were here to arrange my
flowers. These lovely daphnes will give odor to my camellias, and you
were a dear to bring them. There 's my dress; how do you like it?" said
Fanny, hardly daring to lift her eyes from under the yellow tower on her
head.

"It 's regularly splendid; but how do you ever get into it?" answered
Polly, surveying with girlish interest the cloud of pink and white lace
that lay upon the bed.

"It 's fearfully and wonderfully made, but distractingly becoming, as
you shall see. Trix thinks I 'm going to wear blue, so she has got a
green one, and told Belle it would spoil the effect of mine, as we are
much together, of course. Was n't that sweet of her? Belle came and told
me in, time, and I just got pink, so my amiable sister, that is to be,
won't succeed in her pretty little plot."

"I guess she has been reading the life of Josephine. You know she made
a pretty lady, of whom she was jealous, sit beside her on a green sofa,
which set off her own white dress and spoilt the blue one of her guest,"
answered Polly, busy with the flowers.

"Trix never reads anything; you are the one to pick up clever little
stories. I 'll remember and use this one. Am I done? Yes, that is
charming, is n't it, Polly?" and Fan rose to inspect the success of
Monsieur's long labor.

"You know I don't appreciate a stylish coiffure as I ought, so I like
your hair in the old way best. But this is 'the thing,' I suppose, and
not a word must be said."

"Of course it is. Why, child, I have frizzed and burnt my hair so that I
look like an old maniac with it in its natural state, and have to repair
damages as well as I can. Now put the flowers just here," and Fanny laid
a pink camellia in a nest of fuzz, and stuck a spray of daphne straight
up at the back of her head.

"O, Fan, don't, it looks horridly so!" cried Polly, longing to add a
little beauty to her friend's sallow face by a graceful adjustment of
the flowers.

"Can't help it, that 's the way, and so it must be," answered Fan,
planting another sprig half-way up the tower.

Polly groaned and offered no more suggestions as the work went on; but
when Fan was finished from top to toe, she admired all she honestly
could, and tried to keep her thoughts to herself. But her frank face
betrayed her, for Fanny turned on her suddenly, saying, "You may as
well free your mind, Polly, for I see by your eyes that something don't
suit."

"I was only thinking of what grandma once said, that modesty had gone
out of fashion," answered Polly, glancing at the waist of her friend's
dress, which consisted of a belt, a bit of lace, and a pair of shoulder
straps.

Fanny laughed good-naturedly, saying, as she clasped her necklace, "If I
had such shoulders as yours, I should n't care what the fashion was. Now
don't preach, but put my cloak on nicely, and come along, for I 'm to
meet Tom and Trix, and promised to be there early."

Polly was to be left at home after depositing Fan at Belle's.

"I feel as if I was going myself," she said, as they rolled along.

"I wish you were, and you would be, Polly, if you weren't such a
resolute thing. I 've teased, and begged, and offered anything I have if
you 'll only break your absurd vow, and come and enjoy yourself."

"Thank you; but I won't, so don't trouble your kind heart about me; I 'm
all right," said Polly, stoutly.

But when they drew up before the lighted house, and she found herself
in the midst of the pleasant stir of festivity, the coming and going of
carriages, the glimpses of bright colors, forms, and faces, the bursts
of music, and a general atmosphere of gayety, Polly felt that she was
n't all right, and as she drove away for a dull evening in her lonely
little room, she just cried as heartily as any child denied a stick of
candy.

"It 's dreadful wicked of me, but I can't help it," she sobbed to
herself, in the corner of the carriage. "That music sets me all in a
twitter, and I should have looked nice in Fan's blue tarlatan, and
I know I could behave as well as any one, and have lots of partners,
though I 'm not in that set. Oh, just one good gallop with Mr. Sydney or
Tom! No, Tom would n't ask me there, and I would n't accept if he did.
Oh, me! oh, me! I wish I was as old and homely, and good and happy, as
Miss Mills!"

So Polly made her moan, and by the time she got home, was just in the
mood to go to bed and cry herself to sleep, as girls have a way of doing
when their small affliction becomes unbearable.

But Polly did n't get a chance to be miserable very long, for as she
went up stairs feeling like the most injured girl in the world, she
caught a glimpse of Miss Mills, sewing away with such a bright face that
she could n't resist stopping for a word or two.

"Sit down, my dear, I 'm glad to see you, but excuse me if I go on with
my work, as I 'm in a driving hurry to get these things done to-night,"
said the brisk little lady, with a smile and a nod, as she took a new
needleful of thread, and ran up a seam as if for a wager.

"Let me help you, then; I 'm lazy and cross, and it will do me good,"
said Polly, sitting down with the resigned feeling. "Well, if I can't be
happy, I can be useful, perhaps."

"Thank you, my dear; yes, you can just hem the skirt while I put in the
sleeves, and that will be a great lift."

Polly put on her thimble in silence, but as Miss Mills spread the white
flannel over her lap, she exclaimed, "Why, it looks like a shroud! Is it
one?"

"No, dear, thank God, it is n't, but it might have been, if we had n't
saved the poor little soul," cried Miss Mills, with a sudden brightening
of the face, which made it beautiful in spite of the stiff gray curl
that bobbed on each temple, the want of teeth, and a crooked nose.

"Will you tell me about it? I like to hear your adventures and good
works so much," said Polly, ready to be amused by anything that made her
forget herself.

"Ah, my dear, it 's a very common story, and that 's the saddest part of
it. I 'll tell you all about it, for I think you may be able to help me.
Last night I watched with poor Mary Floyd. She 's dying of consumption,
you know," began Miss Mills, as her nimble fingers flew, and her kind
old face beamed over the work, as if she put a blessing in with every
stitch. "Mary was very low, but about midnight fell asleep, and I was
trying to keep things quiet, when Mrs. Finn she 's the woman of the
house came and beckoned me out, with a scared face. 'Little Jane has
killed herself, and I don't know what to do,' she said, leading me up to
the attic."

"Who was little Jane?" broke in Polly, dropping her work.

"I only knew her as a pale, shy young girl who went in and out, and
seldom spoke to any one. Mrs. Finn told me she was poor, but a busy,
honest, little thing, who did n't mix with the other folks, but lived
and worked alone. 'She has looked so down-hearted and pale for a week,
that I thought she was sick, and asked her about it,' said Mrs. Finn,
'but she thanked me in her bashful way, and said she was pretty well, so
I let her alone. But to-night, as I went up late to bed, I was kind of
impressed to look in and see how the poor thing did, for she had n't
left her room all day. I did look in, and here 's what I found.' As Mrs.
Finn ended she opened the door of the back attic, and I saw about as sad
a sight as these old eyes ever looked at."

"O, what?" cried Polly, pale now with interest.

"A bare room, cold as a barn, and on the bed a little dead, white face
that almost broke my heart, it was so thin, so patient, and so young. On
the table was a bottle half full of laudanum, an old pocket-book, and a
letter. Read that, my dear and don't think hard of little Jane."

Polly took the bit of paper Miss Mills gave her, and read these words:

DEAR MRS. FINN, Please forgive me for the trouble I make you, but I
don't see any other way. I can't get work that pays enough to keep me;
the Dr. says I can't be well unless I rest. I hate to be a burden, so
I 'm going away not to trouble anybody anymore. I 've sold my things to
pay what I owe you. Please let me be as I am, and don't let people come
and look at me. I hope it is n't very wicked, but there don't seem
any room for me in the world, and I 'm not afraid to die now, though
I should be if I stayed and got bad because I had n't strength to keep
right. Give my love to the baby, and so good-by, good-by.

JANE BRYANT.

"O, Miss Mills, how dreadful!" cried Polly, with her eyes so full she
could hardly read the little letter.

"Not so dreadful as it might have been, but a bitter, sad thing to
see that child, only seventeen, lying there in her little clean, old
night-gown, waiting for death to come and take her, because 'there did
n't seem to be any room for her in the world.' Ah, well, we saved her,
for it was n't too late, thank heaven, and the first thing she said was,
'Oh, why did you bring me back?' I 've been nursing her all day, hearing
her story, and trying to show her that there is room and a welcome for
her. Her mother died a year ago, and since then she has been struggling
along alone. She is one of the timid, innocent, humble creatures who
can't push their way, and so get put aside and forgotten. She has
tried all sorts of poorly paid work, could n't live on it decently, got
discouraged, sick, frightened, and could see no refuge from the big, bad
world but to get out of it while she was n't afraid to die. A very old
story, my dear, new and dreadful as it seems to you, and I think it
won't do you any harm to see and help this little girl, who has gone
through dark places that you are never like to know."

"I will; indeed, I will do all I can! Where is she now?" asked Polly,
touched to the heart by the story, so simple yet so sad.

"There," and Miss Mills pointed to the door of her own little bedroom.
"She was well enough to be moved to-night, so I brought her home and
laid her safely in my bed. Poor little soul! she looked about her for
a minute, then the lost look went away, and she gave a great sigh, and
took my hand in both her thin bits of ones, and said, 'O, ma'am, I feel
as if I 'd been born into a new world. Help me to begin again, and I
'll do better.' So I told her she was my child now, and might rest here,
sure of a home as long as I had one."

As Miss Mills spoke in her motherly tone, and cast a proud and happy
look toward the warm and quiet nest in which she had sheltered this
friendless little sparrow, feeling sure that God meant her to keep it
from falling to the ground, Polly put both arms about her neck, and
kissed her withered cheek with as much loving reverence as if she had
been a splendid saint, for in the likeness of this plain old maid she
saw the lovely charity that blesses and saves the world.

"How good you are! Dear Miss Mills, tell me what to do, let me help you,
I 'm ready for anything," said Polly, very humbly, for her own troubles
looked so small and foolish beside the stern hardships which had nearly
had so tragical an end, that she felt heartily ashamed of herself, and
quite burned to atone for them.

Miss, Mills stopped to stroke the fresh cheek opposite, to smile, and
say, "Then, Polly, I think I 'll ask you to go in and say a friendly
word to my little girl. The sight of you will do her good; and you have
just the right way of comforting people, without making a fuss."

"Have I?" said Polly, looking much gratified by the words.

"Yes, dear, you 've the gift of sympathy, and the rare art of showing it
without offending. I would n't let many girls in to see my poor Jenny,
because they 'd only flutter and worry her; but you 'll know what to do;
so go, and take this wrapper with you; it 's done now, thanks to your
nimble fingers."

Polly threw the warm garment over her arm, feeling a thrill of gratitude
that it was to wrap a living girl in, and not to hide away a young heart
that had grown cold too soon. Pushing open the door, she went quietly
into the dimly lighted room, and on the pillow saw a face that drew her
to it with an irresistible power, for it was touched by a solemn shadow
that made its youth pathetic. As she paused at the bedside, thinking the
girl asleep, a pair of hollow, dark eyes opened wide, and looked up at
her; startled at first, then softening with pleasure, at sight of the
bonny face before them, and then a humble, beseeching expression filled
them, as if asking pardon for the rash act nearly committed, and pity
for the hard fate that prompted it. Polly read the language of these
eyes, and answered their mute prayer with a simple eloquence that said
more than any words for she just stooped down and kissed the poor child,
with her own eyes full, and lips that trembled with the sympathy she
could not tell. Jenny put both arms about her neck, and began to shed
the quiet tears that so refresh and comfort heavy hearts when a tender
touch unseals the fountain where they lie.

"Everybody is so kind," she sobbed, "and I was so wicked, I don't
deserve it."

"Oh, yes, you do; don't think of that, but rest and let us pet you. The
old life was too hard for such a little thing as you, and we are going
to try and make the new one ever so much easier and happier," said
Polly, forgetting everything except that this was a girl like herself,
who needed heartening up.

"Do you live here?" asked Jenny, when her tears were wiped away, still
clinging to the new-found friend.

"Yes, Miss Mills lets me have a little room up stairs, and there I have
my cat and bird, my piano and my posy pots, and live like a queen. You
must come up and see me to-morrow if you are able. I 'm often lonely,
for there are no young people in the house to play with me," answered
Polly, smiling hospitably.

"Do you sew?" asked Jenny.

"No, I 'm a music teacher, and trot round giving lessons all day."

"How beautiful it sounds, and how happy you must be, so strong and
pretty, and able to go round making music all the time," sighed Jenny,
looking with respectful admiration at the plump, firm hand held in both
her thin and feeble ones.

It did sound pleasant even to Polly's ears, and she felt suddenly so
rich, and so contented, that she seemed a different creature from the
silly girl who cried because she could n't go to the party. It passed
through her mind like a flash, the contrast between her life, and that
of the wan creature lying before her, and she felt as if she could not
give enough out of her abundance to this needy little sister, who had
nothing in the wide world but the life just saved to her. That minute
did more for Polly than many sermons, or the wisest books, for it
brought her face to face with bitter truths, showed her the dark side
of life, and seemed to blow away her little vanities, her frivolous
desires, like a wintry wind, that left a wholesome atmosphere behind.
Sitting on the bedside, Polly listened while Jane told the story, which
was so new to her listener, that every word sank deep into her heart,
and never was forgotten.

"Now you must go to sleep. Don't cry nor think, nor do anything but
rest. That will please Miss Mills best. I 'll leave the doors open, and
play you a lullaby that you can't resist. Good night, dear." And with
another kiss, Polly went away to sit in the darkness of her own room,
playing her softest airs till the tired eyes below were shut, and little
Jane seemed to float away on a sea of pleasant sounds, into the happier
life which had just dawned for her.

Polly had fully intended to be very miserable, and cry herself to sleep;
but when she lay down at last, her pillow seemed very soft, her little
room very lovely, with the firelight flickering on all the home-like
objects, and her new-blown roses breathing her a sweet good-night. She
no longer felt an injured, hard-working, unhappy Polly, but as if quite
burdened with blessings, for which she was n't half grateful enough. She
had heard of poverty and suffering, in the vague, far-off way, which is
all that many girls, safe in happy homes, ever know of it; but now she
had seen it, in a shape which she could feel and understand, and life
grew more earnest to her from that minute. So much to do in the great,
busy world, and she had done so little. Where should she begin?
Then, like an answer came little Jenny's words, now taking a 'new
significance' to Polly's mind, "To be strong, and beautiful, and go
round making music all the time." Yes, she could do that; and with a
very earnest prayer, Polly asked for the strength of an upright soul,
the beauty of a tender heart, the power to make her life a sweet and
stirring song, helpful while it lasted, remembered when it died.

Little Jane's last thought had been to wish with all her might, that
"God would bless the dear, kind girl up there, and give her all she
asked." I think both prayers, although too humble to be put in words,
went up together, for in the fulness of time they were beautifully
answered.




CHAPTER X. BROTHERS AND SISTERS


POLLY'S happiest day was Sunday, for Will never failed to spend it with
her. Instead of sleeping later than usual that morning, she was always
up bright and early, flying round to get ready for her guest, for Will
came to breakfast, and they made a long day of it. Will considered his
sister the best and prettiest girl going, and Polly, knowing well that a
time would come when he would find a better and a prettier, was grateful
for his good opinion, and tried to deserve it. So she made her room and
herself as neat and inviting as possible, and always ran to meet him
with a bright face and a motherly greeting, when he came tramping in,
ruddy, brisk, and beaming, with the brown loaf and the little pot of
beans from the bake-house near by.

They liked a good country breakfast, and nothing gave Polly more
satisfaction than to see her big boy clear the dishes, empty the little
coffee-pot, and then sit and laugh at her across the ravaged table.
Another pleasure was to let him help clear away, as they used to do
at home, while the peals of laughter that always accompanied this
performance did Miss Mills' heart good to hear, for the room was so
small and Will so big that he seemed to be everywhere at once, and Polly
and Puttel were continually dodging his long arms and legs. Then they
used to inspect the flower pots, pay Nick a visit, and have a little
music as a good beginning for the day, after which they went to church
and dined with Miss Mills, who considered Will "an excellent young
man." If the afternoon was fair, they took a long walk together over
the bridges into the country, or about the city streets full of Sabbath
quietude. Most people meeting them would have seen only an awkward young
man, with a boy's face atop of his tall body, and a quietly dressed,
fresh faced little woman hanging on his arm; but a few people, with eyes
to read romances and pleasant histories everywhere, found something very
attractive in this couple, and smiled as they passed, wondering if they
were young, lovers, or country cousins "looking round."

If the day was stormy, they stayed at home, reading, writing letters,
talking over their affairs, and giving each other good advice; for,
though Will was nearly three years younger than Polly, he could n't for
the life of him help assuming amusingly venerable airs, when he became
a Freshman. In the twilight he had a good lounge on the sofa, and Polly
sung to him, which arrangement he particularly enjoyed, it was so "cosy
and homey." At nine o'clock, Polly packed his bag with clean clothes,
nicely mended, such remnants of the festive tea as were transportable,
and kissed him "good-night," with many injunctions to muffle up his
throat going over the bridge, and be sure that his feet were dry
and warm when he went to bed. All of which Will laughed at, accepted
graciously, and did n't obey; but he liked it, and trudged away for
another week's work, rested, cheered, and strengthened by that quiet,
happy day with Polly, for he had been brought up to believe in home
influences, and this brother and sister loved one another dearly, and
were not ashamed to own it.

One other person enjoyed the humble pleasures of these Sundays quite as
much as Polly and Will. Maud used to beg to come to tea, and Polly, glad
to do anything for those who had done a good deal for her, made a point
of calling for the little girl as they came home from their walk, or
sending Will to escort her in the carriage, which Maud always managed
to secure if bad weather threatened to quench her hopes. Tom and Fanny
laughed at her fancy, but she did not tire of it, for the child was
lonely, and found something in that little room which the great house
could not give her.

Maud was twelve now; a pale, plain child, with sharp, intelligent eyes,
and a busy little mind, that did a good deal more thinking than anybody
imagined. She was just at the unattractive, fidgety age when no one
knew what to do with her, and so let her fumble her way up as she could,
finding pleasure in odd things, and living much alone, for she did not
go to school, because her shoulders were growing round, and Mrs.
Shaw would not "allow her figure to be spoiled." That suited Maud
excellently; and whenever her father spoke of sending her again, or
getting a governess, she was seized with bad headaches, a pain in her
back, or weakness of the eyes, at which Mr. Shaw laughed, but let her
holiday go on. Nobody seemed to care much for plain, pug-nosed little
Maudie; her father was busy, her mother nervous and sick, Fanny absorbed
in her own affairs, and Tom regarded her as most young men do their
younger sisters, as a person born for his amusement and convenience,
nothing more. Maud admired Tom with all her heart, and made a little
slave of herself to him, feeling well repaid if he merely said, "Thank
you, chicken," or did n't pinch her nose, or nip her ear, as he had a
way of doing, "just as if I was a doll, or a dog, and had n't got any
feelings," she sometimes said to Fanny, when some service or sacrifice
had been accepted without gratitude or respect. It never occurred to
Tom, when Maud sat watching him with her face full of wistfulness, that
she wanted to be petted as much as ever he did in his neglected boyhood,
or that when he called her "Pug" before people, her little feelings were
as deeply wounded as his used to be, when the boys called him "Carrots."
He was fond of her in his fashion, but he did n't take the trouble to
show it, so Maud worshipped him afar off, afraid to betray the affection
that no rebuff could kill or cool.

One snowy Sunday afternoon Tom lay on the sofa in his favorite attitude,
reading "Pendennis" for the fourth time, and smoking like a chimney as
he did so. Maud stood at the window watching the falling flakes with an
anxious countenance, and presently a great sigh broke from her.

"Don't do that again, chicken, or you 'll blow me away. What's the
matter?" asked Tom, throwing down his book with a yawn that threatened
dislocation.

"I 'm afraid I can't go to Polly's," answered Maud, disconsolately.

"Of course you can't; it 's snowing hard, and father won't be home
with the carriage till this evening. What are you always cutting off to
Polly's for?"

"I like it; we have such nice times, and Will is there, and we bake
little johnny-cakes in the baker before the fire, and they sing, and it
is so pleasant."

"Warbling johnny-cakes must be interesting. Come and tell me all about
it."

"No, you 'll only laugh at me."

"I give you my word I won't, if I can help it; but I really am dying of
curiosity to know what you do down there. You like to hear secrets, so
tell me yours, and I 'll be as dumb as an oyster."

"It is n't a secret, and you would n't care for it. Do you want another
pillow?" she added, as Tom gave his a thump.

"This will do; but why you women always stick tassels and fringe all
over a sofa-cushion, to tease and tickle a fellow, is what I don't
understand."

"One thing that Polly does Sunday nights, is to take Will's head in her
lap, and smooth his forehead. It rests him after studying so hard, she
says. If you don't like the pillow, I could do that for you, 'cause you
look as if you were more tired of studying than Will," said Maud, with
some hesitation, but an evident desire to be useful and agreeable.

"Well, I don't care if you do try it, for I am confoundedly tired." And
Tom laughed, as he recalled the frolic he had been on the night before.

Maud established herself with great satisfaction, and Tom owned that a
silk apron was nicer than a fuzzy cushion.

"Do you like it?" she asked, after a few strokes over the hot forehead,
which she thought was fevered by intense application to Greek and Latin.

"Not bad; play away," was the gracious reply, as Tom shut his eyes,
and lay so still that Maud was charmed at the success of her attempt.
Presently, she said, softly, "Tom, are you asleep?"

"Just turning the corner."

"Before you get quite round would you please tell me what a Public
Admonition is?"

"What do you want to know for?" demanded Tom, opening his eyes very
wide.

"I heard Will talking about Publics and Privates, and I meant to ask
him, but I forgot."

"What did he say?"

"I don't remember; it was about somebody who cut prayers, and got
a Private, and had done all sorts of bad things, and had one or two
Publics. I did n't hear the name and did n't care; I only wanted to know
what the words meant."

"So Will tells tales, does he?" and Tom's forehead wrinkled with a
frown.

"No, he did n't; Polly knew about it and asked him."

"Will's a 'dig,'" growled Tom, shutting his eyes again, as if nothing
more could be said of the delinquent William.

"I don't care if he is; I like him very much, and so does Polly."

"Happy Fresh!" said Tom, with a comical groan.

"You need n't sniff at him, for he is nice, and treats me with respect,"
cried Maud, with an energy that made Tom laugh in her face.

"He 's good to Polly always, and puts on her cloak for her, and says 'my
dear,' and kisses her 'good-night,' and don't think it 's silly, and I
wish I had a brother just like him, yes, I do!" And Maud showed signs of
woe, for her disappointment about going was very great.

"Bless my boots! what's the chicken ruffling up her little feathers and
pecking at me for? Is that the way Polly soothes the best of brothers?"
said Tom, still laughing.

"Oh, I forgot! there, I won't cry; but I do want to go," and Maud
swallowed her tears, and began to stroke again.

Now Tom's horse and sleigh were in the stable, for he meant to drive out
to College that evening, but he did n't take Maud's hint. It was less
trouble to lie still, and say in a conciliatory tone, "Tell me some more
about this good boy, it 's very interesting."

"No, I shan't, but I 'll tell about Puttel's playing on the piano," said
Maud, anxious to efface the memory of her momentary weakness. "Polly
points to the right key with a little stick, and Puttel sits on the
stool and pats each key as it 's touched, and it makes a tune. It 's
so funny to see her, and Nick perches on the rack and sings as if he 'd
kill himself."

"Very thrilling," said Tom, in a sleepy tone.

Maud felt that her conversation was not as interesting as she hoped, and
tried again.

"Polly thinks you are handsomer than Mr. Sydney."

"Much obliged."

"I asked which she thought had the nicest face, and she said yours was
the handsomest, and his the best."

"Does he ever go there?" asked a sharp voice behind them; and looking
round Maud saw Fanny in the big chair, cooking her feet over the
register.

"I never saw him there; he sent up some books one day, and Will teased
her about it."

"What did she do?" demanded Fanny. "Oh, she shook him."

"What a spectacle!" and Tom looked as if he would have enjoyed seeing
it, but Fanny's face grew so forbidding, that Tom's little dog, who was
approaching to welcome her, put his tail between his legs and fled under
the table.

"Then there is n't any 'Sparking Sunday night'?" sung Tom, who appeared
to have waked up again.

"Of course not. Polly is n't going to marry anybody; she 's going to
keep house for Will when he 's a minister, I heard her say so," cried
Maud, with importance.

"What a fate for pretty Polly!" ejaculated Tom.

"She likes it, and I 'm sure I should think she would; it 's beautiful
to hear 'em plan it all out."

"Any more gossip to retail, Pug?" asked Tom a minute after, as Maud
seemed absorbed in visions of the future.

"He told a funny story about blowing up one of the professors. You
never told us, so I suppose you did n't know it. Some bad fellow put a
torpedo, or some sort of powder thing, under the chair, and it went off
in the midst of the lesson, and the poor man flew up, frightened most
to pieces, and the boys ran with pails of water to put the fire out. But
the thing that made Will laugh most was, that the very fellow who did it
got his trousers burnt trying to put out the fire, and he asked the is
it Faculty or President?"

"Either will do," murmured Tom, who was shaking with suppressed
laughter.

"Well, he asked 'em to give him some new ones, and they did give him
money enough, for a nice pair; but he got some cheap ones, with horrid
great stripes on 'em, and always wore 'em to that particular class,
'which was one too many for the fellows,' Will said, and with the rest
of the money he had a punch party. Was n't it dreadful?"

"Awful!" And Tom exploded into a great laugh, that made Fanny cover her
ears, and the little dog bark wildly.

"Did you know that bad boy?" asked innocent Maud.

"Slightly," gasped Tom, in whose wardrobe at college those identical
trousers were hanging at that moment.

"Don't make such a noise, my head aches dreadfully," said Fanny,
fretfully.

"Girls' heads always do ache," answered Tom, subsiding from a roar into
a chuckle.

"What pleasure you boys can find in such ungentlemanly things, I don't
see," said Fanny, who was evidently out of sorts.

"As much a mystery to you as it is to us, how you girls can like to
gabble and prink from one week's end to the other," retorted Tom.

There was a pause after this little passage-at-arms, but Fan wanted to
be amused, for time hung heavily on her hands, so she asked, in a more
amiable tone, "How 's Trix?"

"As sweet as ever," answered Tom, gruffly.

"Did she scold you, as usual?"

"She just did."

"What was the matter?"

"Well, I 'll leave it to you if this is n't unreasonable: she won't
dance with me herself, yet don't like me to go it with anybody else. I
said, I thought, if a fellow took a girl to a party, she ought to dance
with him once, at least, especially if they were engaged. She said that
was the very reason why she should n't do it; so, at the last hop, I let
her alone, and had a gay time with Belle, and to-day Trix gave it to me
hot and heavy, coming home from church."

"If you go and engage yourself to a girl like that, I don't know what
you can expect. Did she wear her Paris hat to-day?" added Fan, with
sudden interest in her voice.

"She wore some sort of a blue thing, with a confounded bird of Paradise
in it, that kept whisking into my face every time she turned her head."

"Men never know a pretty thing when they see it. That hat is perfectly
lovely."

"They know a lady when they see her, and Trix don't look like one; I
can't say where the trouble is, but there 's too much fuss and feathers
for my taste. You are twice as stylish, yet you never look loud or
fast."

Touched by this unusual compliment, Fanny drew her chair nearer as she
replied with complacency, "Yes, I flatter myself I do know how to dress
well. Trix never did; she 's fond of gay colors, and generally looks
like a walking rainbow."

"Can't you give her a hint? Tell her not to wear blue gloves anyway, she
knows I hate 'em."

"I 've done my best for your sake, Tom, but she is a perverse creature,
and don't mind a word I say, even about things much more objectionable
than blue gloves."

"Maudie, run and bring me my other cigar case, it 's lying round
somewhere."

Maud went; and as soon as the door was shut, Tom rose on his elbow,
saying in a cautiously lowered voice, "Fan, does Trix paint?"

"Yes, and draws too," answered Fanny, with a sly laugh.

"Come, you know what I mean; I 've a right to ask and you ought to
tell," said Tom, soberly, for he was beginning to find that being
engaged was not unmitigated bliss.

"What makes you think she does?"

"Well, between ourselves," said Tom, looking a little sheepish, but
anxious to set his mind at rest, "she never will let me kiss her on her
cheek, nothing but an unsatisfactory peck at her lips. Then the
other day, as I took a bit of heliotrope out of a vase to put in my
button-hole, I whisked a drop of water into her face; I was going to
wipe it off, but she pushed my hand away, and ran to the glass, where
she carefully dabbed it dry, and came back with one cheek redder than
the other. I did n't say anything, but I had my suspicions. Come now,
does she?"

"Yes, she does; but don't say a word to her, for she 'll never forgive
my telling if she knew it."

"I don't care for that; I don't like it, and I won't have it," said Tom,
decidedly.

"You can't help yourself. Half the girls do it, either paint or powder,
darken their lashes with burnt hair-pins, or take cologne on lumps of
sugar or belladonna to make their eyes bright. Clara tried arsenic for
her complexion, but her mother stopped it," said Fanny, betraying the
secrets of the prison-house in the basest manner.

"I knew you girls were a set of humbugs, and very pretty ones, too,
some of you, but I can't say I like to see you painted up like a lot of
actresses," said Tom, with an air of disgust.

"I don't do anything of the sort, or need it, but Trix does; and having
chosen her, you must abide your choice, for better or worse."

"It has n't come to that yet," muttered Tom, as he lay down again with a
rebellious air.

Maud's return put an end to these confidences, though Tom excited her
curiosity by asking the mysterious question, "I say, Fan, is Polly up to
that sort of thing?"

"No, she thinks it 's awful. When she gets pale and dragged out she will
probably change her mind."

"I doubt it," said Tom.

"Polly says it is n't proper to talk secrets before people who ain't in
'em," observed Maud, with dignity.

"Do, for mercy sake, stop talking about Polly, I 'm sick to death of
it," cried Fanny, snappishly.

"Hullo!" and Tom sat up to take a survey. "I thought you were bosom
friends, and as spoony as ever."

"Well, I am fond of Polly, but I get tired of hearing Maud sing her
praises everlastingly. Now don't go and repeat that, chatterbox."

"My goodness, is n't she cross?" whispered Maud to Tom.

"As two sticks; let her be. There 's the bell; see who it is, Pug,"
answered Tom, as a tingle broke the silence of the house.

Maud went to peep over the banisters, and came flying back in a rapture.

"It 's Will come for me! Can't I go? It don't snow hard, and I 'll
bundle up, and you can send for me when papa comes."

"I don't care what you do," answered Fan, who was in a very bad temper.

Without waiting for any other permission, Maud rushed away to get ready.
Will would n't come up, he was so snowy, and Fanny was glad, because
with her he was bashful, awkward, and silent, so Tom went down and
entertained him with Maud's report. They were very good friends, but led
entirely different lives, Will being a "dig," and Tom a "bird," or,
in plain English, one was a hard student, and the other a jolly young
gentleman. Tom had rather patronized Will, who did n't like it, and
showed that he did n't by refusing to borrow money of him, or accept
any of his invitations to join the clubs and societies to which Tom
belonged. So Shaw let Milton alone, and he got on very well in his own
way, doggedly sticking to his books, and resisting all temptations
but those of certain libraries, athletic games, and such inexpensive
pleasures as were within his means; for this benighted youth had not yet
discovered that college nowadays is a place in which to "sky-lark," not
to study.

When Maud came down and trotted contentedly away, holding Will's
hand, Tom watched them out of sight, and then strolled about the house
whistling and thinking, till he went to sleep in his father's arm-chair,
for want of something better to do. He awoke to the joys of a solitary
tea, for his mother never came down, and Fanny shut herself and her
headache up in her own room.

"Well, this is cheerful," he said, as the clock struck eight, and his
fourth cigar came to an end. "Trix is mad, and Fan in the dumps, so I
'll take myself off. Guess I 'll go round to Polly's, and ask Will to
drive out with me, and save him the walk, poor chap. Might bring Midget
home, it will please her, and there 's no knowing when the governor will
be back."

With these thoughts in his head, Tom leisurely got under way, and left
his horse at a neighboring stable, for he meant to make a little call,
and see what it was Maud enjoyed so much.

"Polly is holding forth," he said to himself, as he went quietly up
stairs, and the steady murmur of a pleasant voice came down to him. Tom
laughed at Polly's earnest way of talking when she was interested
in anything. But he liked it because it was so different from the
coquettish clatter of most of the girls with whom he talked. Young men
often laugh at the sensible girls whom they secretly respect, and
affect to admire the silly ones whom they secretly despise, because
earnestness, intelligence, and womanly dignity are not the fashion.

The door was ajar, and pausing in the dark entry Tom took a survey
before he went in. The prospect was not dazzling, but home-like and
pleasant. The light of a bright fire filled the little room, and down
on a stool before it was Maud tending Puttel, and watching with deep
interest the roasting of an apple intended for her special benefit. On
the couch lounged Will, his thoughtful eyes fixed on Polly, who, while
she talked, smoothed the broad forehead of her "yellow-haired laddie"
in a way that Tom thought an immense improvement on Maud's performance.
They had evidently been building castles in the air, for Polly was
saying in her most impressive manner, "Well, whatever you do, Will,
don't have a great, costly church that takes so much money to build
and support it that you have nothing to give away. I like the plain,
old-fashioned churches, built for use, not show, where people met for
hearty praying and preaching, and where everybody made their own music
instead of listening to opera singers, as we do now. I don't care if
the old churches were bare and cold, and the seats hard, there was real
piety in them, and the sincerity of it was felt in the lives of the
people. I don't want a religion that I put away with my Sunday clothes,
and don't take out till the day comes round again; I want something to
see and feel and live by day-by-day, and I hope you 'll be one of the
true ministers, who can teach by precept and example, how to get and
keep it."

"I hope I shall be, Polly, but you know they say that in families, if
there is a boy who can't do anything else, they make a minister of him.
I sometimes think I ain't good for much, and that seems to me the reason
why I should n't even try to be a minister," said Will, smiling, yet
looking as if with all his humility he did have faith in the aspirations
that came to him in his best moments.

"Some one said that very thing to father once, and I remember he
answered, 'I am glad to give my best and brightest son to the service of
God.'"

"Did he say that?" and Will's color rose, for the big, book-loving
fellow was as sensitive as a girl to the praise of those dearest to him.

"Yes," said Polly, unconsciously giving the strongest stimulus to her
brother's hope and courage. "Yes, and he added, 'I shall let my boys
follow the guide that is in them, and only ask of them to use their
gifts conscientiously, and be honest, useful men.'"

"So we will! Ned is doing well out West, and I 'm hard at it here. If
father does his best to give us the chance we each want, the least we
can do is to work with a will."

"Whatever you do, you can't help working with a Will," cried Tom, who
had been so interested, that he forgot he was playing eavesdropper.

Polly flew up, looking so pleased and surprised, that Tom reproached
himself for not having called oftener.

"I 've come for Maud," he announced, in a paternal tone, which made that
young lady open her eyes.

"I can't go till my apple is done; besides, it is n't nine yet, and Will
is going to take me along, when he goes. I 'd rather have him."

"I 'm going to take you both in the cutter. The storm is over, but it is
heavy walking, so you 'll drive out with me, old man?" said Tom, with a
nod at Will.

"Of course he will; and thank you very much. I 've been trying to keep
him all night; Miss Mills always manages to find a corner for stray
people, but he insists on going, so as to get to work early to-morrow,"
said Polly, delighted to see that Tom was taking off his coat, as if he
meant to wait for Maud's apple, which Polly blessed for being so slow to
cook.

Putting her guest into the best chair, Polly sat down and beamed at him
with such hospitable satisfaction, that Tom went up several pegs in his
own estimation.

"You don't come very often, so we are rather over-powered when you do
honor us," she said, demurely.

"Well, you, know we fellows are so busy, we have n't much time to enjoy
ourselves," answered Tom.

"Ahem!" said Will, loudly.

"Take a troche," said Tom.

Then they both burst out laughing, and Polly, fully understanding
the joke, joined them, saying, "Here are some peanuts, Tom; do enjoy
yourself while you can."

"Now I call that a delicate compliment!" And Tom, who had not lost his
early relish for this sort of refreshment, though he seldom indulged
his passion nowadays, because peanuts are considered vulgar, fell to
cracking and munching with great satisfaction.

"Do you remember the first visit I made at your house, how you gave
me peanuts, coming from the depot, and frightened me out of my wits,
pretending the coachman was tipsy?" asked Polly.

"Of course I do, and how we coasted one day," answered Tom, laughing.

"Yes, and the velocipede; you 've got the scar of that yet, I see."

"I remember how you stood by me while it was sewed up; that was very
plucky, Polly."

"I was dreadfully afraid, but I remember I wanted to seem very brave,
because you 'd called me a coward."

"Did I? Ought to have been ashamed of myself. I used to rough you
shamefully, Polly, and you were so good-natured, you let me do it."

"Could n't help myself," laughed Polly. "I did use to think you were an
awful boy, but seems to me I rather liked it."

"She had so much of it at home, she got used to it," put in Will,
pulling the little curl behind Polly's ear.

"You boys never teased me as Tom did, that 's the reason it amused me, I
suppose; novelty hath charms, you know."

"Grandma used to lecture Tom for plaguing you, Polly, and he used to say
he 'd be a tip-top boy, but he was n't," observed Maud, with a venerable
air.

"Dear old grandma; she did her best, but I 'm a bad lot," said Tom, with
a shake of the head and a sober face.

"It always seems as if she must be up in her rooms, and I can't get used
to finding them empty," added Polly, softly.

"Father would n't have anything moved, and Tom sits up there sometimes;
it makes him feel good, he says," said Maud, who had a talent for
betraying trifles which people preferred should not be mentioned in
public.

"You 'd better hurry up your apple, for if it is n't done pretty soon,
you 'll have to leave it, Pug," said Tom, looking annoyed.

"How is Fan?" asked Polly, with tact.

"Well, Fan is rather under the weather; says she 's dyspeptic, which
means cross."

"She is cross, but she 's sick too, for I found her crying one day, and
she said nobody cared about her, and she might as well be dead," added
Maud, having turned her apple with tender care.

"We must try to cheer her up, among us. If I was n't so busy I 'd like
to devote myself to her, she has done so much for me," said Polly,
gratefully.

"I wish you could. I can't understand her, for she acts like a
weathercock, and I never know how I 'm going to find her. I hate to have
her mope so, but, upon my life, I don't know what to do," said Tom; but
as he uttered the words, something was suggested by the sight before
him. Chairs were few, and Polly had taken half of Will's when they drew
round the fire. Now she was leaning against him, in a cosy, confiding
way, delightful to behold, while Will's strong arm went round her with
a protecting air, which said, as plainly as any words, that this big
brother and small sister knew how to love and help one another. It was a
pleasant little picture, all the pleasanter for its unconsciousness, and
Tom found it both suggestive and agreeable.

"Poor old Fan, she don't get much petting; maybe that 's what she wants.
I 'll try it and see, for she stands by me like a trump. If she was
a rosy, cosy little woman, like Polly, it would come easier, though,"
thought Tom, as he meditatively ate his last nut, feeling that fraternal
affection could not be very difficult of demonstration, to brothers
blessed with pretty, good-tempered sisters.

"I told Tom about the bad fellow who blew up the professor, and he said
he knew him, slightly; and I was so relieved, because I had a kind of a
feeling that it was Tom himself, you and Will laughed so about it."

Maud had a queer way of going on with her own thoughts, and suddenly
coming out with whatever lay uppermost, regardless of time, place, or
company. As this remark fell from her, there was a general smile, and
Polly said, with mock solemnity, "It was a sad thing, and I 've no doubt
that misguided young man is very sorry for it now."

"He looked perfectly bowed down with remorse last time I saw him," said
Will, regarding Tom with eyes full of fun, for Will was a boy as well as
a bookworm, and relished a joke as well as scatter-brained Tom.

"He always is remorseful after a scrape, I 've understood, for he is n't
a very bad fellow, only his spirits are one too many for him, and he is
n't as fond of his book as another fellow I know."

"I 'm afraid he 'll he expelled if he don't mind," said Polly,
warningly.

"Should n't wonder if he was, he 's such an unlucky dog," answered Tom,
rather soberly.

"I hope he 'll remember that his friends will be very much disappointed
if he is. He might make them so proud and happy; that I guess he will,
for he is n't half as thoughtless as he makes himself out," said Polly,
looking across at Tom with such friendly eyes that he was quite touched,
though of course he did n't show it.

"Thank you, Polly; he may pull through, but I have my doubts. Now old
man, let us 'pud' along; it 's getting late for the chicken," he added,
relapsing into the graceful diction with which a classical education
gifts its fortunate possessor.

Taking advantage of the moment while Will was wrestling with his boots
in the closet, and Maud was absorbed in packing her apple into a large
basket, Polly said to Tom in a low tone, "Thank you very much, for being
so kind to Will."

"Bless your heart, I have n't done anything; he 's such a proud fellow
he won't let me," answered Tom.

"But you do in many little ways; to-night, for example. Do you think
I don't know that the suit of clothes he 's just got would have cost a
good deal more, if your tailor had n't made them? He 's only a boy,
and don't understand things yet; but I know your way of helping proud
people; so that they don't find it out, and I do thank you, Tom, so
much."

"Oh, come, Polly, that won't do. What do you know about tailors and
college matters?" said Tom, looking as much confused as if she had found
him out in something reprehensible.

"I don't know much, and that 's the reason why I 'm grateful for your
kindness to Will. I don't care what stories they tell about you, I 'm
sure, you won't lead him into trouble, but keep him straight, for my
sake. You know I 've lost one brother, and Will takes Jimmy's place to
me now."

The tears in Polly's eyes as she said that made Tom vow a tremendous vow
within himself to stand by Will through thick and thin, and "keep him
straight for Polly's sake"; feeling all the time how ill-fitted he was
for such a task.

"I 'll do my best," he said, heartily, as he pressed the hand Polly gave
him, with a look which assured her that he felt the appeal to his honor,
and that henceforth the country lad was safe from all the temptations
Tom could have offered him.

"There! now I shall give that to mamma to take her pills in; it 's
just what she likes, and it pleases her to be thought of," said Maud,
surveying her gift with complacency, as she put on her things.

"You 're a good little soul, to remember poor mum, said Tom, with an
approving nod.

"Well, she was so pleased with the grapes you brought her, I thought I
'd try something, and maybe she 'd say 'Thank you, darling,' to me too.
Do you think she will?" whispered Maud, with the wistful look so often
seen on her little plain face.

"See if she don't;" and to Maud's great surprise Tom did n't laugh at
her project.

"Good night, dear; take care of yourself, and keep your muffler round
your mouth going over the bridge, or you 'll be as hoarse as a crow
to-morrow," said Polly, as she kissed her brother, who returned it
without looking as if he thought it "girl's nonsense" Then the three
piled into the sleigh and drove off, leave Polly nodding on the
doorstep.

Maud found the drive altogether too short, but was consoled by the
promise of a longer one if the sleighing lasted till next Saturday: and
when Tom ran up to bid his mother good-by, and give her a hint about
Maud's gift, she stayed below to say, at the last minute, in unconscious
imitation of Polly.

"Good night; take care of yourself, my dear."

Tom laughed, and was about to pinch the much enduring little nose; but,
as if the words reminded him of something, he gave her a kiss instead, a
piece of forbearance which almost took Maud's breath away with surprise
and gratification.

It was rather a silent drive, for Will obediently kept his muffler up,
and Tom fell into a brown study.

He was not much given to reflection, but occasionally indulged when
something gave him a turn in that direction, and at such times he was as
sober and sincere as could be desired. Any one might have lectured him
for an hour without doing as much good as that little call and the chat
that grew out of it, for, though nothing very wise or witty was
said, many things were suggested, and every one knows that persuasive
influences are better than any amount of moralizing. Neither Polly nor
Will tried to do anything of the sort, and that was the charm of it.
Nobody likes to be talked to, but nobody can resist the eloquence of
unconscious preaching. With all his thoughtlessness, Tom was quick to
see and feel these things, and was not spoilt enough yet to laugh at
them. The sight of Will and Polly's simple affection for one another
reminded him of a neglected duty so pleasantly, that he could not forget
it. Talking of early days made him wish he could go back and start
again, doing better. Grandma's name recalled the tender memory that
always did him good, and the thought that Polly trusted her dearest
brother to his care stirred up a manful desire to deserve the
confidence. Tortures would n't have drawn a word of all this from him,
but it had its effect, for boys don't leave their hearts and consciences
behind them when they enter college, and little things of this sort do
much to keep both from being damaged by the four years' scrimmage which
begins the battle of life for most of them.




CHAPTER XI. NEEDLES AND TONGUES


DEAR POLLY, The Sewing Circle meets at our house this P. M. This is in
your line, so do come and help me through. I shall depend on you.

Yours ever, FAN.

"Bad news, my dear?" asked Miss Mills, who had just handed the note to
Polly as she came in one noon, a few weeks after Jenny's arrival.

Polly told her what it was, adding, "I suppose I ought to go and help
Fanny, but I can't say I want to. The girls talk about things I have
nothing to do with, and I don't find their gossip very amusing. I 'm an
outsider, and they only accept me on Fan's account; so I sit in a corner
and sew, while they chatter and laugh."

"Would n't it be a good chance to say a word for Jenny? She wants work,
and these young ladies probably have quantities done somewhere. Jenny
does fine work exquisitely, and begins to feel anxious to be earning
something. I don't want her to feel dependent and unhappy, and a little
well-paid sewing would be all she needs to do nicely. I can get it for
her by running round to my friends, but I really have n't the time, till
I get the Mullers off. They are paupers here, but out West they can take
care of themselves, so I 've begged the money to send them, and as soon
as I can get them some clothes, off they go. That 's the way to help
people help themselves," and Miss Mills clashed her big scissors
energetically, as she cut out a little red flannel shirt.

"I know it is, and I want to help, but I don't know where to begin,"
said Polly, feeling quite oppressed with the immensity of the work.

"We can't any of us do all we would like, but we can do our best for
every case that comes to us, and that helps amazingly. Begin with Jenny,
my dear; tell those girls about her, and if I 'm not much mistaken, you
will find them ready to help, for half the time it is n't hardness of
heart, but ignorance or thoughtlessness on the part of the rich, that
makes them seem so careless of the poor."

"To tell the truth, I 'm afraid of being laughed at, if I try to talk
seriously about such things to the girls," said Polly, frankly.

"You believe that 'such things' are true? You are sincere in your wish
to help better them, and you respect those who work for that end?"

"Yes, I do."

"Then, my dear, can't you bear a little ridicule for the sake of a good
cause? You said yesterday that you were going to make it a principle of
your life, to help up your sex as far and as fast as you could. It did
my heart good to hear you say it, for I was sure that in time you would
keep your word. But, Polly, a principle that can't bear being laughed
at, frowned on, and cold-shouldered, is n't worthy of the name."

"I want to be strong-minded in the real sense of the word, but I don't
like to be called so by people who don't understand my meaning; and
I shall be if I try to make the girls think soberly about anything
sensible or philanthropic. They call me old-fashioned now, and I 'd
rather be thought that, though it is n't pleasant, than be set down as
a rampant woman's rights reformer," said Polly, in whose memory many
laughs, and snubs, and sarcasms still lingered, forgiven but not
forgotten.

"This love and thought and care for those weaker, poorer, or worse than
ourselves, which we call Christian charity, is a very old fashion, my
dear. It began eighteen hundred years ago, and only those who honestly
follow the beautiful example set us then, learn how to get genuine
happiness out of life. I 'm not a 'rampant woman's rights reformer,'"
added Miss Mills, with a smile at Polly's sober face; "but I think that
women can do a great deal for each other, if they will only stop fearing
what 'people will think,' and take a hearty interest in whatever is
going to fit their sisters and themselves to deserve and enjoy the
rights God gave them. There are so many ways in which this can be done,
that I wonder they don't see and improve them. I don't ask you to go and
make speeches, only a few have the gift for that, but I do want every
girl and woman to feel this duty, and make any little sacrifice of time
or feeling that may be asked of them, because there is so much to do,
and no one can do it as well as ourselves, if we only think so."

"I 'll try!" said Polly, influenced more by her desire to keep Miss
Mills' good opinion than any love of self-sacrifice for her sex. It was
rather a hard thing to ask of a shy, sensitive girl, and the kind old
lady knew it, for in spite of the gray hair and withered face, her heart
was very young, and her own girlish trials not forgotten. But she
knew also that Polly had more influence over others than she herself
suspected, simply because of her candid, upright nature; and that while
she tried to help others, she was serving herself in a way that would
improve heart and soul more than any mere social success she might gain
by following the rules of fashionable life, which drill the character
out of girls till they are as much alike as pins in a paper, and have
about as much true sense and sentiment in their little heads. There was
good stuff in Polly, unspoiled as yet, and Miss Mills was only acting
out her principle of women helping each other. The wise old lady saw
that Polly had reached that point where the girl suddenly blooms into
a woman, asking something more substantial than pleasure to satisfy the
new aspirations that are born; a time as precious and important to the
after-life, as the hour when the apple blossoms fall, and the young
fruit waits for the elements to ripen or destroy the harvest.

Polly did not know this, and was fortunate in possessing a friend who
knew what influences would serve her best, and who could give her what
all women should desire to give each other, the example of a sweet, good
life, more eloquent and powerful than any words; for this is a right no
one can deny us.

Polly turned the matter over in her mind as she dressed, while Jenny
played waiting maid, little dreaming what this new friend was meaning to
do for her, if she dared.

"Is it going to be a tea-party, Miss?" asked Jenny, as the black silk
went rustling on, to her great admiration, for she considered Polly a
beauty.

"Well, no, I think it will probably be a lecture," answered Polly,
laughing, for Jenny's grateful service and affectionate eyes confirmed
the purpose which Miss Mills' little homily had suggested.

As she entered the Shaws' parlor an hour or two later, an appalling
array of well-dressed girls appeared, each provided with a dainty
reticule, basket, or bag, and each tongue going a good deal faster than
the needle, while the white fingers stitched sleeves in upside down, put
flannel jackets together hind part before, or gobbled button-holes with
the best intentions in life.

"You are a dear to come so early. Here 's a nice place for you between
Belle and Miss Perkins, and here 's a sweet little dress to make, unless
you like something else better," said Fanny, receiving her friend with
warmth and placing her where she thought she would enjoy herself.

"Thank you, I 'll take an unbleached cotton shirt if you have such a
thing, for it is likely to be needed before a cambric frock," replied
Polly, subsiding into her corner as quickly as possible, for at least six
eye-glasses were up, and she did n't enjoy being stared at.

Miss Perkins, a grave, cold-looking young lady, with an aristocratic
nose, bowed politely, and then went on with her work, which displayed
two diamond rings to great advantage. Belle, being of the demonstrative
sort, smiled and nodded, drew up her chair, and began a whispered
account of Trix's last quarrel with Tom. Polly listened with interest
while she sewed diligently, occasionally permitting her eyes to study
the elegant intricacies of Miss Perkins' dress, for that young lady sat
like a statue, quirking her delicate fingers, and accomplishing about
two stitches a minute.

In the midst of Belle's story, a more exciting bit of gossip caught her
ear, and she plunged into the conversation going on across the table,
leaving Polly free to listen and admire the wit, wisdom, and charitable
spirit of the accomplished young ladies about her. There was a perfect
Babel of tongues, but out of the confusion Polly gathered scraps of
fashionable intelligence which somewhat lessened her respect for the
dwellers in high places. One fair creature asserted that Joe Somebody
took so much champagne at the last German, that he had to be got away,
and sent home with two servants. Another divulged the awful fact that
Carrie P.'s wedding presents were half of them hired for the occasion.
A third circulated a whisper to the effect that though Mrs. Buckminster
wore a thousand-dollar cloak, her boys were not allowed but one sheet to
their beds. And a fourth young gossip assured the company that a certain
person never had offered himself to a certain other person, though
the report was industriously spread by interested parties. This latter
remark caused such a clamor that Fanny called the meeting to order in a
most unparliamentary fashion.

"Girls! girls! you really must talk less and sew more, or our society
will be disgraced. Do you know our branch sent in less work than any of
the others last month, and Mrs. Fitz George said, she did n't see how
fifteen young ladies could manage to do so little?"

"We don't talk a bit more than the old ladies do. I just wish you could
have heard them go on, last time. The way they get so much done, is,
they take work home, and make their seamstresses do it, and then they
take credit for vast industry," said Belle, who always spoke her mind
with charming candor.

"That reminds me that mamma says they want as many things as we can
make, for it 's a hard winter, and the poor are suffering very much. Do
any of you wish to take articles home, to do at odd times?" said Fan,
who was president of this energetic Dorcas Society.

"Mercy, no! It takes all my leisure time to mend my gloves and refresh
my dresses," answered Belle.

"I think if we meet once a week, it is all that should be expected of
us, with our other engagements. Poor people always complain that the
winter is a hard one, and never are satisfied," remarked Miss Perkins,
making her diamonds sparkle as she sewed buttons on the wrong side of a
pink calico apron, which would hardly survive one washing.

"Nobody can ask me to do any more, if they remember all I 've got to
attend to before summer," said Trix, with an important air. "I 've got
three women hard at work, and want another, but everyone is so busy, and
ask such abominable prices, that I 'm in despair, and shall have to take
hold myself, I 'm afraid."

"There 's a chance for Jane," thought Polly, but had n't courage "to
speak out loud in meeting," just then, and resolved to ask Trix for
work, in private.

"Prices are high, but you forget how much more it costs to live now than
it used to do. Mamma never allows us to beat down workwomen, but wishes
us to pay them well, and economize in some other way, if we must," said
Emma Davenport, a quiet, bright-eyed girl, who was called "odd" among
the young ladies, because she dressed simply, when her father was a
millionaire.

"Just hear that girl talk about economy! I beg your pardon, she 's some
relation of yours, I believe!" said Belle, in a low tone.

"Very distant; but I 'm proud of it; for with her, economy does n't mean
scrimping in one place to make a show in another. If every one would
follow the Davenports' example, workwomen would n't starve, or servants
be such a trouble. Emma is the plainest dressed girl in the room, next
to me, yet any one can see she is a true gentlewoman," said Polly,
warmly.

"And you are another," answered Belle, who had always loved Polly, in
her scatter-brained way.

"Hush! Trix has the floor."

"If they spent their wages properly, I should n't mind so much, but they
think they must be as fine as anybody, and dress so well that it is hard
to tell mistress from maid. Why our cook got a bonnet just like mine
(the materials were cheaper, but the effect was the same), and had the
impertinence to wear it before my face. I forbid it, and she left, of
course, which made papa so cross he would n't give me the camel's hair
shawl he promised this year."

"It 's perfectly shameful!" said Miss Perkins, as Trix paused out of
breath. "Servants ought to be made to dress like servants, as they do
abroad; then we should have no more trouble," observed Miss Perkins, who
had just made the grand tour, and had brought home a French maid.

"Perky don't practise as she preaches," whispered Belle to Polly, as
Miss P. became absorbed in the chat of her other neighbors. "She pays
her chamber girl with old finery; and the other day, when Betsey was out
parading in her missis's cast-off purple plush suit, Mr. Curtis thought
she was mademoiselle, and bowed to her. He is as blind as a bat, but
recognized the dress, and pulled off his hat to it in the most elegant
style. Perky adores him, and was mad enough to beat Betsey when she told
the story and giggled over it. Betsey is quite as stylish and ever so
much prettier than Perky, and she knows it, which is an aggravation."

Polly could n't help laughing, but grew sober a minute after, as Trix
said, pettishly, "Well, I 'm sick of hearing about beggars; I believe
half of them are humbugs, and if we let them alone they 'd go to work
and take care of themselves. There 's altogether too much fuss made
about charity. I do wish we could be left in peace."

"There can't be too much charity!" burst out Polly, forgetting her
shyness all at once.

"Oh, indeed! Well, I take the liberty to differ from you," returned
Trix, putting up her glass, and bestowing upon Polly her most
"toploftical stare," as the girls called it.

I regret to say that Polly never could talk with or be near Trix without
feeling irritated and combative. She tried to conquer this feeling, but
she could n't, and when Trix put on airs, Polly felt an intense desire
to box her ears. That eye-glass was her especial aversion, for Trix was
no more near-sighted than herself, but pretended to be because it was
the fashion, and at times used the innocent glass as a weapon with which
to put down any one who presumed to set themselves up. The supercilious
glance which accompanied her ironically polite speech roused Polly,
who answered with sudden color and the kindling of the eyes that always
betrayed a perturbed spirit, "I don't think many of us would enjoy that
selfish sort of peace, while little children starve, and girls no older
than us kill themselves because their dreadful poverty leaves them no
choice but sin or death."

A sudden lull took place, for, though Polly, did not raise her voice, it
was full of indignant emotion, and the most frivolous girl there felt
a little thrill of sympathy; for the most utterly fashionable life does
not kill the heart out of women, till years of selfish pleasure have
passed over their heads. Trix was ashamed of herself; but she felt the
same antagonism toward Polly, that Polly did toward her; and, being less
generous, took satisfaction in plaguing her. Polly did not know that the
secret of this was the fact that Tom often held her up as a model for
his fiance to follow, which caused that young lady to dislike her more
than ever.

"Half the awful stories in the papers are made up for a sensation, and
it 's absurd to believe them, unless one likes to be harrowed up. I
don't; and as for peace, I 'm not likely to get much, while I have Tom
to look after," said Trix, with an aggravating laugh.

Polly's needle snapped in two, but she did not mind it, as she said,
with a look that silenced even sharp-tongued Trix, "I can't help
believing what my own eyes and ears have seen and heard. You lead such
safe and happy lives, you can't imagine the misery that is all round
you; but if you could get a glimpse of it, it would make your hearts
ache, as it has mine."

"Do you suffer from heartache? Some one hinted as much to me, but you
looked so well, I could n't believe it."

Now that was cruel in Trix, more cruel than any one guessed; but girls'
tongues can deal wounds as sharp and sudden as the slender stiletto
Spanish women wear in their hair, and Polly turned pale, as those words
stabbed her. Belle saw it, and rushed to the rescue with more good-will
than wisdom.

"Nobody ever accused you of having any heart to ache with. Polly and
I are not old enough yet to get tough and cool, and we are still silly
enough to pity unhappy people, Tom Shaw especially," added Belle, under
her breath.

That was a two-edged thrust, for Trix was decidedly an old girl, and Tom
was generally regarded as a hapless victim. Trix turned red; but before
she could load and fire again, Emma Davenport, who labored under the
delusion that this sort of skirmishing was ill-natured, and therefore
ill-bred, spoke up in her pleasant way, "Speaking of pitying the poor,
I always wonder why it is that we all like to read and cry over their
troubles in books, but when we have the real thing before us, we think
it is uninteresting and disagreeable."

"It 's the genius that gets into the books, which makes us like the
poverty, I fancy. But I don't quite agree that the real thing is n't
interesting. I think it would be, if we knew how to look at and feel
it," said Polly, very quietly, as she pushed her chair out of the arctic
circle of Miss Perkins, into the temperate one of friendly Emma.

"But how shall we learn that? I don't see what we girls can do, more
than we do now. We have n't much money for such things, should n't know
how to use it if we had; and it is n't proper for us to go poking into
dirty places, to hunt up the needy. 'Going about doing good, in pony
phaetons,' as somebody says, may succeed in England, but it won't work
here," said Fanny, who had begun, lately, to think a good deal of some
one beside herself, and so found her interest in her fellow-beings
increasing daily.

"We can't do much, perhaps, just yet; but still there are things left
undone that naturally fall to us. I know a house," said Polly, sewing
busily as she talked, "where every servant who enters it becomes an
object of interest to the mistress and her daughters. These women are
taught good habits, books are put where they can get them, sensible
amusements are planned for them sometimes, and they soon feel that they
are not considered mere scrubs, to do as much work as possible, for as
little money as possible, but helpers in the family, who are loved and
respected in proportion to their faithfulness. This lady feels her duty
to them, owns it, and does it, as conscientiously as she wants them to
do theirs by her; and that is the way it ought to be, I think."

As Polly paused, several keen eyes discovered that Emma's cheeks were
very red, and saw a smile lurking in the corners of the mouth that tried
to look demure, which told them who Polly meant.

"Do the Biddies all turn out saints in that well regulated family?"
asked the irrepressible Trix.

"No; few of us do that, even in the parlor; but every one of the Biddies
is better for being there, whether they are grateful or not. I ought not
to have mentioned this, perhaps, but I wanted to show you one thing that
we girls can do. We all complain about bad servants, most as much as if
we were house-keepers ourselves; but it never occurs to us to try and
mend the matter, by getting up a better spirit between mistress and
maid. Then there 's another thing we can do," added Polly, warming up.
"Most of us find money enough for our little vanities and pleasures, but
feel dreadfully poor when we come to pay for work, sewing especially.
Could n't we give up a few of the vanities, and pay the seamstresses
better?"

"I declare I will!" cried Belle, whose conscience suddenly woke, and
smote her for beating down the woman who did her plain sewing, in order
that she might have an extra flounce on a new dress. "Belle has got a
virtuous fit; pity it won't last a week," said Trix.

"Wait and see," retorted Belle, resolving that it should last, just
to disappoint "that spiteful minx;" as she sweetly called her old
school-mate.

"Now we shall behold Belle galloping away at a great pace, on her new
hobby. I should n't be surprised to hear of her preaching in the jail,
adopting a nice dirty little orphan, or passing round tracts at a
Woman's Rights meeting," said Trix, who never could forgive Belle for
having a lovely complexion, and so much hair of her own that she never
patronized either rats, mice, waterfalls, switches, or puff-combs.

"Well, I might do worse; and I think, of the two, I 'd rather amuse
myself so, than as some young ladies do, who get into the papers for
their pranks," returned Belle, with a moral air.

"Suppose we have a little recess, and rest while Polly plays to us. Will
you, Polly? It will do us good; they all want to hear you, and begged I
'd ask."

"Then I will, with pleasure"; and Polly went to the piano with such
obliging readiness, that several reproachful glances fell upon Trix, who
did n't need her glass to see them.

Polly was never too sad, perturbed, or lazy to sing, for it was almost
as easy to her as breathing, and seemed the most natural outlet for her
emotions. For a minute her hands wandered over the keys, as if uncertain
what to play; then, falling into a sad, sweet strain, she sang "The
Bridge of Sighs." Polly did n't know why she chose it, but the instinct
seemed to have been a true one, for, old as the song was, it went
straight to the hearts of the hearers, and Polly sung it better than
she ever had before, for now the memory of little Jane lent it a tender
pathos which no art could give. It did them all good, for music is a
beautiful magician, and few can resist its power. The girls were touched
by the appeal; Polly was lifted out of herself, and when she turned
round, the softened look on all the faces told her that for the moment
foolish differences and frivolous beliefs were forgotten in the
one womanly sentiment of pity for the wrongs and woes of which the
listeners' happy lives were ignorant.

"That song always makes me cry, and feel as if I had no right to be so
comfortable," said Belle, openly wiping her eyes on a crash towel.

"Fortunately such cases are very rare," said another young lady, who
seldom read the newspapers.

"I wish they were, but I 'm afraid they are not; for only three weeks
ago, I saw a girl younger than any of us, and no worse, who tried to
destroy herself simply because she was so discouraged, sick, and poor,"
said Polly.

"Do tell about her," cried Belle, eagerly.

Feeling that the song had paved the way for the story, and given her
courage to tell it, Polly did tell it, and must have done it well, for
the girls stopped work to listen, and when she ended, other eyes beside
warm-hearted Belle's were wet. Trix looked quite subdued; Miss Perkins
thawed to such a degree, that something glittered on her hand as she
bent over the pink pinafore again, better and brighter than her biggest
diamond; Emma got up and went to Polly with a face full of affectionate
respect, while Fanny, moved by a sudden impulse, caught up a costly
Sevres plate that stood on the etagere, and laying a five-dollar bill in
it, passed it round, quoting Polly's words, "Girls, I know you 'll like
to help poor little Jenny 'begin again, and do better this time.'"

It was good to see how quickly the pretty purses were out, how
generously each gave of its abundance, and what hearty applause broke
from the girls, as Belle laid down her gold thimble, saying with an
April face, "There, take that; I never have any money, somehow it won't
stay with me, but I can't let the plate pass me this time."

When Fanny brought the contributions to Polly, she just gathered it up
in her two hands with such a glad, grateful face, the girls wished they
had had more to give.

"I can't thank you enough," she said, with an eloquent little choke in
her voice. "This will help Jenny very much; but the way in which it was
done will do her more good than double the money, because it will prove
to her that she is n't without friends, and make her feel that there is
a place in the world for her. Let her work for you in return for this;
she don't ask alms, she only wants employment and a little kindness, and
the best charity we can bestow is to see that she has both."

"I 'll give her as much sewing as she wants, and she can stay at our
house while she does it, if she needs a home," said Trix, in a spasm of
benevolence.

"She does n't need a home, thank you; Miss Mills has given half of hers,
and considers Jane her child," answered Polly, with proud satisfaction
in the fact.

"What an old dear!" cried Belle.

"I want to know her. May I?" whispered Emma.

"Oh, yes; I 'm glad to make her known to any one. She is a quiet little
old lady, but she does one heaps of good, and shows you how to be
charitable in the wisest way."

"Do tell us about it. I 'm sure I want to do my duty, but it 's such a
muddle, I don't know how," said Belle.

Then, quite naturally, the conversation fell upon the great work that
none should be too busy to think of, and which few are too young or
too poor to help on with their mite. The faces grew more earnest, the
fingers flew faster, as the quick young hearts and brains took in the
new facts, ideas, and plans that grew out of the true stories, the
sensible hints, the successful efforts which Polly told them, fresh from
the lips of Miss Mills; for, of late, Polly had talked much with the
good lady, and learned quickly the lessons her unselfish life conveyed.
The girls found this more interesting than gossip, partly owing to its
novelty, doubtless; but the enthusiasm was sincere while it lasted, and
did them good. Many of them forgot all about it in a week, but Polly's
effort was not lost, for Emma, Belle, and Fanny remained firm friends
to Jane, so kindly helping her that the poor child felt as if she had
indeed been born again, into a new and happy world.

Not till long afterward did Polly see how much good this little effort
had done her, for the first small sacrifice of this sort leads the way
to others, and a single hand's turn given heartily to the world's great
work helps one amazingly with one's own small tasks. Polly found this
out as her life slowly grew easier and brighter, and the beautiful law
of compensation gave her better purposes and pleasures than any she had
lost. The parents of some of her pupils were persons of real refinement,
and such are always quick to perceive the marks of culture in others, no
matter where they find them. These, attracted first by Polly's cheerful
face, modest manners, and faithful work, soon found in her something
more than a good teacher; they found a real talent for music, an eager
desire for helpful opportunities, and a heart grateful for the kindly
sympathy that makes rough places smooth. Fortunately those who have the
skill to detect these traits also possess the spirit to appreciate and
often the power to serve and develop them. In ways so delicate that the
most sensitive pride could not resent the favor, these true gentlefolk
showed Polly their respect and regard, put many pleasures in her way,
and when they paid her for her work, gave her also the hearty thanks
that takes away all sense of degradation even from the humblest service,
for money so earned and paid sweetens the daily bread it buys, and makes
the mutual obligation a mutual benefit and pleasure.

A few such patrons did much for Polly, and the music she gave them had
an undertone of gratitude that left blithe echoes in those great houses,
which money could not buy.

Then, as her butterfly acquaintances deserted her, she found her way
into a hive of friendly bees, who welcomed her, and showed her how to
find the honey that keeps life sweet and wholesome. Through Miss Mills,
who was the counsellor and comforter of several, Polly came to know
a little sisterhood of busy, happy, independent girls, who each had a
purpose to execute, a talent to develop, an ambition to achieve, and
brought to the work patience and perseverance, hope and courage. Here
Polly found her place at once, for in this little world love and liberty
prevailed; talent, energy, and character took the first rank; money,
fashion, and position were literally nowhere; for here, as in the big
world outside, genius seemed to blossom best when poverty was head
gardener. Young teachers, doing much work for little pay; young artists,
trying to pencil, paint, or carve their way to Rome; young writers,
burning to distinguish themselves; young singers, dreaming of
triumphs, great as those of Jenny Lind; and some who tried to conquer
independence, armed only with a needle, like poor Jane. All these helped
Polly as unconsciously as she helped them, for purpose and principle are
the best teachers we can have, and the want of them makes half the women
of America what they are, restless, aimless, frivolous, and sick.

To outsiders that was a very hard-working and uneventful winter to
Polly. She thought so herself; but as spring came on, the seed of new
virtues, planted in the winter time, and ripened by the sunshine of
endeavor, began to bud in Polly's nature, betraying their presence to
others by the added strength and sweetness of her character, long before
she herself discovered these May flowers that had blossomed for her
underneath the snow.




CHAPTER XII. FORBIDDEN FRUIT


"I 'M perfectly aching for some fun," said Polly to herself as she
opened her window one morning and the sunshine and frosty air set her
blood dancing and her eyes sparkling with youth, health, and overflowing
spirits. "I really must break out somewhere and have a good time. It 's
quite impossible to keep steady any longer. Now what will I do?" Polly
sprinkled crumbs to the doves, who came daily to be fed, and while she
watched the gleaming necks and rosy feet, she racked her brain to devise
some unusually delightful way of enjoying herself, for she really had
bottled up her spirits so long, they were in a state of uncontrollable
effervescence.

"I 'll go to the opera," she suddenly announced to the doves. "It 's
expensive, I know, but it 's remarkably good, and music is such a treat
to me. Yes, I 'll get two tickets as cheap as I can, send a note to
Will, poor lad, he needs fun as much as I do, and we 'll go and have a
nice time in some corner, as Charles Lamb and his sister used to."

With that Polly slammed down the window, to the dismay of her gentle
little pensioners, and began to fly about with great energy, singing and
talking to herself as if it was impossible to keep quiet. She started
early to her first lesson that she might have time to buy the tickets,
hoping, as she put a five-dollar bill into her purse, that they would
n't be very high, for she felt that she was not in a mood to resist
temptation. But she was spared any struggle, for when she reached the
place, the ticket office was blocked up by eager purchasers and the
disappointed faces that turned away told Polly there was no hope for
her.

"Well, I don't care, I 'll go somewhere, for I will have my fun," she
said with great determination, for disappointment only seemed to whet
her appetite. But the playbills showed her nothing inviting and she was
forced to go away to her work with the money burning her pocket and all
manner of wild schemes floating in her head. At noon, instead of going
home to dinner, she went and took an ice, trying to feet very gay and
festive all by herself. It was rather a failure, however, and after a
tour of the picture shops she went to give Maud a lesson, feeling that
it was very hard to quench her longings, and subside into a prim little
music teacher.

Fortunately she did not have to do violence to her feelings very long,
for the first thing Fanny said to her was: "Can you go?"

"Where?"

"Did n't you get my note?"

"I did n't go home to dinner."

"Tom wants us to go to the opera to-night and" Fan got no further, for
Polly uttered a cry of rapture and clasped her hands.

"Go? Of course I will. I 've been dying to go all day, tried to get
tickets this morning and could n't, been fuming about it ever since, and
now oh, how splendid!" And Polly could not restrain an ecstatic skip,
for this burst of joy rather upset her.

"Well, you come to tea, and we 'll dress together, and go all
comfortable with Tom, who is in a heavenly frame of mind to-day."

"I must run home and get my things," said Polly, resolving on the spot
to buy the nicest pair of gloves the city afforded.

"You shall have my white cloak and any other little rigging you want.
Tommy likes to have his ladies a credit to him, you know," said Fanny,
departing to take a beauty sleep.

Polly instantly decided that she would n't borrow Becky's best bonnet,
as she at first intended, but get a new one, for in her present excited
state, no extravagance seemed too prodigal in honor of this grand
occasion. I am afraid that Maud's lesson was not as thorough as it
should have been, for Polly's head was such a chaos of bonnets, gloves,
opera-cloaks and fans, that Maud blundered through, murdering time and
tune at her own sweet will. The instant it was over Polly rushed away
and bought not only the kids but a bonnet frame, a bit of illusion, and
a pink crape rose, which had tempted her for weeks in a certain
shop window, then home and to work with all the skill and speed of a
distracted milliner.

"I 'm rushing madly into expense, I 'm afraid, but the fit is on me
and I 'll eat bread and water for a week to make up for it. I must look
nice, for Tom seldom takes me and ought to be gratified when he does.
I want to do like other girls, just for once, and enjoy myself without
thinking about right and wrong. Now a bit of pink ribbon to tie it with,
and I shall be done in time to do up my best collar," she said, turning
her boxes topsy-turvy for the necessary ribbon in that delightful flurry
which young ladies feel on such occasions.

It is my private opinion that the little shifts and struggles we poor
girls have to undergo beforehand give a peculiar relish to our fun when
we get it. This fact will account for the rapturous mood in which Polly
found herself when, after making her bonnet, washing and ironing her
best set, blacking her boots and mending her fan, she at last, like
Consuelo, "put on a little dress of black silk" and, with the smaller
adornments pinned up in a paper, started for the Shaws', finding it
difficult to walk decorously when her heart was dancing in her bosom.

Maud happened to be playing a redowa up in the parlor, and Polly came
prancing into the room so evidently spoiling for a dance that Tom, who
was there, found it impossible to resist catching her about the waist,
and putting her through the most intricate evolutions till Maud's
fingers gave out.

"That was splendid! Oh, Tom, thank you so much for asking me to-night.
I feel just like having a regular good time," cried Polly, when she
stopped, with her hat hanging round her neck and her hair looking as if
she had been out in a high wind.

"Glad of it. I felt so myself and thought we 'd have a jolly little
party all in the family," said Tom, looking much gratified at her
delight.

"Is Trix sick?" asked Polly.

"Gone to New York for a week."

"Ah, when the cat's away the mice will play."

"Exactly. Come and have another turn."

Before they could start, however, the awful spectacle of a little dog
trotting out of the room with a paper parcel in his mouth, made Polly
clasp her hands with the despairing cry: "My bonnet! Oh, my bonnet!"

"Where? what? which?" And Tom looked about him, bewildered.

"Snip's got it. Save it! save it!"

"I will!" And Tom gave chase with more vigor than discretion.

Snip, evidently regarding it as a game got up for his special benefit,
enjoyed the race immensely and scampered all over the house, shaking the
precious parcel like a rat while his master ran and whistled, commanded
and coaxed, in vain. Polly followed, consumed with anxiety, and Maud
laughed till Mrs. Shaw sent down to know who was in hysterics. A
piteous yelp from the lower regions at last announced that the thief was
captured, and Tom appeared bearing Snip by the nape of the neck in one
hand and Polly's cherished bonnet in the other.

"The little scamp was just going to worry it when I grabbed him. I 'm
afraid he has eaten one of your gloves. I can't find it, and this one
is pretty well chewed up," said Tom, bereaving Snip of the torn kid, to
which he still pertinaciously clung.

"Serves me right," said Polly with a groan. "I 'd no business to get
a new pair, but I wanted to be extra gorgeous to-night, and this is my
punishment for such mad extravagance."

"Was there anything else?" asked Tom.

"Only my best cuffs and collar. You 'll probably find them in the
coal-bin," said Polly, with the calmness of despair.

"I saw some little white things on the dining-room floor as I raced
through. Go get them, Maud, and we 'll repair damages," said Tom,
shutting the culprit into the boot closet, where he placidly rolled
himself up and went to sleep.

"They ain't hurt a bit," proclaimed Maud, restoring the lost treasures.

"Neither is my bonnet, for which I 'm deeply grateful," said Polly, who
had been examining it with a solicitude which made Tom's eyes twinkle.

"So am I, for it strikes me that is an uncommonly 'nobby' little
affair," he said approvingly. Tom had a weakness for pale pink roses,
and perhaps Polly knew it.

"I 'm afraid it 's too gay," said Polly, with a dubious look.

"Not a bit. Sort of bridal, you know. Must be becoming. Put it on and
let 's see."

"I would n't for the world, with my hair all tumbling down. Don't look
at me till I 'm respectable, and don't tell any one how I 've been
acting. I think I must be a little crazy to-night," said Polly,
gathering up her rescued finery and preparing to go and find Fan.

"Lunacy is mighty becoming, Polly. Try it again," answered Tom,
watching her as she went laughing away, looking all the prettier for
her dishevelment. "Dress that girl up, and she 'd be a raving, tearing
beauty," added Tom to Maud in a lower tone as he look her into the
parlor under his arm.

Polly heard it and instantly resolved to be as "raving and as tearing"
as her means would allow, "just for one night," she said as she peeped
over the banisters, glad to see that the dance and the race had taken
the "band-boxy" air out of Tom's elegant array.

I deeply regret being obliged to shock the eyes and ears of such of my
readers as have a prejudice in favor of pure English by expressions like
the above, but, having rashly undertaken to write a little story about
Young America, for Young America, I feel bound to depict my honored
patrons as faithfully as my limited powers permit. Otherwise, I must
expect the crushing criticism, "Well, I dare say it 's all very prim and
proper, but it is n't a bit like us," and never hope to arrive at
the distinction of finding the covers of "An Old-Fashioned Girl" the
dirtiest in the library.

The friends had a social "cup o' tea" upstairs, which Polly considered
the height of luxury, and then each took a mirror and proceeded to prink
to her heart's content. The earnestness with which Polly made her toilet
that night was delightful to behold. Feeling in a daring mood, she
released her pretty hair from the braids in which she usually wore
it and permitted the curls to display themselves in all their brown
abundance, especially several dangerous little ones about the temples
and forehead. The putting on of the rescued collar and cuffs was a task
which absorbed her whole mind. So was the settling of a minute bit of
court-plaster just to the left of the dimple in her chin, an unusual
piece of coquetry in which Polly would not have indulged, if an almost
invisible scratch had not given her an excuse for doing it. The white,
down-trimmed cloak, with certain imposing ornaments on the hood,
was assumed with becoming gravity and draped with much advancing and
retreating before the glass, as its wearer practised the true Boston
gait, elbows back, shoulders forward, a bend and a slide, occasionally
varied by a slight skip. But when that bonnet went on, Polly actually
held her breath till it was safely landed and the pink rose bloomed
above the smooth waves of hair with what Fanny called "a ravishing
effect." At this successful stage of affairs Polly found it impossible
to resist the loan of a pair of gold bands for the wrists and Fanny's
white fan with the little mirror in the middle.

"I can put them in my pocket if I feel too much dressed," said Polly
as she snapped on the bracelets, but after a wave or two of the fan she
felt that it would be impossible to take them off till the evening was
over, so enticing was their glitter.

Fanny also lent her a pair of three-button gloves, which completed her
content, and when Tom greeted her with an approving, "Here 's a sight
for gods and men! Why, Polly, you 're gorgeous!" she felt that her "fun"
had decidedly begun.

"Would n't Polly make a lovely bride?" said Maud, who was revolving
about the two girls, trying to decide whether she would have a blue or a
white cloak when she grew up and went to operas.

"Faith, and she would! Allow me to congratulate you, Mrs. Sydney,"
added Tom, advancing with his wedding-reception bow and a wicked look at
Fanny.

"Go away! How dare you?" cried Polly, growing much redder than her rose.

"If we are going to the opera to-night, perhaps we 'd better start,
as the carriage has been waiting some time," observed Fan coolly, and
sailed out of the room in an unusually lofty manner.

"Don't you like it, Polly?" whispered Tom, as they went down stairs
together.

"Very much."

"The deuce you do!"

"I 'm so fond of music, how can I help it?

"I 'm talking about Syd."

"Well, I 'm not."

"You 'd better try for him."

"I 'll think of it."

"Oh, Polly, Polly, what are you coming to?"

"A tumble into the street, apparently," answered Polly as she slipped a
little on the step, and Tom stopped in the middle of his laugh to pilot
her safely into the carriage, where Fanny was already seated.

"Here 's richness!" said Polly to herself as she rolled away, feeling
as Cinderella probably did when the pumpkin-coach bore her to the first
ball, only Polly had two princes to think about, and poor Cinderella,
on that occasion, had not even one. Fanny did n't seem inclined to talk
much, and Tom would go on in such a ridiculous manner that Polly told
him she would n't listen and began to hum bits of the opera. But
she heard every word, nevertheless, and resolved to pay him for his
impertinence as soon as possible by showing him what he had lost.

Their seats were in the balcony, and hardly were they settled, when, by
one of those remarkable coincidences which are continually occurring
in our youth, Mr. Sydney and Fanny's old friend Frank Moore took their
places just behind them.

"Oh, you villain! You did it on purpose," whispered Polly as she turned
from greeting their neighbors and saw a droll look on Tom's face.

"I give you my word I did n't. It 's the law of attraction, don't you
see?"

"If Fan likes it, I don't care."

"She looks resigned, I think."

She certainly did, for she was talking and laughing in the gayest manner
with Frank while Sydney was covertly surveying Polly as if he did n't
quite understand how the gray grub got so suddenly transformed into
a white butterfly. It is a well-known fact that dress plays a very
important part in the lives of most women and even the most sensible
cannot help owning sometimes how much happiness they owe to a becoming
gown, gracefully arranged hair, or a bonnet which brings out the best
points in their faces and puts them in a good humor. A great man was
once heard to say that what first attracted him to his well-beloved wife
was seeing her in a white muslin dress with a blue shawl on the chair
behind her. The dress caught his eye, and, stopping to admire that, the
wearer's intelligent conversation interested his mind, and in time, the
woman's sweetness won his heart. It is not the finest dress which does
the most execution, I fancy, but that which best interprets individual
taste and character. Wise people understand this, and everybody is more
influenced by it than they know, perhaps. Polly was not very wise, but
she felt that every one about her found something more attractive than
usual in her and modestly attributed Tom's devotion, Sydney's interest,
and Frank's undisguised admiration, to the new bonnet or, more likely,
to that delightful combination of cashmere, silk, and swan's-down,
which, like Charity's mantle, seemed to cover a multitude of sins in
other people's eyes and exalt the little music teacher to the rank of a
young lady.

Polly scoffed at this sort of thing sometimes, but to-night she accepted
it without a murmur rather enjoyed it in fact, let her bracelets shine
before the eyes of all men, and felt that it was good to seem comely in
their sight. She forgot one thing, however: that her own happy spirits
gave the crowning charm to a picture which every one liked to see a
blithe young girl enjoying herself with all her heart. The music and the
light, costume and company, excited Polly and made many things possible
which at most times she would never have thought of saying or doing. She
did not mean to flirt, but somehow "it flirted itself" and she could n't
help it, for, once started, it was hard to stop, with Tom goading
her on, and Sydney looking at her with that new interest in his eyes.
Polly's flirting was such a very mild imitation of the fashionable thing
that Trix & Co. would not have recognized it, but it did very well for a
beginner, and Polly understood that night wherein the fascination of it
lay, for she felt as if she had found a new gift all of a sudden, and
was learning how to use it, knowing that it was dangerous, yet finding
its chief charm in that very fact.

Tom did n't know what to make of her at first, though he thought the
change uncommonly becoming and finally decided that Polly had taken his
advice and was "setting her cap for Syd," as he gracefully expressed
it. Sydney, being a modest man, thought nothing of the kind, but simply
fancied that little Polly was growing up to be a very charming woman. He
had known her since her first visit and had always liked the child; this
winter he had been interested in the success of her plans and had done
what he could to help them, but he never thought of failing in love
with Polly till that night. Then he began to feel that he had not fully
appreciated his young friend; that she was such a bright and lovable
girl, it was a pity she should not always be gay and pretty, and enjoy
herself; that she would make a capital wife for somebody, and perhaps it
was about time to think of "settling," as his sister often said. These
thoughts came and went as he watched the white figure in front, felt
the enchantment of the music, and found everybody unusually blithe and
beautiful. He had heard the opera many times, but it had never seemed
so fine before, perhaps because he had never happened to have had an
ingenuous young face so near him in which the varying emotions born of
the music, and the romance it portrayed, came and went so eloquently
that it was impossible to help reading them. Polly did not know that
this was why he leaned down so often to speak to her, with an expression
which she did not understand but liked very much nevertheless.

"Don't shut your eyes, Polly. They are so full of mischief to-night, I
like to see them," said Tom, after idly wondering for a minute if she
knew how long and curly her lashes were.

"I don't wish to look affected, but the music tells the story so much
better than the acting that I don't care to look on half the time,"
answered Polly, hoping Tom would n't see the tears she had so cleverly
suppressed.

"Now I like the acting best. The music is all very fine, I know, but it
does seem so absurd for people to go round telling tremendous secrets at
the top of their voices. I can't get used to it."

"That 's because you 've more common-sense than romance. I don't mind
the absurdity, and quite long to go and comfort that poor girl with
the broken heart," said Polly with a sigh as the curtain fell on a most
affecting tableau.

"What's-his-name is a great jack not to see that she adores him. In
real life we fellows ain't such bats as all that," observed Tom, who had
decided opinions on many subjects that he knew very little about, and
expressed them with great candor.

A curious smile passed over Polly's face and she put up her glass to
hide her eyes, as she said: "I think you are bats sometimes, but women
are taught to wear masks, and that accounts for it, I suppose."

"I don't agree. There 's precious little masking nowadays; wish there
was a little more sometimes," added Tom, thinking of several blooming
damsels whose beseeching eyes had begged him not to leave them to wither
on the parent stem.

"I hope not, but I guess there 's a good deal more than any one would
suspect."

"What can you know about broken hearts and blighted beings?" asked
Sydney, smiling at the girl's pensive tone.

Polly glanced up at him and her face dimpled and shone again, as she
answered, laughing: "Not much; my time is to come."

"I can't imagine you walking about the world with your back hair down,
bewailing a hard-hearted lover," said Tom.

"Neither can I. That would n't be my way."

"No; Miss Polly would let concealment prey on her damask cheeks and
still smile on in the novel fashion, or turn sister of charity and nurse
the heartless lover through small-pox, or some other contagious disease,
and die seraphically, leaving him to the agonies of remorse and tardy
love."

Polly gave Sydney an indignant look as he said that in a slow satirical
way that nettled her very much, for she hated to be thought sentimental.

"That 's not my way either," she said decidedly. "I 'd try to outlive
it, and if I could n't, I 'd try to be the better for it. Disappointment
need n't make a woman a fool."

"Nor an old maid, if she 's pretty and good. Remember that, and don't
visit the sins of one blockhead on all the rest of mankind," said Tom,
laughing at her earnestness.

"I don't think there is the slightest possibility of Miss Polly's being
either," added Sydney with a look which made it evident that concealment
had not seriously damaged Polly's damask cheek as yet.

"There 's Clara Bird. I have n't seen her but once since she was
married. How pretty she looks!" and Polly retired behind the big glass
again, thinking the chat was becoming rather personal.

"Now, there 's a girl who tried a different cure for unrequited
affection from any you mention. People say she was fond of Belle's
brother. He did n't reciprocate but went off to India to spoil his
constitution, so Clara married a man twenty years older than she is and
consoles herself by being the best-dressed woman in the city."

"That accounts for it," said Polly, when Tom's long whisper ended.

"For what?"

"The tired look in her eyes."

"I don't see it," said Tom, after a survey through the glass.

"Did n't expect you would."

"I see what you mean. A good many women have it nowadays," said Sydney
over Polly's shoulder.

"What's she tired of? The old gentleman?" asked Tom.

"And herself," added Polly.

"You 've been reading French novels, I know you have. That 's just the
way the heroines go on," cried Tom.

"I have n't read one, but it 's evident you have, young man, and you 'd
better stop."

"I don't care for 'em; only do it to keep up my French. But how came you
to be so wise, ma'am?"

"Observation, sir. I like to watch faces, and I seldom see a grown-up
one that looks perfectly happy."

"True for you, Polly; no more you do, now I think of it. I don't know
but one that always looks so, and there it is."

"Where?" asked Polly, with interest.

"Look straight before you and you 'll see it."

Polly did look, but all she saw was her own face in the little mirror of
the fan which Tom held up and peeped over with a laugh in his eyes.

"Do I look happy? I 'm glad of that," And Polly surveyed herself with
care.

Both young men thought it was girlish vanity and smiled at its naive
display, but Polly was looking for something deeper than beauty and was
glad not to find it.

"Rather a pleasant little prospect, hey, Polly?"

"My bonnet is straight, and that 's all I care about. Did you ever see a
picture of Beau Brummel?" asked Polly quickly.

"No."

"Well, there he is, modernized." And turning the fan, she showed him
himself.

"Any more portraits in your gallery?" asked Sydney, as if he liked to
share all the nonsense going.

"One more."

"What do you call it?"

"The portrait of a gentleman." And the little glass reflected a
gratified face for the space of two seconds.

"Thank you. I 'm glad I don't disgrace my name," said Sydney, looking
down into the merry blue eyes that thanked him silently for many of the
small kindnesses that women never can forget.

"Very good, Polly, you are getting on fast," whispered Tom, patting his
yellow kids approvingly.

"Be quiet! Dear me, how warm it is!" And Polly gave him a frown that
delighted his soul.

"Come out and have an ice, we shall have time."

"Fan is so absorbed, I could n't think of disturbing her," said Polly,
fancying that her friend was enjoying the evening as much as she was a
great mistake, by the way, for Fan was acting for effect, and though she
longed to turn and join them, would n't do it, unless a certain person
showed signs of missing her. He did n't, and Fanny chatted on, raging
inwardly over her disappointment, and wondering how Polly could be so
gay and selfish.

It was delicious to see the little airs Polly put on, for she felt as if
she were somebody else, and acting a part. She leaned back, as if quite
oppressed by the heat, permitted Sydney to fan her, and paid him for
the service by giving him a flower from her bouquet, proceedings which
amused Tom immensely, even while it piqued him a little to be treated
like an old friend who did n't count.

"Go in and win, Polly; I 'll give you my blessing," he whispered, as the
curtain rose again.

"It 's only part of the fun, so don't you laugh, you disrespectful boy,"
she whispered back in a tone never used toward Sydney.

Tom did n't quite like the different way in which she treated them, and
the word "boy" disturbed his dignity, for he was almost twenty-one and
Polly ought to treat him with more respect. Sydney at the same moment
was wishing he was in Tom's place young, comely, and such a familiar
friend that Polly would scold and lecture him in the delightful way she
did Tom; while Polly forgot them both when the music began and left them
ample time to look at her and think about themselves.

While they waited to get out when all was over Polly heard Fan whisper
to Tom: "What do you think Trix will say to this?"

"What do you mean?"

"Why, the way you 've been going on to-night."

"Don't know, and don't care; it 's only Polly."

"That 's the very thing. She can't bear P."

"Well, I can; and I don't see why I should n't enjoy myself as well as
Trix."

"You 'll get to enjoying yourself too much if you are n't careful. Polly
's waked up."

"I 'm glad of it, and so 's Syd."

"I only spoke for your good."

"Don't trouble yourself about me; I get lecturing enough in another
quarter and can't stand any more. Come, Polly."

She took the arm he offered her, but her heart was sore and angry,
for that phrase, "It 's only Polly," hurt her sadly. "As if I was n't
anybody, had n't any feelings, and was only made to amuse or work for
people! Fan and Tom are both mistaken and I 'll show them that Polly is
awake," she thought, indignantly. "Why should n't I enjoy myself as well
as the rest? Besides, it 's only Tom," she added with a bitter smile as
she thought of Trix.

"Are you tired, Polly?" asked Tom, bending down to look into her face.

"Yes, of being nobody."

"Ah, but you ain't nobody, you 're Polly, and you could n't better that
if you tried ever so hard," said Tom, warmly, for he really was fond of
Polly, and felt uncommonly so just then.

"I 'm glad you think so, anyway. It 's so pleasant to be liked." And she
looked up with her face quite bright again.

"I always did like you, don't you know, ever since that first visit."

"But you teased me shamefully, for all that."

"So I did, but I don't now."

Polly did not answer, and Tom asked, with more anxiety than the occasion
required: "Do I, Polly?"

"Not in the same way, Tom," she answered in a tone that did n't sound
quite natural.

"Well, I never will again."

"Yes, you will, you can't help it." And Polly's eye glanced at Sydney,
who was in front with Fan.

Tom laughed, and drew Polly closer as the crowd pressed, saying, with
mock tenderness: "Did n't she like to be chaffed about her sweethearts?
Well, she shan't be if I can help it. Poor dear, did she get her little
bonnet knocked into a cocked hat and her little temper riled at the same
time?"

Polly could n't help laughing, and, in spite of the crush, enjoyed the
slow journey from seat to carriage, for Tom took such excellent care of
her, she was rather sorry when it was over.

They had a merry little supper after they got home, and Polly gave them
a burlesque opera that convulsed her hearers, for her spirits rose again
and she was determined to get the last drop of fun before she went back
to her humdrum life again.

"I 've had a regularly splendid time, and thank you ever so much," she
said when the "good-nights" were being exchanged.

"So have I. Let 's go and do it again to-morrow," said Tom, holding the
hand from which he had helped to pull a refractory glove.

"Not for a long while, please. Too much pleasure would soon spoil me,"
answered Polly, shaking her head.

"I don't believe it. Good-night, 'sweet Mistress Milton,' as Syd called
you. Sleep like an angel, and don't dream of I forgot, no teasing
allowed." And Tom took himself off with a theatrical farewell.

"Now it 's all over and done with," thought Polly as she fell asleep
after a long vigil. But it was not, and Polly's fun cost more than the
price of gloves and bonnet, for, having nibbled at forbidden fruit, she
had to pay the penalty. She only meant to have a good time, and there
was no harm in that, but unfortunately she yielded to the various small
temptations that beset pretty young girls and did more mischief to
others than to herself. Fanny's friendship grew cooler after that night.
Tom kept wishing Trix was half as satisfactory as Polly, and Mr. Sydney
began to build castles that had no foundation.




CHAPTER XIII. THE SUNNY SIDE


"I 'VE won the wager, Tom."

"Did n't know there was one."

"Don't you remember you said Polly would be tired of her teaching and
give it up in three months, and I said she would n't?"

"Well, is n't she?"

"Not a bit of it. I thought she was at one time, and expected every day
to have her come in with a long face, and say she could n't stand it.
But somehow, lately, she is always bright and happy, seems to like her
work, and don't have the tired, worried look she used to at first. The
three months are out, so pay up, Tommy."

"All right, what will you have?"

"You may make it gloves. I always need them, and papa looks sober when I
want money."

There was a minute's pause as Fan returned to her practising, and Tom
relapsed into the reverie he was enjoying seated astride of a chair,
with his chin on his folded arms.

"Seems to me Polly don't come here as often as she used to," he said,
presently.

"No, she seems to be very busy; got some new friends, I believe, old
ladies, sewing-girls, and things of that sort. I miss her, but know she
'll get tired of being goody, and will come back to me before long."

"Don't be too sure of that, ma'am." Something in Tom's tone made Fan
turn round, and ask, "What do you mean?"

"Well, it strikes me that Sydney is one of Polly's new friends. Have n't
you observed that she is uncommonly jolly, and don't that sort of thing
account for it?"

"Nonsense!" said Fanny, sharply.

"Hope it is," coolly returned Tom.

"What put it into your head?" demanded Fanny, twirling round again so
that her face was hidden.

"Oh, well, I keep meeting Syd and Polly circulating in the same
directions; she looks as if she had found something uncommonly nice, and
he looks as if all creation was getting Pollyfied pretty rapidly. Wonder
you have n't observed it."

"I have."

It was Tom's turn to look surprised now, for Fanny's voice sounded
strange to him. He looked at her steadily for a minute, but saw only a
rosy ear and a bent head. A cloud passed over his face, and he leaned
his chin on his arm again with a despondent whistle, as he said to
himself, "Poor Fan! Both of us in a scrape at once."

"Don't you think it would be a good thing?" asked Fanny, after playing a
bar or two, very badly.

"Yes, for Syd."

"Not for Polly? Why, he 's rich, and clever, and better than most of you
good-for-nothing fellows. What can the girl expect?"

"Can't say, but I don't fancy the match myself."

"Don't be a dog in the manger, Tom. Bless your little heart, I only take
a brotherly sort of interest in Polly. She 's a capital girl, and she
ought to marry a missionary, or one of your reformer fellows, and be
a shining light of some sort. I don't think setting up for a fine lady
would suit her."

"I think it would, and I hope she 'll have the chance," said Fanny,
evidently making an effort to speak kindly.

"Good for you, Fan!" and Tom gave an emphatic nod, as if her words meant
more than she suspected "Mind you," he added, "I don't know anything,
and only fancied there might be some little flirtation going on. But I
dare say it 's nothing."

"Time will show." Then Fan began to sing, and Tom's horse came, so he
departed with the very unusual demonstration of a gentle pat on the
head, as he said kindly, "That 's right, my dear, keep jolly." It was
n't an elegant way of expressing sympathy, but it was hearty, and
Fan thanked him for it, though she only said, "Don't break your neck,
Tommy."

When he was gone, Fan's song ended as suddenly as it began, and she sat
thinking, with varying expressions of doubt and trouble passing rapidly
across her face.

"Well, I can't do anything but wait!" she said, at last, slamming the
music-book together with a desperate look. "Yes, I can," she added, a
minute after, "it 's Polly's holiday. I can go and see her, and if there
is anything in it I shall find it out."

Fanny dropped her face into her hands, with a little shiver, as she said
that; then got up, looking as pale and resolute as if going to meet some
dreadful doom, and putting on her things, went away to Polly's as fast
as her dignity would allow.

Saturday morning was Polly's clearing-up day, and Fan found her with a
handkerchief tied over her head, and a big apron on, just putting the
last touches to the tidy little room, which was as fresh and bright as
water, air, and a pair of hands could make it.

"All ready for company. I 'll just whisk off my regimentals, and Polly,
the maid, becomes Polly, the missis. It was lovely of you to come early;
take off your things. Another new bonnet? you extravagant wretch! How is
your mother and Maudie? It 's a nice day, and we 'll have a walk, won't
we?"

By the time Polly's welcome was uttered, she had got Fan on the little
sofa beside her, and was smiling at her in such an infectious manner,
that Fan could n't help smiling back.

"I came to see what you have been doing with yourself lately. You don't
come and report, and I got anxious about you," said Fanny, looking into
the clear eyes before her.

"I 've been so busy; and I knew you would n't care to hear about my
doings, for they are n't the sort you like," answered Polly.

"Your lessons did n't use to take up all your time. It 's my private
opinion that you are taking as well as giving lessons, miss," said Fan,
putting on a playfully stern air, to hide her real anxiety.

"Yes, I am," answered Polly, soberly.

"In what? Love?"

A quick color came to Polly's cheeks, as she laughed, and said, looking
away, "No; friendship and good works."

"Oh, indeed! May I ask who is your teacher?"

"I 've more than one; but Miss Mills is head teacher."

"She instructs in good works; who gives the friendship lessons?"

"Such pleasant girls! I wish you knew them, Fan. So clever, and
energetic, and kind, and happy, it always does me good to see them,"
cried Polly, with a face full of enthusiasm.

"Is that all?" And Fan gave her a curious look of mingled disappointment
and relief.

"There, I told you my doings would not interest you, and they don't;
they sound flat and prosy after your brilliant adventures. Let 's change
the subject," said Polly, looking relieved herself.

"Dear me, which of our sweethearts sends us dainty bouquets of violets
so early in the morning?" asked Fanny, suddenly spying the purple
cluster in a graceful little vase on the piano.

"He sends me one every week; he knows I love them so," and Polly's eyes
turned that way full of pride and pleasure.

"I 'd no idea he was so devoted," said Fanny, stooping to smell the
flowers, and at the same time read a card that lay near them.

"You need n't plague me about it, now you know it. I never speak of
our fondness for one another, because such things seem silly to other
people. Will is n't all that Jimmy was to me; but he tries to be, and I
love him dearly for it."

"Will?" Fanny's voice quite startled Polly, it was so sharp and sudden,
and her face grew red and pale all in a minute, as she upset the little
vase with the start she gave.

"Yes, of course; who did you think I meant?" asked Polly, sopping up the
water before it damaged her piano.

"Never mind; I thought you might be having a quiet little flirtation
with somebody. I feel responsible, you know, because I told your mother
I 'd look after you. The flowers are all right. My head aches so, I
hardly know what I 'm doing this morning."

Fanny spoke fast, and laughed uncomfortably, as she went back to the
sofa, wondering if Polly had told her a lie. Polly seemed to guess at
her thoughts as she saw the card, and turning toward her, she held it
up, saying, with a conscious look in her eyes, "You thought Mr. Sydney
sent them? Well, you are mistaken, and the next time you want to know
anything, please ask straight out. I like it better than talking at
cross purposes."

"Now, my dear, don't be angry; I was only teasing you in fun. Tom took
it into his foolish head that something was going on, and I felt a
natural interest, you know."

"Tom! What does he know or care about my affairs?" demanded Polly.

"He met you two in the street pretty often, and being in a sentimental
mood himself, got up a romance for you and Sydney."

"I 'm much obliged to him for his interest, but it 's quite wasted,
thank you."

Fan's next proceeding gave her friend another surprise, for, being
rather ashamed of herself, very much relieved, and quite at a loss what
to say, she took refuge in an hysterical fit of tears, which changed
Polly's anger into tenderness at once.

"Is that the trouble she has been hiding all winter? Poor dear, I wish
I 'd known it sooner," thought Polly, as she tried to soothe her with
comfortable pats, sniffs of cologne and sympathizing remarks upon the
subject of headache, carefully ignoring that other feminine affliction,
the heartache.

"There, I feel better. I 've been needing a good cry for some time, and
now I shall be all right. Never mind it, Polly, I 'm nervous and tired;
I 've danced too much lately, and dyspepsia makes me blue;" and Fanny
wiped her eyes and laughed.

"Of course it does; you need rest and petting, and here I 've been
scolding you, when I ought to have been extra kind. Now tell me what I
can do for you," said Polly, with a remorseful face.

"Talk to me, and tell me all about yourself. You don't seem to have as
many worries as other people. What's the secret, Polly?" And Fan looked
up with wet eyes, and a wistful face at Polly, who was putting little
dabs of cologne all over her head.

"Well," said Polly, slowly, "I just try to look on the bright side of
things; that helps one amazingly. Why, you 've no idea how much goodness
and sunshine you can get out of the most unpromising things, if you make
the best of them."

"I don't know how," said Fan, despondently.

"You can learn; I did. I used to croak and fret dreadfully, and get so
unhappy, I was n't fit for anything. I do it still more than I ought,
but I try not to, and it gets easier, I find. Get a-top of your
troubles, and then they are half cured, Miss Mills says."

"Everything is so contrary and provoking," said Fanny, petulantly.

"Now what in the world have you to fret about?" asked Polly, rather
anxiously.

"Quantities of things," began Fan, and then stopped, for somehow she
felt ashamed to own that she was afflicted because she could n't have
a new set of furs, go to Paris in the spring, and make Mr. Sydney love
her. She hunted up something more presentable, and said in a despairing
tone, "Well, mother is very poorly, Tom and Trix quarrel all the time,
Maud gets more and more wilful every day, and papa is worried about his
affairs."

"A sad state of things, but nothing very desperate. Can't you lend a
hand anywhere? That might do good all round."

"No; I have n't the talent for managing people, but I see what ought to
be done."

"Well, don't wail about it; keep yourself happy, if you can; it will
help other people to see you cheerful."

"Just what Tom said,'Keep jolly'; but, dear me, how can one, when
everything is so stupid and tiresome?"

"If ever a girl needed work, it 's you!" cried Polly. "You began to be
a young lady so early, that you are tired of everything at twenty-two. I
wish you 'd go at something, then you 'd find how much talent and energy
you really had."

"I know ever so many girls who are just like me, sick to death of
fashionable life but don't know what to take in its place. I 'd like to
travel; but papa says he can't afford it, so I can only drag about and
get on as I may."

"I pity you rich girls so much, you have so many opportunities, and
don't seem to know how to use them! I suppose I should do just the same
in your place, but it seems now as if I could be very happy and useful
with plenty of money."

"You are that without it. There, I won't croak any more. Let us go and
take a good walk, and don't you tell any one how I came and cried like a
baby."

"Never!" said Polly, putting on her bonnet.

"I ought to go and make calls," said Fanny, "but I don't feel now as if
I ever wanted to see any of the girls again. Dreadful state of mind, is
n't it?"

"Suppose you come and see some of my friends instead! They are not fine
or ceremonious, but lively, odd, and pleasant. Come, it will amuse you."

"I will," cried Fanny, whose spirits seemed improved by the shower.
"Nice little old lady, is n't she?" added Fan, as she caught sight of
Miss Mills, on their way out, sitting at a table piled with work, and
sewing away with an energy that made the gray curls vibrate.

"Saint Mehitable, I call her. Now, there is a rich woman who knew how to
get happiness out of her money," said Polly, as they walked away. "She
was poor till she was nearly fifty; then a comfortable fortune was left
her, and she knew just how to use it. That house was given her, but
instead of living in it all alone, she filled it with poor gentlefolks
who needed neat, respectable homes, but could n't get anything
comfortable for their little money. I 'm one of them, and I know the
worth of what she does for me. Two old widow ladies live below me,
several students overhead, poor Mrs. Kean and her lame boy have the back
parlor, and Jenny the little bedroom next Miss Mills. Each pays what
they can; that 's independent, and makes us feel better but that dear
woman does a thousand things that money can't pay for, and we feel her
influence all through the house. I 'd rather be married, and have a home
of my own; but next to that, I should like to be an old maid like Miss
Mills."

Polly's sober face and emphatic tone made Fanny laugh, and at the cheery
sound a young girl pushing a baby-carriage looked round and smiled.

"What lovely eyes!" whispered Fanny.

"Yes, that 's little Jane," returned Polly, adding, when she had passed,
with a nod and a friendly "Don't get tired, Jenny," "we help one another
at our house, and every fine morning Jenny takes Johnny Kean out when
she goes for her own walk. That gives his mother time to rest, does both
the children good, and keeps things neighborly. Miss Mills suggested it,
and Jenny is so glad to do anything for anybody, it 's a pleasure to let
her."

"I 've heard of Miss Mills before. But I should think she would get
tired to death, sitting there making hoods and petticoats day after
day," said Fanny, after thinking over Jenny's story for a few minutes,
for seeing the girl seemed to bring it nearer, and make it more real to
her.

"But she don't sit there all the time. People come to her with their
troubles, and she goes to them with all sorts of help, from soap and
soup, to shrouds for the dead and comfort for the living. I go with her
sometimes, and it is more exciting than any play, to see and hear the
lives and stories of the poor."

"How can you bear the dreadful sights and sounds, the bad air, and the
poverty that can't be cured?"

"But it is n't all dreadful. There are good and lovely things among
them, if one only has eyes to see them. It makes me grateful and
contented, shows me how rich I am, and keeps me ready to do all I can
for these poor souls."

"My good Polly!" and Fanny gave her friends arm an affectionate squeeze,
wondering if it was this alone that had worked the change in Polly.

"You have seen two of my new friends, Miss Mills and Jenny, now I 'll
show you two more," said Polly, presently, as they reached a door, and
she led the way up several flights of public stairs. "Rebecca Jeffrey
is a regularly splendid girl, full of talent; she won't let us call it
genius; she will be famous some day, I know, she is so modest, and yet
so intent on her work. Lizzie Small is an engraver, and designs the most
delightful little pictures. Becky and she live together, and take care
of one another in true Damon and Pythias style. This studio is their
home, they work, eat, sleep, and live here, going halves in everything.
They are all alone in the world, but as happy and independent as birds;
real friends, whom nothing will part."

"Let a lover come between them, and their friendship won't last long,"
said Fanny.

"I think it will. Take a look at them, and you 'll change your mind,"
answered Polly, tapping at a door, on which two modest cards were
tacked.

"Come in!" said a voice, and obeying, Fanny found herself in a large,
queerly furnished room, lighted from above, and occupied by two girls.
One stood before a great clay figure, in a corner. This one was tall,
with a strong face, keen eyes, short, curly hair, and a fine head.
Fanny was struck at once by this face and figure, though the one was
not handsome, and the other half hidden by a great pinafore covered with
clay. At a table where the light was clearest, sat a frail-looking girl,
with a thin face, big eyes, and pale hair, a dreamy, absorbed little
person, who bent over a block, skillfully wielding her tools.

"Becky and Bess, how do you do? This is my friend, Fanny Shaw. We are
out on a rampage; so go on with your work, and let us lazy ones look on
and admire."

As Polly spoke, both girls looked up and nodded, smilingly; Bess gave
Fan the one easy-chair; Becky took an artistic survey of the new-comer,
with eyes that seemed to see everything; then each went on with her
work, and all began to talk.

"You are just what I want, Polly. Pull up your sleeve, and give me an
arm while you sit; the muscles here are n't right, and you 've got just
what I want," said Becky, slapping the round arm of the statue, at which
Fan was gazing with awe.

"How do you get on?" asked Polly, throwing off her cloak, and rolling up
her sleeves, as if going to washing.

"Slowly. The idea is working itself clear, and I follow as fast as my
hands can. Is the face better, do you think?" said Becky, taking off a
wet cloth, and showing the head of the statue.

"How beautiful it is!" cried Fanny, staring at it with increased
respect.

"What does it mean to you?" asked Rebecca, turning to her with a sudden
shine in her keen eyes.

"I don't know whether it is meant for a saint or a muse, a goddess or a
fate; but to me it is only a beautiful woman, bigger, lovelier, and more
imposing than any woman I ever saw," answered Fanny, slowly, trying to
express the impression the statue made upon her.

Rebecca smiled brightly, and Bess looked round to nod approvingly, but
Polly clapped her hands, and said, "Well done, Fan! I did n't think you
'd get the idea so well, but you have, and I 'm proud of your insight.
Now I 'll tell you, for Becky will let me, since you have paid her the
compliment of understanding her work. Some time ago we got into a famous
talk about what women should be, and Becky said she 'd show us her idea
of the coming woman. There she is, as you say, bigger, lovelier, and
more imposing than any we see nowadays; and at the same time, she is
a true woman. See what a fine forehead, yet the mouth is both firm
and tender, as if it could say strong, wise things, as well as teach
children and kiss babies. We could n't decide what to put in the hands
as the most appropriate symbol. What do you say?"

"Give her a sceptre: she would make a fine queen," answered Fanny.

"No, we have had enough of that; women have been called queens a long
time, but the kingdom given them is n't worth ruling," answered Rebecca.

"I don't think it is nowadays," said Fanny, with a tired sort of sigh.

"Put a man's hand in hers to help her along, then," said Polly, whose
happy fortune it had been to find friends and helpers in father and
brothers.

"No; my woman is to stand alone, and help herself," said Rebecca,
decidedly.

"She 's to be strong-minded, is she?" and Fanny's lip curled a little as
she uttered the misused words.

"Yes, strong-minded, strong-hearted, strong-souled, and strong-bodied;
that is why I made her larger than the miserable, pinched-up woman of
our day. Strength and beauty must go together. Don't you think these
broad shoulders can bear burdens without breaking down, these hands work
well, these eyes see clearly, and these lips do something besides simper
and gossip?"

Fanny was silent; but a voice from Bess's corner said, "Put a child in
her arms, Becky."

"Not that even, for she is to be something more than a nurse."

"Give her a ballot-box," cried a new voice, and turning round, they saw
an odd-looking woman perched on a sofa behind them.

"Thank you for the suggestion, Kate. I 'll put that with the other
symbols at her feet; for I 'm going to have needle, pen, palette,
and broom somewhere, to suggest the various talents she owns, and the
ballot-box will show that she has earned the right to use them. How
goes it?" and Rebecca offered a clay-daubed hand, which the new-comer
cordially shook.

"Great news, girls! Anna is going to Italy!" cried Kate, tossing up her
bonnet like a school-boy.

"Oh, how splendid! Who takes her? Has she had a fortune left her? Tell
all about it," exclaimed the girls, gathering round the speaker.

"Yes, it is splendid; just one of the beautiful things that does
everybody heaps of good, it is so generous and so deserved. You know
Anna has been longing to go; working and hoping for a chance, and never
getting it, till all of a sudden Miss Burton is inspired to invite the
girl to go with her for several years to Italy. Think of the luck of
that dear soul, the advantages she 'll have, the good it will do her,
and, best of all, the lovely way in which it comes to her. Miss Burton
wants, her as a friend, asks nothing of her but her company, and Anna
will go through fire and water for her, of course. Now, is n't that
fine?"

It was good to see how heartily these girls sympathized in their
comrade's good fortune. Polly danced all over the room, Bess and Becky
hugged one another, and Kate laughed with her eyes full, while even
Fanny felt a glow of, pride and pleasure at the kind act.

"Who is that?" she whispered to Polly, who had subsided into a corner.

"Why, it Is Kate King, the authoress. Bless me, how rude not to
introduce you! Here, my King, is an admirer of yours, Fanny Shaw, and
my well beloved friend," cried Polly, presenting Fan, who regarded the
shabby young woman with as much respect, as if she had been arrayed in
velvet and ermine; for Kate had written a successful book by accident,
and happened to be the fashion, just then.

"It 's time for lunch, girls, and I brought mine along with me, it 's
so much jollier to eat in sisterhood. Let 's club together, and have a
revel," said Kate, producing a bag of oranges, and several big, plummy
buns.

"We 've got sardines, crackers, and cheese," said Bess, clearing off a
table with all speed.

"Wait a bit, and I 'll add my share," cried Polly, and catching up her
cloak, she ran off to the grocery store near by.

"You 'll be shocked at our performances, Miss Shaw, but you can call
it a picnic, and never tell what dreadful things you saw us do," said
Rebecca, polishing a paint knife by rubbing it up and down in a pot of
ivy, while Kate spread forth the feast in several odd plates, and a flat
shell or two.

"Let us have coffee to finish off with; put on the pot, Bess, and skim
the milk," added Becky, as she produced cups, mugs, and a queer little
vase, to supply drinking vessels for the party.

"Here 's nuts, a pot of jam, and some cake. Fan likes sweet things,
and we want to be elegant when we have company," said Polly, flying in
again, and depositing her share on the table.

"Now, then, fall to, ladies, and help yourselves. Never mind if the
china don't hold out; take the sardines by their little tails, and wipe
your fingers on my brown-paper napkins," said Kate, setting the example
with such a relish, that the others followed it in a gale of merriment.

Fanny had been to many elegant lunches, but never enjoyed one more than
that droll picnic in the studio; for there was a freedom about it that
was charming, an artistic flavor to everything, and such a spirit of
good-will and gayety, that she felt at home at once. As they ate, the
others talked and she listened, finding it as interesting as any romance
to hear these young women discuss their plans, ambitions, successes, and
defeats. It was a new world to her, and they seemed a different race
of creatures from the girls whose lives were spent in dress, gossip,
pleasure, or ennui. They were girls still, full of spirits fun, and
youth; but below the light-heartedness each cherished a purpose,
which seemed to ennoble her womanhood, to give her a certain power,
a sustaining satisfaction, a daily stimulus, that led her on to daily
effort, and in time to some success in circumstance or character, which
was worth all the patience, hope, and labor of her life.

Fanny was just then in the mood to feel the beauty of this, for
the sincerest emotion she had ever known was beginning to make her
dissatisfied with herself, and the aimless life she led. "Men must
respect such girls as these," she thought; "yes, and love them too, for
in spite of their independence, they are womanly. I wish I had a talent
to live for, if it would do as much for me as it does for them. It
is this sort of thing that is improving Polly, that makes her society
interesting to Sydney, and herself so dear to every one. Money can't buy
these things for me, and I want them very much."

As these thoughts were passing through her mind, Fanny was hearing all
sorts of topics discussed with feminine enthusiasm and frankness. Art,
morals, politics, society, books, religion, housekeeping, dress, and
economy, for the minds and tongues roved from subject to subject with
youthful rapidity, and seemed to get something from the dryest and the
dullest.

"How does the new book come on?" asked Polly, sucking her orange in
public with a composure which would have scandalized the good ladies of
"Cranford."

"Better than it deserves. My children, beware of popularity; it is a
delusion and a snare; it puffeth up the heart of man, and especially
of woman; it blindeth the eyes to faults; it exalteth unduly the humble
powers of the victim; it is apt to be capricious, and just as one gets
to liking the taste of this intoxicating draught, it suddenly faileth,
and one is left gasping, like a fish out of water," and Kate emphasized
her speech by spearing a sardine with a penknife, and eating it with a
groan.

"It won't hurt you much, I guess; you have worked and waited so long,
a large dose will do you good," said Rebecca, giving her a generous
spoonful of jam, as if eager to add as much sweetness as possible to a
life that had not been an easy one.

"When are you and Becky going to dissolve partnership?" asked Polly,
eager for news of all.

"Never! George knows he can't have one without the other, and has not
suggested such a thing as parting us. There is always room in my house
for Becky, and she lets me do as she would if she was in my place,"
answered Bess, with a look which her friend answered by a smile.

"The lover won't separate this pair of friends, you see," whispered
Polly to Fan. "Bess is to be married in the spring, and Becky is to live
with her."

"By the way, Polly, I 've got some tickets for you. People are always
sending me such things, and as I don't care for them, I 'm glad to
make them over to you young and giddy infants. There are passes for
the statuary exhibition, Becky shall have those, here are the concert
tickets for you, my musical girl; and that is for a course of lectures
on literature, which I 'll keep for myself."

As Kate dealt out the colored cards to the grateful girls, Fanny took a
good look at her, wondering if the time would ever come when women could
earn a little money and success, without paying such a heavy price for
them; for Kate looked sick, tired, and too early old. Then her eye went
to the unfinished statue, and she said, impulsively, "I hope you 'll put
that in marble, and show us what we ought to be."

"I wish I could!" And an intense desire shone in Rebecca's face, as she
saw her faulty work, and felt how fair her model was.

For a minute, the five young women sat silent looking up at the
beautiful, strong figure before them, each longing to see it done, and
each unconscious that she was helping, by her individual effort and
experience, to bring the day when their noblest ideal of womanhood
should be embodied in flesh and blood, not clay.

The city bells rung one, and Polly started up.

"I must go, for I promised a neighbor of mine a lesson at two."

"I thought this was a holiday," said Fanny.

"So it is, but this is a little labor of love, and does n't spoil the
day at all. The child has talent, loves music, and needs help. I can't
give her money, but I can teach her; so I do, and she is the most
promising pupil I have. Help one another, is part of the religion of our
sisterhood, Fan."

"I must put you in a story, Polly. I want a heroine, and you will do,"
said Kate.

"Me! why, there never was such a humdrum, unromantic thing as I am,"
cried Polly, amazed.

"I 've booked you, nevertheless, so in you go; but you may add as much
romance as you like, it 's time you did."

"I 'm ready for it when it comes, but it can't be forced, you know,"
and Polly blushed and smiled as if some little spice of that delightful
thing had stolen into her life, for all its prosaic seeming.

Fanny was amused to see that the girls did not kiss at parting, but
shook hands in a quiet, friendly fashion, looking at one another with
eyes that said more than the most "gushing" words.

"I like your friends very much, Polly. I was afraid I should find them
mannish and rough, or sentimental and conceited. But they are simple,
sensible creatures, full of talent, and all sorts of fine things. I
admire and respect them, and want to go again, if I may."

"Oh, Fan, I am so glad! I hoped you 'd like them, I knew they 'd do you
good, and I 'll take you any time, for you stood the test better than
I expected. Becky asked me to bring you again, and she seldom does that
for fashionable young ladies, let me tell you."

"I want to be ever so much better, and I think you and they might show
me how," said Fanny, with a traitorous tremble in her voice.

"We 'll show you the sunny side of poverty and work, and that is a
useful lesson for any one, Miss Mills says," answered Polly, hoping that
Fan would learn how much the poor can teach the rich, and what helpful
friends girls may be to one another.




CHAPTER XIV. NIPPED IN THE BUD


ON the evening of Fan's visit, Polly sat down before her fire with a
resolute and thoughtful aspect. She pulled her hair down, turned her
skirt back, put her feet on the fender, and took Puttel into her lap,
all of which arrangements signified that something very important had
got to be thought over and settled. Polly did not soliloquize aloud,
as heroines on the stage and in books have a way of doing, but the
conversation she held with herself was very much like this: "I 'm afraid
there is something in it. I 've tried to think it 's nothing but vanity
or imagination, yet I can't help seeing a difference, and feeling as if
I ought not to pretend that I don't. I know it 's considered proper for
girls to shut their eyes and let things come to a crisis no matter how
much mischief is done. But I don't think it 's doing as we 'd be done
by, and it seems a great deal more honest to show a man that you don't
love him before he has entirely lost his heart. The girls laughed at me
when I said so, and they declared that it would be a very improper thing
to do, but I 've observed that they don't hesitate to snub 'ineligible
parties,' as they call poor, very young, or unpopular men. It 's all
right then, but when a nice person comes it 's part of the fun to let
him go on to the very end, whether the girls care for him or not. The
more proposals, the more credit. Fan says Trix always asks when she
comes home after the summer excursions, 'How many birds have you
bagged?' as if men were partridges. What wicked creatures we are! some
of us at least. I wonder why such a love of conquest was put into us?
Mother says a great deal of it is owing to bad education nowadays, but
some girls seem born for the express purpose of making trouble and would
manage to do it if they lived in a howling wilderness. I 'm afraid I 've
got a spice of it, and if I had the chance, should be as bad as any of
them. I 've tried it and liked it, and maybe this is the consequence of
that night's fun."

Here Polly leaned back and looked up at the little mirror over the
chimney-piece, which was hung so that it reflected the faces of those
about the fire. In it Polly saw a pair of telltale eyes looking out from
a tangle of bright brown hair, cheeks that flushed and dimpled suddenly
as the fresh mouth smiled with an expression of conscious power, half
proud, half ashamed, and as pretty to see as the coquettish gesture with
which she smoothed back her curls and flourished a white hand. For
a minute she regarded the pleasant picture while visions of girlish
romances and triumphs danced through her head, then she shook her hair
all over her face and pushed her chair out of range of the mirror,
saying, with a droll mixture of self-reproach and self-approval in her
tone; "Oh, Puttel, Puttel, what a fool I am!"

Puss appeared to endorse the sentiment by a loud purr and a graceful
wave of her tail, and Polly returned to the subject from which these
little vanities had beguiled her.

"Just suppose it is true, that he does ask me, and I say yes! What a
stir it would make, and what fun it would be to see the faces of the
girls when it came out! They all think a great deal of him because he is
so hard to please, and almost any of them would feel immensely flattered
if he liked them, whether they chose to marry him or not. Trix has tried
for years to fascinate him, and he can't bear her, and I 'm so glad!
What a spiteful thing I am. Well, I can't help it, she does aggravate me
so!" And Polly gave the cat such a tweak of the ear that Puttel bounced
out of her lap in high dudgeon.

"It don't do to think of her, and I won't!" said Polly to herself,
setting her lips with a grim look that was not at all becoming. "What
an easy life I should have plenty of money, quantities of friends,
all sorts of pleasures, and no work, no poverty, no cold shoulders or
patched boots. I could do so much for all at home how I should enjoy
that!" And Polly let her thoughts revel in the luxurious future her
fancy painted. It was a very bright picture, but something seemed
amiss with it, for presently she sighed and shook her head, thinking
sorrowfully, "Ah, but I don't love him, and I 'm afraid I never can as
I ought! He 's very good, and generous, and wise, and would be kind,
I know, but somehow I can't imagine spending my life with him; I 'm
so afraid I should get tired of him, and then what should I do? Polly
Sydney don't sound well, and Mrs. Arthur Sydney don't seem to fit me a
bit. Wonder how it would seem to call him 'Arthur'?" And Polly said it
under her breath, with a look over her shoulder to be sure no one heard
it. "It 's a pretty name, but rather too fine, and I should n't dare
to say 'Syd,' as his sister does. I like short, plain, home-like names,
such as Will, Ned, or Tom. No, no, I can never care for him, and it 's
no use to try!" The exclamation broke from Polly as if a sudden
trouble had seized her, and laying her head down on her knees, she sat
motionless for many minutes.

When she looked up, her face wore an expression which no one had ever
seen on it before; a look of mingled pain and patience, as if some loss
had come to her, and left the bitterness of regret behind.

"I won't think of myself, or try to mend one mistake by making another,"
she said with a heavy sigh. "I 'll do what I can for Fan, and not stand
between her and a chance of happiness. Let me see, how can I begin? I
won't walk with him any more; I 'll dodge and go roundabout ways, so
that we can't meet. I never had much faith in the remarkable coincidence
of his always happening home to dinner just as I go to give the Roths
their lesson. The fact is, I like to meet him, I am glad to be seen with
him, and put on airs, I dare say, like a vain goose as I am. Well, I
won't do it any more, and that will spare Fan one affliction. Poor dear,
how I must have worried her all this time, and never guessed it. She has
n't been quite as kind as ever; but when she got sharp, I fancied it was
dyspepsia. Oh, me! I wish the other trouble could be cured as easily as
this."

Here puss showed an amiable desire to forgive and forget, and Polly
took her up, saying aloud: "Puttel, when missis abuses you, play it 's
dyspepsia, and don't bear malice, because it 's a very trying disease,
my dear."

Then, going back to her thoughts, she rambled on again; "If he does
n't take that hint, I will give him a stronger one, for I will not have
matters come to a crisis, though I can't deny that my wicked vanity
strongly tempts me to try and 'bag a bird' just for the excitement and
credit of the thing. Polly, I 'm ashamed of you! What would your blessed
mother say to hear such expressions from you? I 'd write and tell her
all the worry, only it would n't do any good, and would only trouble
her. I 've no right to tell Fan's secrets, and I 'm ashamed to tell
mine. No, I 'll leave mother in peace, and fight it out alone. I do
think Fan would suit him excellently by and by. He has known her all her
life, and has a good influence over her. Love would do so much toward
making her what she might be; it 's a shame to have the chance lost just
because he happens to see me. I should think she 'd hate me; but I 'll
show her that she need n't, and do all I can to help her; for she has
been so good to me nothing shall ever make me forget that. It is a
delicate and dangerous task, but I guess I can manage it; at any rate
I 'll try, and have nothing to reproach myself with if things do go
'contrary.'"

What Polly thought of, as she lay back in her chair, with her eyes shut,
and a hopeless look on her face, is none of our business, though we
might feel a wish to know what caused a tear to gather slowly from time
to time under her lashes, and roll down on Puttel's Quaker-colored coat.
Was it regret for the conquest she relinquished, was it sympathy for her
friend, or was it an uncontrollable overflow of feeling as she read some
sad or tender passage of the little romance which she kept hidden away
in her own heart?

On Monday, Polly began the "delicate and dangerous task." Instead
of going to her pupils by way of the park and the pleasant streets
adjoining, she took a roundabout route through back streets, and thus
escaped Mr. Sydney, who, as usual, came home to dinner very early that
day and looked disappointed because he nowhere saw the bright face
in the modest bonnet. Polly kept this up for a week, and by carefully
avoiding the Shaws' house during calling hours, she saw nothing of
Mr. Sydney, who, of course, did n't visit her at Miss Mills'. Minnie
happened to be poorly that week and took no lesson, so Uncle Syd was
deprived of his last hope, and looked as if his allowance of sunshine
had been suddenly cut off.

Now, as Polly was by no means a perfect creature, I am free to confess
that the old temptation assailed her more than once that week, for, when
the first excitement of the dodging reform had subsided, she missed the
pleasant little interviews that used to put a certain flavor of romance
into her dull, hard-working days. She liked Mr. Sydney very much, for
he had always been kind and friendly since the early times when he had
treated the little girl with a courtesy which the young woman gratefully
remembered. I don't think it was his wealth, accomplishments, or
position that most attracted Polly, though these doubtless possessed
a greater influence than she suspected. It was that indescribable
something which women are quick to see and feel in men who have been
blessed with wise and good mothers. This had an especial charm to Polly,
for she soon found that this side of his character was not shown to
every one. With most girls, he was very like the other young men of his
set, except perhaps in a certain grace of manner which was as natural to
him as his respect for all womankind. But with Fanny and Polly he showed
the domestic traits and virtues which are more engaging to womanly women
than any amount of cool intellect or worldly wisdom.

Polly had seen a good deal of him during her visits at the Shaws', where
he was intimate, owing to the friendship between Madam and his mother;
but she had never thought of him as a possible lover for either Fanny
or herself because he was six or eight years older than they, and still
sometimes assumed the part of a venerable mentor, as in the early days.
Lately this had changed, especially towards Polly, and it flattered her
more than she would confess even to herself. She knew he admired her one
talent, respected her independence, and enjoyed her society; but when
something warmer and more flattering than admiration, respect, or
pleasure crept into his manner, she could not help seeing that one of
the good gifts of this life was daily coming more and more within her
reach, and began to ask herself if she could honestly receive the gift,
and reward the giver.

At first she tried to think she could, but unfortunately hearts are
so "contrary" that they won't be obedient to reason, will, or even
gratitude. Polly felt a very cordial friendship for Mr. Sydney, but not
one particle of the love which is the only coin in which love can be
truly paid. Then she took a fancy into her head that she ought to
accept this piece of good fortune for the sake of the family, and forget
herself. But this false idea of self-sacrifice did not satisfy, for she
was not a fashionable girl trained to believe that her first duty was
to make "a good match" and never mind the consequences, though they
rendered her miserable for life. Polly's creed was very simple: "If
I don't love him, I ought not to marry him, especially when I do love
somebody else, though everything is against me." If she had read as
many French novels as some young ladies, she might have considered it
interesting to marry under the circumstances and suffer a secret anguish
to make her a romantic victim. But Polly's education had been neglected,
and after a good deal of natural indecision she did what most women do
in such cases, thought she would "wait and see."

The discovery of Fanny's secret seemed to show her something to do, for
if the "wait and see" decision was making her friend unhappy, it must be
changed as soon as possible. This finished Polly's indecision, and
after that night she never allowed herself to dwell upon the pleasant
temptation which came in a guise particularly attractive to a young girl
with a spice of the old Eve in her composition. So day after day she
trudged through the dull back streets, longing for the sunny park, the
face that always brightened when it saw her coming, and most of all the
chance of meeting well, it was n't Trix.

When Saturday came, Polly started as usual for a visit to Becky and
Bess, but could n't resist stopping at the Shaws' to leave a little
parcel for Fan, though it was calling time. As she stepped in, meaning
to run up for a word if Fanny should chance to be alone, two hats on the
hall table arrested her.

"Who is here, Katy?"

"Only Mr. Sydney and Master Tom. Won't you stop a bit, Miss Polly?"

"Not this morning, I 'm rather in a hurry." And away went Polly as if a
dozen eager pupils were clamoring for her presence. But as the door shut
behind her she felt so left out in the cold, that her eyes filled,
and when Nep, Tom's great Newfoundland, came blundering after her, she
stopped and hugged his shaggy head, saying softly, as she looked into
the brown, benevolent eyes, full of almost human sympathy: "Now, go
back, old dear, you must n't follow me. Oh, Nep, it 's so hard to put
love away when you want it very much and it is n't right to take it."
A foolish little speech to make to a dog, but you see Polly was only a
tender-hearted girl, trying to do her duty.

"Since he is safe with Fanny, I may venture to walk where I like. It
's such a lovely day, all the babies will be out, and it always does me
good to see them," thought Polly, turning into the wide, sunny street,
where West End-dom promenaded at that hour.

The babies were out in full force, looking as gay and delicate and sweet
as the snow-drops, hyacinths, and daffodils on the banks whence the
snow had melted. But somehow the babies did n't do Polly the good she
expected, though they smiled at her from their carriages, and kissed
their chubby hands as she passed them, for Polly had the sort of face
that babies love. One tiny creature in blue plush was casting despairing
glances after a very small lord of creation who was walking away with
a toddling belle in white, while a second young gentleman in gorgeous
purple gaiters was endeavoring to console the deserted damsel.

"Take hold of Master Charley's hand, Miss Mamie, and walk pretty, like
Willy and Flossy," said the maid.

"No, no, I want to do wid Willy, and he won't let me. Do 'way, Tarley, I
don't lite you," cried little Blue-bonnet, casting down her ermine muff
and sobbing in a microscopic handkerchief, the thread-lace edging on
which could n't mitigate her woe, as it might have done that of an older
sufferer.

"Willy likes Flossy best, so stop crying and come right along, you
naughty child."

As poor little Dido was jerked away by the unsympathetic maid, and
Purple-gaiters essayed in vain to plead his cause, Polly said to
herself, with a smile and a sigh; "How early the old story begins!"

It seemed as if the spring weather had brought out all manner of tender
things beside fresh grass and the first dandelions, for as she went down
the street Polly kept seeing different phases of the sweet old story
which she was trying to forget.

At a street corner, a black-eyed school-boy was parting from
a rosy-faced school-girl, whose music roll he was reluctantly
surrendering.

"Don't you forget, now," said the boy, looking bashfully into the bright
eyes that danced with pleasure as the girl blushed and smiled, and
answered reproachfully; "Why, of course I shan't!"

"That little romance runs smoothly so far; I hope it may to the end,"
said Polly heartily as she watched the lad tramp away, whistling as
blithely as if his pleasurable emotions must find a vent, or endanger
the buttons on the round jacket; while the girl pranced on her own
doorstep, as if practising for the joyful dance which she had promised
not to forget.

A little farther on Polly passed a newly engaged couple whom she knew,
walking arm in arm for the first time, both wearing that proud yet
conscious look which is so delightful to behold upon the countenances of
these temporarily glorified beings.

"How happy they seem; oh, dear!" said Polly, and trudged on, wondering
if her turn would ever come and fearing that it was impossible.

A glimpse of a motherly-looking lady entering a door, received by a
flock of pretty children, who cast themselves upon mamma and her parcels
with cries of rapture, did Polly good; and when, a minute after she
passed a gray old couple walking placidly together in the sunshine,
she felt better still, and was glad to see such a happy ending to the
romance she had read all down the street.

As if the mischievous little god wished to take Polly at a disadvantage,
or perhaps to give her another chance, just at that instant Mr. Sydney
appeared at her side. How he got there was never very clear to Polly,
but there he was, flushed, and a little out of breath, but looking so
glad to see her that she had n't the heart to be stiff and cool, as she
had fully intended to be when they met.

"Very warm, is n't it?" he said when he had shaken hands and fallen into
step, just in the old way.

"You seem to find it so." And Polly laughed, with a sudden sparkle in
her eyes. She really could n't help it, it was so pleasant to see him
again, just when she was feeling so lonely.

"Have you given up teaching the Roths?" asked Sydney, changing the
subject.

"No."

"Do you go as usual?"

"Yes."

"Well, it 's a mystery to me how you get there."

"As much as it is to me how you got here so suddenly."

"I saw you from the Shaws' window and took the liberty of running after
you by the back street," he said, laughing.

"That is the way I get to the Roths," answered Polly. She did not mean
to tell, but his frankness was so agreeable she forgot herself.

"It 's not nearly so pleasant or so short for you as the park."

"I know it, but people sometimes get tired of old ways and like to try
new ones."

Polly did n't say that quite naturally, and Sydney gave her a quick
look, as he asked; "Do you get tired of old friends, too, Miss Polly?"

"Not often; but" And there she stuck, for the fear of being ungrateful
or unkind made her almost hope that he would n't take the hint which she
had been carefully preparing for him.

There was a dreadful little pause, which Polly broke by saying abruptly;
"How is Fan?"

"Dashing, as ever. Do you know I 'm rather disappointed in Fanny,
for she don't seem to improve with her years," said Sydney, as if he
accepted the diversion and was glad of it.

"Ah, you never see her at her best. She puts on that dashing air before
people to hide her real self. But I know her better; and I assure you
that she does improve; she tries to mend her faults, though she won't
own it, and will surprise you some day, by the amount of heart and sense
and goodness she has got."

Polly spoke heartily now, and Sydney looked at her as if Fanny's
defender pleased him more than Fanny's defence.

"I 'm very glad to hear it, and willingly take your word for it.
Everybody shows you their good side, I think, and that is why you find
the world such a pleasant place."

"Oh, but I don't! It often seems like a very hard and dismal place, and
I croak over my trials like an ungrateful raven."

"Can't we make the trials lighter for you?"

The voice that put the question was so very kind, that Polly dared not
look up, because she knew what the eyes were silently saying.

"Thank you, no. I don't get more tribulation than is good for me, I
fancy, and we are apt to make mistakes when we try to dodge troubles."

"Or people," added Sydney in a tone that made Polly color up to her
forehead.

"How lovely the park looks," she said, in great confusion.

"Yes, it 's the pleasantest walk we have; don't you think so?" asked the
artful young man, laying a trap, into which Polly immediately fell.

"Yes, indeed! It 's always so refreshing to me to see a little bit of
the country, as it were, especially at this season."

Oh, Polly, Polly, what a stupid speech to make, when you had just given
him to understand that you were tired of the park! Not being a fool or a
cox-comb, Sydney put this and that together, and taking various trifles
into the account, he had by this time come to the conclusion that Polly
had heard the same bits of gossip that he had, which linked their names
together, that she did n't like it, and tried to show she did n't in
this way. He was quicker to take a hint than she had expected, and being
both proud and generous, resolved to settle the matter at once, for
Polly's sake as well as his own. So, when she made her last brilliant
remark, he said quietly, watching her face keenly all the while; "I
thought so; well, I 'm going out of town on business for several weeks,
so you can enjoy your 'little bit of country' without being annoyed by
me."

"Annoyed? Oh, no!" cried Polly earnestly; then stopped short, not
knowing what to say for herself. She thought she had a good deal of
the coquette in her, and I 've no doubt that with time and training she
would have become a very dangerous little person, but now she was far
too transparent and straightforward by nature even to tell a white lie
cleverly. Sydney knew this, and liked her for it, but he took advantage
of it, nevertheless by asking suddenly; "Honestly, now, would n't you go
the old way and enjoy it as much as ever, if I was n't anywhere about to
set the busybodies gossiping?"

"Yes," said Polly, before she could stop herself, and then could have
bitten her tongue out for being so rude. Another awful pause seemed
impending, but just at that moment a horseman clattered by with a smile
and a salute, which caused Polly to exclaim, "Oh, there 's Tom!" with a
tone and a look that silenced the words hovering on Sydney's lips, and
caused him to hold out his hand with a look which made Polly's heart
flutter then and ache with pity for a good while afterward, though he
only said, "Good by, Polly."

He was gone before she could do anything but look up at him with a
remorseful face, and she walked on, feeling that the first and perhaps
the only lover she would ever have, had read his answer and accepted
it in silence. She did not know what else he had read, and comforted
herself with the thought that he did not care for her very much, since
he took the first rebuff so quickly.

Polly did not return to her favorite walk till she learned from Minnie
that "Uncle" had really left town, and then she found that his friendly
company and conversation was what had made the way so pleasant after
all. She sighed over the perversity of things in general, and croaked a
little over her trials in particular, but on the whole got over her loss
better than she expected, for soon she had other sorrows beside her own
to comfort, and such work does a body more good than floods of regretful
tears, or hours of sentimental lamentation.

She shunned Fanny for a day or two, but gained nothing by it, for that
young lady, hearing of Sydney's sudden departure, could not rest till
she discovered the cause of it, and walked in upon Polly one afternoon
just when the dusk made it a propitious hour for tender confidences.

"What have you been doing with yourself lately?" asked Fanny, composing
herself, with her back toward the rapidly waning light.

"Wagging to and fro as usual. What's the news with you?" answered Polly,
feeling that something was coming and rather glad to have it over and
done with.

"Nothing particular. Trix treats Tom shamefully, and he bears it like a
lamb. I tell him to break his engagement, and not be worried so; but he
won't, because she has been jilted once and he thinks it 's such a mean
thing to do."

"Perhaps she 'll jilt him."

"I 've no doubt she will, if anything better comes along. But Trix is
getting passe, and I should n't wonder if she kept him to his word, just
out of perversity, if nothing else."

"Poor Tom, what a fate!" said Polly with what was meant to be a comical
groan; but it sounded so tragical that she saw it would n't pass, and
hastened to hide the failure by saying, with a laugh, "If you call Trix
passe at twenty-three, what shall we all be at twenty-five?" "Utterly
done with, and laid upon the shelf. I feel so already, for I don't get
half the attention I used to have, and the other night I heard Maud and
Grace wondering why those old girls 'did n't stay at home, and give them
a chance.'"

"How is Maudie?"

"Pretty well, but she worries me by her queer tastes and notions. She
loves to go into the kitchen and mess, she hates to study, and said
right before the Vincents that she should think it would be great fun to
be a beggar-girl, to go round with a basket, it must be so interesting
to see what you 'd get."

"Minnie said the other day she wished she was a pigeon so she could
paddle in the puddles and not fuss about rubbers."

"By the way, when is her uncle coming back?" asked Fanny, who could n't
wait any longer and joyfully seized the opening Polly made for her.

"I 'm sure I don't know."

"Nor care, I suppose, you hard-hearted thing."

"Why, Fan, what do you mean?"

"I 'm not blind, my dear, neither is Tom, and when a young gentleman
cuts a call abruptly short, and races after a young lady, and is seen
holding her hand at the quietest corner of the park, and then goes
travelling all of a sudden, we know what it means if you don't."

"Who got up that nice idea, I should like to know?" demanded Polly, as
Fanny stopped for breath.

"Now don't be affected, Polly, but just tell me, like a dear, has n't he
proposed?"

"No, he has n't."

"Don't you think he means to?"

"I don't think he 'll ever say a word to me."

"Well, I am surprised!" And Fanny drew a long breath, as if a load was
off her mind. Then she added in a changed tone: "But don't you love him,
Polly?"

"No."

"Truly?"

"Truly, Fan."

Neither spoke for a minute, but the heart of one of them beat joyfully
and the dusk hid a very happy face.

"Don't you think he cared for you, dear?" asked Fanny, presently. "I
don't mean to be prying, but I really thought he did."

"That 's not for me to say, but if it is so, it 's only a passing fancy
and he 'll soon get over it."

"Do tell me all about it; I 'm so interested, and I know something has
happened, I hear it in your voice, for I can't see your face."

"Do you remember the talk we once had after reading one of Miss
Edgeworth's stories about not letting one's lovers come to a declaration
if one did n't love them?"

"Yes."

"And you girls said it was n't proper, and I said it was honest, anyway.
Well, I always meant to try it if I got a chance, and I have. Mind you,
I don't say Mr. Sydney loved me, for he never said so, and never will,
now, but I did fancy he rather liked me and might do more if I did n't
show him that it was of no use."

"And you did?" cried Fanny, much excited.

"I just gave him a hint and he took it. He meant to go away before that,
so don't think his heart is broken, or mind what silly tattlers say.
I did n't like his meeting me so much and told him so by going another
way. He understood, and being a gentleman, made no fuss. I dare say
he thought I was a vain goose, and laughed at me for my pains, like
Churchill in 'Helen.'"

"No, he would n't; He 'd like it and respect you for doing it. But,
Polly, it would have been a grand thing for you."

"I can't sell myself for an establishment."

"Mercy! What an idea!"

"Well, that 's the plain English of half your fashionable matches. I
'm 'odd,' you know, and prefer to be an independent spinster and teach
music all my days."

"Ah, but you won't. You were made for a nice, happy home of your own,
and I hope you 'll get it, Polly, dear," said Fanny warmly, feeling so
grateful to Polly, that she found it hard not to pour out all her secret
at once.

"I hope I may; but I doubt it," answered Polly in a tone that made Fanny
wonder if she, too, knew what heartache meant.

"Something troubles you, Polly, what is it? Confide in me, as I do in
you," said Fanny tenderly, for all the coldness she had tried to hide
from Polly, had melted in the sudden sunshine that had come to her.

"Do you always?" asked her friend, leaning forward with an irresistible
desire to win back the old-time love and confidence, too precious to be
exchanged for a little brief excitement or the barren honor of "bagging
a bird," to use Trix's elegant expression. Fanny understood it then,
and threw herself into Polly's arms, crying, with a shower of grateful
tears; "Oh, my dear! my dear! did you do it for my sake?"

And Polly held her close, saying in that tender voice of hers, "I did
n't mean to let a lover part this pair of friends if I could help it."




CHAPTER XV. BREAKERS AHEAD


GOING into the Shaws' one evening, Polly found Maud sitting on the
stairs, with a troubled face.

"Oh, Polly, I 'm so glad you 've come!" cried the little girl, running
to hug her.

"What's the matter, deary?"

"I don't know; something dreadful must have happened, for mamma and Fan
are crying together upstairs, papa is shut up in the library, and Tom is
raging round like a bear, in the dining-room."

"I guess it is n't anything very bad. Perhaps mamma is sicker than
usual, or papa worried about business, or Tom in some new scrape. Don't
look so frightened, Maudie, but come into the parlor and see what I 've
got for you," said Polly, feeling that there was trouble of some sort in
the air, but trying to cheer the child, for her little face was full of
a sorrowful anxiety, that went to Polly's heart.

"I don't think I can like anything till I know what the matter is,"
answered Maud. "It 's something horrid, I 'm sure, for when papa came
home, he went up to mamma's room, and talked ever so long, and mamma
cried very loud, and when I tried to go in, Fan would n't let me, and
she looked scared and strange. I wanted to go to papa when he came down,
but the door was locked, and he said, 'Not now, my little girl,' and
then I sat here waiting to see what would happen, and Tom came home. But
when I ran to tell him, he said, 'Go away, and don't bother,' and just
took me by the shoulders and put me out. Oh, dear! everything is so
queer and horrid, I don't know what to do."

Maud began to cry, and Polly sat down on the stairs beside her, trying
to comfort her, while her own thoughts were full of a vague fear. All
at once the dining-room door opened, and Tom's head appeared. A single
glance showed Polly that something was the matter, for the care and
elegance which usually marked his appearance were entirely wanting. His
tie was under one ear, his hair in a toss, the cherished moustache had
a neglected air, and his face an expression both excited, ashamed, and
distressed; even his voice betrayed disturbance, for instead of the
affable greeting he usually bestowed upon the young lady, he seemed to
have fallen back into the bluff tone of his boyish days, and all he said
was, "Hullo, Polly."

"How do you do?" answered Polly.

"I 'm in a devil of a mess, thank you; send that chicken up stairs, and
come in and hear about it," he said, as if he had been longing to tell
some one, and welcomed prudent Polly as a special providence.

"Go up, deary, and amuse yourself with this book, and these ginger snaps
that I made for you, there 's a good child," whispered Polly, as Maud
rubbed away her tears, and stared at Tom with round, inquisitive eyes.

"You 'll tell me all about it, by and by, won't you?" she whispered,
preparing to obey.

"If I may," answered Polly.

Maud departed with unexpected docility, and Polly went into the
dining-room, where Tom was wandering about in a restless way. If he
had been "raging like a bear," Polly would n't have cared, she was so
pleased that he wanted her, and so glad to be a confidante, as she used
to be in the happy old days, that she would joyfully have faced a much
more formidable person than reckless Tom.

"Now, then, what is it?" she said, coming straight to the point.

"Guess."

"You 've killed your horse racing."

"Worse than that."

"You are suspended again."

"Worse than that."

"Trix has run away with somebody," cried Polly, with a gasp.

"Worse still."

"Oh, Tom, you have n't horse whipped or shot any one?"

"Came pretty near blowing my own brains out but you see I did n't."

"I can't guess; tell me, quick."

"Well, I 'm expelled."

Tom paused on the rug as he gave the answer, and looked at Polly to see
how she took it. To his surprise she seemed almost relieved, and after a
minute silence, said, soberly, "That 's bad, very bad; but it might have
been worse."

"It is worse;" and Tom walked away again with a despairing sort of
groan.

"Don't knock the chairs about, but come and sit down, and tell me
quietly."

"Can't do it."

"Well, go on, then. Are you truly expelled? Can't it be made up? What
did you do?"

"It 's a true bill this time. I just had a row with the Chapel watchman,
and knocked him down. If it was a first offence, I might have got off;
but you see I 've had no end of narrow escapes, and this was my last
chance; I 've lost it, and now there 'll be the dickens to pay. I knew
it was all up with me, so I did n't wait to be turned out, but just took
myself off."

"What will your father say?"

"It will come hard on the governor, but the worst of it is" there Tom
stopped, and stood a minute in the middle of the room with his head
down, as if he did n't find it easy to tell even kind little Polly.
Then out came the truth all in a breath, just as he used to bolt out his
boyish misdemeanors, and then back up against the wall ready to take the
consequences.

"I owe an awful lot of money that the governor don't know about."

"Oh, Tom, how could you?"

"I 've been an extravagant rascal, I know it, and I 'm thundering sorry,
but that don't help a fellow, I 've got to tell the dear old buffer, and
there 's where it cuts."

At another time Polly would have laughed at the contrast between Tom's
face and his language, but there was a sincere remorse, which made even
the dreadful word "buffer" rather touching than otherwise.

"He will be very angry, I dare say; but he 'll help you, won't he? He
always does, Fan says."

"That 's the worst of it, you see. He 's paid up so often, that the last
time he said his patience could n't stand it, nor his pocket either, and
if I got into any more scrapes of that sort, I must get out as I could.
I meant to be as steady as Bunker Hill Monument; but here I am again,
worse than ever, for last quarter I did n't say anything to father, he
was so bothered by the loss of those ships just then, so things have
mounted up confoundedly."

"What have you done with all your money?"

"Hanged if I know."

"Can't you pay it anyway?"

"Don't see how, as I have n't a cent of my own, and no way of getting
it, unless I try gambling."

"Oh, mercy, no! Sell your horse," cried Polly, after a minute of deep
meditation.

"I have; but he did n't bring half I gave for him. I lamed him last
winter, and the beggar won't get over it."

"And that did n't pay up the debts?"

"Only about a half of 'em."

"Why, Tom, how much do you owe?"

"I have dodged figuring it up till yesterday; then things were so
desperate, I thought I might as well face the truth, so I overhauled my
accounts, and there 's the result."

Tom threw a blotted, crumpled paper into Polly's lap, and tramped up
and down again, faster than ever. Polly took one look at the total and
clasped her hands, for to her inexperienced eyes it looked appalling.

"Tidy little sum, is n't it?" asked Tom, who could n't bear the silence,
or the startled, grieved look in Polly's eyes.

"It 's awful! I don't wonder you dread telling your father."

"I 'd rather be shot. I say, Polly, suppose we break it to him easy!"
added Tom, after another turn.

"How do you mean?"

"Why, suppose Fan, or, better still, you go and sort of pave the way. I
can't bear to come down on him with the whole truth at once."

"So you 'd like to have me go and tell him for you?" Polly's lip curled
a little as she said that, and she gave Tom a look that would have
shown him how blue eyes can flash, if he had seen it. But he was at the
window, and did n't turn, as he said slowly, "Well, you see, he 's
so fond of you; we all confide in you; and you are so like one of the
family, that it seems quite natural. Just tell him I 'm expelled, you
know, and as much more as you like; then I 'll come in, and we 'll have
it out."

Polly rose and went to the door without a word. In doing so, Tom caught
a glimpse of her face, and said, hastily, "Don't you think it would be a
good plan?"

"No, I don't."

"Why not? Don't you think he 'd rather have it told him nicely by you,
than blurted out as I always do blurt things?"

"I know he 'd rather have his son go to him and tell the truth, like a
man, instead of sending a girl to do what he is afraid to do himself."

If Polly had suddenly boxed his ears, Tom could n't have looked more
taken aback than by that burst. He looked at her excited face, seemed
to understand the meaning of it, and remembered all at once that he was
trying to hide behind a girl. He turned scarlet, said shortly, "Come
back, Polly," and walked straight out of the room, looking as if going
to instant execution, for poor Tom had been taught to fear his father,
and had not entirely outgrown the dread.

Polly sat down, looking both satisfied and troubled. "I hope I did
right," she said to herself, "I could n't bear to have him shirk and
seem cowardly. He is n't, only he did n't think how it seemed to me, and
I don't wonder he was a little afraid, Mr. Shaw is so severe with the
poor fellow. Oh, dear, what should we do if Will got into such scrapes.
Thank goodness, he 's poor, and can't; I 'm so glad of that!"

Then she sat silent beside the half-open door, hearing the murmur of
Tom's voice across the hall, and hoping, with all her heart, that he
would n't have a very hard time. He seemed to tell his story rapidly and
steadily, without interruption, to the end; then Polly heard Mr. Shaw's
deeper voice say a few words, at which Tom uttered a loud exclamation,
as if taken by surprise. Polly could n't distinguish a word, so she kept
her seat, wondering anxiously what was going on between the two men. A
sudden pause seemed to follow Tom's ejaculation, then Mr. Shaw talked a
long time in a low, earnest tone, so different from the angry one Polly
had expected to hear, that it made her nervous, for Mr. Shaw usually
"blew Tom up first, and forgave him afterward," as Maud said. Presently
Tom's voice was heard, apparently asking eager questions, to which brief
replies were given. Then a dead silence fell upon the room, and nothing
was heard but the spring rain softly falling out of doors. All of a
sudden she heard a movement, and Tom's voice say audibly, "Let me bring
Polly;" and he appeared, looking so pale and miserable that Polly was
frightened.

"Go and say something to him; I can't; poor old father, if I 'd only
known," and to Polly's utter dismay, Tom threw himself into a chair, and
laid his head down on the table, as if he had got a blow that was too
much for him.

"Oh, Tom, what is it?" cried Polly, hurrying to him, full of fears she
dared not speak.

Without looking up, Tom answered, in a smothered voice, "Failed; all
gone to smash; and to-morrow every one will know it."

Polly held on to the back of Tom's chair, for a minute, for the news
took her breath away, and she felt as if the world was coming to an end,
"failed" was such a vaguely dreadful word to her.

"Is it very bad?" she asked, softly, feeling as if anything was better
than to stand still and see Tom so wretched.

"Yes; he means to give up everything. He 's done his best; but it can't
be staved off any longer, and it 's all up with him."

"Oh, I wish I had a million to give him!" cried Polly, clasping her
hands, with the tears running down her cheeks. "How does he bear it,
Tom?"

"Like a man, Polly; and I 'm proud of him," said Tom, looking up,
all red and excited with the emotions he was trying to keep under.
"Everything has been against him, and he has fought all alone to stand
the pressure, but it 's too much for him, and he 's given in. It 's an
honorable failure, mind you, and no one can say a word against him. I 'd
like to see 'em try it!" and Tom clenched his hands, as if it would
be an immense relief to him to thrash half a dozen aspersers of his
father's honest name.

"Of course they can't! This is what poor Maud troubled about. He had
told your mother and Fan before you came, and that is why they are so
unhappy, I suppose."

"They are safe enough. Father has n't touched mother's money; he 'could
n't rob his girls,' he said, and that 's all safe for 'em. Is n't he
a trump, Polly?" And Tom's face shone with pride, even while his lips
would twitch with a tenderer feeling.

"If I could only do anything to help," cried Polly, oppressed with her
own powerlessness.

"You can. Go and be good to him; you know how; he needs it enough, all
alone there. I can't do it, for I 'm only a curse instead of a comfort
to him."

"How did he take your news?" asked Polly, who, for a time, had forgotten
the lesser trouble in the greater.

"Like a lamb; for when I 'd done, he only said, 'My poor lad, we must
bear with one another.' and then told his story."

"I 'm glad he was kind," began Polly, in a soothing tone; but Tom cried
out, remorsefully, "That 's what knocks me over! Just when I ought to
be a pride and a prop to him, I bring him my debts and disgrace, and he
never says a word of blame. It 's no use, I can't stand it!" and Tom's
head went down again with something very like a sob, that would come
in spite of manful efforts to keep it back, for the poor fellow had the
warmest heart that ever was, and all the fine waistcoats outside could
n't spoil it.

That sound gave Polly more pain than the news of a dozen failures and
expulsions, and it was as impossible for her to resist putting her
hand tenderly on the bent head, as it was for her to help noticing with
pleasure how brown the little curls were growing, and how soft they
were. In spite of her sorrow, she enjoyed that minute very much, for she
was a born consoler, and, it is hardly necessary for me to add, loved
this reprehensible Tom with all her heart. It was a very foolish thing
for her to do, she quite agreed to that; she could n't understand it,
explain it, or help it; she only felt that she did care for him very
much, in spite of his faults, his indifference, and his engagement. You
see, she learned to love him one summer, when he made them a visit. That
was before Trix caught him; and when she heard that piece of news, Polly
could n't unlove him all at once, though she tried very hard, as was her
duty. That engagement was such a farce, that she never had much faith
in it, so she put her love away in a corner of her heart, and tried to
forget it, hoping it would either die, or have a right to live. It did
n't make her very miserable, because patience, work, and common-sense
lent her a hand, and hope would keep popping up its bright face from the
bottom of her Pandora-box of troubles. Now and then, when any one said
Trix would n't jilt Tom, or that Tom did care for Trix more than he
should, Polly had a pang, and thought she could n't possibly bear it.
But she always found she could, and so came to the conclusion that it
was a merciful provision of nature that girls' hearts could stand
so much, and their appetites continue good, when unrequited love was
starving.

Now, she could not help yearning over this faulty, well-beloved
scapegrace Tom, or help thinking, with a little thrill of hope, "If Trix
only cared for his money, she may cast him off now he 's lost it; but I
'll love him all the better because he 's poor." With this feeling warm
at her heart, I don't wonder that Polly's hand had a soothing effect,
and that after a heave or two, Tom's shoulders were quiet, and certain
smothered sniffs suggested that he would be all right again, if he could
only wipe his eyes without any one's seeing him do it.

Polly seemed to divine his wish, and tucking a little, clean
handkerchief into one of his half-open hands, she said, "I 'm going to
your father, now," and with a farewell smooth, so comforting that Tom
wished she 'd do it again, she went away.

As she paused a minute in the hall to steady herself, Maud called her
from above, and thinking that the women might need her more than the
men, she ran up to find Fanny waiting for her in her own room.

"Mamma's asleep, quite worn out, poor dear, so we can talk in here
without troubling her," said Fanny, receiving her friend so quietly,
that Polly was amazed.

"Let me come, too, I won't make any fuss; it 's so dreadful to be shut
out everywhere, and have people crying and talking, and locked up, and I
not know what it means," said Maud, beseechingly.

"You do know, now; I 've told her, Polly," said Fan, as they sat down
together, and Maud perched herself on the bed, so that she might retire
among the pillows if her feelings were too much for her.

"I 'm glad you take it so well, dear; I was afraid it might upset you,"
said Polly, seeing now that in spite of her quiet manner, Fan's eyes had
an excited look, and her cheeks a feverish color.

"I shall groan and moan by and by, I dare say, but at first it sort of
dazed me, and now it begins to excite me. I ought to be full of sorrow
for poor papa, and I am truly sorry, but, wicked as it may seem, it 's a
fact, Polly, that I 'm half glad it 's happened, for it takes me out of
myself, and gives me something to do."

Fanny's eyes fell and her color rose as she spoke, but Polly understood
why she wanted to forget herself, and put her arm round her with a more
tender sympathy than Fanny guessed.

"Perhaps things are not as bad as they seem; I don't know much about
such matters, but I 've seen people who have failed, and they seemed
just as comfortable as before," said Polly.

"It won't be so with us, for papa means to give up everything, and not
have a word said against him. Mamma's little property is settled upon
her, and has n't been risked. That touched her so much! She dreads
poverty even more than I do, but she begged him to take it if it would
help him. That pleased him, but he said nothing would induce him to
do it, for it would n't help much, and was hardly enough to keep her
comfortable."

"Do you know what he means to do?" asked Polly, anxiously.

"He said his plans were not made, but he meant to go into the little
house that belonged to grandma, as soon as he could, for it was n't
honest for a bankrupt to keep up an establishment like this."

"I shan't mind that at all, I like the little house 'cause it 's got a
garden, and there 's a cunning room with a three-cornered closet in it
that I always wanted. If that 's all, I don't think bankrupting is so
very bad," said Maud, taking a cheerful view of things.

"Ah, just wait till the carriage goes and the nice clothes and the
servants, and we have to scratch along as we can. You 'll change
your mind then, poor child," said Fanny, whose ideas of failure were
decidedly tragical.

"Will they take all my things away?" cried Maud, in dismay.

"I dare say; I don't know what we are allowed to keep; but not much,
I fancy," and Fan looked as if strung up to sacrifice everything she
possessed.

"They shan't have my new ear-rings, I 'll hide 'em, and my best dress,
and my gold smelling bottle. Oh, oh, oh! I think it 's mean to take a
little girl's things away!" And Maud dived among the pillows to smother
a wail of anguish at the prospect of being bereft of her treasures.

Polly soon lured her out again, by assurances that she would n't be
utterly despoiled, and promises to try and soften the hard hearts of
her father's creditors, if the ear-rings and the smelling-bottle were
attached.

"I wonder if we shall be able to keep one servant, just till we learn
how to do the work," said Fanny, looking at her white hands, with a
sigh.

But Maud clapped hers, and gave a joyful bounce, as she cried, "Now I
can learn to cook! I love so to beat eggs! I 'll have an apron, with
a bib to it, like Polly's, and a feather duster, and sweep the stairs,
maybe, with my head tied up, like Katy. Oh, what fun!"

"Don't laugh at her, or discourage her; let her find comfort in bibs and
dust-pans, if she can," whispered Polly to Fan, while Maud took a joyful
"header" among the pillows, and came up smiling and blowzy, for she
loved house-work, and often got lectured for stolen visits to the
kitchen, and surreptitious sweepings and dustings when the coast was
clear.

"Mamma is so feeble, I shall have to keep house, I suppose, and you must
show me how, Polly," said Fan.

"Good practice, ma'am, as you 'll find out some day," answered Polly,
laughing significantly.

Fanny smiled, then grew both grave and sad. "This changes everything;
the old set will drop me, as we did the Mertons when their father
failed, and my 'prospects,' as we say, are quite ruined."

"I don't believe it; your real friends won't drop you, and you 'll find
out which the true ones are now. I know one friend who will be kinder
than ever."

"Oh, Polly, do you think so?" and Fanny's eyes softened with sudden
tears.

"I know who she means," cried Maud, always eager to find out things. "It
's herself; Polly won't mind if we are poor, 'cause she likes beggars."

"Is that who you meant?" asked Fan, wistfully.

"No, it 's a much better and dearer friend than I am," said Polly,
pinching Fanny's cheek, as it reddened prettily under her eyes. "You 'll
never guess, Maud, so I would n't try, but be planning what you will put
in your cunning, three-cornered closet, when you get it."

Having got rid of "Miss Paulina Pry," as Tom called Maud, who was
immediately absorbed by her cupboard, the older girls soberly discussed
the sudden change which had come, and Polly was surprised to see what
unexpected strength and sense Fanny showed. Polly was too unconscious
of the change which love had made in herself to understand at first the
cause of her friend's new patience and fortitude; but she rejoiced over
it, and felt that her prophecy would yet be fulfilled. Presently Maud
emerged from her new closet, bringing a somewhat startling idea with
her.

"Do bankrupting men" (Maud liked that new word) "always have fits?"

"Mercy, no! What put that into your head, child?" cried Polly.

"Why, Mr. Merton did; and I was thinking perhaps papa had got one down
there, and it kind of frightened me."

"Mr. Merton's was a bad, disgraceful failure, and I don't wonder he had
a fit. Ours is n't, and papa won't do anything of that sort, you may be
sure," said Fanny, with as proud an air as if "our failure" was rather
an honor than otherwise.

"Don't you think you and Maud had better go down and see him?" asked
Polly.

"Perhaps he would n't like it; and I don't know what to say, either,"
began Fan; but Polly said, eagerly, "I know he would like it. Never mind
what you say; just go, and show him that you don't doubt or blame him
for this, but love him all the more, and are ready and glad to help him
bear the trouble."

"I 'm going, I ain't afraid; I 'll just hug him, and say I 'm ever so
glad we are going to the little house," cried Maud, scrambling off the
bed, and running down stairs.

"Come with me, Polly, and tell me what to do," said Fanny, drawing her
friend after her.

"You 'll know what to do when you see him, better than I can tell you,"
answered Polly, readily yielding, for she knew they considered her
"quite one of the family," as Tom said.

At the study door they found Maud, whose courage had given out, for Mr.
Merton's fit rather haunted her. Polly opened the door; and the minute
Fanny saw her father, she did know what to do. The fire was low, the gas
dim, and Mr. Shaw was sitting in his easy-chair, his gray head in both
his hands, looking lonely, old, and bowed down with care. Fanny gave
Polly one look, then went and took the gray head in both her arms,
saying, with a tender quiver in her voice, "Father dear, we 've come to
help you bear it."

Mr. Shaw looked up, and seeing in his daughter's face something that
never had been there before, put his arm about her, and leaned his
tired head against her, as if, when least expected, he had found the
consolation he most needed. In that minute, Fanny felt, with mingled joy
and self-reproach, what a daughter might be to her father; and Polly,
thinking of feeble, selfish Mrs. Shaw, asleep up stairs, saw with
sudden clearness what a wife should be to her husband, a helpmeet, not
a burden. Touched by these unusual demonstrations, Maud crept quietly
to her father's knee, and whispered, with a great tear shining on her
little pug nose, "Papa, we don't mind it much, and I 'm going to help
Fan keep house for you; I 'd like to do it, truly."

Mr. Shaw's other arm went round the child, and for a minute no one said
anything, for Polly had slipped behind his chair, that nothing should
disturb the three, who were learning from misfortune how much they loved
one another. Presently Mr. Shaw steadied himself and asked, "Where is my
other daughter, where 's my Polly?"

She was there at once; gave him one of the quiet kisses that had more
than usual tenderness in it, for she loved to hear him say "my other
daughter," and then she whispered, "Don't you want Tom, too?"

"Of course I do; where is the poor fellow?"

"I 'll bring him;" and Polly departed with most obliging alacrity.

But in the hall she paused a minute to peep into the glass and see if
she was all right, for somehow she was more anxious to look neat and
pretty to Tom in his hour of trouble than she had ever been in his
prosperous days. In lifting her arms to perk up the bow at her throat
she knocked a hat off the bracket. Now, a shiny black beaver is not an
object exactly calculated to inspire tender or romantic sentiments, one
would fancy, but that particular "stove pipe" seemed to touch Polly to
the heart, for she caught it up, as if its fall suggested a greater one,
smoothed out a slight dint, as if it was symbolical of the hard knocks
its owner's head was now in danger of receiving, and stood looking at
it with as much pity and respect, as if it had been the crown of a
disinherited prince. Girls will do such foolish little things, and
though we laugh at them, I think we like them the better for it, after
all.

Richard was himself again when Polly entered, for the handkerchief had
disappeared, his head was erect, his face was steady, and his whole
air had a dogged composure which seemed to say to fate, "Hit away, I 'm
ready." He did not hear Polly come in, for he was looking fixedly at
the fire with eyes that evidently saw a very different future there
from that which it used to show him; but when she said, "Tom, dear, your
father wants you," he got up at once, held out his hand to her, saying,
"Come too, we can't get on without you," and took her back into the
study with him.

Then they had a long talk, for the family troubles seemed to warm and
strengthen the family affection and confidence, and as the young people
listened while Mr. Shaw told them as much of his business perplexities
as they could understand, every one of them blamed him or herself for
going on so gayly and blindly, while the storm was gathering, and the
poor man was left to meet it all alone. Now, however, the thunder-clap
had come, and after the first alarm, finding they were not killed, they
began to discover a certain half-anxious, half-pleasant excitement
in talking it over, encouraging one another, and feeling unusually
friendly, as people do when a sudden shower drives two or three to the
shelter of one umbrella.

It was a sober talk, but not all sad, for Mr. Shaw felt inexpressibly
comforted by his children's unexpected sympathy, and they, trying to
take the downfall cheerfully for his sake, found it easier to bear
themselves. They even laughed occasionally, for the girls, in their
ignorance, asked queer questions; Tom made ludicrously unbusiness-like
propositions; and Maud gave them one hearty peal, that did a world of
good, by pensively remarking, when the plans for the future had been
explained to her, "I 'm so relieved; for when papa said we must give up
everything, and mamma called us all beggars, I did think I 'd got to go
round asking for cold vittles, with a big basket, and an old shawl over
my head. I said once I 'd like that, but I 'm afraid I should n't, for I
can't bear Indian cake and cold potatoes, that 's what the poor children
always seem to get, and I should hate to have Grace and the rest see me
scuffing round the back gates."

"My little girl shall never come to that, if I can help it," said Mr.
Shaw, holding her close, with a look that made Maud add, as she laid her
cheek against his own, "But I 'd do it, father, if you asked me to, for
I truly want to help."

"So do I!" cried Fanny, wondering at the same minute how it would seem
to wear turned silks, and clean her gloves.

Tom said nothing, but drew toward him a paper of figures which his
father had drawn up, and speedily reduced himself to the verge of
distraction by trying to understand them, in his ardent desire to prove
his willingness to put his shoulder to the wheel.

"We shall pull through, children, so don't borrow trouble, only be ready
for discomforts and annoyances. Put your pride in your pockets, and
remember poverty is n't disgraceful, but dishonesty is."

Polly had always loved kind Mr. Shaw, but now she respected him
heartily, and felt that she had not done him justice when she sometimes
thought that he only cared for making money.

"I should n't wonder if this was a good thing for the whole family,
though it don't look so. Mrs. Shaw will take it the hardest, but it may
stir her up, so she will forget her nerves, and be as busy and happy as
mother is," said Polly to herself, in a hopeful mood, for poverty was an
old friend, and she had learned long ago not to fear it, but to take its
bitter and its sweet, and make the best of both.

When they parted for the night, Polly slipped away first, to leave them
free, yet could n't help lingering outside to see how tenderly the girls
parted from their father. Tom had n't a word to say for himself, for men
don't kiss, caress, or cry when they feel most, and all he could do to
express his sympathy and penitence, was to wring his father's hand with
a face full of respect, regret, and affection, and then bolt up stairs
as if the furies were after him, as they were, in a mild and modern
form.




CHAPTER XVI. A DRESS PARADE


THE weeks that followed taught the Shaws, as many other families have
been taught, how rapidly riches take to themselves wings and fly away,
when they once begin to go. Mr. Shaw carried out his plans with an
energy and patience that worked wonders, and touched the hearts of his
hardest creditors. The big house was given up as soon as possible and
the little house taken; being made comfortable with the furniture Madam
left there when she went to live with her son. The old-fashioned things
had been let with the house, and now seemed almost like a gift from
Grandma, doubly precious in these troublous times. At the auction,
several persons tried to show the family that, though they had lost
their fortune, friends still remained, for one bid in Fanny's piano,
and sent it to her; another secured certain luxurious articles for Mrs.
Shaw's comfort; and a third saved such of Mr. Shaw's books as he valued
most, for he had kept his word and given up everything, with the most
punctilious integrity. So the little house was not bare, but made
pleasant to their eyes by these waifs from the wreck, brought them by
the tide of sympathy and good-will which soon set in. Everybody who
knew them hastened to call, many from a real regard, but more from mere
curiosity to "see how they took it." This was one of the hardest things
they had to bear, and Tom used strong language more than once, when some
fine lady came to condole, and went away to gossip. Polly's hopes of
Mrs. Shaw were disappointed, for misfortune did not have a bracing
effect. She took to her bed at once, received her friends in tears and a
point-lace cap, and cheered her family by plaintively inquiring when she
was to be taken to the almshouse. This was hard for Fanny; but after
an interval of despair, she came to the conclusion that under the
circumstances it was the best thing her mother could have done, and
with something of her father's energy, Fanny shouldered the new burden,
feeling that at last necessity had given her what she had long needed,
something to do.

The poor girl knew as much of household affairs as Snip; but pride and
the resolution "to stand by Father," kept up her courage, and she worked
away with feverish activity at whatever task came first till, just as
strength and heart were about to fail, order began to emerge from chaos
and the vision of a home made happy and comfortable by her skill and
care came to repay and sustain her.

Maud, being relieved from the fear of back-door beggary, soon became
reconciled to bankruptcy; thought it rather a good joke, on the whole,
for children like novelty, and don't care much for Mrs. Grundy. She
regarded the new abode as a baby house on a large scale, where she
was allowed to play her part in the most satisfactory manner. From the
moment when, on taking possession of the coveted room, she opened the
doors of the three-cornered closet, and found a little kettle just like
Polly's, standing there, she felt that a good time was coming for her
and fell to dusting furniture, washing cups, and making toast, the
happiest, fussiest little housewife in the city. For Maud inherited the
notable gifts of her grandmother, and would have made a capital farmer's
daughter, in spite of her city breeding.

Polly came and went through all these changes, faithful, helpful, and
as cheery as she could be when her friends were in trouble. The parts
seemed reversed now, and it was Polly who gave, Fanny who received; for
where everything seemed strange and new to Fan, Polly was quite at home,
and every one of the unfashionable domestic accomplishments now came
into play, to the comfort of the Shaws, and the great satisfaction of
Polly. She could not do enough to prove her gratitude for former favors,
and went toiling and moiling about, feeling that the hardest, most
disagreeable tasks were her especial duty. In the moving nothing suited
her better than to trot up and down, lugging heavy things, to pound her
fingers black and blue nailing carpets and curtains, and the day she
nearly broke her neck tumbling down the cellar stairs, in her eagerness
to see that Mrs. Shaw's wine was rightly stored, she felt that she was
only paying her debts, and told Tom she liked it, when he picked her up
looking as grimy as a chimney-sweep.

"You can turn your hand to anything, you clever girl, so do come and
give me some advice, for I am in the depths of despair," said Fanny when
the "maid-of-all-work" as Polly called herself, found a leisure hour.

"What is it? Moths in the furs, a smoky chimney, or small-pox next
door?" asked Polly, as they entered Fan's room, where Maud was trying on
old bonnets before the looking-glass.

"Actually I have nothing to wear," began Fan impressively; "I 've been
too busy to think or care till now, but here it is nearly May and I have
hardly a decent rag to my back. Usually, you know, I just go to Mrs.
O'Grady and tell her what I want; she makes my spring wardrobe, Papa
pays the bill, and there I am. Now I 've looked into the matter, and I
declare to you, Polly, I 'm frightened to see how much it costs to dress
me."

"Not so much as some girls I know," said Polly encouragingly.

"Perhaps not, for I have a conscience, and taste is economy sometimes;
but really, Polly, I have n't the heart to ask Papa for a cent just
now, and yet I must have clothes. You are such a genius for planning and
working wonders, that I throw myself upon you and ask, 'How shall I make
a spring wardrobe out of nothing?'"

"Let me see the 'nothing' before I advise. Bring out every rag you 've
got, and we 'll see what can be done," said Polly, looking as if she
enjoyed the prospect, for she had a great deal of that feminine faculty
which we call "knack," and much practice had increased it.

Fanny brought out her "rags" and was astonished to see how many she had,
for chair, sofa, bed, and bureau were covered, and still Maud, who was
burrowing in the closets, kept crying, "Here 's another."

"There 's a discouraging heap of rubbish for you!" said Fan, as she
added a faded muslin to the last pile.

"Now, to me your 'rubbish' looks very encouraging, because there is good
material there, and not much worn-out finery, that 's my detestation,
for you can't do anything with it. Let me see, five bonnets. Put the
winter ones away till autumn, rip up the summer ones, and out of three
old ones we 'll get a pretty new one, if my eyes don't deceive me."

"I 'll rip, and then do let me see you make a bonnet, it must be so
interesting," said Maud, whipping out her scissors and eagerly beginning
to reduce a shabby little bonnet to its original elements. "Now the
dresses," continued Polly, who had rapidly sorted out the piles.

"Will you have the goodness to look at this?" said Fan, holding up a
gray street suit faded past cure.

Polly whisked it wrong side out, and showing the clean, bright fabric,
said, with a triumphant wave, "Behold your new suit; fresh trimming and
less of it will finish you off as smart as ever."

"I never wore a turned dress in my life; do you suppose people will know
it?" said Fan doubtfully.

"What if they do? It won't hurt you. Not one in a hundred will ever
think anything about your dress, except that it is pretty. I 've worn
turned and dyed gowns all my days, and it don't seem to have alienated
my friends, or injured my constitution."

"That it has n't; I 'm a goose, Polly, and I 'll get over the feeling
that it 's sort of disgraceful to be poor and have to economize. We 'll
turn the gray, and I 'll wear it bravely."

"Then it will be more becoming than ever. Oh, here 's the pretty violet
silk. That will make a lovely suit," cried Polly, going on with the
review.

"Don't see how two draggled skirts and a stained waist can be
transformed into a whole rig," said Fan, sitting on the bed, with her
garments strewn about her in various attitudes of limp despondency.

"Well, ma'am, my plan is this," began Polly, imitating Mrs. O'Grady's
important tone, and bad grammar: "Gores is out, and plaits is in;
therefore, as the top of this skirt is quite fresh, we will take off the
ruffles, turn it upside down, and leave it plain. The upper skirt
will be made scanter, and finished with a frill; then the waist can be
refreshed with the best parts of these wide flounces, and out of those
new bits we will concoct a hat. The black lace Maud has just taken
off the green one will do to edge the violet, and with your nice silk
mantilla you are complete, don't you see?"

"I don't quite see it yet, but I have firm faith that I shall in time,
and consider my calling costume finished," said Fanny, getting more and
more interested as she saw her condemned wardrobe coming out fresh again
under Polly's magic knack.

"There are two; then that piqu, is all right, if you cut the tail off
the jacket and change the trimming a bit. The muslins only need mending
and doing up to look as well as ever; you ought not to put them away
torn and soiled, my child. The two black silks will be good stand-bys
for years. If I were you, I 'd have a couple of neat, pretty prints for
home-wear, and then I don't see why you are n't fixed well enough for
our short season."

"Can't I do anything with this barege? It 's one of my favorite dresses,
and I hate to give it up."

"You wore that thoroughly out, and it 's only fit for the rag-bag. Yes,
it was very pretty and becoming, I remember, but its day is over."

Fanny let the dress lie in her lap a minute as she absently picked at
the fringe, smiling to herself over the happy time when she wore it last
and Sydney said she only needed cowslips in her lap to look like spring.
Presently she folded it up and put it away with a sigh, but it never
went into the rag-bag, and my sentimental readers can understand what
saved it.

"The ball dresses had better be put nicely away till next year," began
Polly, coming to a rainbow colored heap.

"My day is over, I shall never use them again. Do what you like with
them," said Fan calmly.

"Did you ever sell your cast-off finery, as many ladies do?" asked
Polly.

"Never; I don't like the fashion. I give it away, or let Maud have it
for tableaux."

"I wonder if you would mind my telling you something Belle proposed?"

"If it 's an offer to buy my clothes, I should mind," answered Fanny,
sharply.

"Then I won't," and Polly retired behind a cloud of arsenic-green gauze,
which made her look as if she had the cholera.

"If she wanted to buy that horrid new 'gooseberry-colored gown,' as
Tom calls it, I 'd let her have it cheap," put in Maud, who was of a
practical turn.

"Does she want it, Polly?" asked Fan, whose curiosity got the better of
her pride.

"Well, she merely asked me if I thought you 'd be mortally offended,
if she offered to take it off your hands, as you 'd never worn it. You
don't like it, and in another season it will be all out of fashion,"
said Polly from her verdant retreat.

"What did you say?"

"I saw she meant it kindly, so I said I 'd ask. Now between ourselves,
Fan, the price of that dress would give you all you 'll want for your
spring fixings, that 's one consideration; then here 's another, which
may have some weight with you," added Polly slyly. "Trix told Belle she
was going to ask you for the dress, as you would n't care to wear it
now. That made Belle fire up, and say it was a mean thing to do without
offering some return for a costly thing like that; and then Belle said,
in her blunt way, 'I 'll give Fan all she paid for it, and more, too, if
it will be any help to her. I don't care for the dress, but I 'd like to
slip a little money into her pocket, for I know she needs it and is too
good to ask dear Mr. Shaw for anything she can get on without.'"

"Did she say that? I 'll give her the dress, and not take a penny for
it," cried Fan, flushing up with mingled anger toward Trix and gratitude
to Belle.

"That won't suit her; you let me manage it, and don't feel any shame or
anxiety about it. You did many a kind and generous thing for Belle when
you had the power, and you liked to do it; now let her pay her debts,
and have the same pleasure."

"If she looks at it in that way, it makes a difference. Perhaps I 'd
better the money would be an immense help only I don't quite like to
take it."

"Kings and queens sell their jewels when times are hard or they get
turned off their thrones, and no one thinks it anything amiss, so
why need you? It 's just a little transaction between two friends who
exchange things they don't want for things which they do, and I 'd do it
if I were you."

"We 'll see about it," said Fan, privately resolving to take Polly's
advice.

"If I had lots of things like Fan, I 'd have an auction and get all
I could for them. Why don't you?" asked Maud, beginning on her third
bonnet.

"We will," said Polly, and mounting a chair, she put up, bid in, and
knocked down Fan's entire wardrobe to an imaginary group of friends,
with such droll imitations of each one that the room rang with laughter.

"That 's enough nonsense; now we 'll return to business," said Polly,
descending breathless but satisfied with the effect of her fun.

"These white muslins and pretty silks will keep for years, so I should
lay them by till they are needed. It will save buying, and you can go to
your stock any time and make over what you want. That 's the way Mother
does; we 've always had things sent us from richer friends, and whatever
was n't proper for us to wear at the time, Mother put away to be used
when we needed it. Such funny bundles as we used to have sometimes, odd
shoes, bonnets without crowns, stockings without heels or toes, and old
finery of all sorts. We used to rush when a bundle came, and sit round
while Mother opened it. The boys always made fun of the things, though
they were as grateful, really, as any of us. Will made a verse one day
which we thought pretty well for a little chap: 'To poor country folks
Who have n't any clothes, Rich folks, to relieve them, Send old lace
gowns and satin bows.'"

"I think that Will is going to be as nice a poet as Mr. Shakespeare,"
remarked Maud in a tone of serious conviction.

"He is already a Milton; but I don't believe he will ever be anything
but a poet in name," said Polly, working away while she talked.

"Did n't your mother ever let you wear the nice things that came?" asked
Maud.

"No, she thought it was n't the thing for a poor minister's girls to go
flourishing about in second-hand finery, so she did what I 'm doing now,
put away what would be useful and proper for us by and by, and let us
play with the shabby, silk bonnets and dirty, flounced gowns. Such fun
as we used to have up in our big garret! I remember one day we 'd been
playing have a ball, and were all rigged up, even the boys. Some new
neighbors came to call, and expressed a wish to see us, having been told
that we were pattern children. Mother called us, but we had paraded out
into the garden, after our ball, and were having a concert, as we sat
about on the cabbages for green satin seats, so we did n't hear the
call, and just as the company was going, a great noise arrested them
on the doorstep, and round the corner of the house rattled Ned in
full costume, wheeling Kitty in a barrow, while Jimmy, Will, and I ran
screaming after, looking like Bedlamites; for we were playing that Lady
Fitz Perkins had fainted, and was being borne home senseless in a cab.
I thought mother would kill herself with laughing; and you can imagine
what a fine impression the strangers received of the model children."

Maud was so tickled with this youthful prank that she unguardedly sat
down to laugh on the edge of an open trunk, immediately doubled up, fell
in, and was with difficulty extricated.

"People in the country have great deal nicer times than we do. I never
rode in a wheelbarrow, I never sat on cabbages, and I don't think it 's
fair," she said with an injured expression. "You need n't save any old
silk gowns for me; I don't mean to be a fine lady when I grow up, I 'm
going to be a farmer's wife, and make butter and cheese, and have ten
children, and raise pigs," she added in one enthusiastic burst.

"I do believe she will if she can find a farmer anywhere," said Fanny.

"Oh, I 'm going to have Will; I asked him and he said, 'All right.' He
's going to preach Sundays, and work on the farm the rest of the time.
Well, he is, so you need n't laugh, for we 've made all our plans,"
said Maud with comical dignity as she tried the effect of an old white
bonnet, wondering if farmers' wives could wear ostrich feathers when
they went to meeting.

"Blessed innocence! Don't you wish you were a child, and dared tell what
you want?" murmured Fanny.

"I wish I had seen Will's face when Maud proposed," answered Polly, with
a nod which answered her friend's speech better than her words.

"Any news of anybody?" whispered Fan, affecting to examine a sleeve with
care.

"Still at the South; don't think late events have been reported yet;
that accounts for absence," answered Polly.

"I think Sir Philip was hit harder than was supposed," said Fan.

"I doubt it, but time cures wounds of that sort amazing quick."

"Wish it did!"

"Who is Sir Philip?" demanded Maud, pricking up her ears.

"A famous man who lived in the time of Queen Elizabeth," answered Fan,
with a look at Polly.

"Oh!" And Maud seemed satisfied, but the sharp child had her suspicions
nevertheless.

"There will be an immense deal of work in all this fixing over and I
hate to sew," said Fanny, to divert a certain person's thoughts.

"Jenny and I are going to help. We are your debtors, as well as Belle,
and demand the privilege of paying up. Blessings, like curses, come home
to roost, Fan."

"Mine come home a good deal bigger than they went," answered Fanny,
looking pleased that little favors should be so faithfully remembered.

"The interest on that sort of investment rolls up beautifully, you know.
Now rip that dress for Jenny to put in order, and I 'll toss you up a
bonnet in less than no time," said Polly, determined to have things go
smoothly, for she knew Fan's feelings had been a good deal tried lately,
in many ways.

"I must have something to match my dress, and blue inside," said Fanny,
bringing out her ribbon boxes.

"Anything you like, my dear; when it comes to bonnets, I am usually
inspired. I have it! There we are! And nothing could be nicer," cried
Polly, making a dive among the silks Fan was turning over with a lost
expression. "This bit of silver-gray is all I ask, here 's enough for
a killing bonnet, and those forget-me-nots are both pretty and
appropriate."

"You wretch, be still!" cried Fanny, as Polly looked up at her with a
wicked laugh in her eyes.

"It will be done in time, and the dress likewise, so look your
prettiest, and accept my blessing," continued Polly, seeing that Fan
liked her raillery.

"Time for what?" asked Paulina Pry.

"Your wedding, dear," sweetly answered Fan, for Polly's pleasant hints
and predictions put her in a charming humor, and even made old clothes
of little consequence.

Maud gave an incredulous sniff, and wondered why "big girls need to be
so dreadful mysterious about their old secrets."

"This silk reminds me of Kitty's performance last summer. A little
checked silk was sent in our spring bundle from Mrs. Davenport, and
Mother said Kit might have it if she could make it do. So I washed it
nicely, and we fussed and planned, but it came short by half of one
sleeve. I gave it up, but Kit went to work and matched every scrap that
was left so neatly that she got out the half sleeve, put it on the under
side, and no one was the wiser. How many pieces do you think she put in,
Maud?"

"Fifty," was the wise reply.

"No, only ten, but that was pretty well for a fourteen-year-old
dressmaker. You ought to have seen the little witch laugh in her sleeve
when any one admired the dress, for she wore it all summer and looked as
pretty as a pink in it. Such things are great fun when you get used to
them; besides, contriving sharpens your wits, and makes you feel as if
you had more hands than most people."

"I think we 'll get a farm near your house; I should like to know
Kitty," said Maud, feeling a curious interest in a girl who made such
peculiar patchwork.

"The dress-parade is over, and I 'm ever so much obliged to you, Polly,
for helping me through, and showing me how to make the best of things.
I hope in time to have as many hands as you," said Fan gratefully,
when the simple bonnet was done and everything planned out ready to be
finished.

"I hope you will soon have two good, strong ones beside your own, my
dear," answered Polly, as she vanished, with a parting twinkle that kept
Fan's face bright all day.




CHAPTER XVII. PLAYING GRANDMOTHER


I THINK Tom had the hardest time of all, for besides the family
troubles, he had many of his own to perplex and harass him. College
scrapes were soon forgotten in greater afflictions; but there were
plenty of tongues to blame "that extravagant dog," and plenty of heads
to wag ominously over prophecies of the good time Tom Shaw would now
make on the road to ruin. As reporters flourish in this country, of
course Tom soon heard all the friendly criticisms passed upon him and
his career, and he suffered more than anybody guessed; for the truth
that was at the bottom of the gossip filled him with the sharp regret
and impotent wrath against himself as well as others, which drives many
a proud fellow, so placed, to destruction, or the effort that redeems
boyish folly, and makes a man of him.

Now that he had lost his heritage, Tom seemed to see for the first
time how goodly it had been, how rich in power, pleasure, and gracious
opportunities. He felt its worth even while he acknowledged, with the
sense of justice that is strong in manly men, how little he deserved
a gift which he had so misused. He brooded over this a good deal, for,
like the bat in the fable, he did n't seem to find any place in the new
life which had begun for all. Knowing nothing of business, he was not
of much use to his father, though he tried to be, and generally ended
by feeling that he was a hindrance, not a help. Domestic affairs were
equally out of his line, and the girls, more frank than their father,
did not hesitate to tell him he was in the way when he offered to lend
a hand anywhere. After the first excitement was over, and he had time to
think, heart and energy seemed to die out, remorse got hold of him, and,
as generous, thoughtless natures are apt to do when suddenly confronted
with conscience, he exaggerated his faults and follies into sins of the
deepest dye, and fancied he was regarded by others as a villain and an
outcast. Pride and penitence made him shrink out of sight as much as
possible, for he could not bear pity, even when silently expressed by a
friendly hand or a kindly eye. He stayed at home a good deal, and loafed
about with a melancholy and neglected air, vanished when anyone came,
talked very little, and was either pathetically humble or tragically
cross. He wanted to do something, but nothing seemed to appear; and
while he waited to get his poise after the downfall, he was so very
miserable that I 'm afraid, if it had not been for one thing, my poor
Tom would have got desperate, and been a failure. But when he seemed
most useless, outcast, and forlorn, he discovered that one person needed
him, one person never found him in the way, one person always welcomed
and clung to him with the strongest affection of a very feeble nature.
This dependence of his mother's was Tom's salvation at that crisis of
his life; and the gossips, who said softly to one another over their
muffins and tea. "It really would be a relief to that whole family if
poor, dear Mrs. Shaw could be ahem! mercifully removed," did not know
that the invalid's weak, idle hands were unconsciously keeping the son
safe in that quiet room, where she gave him all that she had to give,
mother-love, till he took heart again, and faced the world ready to
fight his battles manfully.

"Dear, dear! how old and bent poor father does look. I hope he won't
forget to order my sweetbread," sighed Mrs. Shaw one day, as she watched
her husband slowly going down the street.

Tom, who stood by her, idly spinning the curtain tassel, followed the
familiar figure with his eye, and seeing how gray the hair had grown,
how careworn the florid face, and how like a weary old man his once
strong, handsome father walked, he was smitten by a new pang of
self-reproach, and with his usual impetuosity set about repairing the
omission as soon as he discovered it.

"I 'll see to your sweetbread, mum. Good-by, back to dinner," and with a
hasty kiss, Tom was off.

He did n't know exactly what he meant to do, but it had suddenly come
over him, that he was hiding from the storm, and letting his father
meet it alone; for the old man went to his office every day with the
regularity of a machine, that would go its usual round until it stopped,
while the young man stayed at home with the women, and let his mother
comfort him.

"He has a right to be ashamed of me, but I act as if I was ashamed of
him; dare say people think so. I 'll show them that I ain't; yes, by the
powers, I will!" and Tom drew on his gloves with the air of a man about
to meet and conquer an enemy.

"Have an arm, sir? If you don't mind I 'll walk down with you. Little
commission for mother, nice day, is n't it?"

Tom rather broke down at the end of his speech, for the look of pleased
surprise with which his father greeted him, the alacrity with which he
accepted and leaned on the strong arm offered him, proved that the
daily walks had been solitary and doubtless sad ones. I think Mr. Shaw
understood the real meaning of that little act of respect, and felt
better for the hopeful change it seemed to foretell. But he took it
quietly, and leaving his face to speak for him, merely said, "Thanky,
Tom; yes, mother will enjoy her dinner twice as much if you order it."

Then they began to talk business with all their might, as if they feared
that some trace of sentiment might disgrace their masculine dignity. But
it made no difference whether they discussed lawsuits or love, mortgages
or mothers, the feeling was all right and they knew it, so Mr. Shaw
walked straighter than usual, and Tom felt that he was in his proper
place again. The walk was not without its trials, however; for while it
did Tom's heart good to see the cordial respect paid to his father,
it tried his patience sorely to see also inquisitive or disapproving
glances fixed upon himself when hats were lifted to his father, and
to hear the hearty "Good day, Mr. Shaw," drop into a cool or careless,
"That 's the son; it 's hard on him. Wild fellow, do him good."

"Granted; but you need n't hit a man when he 's down," muttered Tom to
himself, feeling every moment a stronger desire to do something that
should silence everybody. "I 'd cut away to Australia if it was n't for
mother; anything, anywhere to get out of the way of people who know me.
I never can right myself here, with all the fellows watching, and laying
wagers whether I sink or swim. Hang Greek and Latin! wish I 'd learned
a trade, and had something to fall back upon. Have n't a blessed thing
now, but decent French and my fists. Wonder if old Bell don't want
a clerk for the Paris branch of the business? That would n't be bad;
faith, I 'll try it."

And when Tom had landed his father safely at the office, to the great
edification of all beholders, he screwed up his courage, and went to
prefer his request, feeling that the prospect brightened a little. But
Mr. Bell was not in a good humor, and only gave Tom a severe lecture on
the error of his ways, which sent him home much depressed, and caused
the horizon to lower again.

As he roamed about the house that afternoon, trying to calculate how
much an Australian outfit would cost, the sound of lively voices and
clattering spoons attracted him to the kitchen. There he found
Polly giving Maud lessons in cookery; for the "new help" not being a
high-priced article, could not be depended on for desserts, and Mrs.
Shaw would have felt as if the wolf was at the door if there was not "a
sweet dish" at dinner. Maud had a genius for cooking, and Fanny hated
it, so that little person was in her glory, studying receipt books, and
taking lessons whenever Polly could give them.

"Gracious me, Tom, don't come now; we are awful busy! Men don't belong
in kitchens," cried Maud, as her brother appeared in the doorway.

"Could n't think what you were about. Mum is asleep, and Fan out, so I
loafed down to see if there was any fun afoot," said Tom, lingering, as
if the prospect was agreeable. He was a social fellow, and very grateful
just then to any one who helped him to forget his worries for a time.
Polly knew this, felt that his society would not be a great affliction
to herself at least, and whispering to Maud, "He won't know," she added,
aloud, "Come in if you like, and stir this cake for me; it needs a
strong hand, and mine are tired. There, put on that apron to keep you
tidy, sit here, and take it easy."

"I used to help grandma bat up cake, and rather liked it, if I remember
right," said Tom, letting Polly tie a checked apron on him, put a big
bowl into his hands, and settle him near the table, where Maud
was picking raisins, and she herself stirring busily about among
spice-boxes, rolling-pins, and butter-pots.

"You do it beautifully, Tom. I 'll give you a conundrum to lighten your
labor: Why are bad boys like cake?" asked Polly, anxious to cheer him
up.

"Because a good beating makes them better. I doubt that myself, though,"
answered Tom, nearly knocking the bottom of the bowl out with his
energetic demonstrations, for it really was a relief to do something.

"Bright boy! here 's a plum for you," and Polly threw a plump raisin
into his mouth.

"Put in lots, won't you? I 'm rather fond of plum-cake," observed
Tom, likening himself to Hercules with the distaff, and finding his
employment pleasant, if not classical.

"I always do, if I can; there 's nothing I like better than to shovel in
sugar and spice, and make nice, plummy cake for people. It 's one of the
few things I have a gift for."

"You 've hit it this time, Polly; you certainly have a gift for putting
a good deal of both articles into your own and other people's lives,
which is lucky, as, we all have to eat that sort of cake, whether we
like it or not," observed Tom, so soberly that Polly opened her eyes,
and Maud exclaimed, "I do believe he 's preaching."

"Feel as if I could sometimes," continued Tom; then his eye fell upon
the dimples in Polly's elbows, and he added, with a laugh, "That 's more
in your line, ma'am; can't you give us a sermon?"

"A short one. Life, my brethren, is like plum-cake," began Polly,
impressively folding her floury hands. "In some the plums are all on
the top, and we eat them gayly, till we suddenly find they are gone. In
others the plums sink to the bottom, and we look for them in vain as we
go on, and often come to them when it is too late to enjoy them. But
in the well-made cake, the plums are wisely scattered all through, and
every mouthful is a pleasure. We make our own cakes, in a great measure,
therefore let us look to it, my brethren, that they are mixed according
to the best receipt, baked in a well regulated oven, and gratefully
eaten with a temperate appetite."

"Good! good!" cried Tom, applauding with the wooden spoon. "That 's a
model sermon, Polly, short, sweet, sensible, and not a bit sleepy. I 'm
one of your parish, and will see that you get your 'celery punctooal,'
as old Deacon Morse used to say."

"'Thank you, brother, my wants is few, and ravens scurser than they used
to be,' as dear old Parson Miller used to answer. Now, Maud, bring on
the citron;" and Polly began to put the cake together in what seemed
a most careless and chaotic manner, while Tom and Maud watched with
absorbing interest till it was safely in the oven.

"Now make your custards, dear; Tom may like to beat the eggs for you; it
seems to have a good effect upon his constitution."

"First-rate; hand 'em along," and Tom smoothed his apron with a cheerful
air. "By the way, Syd's got back. I met him yesterday, and he treated me
like a man and a brother," he added, as if anxious to contribute to the
pleasures of the hour.

"I 'm so glad!" cried Polly, clapping her hands, regardless of the egg
she held, which dropped and smashed on the floor at her feet. "Careless
thing! Pick it up, Maud, I 'll get some more;" and Polly whisked out of
the room, glad of an excuse to run and tell Fan, who had just come
in, lest, hearing the news in public, she might be startled out of the
well-bred composure with which young ladies are expected to receive
tidings, even of the most vital importance.

"You know all about history, don't you?" asked Maud, suddenly.

"Not quite," modestly answered Tom.

"I just want to know if there really was a man named Sir Philip, in the
time of Queen Elizabeth."

"You mean Sir Philip Sidney? Yes, he lived then and a fine old fellow he
was too."

"There; I knew the girls did n't mean him," cried Maud, with a chop that
sent the citron flying.

"What mischief are you up to now, you little magpie?"

"I shan't tell you what they said, because I don't remember much of it;
but I heard Polly and Fan talking about some one dreadful mysterious,
and when I asked who it was, Fan said,'Sir Philip.' Ho! she need n't
think I believe it! I saw 'em laugh, and blush, and poke one another,
and I knew it was n't about any old Queen Elizabeth man," cried Maud,
turning up her nose as far as that somewhat limited feature would go.

"Look here, you are letting cats out of the bag. Never mind, I thought
so. They don't tell us their secrets, but we are so sharp, we can't help
finding them out, can we?" said Tom, looking so much interested, that
Maud could n't resist airing her knowledge a little.

"Well, I dare say, it is n't proper for you to know, but I am old enough
now to be told anything, and those girls better mind what they say, for
I 'm not a stupid chit, like Blanche. I just wish you could have heard
them go on. I 'm sure there 's something very nice about Mr. Sydney,
they looked so pleased when they whispered and giggled on the bed, and
thought I was ripping bonnets, and did n't hear a word."

"Which looked most pleased?" asked Tom, investigating the kitchen boiler
with deep interest.

"Well, 'pears to me Polly did; she talked most, and looked funny and
very happy all the time. Fan laughed a good deal, but I guess Polly is
the loveress," replied Maud, after a moment's reflection.

"Hold your tongue; she 's coming!" and Tom began to pump as if the house
was on fire.

Down came Polly, with heightened color, bright eyes, and not a single
egg. Tom took a quick look at her over his shoulder, and paused as if
the fire was suddenly extinguished. Something in his face made Polly
feel a little guilty, so she fell to grating nutmeg, with a vigor which
made red cheeks the most natural thing in life. Maud, the traitor, sat
demurely at work, looking very like what Tom had called her, a magpie
with mischief in its head. Polly felt a change in the atmosphere, but
merely thought Tom was tired, so she graciously dismissed him with a
stick of cinnamon, as she had nothing else just then to lay upon the
shrine. "Fan's got the books and maps you wanted. Go and rest now. I 'm
much obliged; here 's your wages, Bridget."

"Good luck to your messes," answered Tom, as he walked away meditatively
crunching his cinnamon, and looking as if he did not find it as spicy as
usual. He got his books, but did not read them; for, shutting himself up
in the little room called "Tom's den," he just sat down and brooded.

When he came down to breakfast the next morning, he was greeted with
a general "Happy birthday, Tom!" and at his place lay gifts from every
member of the family; not as costly as formerly, perhaps, but infinitely
dearer, as tokens of the love that had outlived the change, and only
grown the warmer for the test of misfortune. In his present state of
mind, Tom felt as if he did not deserve a blessed thing; so when every
one exerted themselves to make it a happy day for him, he understood
what it means "to be nearly killed with kindness," and sternly resolved
to be an honor to his family, or perish in the attempt. Evening brought
Polly to what she called a "festive tea," and when they gathered round
the table, another gift appeared, which, though not of a sentimental
nature, touched Tom more than all the rest. It was a most delectable
cake, with a nosegay atop, and round it on the snowy frosting there
ran a pink inscription, just as it had been every year since Tom could
remember.

"Name, age, and date, like a nice white tombstone," observed Maud,
complacently, at which funereal remark, Mrs. Shaw, who was down in honor
of the day, dropped her napkin, and demanded her salts.

"Whose doing is that?" asked Tom, surveying the gift with satisfaction;
for it recalled the happier birthdays, which seemed very far away now.

"I did n't know what to give you, for you 've got everything a man
wants, and I was in despair till I remembered that dear grandma always
made you a little cake like that, and that you once said it would n't be
a happy birthday without it. So I tried to make it just like hers, and I
do hope it will prove a good, sweet, plummy one."

"Thank you," was all Tom said, as he smiled at the giver, but Polly knew
that her present had pleased him more than the most elegant trifle she
could have made.

"It ought to be good, for you beat it up yourself, Tom," cried, Maud.
"It was so funny to see you working away, and never guessing who the
cake was for. I perfectly trembled every time you opened your mouth,
for fear you 'd ask some question about it. That was the reason Polly
preached and I kept talking when she was gone."

"Very stupid of me; but I forgot all about to-day. Suppose we cut it;
I don't seem to care for anything else," said Tom, feeling no appetite,
but bound to do justice to that cake, if he fell a victim to his
gratitude.

"I hope the plums won't all be at the bottom," said Polly, as she rose
to do the honors of the cake, by universal appointment.

"I 've had a good many at the top already, you know," answered Tom,
watching the operation with as much interest as if he had faith in the
omen.

Cutting carefully, slice after slice fell apart; each firm and dark,
spicy and rich, under the frosty rime above; and laying a specially
large piece in one of grandma's quaint little china plates, Polly added
the flowers and handed it to Tom, with a look that said a good deal,
for, seeing that he remembered her sermon, she was glad to find that her
allegory held good, in one sense at least. Tom's face brightened as he
took it, and after an inspection which amused the others very much he
looked up, saying, with an air of relief, "Plums all through; I 'm glad
I had a hand in it, but Polly deserves the credit, and must wear the
posy," and turning to her, he put the rose into her hair with more
gallantry than taste, for a thorn pricked her head, the leaves tickled
her ear, and the flower was upside down.

Fanny laughed at his want of skill, but Polly would n't have it altered,
and everybody fell to eating cake, as if indigestion was one of the lost
arts. They had a lively tea, and were getting on famously afterward,
when two letters were brought for Tom, who glanced at one, and retired
rather precipitately to his den, leaving Maud consumed with curiosity,
and the older girls slightly excited, for Fan thought she recognized the
handwriting on one, and Polly, on the other.

One half an hour and then another elapsed, and Tom did not return. Mr.
Shaw went out, Mrs. Shaw retired to her room escorted by Maud, and the
two girls sat together wondering if anything dreadful had happened. All
of a sudden a voice called, "Polly!" and that young lady started out of
her chair, as if the sound had been a thunder-clap.

"Do run! I 'm perfectly fainting to know what the matter is," said Fan.

"You 'd better go," began Polly, wishing to obey, yet feeling a little
shy.

"He don't want me; besides, I could n't say a word for myself if that
letter was from Sydney," cried Fanny, hustling her friend towards the
door, in a great flutter.

Polly went without another word, but she wore a curiously anxious look,
and stopped on the threshold of the den, as if a little afraid of its
occupant. Tom was sitting in his favorite attitude, astride of a chair,
with his arms folded and his chin on the top rail; not an elegant
posture, but the only one in which, he said, he could think well.

"Did you want me, Tom?"

"Yes. Come in, please, and don't look scared; I only want to show you a
present I 've had, and ask your advice about accepting it."

"Why, Tom, you look as if you had been knocked down!" exclaimed Polly,
forgetting all about herself, as she saw his face when he rose and
turned to meet her.

"I have; regularly floored; but I 'm up again, and steadier than ever.
Just you read that, and tell me what you think of it."

Tom snatched a letter off the table, put it into her hands, and began to
walk up and down the little room, like a veritable bear in its cage. As
Polly read that short note, all the color went out of her face, and her
eyes began to kindle. When she came to the end, she stood a minute, as
if too indignant to speak, then gave the paper a nervous sort of crumple
and dropped it on the floor, saying, all in one breath, "I think she is
a mercenary, heartless, ungrateful girl! That 's what I think."

"Oh, the deuce! I did n't mean to show that one; it 's the other." And
Tom took up a second paper, looking half angry, half ashamed at his
own mistake. "I don't care, though; every one will know to-morrow; and
perhaps you 'll be good enough to keep the girls from bothering me
with questions and gabble," he added, as if, on second thoughts, he was
relieved to have the communication made to Polly first.

"I don't wonder you looked upset. If the other letter is as bad, I 'd
better have a chair before I read it," said Polly, feeling that she
began to tremble with excitement.

"It 's a million times better, but it knocked me worse than the other;
kindness always does." Tom stopped short there, and stood a minute
turning the letter about in his hand as if it contained a sweet which
neutralized the bitter in that smaller note, and touched him very much.
Then he drew up an arm-chair, and beckoning Polly to take it, said in
a sober, steady tone, that surprised her greatly, "Whenever I was in a
quandary, I used to go and consult grandma, and she always had something
sensible or comfortable to say to me. She 's gone now, but somehow,
Polly, you seem to take her place. Would you mind sitting in her chair,
and letting me tell you two or three things, as Will does?"

Mind it? Polly felt that Tom had paid her the highest and most beautiful
compliment he could have devised. She had often longed to do it, for,
being brought up in the most affectionate and frank relations with her
brothers, she had early learned what it takes most women some time to
discover, that sex does not make nearly as much difference in hearts and
souls as we fancy. Joy and sorrow, love and fear, life and death
bring so many of the same needs to all, that the wonder is we do not
understand each other better, but wait till times of tribulation teach
us that human nature is very much the same in men and women. Thanks to
this knowledge, Polly understood Tom in a way that surprised and won
him. She knew that he wanted womanly sympathy, and that she could give
it to him, because she was not afraid to stretch her hand across the
barrier which our artificial education puts between boys and girls, and
to say to him in all good faith, "If I can help you, let me."

Ten minutes sooner Polly could have done this almost as easily to Tom as
to Will, but in that ten minutes something had happened which made this
difficult. Reading that Trix had given Tom back his freedom changed many
things to Polly, and caused her to shrink from his confidence, because
she felt as if it would be harder now to keep self out of sight; for,
spite of maiden modesty, love and hope would wake and sing at the good
news. Slowly she sat down, and hesitatingly she said, with her eyes on
the ground, and a very humble voice, "I 'll do my best, but I can't fill
grandma's place, or give you any wise, good advice. I wish I could!"

"You 'll do it better than any one else. Talk troubles mother, father
has enough to think of without any of my worries. Fan is a good soul,
but she is n't practical, and we always get into a snarl if we try to
work together, so who have I but my other sister, Polly? The pleasure
that letter will give you may make up for my boring you."

As he spoke, Tom laid the other paper in her lap, and went off to the
window, as if to leave her free to enjoy it unseen; but he could not
help a glance now and then, and as Polly's face brightened, his own
fell.

"Oh, Tom, that 's a birthday present worth having, for it 's so
beautifully given I don't see how you can refuse it. Arthur Sydney is a
real nobleman!" cried Polly, looking up at last, with her fact glowing,
and her eyes full of delight.

"So he is! I don't know another man living, except father, who would
have done such a thing, or who I could bring myself to take it from. Do
you see, he 's not only paid the confounded debts, but has done it in my
name, to spare me all he could?"

"I see, it 's like him; and I think he must be very happy to be able to
do such a thing."

"It is an immense weight off my shoulders, for some of those men could
n't afford to wait till I 'd begged, borrowed, or earned the money.
Sydney can wait, but he won't long, if I know myself." "You won't take
it as a gift, then?"

"Would you?"

"No."

"Then don't think I will. I 'm a pretty poor affair, Polly, but I 'm
not mean enough to do that, while I 've got a conscience and a pair of
hands."

A rough speech, but it pleased Polly better than the smoothest Tom had
ever made in her hearing, for something in his face and voice told her
that the friendly act had roused a nobler sentiment than gratitude,
making the cancelled obligations of the boy, debts of honor to the man.

"What will you do, Tom?"

"I 'll tell you; may I sit here?" And Tom took the low footstool that
always stood near grandma's old chair. "I 've had so many plans in my
head lately, that sometimes it seems as if it would split," continued
the poor fellow, rubbing his tired forehead, as if to polish up his
wits. "I 've thought seriously of going to California, Australia, or
some out-of-the-way place, where men get rich in a hurry."

"Oh, no!" cried Polly, putting out her hand as it to keep him, and then
snatching it back again before he could turn round.

"It would be hard on mother and the girls, I suppose; besides, I don't
quite like it myself; looks as if I shirked and ran away."

"So it does," said Polly, decidedly.

"Well, you see I don't seem to find anything to do unless I turn clerk,
and I don't think that would suit. The fact is, I could n't stand
it here, where I 'm known. It would be easier to scratch gravel on a
railroad, with a gang of Paddies, than to sell pins to my friends and
neighbors. False pride, I dare say, but it 's the truth, and there 's no
use in dodging."

"Not a bit, and I quite agree with you."

"That 's comfortable. Now I 'm coming to the point where I specially
want your advice, Polly. Yesterday I heard you telling Fan about your
brother Ned; how well he got on; how he liked his business, and wanted
Will to come and take some place near him. You thought I was reading,
but I heard; and it struck me that perhaps I could get a chance out West
somewhere. What do you think?"

"If you really mean work, I know you could," answered Polly, quickly, as
all sorts of plans and projects went sweeping through her mind. "I wish
you could be with Ned; you 'd get on together, I 'm sure; and he 'd be
so glad to do anything he could. I 'll write and ask, straight away, if
you want me to."

"Suppose you do; just for information, you know, then I shall have
something to go upon. I want to have a feasible plan all ready, before
I speak to father. There 's nothing so convincing to business men as
facts, you know."

Polly could not help smiling at Tom's new tone, it seemed so strange
to hear him talking about anything but horses and tailors, dancing and
girls. She liked it, however, as much as she did the sober expression of
his face, and the way he had lately of swinging his arms about, as if he
wanted to do something energetic with them.

"That will be wise. Do you think your father will like this plan?"

"Pretty sure he will. Yesterday, when I told him I must go at something
right off, he said, 'Anything honest, Tom, and don't forget that your
father began the world as a shop-boy.' You knew that, did n't you?"

"Yes, he told me the story once, and I always liked to hear it, because
it was pleasant to see how well he had succeeded."

"I never did like the story, a little bit ashamed, I 'm afraid; but
when we talked it over last night, it struck me in a new light, and I
understood why father took the failure so well, and seems so contented
with this poorish place. It is only beginning again, he says; and having
worked his way up once, he feels as if he could again. I declare to you,
Polly, that sort of confidence in himself, and energy and courage in a
man of his years, makes me love and respect the dear old gentleman as I
never did before."

"I 'm so glad to hear you say that, Tom! I 've sometimes thought you did
n't quite appreciate your father, any more than he knew how much of a
man you were."

"Never was till to-day, you know," said Tom, laughing, yet looking as
if he felt the dignity of his one and twenty years. "Odd, is n't it, how
people live together ever so long, and don't seem to find one another
out, till something comes to do it for them. Perhaps this smash-up was
sent to introduce me to my own father."

"There 's philosophy for you," said Polly, smiling, even while she felt
as if adversity was going to do more for Tom than years of prosperity.

They both sat quiet for a minute, Polly in the big chair looking at him
with a new respect in her eyes, Tom on the stool near by slowly tearing
up a folded paper he had absently taken from the floor while he talked.

"Did this surprise you?" he asked, as a little white shower fluttered
from his hands.

"No."

"Well, it did me; for you know as soon as we came to grief I offered to
release Trix from the engagement, and she would n't let me," continued
Tom, as if, having begun the subject, he wished to explain it
thoroughly.

"That surprised me," said Polly.

"So it did me, for Fan always insisted it was the money and not the
man she cared for. Her first answer pleased me very much, for I did not
expect it, and nothing touches a fellow more than to have a woman stand
by him through thick and thin."

"She don't seem to have done it."

"Fan was right. Trix only waited to see how bad things really were, or
rather her mother did. She 's as cool, hard, and worldly minded an old
soul as I ever saw, and Trix is bound to obey. She gets round it very
neatly in her note, 'I won't be a burden,' 'will sacrifice her hopes,'
'and always remain my warm friend,' but the truth is, Tom Shaw rich was
worth making much of, but Tom Shaw poor is in the way, and may go to the
devil as fast as he likes."

"Well, he is n't going!" cried Polly, defiantly, for her wrath burned
hotly against Trix, though she blessed her for setting the bondman free.

"Came within an ace of it," muttered Tom to himself; adding aloud, in
a tone of calm resignation that assured Polly his heart would not
be broken though his engagement was, "It never rains but it pours,
'specially in hard times, but when a man is down, a rap or two more
don't matter much, I suppose. It 's the first blow that hurts most."

"Glad to see you take the last blow so well." There was an ironical
little twang to that speech, and Polly could n't help it. Tom colored up
and looked hurt for a minute, then seemed to right himself with a shrug,
and said, in his outspoken way, "To tell the honest truth, Polly, it was
not a very hard one. I 've had a feeling for some time that Trix and I
were not suited to one another, and it might be wiser to stop short. But
she did not or would not see it; and I was not going to back out, and
leave her to wear any more willows, so here we are. I don't bear malice,
but hope she 'll do better, and not be disappointed again, upon my word
I do."

"That 's very good of you, quite Sydneyesque, and noble," said Polly,
feeling rather ill at ease, and wishing she could hide herself behind a
cap and spectacles, if she was to play Grandma to this confiding youth.

"It will be all plain sailing for Syd, I fancy," observed Tom, getting
up as if the little cricket suddenly ceased to be comfortable.

"I hope so," murmured Polly, wondering what was coming next.

"He deserves the very best of everything, and I pray the Lord he may get
it," added Tom, poking the fire in a destructive manner.

Polly made no answer, fearing to pay too much, for she knew Fan had made
no confidant of Tom, and she guarded her friend's secret as jealously as
her own. "You 'll write to Ned to-morrow, will you? I 'll take anything
he 's got, for I want to be off," said Tom, casting down the poker,
and turning round with a resolute air which was lost on Polly, who sat
twirling the rose that had fallen into her lap.

"I 'll write to-night. Would you like me to tell the girls about Trix
and Sydney?" she asked as she rose, feeling that the council was over.

"I wish you would. I don't know how to thank you for all you 've done
for me; I wish to heaven I did," said Tom, holding out his hand with a
look that Polly thought a great deal too grateful for the little she had
done.

As she gave him her hand, and looked up at him with those confiding eyes
of hers, Tom's gratitude seemed to fly to his head, for, without the
slightest warning, he stooped down and kissed her, a proceeding which
startled Polly so that he recovered himself at once, and retreated into
his den with the incoherent apology, "I beg pardon could n't help it
grandma always let me on my birthday."

While Polly took refuge up stairs, forgetting all about Fan, as she sat
in the dark with her face hidden, wondering why she was n't very angry,
and resolving never again to indulge in the delightful but dangerous
pastime of playing grandmother.




CHAPTER XVIII. THE WOMAN WHO DID NOT DARE


POLLY wrote enthusiastically, Ned answered satisfactorily, and after
much corresponding, talking, and planning, it was decided that Tom
should go West. Never mind what the business was; it suffices to say
that it was a good beginning for a young man like Tom, who, having been
born and bred in the most conservative class of the most conceited city
in New England, needed just the healthy, hearty, social influences of
the West to widen his views and make a man of him.

Of course there was much lamentation among the women, but every one felt
it was the best thing for him; so while they sighed they sewed, packed
visions of a brilliant future away with his new pocket handkerchiefs,
and rejoiced that the way was open before him even in the act of
bedewing his boots with tears. Sydney stood by him to the last, "like
a man and a brother" (which expression of Tom's gave Fanny infinite
satisfaction), and Will felt entirely consoled for Ned's disappointment
at his refusal to go and join him, since Tom was to take the place Ned
had kept for him.

Fortunately every one was so busy with the necessary preparations that
there was no time for romance of any sort, and the four young people
worked together as soberly and sensibly as if all sorts of emotions were
not bottled up in their respective hearts. But in spite of the silence,
the work, and the hurry, I think they came to know one another better
in that busy little space of time than in all the years that had gone
before, for the best and bravest in each was up and stirring, and
the small house was as full of the magnetism of love and friendship,
self-sacrifice and enthusiasm, as the world outside was full of spring
sunshine and enchantment. Pity that the end should come so soon, but the
hour did its work and went its way, leaving a clearer atmosphere behind,
though the young folks did not see it then, for their eyes were dim
because of the partings that must be.

Tom was off to the West; Polly went home for the summer; Maud was
taken to the seaside with Belle; and Fanny left alone to wrestle with
housekeeping, "help," and heartache. If it had not been for two things,
I fear she never would have stood a summer in town, but Sydney often
called, till his vacation came, and a voluminous correspondence with
Polly beguiled the long days. Tom wrote once a week to his mother, but
the letters were short and not very satisfactory, for men never do
tell the interesting little things that women best like to hear. Fanny
forwarded her bits of news to Polly. Polly sent back all the extracts
from Ned's letters concerning Tom, and by putting the two reports
together, they gained the comfortable assurance that Tom was well, in
good spirits, hard at work, and intent on coming out strong in spite of
all obstacles.

Polly had a quiet summer at home, resting and getting ready in mind and
body for another winter's work, for in the autumn she tried her plan
again, to the satisfaction of her pupils and the great joy of her
friends. She never said much of herself in her letters, and Fanny's
first exclamation when they met again, was an anxious "Why, Polly, dear!
Have you been sick and never told me?"

"No, I 'm only tired, had a good deal to do lately, and the dull weather
makes me just a trifle blue. I shall soon brighten up when I get to my
work again," answered Polly, bustling about to put away her things.

"You don't look a bit natural. What have you been doing to your precious
little self?" persisted Fanny, troubled by the change, yet finding it
hard to say wherein it lay.

Polly did not look sick, though her cheeks were thinner and her color
paler than formerly, but she seemed spiritless, and there was a tired
look in her eyes that went to Fanny's heart.

"I 'm all right enough, as you 'll see when I 'm in order. I 'm proper
glad to find you looking so well and happy. Does all go smoothly, Fan?"
asked Polly, beginning to brush her hair industriously.

"Answer me one question first," said Fanny, looking as if a sudden fear
had come over her. "Tell me, truly, have you never repented of your hint
to Sydney?"

"Never!" cried Polly, throwing back the brown veil behind which she had
half hidden her face at first.

"On your honor, as an honest girl?"

"On my honor, as anything you please. Why do you suspect me of it?"
demanded Polly, almost angrily.

"Because something is wrong with you. It 's no use to deny it, for you
've got the look I used to see in that very glass on my own face when I
thought he cared for you. Forgive me, Polly, but I can't help saying it,
for it is there, and I want to be as true to you as you were to me if I
can."

Fanny's face was full of agitation, and she spoke fast and frankly, for
she was trying to be generous and found it very hard. Polly understood
now and put her fear at rest by saying almost passionately, "I tell you
I don't love him! If he was the only man in the world, I would n't marry
him, because I don't want to."

The last three words were added in a different tone, for Polly had
checked herself there with a half-frightened look and turned away to
hide her face behind her hair again.

"Then if it 's not him, it 's some one else. You 've got a secret,
Polly, and I should think you might tell it, as you know mine," said
Fanny, unable to rest till everything was told, for Polly's manner
troubled her.

There was no answer to her question, but she was satisfied and putting
her arm round her friend, she said, in her most persuasive tone, "My
precious Polly, do I know him?"

"You have seen him."

"And is he very wise, good, and splendid, dear?"

"No."

"He ought to be if you love him. I hope he is n't bad?" cried Fan,
anxiously, still holding Polly, who kept her head obstinately turned.

"I 'm suited, that 's enough."

"Oh, please just tell me one thing more. Don't he love back again?"

"No. Now don't say another word, I can't bear it!" and Polly drew
herself away, as she spoke in a desperate sort of tone.

"I won't, but now I 'm not afraid to tell you that I think, I hope, I
do believe that Sydney cares a little for me. He 's been very kind to us
all, and lately he has seemed to like to see me always when he comes
and miss me if I 'm gone. I did n't dare to hope anything, till Papa
observed something in his manner, and teased me about it. I try not to
deceive myself, but it does seem as if there was a chance of happiness
for me."

"Thank heaven for that!" cried Polly, with the heartiest satisfaction in
her voice. "Now come and tell me all about it," she added, sitting down
on the couch with the air of one who has escaped a great peril.

"I 've got some notes and things I want to ask your opinion about, if
they really mean anything, you know," said Fanny, getting out a bundle
of papers from the inmost recesses of her desk. "There 's a photograph
of Tom, came in his last letter. Good, is n't it? He looks older, but
that 's the beard and the rough coat, I suppose. Dear old fellow, he is
doing so well I really begin to feel quite proud of him."

Fan tossed her the photograph, and went on rummaging for a certain note.
She did not see Polly catch up the picture and look at it with hungry
eyes, but she did hear something in the low tone in which Polly said,
"It don't do him justice," and glancing over her shoulder, Fan's quick
eye caught a glimpse of the truth, though Polly was half turned away
from her. Without stopping to think, Fan dropped her letters, took Polly
by the shoulders, and cried in a tone full of astonishment, "Polly, is
it Tom?"

Poor Polly was so taken by surprise, that she had not a word to say.
None were needed; her telltale face answered for her, as well as the
impulse which made her hide her head in the sofa cushion, like a foolish
ostrich when the hunters are after it.

"Oh, Polly, I am so glad! I never thought of it you are so good, and he
's such a wild boy, I can't believe it but it is so dear of you to care
for him."

"Could n't help it tried not to but it was so hard you know, Fan, you
know," said a stifled voice from the depths of the very fuzzy cushion
which Tom had once condemned.

The last words, and the appealing hand outstretched to her, told Fanny
the secret of her friend's tender sympathy for her own love troubles,
and seemed so pathetic, that she took Polly in her arms, and cried over
her, in the fond, foolish way girls have of doing when their hearts are
full, and tears can say more than tongues. The silence never lasts long,
however, for the feminine desire to "talk it over" usually gets the
better of the deepest emotion. So presently the girls were hard at
it, Polly very humble and downcast, Fanny excited and overflowing with
curiosity and delight.

"Really my sister! You dear thing, how heavenly that will be," she
cried.

"It never will be," answered Polly in a tone of calm despair.

"What will prevent it?"

"Maria Bailey," was the tragic reply.

"What do you mean? Is she the Western girl? She shan't have Tom; I 'll
kill her first!"

"Too late, let me tell you is that door shut, and Maud safe?"

Fanny reconnoitered, and returning, listened breathlessly, while Polly
poured into her ear the bitter secret which was preying on her soul.

"Has n't he mentioned Maria in his letters?"

"Once or twice, but sort of jokingly, and I thought it was only some
little flirtation. He can't have time for much of that fun, he 's so
busy."

"Ned writes good, gossipy letters I taught him how and he tells me all
that 's going on. When he 'd spoken of this girl several times (they
board with her mother, you know), I asked about her, quite carelessly,
and he told me she was pretty, good, and well educated, and he thought
Tom was rather smitten. That was a blow, for you see, Fan, since Trix
broke the engagement, and it was n't wrong to think of Tom, I let myself
hope, just a little, and was so happy! Now I must give it up, and now I
see how much I hoped, and what a dreadful loss it 's going to be."

Two great tears rolled down Polly's cheeks, and Fanny wiped them away,
feeling an intense desire to go West by the next train, wither Maria
Bailey with a single look, and bring Tom back as a gift to Polly.

"It was so stupid of me not to guess before. But you see Tom always
seems so like a boy, and you are more womanly for your age than any girl
I know, so I never thought of your caring for him in that way. I knew
you were very good to him, you are to every one, my precious; and I knew
that he was fond of you as he is of me, fonder if anything, because he
thinks you are perfect; but still I never dreamed of his loving you as
more than a dear friend."

"He does n't," sighed Polly.

"Well, he ought; and if I could get hold of him, he should!"

Polly clutched Fan at that, and held her tight, saying sternly, "If you
ever breathe a word, drop a hint, look a look that will tell him or any
one else about me, I 'll yes, as sure as my name is Mary Milton I 'll
proclaim from the housetops that you like Ar" Polly got no further,
for Fan's hand was on her mouth, and Fan's alarmed voice vehemently
protested, "I won't! I promise solemnly I 'll never say a word to a
mortal creature. Don't be so fierce, Polly; you quite frighten me."

"It 's bad enough to love some one who don't love you, but to have them
told of it is perfectly awful. It makes me wild just to think of it. Oh,
Fan, I 'm getting so ill-tempered and envious and wicked, I don't know
what will happen to me."

"I 'm not afraid for you, my dear, and I do believe things will go
right, because you are so good to every one. How Tom could help adoring
you I don't see. I know he would if he had stayed at home longer after
he got rid of Trix. It would be the making of him; but though he is my
brother, I don't think he 's good enough for you, Polly, and I don't
quite see how you can care for him so much, when you might have had a
person so infinitely superior."

"I don't want a 'superior' person; he 'd tire me if he was like A. S.
Besides, I do think Tom is superior to him in many things. Well, you
need n't stare; I know he is, or will be. He 's so different, and very
young, and has lots of faults, I know, but I like him all the better for
it, and he 's honest and brave, and has got a big, warm heart, and I 'd
rather have him care for me than the wisest, best, most accomplished man
in the world, simply because I love him!"

If Tom could only have seen Polly's face when she said that! It was so
tender, earnest, and defiant, that Fanny forgot the defence of her own
lover in admiration of Polly's loyalty to hers; for this faithful, all
absorbing love was a new revelation to Fanny, who was used to hearing
her friends boast of two or three lovers a year, and calculate their
respective values, with almost as much coolness as the young men
discussed the fortunes of the girls they wished for, but "could not
afford to marry." She had thought her love for Sydney very romantic,
because she did not really care whether he was rich or poor, though she
never dared to say so, even to Polly, for fear of being laughed at.
She began to see now what true love was, and to feel that the sentiment
which she could not conquer was a treasure to be accepted with
reverence, and cherished with devotion.

"I don't know when I began to love Tom, but I found out that I did last
winter, and was as much surprised as you are," continued Polly, as if
glad to unburden her heart. "I did n't approve of him at all. I
thought he was extravagant, reckless, and dandified. I was very much
disappointed when he chose Trix, and the more I thought and saw of it,
the worse I felt, for Tom was too good for her, and I hated to see her
do so little for him, when she might have done so much; because he is
one of the men who can be led by their affections, and the woman he
marries can make or mar him."

"That 's true!" cried Fan, as Polly paused to look at the picture, which
appeared to regard her with a grave, steady look, which seemed rather to
belie her assertions.

"I don't mean that he 's weak or bad. If he was, I should hate him; but
he does need some one to love him very much, and make him happy, as
a good woman best knows how," said Polly, as if answering the mute
language of Tom's face.

"I hope Maria Bailey is all he thinks her," she added, softly, "for I
could n't bear to have him disappointed again."

"I dare say he don't care a fig for her, and you are only borrowing
trouble. What do you say Ned answered when you asked about this
inconvenient girl?" said Fanny turning hopeful all at once.

Polly repeated it, and added, "I asked him in another letter if he did
n't admire Miss B. as much as Tom, and he wrote back that she was 'a
nice girl,' but he had no time for nonsense, and I need n't get my white
kids ready for some years yet, unless to dance at Tom's wedding. Since
then he has n't mentioned Maria, so I was sure there was something
serious going on, and being in Tom's confidence, he kept quiet."

"It does look bad. Suppose I say a word to Tom, just inquire after his
heart in a general way, you know, and give him a chance to tell me, if
there is anything to tell." "I 'm willing, but you must let me see the
letter. I can't trust you not to hint or say too much."

"You shall. I 'll keep my promise in spite of everything, but it will be
hard to see things going wrong when a word would set it right."

"You know what will happen if you do," and Polly looked so threatening
that Fan trembled before her, discovering that the gentlest girls when
roused are more impressive than any shrew; for even turtle doves peck
gallantly to defend their nests.

"If it is true about Maria, what shall we do?" said Fanny after a pause.

"Bear it; People always do bear things, somehow," answered Polly,
looking as if sentence had been passed upon her.

"But if it is n't?" cried Fan, unable to endure the sight.

"Then I shall wait." And Polly's face changed so beautifully that Fan
hugged her on the spot, fervently wishing that Maria Bailey never had
been born.

Then the conversation turned to lover number two, and after a long
confabulation, Polly gave it as her firm belief that A. S. had forgotten
M. M., and was rapidly finding consolation in the regard of F. S. With
this satisfactory decision the council ended after the ratification of a
Loyal League, by which the friends pledged themselves to stand staunchly
by one another, through the trials of the coming year.

It was a very different winter from the last for both the girls. Fanny
applied herself to her duties with redoubled ardor, for "A. S." was a
domestic man, and admired housewifely accomplishments. If Fanny wanted
to show him what she could do toward making a pleasant home, she
certainly succeeded better than she suspected, for in spite of many
failures and discouragements behind the scenes, the little house became
a most attractive place, to Mr. Sydney at least, for he was more the
house-friend than ever, and seemed determined to prove that change of
fortune made no difference to him.

Fanny had been afraid that Polly's return might endanger her hopes, but
Sydney met Polly with the old friendliness, and very soon convinced her
that the nipping in the bud process had been effectual, for being taken
early, the sprouting affection had died easy, and left room for an older
friendship to blossom into a happier love.

Fanny seemed glad of this, and Polly soon set her heart at rest by
proving that she had no wish to try her power. She kept much at home
when the day's work was done, finding it pleasanter to sit dreaming over
book or sewing alone, than to exert herself even to go to the Shaws'.

"Fan don't need me, and Sydney don't care whether I come or not, so I
'll keep out of the way," she would say, as if to excuse her seeming
indolence.

Polly was not at all like herself that winter, and those nearest to her
saw and wondered at it most. Will got very anxious, she was so quiet,
pale and spiritless, and distracted poor Polly by his affectionate
stupidity, till she completed his bewilderment by getting cross and
scolding him. So he consoled himself with Maud, who, now being in her
teens, assumed dignified airs, and ordered him about in a style that
afforded him continued amusement and employment.

Western news continued vague, for Fan's general inquiries produced only
provokingly unsatisfactory replies from Tom, who sang the praises of
"the beautiful Miss Bailey," and professed to be consumed by a hopeless
passion for somebody, in such half-comic, half-tragic terms, that the
girls could not decide whether it was "all that boy's mischief," or only
a cloak to hide the dreadful truth.

"We 'll have it out of him when he comes home in the spring," said Fanny
to Polly, as they compared the letters of their brothers, and agreed
that "men were the most uncommunicative and provoking animals under
the sun." For Ned was so absorbed in business that he ignored the whole
Bailey question and left them in utter darkness.

Hunger of any sort is a hard thing to bear, especially when the sufferer
has a youthful appetite, and Polly was kept on such a short allowance of
happiness for six months, that she got quite thin and interesting; and
often, when she saw how big her eyes were getting, and how plainly the
veins on her temples showed, indulged the pensive thought that perhaps
spring dandelions might blossom o'er her grave. She had no intention of
dying till Tom's visit was over, however, and as the time drew near,
she went through such alternations of hope and fear, and lived in such a
state of feverish excitement, that spirits and color came back, and she
saw that the interesting pallor she had counted on would be an entire
failure.

May came at last, and with it a burst of sunshine which cheered even
poor Polly's much-enduring heart. Fanny came walking in upon her one
day, looking as if she brought tidings of such great joy that she hardly
knew how to tell them.

"Prepare yourself somebody is engaged!" she said, in a solemn tone,
that made Polly put up her hand as if to ward off an expected blow. "No,
don't look like that, my poor dear; it is n't Tom, it 's I!"

Of course there was a rapture, followed by one of the deliciously
confidential talks which bosom friends enjoy, interspersed with tears
and kisses, smiles and sighs.

"Oh, Polly, though I 've waited and hoped so long I could n't believe it
when it came, and don't deserve it; but I will! for the knowledge that
he loves me seems to make everything possible," said Fanny, with an
expression which made her really beautiful, for the first time in her
life.

"You happy girl!" sighed Polly, then smiled and added, "I think you
deserve all that 's come to you, for you have truly tried to be worthy
of it, and whether it ever came or not that would have been a thing to
be proud of."

"He says that is what made him love me," answered Fanny, never calling
her lover by his name, but making the little personal pronoun a very
sweet word by the tone in which she uttered it. "He was disappointed in
me last year, he told me, but you said good things about me and though
he did n't care much then, yet when he lost you, and came back to me, he
found that you were not altogether mistaken, and he has watched me
all this winter, learning to respect and love me better every day. Oh,
Polly, when he said that, I could n't bear it, because in spite of all
my trying, I 'm still so weak and poor and silly."

"We don't think so; and I know you 'll be all he hopes to find you, for
he 's just the husband you ought to have."

"Thank you all the more, then, for not keeping him yourself," said
Fanny, laughing the old blithe laugh again.

"That was only a slight aberration of his; he knew better all the time.
It was your white cloak and my idiotic behavior the night we went to the
opera that put the idea into his head," said Polly, feeling as if the
events of that evening had happened some twenty years ago, when she was
a giddy young thing, fond of gay bonnets and girlish pranks.

"I 'm not going to tell Tom a word about it, but keep it for a surprise
till he comes. He will be here next week, and then we 'll have a
grand clearing up of mysteries," said Fan, evidently feeling that the
millennium was at hand.

"Perhaps," said Polly, as her heart fluttered and then sunk, for this
was a case where she could do nothing but hope, and keep her hands busy
with Will's new set of shirts.

There is a good deal more of this sort of silent suffering than the
world suspects, for the "women who dare" are few, the women who "stand
and wait" are many. But if work-baskets were gifted with powers of
speech, they could tell stories more true and tender than any we read.
For women often sew the tragedy or comedy of life into their work as
they sit apparently safe and serene at home, yet are thinking deeply,
living whole heart-histories, and praying fervent prayers while they
embroider pretty trifles or do the weekly mending.




CHAPTER XIX. TOM'S SUCCESS


     "Come, Philander, let us be a marching,
     Every one his true love a searching,"

WOULD be the most appropriate motto for this chapter, because,
intimidated by the threats, denunciations, and complaints showered upon
me in consequence of taking the liberty to end a certain story as I
liked, I now yield to the amiable desire of giving satisfaction, and,
at the risk of outraging all the unities, intend to pair off everybody I
can lay my hands on.

Occasionally a matrimonial epidemic appears, especially toward spring,
devastating society, thinning the ranks of bachelordom, and leaving
mothers lamenting for their fairest daughters. That spring the disease
broke out with great violence in the Shaw circle, causing paternal heads
much bewilderment, as one case after another appeared with alarming
rapidity. Fanny, as we have seen, was stricken first, and hardly had she
been carried safely through the crisis, when Tom returned to swell the
list of victims. As Fanny was out a good deal with her Arthur, who was
sure that exercise was necessary for the convalescent, Polly went every
day to see Mrs. Shaw, who found herself lonely, though much better than
usual, for the engagement had a finer effect upon her constitution than
any tonic she ever tried. Some three days after Fan's joyful call Polly
was startled on entering the Shaws' door, by Maud, who came tumbling
down stairs, sending an avalanche of words before her, "He 's come
before he said he should to surprise us! He 's up in mamma's room,
and was just saying, 'How 's Polly?' when I heard you come, in your
creep-mouse way, and you must go right up. He looks so funny with
whiskers, but he 's ever so nice, real big and brown, and he swung me
right up when he kissed me. Never mind your bonnet, I can't wait."

And pouncing upon Polly, Maud dragged her away like a captured ship
towed by a noisy little steam-tug.

"The sooner it 's over the better for me," was the only thought Polly
had time for before she plunged into the room above, propelled by Maud,
who cried triumphantly, "There he is! Ain't he splendid?"

For a minute, everything danced before Polly's eyes, as a hand shook
hers warmly, and a gruffish voice said heartily, "How are you, Polly?"
Then she slipped into a chair beside Mrs. Shaw, hoping that her reply
had been all right and proper, for she had not the least idea what she
said.

Things got steady again directly, and while Maud expatiated on the great
surprise, Polly ventured to look at Tom, feeling glad that her back
was toward the light, and his was not. It was not a large room, and Tom
seemed to fill it entirely; not that he had grown so very much, except
broader in the shoulders, but there was a brisk, genial, free-and-easy
air about him, suggestive of a stirring, out-of-door life, with people
who kept their eyes wide open, and were not very particular what they
did with their arms and legs. The rough-and-ready travelling suit, stout
boots, brown face, and manly beard, changed him so much, that Polly
could find scarcely a trace of elegant Tom Shaw in the hearty-looking
young man who stood with one foot on a chair, while he talked business
to his father in a sensible way, which delighted the old gentleman.
Polly liked the change immensely, and sat listening to the state of
Western trade with as much interest as if it had been the most thrilling
romance, for, as he talked, Tom kept looking at her with a nod or a
smile so like old times, that for a little while, she forgot Maria
Bailey, and was in bliss.

By and by Fanny came flying in, and gave Tom a greater surprise than his
had been. He had not the least suspicion of what had been going on at
home, for Fan had said to herself, with girlish malice, "If he don't
choose to tell me his secrets, I 'm not going to tell mine," and had
said nothing about Sydney, except an occasional allusion to his
being often there, and very kind. Therefore, when she announced her
engagement, Tom looked so staggered for a minute, that Fan thought he
did n't like it; but after the first surprise passed, he showed such an
affectionate satisfaction, that she was both touched and flattered.

"What do you think of this performance?" asked Tom, wheeling round to
Polly, who still sat by Mrs. Shaw, in the shadow of the bed-curtains.

"I like it very much," she said in such a hearty tone, that Tom could
not doubt the genuineness of her pleasure.

"Glad of that. Hope you 'll be as well pleased with another engagement
that 's coming out before long"; and with an odd laugh, Tom carried
Sydney off to his den, leaving the girls to telegraph to one another the
awful message, "It is Maria Bailey."

How she managed to get through that evening, Polly never knew, yet it
was not a long one, for at eight o'clock she slipped out of the room,
meaning to run home alone, and not compel any one to serve as escort.
But she did not succeed, for as she stood warming her rubbers at the
dining-room fire, wondering pensively as she did so if Maria Bailey
had small feet, and if Tom ever put her rubbers on for her, the
little overshoes were taken out of her hands, and Tom's voice said,
reproachfully, "Did you really mean to run away, and not let me go home
with you?"

"I 'm not afraid; I did n't want to take you away," began Polly,
secretly hoping that she did n't look too pleased.

"But I like to be taken away. Why, it 's a whole year since I went home
with you; do you remember that?" said Tom, flapping the rubbers about
without any signs of haste.

"Does it seem long?"

"Everlasting!"

Polly meant to say that quite easily, and smile incredulously at his
answer; but in spite of the coquettish little rose-colored hood she
wore, and which she knew was very becoming, she did not look or speak
gayly, and Tom saw something in the altered face that made him say
hastily, "I 'm afraid you 've been doing too much this winter; you look
tired out, Polly."

"Oh, no! it suits me to be very busy," and she began to drag on her
gloves as if to prove it.

"But it does n't suit me to have you get thin and pale, you know."

Polly looked up to thank him, but never did, for there was something
deeper than gratitude in the honest blue eyes, that could not hide
the truth entirely. Tom saw it, flushed all over his brown face, and
dropping the rubbers with a crash, took her hands, saying, in his old
impetuous way, "Polly, I want to tell you something!"

"Yes, I know, we 've been expecting it. I hope you 'll be very happy,
Tom;" and Polly shook his hands with a smile that was more pathetic than
a flood of tears.

"What!" cried Tom, looking as if he thought she had lost her mind.

"Ned told us all about her; he thought it would be so, and when you
spoke of another engagement, we knew you meant your own."

"But I did n't! Ned's the man; he told me to tell you. It 's just
settled."

"Is it Maria?" cried Polly, holding on to a chair as if to be prepared
for anything.

"Of course. Who else should it be?"

"He did n't say you talked about her most and so we thought" stammered
Polly, falling into a sudden flutter.

"That I was in love? Well, I am, but not with her."

"Oh!" and Polly caught her breath as if a dash of cold water had fallen
on her, for the more in earnest Tom grew, the blunter he became.

"Do you want to know the name of the girl I 've loved for more than a
year? Well, it 's Polly!" As he spoke, Tom stretched out his arms to
her, with the sort of mute eloquence that cannot be resisted, and Polly
went straight into them, without a word.

Never mind what happened for a little bit. Love scenes, if genuine, are
indescribable; for to those who have enacted them, the most elaborate
description seems tame, and to those who have not, the simplest picture
seems overdone. So romancers had better let imagination paint for them
that which is above all art, and leave their lovers to themselves during
the happiest minutes of their lives.

Before long, Tom and Polly were sitting side by side, enjoying the
blissful state of mind which usually follows the first step out of our
work-a-day world, into the glorified region wherein lovers rapturously
exist for a month or two. Tom just sat and looked at Polly as if he
found it difficult to believe that the winter of his discontent had
ended in this glorious spring. But Polly, being a true woman, asked
questions, even while she laughed and cried for joy.

"Now, Tom, how could I know you loved me when you went away and never
said a word?" she began, in a tenderly reproachful tone, thinking of the
hard year she had spent.

"And how could I have the courage to say a word, when I had nothing on
the face of the earth to offer you but my worthless self?" answered Tom,
warmly.

"That was all I wanted!" whispered Polly, in a tone which caused him to
feel that the race of angels was not entirely extinct.

"I 've always been fond of you, my Polly, but I never realized how fond
till just before I went away. I was n't free, you know, and besides I
had a strong impression that you liked Sydney in spite of the damper
which Fan hinted you gave him last winter. He 's such a capital fellow,
I really don't see how you could help it."

"It is strange; I don't understand it myself; but women are queer
creatures, and there 's no accounting for their tastes," said Polly,
with a sly look, which Tom fully appreciated.

"You were so good to me those last days, that I came very near speaking
out, but could n't bear to seem to be offering you a poor, disgraced
sort of fellow, whom Trix would n't have, and no one seemed to think
worth much. 'No,' I said to myself, 'Polly ought to have the best; if
Syd can get her, let him, and I won't say a word. I 'll try to be better
worthy her friendship, anyway; and perhaps, when I 've proved that I
can do something, and am not ashamed to work, then, if Polly is free, I
shan't be afraid to try my chance.' So I held my tongue, worked like a
horse, satisfied myself and others that I could get my living honestly,
and then came home to see if there was any hope for me."

"And I was waiting for you all the time," said a soft voice close to his
shoulder; for Polly was much touched by Tom's manly efforts to deserve
her.

"I did n't mean to do it the first minute, but look about me a little,
and be sure Syd was all right. But Fan's news settled that point, and
just now the look in my Polly's face settled the other. I could n't wait
another minute, or let you either, and I could n't help stretching out
my arms to my little wife, God bless her, though I know I don't deserve
her."

Tom's voice got lower and lower as he spoke, and his face was full of
an emotion of which he need not be ashamed, for a very sincere love
ennobled him, making him humble, where a shallower affection would have
been proud of its success. Polly understood this, and found the honest,
hearty speech of her lover more eloquent than poetry itself. Her hand
stole up to his cheek, and she leaned her own confidingly against the
rough coat, as she said, in her frank simple way, "Tom, dear, don't say
that, as if I was the best girl in the world. I 've got ever so many
faults, and I want you to know them all, and help me cure them, as you
have your own. Waiting has not done us any harm, and I love you all the
better for your trial. But I 'm afraid your year has been harder than
mine, you look so much older and graver than when you went away. You
never would complain; but I 've had a feeling that you were going
through a good deal more than any of us guessed."

"Pretty tough work at first, I own. It was all so new and strange, I
'm afraid I should n't have stood it if it had not been for Ned. He 'd
laugh and say 'Pooh!' if he heard me say it, but it 's true nevertheless
that he 's a grand fellow and helped me through the first six months
like a well, a brother as he is. There was no reason why he should go
out of his way to back up a shiftless party like me, yet he did, and
made many things easy and safe that would have been confoundedly hard
and dangerous if I 'd been left to myself. The only way I can explain it
is that it 's a family trait, and as natural to the brother as it is to
the sister."

"It 's a Shaw trait to do the same. But tell me about Maria; is Ned
really engaged to her?"

"Very much so; you 'll get a letter full of raptures tomorrow; he had
n't time to send by me, I came off in such a hurry. Maria is a sensible,
pretty girl and Ned will be a happy old fellow."

"Why did you let us think it was you?"

"I only teased Fan a little; I did like Maria, for she reminded me of
you sometimes, and was such a kind, cosy little woman I could n't help
enjoying her society after a hard day's work. But Ned got jealous, and
then I knew that he was in earnest, so I left him a clear field, and
promised not to breathe a word to any one till he had got a Yes or No
from his Maria."

"I wish I 'd known it," sighed Polly. "People in love always do such
stupid things!"

"So they do; for neither you nor Fan gave us poor fellows the least hint
about Syd, and there I 've been having all sorts of scares about you."

"Serves us right; brothers and sisters should n't have secrets from each
other."

"We never will again. Did you miss me very much?"

"Yes, Tom; very, very much."

"My patient little Polly!"

"Did you really care for me before you went?"

"See if I did n't;" and with great pride Tom produced a portly
pocket-book stuffed with business-like documents of a most imposing
appearance, opened a private compartment, and took out a worn-looking
paper, unfolded it carefully, and displayed a small brown object which
gave out a faint fragrance.

"That 's the rose you put in the birthday cake, and next week we 'll
have a fresh one in another jolly little cake which you 'll make me; you
left it on the floor of my den the night we talked there, and I 've kept
it ever since. There 's love and romance for you!"

Polly touched the little relic, treasured for a year, and smiled to read
the words "My Polly's rose," scribbled under the crumbling leaves.

"I did n't know you could be so sentimental," she said, looking so
pleased that he did not regret confessing his folly.

"I never was till I loved you, my dear, and I 'm not very bad yet, for I
don't wear my posy next my heart, but where I can see it every day, and
so never forget for whom I am working. Should n't wonder if that bit
of nonsense had kept me economical, honest, and hard at it, for I never
opened my pocket-book that I did n't think of you."

"That 's lovely, Tom," and Polly found it so touching that she felt for
her handkerchief; but Tom took it away, and made her laugh instead of
cry, by saying, in a wheedlesome tone, "I don't believe you did as much,
for all your romance. Did you, now?"

"If you won't laugh, I 'll show you my treasures. I began first, and I
've worn them longest."

As she spoke, Polly drew out the old locket, opened it, and showed the
picture Tom gave her in the bag of peanuts cut small and fitted in on
one side on the other was a curl of reddish hair and a black button. How
Tom laughed when he saw them!

"You don't mean you 've kept that frightful guy of a boy all this time?
Polly! Polly! you are the most faithful 'loveress,' as Maud says, that
was ever known."

"Don't flatter yourself that I 've worn it all these years, sir; I only
put it in last spring because I did n't dare to ask for one of the new
ones. The button came off the old coat you insisted on wearing after the
failure, as if it was your duty to look as shabby as possible, and the
curl I stole from Maud. Are n't we silly?"

He did not seem to think so, and after a short pause for refreshments,
Polly turned serious, and said anxiously, "When must you go back to your
hard work?"

"In a week or two; but it won't seem drudgery now, for you 'll write
every day, and I shall feel that I 'm working to get a home for you.
That will give me a forty-man-power, and I 'll pay up my debts and get a
good start, and then Ned and I will be married and go into partnership,
and we 'll all be the happiest, busiest people in the West."

"It sounds delightful; but won't it take a long time, Tom?"

"Only a few years, and we need n't wait a minute after Syd is paid, if
you don't mind beginning rather low down, Polly."

"I 'd rather work up with you, than sit idle while you toil away all
alone. That 's the way father and mother did, and I think they were very
happy in spite of the poverty and hard work."

"Then we 'll do it by another year, for I must get more salary before I
take you away from a good home here. I wish, oh, Polly, how I wish I had
a half of the money I 've wasted, to make you comfortable, now."

"Never mind, I don't want it; I 'd rather have less, and know you earned
it all yourself," cried Polly, as Tom struck his hand on his knee with
an acute pang of regret at the power he had lost.

"It 's like you to say it, and I won't waste any words bewailing myself,
because I was a fool. We will work up together, my brave Polly, and you
shall yet be proud of your husband, though he is 'poor Tom Shaw.'"

She was as sure of that as if an oracle had foretold it, and was not
deceived; for the loving heart that had always seen, believed, and
tried to strengthen all good impulses in Tom, was well repaid for its
instinctive trust by the happiness of the years to come.

"Yes," she said, hopefully, "I know you will succeed, for the best thing
a man can have, is work with a purpose in it, and the will to do it
heartily."

"There is one better thing, Polly," answered Tom, turning her face up a
little, that he might see his inspiration shining in her eyes.

"What is it, dear?"

"A good woman to love and help him all his life, as you will me, please
God."

"Even though she is old-fashioned," whispered Polly, with happy eyes,
the brighter for their tears, as she looked up at the young man, who,
through her, had caught a glimpse of the truest success, and was not
ashamed to owe it to love and labor, two beautiful old fashions that
began long ago, with the first pair in Eden.

Lest any of my young readers who have honored Maud with their interest
should suffer the pangs of unsatisfied curiosity as to her future, I
will add for their benefit that she did not marry Will, but remained a
busy, lively spinster all her days, and kept house for her father in the
most delightful manner.

Will's ministerial dream came to pass in the course of time, however,
and a gentle, bright-eyed lady ruled over the parsonage, whom the
reverend William called his "little Jane."

Farther into futurity even this rash pen dares not proceed, but pauses
here, concluding in the words of the dear old fairy tales, "And so they
were married, and all lived happily till they died."







  Aunt Jo's Scrap Bag


  Louisa M. Alcott




  AUNT JO'S SCRAP-BAG.

  PRINTED BY
  SPOTTISWOODE AND CO., NEW-STREET SQUARE
  LONDON




  AUNT JO'S SCRAP-BAG

  BY

  LOUISA M. ALCOTT,


  AUTHOR OF

  'LITTLE WOMEN,' 'AN OLD-FASHIONED GIRL,' 'LITTLE MEN,'
  'HOSPITAL SKETCHES.'


  _NEW AND CHEAPER EDITION_

  LONDON
  SAMPSON LOW, MARSTON & COMPANY
  (_LIMITED_)
  St. Dunstan's House
  FETTER LANE, FLEET STREET, E.C.
  1892

  _All rights reserved_




PREFACE.


As grandmothers rummage their piece-bags and bundles in search of gay
odds and ends to make gifts with which to fill the little stockings that
hang all in a row on Christmas Eve, so I have gathered together some
stories, old and new, to amuse the large family that has so rapidly and
beautifully grown up about me.

I hope that when they promenade in night-caps and gowns to rifle the
plump stockings, the little 'dears' will utter an 'Oh!' of pleasure, and
give a prance of satisfaction, as they pull out this small gift from
Aunt Jo's Scrap-Bag.

CHRISTMAS HOLIDAYS,
1871-72.




CONTENTS.


                                                  PAGE

  MY BOYS.                                           1

  TESSA'S SURPRISES.                                45

  BUZZ.                                             75

  THE CHILDREN'S JOKE.                              85

  DANDELION.                                       116

  MADAM CLUCK AND HER FAMILY.                      127

  A CURIOUS CALL.                                  141

  TILLY'S CHRISTMAS.                               156

  MY LITTLE GENTLEMAN.                             170

  BACK WINDOWS.                                    188

  LITTLE MARIE OF LEHON.                           200

  MY MAY-DAY AMONG CURIOUS BIRDS AND BEASTS.       222

  OUR LITTLE NEWSBOY.                              235

  PATTY'S PATCHWORK.                               244




_MY BOYS._


Feeling that I have been unusually fortunate in my knowledge of a choice
and pleasing variety of this least appreciated portion of the human
race, I have a fancy to record some of my experiences, hoping that it
may awaken an interest in other minds, and cause other people to
cultivate the delightful, but too often neglected boys, who now run to
waste, so to speak.

I have often wondered what they thought of the peculiar treatment they
receive, even at the hands of their nearest friends. While they are
rosy, roly-poly little fellows they are petted and praised, adorned and
adored, till it is a miracle that they are not utterly ruined. But the
moment they outgrow their babyhood their trials begin, and they are
regarded as nuisances till they are twenty-one, when they are again
received into favor.

Yet that very time of neglect is the period when they most need all
manner of helps, and ought to have them. I like boys and oysters raw;
so, though good manners are always pleasing, I don't mind the rough
outside burr which repels most people, and perhaps that is the reason
why the burrs open and let me see the soft lining and taste the sweet
nut hidden inside.

My first well-beloved boy was a certain Frank, to whom I clung at the
age of seven with a devotion which I fear he did not appreciate. There
were six girls in the house, but I would have nothing to say to them,
preferring to tag after Frank, and perfectly happy when he allowed me to
play with him. I regret to say that the small youth was something of a
tyrant, and one of his favorite amusements was trying to make me cry by
slapping my hands with books, hoop-sticks, shoes, anything that came
along capable of giving a good stinging blow. I believe I endured these
marks of friendship with the fortitude of a young Indian, and felt fully
repaid for a blistered palm by hearing Frank tell the other boys, 'She's
a brave little thing, and you can't make her cry.'

My chief joy was in romping with him in the long galleries of a piano
manufactory behind our house. What bliss it was to mount one of the cars
on which the workmen rolled heavy loads from room to room, and to go
thundering down the inclined plains, regardless of the crash that
usually awaited us at the bottom! If I could have played foot-ball on
the Common with my Frank and Billy Babcock, life could have offered me
no greater joy at that period. As the prejudices of society forbid this
sport, I revenged myself by driving hoop all around the mall without
stopping, which the boys could _not_ do.

I can remember certain happy evenings, when we snuggled in sofa corners
and planned tricks and ate stolen goodies, and sometimes Frank would put
his curly head in my lap and let me stroke it when he was tired. What
the girls did I don't recollect; their domestic plays were not to my
taste, and the only figure that stands out from the dimness of the past
is that jolly boy with a twinkling eye. This memory would be quite
radiant but for one sad thing--a deed that cut me to the soul then, and
which I have never quite forgiven in all these years.

On one occasion I did something very naughty, and when called up for
judgment fled to the dining-room, locked the door, and from my
stronghold defied the whole world. I could have made my own terms, for
it was near dinner time and the family must eat; but, alas for the
treachery of the human heart! Frank betrayed me. He climbed in at the
window, unlocked the door, and delivered me up to the foe. Nay, he even
defended the base act, and helped bear the struggling culprit to
imprisonment. That nearly broke my heart, for I believed _he_ would
stand by me as staunchly as I always stood by him. It was a sad blow,
and I couldn't love or trust him any more. Peanuts and candy,
ginger-snaps and car-rides were unavailing; even foot-ball could not
reunite the broken friendship, and to this day I recollect the pang
that entered my little heart when I lost my faith in the loyalty of my
first boy.

The second attachment was of quite a different sort, and had a happier
ending. At the mature age of ten, I left home for my first visit to a
family of gay and kindly people in--well why not say right
out?--Providence. There were no children, and at first I did not mind
this, as every one petted me, especially one of the young men named
Christopher. So kind and patient, yet so merry was this good Christy
that I took him for my private and particular boy, and loved him dearly;
for he got me out of innumerable scrapes, and never was tired of amusing
the restless little girl who kept the family in a fever of anxiety by
her pranks. _He_ never laughed at her mishaps and mistakes, never played
tricks upon her like a certain William, who composed the most trying
nicknames, and wickedly goaded the wild visitor into all manner of
naughtiness. Christy stood up for her through everything; let her ride
the cows, feed the pigs, bang on the piano, and race all over the spice
mill, feasting on cinnamon and cloves; brought her down from housetops
and fished her out of brooks; never scolded, and never seemed tired of
the troublesome friendship of little Torment.

In a week I had exhausted every amusement and was desperately homesick.
It has always been my opinion that I should have been speedily restored
to the bosom of my family but for Christy, and but for him I should
assuredly have run away before the second week was out. He kept me, and
in the hour of my disgrace stood by me like a man and a brother.

One afternoon, inspired by a spirit of benevolence, enthusiastic but
short-sighted, I collected several poor children in the barn, and
regaled them on cake and figs, helping myself freely to the treasures of
the pantry without asking leave, meaning to explain afterward. Being
discovered before the supplies were entirely exhausted, the patience of
the long-suffering matron gave out, and I was ordered up to the garret
to reflect upon my sins, and the pleasing prospect of being sent home
with the character of the worst child ever known.

My sufferings were deep as I sat upon a fuzzy little trunk all alone in
the dull garret, thinking how hard it was to do right, and wondering why
I was scolded for feeding the poor when we were expressly bidden to do
so. I felt myself an outcast, and bewailed the disgrace I had brought
upon my family. Nobody could possibly love such a bad child; and if the
mice were to come and eat me then and there--à la Bishop Hatto--it
would only be a relief to my friends. At this dark moment I heard
Christy say below, 'She meant it kindly, so I wouldn't mind, Fanny;' and
then up came my boy full of sympathy and comfort. Seeing the tragic
expression of my face, he said not a word, but, sitting down in an old
chair, took me on his knee and held me close and quietly, letting the
action speak for itself. It did most eloquently; for the kind arm seemed
to take me back from that dreadful exile, and the friendly face to
assure me without words that I had not sinned beyond forgiveness.

I had not shed a tear before, but now I cried tempestuously, and clung
to him like a shipwrecked little mariner in a storm. Neither spoke, but
he held me fast and let me cry myself to sleep; for, when the shower was
over, a pensive peace fell upon me, and the dim old garret seemed not a
prison, but a haven of refuge, since my boy came to share it with me.
How long I slept I don't know, but it must have been an hour, at least;
yet my good Christy never stirred, only waited patiently till I woke up
in the twilight, and was not afraid because he was there. He took me
down as meek as a mouse, and kept me by him all that trying evening,
screening me from jokes, rebukes, and sober looks; and when I went to
bed he came up to kiss me, and to assure me that this awful circumstance
should not be reported at home. This took a load off my heart, and I
remember fervently thanking him, and telling him I never would forget
it.

I never have, though he died long ago, and others have probably
forgotten all about the naughty prank. I often longed to ask him how he
knew the surest way to win a child's heart by the patience, sympathy,
and tender little acts that have kept his memory green for nearly thirty
years.

Cy was a comrade after my own heart, and for a summer or two we kept the
neighbourhood in a ferment by our adventures and hair-breadth escapes. I
think I never knew a boy so full of mischief, and my opportunities of
judging have been manifold. He did not get into scrapes himself, but
possessed a splendid talent for deluding others into them, and then
morally remarking, 'There, I told you so!' His way of saying 'You
dars'nt do this or that' was like fire to powder; and why I still live
in the possession of all my limbs and senses is a miracle to those who
know my youthful friendship with Cy. It was he who incited me to jump
off of the highest beam in the barn, to be borne home on a board with a
pair of sprained ankles. It was he who dared me to rub my eyes with red
peppers, and then sympathisingly led me home blind and roaring with
pain. It was he who solemnly assured me that all the little pigs would
die in agony if their tails were not cut off, and won me to hold
thirteen little squealers while the operation was performed. Those
thirteen innocent pink tails haunt me yet, and the memory of that deed
has given me a truly Jewish aversion to pork.

I did not know him long, but he was a kindred soul, and must have a
place in my list of boys. He is a big, brown man now, and, having done
his part in the war, is at work on his farm. We meet sometimes, and
though we try to be dignified and proper, it is quite impossible; there
is a sly twinkle in Cy's eye that upsets my gravity, and we always burst
out laughing at the memory of our early frolics.

My Augustus! oh, my Augustus! my first little lover, and the most
romantic of my boys. At fifteen I met this charming youth, and thought I
had found my fate. It was at a spelling school in a little country town
where I, as a stranger and visitor from the city, was an object of
interest. Painfully conscious of this fact, I sat in a corner trying to
look easy and elegant, with a large red bow under my chin, and a
carnelian ring in full view. Among the boys and girls who frolicked
about me, I saw one lad of seventeen with 'large blue eyes, a noble
brow, and a beautiful straight nose,' as I described him in a letter to
my sister. This attractive youth had a certain air of refinement and
ease of manner that the others lacked; and when I found he was the
minister's son, I felt that I might admire him without loss of dignity.
'Imagine my sensations,' as Miss Burney's Evelina says, when this boy
came and talked to me, a little bashfully at first, but soon quite
freely, and invited me to a huckleberry party next day. I had observed
that he was one of the best spellers. I also observed that his language
was quite elegant; he even quoted Byron, and rolled his eyes in a most
engaging manner, not to mention that he asked who gave me my ring, and
said he depended on escorting me to the berry pasture.

'Dear me, how interesting it was! and when I found myself, next day,
sitting under a tree in the sunny field (full of boys and girls, all
more or less lovering), with the amiable Augustus at my feet, gallantly
supplying me with bushes to strip while we talked about books and
poetry, I really felt as if I had got into a novel, and enjoyed it
immensely. I believe a dim idea that Gus was sentimental hovered in my
mind, but I would not encourage it, though I laughed in my sleeve when
he was spouting Latin for my benefit, and was uncertain whether to box
his ears or simper later in the day, when he languished over the gate,
and said he thought chestnut hair the loveliest in the world.

Poor, dear boy! how innocent and soft-hearted and full of splendid
dreams he was, and what deliciously romantic times we had floating on
the pond, while the frogs sung to his accordion, as he tried to say
unutterable things with his honest blue eyes. It makes me shiver now to
think of the mosquitoes and the damp; but it was Pauline and Claude
Melnotte then, and when I went home we promised to be true to one
another, and write every week during the year he was away at school.

We parted--not in tears by any means; that sort of nonsense comes
later, when the romance is less childish--but quite jolly and
comfortable, and I hastened to pour forth the thrilling tale to my
faithful sister, who approved of the match, being a perfect 'mush of
sentiment' herself.

I fear it was not a very ardent flame, however, for Gus did not write
every week, and I did not care a bit; nevertheless, I kept his picture
and gave it a sentimental sigh when I happened to think of it, while he
sent messages now and then, and devoted himself to his studies like an
ambitious boy as he was. I hardly expected to see him again, but soon
after the year was out, to my great surprise, he called. I was so
fluttered by the appearance of his card that I rather lost my head, and
did such a silly thing that it makes me laugh even now. He liked
chestnut hair, and, pulling out my combs, I rushed down, theatrically
dishevelled, hoping to impress my lover with my ardour and my charms.

I expected to find little Gus; but, to my great confusion, a tall being
with a beaver in his hand rose to meet me, looking so big and handsome
and generally imposing that I could not recover myself for several
minutes, and mentally wailed for my combs, feeling like an untidy
simpleton.

I don't know whether he thought me a little cracked or not, but he was
very friendly and pleasant, and told me his plans, and hoped I would
make another visit, and smoothed his beaver, and let me see his
tail-coat, and behaved himself like a dear, conceited, clever boy. He
did not allude to our love-passages, being shy, and I blessed him for
it; for really, I don't know what rash thing I might have done under
the exciting circumstances. Just as he was going, however, he forgot
his cherished hat for a minute, put out both hands, and said heartily,
with his old boyish laugh,--

'Now you will come, and we'll go boating and berrying, and all the rest
of it again, won't we?'

The blue eyes were full of fun and feeling, too, I fancied, as I
blushingly retired behind my locks and gave the promise. But I never
went, and never saw my little lover any more, for in a few weeks he was
dead of a fever, brought on by too much study,--and so ended the sad
history of my fourth boy.

After this, for many years, I was a boyless being; but was so busy I did
not feel my destitute condition till I went to the hospital during the
war, and found my little sergeant. His story has been told elsewhere,
but the sequel to it is a pleasant one, for Baby B. still writes to me
now and then, asks advice about his future, and gladdens me with good
news of his success as a business man in Kansas.

As if to atone for the former dearth, a sudden shower of most superior
boys fell upon me, after I recovered from my campaign. Some of the very
best sort it was my fortune to know and like--real gentlemen, yet boys
still--and jolly times they had, stirring up the quiet old town with
their energetic society.

There was W., a stout, amiable youth, who would stand in the middle of a
strawberry patch with his hands in his pockets and let us feed him
luxuriously. B., a delightful scapegrace, who came once a week to
confess his sins, beat his breast in despair, vow awful vows of
repentance, and then cheerfully depart to break every one of them in the
next twenty-four hours. S., the gentle-hearted giant; J., the dandy;
sober, sensible B.; and E., the young knight without reproach or fear.

But my especial boy of the batch was A.--proud and cold and shy to other
people, sad and serious sometimes when his good heart and tender
conscience showed him his short-comings, but so grateful for sympathy
and a kind word.

I could not get at him as easily as I could the other lads, but, thanks
to Dickens, I found him out at last.

We played Dolphus and Sophy Tetterby in the 'Haunted Man,' at one of the
school festivals; and during the rehearsals I discovered that my Dolphus
was--permit the expression, oh, well-bred readers!--a trump. What fun we
had to be sure, acting the droll and pathetic scenes together, with a
swarm of little Tetterbys skirmishing about us! From that time he has
been my Dolphus and I his Sophy, and my yellow-haired laddie don't
forget me, though he has a younger Sophy now, and some small Tetterbys
of his own. He writes just the same affectionate letters as he used to
do, though I, less faithful, am too busy to answer them.

But the best and dearest of all my flock was my Polish boy, Ladislas
Wisniewski--two hiccoughs and a sneeze will give you the name perfectly.
Six years ago, as I went down to my early breakfast at our Pension in
Vevey, I saw that a stranger had arrived. He was a tall youth, of
eighteen or twenty, with a thin, intelligent face, and the charmingly
polite manners of a foreigner. As the other boarders came in, one by
one, they left the door open, and a draught of cold autumn air blew in
from the stone corridor, making the new-comer cough, shiver, and cast
wistful glances towards the warm corner by the stove. My place was
there, and the heat often oppressed me, so I was glad of an opportunity
to move.

A word to Madame Vodoz effected the change; and at dinner I was rewarded
by a grateful smile from the poor fellow, as he nestled into his warm
seat, after a pause of surprise and a flush of pleasure at the small
kindness from a stranger. We were too far apart to talk much, but, as he
filled his glass, the Pole bowed to me, and said low in French--

'I drink the good health to Mademoiselle.'

I returned the wish, but he shook his head with a sudden shadow on his
face, as if the words meant more than mere compliment to him.

'That boy is sick and needs care. I must see to him,' said I to myself,
as I met him in the afternoon, and observed the military look of his
blue and white suit, as he touched his cap and smiled pleasantly. I have
a weakness for brave boys in blue, and having discovered that he had
been in the late Polish Revolution, my heart warmed to him at once.

That evening he came to me in the salon, and expressed his thanks in the
prettiest broken English I ever heard. So simple, frank, and grateful
was he that a few words of interest won his little story from him, and
in half an hour we were friends. With his fellow-students he had fought
through the last outbreak, and suffered imprisonment and hardship rather
than submit, had lost many friends, his fortune and his health, and at
twenty, lonely, poor, and ill, was trying bravely to cure the malady
which seemed fatal.

'If I recover myself of this affair in the chest, I teach the music to
acquire my bread in this so hospitable country. At Paris, my friends,
all two, find a refuge, and I go to them in spring if I die not here.
Yes, it is solitary, and my memories are not gay, but I have my work,
and the good God remains always to me, so I content myself with much
hope, and I wait.'

Such genuine piety and courage increased my respect and regard
immensely, and a few minutes later he added to both by one of the little
acts that show character better than words.

He told me about the massacre, when five hundred Poles were shot down by
Cossacks in the market-place, merely because they sung their national
hymn.

'Play me that forbidden air,' I said, wishing to judge of his skill, for
I had heard him practising softly in the afternoon.

He rose willingly, then glanced about the room and gave a little shrug
which made me ask what he wanted.

'I look to see if the Baron is here. He is Russian, and to him my
national air will not be pleasing.'

'Then play it. He dare not forbid it here, and I should rather enjoy
that little insult to your bitter enemy,' said I, feeling very indignant
with everything Russian just then.

'Ah, mademoiselle, it is true we are enemies, but we are also
gentlemen,' returned the boy, proving that _he_ at least was one.

I thanked him for his lesson in politeness, and as the Baron was not
there he played the beautiful hymn, singing it enthusiastically in spite
of the danger to his weak lungs. A true musician evidently, for, as he
sung his pale face glowed, his eyes shone, and his lost vigor seemed
restored to him.

From that evening we were fast friends; for the memory of certain dear
lads at home made my heart open to this lonely boy, who gave me in
return the most grateful affection and service. He begged me to call him
'Varjo,' as his mother did. He constituted himself my escort,
errand-boy, French teacher, and private musician, making those weeks
indefinitely pleasant by his winning ways, his charming little
confidences, and faithful friendship.

We had much fun over our lessons, for I helped him about his English.
With a great interest in free America, and an intense longing to hear
about our war, the barrier of an unknown tongue did not long stand
between us.

Beginning with my bad French and his broken English, we got on
capitally; but he outdid me entirely, making astonishing progress,
though he often slapped his forehead with the despairing exclamation,--

'I am imbecile! I never can will shall to have learn this beast of
English!'

But he did, and in a month had added a new language to the five he
already possessed.

His music was the delight of the house; and he often gave us little
concerts with the help of Madame Teiblin, a German St. Cecilia, with a
cropped head and a gentlemanly sack, cravat, and collar. Both were
enthusiasts, and the longer they played the more inspired they got. The
piano vibrated, the stools creaked, the candles danced in their sockets,
and every one sat mute while the four white hands chased one another up
and down the keys, and the two fine faces beamed with such ecstasy that
we almost expected to see instrument and performers disappear in a
musical whirlwind.

Lake Leman will never seem so lovely again as when Laddie and I roamed
about its shores, floated on its bosom, or laid splendid plans for the
future in the sunny garden of the old chateau. I tried it again last
year, but the charm was gone, for I missed my boy with his fun, his
music, and the frank, fresh affection he gave his 'little mamma,' as he
insisted on calling the lofty spinster who loved him like half-a-dozen
grandmothers rolled into one.

December roses blossomed in the gardens then, and Laddie never failed to
have a posy ready for me at dinner. Few evenings passed without
'confidences' in my corner of the salon, and I still have a pile of
merry little notes which I used to find tucked under my door. He called
them chapters of a great history we were to write together, and being a
'_polisson_' he illustrated it with droll pictures, and a funny mixture
of French and English romance.

It was very pleasant, but like all pleasant things in this world of
change it soon came to an end. When I left for Italy we jokingly agreed
to meet in Paris the next May, but neither really felt that we should
ever meet again, for Laddie hardly expected to outlive the winter, and I
felt sure I should soon be forgotten. As he kissed my hand there were
tears in my boy's eyes, and a choke in the voice that tried to say
cheerfully--

'_Bon voyage_, dear and good little mamma. I do not say adieu, but _au
revoir_.'

Then the carriage rolled away, the wistful face vanished, and nothing
remained to me but the memory of Laddie, and a little stain on my glove
where a drop had fallen.

As I drew near Paris six months later, and found myself wishing that I
might meet Varjo in the great, gay city, and wondering if there was any
chance of my doing it, I never dreamed of seeing him so soon; but, as I
made my way among the crowd of passengers that poured through the
station, feeling tired, bewildered, and homesick, I suddenly saw a blue
and white cap wave wildly in the air, then Laddie's beaming face
appeared, and Laddie's eager hands grasped mine so cordially that I
began to laugh at once, and felt that Paris was almost as good as home.

'Ah, ha! behold the little mamma, who did not think to see again her bad
son! Yes, I am greatly glad that I make the fine surprise for you as you
come all weary to this place of noise. Give to me the billets, for I am
still mademoiselle's servant and go to find the coffers.'

He got my trunks, put me into a carriage, and as we rolled merrily away
I asked how he chanced to meet me so unexpectedly. Knowing where I
intended to stay, he had called occasionally till I notified Madame D.
of the day and hour of my arrival, and then he had come to 'make the
fine surprise.' He enjoyed the joke like a true boy, and I was glad to
see how well he looked, and how gay he seemed.

'You are better?' I said.

'I truly hope so. The winter was good to me and I cough less. It is a
small hope, but I do not enlarge my fear by a sad face. I yet work and
save a little purse, so that I may not be a heaviness to those who have
the charity to finish me if I fall back and yet die.'

I would not hear of that, and told him he looked as well and happy as if
he had found a fortune.

He laughed, and answered with his fine bow, 'I have. Behold, you come
to make the fête for me. I find also here my friends Joseph and
Napoleon. Poor as mouses of the church, as you say, but brave boys, and
we work together with much gaiety.'

When I asked if he had leisure to be my guide about Paris, for my time
was short and I wanted to see _everything_; he pranced, and told me he
had promised himself a holiday, and had planned many excursions the most
wonderful, charming, and gay. Then, having settled me at Madame's, he
went blithely away to what I afterwards discovered were very poor
lodgings, across the river.

Next day began the pleasantest fortnight in all my year of travel.
Laddie appeared early, elegant to behold, in a new hat and buff gloves,
and was immensely amused because the servant informed me that my big son
had arrived.

I believe the first thing a woman does in Paris is to buy a new bonnet.
I did, or rather stood by and let 'my son' do it in the best of French,
only whispering when he proposed gorgeous _chapeaus_ full of flowers and
feathers, that I could not afford it.

'Ah! we must make our economies, must we? See, then, this modest,
pearl-colored one, with the crape rose. Yes, we will have that, and be
most elegant for the Sunday promenade.'

I fear I should have bought a pea-green hat with a yellow plume if he
had urged it, so wheedlesome and droll were his ways and words. His good
taste saved me, however, and the modest one was sent home for the
morrow, when we were to meet Joseph and Napoleon and go to the concert
in the Tuileries garden.

Then we set off on our day of sight-seeing, and Laddie proved himself
an excellent guide. We had a charming trip about the enchanted city, a
gay lunch at a café, and a first brief glimpse of the Louvre. At
dinner-time I found a posy at my place; and afterward Laddie came and
spent the evening in my little salon, playing to me, and having what he
called 'babblings and pleasantries.' I found that he was translating
'Vanity Fair' into Polish, and intended to sell it at home. He convulsed
me with his struggles to put cockney English and slang into good Polish,
for he had saved up a list of words for me to explain to him. Hay-stack
and bean-pot were among them, I remember; and when he had mastered the
meanings he fell upon the sofa exhausted.

Other days like this followed, and we led a happy life together: for my
twelve years' seniority made our adventures quite proper, and I
fearlessly went anywhere on the arm of my big son. Not to theatres or
balls, however, for heated rooms were bad for Laddie, but pleasant trips
out of the city in the bright spring weather, quiet strolls in the
gardens, moonlight concerts in the Champs Elysées; or, best of all, long
talks with music in the little red salon, with the gas turned low, and
the ever-changing scenes of the Rue de Rivoli under the balcony.

Never were pleasures more cheaply purchased or more thoroughly enjoyed,
for our hearts were as light as our purses, and our 'little economies'
gave zest to our amusements.

Joseph and Napoleon sometimes joined us, and I felt in my element with
the three invalid soldier boys, for Napoleon still limped with a wound
received in the war, Joseph had never recovered from his two years'
imprisonment in an Austrian dungeon, and Laddie's loyalty might yet
cost him his life.

Thanks to them, I discovered a joke played upon me by my '_polisson_'.
He told me to call him 'ma drogha,' saying it meant 'my friend,' in
Polish. I innocently did so, and he seemed to find great pleasure in it,
for his eyes always laughed when I said it. Using it one day before the
other lads, I saw a queer twinkle in their eyes, and suspecting
mischief, demanded the real meaning of the words. Laddie tried to
silence them, but the joke was too good to keep, and I found to my
dismay that I had been calling him 'my darling' in the tenderest manner.

How the three rascals shouted, and what a vain struggle it was to try
and preserve my dignity when Laddie clasped his hands and begged pardon,
explaining that jokes were necessary to his health, and he never meant
me to know the full baseness of this 'pleasantrie!' I revenged myself by
giving him some bad English for his translation, and telling him of it
just as I left Paris.

It was not all fun with my boy, however; he had his troubles, and in
spite of his cheerfulness he knew what heartache was. Walking in the
quaint garden of the Luxembourg one day, he confided to me the little
romance of his life. A very touching little romance as he told it, with
eloquent eyes and voice and frequent pauses for breath. I cannot give
his words, but the simple facts were these:--

He had grown up with a pretty cousin, and at eighteen was desperately in
love with her. She returned his affection, but they could not be happy,
for her father wished her to marry a richer man. In Poland, to marry
without the consent of parents is to incur lasting disgrace; so Leonore
obeyed, and the young pair parted. This had been a heavy sorrow to
Laddie, and he rushed into the war, hoping to end his trouble.

'Do you ever hear from your cousin?' I asked, as he walked beside me,
looking sadly down the green aisles where kings and queens had loved and
parted years ago.

'I only know that she suffers still, for she remembers. Her husband
submits to the Russians, and I despise him as I have no English to
tell;' and he clenched his hands with the flash of the eye and sudden
kindling of the whole face that made him handsome.

He showed me a faded little picture, and when I tried to comfort him, he
laid his head down on the pedestal of one of the marble queens who
guard the walk, as if he never cared to lift it up again.

But he was all right in a minute, and bravely put away his sorrow with
the little picture. He never spoke of it again, and I saw no more
shadows on his face till we came to say good-bye.

'You have been so kind to me, I wish I had something beautiful to give
you, Laddie,' I said, feeling that it would be hard to get on without my
boy.

'This time it is for always; so, as a parting souvenir, give to me the
sweet English good-bye.'

As he said this, with a despairing sort of look, as if he could not
spare even so humble a friend as myself, my heart was quite rent within
me, and, regardless of several prim English ladies, I drew down his tall
head and kissed him tenderly, feeling that in this world there were no
more meetings for us. Then I ran away and buried myself in an empty
railway carriage, hugging the little cologne bottle he had given me.

He promised to write, and for five years he has kept his word, sending
me from Paris and Poland cheery, bright letters in English, at my
desire, so that he might not forget. Here is one as a specimen.

     'MY DEAR AND GOOD FRIEND,--What do you think of me that I do not
     write so long time? Excuse me, my good mamma, for I was so busy in
     these days I could not do this pleasant thing. I write English
     without the fear that you laugh at it, because I know it is more
     agreeable to read the own language, and I think you are not
     excepted of this rule. It is good of me, for the expressions of
     love and regard, made with faults, take the funny appearance; they
     are _ridicule_, and instead to go to the heart, they make the
     laugh. Never mind, I do it.

     'You cannot imagine yourself how _stupide_ is Paris when you are
     gone. I fly to my work, and make no more fêtes,--it is too sad
     alone. I tie myself to my table and my Vanity (not of mine, for I
     am not vain, am I?). I wish some chapters to finish themselfs
     _vite_, that I send them to Pologne and know the end. I have a
     little question to ask you (of Vanity as always). I cannot
     translate this, no one of _dictionnaires_ makes me the words, and I
     think it is _jargon de prison_, this little period. Behold:--

       Mopy, is that your snum?
       Nubble your dad and gully the dog, &c.

     'So funny things I cannot explain myself, so I send to you, and
     you reply sooner than without it, for you have so kind interest in
     my work you do not stay to wait. So this is a little hook for you
     to make you write some words to your son who likes it so much and
     is fond of you.

     'My doctor tells me my lungs are soon to be re-established; so you
     may imagine yourself how glad I am, and of more courage in my
     future. You may one day see your Varjo in Amerique, if I study
     commerce as I wish. So then the last time of seeing ourselves is
     _not_ the last. Is that to please you? I suppose the grand
     _histoire_ is finished, _n'est ce pas_? You will then send it to me
     care of M. Gryhomski Austriche, and he will give to me in
     clandestine way at Varsovie, otherwise it will be confiscated at
     the frontier by the stupide Russians.

     'Now we are dispersed in two sides of world far apart, for soon I
     go home to Pologne and am no more "_juif errant_." It is now time I
     work at my life in some useful way, and I do it.

     'As I am your _grand fils_, it is proper that I make you my
     compliment of happy Christmas and New Year, is it not? I wish for
     you so many as they may fulfil long human life. May this year bring
     you more and more good hearts to love you (the only real happiness
     in the hard life), and may I be as now, yours for always,

    'VARJO.'


A year ago he sent me his photograph and a few lines. I acknowledged the
receipt of it, but since then not a word has come, and I begin to fear
that my boy is dead. Others have appeared to take his place, but they
don't suit, and I keep his corner always ready for him if he lives. If
he is dead, I am glad to have known so sweet and brave a character, for
it does one good to see even as short-lived and obscure a hero as my
Polish boy, whose dead December rose embalms for me the memory of Varjo,
the last and dearest of my boys.

It is hardly necessary to add, for the satisfaction of inquisitive
little women, that Laddie was the original of Laurie, as far as a pale
pen-and-ink sketch could embody a living, loving boy.




_TESSA'S SURPRISES._


I.

Little Tessa sat alone by the fire, waiting for her father to come home
from work. The children were fast asleep, all four in the big bed behind
the curtain; the wind blew hard outside, and the snow beat on the
window-panes; the room was large, and the fire so small and feeble that
it didn't half warm the little bare toes peeping out of the old shoes on
the hearth.

Tessa's father was an Italian plaster-worker, very poor, but kind and
honest. The mother had died not long ago, and left twelve-year old
Tessa to take care of the little children. She tried to be very wise and
motherly, and worked for them like any little woman; but it was so hard
to keep the small bodies warm and fed, and the small souls good and
happy, that poor Tessa was often at her wits' end. She always waited for
her father, no matter how tired she was, so that he might find his
supper warm, a bit of fire, and a loving little face to welcome him.
Tessa thought over her troubles at these quiet times, and made her
plans; for her father left things to her a good deal, and she had no
friends but Tommo, the harp-boy upstairs, and the lively cricket who
lived in the chimney. To-night her face was very sober, and her pretty
brown eyes very thoughtful as she stared at the fire and knit her brows,
as if perplexed. She was not thinking of her old shoes, nor the empty
closet, nor the boys' ragged clothes just then. No; she had a fine plan
in her good little head, and was trying to discover how she could carry
it out.

You see, Christmas was coming in a week; and she had set her heart on
putting something in the children's stockings, as the mother used to do,
for while she lived things were comfortable. Now Tessa had not a penny
in the world, and didn't know how to get one, for all the father's
earnings had to go for food, fire, and rent.

'If there were only fairies, ah! how heavenly that would be; for then I
should tell them all I wish, and, pop! behold the fine things in my
lap!' said Tessa to herself. 'I must earn the money; there is no one to
give it to me, and I cannot beg. But what can I do, so small and stupid
and shy as I am? I _must_ find some way to give the little ones a nice
Christmas. I _must_! I _must_!' and Tessa pulled her long hair, as if
that would help her think.

But it didn't, and her heart got heavier and heavier; for it did seem
hard that in a great city full of fine things, there should be none for
poor Nono, Sep, and little Speranza. Just as Tessa's tears began to
tumble off her eyelashes on to her brown cheeks, the cricket began to
chirp. Of course, he didn't say a word; but it really did seem as if he
had answered her question almost as well as a fairy; for, before he had
piped a dozen shrill notes, an idea popped into Tessa's head--such a
truly splendid idea that she clapped her hands and burst out laughing.
'I'll do it! I'll do it! if father will let me,' she said to herself,
smiling and nodding at the fire. 'Tommo will like to have me go with him
and sing, while he plays his harp in the streets. I know many songs, and
may get money if I am not frightened; for people throw pennies to other
little girls who only play the tambourine. Yes, I will try; and then, if
I do well, the little ones shall have a Merry Christmas.'

So full of her plan was Tessa that she ran upstairs at once, and asked
Tommo if he would take her with him on the morrow. Her friend was
delighted, for he thought Tessa's songs very sweet, and was sure she
would get money if she tried.

'But see, then, it is cold in the streets; the wind bites, and the snow
freezes one's fingers. The day is very long, people are cross, and at
night one is ready to die with weariness. Thou art so small, Tessa, I am
afraid it will go badly with thee,' said Tommo, who was a merry,
black-eyed boy of fourteen, with the kindest heart in the world under
his old jacket.

'I do not mind cold and wet, and cross people, if I can get the
pennies,' answered Tessa, feeling very brave with such a friend to help
her. She thanked Tommo, and ran away to get ready, for she felt sure her
father would not refuse her anything. She sewed up the holes in her
shoes as well as she could, for she had much of that sort of cobbling to
do; she mended her only gown, and laid ready the old hood and shawl
which had been her mother's. Then she washed out little Ranza's frock
and put it to dry, because she would not be able to do it the next day.
She set the table and got things ready for breakfast, for Tommo went out
early, and must not be kept waiting for her. She longed to make the beds
and dress the children over night, she was in such a hurry to have all
in order; but, as that could not be, she sat down again, and tried over
all the songs she knew. Six pretty ones were chosen; and she sang away
with all her heart in a fresh little voice so sweetly that the children
smiled in their sleep, and her father's tired face brightened as he
entered, for Tessa was his cheery cricket on the hearth. When she had
told her plan, Peter Benari shook his head, and thought it would never
do; but Tessa begged so hard, he consented at last that she should try
it for one week, and sent her to bed the happiest little girl in New
York.

Next morning the sun shone, but the cold wind blew, and the snow lay
thick in the streets. As soon as her father was gone, Tessa flew about
and put everything in nice order, telling the children she was going out
for the day, and they were to mind Tommo's mother, who would see about
the fire and the dinner; for the good woman loved Tessa, and entered
into her little plans with all her heart. Nono and Giuseppe, or Sep, as
they called him, wondered what she was going away for, and little Ranza
cried at being left; but Tessa told them they would know all about it in
a week, and have a fine time if they were good; so they kissed her all
round and let her go.

Poor Tessa's heart beat fast as she trudged away with Tommo, who slung
his harp over his shoulder, and gave her his hand. It was rather a dirty
hand, but so kind that Tessa clung to it, and kept looking up at the
friendly brown face for encouragement.

'We go first to the _café_, where many French and Italians eat the
breakfast. They like my music, and often give me sips of hot coffee,
which I like much. You too shall have the sips, and perhaps the pennies,
for these people are greatly kind,' said Tommo, leading her into a large
smoky place where many people sat at little tables, eating and drinking.
'See, now, have no fear; give them "Bella Monica;" that is merry and
will make the laugh,' whispered Tommo, tuning his harp.

For a moment Tessa felt so frightened that she wanted to run away; but
she remembered the empty stockings at home, and the fine plan, and she
resolved _not_ to give it up. One fat old Frenchman nodded to her, and
it seemed to help her very much; for she began to sing before she
thought, and that was the hardest part of it. Her voice trembled, and
her cheeks grew redder and redder as she went on; but she kept her eyes
fixed on her old shoes, and so got through without breaking down, which
was very nice. The people laughed, for the song _was_ merry; and the fat
man smiled and nodded again. This gave her courage to try another, and
she sung better and better each time; for Tommo played his best, and
kept whispering to her, 'Yes; we go well; this is fine. They will give
the money and the blessed coffee.'

So they did; for, when the little concert was over, several men put
pennies in the cap Tessa offered, and the fat man took her on his knee,
and ordered a mug of coffee, and some bread and butter for them both.
This quite won her heart; and when they left the _café_, she kissed her
hand to the old Frenchman, and said to her friend, 'How kind they are! I
like this very much; and now it is not hard.'

But Tommo shook his curly head, and answered, soberly, 'Yes, I took you
there first, for they love music, and are of our country; but up among
the great houses we shall not always do well. The people there are busy
or hard or idle, and care nothing for harps and songs. Do not skip and
laugh too soon; for the day is long, and we have but twelve pennies
yet.'

Tessa walked more quietly, and rubbed her cold hands, feeling that the
world was a very big place, and wondering how the children got on at
home without the little mother. Till noon they did not earn much, for
every one seemed in a hurry, and the noise of many sleigh-bells drowned
the music. Slowly they made their way up to the great squares where the
big houses were, with fine ladies and pretty children at the windows.
Here Tessa sung all her best songs, and Tommo played as fast as his
fingers could fly; but it was too cold to have the windows open, so the
pretty children could not listen long, and the ladies tossed out a
little money, and soon went back to their own affairs.

All the afternoon the two friends wandered about, singing and playing,
and gathering up their small harvest. At dusk they went home, Tessa so
hoarse she could hardly speak, and so tired she fell asleep over her
supper. But she had made half a dollar, for Tommo divided the money
fairly, and she felt rich with her share. The other days were very much
like this; sometimes they made more, sometimes less, but Tommo always
'went halves;' and Tessa kept on, in spite of cold and weariness, for
her plans grew as her earnings increased, and now she hoped to get
useful things, instead of candy and toys alone.

On the day before Christmas she made herself as tidy as she could, for
she hoped to earn a good deal. She tied a bright scarlet handkerchief
over the old hood, and the brilliant color set off her brown cheeks and
bright eyes, as well as the pretty black braids of her hair. Tommo's
mother lent her a pair of boots so big that they turned up at the toes,
but there were no holes in them, and Tessa felt quite elegant in whole
boots. Her hands were covered with chilblains, for she had no mittens;
but she put them under her shawl, and scuffled merrily away in her big
boots, feeling so glad that the week was over, and nearly three dollars
safe in her pocket. How gay the streets were that day! how brisk every
one was, and how bright the faces looked, as people trotted about with
big baskets, holly-wreaths, and young evergreens going to blossom into
splendid Christmas trees!

'If I could have a tree for the children, I'd never want anything again.
But I can't; so I'll fill the socks all full, and be happy,' said Tessa,
as she looked wistfully into the gay stores, and saw the heavy baskets
go by.

'Who knows what may happen if we do well?' returned Tommo, nodding
wisely, for he had a plan as well as Tessa, and kept chuckling over it
as he trudged through the mud. They did _not_ do well somehow, for every
one seemed so full of their own affairs they could not stop to listen,
even to 'Bella Monica,' but bustled away to spend their money in
turkeys, toys, and trees. In the afternoon it began to rain, and poor
Tessa's heart to fail her; for the big boots tired her feet, the cold
wind made her hands ache, and the rain spoilt the fine red handkerchief.
Even Tommo looked sober, and didn't whistle as he walked, for he also
was disappointed, and his plan looked rather doubtful, the pennies came
in so slowly.

'We'll try one more street, and then go home, thou art so tired, little
one. Come; let me wipe thy face, and give me thy hand here in my jacket
pocket; there it will be as warm as any kitten;' and kind Tommo brushed
away the drops which were not _all_ rain from Tessa's cheeks, tucked
the poor hand into his ragged pocket, and led her carefully along the
slippery streets, for the boots nearly tripped her up.


II.

At the first house, a cross old gentleman flapped his newspaper at them;
at the second, a young gentleman and lady were so busy talking that they
never turned their heads, and at the third, a servant came out and told
them to go away, because some one was sick. At the fourth, some people
let them sing all their songs and gave nothing. The next three houses
were empty; and the last of all showed not a single face as they looked
up anxiously. It was so cold, so dark and discouraging, that Tessa
couldn't help one sob; and, as he glanced down at the little red nose
and wet figure beside him, Tommo gave his harp an angry thump, and said
something very fierce in Italian. They were just going to turn away; but
they didn't, for that angry thump happened to be the best thing they
could have done. All of a sudden a little head appeared at the window,
as if the sound had brought it; then another and another, till there
were five, of all heights and colors, and five eager faces peeped out,
smiling and nodding to the two below.

'Sing, Tessa; sing! Quick! quick!' cried Tommo, twanging away with all
his might, and showing his white teeth, as he smiled back at the little
gentle-folk.

Bless us! How Tessa did tune up at that! She chirped away like a real
bird, forgetting all about the tears on her cheeks, the ache in her
hands, and the heaviness at her heart. The children laughed, and clapped
their hands, and cried 'More! more! Sing another, little girl! Please
do!' And away they went again, piping and playing, till Tessa's breath
was gone, and Tommo's stout fingers tingled well.

'Mamma says, come to the door; it's too muddy to throw the money into
the street!' cried out a kindly child's voice as Tessa held up the old
cap, with beseeching eyes.

Up the wide stone steps went the street musicians, and the whole flock
came running down to give a handful of silver, and ask all sorts of
questions. Tessa felt so grateful that, without waiting for Tommo, she
sang her sweetest little song all alone. It was about a lost lamb, and
her heart was in the song; therefore she sang it well, so well that a
pretty young lady came down to listen, and stood watching the
bright-eyed girl, who looked about her as she sang, evidently enjoying
the light and warmth of the fine hall, and the sight of the lovely
children with their gay dresses, shining hair, and dainty little shoes.

'You have a charming voice, child. Who taught you to sing?' asked the
young lady kindly.

'My mother. She is dead now; but I do not forget,' answered Tessa, in
her pretty broken English.

'I wish she could sing at our tree, since Bella is ill,' cried one of
the children peeping through the banisters.

'She is not fair enough for the angel, and too large to go up in the
tree. But she sings sweetly, and looks as if she would like to see a
tree,' said the young lady.

'Oh, so much!' exclaimed Tessa; adding eagerly, 'my sister Ranza is
small and pretty as a baby-angel. She could sit up in the fine tree, and
I could sing for her from under the table.'

'Sit down and warm yourself, and tell me about Ranza,' said the kind
elder sister, who liked the confiding little girl, in spite of her
shabby clothes.

So Tessa sat down and dried the big boots over the furnace, and told her
story, while Tommo stood modestly in the background, and the children
listened with faces full of interest.

'O Rose! let us see the little girl; and if she will do, let us have
her, and Tessa can learn our song, and it will be splendid!' cried the
biggest boy, who sat astride of a chair, and stared at the harp with
round eyes.

'I'll ask mamma,' said Rose; and away she went into the dining-room
close by. As the door opened, Tessa saw what looked to her like a fairy
feast,--all silver mugs and flowery plates and oranges and nuts and rosy
wine in tall glass pitchers, and smoking dishes that smelt so
deliciously she could not restrain a little sniff of satisfaction.

'Are you hungry?' asked the boy, in a grand tone.

'Yes, sir,' meekly answered Tessa.

'I say, mamma; she wants something to eat. Can I give her an orange?'
called the boy, prancing away into the splendid room, quite like a fairy
prince, Tessa thought.

A plump motherly lady came out and looked at Tessa, asked a few
questions, and then told her to come to-morrow with Ranza, and they
would see what could be done. Tessa clapped her hands for joy,--she
didn't mind the chilblains now,--and Tommo played a lively march, he
was so pleased.

'Will you come, too, and bring your harp? You shall be paid, and shall
have something from the tree, likewise,' said the motherly lady, who
liked what Tessa gratefully told about his kindness to her.

'Ah, yes; I shall come with much gladness, and play as never in my life
before,' cried Tommo, with a flourish of the old cap that made the
children laugh.

'Give these to your brothers,' said the fairy prince, stuffing nuts and
oranges into Tessa's hands.

'And these to the little girl,' added one of the young princesses,
flying out of the dining-room with cakes and rosy apples for Ranza.

Tessa didn't know what to say; but her eyes were full, and she just took
the mother's white hand in both her little grimy ones, and kissed it
many times in her pretty Italian fashion. The lady understood her, and
stroked her cheek softly, saying to her elder daughter, 'We must take
care of this good little creature. Freddy, bring me your mittens; these
poor hands must be covered. Alice, get your play-hood; this handkerchief
is all wet; and, Maud, bring the old chinchilla tippet.'

The children ran, and in a minute there were lovely blue mittens on the
red hands, a warm hood over the black braids, and a soft 'pussy' round
the sore throat.

'Ah! so kind, so very kind! I have no way to say "thank you;" but Ranza
shall be for you a heavenly angel, and I will sing my heart out for your
tree!' cried Tessa, folding the mittens as if she would say a prayer of
thankfulness if she knew how.

Then they went away, and the pretty children called after them, 'Come
again, Tessa! come again, Tommo!' Now the rain didn't seem dismal, the
wind cold, nor the way long, as they bought their gifts and hurried
home, for kind words and the sweet magic of charity had changed all the
world to them.

I think the good spirits who fly about on Christmas Eve, to help the
loving fillers of little stockings, smiled very kindly on Tessa as she
brooded joyfully over the small store of presents that seemed so
magnificent to her. All the goodies were divided evenly into three parts
and stowed away in father's three big socks, which hung against the
curtain. With her three dollars, she had got a pair of shoes for Nono, a
knit cap for Sep, and a pair of white stockings for Ranza; to her she
also gave the new hood; to Nono the mittens; and to Sep the tippet.

'Now the dear boys can go out, and my Ranza will be ready for the lady
to see, in her nice new things,' said Tessa, quite sighing with pleasure
to see how well the gifts looked pinned up beside the bulging socks,
which wouldn't hold them all. The little mother kept nothing for herself
but the pleasure of giving everything away; yet, I think, she was both
richer and happier than if she had kept them all. Her father laughed as
he had not done since the mother died, when he saw how comically the old
curtain had broken out into boots and hoods, stockings and tippets.

'I wish I had a gold gown and a silver hat for thee, my Tessa, thou art
so good. May the saints bless and keep thee always!' said Peter Benari
tenderly, as he held his little daughter close, and gave her the
good-night kiss.

Tessa felt very rich as she crept under the faded counterpane, feeling
as if she had received a lovely gift, and fell happily asleep with
chubby Ranza in her arms, and the two rough black heads peeping out at
the foot of the bed. She dreamed wonderful dreams that night, and woke
in the morning to find real wonders before her eyes. She got up early,
to see if the socks were all right, and there she found the most
astonishing sight. Four socks, instead of three; and by the fourth,
pinned out quite elegantly was a little dress, evidently meant for
her--a warm, woollen dress, all made, and actually with bright buttons
on it. It nearly took her breath away; so did the new boots on the
floor, and the funny long stocking like a grey sausage, with a wooden
doll staring out at the top, as if she said, politely, 'A Merry
Christmas, ma'am!' Tessa screamed and danced in her delight, and up
tumbled all the children to scream and dance with her, making a regular
carnival on a small scale. Everybody hugged and kissed everybody else,
offered sucks of orange, bites of cake, and exchanges of candy; every
one tried on the new things, and pranced about in them like a flock of
peacocks. Ranza skipped to and fro airily, dressed in her white socks
and the red hood; the boys promenaded in their little shirts, one with
his creaking new shoes and mittens, the other in his gay cap and fine
tippet; and Tessa put her dress straight on, feeling that her father's
'gold gown' was not all a joke. In her long stocking she found all sorts
of treasures; for Tommo had stuffed it full of queer things, and his
mother had made gingerbread into every imaginable shape, from fat pigs
to full omnibuses.

Dear me! What happy little souls they were that morning; and when they
were quiet again, how like a fairy tale did Tessa's story sound to them.
Ranza was quite ready to be an angel; and the boys promised to be
marvellously good, if they were only allowed to see the tree at the
'palace,' as they called the great house.

Little Ranza was accepted with delight by the kind lady and her
children, and Tessa learned the song quite easily. The boys _were_
asked; and, after a happy day, the young Italians all returned, to play
their parts at the fine Christmas party. Mamma and Miss Rose drilled
them all; and when the folding-doors flew open, one rapturous 'Oh!'
arose from the crowd of children gathered to the festival. I assure
you, it was splendid; the great tree glittering with lights and gifts;
and, on her invisible perch, up among the green boughs, sat the little
golden-haired angel, all in white, with downy wings, a shining crown on
her head, and the most serene satisfaction in her blue eyes, as she
stretched her chubby arms to those below, and smiled her baby smile at
them. Before any one could speak, a voice, as fresh and sweet as a
lark's, sang the Christmas Carol so blithely that every one stood still
to hear, and then clapped till the little angel shook on her perch, and
cried out, 'Be 'till, or me'll fall!' How they laughed at that; and what
fun they had talking to Ranza, while Miss Rose stripped the tree, for
the angel could not resist temptation, and amused herself by eating all
the bonbons she could reach, till she was taken down, to dance about
like a fairy in a white frock and red shoes. Tessa and her friends had
many presents; the boys were perfect lambs, Tommo played for the little
folks to dance, and every one said something friendly to the strangers,
so that they did not feel shy, in spite of shabby clothes. It was a
happy night: and all their lives they remembered it as something too
beautiful and bright to be quite true. Before they went home, the kind
mamma told Tessa she should be her friend, and gave her a motherly kiss,
which warmed the child's heart and seemed to set a seal upon that
promise. It was faithfully kept, for the rich lady had been touched by
Tessa's patient struggles and sacrifices; and for many years, thanks to
her benevolence, there was no end to Tessa's Surprises.




_BUZZ._


I live high up in a city house all alone. My room is a cosy little
place, though there is nothing very splendid in it,--only my pictures
and books, my flowers and my little friend. When I began to live there,
I was very busy and therefore very happy; but by-and-by, when my hurry
was over and I had more time to myself, I often felt lonely. When I ate
my meals I used to wish for a pleasant companion to eat with me; and
when I sat by the fire of evenings, I thought how much more social it
would be if some one sat opposite. I had many friends and callers
through the day, but the evenings were often rather dull; for I
couldn't read much, and didn't care to go out in the stormy weather.

I was wishing for a cheerful friend one night, when all of a sudden I
found one; for, sitting on my hand, I saw a plump, jolly-looking fly. He
sat quietly staring at me, with a mild little hum, as if to say,--

'How are you? You wanted a friend, and here I am. Will you have me?'

Of course I would, for I liked him directly, he was so cheery and
confiding, and seemed as glad to see me as I was to see him. All his
mates were dead and gone, and he was alone, like myself. So I waggled
one finger, by way of welcome, fearing to shake my hand, lest he should
tumble off and feel hurt at my reception. He seemed to understand me,
and buzzed again, evidently saying,--

'Thank you, ma'am. I should like to stay in your warm room, and amuse
you for my board. I won't disturb you, but do my best to be a good
little friend.'

So the bargain was struck, and he stopped to tea. I found that his
manners had been neglected; for he was inclined to walk over the butter,
drink out of the cream-pot, and put his fingers in the jelly. A few taps
with my spoon taught him to behave with more propriety, and he sipped a
drop of milk from the waiter with a crumb of sugar, as a well-bred fly
should do.

On account of his fine voice, I named him Buzz, and we soon got on
excellently together. He seemed to like his new quarters, and, after
exploring every corner of the room, he chose his favourite haunts and
began to enjoy himself. I always knew where he was, for he kept up a
constant song, humming and buzzing, like a little kettle getting ready
to boil.

On sunny days, he amused himself by bumping his head against the window,
and watching what went on outside. It would have given me a headache,
but he seemed to enjoy it immensely. Up in my hanging basket of ivy he
made his bower, and sat there on the moss basking in the sunshine, as
luxuriously as any gentleman in his conservatory. He was interested in
the plants, and examined them daily with great care, walking over the
ivy leaves, grubbing under the moss, and poking his head into the
unfolding hyacinth buds to see how they got on.

The pictures, also, seemed to attract his attention, for he spent much
time skating over the glasses and studying the designs. Sometimes I
would find him staring at my Madonna, as if he said, 'What in the world
are all those topsy-turvy children about?' Then he'd sit in the middle
of a brook, in a water-color sketch by Vautin, as if bathing his feet,
or seem to be eating the cherry which one little duck politely offers
another little duck, in Oscar Pletch's Summer Party. He frequently
kissed my mother's portrait, and sat on my father's bald head, as if
trying to get out some of the wisdom stored up there, like honey in an
ill-thatched bee-hive. My bronze Mercury rather puzzled him, for he
could not understand why the young gentleman didn't fly off when he had
four wings and seemed in such a hurry.

I'm afraid he was a trifle vain, for he sat before the glass a great
deal, and I often saw him cleaning his proboscis, and twiddling his
feelers, and I know he was 'prinking,' as we say. The books pleased him,
too, and he used to run them over, as if trying to choose which he
would read, and never seemed able to decide. He would have nothing to
say to the fat French Dictionary, or my English Plays, but liked Goethe
and Schiller, Emerson and Browning, as well as I did. Carlyle didn't
suit him, and Richter evidently made his head ache. But Jean Ingelow's
Poems delighted him, and so did her 'Stories told to a Child.' 'Fairy
Bells' he often listened to, and was very fond of the pictures in a
photograph book of foreign places and great people.

He frequently promenaded on the piazza of a little Swiss chalet,
standing on the mantel-piece, and thought it a charming residence for a
single gentleman like himself. The closet delighted him extremely, and
he buzzed in the most joyful manner when he got among the
provisions,--for we kept house together. Such revels as he had in the
sugar-bowl; such feasts of gingerbread and grapes; such long sips of
milk, and sly peeps into every uncovered box and dish! Once I'm afraid
he took too much cider, for I found him lying on his back, kicking and
humming like a crazy top, and he was very queer all the rest of that
day; so I kept the bottle corked after that. But his favorite nook was
among the ferns in the vase which a Parian dancing-girl carried. She
stood just over the stove on one little toe, rattling some castanets,
which made no sound, and never getting a step farther for all her
prancing. This was a warm and pretty retreat for Buzz, and there he
spent much of his time, swinging on the ferns, sleeping snugly in the
vase, or warming his feet in the hot air that blew up, like a south
wind, from the stove.

I don't believe there was a happier fly in Boston than my friend Buzz,
and I grew fonder and fonder of him every day; for he never got into
mischief, but sung his cheery song, no matter what the weather was, and
made himself agreeable. Then he was so interested in all I did, it was
delightful to have him round. When I wrote he came and walked about over
my paper to see that it was right, peeped into my ink-stand, and ran
after my pen. He never made silly or sharp criticisms on my stories, but
appeared to admire them very much; so I am sure he was a good judge.
When I sewed, he sat in my basket, or played hide-and-seek in the folds
of my work, talking away all the while in the most sociable manner. He
often flew up all of a sudden, and danced about in the air, as if he was
in such a jolly mood he couldn't keep still, and wanted me to come and
play with him. But, alas! I had no wings, and could only sit stupidly
still, and laugh at his pranks. That was his exercise, for he never went
out, and only took a sniff of air now and then when I opened the
windows.

Well, little Buzz and I lived together many weeks, and never got tired
of one another, which is saying a good deal. At Christmas I went home
for a week and left my room to take care of itself. I put the hyacinths
into the closet to be warm, and dropped the curtain, so the frost should
not nip my ivy; but I forgot Buzz. I really would have taken him with
me, or carried him down to a neighbour's room to be taken care of while
I was away, but I never thought of him in the hurry of getting my
presents and myself ready. Off I went without even saying 'good-bye,'
and never thought of my little friend till Freddy, my small nephew, said
to me one evening at dusk,--

'Aunt Jo, tell me a story.'

So I began to tell him about Buzz, and all of a sudden I cried out,--

'Mercy on me! I'm afraid he'll die of cold while I'm gone.'

It troubled me a good deal, and I wanted to know how the poor little
fellow was so much that I would have gone to see if I had not been so
far away. But it would be rather silly to hurry away twenty miles to
look after one fly: so I finished my visit, and then went back to my
room, hoping to find Buzz alive and well in spite of the cold.

Alas, no! my little friend was gone. There he lay on his back on the
mantel-piece, his legs meekly folded, and his wings stiff and still. He
had evidently gone to the warm place, and been surprised when the heat
died out and left him to freeze. My poor little Buzz had sung his last
song, danced his last dance, and gone where the good flies go. I was
very sorry and buried him among the ivy roots, where the moss lay green
above him, the sun shone warmly on him, and the bitter cold could never
come. I miss him very much; when I sit writing, I miss his cheerful
voice and busy wings; at meals there is no tiny little body to drink up
spilt drops and eat the crumbs: in the evenings, when I sit alone, I
want him more than ever, and every day, as I water my plants, I say,
softly,--

'Grow green, ivy, lie lightly, moss, shine warmly, sun, and make his
last bed pleasant to my little friend.'




_THE CHILDREN'S JOKE._


'"You can't do this" and "you mustn't do that," from morning to night.
Try it yourself and see how you'd like it,' muttered Harry, as he flung
down his hat in sulky obedience to his father's command to give up a
swim in the river and keep himself cool with a book that warm summer
evening.

'Of course I should like to mind my parents. Good children always do,'
began Mr. Fairbairn, entirely forgetting the pranks of his boyhood, as
people are apt to.

'Glad I didn't know you then. Must have been a regular prig,' growled
Harry under his breath.

'Silence, sir! go to your room, and don't let me see you till tea-time.
You must be taught respect as well as obedience,' and Mr. Fairbairn gave
the table a rap that caused his son to retire precipitately.

On the stairs he met his sister Kitty looking as cross as himself.

'What's the matter with you?' he asked, pausing a minute, for misery
loves company.

'Mamma will make me dress up in a stiff clean frock, and have my hair
curled over again just because some one _may_ come. I want to play in
the garden, and I can't all fussed up this way. I do hate company and
clothes and manners, don't you?' answered Kitty, with a spiteful pull at
her sash.

'I hate being ordered round everlastingly, and badgered from morning
till night. I'd just like to be let alone,' and Harry went on his way
to captivity with a grim shake of the head and a very strong desire to
run away from home altogether.

'So would I, mamma is so fussy. I never have any peace of my life,'
sighed Kitty, feeling that her lot was a hard one.

The martyr in brown linen went up, and the other martyr in white cambric
went down, both looking as they felt, rebellious and unhappy. Yet a
stranger seeing them and their home would have thought they had
everything heart could desire. All the comforts that money could buy,
and all the beauty that taste could give seemed gathered round them.
Papa and mamma loved the two little people dearly, and no real care or
sorrow came to trouble the lives that would have been all sunshine but
for one thing. With the best intentions in the world, Mr. and Mrs.
Fairbairn were spoiling their children by constant fault-finding, too
many rules and too little sympathy with the active young souls and
bodies under their care. As Harry said, they were ordered about,
corrected and fussed over from morning till night, and were getting so
tired of it that the most desperate ideas began to enter their heads.

Now, in the house was a quiet old maiden aunt, who saw the mischief
brewing, and tried to cure it by suggesting more liberty and less
'nagging,' as the boys call it. But Mr. and Mrs. F. always silenced her
by saying,--

'My dear Betsey, you never had a family, so how _can_ you know anything
about the proper management of children?'

They quite forgot that sister Betsey had brought up a flock of
motherless brothers and sisters, and done it wisely and well, though she
never got any thanks or praise for it, and never expected any for doing
her duty faithfully. If it had not been for aunty, Harry and Kitty would
have long ago carried out their favorite plan, and have run away
together, like Roland and Maybird. She kept them from this foolish prank
by all sorts of unsuspected means, and was their refuge in troublous
times. For all her quiet ways, aunty was full of fun as well as sympathy
and patience, and she smoothed the thorny road to virtue with the
innocent and kindly little arts that make some people as useful and
beloved as good fairy godmothers were once upon a time.

As they sat at tea that evening papa and mamma were most affable and
lively; but the children's spirits were depressed by a long day of
restraint, and they sat like well-bred mutes, languidly eating their
supper.

'It's the warm weather. They need something bracing. I'll give them a
dose of iron mixture to-morrow,' said mamma.

'I've taken enough now to make a cooking-stove,' groaned Kitty, who
hated being dosed.

'If you'd let me go swimming every night I'd be all right,' added Harry.

'Not another word on that point. I will _not_ let you do it, for you
will get drowned as sure as you try,' said mamma, who was so timid she
had panics the minute her boy was out of sight.

'Aunt Betsey let her boys go, and they never came to grief,' began
Harry.

'Aunt Betsey's ideas and mine differ. Children are not brought up now as
they were in her day,' answered mamma with a superior air.

'I just wish they were. Jolly good times _her_ boys had.'

'Yes, and girls too, playing anything they liked, and not rigged up and
plagued with company,' cried Kitty, with sudden interest.

'What do you mean by that?' asked papa good-naturedly; for somehow his
youth returned to him for a minute, and seemed very pleasant.

The children could not explain very well, but Harry said slowly,--

'If you were to be in our places for a day you'd see what we mean.'

'Wouldn't it be worth your while to try the experiment?' said Aunt
Betsey, with a smile.

Papa and mamma laughed at the idea, but looked sober when aunty added,--

'Why not put yourselves in their places for a day and see how you like
it? I think you would understand the case better than any one could
describe it, and perhaps do both yourselves and the children a lasting
service.'

'Upon my word, that's a droll idea! What do you say to it, mamma?' and
papa looked much amused.

'I am willing to try it if you are, just for the fun of the thing, but I
don't think it will do any good;' and mamma shook her head as if Aunt
Betsey's plan was a wild one.

The children sat quiet, speechless with surprise at this singular
proposal, but as its full richness dawned upon them, they skipped in
their chairs and clapped their hands delightedly.

'How do you propose to carry out this new educational frolic?' asked
papa, beginning to feel some curiosity as to the part he was to play.

'Merely let the children do as they like for one day and have full power
over you. Let them plan your duties and pleasures, order your food, fix
your hours, and punish or reward you as they think proper. You must
promise entire obedience, and keep the agreement till night.'

'Good! good! Oh, won't it be fun!' cried Harry and Kitty, applauding
enthusiastically; while papa and mamma looked rather sober as the plan
was developed before them.

'To-morrow is a holiday for us all, and we might celebrate it by this
funny experiment. It will amuse us and do no harm, at any rate,' added
aunty, quite in love with her new scheme.

'Very well, we will. Come, mamma, let us promise, and see what these
rogues will do for us. Playing father and mother is no joke, mind you;
but you will have an easier time of it than we do, for _we_ shall behave
ourselves,' said papa, with a virtuous expression.

Mamma agreed, and the supper ended merrily, for every one was full of
curiosity as to the success of the new play. Harry and Kitty went to
bed early, that they might be ready for the exciting labors of the next
day. Aunt Betsey paid each a short visit before they slept, and it is
supposed that she laid out the order of performances, and told each what
to do; for the little people would never have thought of so many sly
things if left to themselves.

At seven the next morning, as mamma was in her dressing-room, just
putting on her cool, easy wrapper, in came Kitty with a solemn face,
though her eyes danced with fun, as she said,--

'Careless, untidy girl! Put on a clean dress, do up your hair properly,
and go and practise half an hour before breakfast.'

At first mamma looked as if inclined to refuse, but Kitty was firm; and,
with a sigh, mamma rustled into a stiff, scratchy, French print, took
her hair out of the comfortable net, and braided it carefully up; then,
instead of reading in her arm-chair, she was led to the parlor and set
to learning a hard piece of music.

'Can't I have my early cup of tea and my roll?' she asked.

'Eating between meals is a very bad habit, and I can't allow it,' said
Kitty, in the tone her mother often used to her. 'I shall have a mug of
new milk and a roll, because grown people need more nourishment than
children;' and sitting down, she ate her early lunch with a relish,
while poor mamma played away, feeling quite out of tune herself.

Harry found papa enjoying the last delightful doze that makes bed so
fascinating of a morning. As if half afraid to try the experiment, the
boy slowly approached and gave the sleeper a sudden, hard shake, saying
briskly,--

'Come, come, come, lazy-bones! Get up, get up!'

Papa started as if an earthquake had roused him, and stared at Harry,
astonished for a minute, then he remembered, and upset Harry's gravity
by whining out,--

'Come, you let me alone. It isn't time yet, and I am _so_ tired.'

Harry took the joke, and assuming the stern air of his father on such
occasions, said impressively,--

'You have been called, and now if you are not down in fifteen minutes
you won't have any breakfast. Not a morsel, sir, not a morsel;' and,
coolly pocketing his father's watch, he retired, to giggle all the way
downstairs.

When the breakfast bell rang, mamma hurried into the dining-room,
longing for her tea. But Kitty sat behind the urn, and said gravely,--

'Go back, and enter the room properly. Will you never learn to behave
like a lady?'

Mamma looked impatient at the delay, and having re-entered in her most
elegant manner, sat down, and passed her plate for fresh trout and
muffins.

'No fish or hot bread for you, my dear. Eat your good oatmeal porridge
and milk; that is the proper food for children.'

'Can't I have some tea?' cried mamma, in despair, for without it she
felt quite lost.

'Certainly not. _I_ never was allowed tea when a little girl, and
couldn't think of giving it to you,' said Kitty, filling a large cup for
herself, and sipping the forbidden draught with a relish.

Poor mamma quite groaned at this hard fate, but meekly obeyed, and ate
the detested porridge, understanding Kitty's dislike to it at last.

Harry, sitting in his father's chair, read the paper, and ate everything
he could lay his hands on, with a funny assumption of his father's
morning manner. Aunt Betsey looked on much amused, and now and then
nodded to the children as if she thought things were going nicely.

Breakfast was half over when papa came in, and was about to take Harry's
place when his son said, trying vainly to look grave as he showed the
watch,--

'What did I tell you, sir? You are late again, sir. No breakfast, sir.
I'm sorry, but this habit _must_ be broken up. Not a word; it's your own
fault, and you must bear the penalty.'

'Come, now, that's hard on a fellow! I'm awful hungry. Can't I have just
a bite of something?' asked papa, quite taken aback at this stern
decree.

'I said not a morsel, and I shall keep my word. Go to your morning
duties and let this be a lesson to you.'

Papa cast a look at Aunt Betsey, that was both comic and pathetic, and
departed without a word; but he felt a sudden sympathy with his son, who
had often been sent fasting from the table for some small offence.

Now it was that he appreciated aunty's kind heart, and felt quite fond
of her, for in a few minutes she came to him, as he raked the gravel
walk (Harry's duty every day), and slipping a nice, warm, well-buttered
muffin into his hand, said, in her motherly way,--

'My dear, do try and please your father. He is right about late rising,
but I can't bear to see you starve.'

'Betsey, you are an angel!' and turning his back to the house, papa
bolted the muffin with grateful rapidity, inquiring with a laugh, 'Do
you think those rogues will keep it up in this vigorous style all day?'

'I trust so; it isn't a bit overdone. Hope you like it!' and Aunt Betsey
walked away, looking as if _she_ enjoyed it extremely.

'Now put on your hat and draw baby up and down the avenue for half an
hour. Don't go on the grass, or you will wet your feet; and don't play
with baby, I want her to go to sleep; and don't talk to papa, or he will
neglect his work,' said Kitty, as they rose from table.

Now, it was a warm morning and baby was heavy and the avenue was dull,
and mamma much preferred to stay in the house and sew the trimming on to
a new and pretty dress.

'Must I really? Kitty you are a hard-hearted mamma to make me do it,'
and Mrs. Fairbairn hoped her play-parent would relent.

But she did not, and only answered with a meaning look.

'_I_ have to do it every day, and _you_ don't let me off.'

Mamma said no more, but put on her hat and trundled away with fretful
baby, thinking to find her fellow-sufferer and have a laugh over the
joke. She was disappointed, however, for Harry called papa away to weed
the lettuce-bed, and then shut him up in the study to get his lessons,
while he mounted the pony and trotted away to town to buy a new
fishing-rod and otherwise enjoy himself.

When mamma came in, hot and tired, she was met by Kitty with a bottle in
one hand and a spoon in the other.

'Here is your iron mixture, dear. Now take it like a good girl.'

'I won't!' and mamma looked quite stubborn.

'Then aunty will hold your hands and I shall make you.'

'But I don't like it; I don't need it,' cried mamma.

'Neither do I, but you give it to me all the same. I'm sure you need
strengthening more than I do, you have so many "trials,"' and Kitty
looked very sly as she quoted one of the words often on her mother's
lips.

'You'd better mind, Carrie; it can't hurt you, and you know you promised
entire obedience. Set a good example,' said aunty.

'But I never thought these little chits would do so well. Ugh, how
disagreeable it is!' And mamma took her dose with a wry face, feeling
that Aunt Betsey was siding with the wrong party.

'Now sit down and hem these towels till dinner-time. I have so much to
do I don't know which way to turn,' continued Kitty, much elated with
her success.

Rest of any sort was welcome, so mamma sewed busily till callers came.
They happened to be some little friends of Kitty's, and she went to them
in the parlor, telling mamma to go up to nurse and have her hair brushed
and her dress changed, and then come and see the guests. While she was
away Kitty told the girls the joke they were having, and begged them to
help her carry it out. They agreed, being ready for fun and not at all
afraid of Mrs. Fairbairn. So when she came in they all began to kiss and
cuddle and praise and pass her round as if she was a doll, to her great
discomfort and the great amusement of the little girls.

While this was going on in the drawing-room, Harry was tutoring his
father in the study, and putting that poor gentleman through a course of
questions that nearly drove him distracted; for Harry got out the
hardest books he could find, and selected the most puzzling subjects. A
dusty old history was rummaged out also, and classical researches
followed, in which papa's memory played him false more than once,
calling forth rebukes from his severe young tutor. But he came to open
disgrace over his mathematics, for he had no head for figures, and, not
being a business man, had not troubled himself about the matter; so
Harry, who was in fine practice, utterly routed him in mental arithmetic
by giving him regular puzzlers, and when he got stuck offered no help,
but shook his head and called him a stupid fellow.

The dinner-bell released the exhausted student, and he gladly took his
son's place, looking as if he had been hard at work. He was faint with
hunger, but was helped last, being 'only a boy,' and then checked every
five minutes for eating too fast. Mamma was very meek, and only looked
wistfully at the pie when told in her own words that pastry was bad for
children.

Any attempts at conversation were promptly quenched by the worn-out old
saying, 'Children should be seen, not heard,' while Harry and Kitty
chattered all dinner-time, and enjoyed it to their hearts' content,
especially the frequent pecks at their great children, who, to be even
with them, imitated all their tricks as well as they could.

'Don't whistle at table, papa;' 'keep your hands still mamma;' 'wait
till you are helped, sir;' 'tuck your napkin well in, and don't spill
your soup, Caroline.'

Aunt Betsey laughed till her eyes were full, and they had a jolly time,
though the little people had the best of it, for the others obeyed them
in spite of their dislike to the new rules.

'Now you may play for two hours,' was the gracious order issued as they
rose from table.

Mamma fell upon a sofa exhausted, and papa hurried to read his paper in
the shady garden.

Usually these hours of apparent freedom were spoilt by constant
calls,--not to run, not to play this or that, or frequent calls to do
errands. The children had mercy, however, and left them in peace; which
was a wise move on the whole, for the poor souls found rest so agreeable
they privately resolved to let the children alone in their play-hours.

'Can I go over and see Mr. Hammond?' asked papa, wishing to use up the
last half-hour of his time by a neighbourly call.

'No; I don't like Tommy Hammond, so I don't wish you to play with his
father,' said Harry, with a sly twinkle of the eye, as he turned the
tables on his papa.

Mr. Fairbairn gave a low whistle and retired to the barn, where Harry
followed him, and ordered the man to harness up old Bill.

'Going to drive, sir?' asked papa, respectfully.

'Don't ask questions,' was all the answer he got.

Old Bill was put into the best buggy and driven to the hall door. Papa
followed, and mamma sprang up from her nap, ready for her afternoon
drive.

'Can't I go?' she asked, as Kitty came down in her new hat and gloves.

'No; there isn't room.'

'Why not have the carryall, and let us go, too, we like it so much,'
said papa, in the pleading tone Harry often used.

Kitty was about to consent, for she loved mamma, and found it hard to
cross her so. But Harry was made of sterner stuff; his wrongs still
burned within him, and he said impatiently--

'We can't be troubled with you. The buggy is nicest and lightest, and we
want to talk over our affairs. You, my son, can help John turn the hay
on the lawn, and Caroline can amuse baby, or help Jane with the
preserves. Little girls should be domestic.'

'Oh, thunder!' growled papa.

'Aunt Betsey taught you that speech, you saucy boy,' cried mamma, as the
children drove off in high glee, leaving their parents to the
distasteful tasks set them.

Mrs. Fairbairn wanted to read, but baby was fretful, and there was no
Kitty to turn him over to, so she spent her afternoon amusing the small
tyrant, while papa made hay in the sun and didn't like it.

Just at tea-time the children came home, full of the charms of their
drive, but did not take the trouble to tell much about it to the
stay-at-home people. Bread and milk was all they allowed their victims,
while they revelled in marmalade and cake, fruit and tea.

'I expect company this evening, but I don't wish you to sit up,
Caroline; you are too young, and late hours are bad for your eyes. Go to
bed, and don't forget to brush your hair and teeth well, five minutes
for each; cold cream your hands, fold your ribbons, hang up your
clothes, put out your boots to be cleaned, and put in the mosquito bars;
I will come and take away the light when I am dressed.'

Kitty delivered this dread command with effect, for she had heard and
cried over it too often not to have it quite by heart.

'But I can't go to bed at half-past seven o'clock of a summer night! I'm
not sleepy, and this is just the pleasantest time of the whole day,'
said mamma, thinking her bargain a hard one.

'Go up directly, my daughter, and don't discuss the matter; I know what
is best for you,' and Kitty sent social, wide-awake mamma to bed, there
to lie thinking soberly till Mrs. Kit came for the lamp.

'Have you had a happy day, love?' she asked, bending over the pillow, as
her mother used to do.

'No, ma'am.'

'Then it was your own fault, my child. Obey your parents in all things,
and you will be both good and happy.'

'That depends'--began mamma, but stopped short, remembering that
to-morrow she would be on the other side, and anything she might say now
would be quoted against her.

But Kitty understood, and her heart melted as she hugged her mother and
said in her own caressing way--

'Poor little mamma! did she have a hard time? and didn't she like being
a good girl and minding her parents?'

Mamma laughed also, and held Kitty close, but all she said was--

'Good-night, dear; don't be troubled: it will be all right to-morrow.'

'I hope so,' and with a hearty kiss, Kitty went thoughtfully downstairs
to meet several little friends whom she had asked to spend the evening
with her.

As the ladies left the room, papa leaned back and prepared to smoke a
cigar, feeling that he needed the comfort of it after this trying day.
But Harry was down upon him at once.

'A very bad habit--can't allow it. Throw that dirty thing away, and go
and get your Latin lesson for to-morrow. The study is quiet, and we want
this room.'

'But I am tired. I can't study at night. Let me off till to-morrow,
please, sir!' begged papa, who had not looked at Latin since he left
school.

'Not a word, sir! I shall listen to no excuses, and shall _not_ let you
neglect your education on any account,' and Harry slapped the table _à
la_ papa in the most impressive manner.

Mr. Fairbairn went away into the dull study and made believe do his
lesson, but he really smoked and meditated.

The young folks had a grand revel, and kept it up till ten o'clock,
while mamma lay awake, longing to go down and see what they were about,
and papa shortly fell asleep, quite exhausted by the society of a Latin
Grammar.

'Idle boy, is this the way you study?' said Harry, audaciously tweaking
him by the ear.

'No, it's the way you do;' and feeling that his day of bondage was over,
papa cast off his allegiance, tucked a child under each arm, and marched
upstairs with them, kicking and screaming. Setting them down at the
nursery door, he said, shaking his finger at them in an awful manner,--

'Wait a bit, you rascals, and see what you will get to-morrow.'

With this dark threat he vanished into his own room, and a minute after
a great burst of laughter set their fears at rest.

'It was a fair bargain, so I'm not afraid,' said Harry stoutly.

'He kissed us good-night though he did glower at us, so I guess it was
only fun,' added Kitty.

'Hasn't it been a funny day?' asked Harry.

'Don't think I quite like it, everything is so turned round,' said
Kitty.

'Guess _they_ didn't like it very well. Hear 'em talking in there;' and
Harry held up his finger, for a steady murmur of conversation had
followed the laughter in papa and mamma's room.

'I wonder if our joke will do any good?' said Kitty thoughtfully.

'Wait and see,' answered Aunt Betsey, popping her night-capped head out
of her room with a nod and a smile that sent them to bed full of hope
for the future.




_DANDELION._


Down by the sea lived Ben the fisherman, with his wife, and little son,
who was called Dandelion, because he wore yellow pinafores, and had
curly, yellow hair, that covered his head with a golden fuzz. A very
happy family, for Ben was kind and industrious, Hetty, his wife, a
cheerful, busy creature, and Dandelion the jolliest three-year-old baby
who ever made sand-pies and paddled on the beach.

But one day a great trouble came to them. Ben and his fellow-fishermen
sailed blithely away as usual, and Hetty watched the fleet of
white-winged boats out of the bay, thinking how pretty they looked with
the sunshine on them; while Dandelion stood clapping his chubby hands,
and saying, as he always did, 'Daddy tummin' soon.' But Daddy did not
come soon that time; for a great storm arose, and when some of the boats
came scudding home at nightfall, Ben's was not among them. All night the
gale raged, and in the morning, Ben's boat lay empty and broken on the
shore. His mates shook their heads when they saw the wreck, and drew
their rough hands over their eyes; for Ben was a good seaman, and they
knew he never would desert his boat alive. They looked for him far and
wide, but could hear nothing of him, and felt sure that he had perished
in the storm. They tried to comfort poor Hetty, but she would not be
comforted. Her heart seemed broken; and if it had not been for her baby,
her neighbours feared that she would have gone to join Ben in his grave
under the sea. Dandelion didn't understand why every one was so sad, and
why his father stayed away so long; but he never lost his cheerfulness,
never gave up hoping, or stopped saying, with a contented smile, 'Daddy
tummin' soon.' The sunshiny little face was Hetty's only comfort. The
sight of the fuzzy yellow head, bobbing round the house, alone made it
endurable; and the touch of the loving baby hands kept her from the
despair which made her long to end her sorrow in the sea.

People don't believe in fairies now-a-days; nevertheless, good spirits
still exist, and help us in our times of trouble, better even than the
little people we used to read about. One of these household spirits is
called Love, and it took the shape of Dandelion to comfort poor Hetty.
Another is called Labor: a beautiful, happy spirit this is, and it did
its part so well that there was little time for bitter thoughts or vain
regrets; for Hetty's spinning-wheel must go, in order to earn bread for
Dandelion, whose mouth was always ready for food, like a hungry bird's.
Busily hummed the wheel: and, as it flew, it seemed to catch an echo of
the baby's cheerful song, saying, over and over, 'Daddy tummin' soon,'
till Hetty stopped crying as she worked, and listened to the cheerful
whirr. 'Yes, I shall see my good Ben again, if I wait patiently. Baby
takes comfort in saying that, and I will, too; though the poor dear will
get tired of it soon,' she said.

But Dandelion didn't get tired. He firmly believed what he said, and
nothing could change his mind. He had been much troubled at seeing the
boat laid up on the beach all broken and dismantled, but his little
mind couldn't take in the idea of shipwreck and death; so, after
thinking it over, he decided that Daddy was waiting somewhere for a new
boat to be sent to bring him home. This idea was so strong that the
child gathered together his store of toy-boats,--for he had many, as
they were his favourite plaything,--and launched them, one after
another, telling them to find his father, and bring him home.

As Dandelion was not allowed to play on the beach, except at low tide,
the little boats sailed safely away on the receding waves, and the child
was sure that some of them would get safely into the distant port where
Daddy was waiting. All the boats were launched at last, all sailed
bravely away; but none came back, and little Dandy was much
disappointed. He babbled about it to himself; told the peeps and the
horse-shoes, the snails and the lobsters, of his trouble; begged the
gulls to fly away and find Daddy; and every windy night when the sea
dashed on the shore and the shutters rattled, he would want the lamp put
in the window, as it used to be when they expected Ben, and tried to
make home look cheerful, even before he got there.

Hetty used to humour the child, though it made her heart ache to know
that the light shone in vain. At such times Dandy would prance about the
room in his little shirt, and talk about Daddy as happily as if long
months had not passed without bringing him back. When fairly in his big,
old-fashioned cradle, the boy would lie, looking more like a dandelion
than ever, in his yellow flannel night-gown, playing with his toes, or
rocking himself to and fro, calling the cradle his boat, and blithely
telling his mother that he was sailing 'far way to find Daddy.' When
tired of play, he lay still and asked her to sing to him. She had no
heart for the gay old sea-songs she used to sing for lullabies; so she
sung hymns in her soft, motherly voice, till the blue eyes closed and
the golden head lay still, looking so pretty, with the circle of bright
hair above the rosy face. 'My little saint,' Hetty called him; and
though she often wept sadly as she watched him, the bitterness of her
grief passed away, and a patient hope came to her; for the child's firm
faith impressed her deeply, the pious music of the sweet old hymns
comforted her sore heart, and daily labor kept her cheerful in spite of
herself. The neighbours wondered at the change that came over her, but
she could not explain it; and no one knew that the three good spirits
called Love, Labor, and Hope, were working their pleasant miracles.

Six long months went by, and no one ever thought of seeing Ben
again,--no one but his little son, who still watched for him here, and
his wife, who waited to meet him hereafter.

One bright spring day something happened. The house was as tidy as ever;
the wheel hummed briskly as Hetty sung softly to herself with a cheerful
face, though there were white hairs among the brown, and her eyes had a
thoughtful, absent look at times. Dandelion, more chubby and cheery than
ever, sat at her feet, with the sunshine making a golden glory of his
yellow hair, as he tried his new boat in the tub of water his mother
kept for her little sailor, or tugged away with his fat fingers at a big
needle which he was trying to pull through a bit of cloth intended for a
sail. The faithful little soul had not forgotten his father, but had
come to the conclusion that the reason his boats never prospered was
because they hadn't large enough sails; so he was intent on rigging a
new boat lately given him, with a sail that could not fail to waft Ben
safely home. With his mouth puckered up, his downy eyebrows knit, and
both hands pulling at the big needle, he was so wrapped in his work that
he did not mind the stopping of the wheel when Hetty fell into a
reverie, thinking of the happy time when she and Ben should meet again.
Sitting so, neither heard a step come softly over the sand; neither saw
an eager, brown face peer in at the door; and neither knew for a minute,
that Ben was watching them, with a love and longing in his heart that
made him tremble like a woman.

Dandelion saw him first; for, as he pulled the thread through with a
triumphant jerk, the small sailmaker lost his balance, tumbled over,
and lay staring up at the tall man with his blue eyes so wide open, they
looked as if they would never shut again. All of a sudden, he shouted,
with a joyful shout, 'Daddy's tummin'!' and the next instant, vanished,
ship and all, in the arms of the man who wore the rough jacket. Over
went the spinning-wheel, as Hetty vanished likewise; and for a time
there was nothing but sobbing and kissing, clinging, and thanking Heaven
for its kindness to them. When they grew quieter, and Ben got into his
old chair, with his wife on one knee and his boy on the other, he told
them how he was wrecked in the gale, picked up by an outward-bound ship,
and only able to get back after months of sickness and delay.

'My boaty fetched him,' said Dandelion, feeling that every thing had
turned out just as he expected.

'So it did, my precious; leastways, your faith helped, I haven't a
doubt,' cried Hetty, hugging the curly headed prophet close, as she told
Ben all that had happened.

Ben didn't say much, but a few great tears rolled down the rough blue
jacket, as he looked from the queer sail with its two big stitches to
the little son, whose love, he firmly believed, had kept him safe
through many dangers and brought him home at last.

When the fine new boat was built, no one thought it strange that Ben
named it 'Dandelion;' no one laughed at the little sail which always
hung over the fire-place in the small house: and long years after, when
Ben was an old man, and sat by the door with his grand-children on his
knee, the story which always pleased them best was that which ended with
the funny words, 'Daddy tummin' soon.'




_MADAM CLUCK AND HER FAMILY._


There never was a prouder mamma than Madam Cluck when she led forth her
family of eight downy little chicks. Chanticleer, Strut, Snowball,
Speckle, Peep, Peck, Downy, and Blot were their names; and no sooner
were they out of the shell than they began to chirp and scratch as gaily
as if the big world in which they suddenly found themselves was made for
their especial benefit. It was a fine brood; but poor Madam Cluck had
bad luck with her chicks, for they were her first, and she didn't know
how to manage them. Old Aunt Cockletop told her that she didn't, and
predicted that 'those poor dears would come to bad ends.'

Aunt Cockletop was right, as you will see, when I have told the sad
history of this unfortunate family. The tragedy began with Chanty, who
was the boldest little cockadoodle who ever tried to crow. Before he had
a feather to his bit of a tail, Chanty began to fight, and soon was
known as the most quarrelsome chick in the farm-yard. Having pecked his
brothers and sisters, he tried to do the same to his playmates, the
ducklings, goslings, and young turkeys, and was so disagreeable that all
the fowls hated him. One day, a pair of bantams arrived,--pretty little
white birds, with red crests and nice yellow feet. Chanty thought he
could beat Mr. Bantam easily, he was so small, and invited him to fight.
Mr. B. declined. Then Chanty called him a coward, and gave Mrs. B. a
peck, which so enraged her spouse that he flew at Chanty like a
gamecock, and a dreadful fight followed, which ended in Chanty's utter
defeat, for he died from his wounds.

Downy and Snowball soon followed; for the two sweet little things would
swing on the burdock-leaves that grew over the brook. Sitting side by
side, the plump sisters were placidly swaying up and down over the clear
brown water rippling below, when--ah! sad to relate--the stem broke, and
down went leaf, chickens and all, to a watery death.

'I'm the most unlucky hen ever hatched!' groaned poor Madam Cluck; and
it did seem so, for the very next week, Speckle, the best and prettiest
of the brood, went to walk with Aunt Cockletop, 'grasshoppering' they
called it, in the great field across the road. What a nice time Speckle
did have, to be sure; for the grasshoppers were lively and fat, and aunt
was in an unusually amiable mood.

'Never run away from anything, but face danger and conquer it, like a
brave chick,' said the old biddy, as she went clucking through the
grass, with her gray turban wagging in the wind. Speckle had hopped away
from a toad with a startled chirp, which caused aunt to utter that
remark. The words had hardly left her beak, when a shadow above made her
look up, give one loud croak of alarm, and then scuttle away, as fast as
legs and wings could carry her.

Little Speckle, remembering the advice, and unconscious of the danger,
stood her ground as a great hawk came circling nearer and nearer, till,
with a sudden dart he pounced on the poor chicken, and bore it away
chirping dismally,

'Aunty told me not to run. Oh, dear! oh, dear! What shall I do?'

It was a dreadful blow to Mrs. Cluck; and Aunt Cockletop didn't show
herself for a whole day after that story was known, for every fowl in
the yard twitted her with the difference between her preaching and her
practice.

Strut, the other son, was the vainest chick ever seen; and the great aim
of his life was to crow louder than any other cock in the neighbourhood.
He was at it from morning till night, and everyone was tired to death of
hearing his shrill, small voice making funny attempts to produce hoarse
little crows, as he sat on the wall and stretched his yellow neck, till
his throat quite ached with the effort.

'Ah! if I could only fly to the highest beam in the barn, and give a
splendid crow that everyone could hear, I should be perfectly happy,'
said this silly little fowl, as he stared up at the loft where the old
cock often sat.

So he tried every day to fly and crow, and at last managed to get up;
then how he did strut and rustle his feathers, while his playmates sat
below and watched him.

'You'll fall and get hurt,' said his sister Blot.

'Hold your tongue, you ugly little thing, and don't talk to me. I'm
going to crow, and can't be interrupted by any silly bit of a hen. Be
quiet, down there, and hear if I can't do it as well as daddy.'

The chicks stopped scratching and peeping, and sat in a row to hear
Strut crow. Perching himself on the beam, he tried his best, but only a
droll 'cock-a-doodle-doo' came of it, and all the chicks laughed. That
made Strut mad, and he resolved to crow, even if he killed himself doing
it. He gave an angry cluck, flapped his wings, and tried again. Alas,
alas, for poor Strut! he leaned so far forward in his frantic effort to
get a big crow out, that he toppled over and fell bump on the hard
barn-floor, killing himself instantly.

For some time after this, Mrs. Cluck kept her three remaining little
ones close to her side, watching over them with maternal care, till they
were heartily tired of her anxious cluckings. Peep and Peck were always
together, being very fond of one another. Peep was a most inquisitive
chicken, poking her head into every nook and corner, and never satisfied
till she had seen all there was to see. Peck was a glutton, eating
everything she could find, and often making herself ill by gobbling too
fast, and forgetting to eat a little gravel to help digest her food.

'Don't go out of the barn, children. I'm going to lay an egg, and can't
look after you just now,' said their mother one day.

'Yes, ma'am,' chirped the chickens; and then as she went rustling into
the hay-mow, they began to run about and enjoy themselves with all their
might. Peep found a little hole into the meal-room, and slipped in, full
of joy at the sight of the bags, boxes, and bins. 'I'll eat all I want,
and then I'll call Peck,' she said; and having taken a taste of every
thing, she was about to leave, when she heard the stableman coming, and
in her fright couldn't find the hole, so flew into the meal-bin and hid
herself. Sam never saw her, but shut down the cover of the bin as he
passed, and left poor Peep to die. No one knew what had become of her
till some days later, when she was found dead in the meal, with her poor
little claws sticking straight up as if imploring help. Peck meanwhile
got into mischief also; for, in her hunt for something good to eat, she
strayed into the sheep-shed, and finding some salt, ate as much as she
liked, not knowing that salt is bad for hens. Having taken all she
wanted, she ran back to the barn, and was innocently catching gnats when
her mamma came out of the hay-mow with a loud. 'Cut-cut-cut-ca-dar-cut!'

'Where is Peep?' asked Mrs. Cluck.

'Don't know, ma. She'--there Peck stopped suddenly, rolled up her eyes,
and began to stagger about as if she was tipsy.

'Mercy on us! What's the matter with the chick?' cried Mrs. Cluck, in
great alarm.

'Fits, ma'am,' answered Doctor Drake, who just then waddled by.

'Oh! what can I do?' screamed the distracted hen.

'Nothing, ma'am; it's fatal.' And the doctor waddled on to visit Dame
Partlet's son, who was ill of the pip.

'My child, my child! don't flap and stagger so! Let me hold you! Taste
this mint-leaf! Have a drop of water! What shall I do?'

As poor Mrs. Cluck sighed and sobbed, her unhappy child went scuffling
about on her back, gasping and rolling up her eyes in great anguish, for
she had eaten too much of the fatal salt, and there was no help for her.
When all was over they buried the dead chicken under a currant bush,
covered the little grave with chickweed, and the bereaved parent wore a
black string round her leg for a month.

Blot, 'the last of that bright band,' needed no mourning for she was as
black as a crow. This was the reason why her mother never had loved her
as much as she did the others, who were all white, gray, or yellow.
Poor little Blot had been much neglected by every one; but now her
lonely mamma discovered how good and affectionate a chicken she was, for
Blot was a great comfort to her, never running away or disobeying in any
way, but always close to her side, ready to creep under her wing, or
bring her a plump bug when the poor biddy's appetite failed her. They
were very happy together till Thanksgiving drew near, when a dreadful
pestilence seemed to sweep through the farm-yard; for turkeys, hens,
ducks, and geese fell a prey to it, and were seen by their surviving
relatives featherless, pale, and stiff, borne away to some unknown place
whence no fowl returned. Blot was waked one night by a great cackling
and fluttering in the hen-house, and peeping down from her perch saw a
great hand glide along the roost, clutch her beloved mother by the leg,
and pull her off, screaming dolefully, 'Good-by, good-by, my darling
child!'

Aunt Cockletop pecked and croaked fiercely; but, tough as she was, the
old biddy did not escape, and many another amiable hen and gallant
cockadoodle fell a victim to that mysterious hand. In the morning few
remained, and Blot felt that she was a forlorn orphan, a thought which
caused her to sit with her head under her wing for several hours,
brooding over her sad lot, and longing to join her family in some safe
and happy land, where fowls live in peace. She had her wish very soon,
for one day, when the first snowflakes began to flutter out of the cold
gray sky, Blot saw a little kitten mewing pitifully as it sat under the
fence.

'What is the matter, dear?' asked kind Blot.

'I'm lost, and I can't find my way home,' answered the kitten, shivering
with cold. 'I live at the red farm-house over the hill, only I don't
know which road to take.'

'I'll show you. Come at once, for night is coming on, and the snow will
soon be too deep for us,' said Blot.

So away they went, as fast as their small legs could carry them; but it
was a long way, and dusk came on before the red farm-house appeared.

'Now I'm safe; thank you very much. Won't you come in, and stay all
night? My mother will be glad to see you,' said the kit rubbing her soft
white face against Blot's little black breast.

'It's against the rule to stay out all night, and I promised to be in
early; so, good-by, dear.' And off trotted Blot along the snowy road,
hoping to get home before the hen-house door was shut. Faster and faster
fell the snow darker and darker grew the night, and colder and colder
became poor Blot's little feet as she waded through the drifts. The
firelight was shining out into the gloom, as the half-frozen chicken
came into the yard, to find all doors shut, and no shelter left for her
but the bough of a leafless tree. Too stiff and weak to fly up, she
crept as close as possible to the bright glow which shone across the
door-step, and with a shiver put her little head under her wing, trying
to forget hunger, weariness, and the bitter cold, and wait patiently for
morning. But when morning came, little Blot lay frozen stiff under a
coverlet of snow: and the tender-hearted children sighed as they dug a
grave for the last of the unfortunate family of the Clucks.




_A CURIOUS CALL._


I have often wondered what the various statues standing about the city
think of all day, and what criticisms they would make upon us and our
doings, if they could speak. I frequently stop and stare at them,
wondering if they don't feel lonely; if they wouldn't be glad of a nod
as we go by; and I always long to offer my umbrella to shield their
uncovered heads on a rainy day, especially to good Ben Franklin, when
the snow lies white on his benevolent forehead. I was always fond of
this old gentleman; and one of my favourite stories when a little girl,
was that of his early life, and the time when he was so poor he walked
about Philadelphia with a roll of bread under each arm, eating a third
as he went. I never pass without giving him a respectful look, and
wishing he could know how grateful I am for all he had done in the
printing line; for, without types and presses, where would the books be?

Well, I never imagined that he understood why the tall woman in the big
bonnet stared at him; but he did, and he liked it, and managed to let me
know it in a very curious manner, as you shall hear.

As I look out, the first thing I see is the great gilt eagle on the
City-Hall dome. There he sits, with open wings, all day long, looking
down on the people, who must appear like ants scampering busily to and
fro about an ant-hill. The sun shines on him splendidly in the morning;
the gay flag waves and rustles in the wind above him sometimes; and the
moonlight turns him to silver when she comes glittering up the sky.
When it rains he never shakes his feathers; snow beats on him without
disturbing his stately repose; and he never puts his head under his wing
at night, but keeps guard in darkness as in day, like a faithful
sentinel. I like the big, lonely bird, call him my particular fowl, and
often wish he'd turn his head and speak to me. One night he did actually
do it, or seemed to; for I've never been able to decide whether I
dreamed what I'm going to tell you, or whether it really happened.

It was a stormy night! and, as I drew down my curtain, I said to myself,
after peering through the driving snow to catch a glimpse of my
neighbour, 'Poor Goldy! he'll have a rough time of it. I hope this
northeaster won't blow him off his perch.' Then I sat down by my fire,
took my knitting, and began to meditate. I'm sure I didn't fall asleep;
but I can't prove it, so we'll say no more about it. All at once there
came a tap at my door, as I thought; and I said 'Come in,' just as Mr.
Poe did when that unpleasant raven paid him a call. No one came, so I
went to see who it was. Not a sign of a human soul in the long hall,
only little Jessie, the poodle, asleep on her mat. Down I sat; but in a
minute the tap came again; this time so loud that I knew it was at the
window, and went to open it, thinking that one of my doves wanted to
come in perhaps. Up went the sash, and in bounced something so big and
so bright that it dazzled and scared me.

'Don't be frightened, ma'am; it's only me,' said a hoarse voice. So I
collected my wits, rubbed my eyes, and looked at my visitor. It was the
gold eagle off the City Hall! I don't expect to be believed; but I wish
you'd been here to see, for I give you my word, it was a sight to
behold. How he ever got in at such a small window I can't tell; but
there he was, strutting majestically up and down the room, his golden
plumage rustling, and his keen eyes flashing as he walked. I really
didn't know what to do. I couldn't imagine what he came for; I had my
doubts about the propriety of offering him a chair; and he was so much
bigger than I expected that I was afraid he might fly away with me, as
the roc did with Sindbad: so I did nothing but sidle to the door, ready
to whisk out, if my strange guest appeared to be peckishly inclined. My
respectful silence seemed to suit him; for, after a turn or two, he
paused, nodded gravely, and said affably, 'Good-evening, ma'am. I
stepped over to bring you old Ben's respects, and to see how you were
getting on.'

'I'm very much obliged, sir. May I inquire who Mr. Old-Ben is? I'm
afraid I haven't the honour of his acquaintance.'

'Yes, you have; it's Ben Franklin, of City-Hall yard. You know him; and
he wished me to thank you for your interest in him.'

'Dear me! how very odd! Will you sit down, sir?'

'Never sit! I'll perch here;' and the great fowl took his accustomed
attitude just in front of the fire, looking so very splendid that I
couldn't keep my eyes off of him.

'Ah! you often do that. Never mind; I rather like it,' said the eagle,
graciously, as he turned his brilliant eye upon me. I was rather
abashed; but being very curious, I ventured to ask a few questions, as
he seemed in a friendly mood.

'Being a woman, sir, I'm naturally of an inquiring turn; and I must
confess that I have a strong desire to know how it happens that you
take your walks abroad, when you are supposed to be permanently engaged
at home?'

He shrugged his shoulders, and actually winked at me, as he replied,
'That's all people know of what goes on under, or rather over, their
noses. Bless you, ma'am! I leave my roost every night, and enjoy myself
in all sorts of larks. Excuse the expression; but, being ornithological,
it is more proper for me than for some people who use it.'

'What a gay old bird!' thought I, feeling quite at home after that.
'Please tell me what you do, when the shades of evening prevail, and you
go out for a frolic?'

'I am a gentleman; therefore I behave myself,' returned the eagle; with
a stately air. 'I must confess, I smoke a great deal: but that's not my
fault, it's the fault of the chimneys. They keep it up all day, and I
have to take it; just as you poor ladies have to take cigar smoke,
whether you like it or not. My amusements are of a wholesome kind. I
usually begin by taking a long flight down the harbour, for a look at
the lighthouses, the islands, the shipping, and the sea. My friends, the
gulls, bring their reports to me; for they are the harbour-police, and I
take notes of their doings. The school-ship is an object of interest to
me, and I often perch on the mast-head, to see how the lads are getting
on. Then I take a turn over the city, gossip with the weathercocks, pay
my compliments to the bells, inspect the fire-alarm, and pick up
information by listening at the telegraph wires. People often talk about
"a little bird" who spreads news; but they don't know how that figure of
speech originated. It is the sparrows sitting on the wires, who receive
the electric shock, and, being hollow-boned, the news go straight to
their heads; they then fly about, chirping it on the housetops, and the
air carries it everywhere. That's the way rumours rise and news spread.'

'If you'll allow, I'll make a note of that interesting fact,' said I,
wondering if I might believe him. He appeared to fall into a reverie
while I jotted down the sparrow story, and it occurred to me that
perhaps I ought to offer my distinguished guest some refreshment; but,
when I modestly alluded to it, he said, with an aldermanic air, 'No,
thank you; I've just dined at the Parker House.'

Now, I really could _not_ swallow that; and so plainly betrayed my
incredulity, that the eagle explained. 'The savoury smells which rise to
my nostrils from that excellent hotel, with an occasional sniff from the
Tremont, are quite sufficient to satisfy my appetite; for, having no
stomach, I don't need much food, and I drink nothing but water.'

'I wish others would follow your example in that latter habit,' said I,
respectfully, for I was beginning to see that there was something in my
bird, though he _was_ hollow. 'Will you allow me to ask if the other
statues in the city fly by night?'

'They promenade in the parks; and occasionally have social gatherings,
when they discuss politics, education, medicine, or any of the subjects
in which they are interested. Ah! we have grand times when you are all
asleep. It quite repays me for being obliged to make an owl of myself.'

'Do the statues come from the shops to these parties?' I asked,
resolving to take a late walk the next moonlight night.

'Sometimes; but they get lazy and delicate, living in close, warm
places. We laugh at cold and bad weather, and are so strong and hearty
that I shouldn't be surprised if I saw Webster and Everett flying round
the Common on the new-fashioned velocipedes, for they believed in
exercise. Goethe and Schiller often step over from De Vries's window, to
flirt with the goddesses, who come down from their niches on
Horticultural Hall. Nice, robust young women are Pomona and Flora. If
your niminy-piminy girls could see them run, they would stop tilting
through the streets, and learn that the true Grecian Bend is the line of
beauty always found in straight shoulders, well-opened chest, and an
upright figure, firmly planted on active feet.'

'In your rambles don't you find a great deal of misery?' said I, to
change the subject, for he was evidently old-fashioned in his notions.

'Many sad sights!' And he shook his head with a sigh; then added,
briskly, 'But there is a deal of charity in our city, and it does its
work beautifully. By the by, I heard of a very sweet charity the other
day,--a church whose Sunday school is open to all the poor children who
will come; and there, in pleasant rooms, with books, pictures, kindly
teachers, and a fatherly minister to welcome them, the poor little
creatures find refreshment for their hungry souls. I like that; it's a
lovely illustration of the text, "Suffer little children to come unto
me;" and _I_ call it practical Christianity.'

He did like it, my benevolent old bird; for he rustled his great wings,
as if he wanted to clap them, if there had only been room; and every
feather shone as if a clearer light than that of my little fire had
fallen on it as he spoke.

'You are a literary woman, hey?' he said suddenly, as if he'd got a new
idea, and was going to pounce upon me with it.

'Ahem! I do a little in that line,' I answered, with a modest cough.

'Then tell people about that place; write some stories for the children;
go and help teach them; do something, and make others do what they can
to increase the sabbath sunshine that brightens one day in the week for
the poor babies who live in shady places.'

'I should be glad to do my best; and, if I'd known before'--I began.

'You might have known, if you'd looked about you. People are so wrapt up
in their own affairs they don't do half they might. Now, then, hand me a
bit of paper, and I'll give you the address, so you won't have any
excuse for forgetting what I tell you.'

'Mercy on us; what will he do next?' thought I, as he tweaked a feather
out of his breast, gave the nib a peck, and then coolly wrote these
words on the card I handed him: '_Church of the Disciples. Knock and it
shall be opened!_' There it was, in letters of gold; and, while I looked
at it, feeling reproached that I hadn't known it sooner, my friend,--he
didn't seem a stranger any more,--said in a business-like tone, as he
put back his pen, 'Now I must be off. Old Ben reads an article on the
"Abuses of the Press at the present day," and I must be there to
report.'

'It must be very interesting. I suppose you don't allow mortals at your
meetings?' said I, burning to go, in spite of the storm.

'No, ma'am. We meet on the Common; and, in the present state of the
weather, I don't think flesh and blood would stand it. Bronze, marble,
and wood are sterner stuff, and can defy the elements.'

'Good evening; pray, call again,' I said, hospitably.

'I will; your eyrie suits me: but don't expect me to call in the
daytime. I'm on duty then, and can't take my eye off my charge. The city
needs a deal of watching, my dear. Bless me! it's striking eight. Your
watch is seven minutes slow by the Old South. Good-night, good-night!'

And as I opened the window, the great bird soared away like a flash of
light through the storm, leaving me so astonished at the whole
performance that I haven't got over it yet.




_TILLY'S CHRISTMAS._


'I'm so glad to-morrow is Christmas, because I'm going to have lots of
presents.'

'So am I glad, though I don't expect any presents but a pair of
mittens.'

'And so am I; but I shan't have any presents at all.'

As the three little girls trudged home from school they said these
things, and as Tilly spoke, both the others looked at her with pity and
some surprise, for she spoke cheerfully, and they wondered how she could
be happy when she was so poor she could have no presents on Christmas.

'Don't you wish you could find a purse full of money right here in the
path?' said Kate, the child who was going to have 'lots of presents.'

'Oh, don't I, if I could keep it honestly!' and Tilly's eyes shone at
the very thought.

'What would you buy?' asked Bessy, rubbing her cold hands, and longing
for her mittens.

'I'd buy a pair of large, warm blankets, a load of wood, a shawl for
mother, and a pair of shoes for me; and if there was enough left, I'd
give Bessy a new hat, and then she needn't wear Ben's old felt one,'
answered Tilly.

The girls laughed at that; but Bessy pulled the funny hat over her ears,
and said she was much obliged but she'd rather have candy.

'Let's look, and maybe we _can_ find a purse. People are always going
about with money at Christmas time, and some one may lose it here,' said
Kate.

So, as they went along the snowy road, they looked about them, half in
earnest, half in fun. Suddenly Tilly sprang forward, exclaiming,--

'I see it! I've found it!'

The others followed, but all stopped disappointed; for it wasn't a
purse, it was only a little bird. It lay upon the snow with its wings
spread and feebly fluttering, as if too weak to fly. Its little feet
were benumbed with cold; its once bright eyes were dull with pain, and
instead of a blithe song, it could only utter a faint chirp, now and
then, as if crying for help.

'Nothing but a stupid old robin; how provoking!' cried Kate, sitting
down to rest.

'I shan't touch it. I found one once, and took care of it, and the
ungrateful thing flew away the minute it was well,' said Bessy, creeping
under Kate's shawl, and putting her hands under her chin to warm them.

'Poor little birdie! How pitiful he looks, and how glad he must be to
see some one coming to help him! I'll take him up gently, and carry him
home to mother. Don't be frightened, dear, I'm your friend;' and Tilly
knelt down in the snow, stretching her hand to the bird, with the
tenderest pity in her face.

Kate and Bessy laughed.

'Don't stop for that thing; it's getting late and cold: let's go on and
look for the purse,' they said moving away.

'You wouldn't leave it to die!' cried Tilly. 'I'd rather have the bird
than the money, so I shan't look any more. The purse wouldn't be mine,
and I should only be tempted to keep it; but this poor thing will thank
and love me, and I'm _so_ glad I came in time.'

Gently lifting the bird, Tilly felt its tiny cold claws cling to her
hand, and saw its dim eyes brighten as it nestled down with a grateful
chirp.

'Now I've got a Christmas present after all,' she said, smiling, as they
walked on. 'I always wanted a bird, and this one will be such a pretty
pet for me.'

'He'll fly away the first chance he gets, and die anyhow; so you'd
better not waste your time over him,' said Bessy.

'He can't pay you for taking care of him, and my mother says it isn't
worth while to help folks that can't help us,' added Kate.

'My mother says, "Do as you'd be done by;" and I'm sure I'd like any one
to help me if I was dying of cold and hunger. "Love your neighbour as
yourself," is another of her sayings. This bird is my little neighbour,
and I'll love him and care for him, as I often wish our rich neighbour
would love and care for us,' answered Tilly, breathing her warm breath
over the benumbed bird, who looked up at her with confiding eyes, quick
to feel and know a friend.

'What a funny girl you are,' said Kate; 'caring for that silly bird, and
talking about loving your neighbour in that sober way. Mr. King don't
care a bit for you, and never will, though he knows how poor you are; so
I don't think your plan amounts to much.'

'I believe it, though; and shall do my part, any way. Good-night. I hope
you'll have a merry Christmas, and lots of pretty things,' answered
Tilly, as they parted.

Her eyes were full, and she felt so poor as she went on alone toward the
little old house where she lived. It would have been so pleasant to know
that she was going to have some of the pretty things all children love
to find in their full stockings on Christmas morning. And pleasanter
still to have been able to give her mother something nice. So many
comforts were needed, and there was no hope of getting them; for they
could barely get food and fire.

'Never mind, birdie, we'll make the best of what we have, and be merry
in spite of every thing. _You_ shall have a happy Christmas, any way;
and I know God won't forget us if every one else does.'

She stopped a minute to wipe her eyes, and lean her cheek against the
bird's soft breast, finding great comfort in the little creature, though
it could only love her, nothing more.

'See, mother, what a nice present I've found,' she cried, going in with
a cheery face that was like sunshine in the dark room.

'I'm glad of that, dearie; for I haven't been able to get my little girl
anything but a rosy apple. Poor bird! Give it some of your warm bread
and milk.'

'Why, mother, what a big bowlful! I'm afraid you gave me all the milk,'
said Tilly, smiling over the nice, steaming supper that stood ready for
her.

'I've had plenty, dear. Sit down and dry your wet feet, and put the bird
in my basket on this warm flannel.'

Tilly peeped into the closet and saw nothing there but dry bread.

'Mother's given me all the milk, and is going without her tea, 'cause
she knows I'm hungry. Now I'll surprise her, and she shall have a good
supper too. She is going to split wood, and I'll fix it while she's
gone.'

So Tilly put down the old tea-pot, carefully poured out a part of the
milk, and from her pocket produced a great, plummy bun, that one of the
school-children had given her, and she had saved for her mother. A slice
of the dry bread was nicely toasted, and the bit of butter set by for
her put on it. When her mother came in there was the table drawn up in a
warm place, a hot cup of tea ready, and Tilly and birdie waiting for
her.

Such a poor little supper, and yet such a happy one; for love, charity,
and contentment were guests there, and that Christmas eve was a blither
one than that up at the great house, where lights shone, fires blazed, a
great tree glittered, and music sounded, as the children danced and
played.

'We must go to bed early, for we've only wood enough to last over
to-morrow. I shall be paid for my work the day after, and then we can
get some,' said Tilly's mother, as they sat by the fire.

'If my bird was only a fairy bird, and would give us three wishes, how
nice it would be! Poor dear, he can't give me any thing; but it's no
matter,' answered Tilly, looking at the robin, who lay in the basket
with his head under his wing, a mere little feathery bunch.

'He can give you one thing, Tilly,--the pleasure of doing good. That is
one of the sweetest things in life; and the poor can enjoy it as well as
the rich.'

As her mother spoke, with her tired hand softly stroking her little
daughter's hair, Tilly suddenly started and pointed to the window,
saying, in a frightened whisper,--

'I saw a face,--a man's face, looking in! It's gone now; but I truly saw
it.'

'Some traveller attracted by the light perhaps. I'll go and see.' And
Tilly's mother went to the door.

No one was there. The wind blew cold, the stars shone, the snow lay
white on field and wood, and the Christmas moon was glittering in the
sky.

'What sort of a face was it?' asked Tilly's mother, coming back.

'A pleasant sort of face, I think; but I was so startled I don't quite
know what it was like. I wish we had a curtain there,' said Tilly.

'I like to have our light shine out in the evening, for the road is dark
and lonely just here, and the twinkle of our lamp is pleasant to
people's eyes as they go by. We can do so little for our neighbours, I
am glad to cheer the way for them. Now put these poor old shoes to dry,
and go to bed, dearie; I'll come soon.'

Tilly went, taking her bird with her to sleep in his basket near by,
lest he should be lonely in the night.

Soon the little house was dark and still, and no one saw the Christmas
spirits at their work that night.

When Tilly opened the door next morning, she gave a loud cry, clapped
her hands, and then stood still; quite speechless with wonder and
delight. There, before the door, lay a great pile of wood, all ready to
burn, a big bundle and a basket, with a lovely nosegay of winter roses,
holly, and evergreen tied to the handle.

'Oh, mother! did the fairies do it?' cried Tilly, pale with her
happiness, as she seized the basket, while her mother took in the
bundle.

'Yes, dear, the best and dearest fairy in the world, called "Charity."
She walks abroad at Christmas time, does beautiful deeds like this, and
does not stay to be thanked,' answered her mother with full eyes, as she
undid the parcel.

There they were,--the warm, thick blankets, the comfortable shawls, the
new shoes, and, best of all, a pretty winter hat for Bessy. The basket
was full of good things to eat, and on the flowers lay a paper,
saying,--

'For the little girl who loves her neighbour as herself.'

'Mother, I really think my bird is a fairy bird, and all these splendid
things come from him,' said Tilly, laughing and crying with joy.

It really did seem so, for as she spoke, the robin flew to the table,
hopped to the nosegay, and perching among the roses, began to chirp with
all his little might. The sun streamed in on flowers, bird, and happy
child, and no one saw a shadow glide away from the window; no one ever
knew that Mr. King had seen and heard the little girls the night before,
or dreamed that the rich neighbour had learned a lesson from the poor
neighbour.

And Tilly's bird _was_ a fairy bird; for by her love and tenderness to
the helpless thing, she brought good gifts to herself, happiness to the
unknown giver of them, and a faithful little friend who did not fly
away, but stayed with her till the snow was gone, making summer for her
in the winter-time.




_MY LITTLE GENTLEMAN._


No one would have thought of calling him so, this ragged, barefooted,
freckle-faced Jack, who spent his days carrying market-baskets for the
butcher, or clean clothes for Mrs. Quinn, selling chips, or grubbing in
the ash-heaps for cinders. But he was honestly earning his living, doing
his duty as well as he knew how, and serving those poorer and more
helpless than himself, and that is being a gentleman in the best sense
of that fine old word. He had no home but Mrs. Quinn's garret; and for
this he paid by carrying the bundles and getting the cinders for her
fire. Food and clothes he picked up as he could; and his only friend was
little Nanny. Her mother had been kind to him when the death of his
father left him all alone in the world; and when she, too, passed away,
the boy tried to show his gratitude by comforting the little girl, who
thought there was no one in the world like her Jack.

Old Mrs. Quinn took care of her, waiting till she was strong enough to
work for herself; but Nanny had been sick, and still sat about, a pale,
little shadow of her former self, with a white film slowly coming over
her pretty blue eyes. This was Jack's great trouble, and he couldn't
whistle it away as he did his own worries; for he was a cheery lad, and
when the baskets were heavy, the way long, the weather bitter cold, his
poor clothes in rags, or his stomach empty, he just whistled, and
somehow things seemed to get right. But the day he carried Nanny the
first dandelions, and she felt of them, instead of looking at them, as
she said, with such pathetic patience in her little face, 'I don't see
'em; but I know they're pretty, and I like 'em lots,' Jack felt as if
the blithe spring sunshine was all spoiled; and when he tried to cheer
himself up with a good whistle, his lips trembled so they wouldn't
pucker.

'The poor dear's eyes could be cured, I ain't a doubt; but it would take
a sight of money, and who's agoing to pay it?' said Mrs. Quinn,
scrubbing away at her tub.

'How much money?' asked Jack.

'A hundred dollars, I dare say. Dr. Wilkinson's cook told me once that
he done something to a lady's eyes, and asked a thousand dollars for
it.'

Jack sighed a long, hopeless sigh, and went away to fill the
water-pails; but he remembered the doctor's name, and began to wonder
how many years it would take to earn a hundred dollars.

Nanny was very patient; but, by and by, Mrs. Quinn began to talk about
sending her to some almshouse, for she was too poor to be burdened with
a helpless child. The fear of this nearly broke Jack's heart; and he
went about with such an anxious face that it was a mercy Nanny did not
see it. Jack was only twelve, but he had a hard load to carry just then;
for the thought of his little friend, doomed to lifelong darkness for
want of a little money, tempted him to steal more than once, and gave
him the first fierce, bitter feeling against those better off than he.
When he carried nice dinners to the great houses and saw the plenty that
prevailed there, he couldn't help feeling that it wasn't fair for some
to have so much, and others so little. When he saw pretty children
playing in the park, or driving with their mothers, so gay, so well
cared for, so tenderly loved, the poor boy's eyes would fill to think of
poor little Nanny, with no friend in the world but himself, and he so
powerless to help her.

When he one day mustered courage to ring at the great doctor's bell,
begging to see him a minute, and the servant answered, gruffly, as he
shut the door, 'Go along! he can't be bothered with the like of you!'
Jack clenched his hands hard as he went down the steps, and said to
himself, with a most unboyish tone, 'I'll get the money somehow, and
_make_ him let me in!'

He did get it, and in a most unexpected way; but he never forgot the
desperate feeling that came to him that day, and all his life long he
was very tender to people who were tempted in their times of trouble,
and yielded, as he was saved from doing, by what seemed an accident.

Some days after his attempt at the doctor's, as he was grubbing in a
newly-deposited ash-heap, with the bitter feeling very bad, and the
trouble very heavy, he found a dirty old pocket-book, and put it in his
bosom without stopping to examine it; for many boys and girls were
scratching, like a brood of chickens, all round him, and the pickings
were unusually good, so no time must be lost. 'Findings is havings' was
one of the laws of the ash-heap haunters; and no one thought of
disputing another's right to the spoons and knives that occasionally
found their way into the ash-barrels; while bottles, old shoes, rags,
and paper, were regular articles of traffic among them. Jack got a good
basketful that day; and when the hurry was over sat down to rest and
clear the dirt off his face with an old silk duster which he had picked
out of the rubbish, thinking Mrs. Quinn might wash it up for a
handkerchief. But he didn't wipe his dirty face that day; for, with the
rag, out tumbled a pocket-book; and on opening it he saw--money. Yes; a
roll of bills with two figures on all of them,--three tens and one
twenty. It took his breath away for a minute; then he hugged the old
book tight in both his grimy hands, and rocked to and fro all in a heap
among the oyster-shells and rusty tin kettles, saying to himself, with
tears running down his cheeks, 'O Nanny! O Nanny! now I can do it!'

I don't think a basket of cinders ever travelled at such a rate before
as Mrs. Quinn's did that day; for Jack tore home at a great pace, and
burst into the room, waving the old duster, and shouting, 'Hooray! I've
got it! I've got it!'

It is no wonder Mrs. Quinn thought he had lost his wits; for he looked
like a wild boy, with his face all streaked with tears and red ashes,
as he danced a double-shuffle till he was breathless, then showered the
money into Nanny's lap, and hugged her with another 'Hooray!' which
ended in a choke. When they got him quiet and heard the story, Mrs.
Quinn rather damped his joy, by telling him the money wasn't his, and he
ought to advertise it.

'But I want it for Nanny!' cried Jack; 'and how can I ever find who owns
it, when there was ever so many barrels emptied in that heap, and no one
knows where they came from?'

'It's very like you won't find the owner, and you can do as you please;
but it's honest to try, I'm thinking, for some poor girl may have lost
her earnin's this way, and we wouldn't like that ourselves,' said Mrs.
Quinn, turning over the shabby pocket-book, and carefully searching for
some clue to its owner.

Nanny looked very sober, and Jack grabbed up the money as if it were too
precious to lose. But he wasn't comfortable about it; and after a hard
fight with himself he consented to let Mrs. Quinn ask their policeman
what they should do. He was a kindly man; and when he heard the story,
said he'd do what was right, and if he couldn't find an owner, Jack
should have the fifty dollars back.

How hard it was to wait! how Jack thought and dreamed of his money, day
and night! How Nanny ran to the door to listen when a heavy step came up
the stairs! and how wistfully the poor darkened eyes turned to the light
which they longed to see again.

Honest John Floyd did his duty, but he didn't find the owner; so the old
purse came back at last, and now Jack could keep it with a clear
conscience. Nanny was asleep when it happened; and as they sat counting
the dingy bills, Mrs. Quinn said to the boy, 'Jack, you'd better keep
this for yourself. I doubt if it's enough to do the child any good; and
you need clothes and shoes, and a heap of things, let alone the books
you hanker after so much. It ain't likely you'll ever find another
wallet. It's all luck about Nanny's eyes; and maybe you are only
throwing away a chance you'll never have again.'

Jack leaned his head on his arms and stared at the money, all spread out
there, and looking so magnificent to him that it seemed as if it could
buy half the world. He did need clothes; his hearty boy's appetite did
long for better food; and, oh! how splendid it would be to go and buy
the books he had wanted so long,--the books that would give him a taste
of the knowledge which was more enticing to his wide-awake young mind
than clothes and food to his poor little body. It wasn't an easy thing
to do; but he was so used to making small sacrifices that the great one
was less hard; and when he had brooded over the money a few minutes in
thoughtful silence, his eye went from the precious bits of paper to the
dear little face in the trundle-bed, and he said, with a decided nod,
'I'll give Nanny the chance, and work for my things, or go without 'em.'

Mrs. Quinn was a matter-of-fact body; but her hard old face softened
when he said that, and she kissed him good-night almost as gently as if
she'd been his mother.

Next day, Jack presented himself at Dr. Wilkinson's door, with the money
in one hand and Nanny in the other, saying boldly to the gruff servant,
'I want to see the doctor. I can pay; so you'd better let me in.'

I'm afraid cross Thomas would have shut the door in the boy's face
again, if it had not been for the little blind girl, who looked up at
him so imploringly that he couldn't resist the mute appeal.

'The doctor's going out; but maybe he'll see you a minute;' and with
that he led them into a room where stood a tall man putting on his
gloves.

Jack was a modest boy; but he was so afraid that Nanny would lose her
chance, that he forgot himself, and told the little story as fast as he
could--told it well, too, I fancy; for the doctor listened attentively,
his eye going from the boy's eager, flushed face, to the pale patient
one beside him, as if the two little figures, shabby though they were,
illustrated the story better than the finest artist could have done.
When Jack ended, the doctor sat Nanny on his knee, gently lifted up the
half-shut eyelids, and after examining the film a minute, stroked her
pretty hair, and said so kindly that she nestled her little hand
confidingly into his, 'I think I can help you, my dear. Tell me where
you live, and I'll attend to it at once, for it's high time something
was done.'

Jack told him, adding, with a manly air, as he showed the money, 'I can
pay you, sir, if fifty dollars is enough.'

'Quite enough,' said the doctor, with a droll smile.

'If it isn't, I'll work for the rest, if you'll trust me. Please save
Nanny's eyes, and I'll do any thing to pay you!' cried Jack, getting red
and choky in his earnestness.

The doctor stopped smiling, and held out his hand in a grave,
respectful way, as he said, 'I'll trust you, my boy. We'll cure Nanny
first; and you and I will settle the bill afterward.'

Jack liked that; it was a gentlemanly way of doing things, and he showed
his satisfaction by smiling all over his face, and giving the big, white
hand a hearty shake with both his rough ones.

The doctor was a busy man; but he kept them some time, for there were no
children in the fine house, and it seemed pleasant to have a little girl
sit on his knee and a bright boy stand beside his chair; and when, at
last, they went away, they looked as if he had given them some magic
medicine, which made them forget every trouble they had ever known.

Next day the kind man came to give Nanny her chance. She had no doubt,
and very little fear, but looked up at him so confidingly when all was
ready, that he stooped down and kissed her softly before he touched her
eyes.

'Let Jack hold my hands; then I'll be still, and not mind if it hurts
me,' she said. So Jack, pale with anxiety, knelt down before her, and
kept the little hands steadily in his all through the minutes that
seemed so long to him.

'What do you see, my child?' asked the doctor, when he had done
something to both eyes with a quick, skilful hand.

Nanny leaned forward, with the film all gone, and answered, with a
little cry of joy, that went to the hearts of those who heard it,
'Jack's face! I see it! oh, I see it!'

Only a freckled, round face, with wet eyes and tightly-set lips; but to
Nanny it was as beautiful as the face of an angel; and when she was laid
away with bandaged eyes to rest, it haunted all her dreams, for it was
the face of the little friend who loved her best.

Nanny's chance was _not_ a failure; and when she saw the next dandelions
he brought her, all the sunshine came back into the world brighter than
ever for Jack. Well might it seem so; for his fifty dollars bought him
many things that money seldom buys. The doctor wouldn't take it at
first; but when Jack said, in the manful tone the doctor liked although
it made him smile, 'It was a bargain, sir. I wish to pay my debts; and I
shan't feel happy if Nanny don't have it _all_ for her eyes. Please do!
I'd rather,'--then he took it; and Nanny did have it, not only for her
eyes, but in clothes and food and care, many times over; for it was
invested in a bank that pays good interest on every mite so given.

Jack discovered that fifty dollars was far less than most people would
have had to pay, and begged earnestly to be allowed to work for the
rest. The doctor agreed to this, and Jack became his errand-boy, serving
with a willingness that made a pleasure of duty; soon finding that many
comforts quietly got into his life; that much help was given without
words; and that the days of hunger and rags, heavy burdens and dusty
ash-heaps, were gone by for ever.

The happiest hours of Jack's day were spent in the doctor's chaise, when
he made his round of visits; for while he waited, the boy studied or
read, and while they drove hither and thither, the doctor talked with
him, finding an eager mind as well as a tender heart and a brave spirit
under the rough jacket of his little serving-man. But he never called
him that; for remembering the cheerfulness, self-denial, honesty, and
loyalty to those he loved, shown by the boy, the good doctor proved his
respect for the virtues all men should covet, wherever they are found,
and always spoke of Jack with a smile, as 'My Little Gentleman.'




_BACK WINDOWS._


As I sit working at my back window, I look out on a long row of other
people's back windows; and it is quite impossible for me to help seeing
and being interested in my neighbours. There are a good many children in
those houses; and though I don't know one of their names, I know them a
great deal better than they think I do. I never spoke a word to any of
them, and never expect to do so; yet I have my likes and dislikes among
them, and could tell them things that they have said and done, which
would astonish them very much, I assure you.

First, the babies,--for there are three: the aristocratic baby, the
happy-go-lucky baby, and the forlorn baby. The aristocratic baby lives
in a fine, well-furnished room, has a pretty little mamma, who wears
white gowns, and pink ribbons in her cap; likewise, a fond young papa,
who evidently thinks _this_ the most wonderful baby in Boston. There is
a stout, motherly lady, who is the grandma, I fancy, for she is always
hovering about 'the dear' with cups, blankets, or a gorgeous red worsted
bird to amuse it. Baby is a plump, rosy, sweet-faced little creature,
always smiling and kissing its hand to the world in general. In its
pretty white frocks, with its own little pink or blue ribbons, and its
young mamma proudly holding it up to see and be seen, my aristocratic
neighbour has an easy life of it, and is evidently one of the little
lilies who do nothing but blossom in the sunshine.

The happy-go-lucky baby is just able to toddle; and I seldom pull up my
curtain in the morning without seeing him at his window in his yellow
flannel night-gown, taking a look at the weather. No matter whether it
rains or shines, there he is, smiling and nodding, and looking so merry,
that it is evident he has plenty of sunshine bottled up in his own
little heart for private use. I depend on seeing him, and feel as if the
world was not right until this golden little sun rises to shine upon me.
He don't seem to have any one to take care of him, but trots about all
day, and takes care of himself. Sometimes he is up in the chambers with
the girl, while she makes beds, and he helps; then he takes a stroll
into the parlour, and spins the gay curtain-tassels to his heart's
content; next, he dives into the kitchen (I hope he does not tumble
downstairs, but I dare say he wouldn't mind if he did), and he gets
pushed about by all the busy women, as they 'fly round.' I rather think
it gets too hot for him there about dinner-time; for he often comes out
into the yard for a walk at noon, and seems to find endless wonders and
delights in the ash barrel, the water-but, two old flower-pots, and a
little grass plat, in which he plants a choice variety of articles, in
the firm faith they will come up in full bloom. I hope the big spoon and
his own red shoe _will_ sprout and appear before any trouble is made
about their mysterious disappearance. At night I see a little shadow
bobbing about on the curtain, and watch it, till with a parting glimpse
at a sleepy face at the window, my small sun sets, and I leave him to
his dreams.

The forlorn baby roars all day, and I don't blame him; for he is
trotted, shaken, spanked, and scolded by a very cross nurse, who treats
him like a meal bag. I pity that little neighbour, and don't believe he
will stand it long; for I see him double up his tiny fists, and spar
away at nothing, as if getting ready for a good tussle with the world by
and by, if he lives to try it.

Then the boys,--bless their buttons!--how amusing they are. One young
man, aged about ten, keeps hens; and the trials of that boy are really
pathetic. The biddies get out every day or two, and fly away all over
the neighbourhood, like feathers when you shake a pillow. They cackle
and crow, and get up on sheds and fences, and trot down the streets, all
at once, and that poor fellow spins round after them like a distracted
top. One by one he gets them and comes lugging them back, upside down,
in the most undignified attitude, and shuts them up, and hammers away,
and thinks they are all safe, and sits down to rest, when a triumphant
crow from some neighbouring shed tells him that that rascally black
rooster is out again for another promenade. I'm not blood-thirsty; but I
really do long for Thanksgiving that my neighbour Henry may find rest
for the sole of his foot; for, not till his poultry are safely eaten
will he ever know where they are.

Another boy has a circus about once a week, and tries to break his neck
jumping through hoops, hanging to a rope by his heels, turning
somersaults in the air, and frightening his mother out of her wits by
his pranks. I suspect that he has been to see Leotard, and I admire his
energy, for he is never discouraged; and, after tumbling flat,
half-a-dozen times, he merely rubs his elbows and knees, and then up and
takes another.

There is a good, domestic boy, who brushes and curls his three little
sisters' hair every morning, and must do it very gently, for they seem
to like it; and I often see them watch at the back gate for him, and
clap their hands, and run to meet him, sure of being welcomed as little
sisters like to be met by the big brothers whom they love. I respect
that virtuous boy.

The naughty boy is very funny; and the running fight he keeps up with
the cross cook is as good as a farce. He _is_ a torment, but I think she
could tame him, if she took the right way. The other day she wouldn't
let him in because she had washed up her kitchen and his boots were
muddy. He wiped them on the grass, but that wouldn't do; and, after
going at her with his head down, like a battering ram, he gave it up, or
seemed to; for, the minute she locked the door behind her and came out
to take in her clothes, that sly dog whipped up one of the low windows,
scrambled in, and danced a hornpipe all over the kitchen, while the fat
cook scolded and fumbled for her key, for _she_ couldn't follow through
the window. Of course he was off upstairs by the time she got in; but
I'm afraid he had a shaking, for I saw him glowering fiercely as he came
out later with a basket, going some 'confounded errand.' Occasionally
his father brings him out and whips him for some extra bad offence,
during which performance he howls dismally; but when he is left sitting
despondently and miraculously on an old chair without any seat, he soon
cheers up, boos at a strange cat, whistles to his dog,--who is just like
him,--or falls back on that standing cure for all the ills that boys are
heir to, and whittles vigorously. I know I ought to frown upon this
reprehensible young person, and morally close my eyes to his pranks;
but I really can't do it, and am afraid I find this little black sheep
the most interesting of the flock.

The girls have tea-parties, make calls, and play mother, of course; and
the sisters of the good boy have capital times up in a big nursery, with
such large dollies that I can hardly tell which are the babies and which
the mammas. One little girl plays about at home with a dirty face,
tumbled hair, and an old pinafore on. She won't be made tidy, and I see
her kick and cry when they try to make her neat. Now and then there is a
great dressing and curling; and then I see her prancing away in her
light boots, smart hat, and pretty dress, looking as fresh as a daisy.
But I don't admire her; for I've been behind the scenes, you see, and I
know that she likes to be fine rather than neat.

So is the girl who torments her kitty, slaps her sister, and runs away
when her mother tells her not to go out of the yard. But the
house-wifely little girl who tends the baby, washes the cups, and goes
to school early with a sunshiny face and kiss all round, _she_, now, is
a neighbour worth having, and I'd put a good mark against her name if I
knew it.

I don't know as it would be proper for me to mention the grown-up people
over the way. They go on very much as the children do; for there is the
lazy, dandified man, who gets up late, and drinks; the cross man, who
swears at the shed-door when it won't shut; the fatherly man, who sits
among his children every evening, and the cheery old man up in the
attic, who has a flower in his window, and looks out at the world with
very much the same serene smile as my orange-coloured baby.

The women, too, keep house, make calls, and play mother; and some don't
do it well either. The forlorn baby's mamma never seems to cuddle and
comfort him; and some day, when the little fist lies cold and quiet, I'm
afraid she'll wish she had. Then the naughty boy's mother. I'm very
sure, if she put her arms round him sometimes, and smoothed that rough
head of his, and spoke to him as only mothers can speak, that it would
tame him far better than the scoldings and thrashings: for I know there
is a true boy's heart, warm and tender, somewhere under the jacket that
gets dusted so often. As for the fine lady who lets her children do as
they can, while she trims her bonnet, or makes panniers, I wouldn't be
introduced to her on any account. But as some might think it was
unjustifiable curiosity on my part to see these things, and an
actionable offence to speak of them, I won't mention them.

I sometimes wonder if the kind spirits who feel an interest in mortals
ever take a look at us on the shady side which we don't show the world,
seeing the trouble, vanities, and sins which we think no one knows. If
they love, pity, or condemn us? What records they keep, and what rewards
they prepare for those who are so busy with their work and play that
they forget who may be watching their back windows with clearer eyes and
truer charity than any inquisitive old lady with a pen in her hand?




_LITTLE MARIE OF LEHON._


'Here comes our pretty little girl,' I said to Kate, as we sat resting
on the seat beside the footpath that leads from Dinan on the hill to
Lehon in the valley.

Yes, there she was, trotting toward us in her round cap, blue woollen
gown, white apron, and wooden shoes. On her head was a loaf of buckwheat
bread as big as a small wheel, in one hand a basket full of green stuff,
while the other led an old goat, who seemed in no hurry to get home. We
had often seen this rosy, bright-eyed child, had nodded to her, but
never spoken, for she looked rather shy, and always seemed in haste. Now
the sight of the goat reminded us of an excuse for addressing her, and
as she was about to pass with the respectful little curtsey of the
country, my friend said in French:--

'Stay please. I want to speak to you.' She stopped at once and stood
looking at us under her long eyelashes in a timid yet confiding way,
very pretty to see.

'We want to drink goat's milk every morning: can you let us have it,
little one?'

'Oh, yes, mademoiselle! Nannette gives fine milk, and no one has yet
engaged her,' answered the child, her whole face brightening at the
prospect.

'What name have you?'

'Marie Rosier, mademoiselle.'

'And you live at Lehon?'

'Yes, mademoiselle.'

'Have you parents?'

'Truly, yes, of the best. My father has a loom, my mother works in the
field and mill with brother Yvon, and I go to school and care for
Nannette and nurse little Bebe.'

'What school?'

'At the convent, mademoiselle. The good sisters teach us the catechism,
also to write and read and sew. I like it much,' and Marie glanced at
the little prayer in her apron pocket, as if proud to show she could
read it.

'What age have you?'

'Ten years, mademoiselle.'

'You are young to do so much, for we often see you in the market buying
and selling, and sometimes digging in your garden there below, and
bringing water from the river. Do you love work as well as school?'

'Ah, no; but mademoiselle knows it is necessary to work: every one does,
and I'm glad to do my part. Yvon works much harder than I, and the
father sits all day at his loom, yet he is sick and suffers much. Yes, I
am truly glad to help,' and little Marie settled the big loaf as if
quite ready to bear her share of the burdens.

'Shall we go and see your father about the goat? and if he agrees will
you bring the milk fresh and warm every morning?' I asked, thinking that
a sight of that blooming face would brighten our days for us.

'Oh, yes! I always do it for the ladies, and you will find the milk
quite fresh and warm, hey, Nannette?' and Marie laughed as she pulled
the goat from the hedge where she was nibbling the young leaves.

We followed the child as she went clattering down the stony path, and
soon came into the narrow street bounded on one side by the row of low,
stone houses, and on the other by the green wet meadow full of willows,
and the rapid mill-stream. All along this side of the road sat women and
children, stripping the bark from willow twigs to be used in
basket-making. A busy sight and a cheerful one; for the women gossiped
in their high, clear voices, the children sang and laughed, and the
babies crept about as freely as young lambs.

We found Marie's home a very poor one. Only two rooms in the little hut,
the lower one with its earthen floor, beds in the wall, smoky fire, and
single window where the loom stood. At it sat a pale, dark man who
stopped work as we entered, and seemed glad to rest while we talked to
him, or rather while Kate did, for I could not understand his odd
French, and preferred to watch Marie during the making of the bargain.

Yvon, a stout lad of twelve, was cutting up brush with an old sickle,
and little Bebe, looking like a Dutch doll in her tiny round cap, tight
blue gown, and bits of sabots, clung to Marie as she got the supper.

I wondered what the children at home would have said to such a supper. A
few cabbage leaves made the soup, and this, with the dry black bread and
a sip of sour wine, was all they had. There were no plates or bowls, but
little hollow places in the heavy wooden table near the edge, and into
these fixed cups Marie ladled the soup, giving each a wooden spoon from
a queer rack in the middle; the kettle stood at one end, the big loaf
lay at the other, and all stood round eating out of their little
troughs, with Nannette and a rough dog close by to receive any crusts
that might be left.

Presently the mother came in, a true Breton woman; rosy and robust,
neat and cheery, though her poor clothes were patched all over, her
hands more rough and worn with hard work than any I ever saw, and the
fine hair under her picturesque cap gray at thirty with much care.

I saw then where Marie got the brightness that seemed to shine in every
feature of her little face, for the mother's coming was like a ray of
sunshine in that dark place, and she had a friendly word and look for
every one.

Our little arrangement was soon made, and we left them all smiling and
nodding as if the few francs we were to pay would be a fortune to them.

Early next morning we were wakened by Françoise, the maid, who came up
to announce that the goat's milk had arrived. Then we heard a queer,
quick, tapping sound on the stairs, and to our great amusement,
Nannette walked into the room, straight up to my bedside, and stood
there looking at me with her mild yellow eyes as if she was quite used
to seeing night-caps. Marie followed with a pretty little bowl in her
hand, and said, laughing at our surprise, 'See, dear mademoiselle; in
this way I make sure that the milk is quite fresh and warm;' and
kneeling down, she milked the bowl full in a twinkling, while Nannette
quietly chewed her cud and sniffed at a plate of rolls on the table.

The warm draught was delicious, and we drank each our portion with much
merriment.

'It is our custom,' said Françoise; who stood by with her arms folded,
and looked on in a lofty manner.

'What had you for your own breakfast?' I asked, as I caught Marie's eye
hungrily fixed on the rolls and some tempting little cakes of chocolate
left from our lunch the day before.

'My good bread, as usual, mademoiselle, also sorrel salad and--and
water,' answered Marie, as if trying to make the most of her scanty
meal.

'Will you eat the rolls and put the chocolate in your pocket to nibble
at school? You must be tired with this long walk so early.'

She hesitated, but could not resist; and said in a low tone, as she held
the bread in her hand without eating it,--

'Would mademoiselle be angry if I took it to Bebe? She has never tasted
the beautiful white bread, and it would please her much.'

I emptied the plate into her basket, tucked in the chocolate, and added
a gay picture for baby, which unexpected treasures caused Marie to clasp
her hands and turn quite red with delight.

After that she came daily, and we had merry times with old Nannette and
her little mistress, whom we soon learned to love, so busy, blithe, and
grateful was she.

We soon found a new way to employ her, for the boy who drove our donkey
did not suit us, and we got the donkey-woman to let us have Marie in the
afternoon when her lessons were done. She liked that, and so did we; for
she seemed to understand the nature of donkeys, and could manage them
without so much beating and shouting as the boy thought necessary. Such
pleasant drives as we had, we two big women in the droll wagon, drawn by
the little gray donkey that looked as if made of an old trunk, so rusty
and rough was he as he went trotting along, his long ears wagging, and
his small hoofs clattering over the fine hard road, while Marie sat on
the shaft with a long whip, talking and laughing, and giving Andrè a
poke now and then, crying 'E! E! houp la!' to make him go.

We found her a capital little guide and story-teller, for her
grandmother had told her all the tales and legends of the neighbourhood,
and it was very pleasant to hear her repeat them in pretty peasant
French, as we sat among the ruins, while Kate sketched, I took notes,
and Marie held the big parasol over us.

Some of these stones were charming; at least as _she_ told them, with
her little face changing from gay to sad as she gesticulated most
dramatically.

The romance of 'Gilles de Bretagne' was one of her favourites. How he
carried off his child-wife when she was only twelve, how he was
imprisoned and poisoned, and at last left to starve in a dungeon, and
would stand at his window crying, 'Bread, bread; for the love of God!'
yet no one dared to give him any, till a poor peasant woman went in the
night and gave him half her black loaf. Not once, but every night for
six months, though she robbed her children to do it. And when he was
dying, it was she who took a priest to him, that he might confess
through the bars of his cell.

'So good, ah, so good, this poor woman! It is beautiful to hear of that,
mademoiselle!' little Marie would say, with her black eyes full and her
lips trembling.

But the story she liked best of all was about the peasant girl and her
grandmother.

'See then, dear ladies, it was in this way. In the time of the great war
many poor people were shot because it was feared they would burn the
chateaus. In one of these so sad parties being driven to St. Malo to be
shot, was this young girl. Only fifteen, dear ladies, behold how young
is this! and see the brave thing she did! With her went the old
grandmother whom she loved next the good God. They went slowly, she was
so old, and one of the officers who guarded them had pity on the pretty
girl, and said to her as they were a little apart from the rest, "Come,
you are young, and can run. I will save you; it is a pity so fine a
little girl should be shot."

'Then she was glad and thanked him much, saying, "And the grandmother
also? You will save her with me?" "It is impossible," says the officer.
"She is too old to run. I can save but one, and her life is nearly over;
let her go, and do you fly into the next wood. I will not betray you,
and when we come up with the gang it will be too late to find you."

'Then the great temptation of Satan came to this girl. She had no wish
to suffer, but she could not leave the good old grandmere to die alone.
She wept, she prayed, and the saints gave her courage.

'"No, I will not go," she said; and in the morning at St. Malo she was
shot with the old mother in her arms.'

'Could you do that for your grandmere?' I once asked, as she stopped for
breath, because this tale always excited her. She crossed herself
devoutly, and answered with fire in her eyes, and a resolute gesture of
her little brown hands,--

'I should try, mademoiselle.'

I think she would, and succeed, too, for she was a brave and
tender-hearted child, as she soon after proved.

A long drought parched the whole country that summer, and the gardens
suffered much, especially the little plats in Lehon, for most of them
were on the steep hillside behind the huts; and unless it rained, water
had to be carried up from the stream below. The cabbages and onions on
which these poor people depend, when fresh salads are gone, were dying
in the baked earth, and a hard winter was before them if this little
store failed.

The priests prayed for rain in the churches, and long processions
streamed out of the gates to visit the old stone cross called the 'Croix
de Saint Esprit,' and, kneeling there in crowds, the people implored the
blessing of rain to save their harvest. We felt great pity for them, but
liked little Marie's way of praying best.

She did not come one morning, but sent her brother, who only laughed,
and said Marie had hurt her foot, when we inquired for her. Anxious to
know if she was really ill, we went to see her in the afternoon, and
heard a pretty little story of practical Christianity.

Marie lay asleep on her mother's bed in the wall, and her father,
sitting by her, told the tale in a low voice, pausing now and then to
look at her, as if his little daughter had done something to be proud
of.

It seems that in the village there was an old woman frightfully
disfigured by fire, and not quite sane as the people thought. She was
harmless, but never showed herself by day, and only came out at night to
work in her garden or take the air. Many of the ignorant peasants feared
her, however; for the country abounds in fairy legends, and strange
tales of ghosts and goblins. But the more charitable left bread at her
door, and took in return the hose she knit or the thread she spun.

During the drought it was observed that _her_ garden, though the
steepest and stoniest, was never dry; _her_ cabbages flourished when her
neighbours' withered, and _her_ onions stood up green and tall as if
some special rain-spirit watched over them. People wondered and shook
their heads, but could not explain it, for Mother Lobineau was too
infirm to carry much water up the steep path, and who would help her
unless some of her own goblin friends did it?

This idea was suggested by the story of a peasant returning late at
night, who had seen something white flitting to and fro in the
garden-patch, and when he called to it saw it vanish most mysteriously.
This made quite a stir in the town; others watched also, saw the white
phantom in the starlight, and could not tell where it went when it
vanished behind the chestnut trees on the hill, till one man, braver
than the rest, hid himself behind these trees and discovered the
mystery. The sprite was Marie, in her little shift, who stepped out of
the window of the loft where she slept on to a bough of the tree, and
thence to the hill, for the house was built so close against the bank
that it was 'but a step from garret to garden,' as they say in Morlaix.

In trying to escape from this inquisitive neighbour, Marie hurt her
foot, but was caught, and confessed that it was she who went at night to
water poor Mother Lobineau's cabbages; because if they failed the old
woman might starve, and no one else remembered her destitute and
helpless state.

The good-hearted people were much touched by this silent sermon on
loving one's neighbour as one's self, and Marie was called the 'little
saint,' and tended carefully by all the good women. Just as the story
ended, she woke up, and at first seemed inclined to hide under the
bedclothes. But we had her out in a minute, and presently she was
laughing over her good deed, with a true child's enjoyment of a bit of
roguery, saying in her simple way,--

'Yes; it was so droll to go running about _en chemise_, like the girl in
the tale of the 'Midsummer Eve,' where she pulls the Saint Johns-wort
flower, and has her wish to hear all the creatures talk. I liked it
much, and Yvon slept so like the dormouse that he never heard me creep
in and out. It was hard to bring much water, but the poor cabbages were
_so_ glad, and Mother Lobineau felt that all had not forgotten her.

We took care that little Saint Marie was not forgotten, but quite well,
and all ready for her confirmation when the day came. This is a pretty
sight, and for her sake we went to the old church of St. Sauveur to see
it. It was a bright spring day, and the gardens were full of early
flowers, the quaint streets gay with proud fathers and mothers in
holiday dress, and flocks of strangers pausing to see the long
procession of little girls with white caps and veils, gloves and gowns,
prayer-books and rosaries, winding through the sunny square into the
shadowy church with chanting and candles, garlands and crosses.

The old priest was too ill to perform the service, but the young one who
took his place announced, after it was over, that if they would pass the
house the good old man would bless them from his balcony. That was the
best of all, and a sweet sight, as the feeble fatherly old priest leaned
from his easy-chair to stretch his trembling hands over the little flock
so like a bed of snowdrops, while the bright eyes and rosy faces looked
reverently up at him, and the fresh voices chanted the responses as the
curly heads under the long veils bowed and passed by.

We learned afterwards that our Marie had been called in and praised for
her secret charity--a great honour, because the good priest was much
beloved by all his flock, and took a most paternal interest in the
little ones.

That was almost the last we saw of our little friend, for we left Dinan
soon after, bidding the Lehon family good-bye, and leaving certain warm
souvenirs for winter-time. Marie cried and clung to us at parting, then
smiled like an April day, and waved her hand as we went away, never
expecting to see her any more.

But the next morning, just as we were stepping on board the steamer to
go down the Rance to St. Malo, we saw a little white cap come bobbing
through the market-place, down the steep street, and presently Marie
appeared with two great bunches of pale yellow primroses and wild blue
hyacinths in one hand, while the other held her sabots, that she might
run the faster. Rosy and smiling and breathless with haste she came
racing up to us, crying,--

'Behold my souvenir for the dear ladies. I do not cry now. No; I am glad
the day is so fine. _Bon voyage! bon voyage!_'

We thanked and kissed and left her on the shore, bravely trying not to
cry, as she waved her wooden shoes and kissed her hand till we were out
of sight, and had nothing but the soft colours and sweet breath of our
nosegays to remind us of Little Marie of Lehon.




_MY MAY-DAY AMONG CURIOUS BIRDS AND BEASTS._


Being alone in London, yet wishing to celebrate the day, I decided to
pay my respects to the lions at the Zoological Gardens. A lovely place
it was, and I enjoyed myself immensely; for May-day in England is just
what it should be, mild, sunny, flowery, and spring-like. As I walked
along the well-kept paths, between white and rosy hawthorn hedges, I
kept coming upon new and curious sights; for the birds and beasts are so
skilfully arranged that it is more like travelling through a strange and
pleasant country than visiting a menagerie.

The first thing I saw was a great American bison; and I was so glad to
meet with any one from home, that I'd have patted him with pleasure if
he had shown any cordiality toward me. He didn't, however, but stared
savagely with his fiery eyes, and put down his immense head with a
sullen snort, as if he'd have tossed me with great satisfaction. I did
not blame him, for the poor fellow was homesick, doubtless, for his own
wide prairies and the free life he had lost. So I threw him some fresh
clover, and went on to the pelicans.

I never knew before what handsome birds they were; not graceful, but
with such snowy plumage, tinged with pale pink and faint yellow. They
had just had their bath, and stood arranging their feathers with their
great bills, uttering a queer cry now and then, and nodding to one
another sociably. When fed, they gobbled up the fish, never stopping to
swallow it till the pouches under their bills were full; then they
leisurely emptied them, and seemed to enjoy their lunch with the grave
deliberation of regular Englishmen.

Being in a hurry to see the lions, I went on to the long row of cages,
and there found a splendid sight. Six lions and lionesses, in three or
four different cages, sitting or standing in dignified attitudes, and
eyeing the spectators with a mild expression in their fine eyes. One
lioness was ill, and lay on her bed, looking very pensive, while her
mate moved restlessly about her, evidently anxious to do something for
her, and much afflicted by her suffering. I liked this lion very much,
for, though the biggest, he was very gentle, and had a noble face.

The tigers were rushing about, as tigers usually are; some creeping
noiselessly to and fro, some leaping up and down, and some washing
their faces with their velvet paws. All looked and acted so like cats
that I wasn't at all surprised to hear one of them purr when the keeper
scratched her head. It was a very loud and large purr, but no fireside
pussy could have done it better, and every one laughed at the sound.

There were pretty spotted leopards, panthers, and smaller varieties of
the same species. I sat watching them a long time, longing to let some
of the wild things out for a good run, they seemed so unhappy barred in
those small dens.

Suddenly the lions began to roar, the tigers to snarl, and all to get
very much excited about something, sniffing at the openings, thrusting
their paws through the bars, and lashing their tails impatiently. I
couldn't imagine what the trouble was, till, far down the line, I saw a
man with a barrowful of lumps of raw meat. This was their dinner, and
as they were fed but once a day they were ravenous. Such roars and howls
and cries as arose while the man went slowly down the line, gave one a
good idea of the sounds to be heard in Indian forests and jungles. The
lions behaved best, for they only paced up and down, with an occasional
cry; but the tigers were quite frantic; for they tumbled one over the
other, shook the cages, and tried to reach the bystanders, just out of
reach behind the bar that kept us at a safe distance. One lady had a
fright, for the wind blew the end of her shawl within reach of a tiger's
great claw, and he clutched it, trying to drag her nearer. The shawl
came off, and the poor lady ran away screaming, as if a whole family of
wild beasts were after her.

When the lumps of meat were thrown in, it was curious to see how
differently the animals behaved. The tigers snarled and fought and tore
and got so savage I was very grateful that they were safely shut up. In
a few minutes, nothing but white bones remained, and then they howled
for more. One little leopard was better bred than the others, for he
went up on a shelf in the cage, and ate his dinner in a quiet, proper
manner, which was an example to the rest. The lions ate in dignified
silence, all but my favourite, who carried his share to his sick mate,
and by every gentle means in his power tried to make her eat. She was
too ill, however, and turned away with a plaintive moan which seemed to
grieve him sadly. He wouldn't touch his dinner, but lay down near her,
with the lump between his paws, as if guarding it for her; and there I
left him patiently waiting, in spite of his hunger, till his mate could
share it with him. As I took a last look at his fine old face, I named
him Douglas, and walked away, humming to myself the lines of the
ballad,--

  Douglas, Douglas,
  Tender and true.

As a contrast to the wild beasts, I went to see the monkeys, who lived
in a fine large house all to themselves. Here was every variety, from
the great ugly chimpanzee to the funny little fellows who played like
boys, and cut up all sorts of capers. A mamma sat tending her baby, and
looking so like a little old woman that I laughed till the gray monkey
with the blue nose scolded at me. He was a cross old party, and sat
huddled up in the straw, scowling at every one, like an ill-tempered old
bachelor. Half-a-dozen little ones teased him capitally by dropping bits
of bread, nut-shells, and straws down on him from above, as they climbed
about the perches, or swung by their tails. One poor little chap had
lost the curly end of his tail,--I'm afraid the gray one bit it
off,--and kept trying to swing like the others, forgetting that the
strong, curly end was what he held on with. He would run up the bare
boughs, and give a jump, expecting to catch and swing, but the lame tail
wouldn't hold him, and down he'd go, bounce on to the straw. At first
he'd sit and stare about him, as if much amazed to find himself there;
then he'd scratch his little round head and begin to scold violently,
which seemed to delight the other monkeys; and, finally, he'd examine
his poor little tail, and appear to understand the misfortune which had
befallen him. The funny expression of his face was irresistible, and I
enjoyed seeing him very much, and gave him a bun to comfort him when I
went away.

The snake-house came next, and I went in, on my way to visit the
rhinoceros family. I rather like snakes, since I had a tame green one,
who lived under the door-step, and would come out and play with me on
sunny days. These snakes I found very interesting, only they got under
their blankets and wouldn't come out, and I wasn't allowed to poke them;
so I missed seeing several of the most curious. An ugly cobra laid and
blinked at me through the glass, looking quite as dangerous as he was.
There were big and little snakes,--black, brown, and speckled, lively
and lazy, pretty and plain ones,--but I liked the great boa best.

When I came to his cage, I didn't see anything but the branch of a tree,
such as I had seen in other cages, for the snakes to wind up and down.
'Where is he, I wonder? I hope he hasn't got out,' I said to myself,
thinking of a story I read once of a person in a menagerie, who turned
suddenly and saw a great boa gliding towards him. As I stood wondering
if the big worm could be under the little flat blanket before me, the
branch began to move all at once, and with a start, I saw a limb swing
down to stare at me with the boa's glittering eyes. He was so exactly
the colour of the bare bough, and lay so still, I had not seen him till
he came to take a look at me. A very villainous-looking reptile he was,
and I felt grateful that I didn't live in a country where such
unpleasant neighbours might pop in upon you unexpectedly. He was kind
enough to take a promenade and show me his size, which seemed immense,
as he stretched himself, and then knotted his rough grayish body into a
great loop, with the fiery-eyed head in the middle. He was not one of
the largest kind, but I was quite satisfied, and left him to his dinner
of rabbits, which I hadn't the heart to stay and see him devour alive.

I was walking toward the camel's pagoda, when, all of a sudden, a long,
dark, curling thing came over my shoulder, and I felt warm breath in my
face. 'It's the boa;' I thought, and gave a skip which carried me into
the hedge, where I stuck, much to the amusement of some children riding
on the elephant whose trunk had frightened me. He had politely tried to
tell me to clear the way, which I certainly had done with all speed.
Picking myself out of the hedge I walked beside him, examining his
clumsy feet and peering up at his small, intelligent eye. I'm very sure
he winked at me, as if enjoying the joke, and kept poking his trunk into
my pocket, hoping to find something eatable.

I felt as if I had got into a foreign country as I looked about me and
saw elephants and camels walking among the trees; flocks of snow-white
cranes stalking over the grass, on their long scarlet legs; striped
Zebras racing in their paddock; queer kangaroos hopping about, with
little ones in their pouches; pretty antelopes chasing one another; and,
in an immense wire-covered aviary, all sorts of brilliant birds were
flying about as gaily as if at home.

One of the curiosities was a sea-cow, who lived in a tank of salt water,
and came at the keeper's call to kiss him, and flounder on its flippers
along the margin of the tank after a fish. It was very like a seal, only
much larger, and had four fins instead of two. Its eyes were lovely, so
dark and soft and liquid; but its mouth was not pretty, and I declined
one of the damp kisses which it was ready to dispense at word of
command.

The great polar bear lived next door, and spent his time splashing in
and out of a pool of water, or sitting on a block of ice, panting, as if
the mild spring day was blazing midsummer. He looked very unhappy, and I
thought it a pity that they didn't invent a big refrigerator for him.

These are not half of the wonderful creatures I saw, but I have not room
to tell more; only I advise all who can to pay a visit to the Zoological
Gardens when they go to London, for it is one of the most interesting
sights in that fine old city.




_OUR LITTLE NEWSBOY._


Hurrying to catch a certain car at a certain corner late one stormy
night, I was suddenly arrested by the sight of a queer-looking bundle
lying in a door-way.

'Bless my heart, it's a child! O John! I'm afraid he's frozen!' I
exclaimed to my brother, as we both bent over the bundle.

Such a little fellow as he was, in the big, ragged coat; such a tired,
baby face, under the fuzzy cap; such a purple, little hand, still
holding fast a few papers; such a pathetic sight altogether was the boy,
lying on the stone step, with the snow drifting over him, that it was
impossible to go by.

'He is asleep; but he'll freeze, if left so long. Here! wake up, my boy,
and go home, as fast as you can,' cried John, with a gentle shake, and a
very gentle voice; for the memory of a dear little lad, safely tucked up
at home, made him fatherly kind to the small vagabond.

The moment he was touched, the boy tumbled up, and, before he was half
awake, began his usual cry, with an eye to business.

'Paper, sir? "Herald!" "Transkip!" Last'--a great gape swallowed up the
'last edition,' and he stood blinking at us like a very chilly young
owl.

'I'll buy 'em all if you'll go home, my little chap; it's high time you
were abed,' said John, whisking the damp papers into one pocket, and his
purse out of another, as he spoke.

'All of 'em?--why there's six!' croaked the boy, for he was as hoarse as
a raven.

'Never mind, I can kindle the fire with 'em. Put that in your pocket;
and trot home, my man, as fast as possible.'

'Where do you live?' I asked, picking up the fifty cents that fell from
the little fingers, too benumbed to hold it.

'Mills Court, out of Hanover. Cold, ain't it?' said the boy, blowing on
his purple hands, and hopping feebly from one leg to the other, to take
the stiffness out.

'He can't go all that way in this storm--such a mite, and so used up
with cold and sleep, John.'

'Of course he can't; we'll put him in a car,' began John; when the boy
wheezed out,--

'No; I've got ter wait for Sam. He'll be along as soon's the theatre's
done. He said he would; and so I'm waitin'.'

'Who is Sam?' I asked.

'He's the feller I lives with. I ain't got any folks, and he takes care
o' me.'

'Nice care, indeed; leaving a baby like you to wait for him here such a
night as this,' I said crossly.

'Oh, he's good to me Sam is, though he does knock me round sometimes,
when I ain't spry. The big feller shoves me back, you see; and I gets
cold, and can't sing out loud; so I don't sell my papers, and has to
work 'em off late.'

'Hear the child talk! One would think he was sixteen, instead of six,' I
said, half laughing.

'I'm most ten. Hi! ain't that a oner?' cried the boy, as a gust of sleet
slapped him in the face, when he peeped to see if Sam was coming.
'Hullo! the lights is out! Why, the play's done, and the folks gone, and
Sam's forgot me.'

It was very evident that Sam _had_ forgotten his little _protégé_; and
a strong desire to shake Sam possessed me.

'No use waitin' any longer; and now my papers is sold, I ain't afraid to
go home,' said the boy, stepping down like a little old man with the
rheumatism, and preparing to trudge away through the storm.

'Stop a bit, my little Casabianca; a car will be along in fifteen
minutes; and while waiting you can warm yourself over there,' said John,
with the purple hand in his.

'My name's Jack Hill, not Cassy Banks, please, sir,' said the little
party, with dignity.

'Have you had your supper, Mr. Hill?' asked John, laughing.

'I had some peanuts, and two sucks of Joe's orange; but it warn't very
fillin',' he said, gravely.

'I should think not. Here! one stew; and be quick, please,' cried John,
as we sat down in a warm corner of the confectioner's opposite.

While little Jack shovelled in the hot oysters, with his eyes shutting
up now and then in spite of himself, we looked at him and thought again
of little Rosy-face at home safe in his warm nest, with mother-love
watching over him. Nodding towards the ragged, grimy, forlorn, little
creature, dropping asleep over his supper like a tired baby, I said,--

'Can you imagine our Freddy out alone at this hour, trying to 'work off'
his papers, because afraid to go home till he has?'

'I'd rather not try,' answered brother John, winking hard, as he stroked
the little head beside him, which, by the bye, looked very like a
ragged, yellow door-mat. I _think_ brother John winked hard, but I can't
be sure, for I know I did; and for a minute there seemed to be a dozen
little newsboys dancing before my eyes.

'There goes our car; and it's the last,' said John, looking at me.

'Let it go, but don't leave the boy;' and I frowned at John for hinting
at such a thing.

'Here is his car. Now, my lad, bolt your last oyster, and come on.'

'Good-night, ma'am! thankee, sir!' croaked the grateful little voice, as
the child was caught up in John's strong hands and set down on the
car-step.

With a word to the conductor, and a small business transaction, we left
Jack coiled up in a corner to finish his nap as tranquilly as if it
wasn't midnight, and a 'knocking-round' might not await him at his
journey's end.

We didn't mind the storm much as we plodded home; and when I told the
story to Rosy-face, next day, his interest quite reconciled me to the
sniffs and sneezes of a bad cold.

'If I saw that poor little boy, Aunt Jo, I'd love him lots!' said
Freddy, with a world of pity in his beautiful child's eyes.

And, believing that others also would be kind to little Jack, and such
as he, I tell the story.

When busy fathers hurry home at night, I hope they'll buy their papers
of the small boys, who get 'shoved back;' the feeble ones, who grow
hoarse, and can't 'sing out;' the shabby ones, who evidently have only
forgetful Sams to care for them; and the hungry-looking ones, who don't
get what is 'fillin'.' For love of the little sons and daughters safe at
home, say a kind word, buy a paper, even if you don't want it; and never
pass by, leaving them to sleep forgotten in the streets at midnight,
with no pillow but a stone, no coverlet but the pitiless snow, and not
even a tender-hearted robin to drop leaves over them.




_PATTY'S PATCHWORK._


'I perfectly hate it! and something dreadful ought to be done to the
woman who invented it,' said Patty, in a pet, sending a shower of gay
pieces flying over the carpet as if a small whirlwind and a rainbow had
got into a quarrel.

Puss did not agree with Patty, for, after a surprised hop when the
flurry came, she calmly laid herself down on a red square, purring
comfortably and winking her yellow eyes, as if she thanked the little
girl for the bright bed that set off her white fur so prettily. This
cool performance made Patty laugh, and say more pleasantly--

'Well, it _is_ tiresome, isn't it, Aunt Pen?'

'Sometimes; but we all have to make patchwork, my dear, and do the best
we can with the pieces given us.'

'Do we?' and Patty opened her eyes in great astonishment at this new
idea.

'Our lives are patchwork, and it depends on us a good deal how the
bright and dark bits get put together so that the whole is neat, pretty,
and useful when it is done,' said Aunt Pen soberly.

'Deary me, now she is going to preach,' thought Patty; but she rather
liked Aunt Pen's preachments, for a good deal of fun got mixed up with
the moralising; and she was so good herself that children could never
say in their naughty little minds, 'You are just as bad as we, so you
needn't talk to us, ma'am.'

'I gave you that patchwork to see what you would make of it, and it is
as good as a diary to me, for I can tell by the different squares how
you felt when you made them,' continued Aunt Pen, with a twinkle in her
eye as she glanced at the many-coloured bits on the carpet.

'Can you truly? just try and see,' and Patty looked interested at once.

Pointing with the yard-measure, Aunt Pen said, tapping a certain dingy,
puckered, brown and purple square--

'That is a bad day; don't it look so?'

'Well, it was, I do declare! for that was the Monday piece, when
everything went wrong and I didn't care how my work looked,' cried
Patty, surprised at Aunt Pen's skill in reading the calico diary.

'This pretty pink and white one so neatly sewed is a good day; this
funny mixture of red, blue, and yellow with the big stitches is a merry
day; that one with spots on it is one that got cried over; this with the
gay flowers is a day full of good little plans and resolutions; and that
one made of dainty bits, all stars and dots and tiny leaves, is the one
you made when you were thinking about the dear new baby there at home.'

'Why, Aunt Pen, you are a fairy! How _did_ you know? they truly are just
as you say, as near as I can remember. I rather like that sort of
patchwork,' and Patty sat down upon the floor to collect, examine, and
arrange her discarded work with a new interest in it.

'I see what is going on, and I have queer plays in my mind just as you
little folks do. Suppose you make this a moral bed-quilt, as some people
make album quilts. See how much patience, perseverance, good nature, and
industry you can put into it. Every bit will have a lesson or a story,
and when you lie under it you will find it a real comforter,' said Aunt
Pen, who wanted to amuse the child and teach her something better even
than the good old-fashioned accomplishment of needlework.

'I don't see how I can put that sort of thing into it,' answered Patty,
as she gently lifted puss into her lap, instead of twitching the red bit
roughly from under her.

'There goes a nice little piece of kindness this very minute,' laughed
Aunt Pen, pointing to the cat and the red square.

Patty laughed also, and looked pleased as she stroked Mother Bunch,
while she said thoughtfully--

'I see what you mean now. I am making two kinds of patchwork at the same
time; and this that I see is to remind me of the other kind that I don't
see.'

'Every task, no matter how small or homely, that gets well and
cheerfully done, is a fine thing; and the sooner we learn to use up the
dark and bright bits (the pleasures and pains, the cares and duties)
into a cheerful, useful life, the sooner we become real comforters, and
every one likes to cuddle about us. Don't you see, deary?'

'That's what you are, Aunt Pen;' and Patty put up her hand to hold fast
by that other strong, kind, helpful hand that did so much, yet never was
tired, cold, or empty.

Aunt Pen took the chubby little one in both her own, and said, smiling,
yet with meaning in her eyes, as she tapped the small fore-finger, rough
with impatient and unskilful sewing--

'Shall we try and see what a nice little comforter we can make this
month, while you wait to be called home to see mamma and the dear new
baby?'

'Yes, I'd like to try;' and Patty gave Aunt Pen's hand a hearty shake,
for she wanted to be good, and rather thought the new fancy would lend a
charm to the task which we all find rather tiresome and hard.

So the bargain was made, and the patch Patty sewed that day was
beautiful to behold; for she was in a delightfully moral state of mind,
and felt quite sure that she was going to become a model for all
children to follow, if they could. The next day her ardour had cooled a
little, and being in a hurry to go out to play, she slighted her work,
thinking no one would know. But the third day she got so angry with her
patch that she tore it in two, and declared it was all nonsense to fuss
about being good and thorough and all the rest of it.

Aunt Pen did not say much, but made her mend and finish her patch and
add it to the pile. After she went to bed that night Patty thought of
it, and wished she could do it over, it looked so badly. But as it could
not be, she had a penitent fit, and resolved to keep her temper while
she sewed, at any rate, for mamma was to see the little quilt when it
was done, and would want to know all about it.

Of course she did not devote herself to being good _all_ the time, but
spent her days in lessons, play, mischief, and fun, like any other
lively, ten-year-older. But somehow, whenever the sewing-hour came, she
remembered that talk; and as she worked she fell into the way of
wondering whether Aunt Pen could guess from the patches what sort of
days she had passed. She wanted to try and see, but Aunt Pen refused to
read any more calico till the quilt was done: then, she said in a
queer, solemn way, she should make the good and bad days appear in a
remarkable manner.

This puzzled Patty very much, and she quite ached to know what the joke
would be; meantime the pile grew steadily, and every day, good or bad,
added to that other work called Patty's life. She did not think much
about that part of it, but unconsciously the quiet sewing-time had its
influence on her, and that little 'conscience hour,' as she sometimes
called it, helped her very much.

One day she said to herself as she took up her work, 'Now I'll puzzle
Aunt Pen. She thinks my naughty tricks get into the patches; but I'll
make this very nicely and have it gay, and then I don't see how she will
ever guess what I did this morning.'

Now you must know that Tweedle-dee, the canary, was let out every day
to fly about the room and enjoy himself. Mother Bunch never tried to
catch him, though he often hopped temptingly near her. He was a droll
little bird, and Patty liked to watch his promenades, for he did funny
things. That day he made her laugh by trying to fly away with a shawl,
picking up the fringe with which to line the nest he was always trying
to build. It was so heavy he tumbled on his back and lay kicking and
pulling, but had to give it up and content himself with a bit of thread.

Patty was forbidden to chase or touch him at these times, but always
felt a strong desire to have just one grab at him and see how he felt.
That day, being alone in the dining-room, she found it impossible to
resist; and when Tweedle-dee came tripping pertly over the table-cloth,
cocking his head on one side with shrill chirps and little prancings,
she caught him, and for a minute held him fast in spite of his wrathful
pecking.

She put her thimble on his head, laughing to see how funny he looked,
and just then he slipped out of her hand. She clutched at him, missed
him, but alas, alas! he left his little tail behind him. Every feather
in his blessed little tail, I do assure you; and there sat Patty with
the yellow plumes in her hand and dismay in her face. Poor Tweedle-dee
retired to his cage much afflicted, and sung no more that day, but Patty
hid the lost tail and never said a word about it.

'Aunt Pen is so near-sighted she won't mind, and maybe he will have
another tail pretty soon, or she will think he is moulting. If she asks
of course I shall tell her.'

Patty settled it in that way, forgetting that the slide was open and
Aunt Pen in the kitchen. So she made a neat blue and buff patch, and put
it away, meaning to puzzle aunty when the reading-time came. But Patty
got the worst of it, as you will see by-and-bye.

Another day she strolled into the store-room and saw a large tray of
fresh buns standing there. Now, it was against the rule to eat between
meals, and new hot bread or cake was especially forbidden. Patty
remembered both these things, but could not resist temptation. One
plump, brown bun, with a lovely plum right in the middle, was so
fascinating it was impossible to let it alone; so Patty whipped it into
her pocket, ran to the garden, and hiding behind the big lilac-bush, ate
it in a great hurry. It was just out of the oven, and so hot it burned
her throat, and lay like a live coal in her little stomach after it was
down, making her very uncomfortable for several hours.

'Why do you keep sighing?' asked Aunt Pen, as Patty sat down to her
work.

'I don't feel very well.'

'You have eaten something that disagrees with you. Did you eat hot
biscuits for breakfast?'

'No, ma'am, I never do,' and Patty gave another little gasp, for the bun
lay very heavily on both stomach and conscience just then.

'A drop or two of ammonia will set you right,' and Aunt Pen gave her
some. It did set the stomach right, but the conscience still worried
her, for she could not make up her mind to 'fess' the sly, greedy thing
she had done.

'Put a white patch in the middle of those green ones,' said Aunt Pen, as
Patty sat soberly sewing her daily square.

'Why?' asked the little girl, for aunty seldom interfered in her
arrangement of the quilt.

'It will look pretty, and match the other three squares that are going
at the corners of that middle piece.'

'Well, I will,' and Patty sewed away, wondering at this sudden interest
in her work, and why Aunt Pen laughed to herself as she put away the
ammonia bottle.

These are two of the naughty little things that got worked into the
quilt; but there were good ones also, and Aunt Pen's sharp eyes saw them
all.

At the window of a house opposite, Patty often saw a little girl who sat
there playing with an old doll or a torn book. She never seemed to run
about or go out, and Patty often wondered if she was sick, she looked so
thin and sober, and was so quiet. Patty began by making faces at her
for fun, but the little girl only smiled back, and nodded so
good-naturedly that Patty was ashamed of herself.

'Is that girl over there poor?' she asked suddenly as she watched her
one day.

'Very poor: her mother takes in sewing, and the child is lame,' answered
Aunt Pen, without looking up from the letter she was writing.

'Her doll is nothing but an old shawl tied round with a string, and she
don't seem to have but one book. Wonder if she'd like to have me come
and play with her,' said Patty to herself, as she stood her own big doll
in the window, and nodded back at the girl, who bobbed up and down in
her chair with delight at this agreeable prospect.

'You can go and see her some day if you like,' said Aunt Pen, scribbling
away.

Patty said no more then, but later in the afternoon she remembered this
permission, and resolved to try if aunty would find out her good doings
as well as her bad ones. So, tucking Blanch Augusta Arabella Maud under
one arm, her best picture-book under the other, and gathering a little
nosegay of her own flowers, she slipped across the road, knocked, and
marched boldly upstairs.

Mrs. Brown, the sewing-woman, was out, and no one there but Lizzie in
her chair at the window, looking lonely and forlorn.

'How do you do? My name is Patty, and I live over there, and I've come
to play with you,' said one child in a friendly tone.

'How do you do? My name is Lizzie, and I'm very glad to see you. What a
lovely doll!' returned the other child gratefully; and then the ceremony
of introduction was over, and they began to play as if they had known
each other for ever so long.

To poor Lizzie it seemed as if a little fairy had suddenly appeared to
brighten the dismal room with flowers and smiles and pretty things;
while Patty felt her pity and good-will increase as she saw Lizzie's
crippled feet, and watched her thin face brighten and glow with interest
and delight over book and doll and posy. 'It felt good,' as Patty said
afterwards; 'sort of warm and comfortable in my heart, and I liked it
ever so much.' She stayed an hour, making sunshine in a shady place, and
then ran home, wondering if Aunt Pen would find that out.

She found her sitting with her hands before her, and such a sad look in
her face that Patty ran to her, saying anxiously--

'What's the matter, aunty? Are you sick?'

'No dear; but I have sorrowful news for you. Come, sit in my lap and
let me tell you as gently as I can.'

'Mamma is dead!' Cried Patty with a look of terror in her rosy face.

'No, thank God! but the dear, new baby only stayed a week, and we shall
never see her in this world.'

With a cry of sorrow Patty threw herself into the arms outstretched to
her, and on Aunt Pen's loving bosom sobbed away the first bitterness of
her grief and disappointment.

'Oh, I wanted a little sister so much, and I was going to be so fond of
her, and was so glad she came, and now I can't see or have her even for
a day! I'm _so_ disappointed I don't think I _can_ bear it,' sobbed
Patty.

'Think of poor mamma, and bear it bravely for her sake,' whispered Aunt
Pen, wiping away her own and Patty's tears.

'Oh, dear me! there's the pretty quilt I was going to make for baby, and
now it isn't any use, and I can't bear to finish it;' and Patty broke
out afresh at the thought of so much love's labour lost.

'Mamma will love to see it, so I wouldn't give it up. Work is the best
cure for sorrow; and I think you never will be sorry you tried it. Let
us put a bright bit of submission with this dark trouble, and work both
into your little life as patiently as we can, deary.'

Patty put up her trembling lips, and kissed Aunt Pen, grateful for the
tender sympathy and the helpful words. 'I'll try,' was all she said; and
then they sat talking quietly together about the dear, dead baby, who
only stayed long enough to make a place in every one's heart, and leave
them aching when she went.

Patty did try to bear her first trouble bravely, and got on very well
after the first day or two, except when the sewing-hour came. Then the
sight of the pretty patchwork recalled the memory of the cradle it was
meant to cover, and reminded her that it was empty now. Many quiet tears
dropped on Patty's work; and sometimes she had to put it down and sob,
for she had longed so for a little sister, it was very hard to give her
up, and put away all the loving plans she had made for the happy time
when baby came. A great many tender little thoughts and feelings got
sewed into the gay squares; and if a small stain showed here and there,
I think they only added to its beauty in the eyes of those who knew what
made them. Aunt Pen never suggested picking out certain puckered bits
and grimy stitches, for she knew that just there the little fingers
trembled, and the blue eyes got dim as they touched and saw the
delicate, flowery bits left from baby's gowns.

Lizzie was full of sympathy, and came hopping over on her crutches with
her only treasure, a black rabbit, to console her friend. But of all the
comfort given, Mother Bunch's share was the greatest and best; for that
very first sad day, as Patty wandered about the house disconsolately,
puss came hurrying to meet her, and in her dumb way begged her mistress
to follow and see the fine surprise prepared for her--four plump kits as
white as snow, with four gray tails all wagging in a row, as they laid
on their proud mamma's downy breast, while she purred over them, with
her yellow eyes full of supreme content.

It was in the barn, and Patty lay for an hour with her head close to
Mother Bunch, and her hands softly touching the charming little
Bunches, who squeaked and tumbled and sprawled about with their dim eyes
blinking, their tiny pink paws fumbling, and their dear gray tails
waggling in the sweetest way. Such a comfort as they were to Patty no
words could tell, and nothing will ever convince me that Mrs. Bunch did
not know all about baby, and so lay herself out to cheer up her little
mistress like a motherly loving old puss, as she was.

As Patty lay on the rug that evening while Aunt Pen sung softly in the
twilight, a small, white figure came pattering over the straw carpet,
and dropped a soft, warm ball down by Patty's cheek, saying, as plainly
as a loud, confiding purr could say it--

'There, my dear, this is a lonely time for you, I know, so I've brought
my best and prettiest darling to comfort you;' and with that Mother
Bunch sat down and washed her face, while Patty cuddled little
Snowdrop, and forgot to cry about baby.

Soon after this came a great happiness to Patty in the shape of a letter
from mamma, saying she must have her little girl back a week earlier
than they had planned.

'I'm sorry to leave you, aunty, but it is _so_ nice to be wanted, and
I'm all mamma has now, you know, so I must hurry and finish my work to
surprise her with. How shall we finish it off? There ought to be
something regularly splendid to go all round,' said Patty, in a great
bustle, as she laid out her pieces, and found that only a few more were
needed to complete the 'moral bed-quilt.'

'I must try and find something. We will put this white star, with the
blue round it, in the middle, for it is the neatest and prettiest piece,
in spite of the stains. I will sew in this part, and you may finish
putting the long strips together,' said Aunt Pen, rummaging her bags and
bundles for something fine to end off with.

'I know! I've got something!' and away hurried Lizzie, who was there,
and much interested in the work.

She came hopping back again, presently, with a roll in her hand, which
she proudly spread out, saying--

'There! mother gave me that ever so long ago, but I never had any quilt
to use it for, and now it's just what you want. You can't buy such
chintz now-a-days, and I'm _so_ glad I had it for you.'

'It's regularly splendid!' cried Patty, in a rapture; and so it was, for
the pink and white was all covered with animals, and the blue was full
of birds and butterflies and bees flying about as naturally as possible.
Really lovely were the little figures and the clear, soft colours, and
Aunt Pen clapped her hands, while Patty hugged her friend, and declared
that the quilt was perfect now.

Mrs. Brown begged to be allowed to quilt it when the patches were all
nicely put together, and Patty was glad to have her, for that part of
the work was beyond her skill. It did not come home till the morning
Patty left, and Aunt Pen packed it up without ever unrolling it.

'We will look at it together when we show it to mamma,' she said: and
Patty was in such a hurry to be off that she made no objection.

A pleasant journey, a great deal of hugging and kissing, some tears and
tender laments for baby, and then it was time to show the quilt, which
mamma said was just what she wanted to throw over her feet as she lay on
the sofa.

If there _were_ any fairies, Patty would have been sure they had done
something to her bed-cover, for when she proudly unrolled it, what do
you think she saw?

Right in the middle of the white star, which was the centre-piece,
delicately drawn with indelible ink, was a smiling little cherub, all
head and wings, and under it these lines--

  'While sister dear lies asleep,
  Baby careful watch will keep.'

Then in each of the four gay squares that were at the corners of the
strip that framed the star, was a white bit bearing other pictures and
couplets that both pleased and abashed Patty as she saw and read them.

In one was seen a remarkably fine bun, with the lines--

  'Who stole the hot bun
    And got burnt well?
  Go ask the lilac bush,
    Guess it can tell.'

In the next was a plump, tailless bird, who seemed to be saying
mournfully--

  'My little tail, my little tail!
  This bitter loss I still bewail;
  But rather ne'er have tail again
  Than Patty should deceive Aunt Pen.'

The third was less embarrassing, for it was a pretty bunch of flowers so
daintily drawn one could almost think they smelt them, and these lines
were underneath--

  'Every flower to others given,
  Blossoms fair and sweet in heaven.'

The fourth was a picture of a curly-haired child sewing, with some very
large tears rolling down her cheeks and tumbling off her lap like
marbles, while some tiny sprites were catching and flying away with them
as if they were very precious--

  'Every tender drop that fell,
    Loving spirits caught and kept;
  And Patty's sorrows lighter grew,
    For the gentle tears she wept.'

'Oh, aunty! what does it all mean?' cried Patty, who had looked both
pleased and ashamed as she glanced from one picture to the other.

'It means, dear, that the goods and bads got into the bed-quilt in spite
of you, and there they are to tell their own story. The bun and the lost
tail, the posy you took to poor Lizzie, and the trouble you bore so
sweetly. It is just so with our lives, though we don't see it quite as
clearly as this. Invisible hands paint our faults and virtues, and
by-and-bye we have to see them, so we must be careful that they are good
and lovely, and we are not ashamed to let the eyes that love us best
read there the history of our lives.'

As Aunt Pen spoke, and Patty listened with a thoughtful face, mamma
softly drew the pictured coverlet over her, and whispered, as she held
her little daughter close--

'My Patty will remember this; and if all her years tell as good a story
as this month, I shall not fear to read the record, and she will be in
truth my little comforter.'


(FOR SECOND SERIES, SEE 'SHAWL-STRAPS.')


  PRINTED BY
  SPOTTISWOODE AND CO., NEW-STREET SQUARE
  LONDON





AUNT JO'S SCRAP-BAG

Is now full, and contains

    =I. MY BOYS=, and other stories.
   =II. SHAWL-STRAPS=. Sketches of a European Trip.
  =III. CUPID AND CHOW-CHOW=, and other stories.
   =IV. MY GIRLS=, and other stories.
    =V. JIMMY'S CRUISE IN THE PINAFORE=, and other stories.
   =VI. AN OLD-FASHIONED THANKSGIVING=, and other stories.

_Six volumes neatly bound in cloth. Price, $6.00._

ROBERTS BROTHERS, PUBLISHERS, BOSTON.

[Illustration: AN OLD-FASHIONED THANKSGIVING.

"Suddenly Tilly threw down the axe, flung open the door, and ran
straight into the arms of the bear."--PAGE 29.]

[Illustration: HOW IT ALL HAPPENED.

Dolly opened the door, and started back with a cry of astonishment at
the lovely spectacle before her.--PAGE 47.]

       *       *       *       *       *




AUNT JO'S SCRAP-BAG.

AN OLD-FASHIONED THANKSGIVING,
  Etc.

[Illustration: SCRAP-BAG, VOL. VI.]

BY LOUISA M. ALCOTT,

AUTHOR OF "LITTLE WOMEN," "AN OLD-FASHIONED GIRL," "LITTLE MEN,"
"HOSPITAL SKETCHES."

  BOSTON:
  ROBERTS BROTHERS.
  1882.

  _Copyright, 1882,_
  BY LOUISA M. ALCOTT.

  UNIVERSITY PRESS:
  JOHN WILSON AND SON, CAMBRIDGE.




CONTENTS.

                                                               PAGE.
     I. AN OLD-FASHIONED THANKSGIVING                              7
    II. HOW IT ALL HAPPENED                                       37
   III. THE DOLLS' JOURNEY FROM MINNESOTA TO MAINE                53
    IV. MORNING-GLORIES                                           78
     V. SHADOW-CHILDREN                                          104
    VI. POPPY'S PRANKS                                           124
   VII. WHAT THE SWALLOWS DID                                    147
  VIII. LITTLE GULLIVER                                          163
    IX. THE WHALE'S STORY                                        178
     X. A STRANGE ISLAND                                         192
    XI. FANCY'S FRIEND                                           208

       *       *       *       *       *




I.

AN OLD-FASHIONED THANKSGIVING.


Sixty years ago, up among the New Hampshire hills, lived Farmer Bassett,
with a house full of sturdy sons and daughters growing up about him.
They were poor in money, but rich in land and love, for the wide acres
of wood, corn, and pasture land fed, warmed, and clothed the flock,
while mutual patience, affection, and courage made the old farm-house a
very happy home.

November had come; the crops were in, and barn, buttery, and bin were
overflowing with the harvest that rewarded the summer's hard work. The
big kitchen was a jolly place just now, for in the great fireplace
roared a cheerful fire; on the walls hung garlands of dried apples,
onions, and corn; up aloft from the beams shone crook-necked squashes,
juicy hams, and dried venison--for in those days deer still haunted the
deep forests, and hunters flourished. Savory smells were in the air; on
the crane hung steaming kettles, and down among the red embers copper
sauce-pans simmered, all suggestive of some approaching feast.

A white-headed baby lay in the old blue cradle that had rocked seven
other babies, now and then lifting his head to look out, like a round,
full moon, then subsided to kick and crow contentedly, and suck the rosy
apple he had no teeth to bite. Two small boys sat on the wooden settle
shelling corn for popping, and picking out the biggest nuts from the
goodly store their own hands had gathered in October. Four young girls
stood at the long dresser, busily chopping meat, pounding spice, and
slicing apples; and the tongues of Tilly, Prue, Roxy, and Rhody went as
fast as their hands. Farmer Bassett, and Eph, the oldest boy, were
"chorin' 'round" outside, for Thanksgiving was at hand, and all must be
in order for that time-honored day.

To and fro, from table to hearth, bustled buxom Mrs. Bassett, flushed
and floury, but busy and blithe as the queen bee of this busy little
hive should be.

"I do like to begin seasonable and have things to my mind. Thanksgivin'
dinners can't be drove, and it does take a sight of victuals to fill all
these hungry stomicks," said the good woman, as she gave a vigorous stir
to the great kettle of cider apple-sauce, and cast a glance of
housewifely pride at the fine array of pies set forth on the buttery
shelves.

"Only one more day and then it will be time to eat. I didn't take but
one bowl of hasty pudding this morning, so I shall have plenty of room
when the nice things come," confided Seth to Sol, as he cracked a large
hazel-nut as easily as a squirrel.

"No need of my starvin' beforehand. _I always_ have room enough, and I'd
like to have Thanksgiving every day," answered Solomon, gloating like a
young ogre over the little pig that lay near by, ready for roasting.

"Sakes alive, I don't, boys! It's a marcy it don't come but once a year.
I should be worn to a thread-paper with all this extra work atop of my
winter weavin' and spinnin'," laughed their mother, as she plunged her
plump arms into the long bread-trough and began to knead the dough as if
a famine was at hand.

Tilly, the oldest girl, a red-cheeked, black-eyed lass of fourteen, was
grinding briskly at the mortar, for spices were costly, and not a grain
must be wasted. Prue kept time with the chopper, and the twins sliced
away at the apples till their little brown arms ached, for all knew how
to work, and did so now with a will.

"I think it's real fun to have Thanksgiving at home. I'm sorry Gran'ma
is sick, so we can't go there as usual, but I like to mess 'round here,
don't you, girls?" asked Tilly, pausing to take a sniff at the spicy
pestle.

"It will be kind of lonesome with only our own folks." "I like to see
all the cousins and aunts, and have games, and sing," cried the twins,
who were regular little romps, and could run, swim, coast and shout as
well as their brothers.

"I don't care a mite for all that. It will be so nice to eat dinner
together, warm and comfortable at home," said quiet Prue, who loved her
own cozy nooks like a cat.

"Come, girls, fly 'round and get your chores done, so we can clear away
for dinner jest as soon as I clap my bread into the oven," called Mrs.
Bassett presently, as she rounded off the last loaf of brown bread which
was to feed the hungry mouths that seldom tasted any other.

"Here's a man comin' up the hill, lively!" "Guess it's Gad Hopkins. Pa
told him to bring a dezzen oranges, if they warn't too high!" shouted
Sol and Seth, running to the door, while the girls smacked their lips at
the thought of this rare treat, and Baby threw his apple overboard, as
if getting ready for a new cargo.

But all were doomed to disappointment, for it was not Gad, with the
much-desired fruit. It was a stranger, who threw himself off his horse
and hurried up to Mr. Bassett in the yard, with some brief message that
made the farmer drop his ax and look so sober that his wife guessed at
once some bad news had come; and crying, "Mother's wuss! I know she
is!" out ran the good woman, forgetful of the flour on her arms and the
oven waiting for its most important batch.

The man said old Mr. Chadwick, down to Keene, stopped him as he passed,
and told him to tell Mrs. Bassett her mother was failin' fast, and she'd
better come to-day. He knew no more, and having delivered his errand he
rode away, saying it looked like snow and he must be jogging, or he
wouldn't get home till night.

"We must go right off, Eldad. Hitch up, and I'll be ready in less'n
no time," said Mrs. Bassett, wasting not a minute in tears and
lamentations, but pulling off her apron as she went in, with her mind in
a sad jumble of bread, anxiety, turkey, sorrow, haste, and cider
apple-sauce.

A few words told the story, and the children left their work to help her
get ready, mingling their grief for "Gran'ma" with regrets for the lost
dinner.

"I'm dreadful sorry, dears, but it can't be helped. I couldn't cook nor
eat no way, now, and if that blessed woman gets better sudden, as she
has before, we'll have cause for thanksgivin', and I'll give you a
dinner you won't forget in a hurry," said Mrs. Bassett, as she tied on
her brown silk pumpkin-hood, with a sob for the good old mother who had
made it for her.

Not a child complained after that, but ran about helpfully, bringing
moccasins, heating the footstone, and getting ready for a long drive,
because Gran'ma lived twenty miles away, and there were no railroads in
those parts to whisk people to and fro like magic. By the time the old
yellow sleigh was at the door, the bread was in the oven, and Mrs.
Bassett was waiting, with her camlet cloak on, and the baby done up like
a small bale of blankets.

"Now, Eph, you must look after the cattle like a man, and keep up the
fires, for there's a storm brewin', and neither the children nor dumb
critters must suffer," said Mr. Bassett, as he turned up the collar of
his rough coat and put on his blue mittens, while the old mare shook her
bells as if she preferred a trip to Keene to hauling wood all day.

"Tilly, put extry comfortables on the beds to-night, the wind is so
searchin' up chamber. Have the baked beans and Injun-puddin' for dinner,
and whatever you do, don't let the boys git at the mince-pies, or you'll
have them down sick. I shall come back the minute I can leave Mother. Pa
will come to-morrer, anyway, so keep snug and be good. I depend on you,
my darter; use your jedgment, and don't let nothin' happen while
Mother's away."

"Yes'm, yes'm--good-bye, good-bye!" called the children, as Mrs. Bassett
was packed into the sleigh and driven away, leaving a stream of
directions behind her.

Eph, the sixteen-year-old boy, immediately put on his biggest boots,
assumed a sober, responsible manner, and surveyed his little
responsibilities with a paternal air, drolly like his father's. Tilly
tied on her mother's bunch of keys, rolled up the sleeves of her
homespun gown, and began to order about the younger girls. They soon
forgot poor Granny, and found it great fun to keep house all alone, for
Mother seldom left home, but ruled her family in the good old-fashioned
way. There were no servants, for the little daughters were Mrs.
Bassett's only maids, and the stout boys helped their father, all
working happily together with no wages but love; learning in the best
manner the use of the heads and hands with which they were to make their
own way in the world.

The few flakes that caused the farmer to predict bad weather soon
increased to a regular snow-storm, with gusts of wind, for up among the
hills winter came early and lingered long. But the children were busy,
gay, and warm in-doors, and never minded the rising gale nor the
whirling white storm outside.

Tilly got them a good dinner, and when it was over the two elder girls
went to their spinning, for in the kitchen stood the big and little
wheels, and baskets of wool-rolls, ready to be twisted into yarn for the
winter's knitting, and each day brought its stint of work to the
daughters, who hoped to be as thrifty as their mother.

Eph kept up a glorious fire, and superintended the small boys, who
popped corn and whittled boats on the hearth; while Roxy and Rhody
dressed corn-cob dolls in the settle corner, and Bose, the brindled
mastiff, lay on the braided mat, luxuriously warming his old legs. Thus
employed, they made a pretty picture, these rosy boys and girls, in
their homespun suits, with the rustic toys or tasks which most children
nowadays would find very poor or tiresome.

Tilly and Prue sang, as they stepped to and fro, drawing out
the smoothly twisted threads to the musical hum of the great
spinning-wheels. The little girls chattered like magpies over their
dolls and the new bed-spread they were planning to make, all white
dimity stars on a blue calico ground, as a Christmas present to Ma. The
boys roared at Eph's jokes, and had rough and tumble games over Bose,
who didn't mind them in the least; and so the afternoon wore pleasantly
away.

At sunset the boys went out to feed the cattle, bring in heaps of wood,
and lock up for the night, as the lonely farm-house seldom had visitors
after dark. The girls got the simple supper of brown bread and milk,
baked apples, and a doughnut all 'round as a treat. Then they sat before
the fire, the sisters knitting, the brothers with books or games, for
Eph loved reading, and Sol and Seth never failed to play a few games of
Morris with barley corns, on the little board they had made themselves
at one corner of the dresser.

"Read out a piece," said Tilly, from Mother's chair, where she sat in
state, finishing off the sixth woolen sock she had knit that month.

"It's the old history book, but here's a bit you may like, since it's
about our folks," answered Eph, turning the yellow page to look at a
picture of two quaintly dressed children in some ancient castle.

"Yes, read that. I always like to hear about the Lady Matildy I was
named for, and Lord Bassett, Pa's great-great-great-grandpa. He's only a
farmer now, but it's nice to know that we were somebody two or three
hundred years ago," said Tilly, bridling and tossing her curly head as
she fancied the Lady Matilda might have done.

"Don't read the queer words, 'cause we don't understand 'em. Tell it,"
commanded Roxy, from the cradle, where she was drowsily cuddled with
Rhody.

"Well, a long time ago, when Charles the First was in prison, Lord
Bassett was a true friend to him," began Eph, plunging into his story
without delay. "The lord had some papers that would have hung a lot of
people if the king's enemies got hold of 'em, so when he heard one day,
all of a sudden, that soldiers were at the castle-gate to carry him
off, he had just time to call his girl to him, and say: 'I may be going
to my death, but I won't betray my master. There is no time to burn the
papers, and I can not take them with me; they are hidden in the old
leathern chair where I sit. No one knows this but you, and you must
guard them till I come or send you a safe messenger to take them away.
Promise me to be brave and silent, and I can go without fear.' You see,
he wasn't afraid to die, but he _was_ to seem a traitor. Lady Matildy
promised solemnly, and the words were hardly out of her mouth when the
men came in, and her father was carried away a prisoner and sent off to
the Tower.

"But she didn't cry; she just called her brother, and sat down in that
chair, with her head leaning back on those papers, like a queen, and
waited while the soldiers hunted the house over for 'em: wasn't that a
smart girl?" cried Tilly, beaming with pride, for she was named for this
ancestress, and knew the story by heart.

"I reckon she was scared, though, when the men came swearin' in and
asked her if she knew anything about it. The boy did his part then, for
_he_ didn't know, and fired up and stood before his sister; and he says,
says he, as bold as a lion: 'If my lord had told us where the papers be,
we would die before we would betray him. But we are children and know
nothing, and it is cowardly of you to try to fright us with oaths and
drawn swords!'"

As Eph quoted from the book, Seth planted himself before Tilly, with the
long poker in his hand, saying, as he flourished it valiantly:

"Why didn't the boy take his father's sword and lay about him? I would,
if any one was ha'sh to Tilly."

"You bantam! He was only a bit of a boy, and couldn't do anything. Sit
down and hear the rest of it," commanded Tilly, with a pat on the yellow
head, and a private resolve that Seth should have the largest piece of
pie at dinner next day, as reward for his chivalry.

"Well, the men went off after turning the castle out of window, but they
said they should come again; so faithful Matildy was full of trouble,
and hardly dared to leave the room where the chair stood. All day she
sat there, and at night her sleep was so full of fear about it, that she
often got up and went to see that all was safe. The servants thought the
fright had hurt her wits, and let her be, but Rupert, the boy, stood by
her and never was afraid of her queer ways. She was 'a pious maid,' the
book says, and often spent the long evenings reading the Bible, with her
brother by her, all alone in the great room, with no one to help her
bear her secret, and no good news of her father. At last, word came that
the king was dead and his friends banished out of England. Then the
poor children were in a sad plight, for they had no mother, and the
servants all ran away, leaving only one faithful old man to help them."

"But the father did come?" cried Roxy, eagerly.

"You'll see," continued Eph, half telling, half reading.

"Matilda was sure he would, so she sat on in the big chair, guarding the
papers, and no one could get her away, till one day a man came with her
father's ring and told her to give up the secret. She knew the ring, but
would not tell until she had asked many questions, so as to be very
sure, and while the man answered all about her father and the king, she
looked at him sharply. Then she stood up and said, in a tremble, for
there was something strange about the man: 'Sir, I doubt you in spite of
the ring, and I will not answer till you pull off the false beard you
wear, that I may see your face and know if you are my father's friend or
foe.' Off came the disguise, and Matilda found it was my lord himself,
come to take them with him out of England. He was very proud of that
faithful girl, I guess, for the old chair still stands in the castle,
and the name keeps in the family, Pa says, even over here, where some of
the Bassetts came along with the Pilgrims."

"Our Tilly would have been as brave, I know, and she looks like the old
picter down to Grandma's, don't she, Eph?" cried Prue, who admired her
bold, bright sister very much.

"Well, I think you'd do the settin' part best, Prue, you are so patient.
Till would fight like a wild cat, but she can't hold her tongue worth a
cent," answered Eph; whereat Tilly pulled his hair, and the story ended
with a general frolic.

When the moon-faced clock behind the door struck nine, Tilly tucked up
the children under the "extry comfortables," and having kissed them all
around, as Mother did, crept into her own nest, never minding the little
drifts of snow that sifted in upon her coverlet between the shingles of
the roof, nor the storm that raged without.

As if he felt the need of unusual vigilance, old Bose lay down on the
mat before the door, and pussy had the warm hearth all to herself. If
any late wanderer had looked in at midnight, he would have seen the fire
blazing up again, and in the cheerful glow the old cat blinking her
yellow eyes, as she sat bolt upright beside the spinning-wheel, like
some sort of household goblin, guarding the children while they slept.

When they woke, like early birds, it still snowed, but up the little
Bassetts jumped, broke the ice in their pitchers, and went down with
cheeks glowing like winter apples, after a brisk scrub and scramble
into their clothes. Eph was off to the barn, and Tilly soon had a great
kettle of mush ready, which, with milk warm from the cows, made a
wholesome breakfast for the seven hearty children.

"Now about dinner," said the young housekeeper, as the pewter spoons
stopped clattering, and the earthen bowls stood empty.

"Ma said, have what we liked, but she didn't expect us to have a real
Thanksgiving dinner, because she won't be here to cook it, and we don't
know how," began Prue, doubtfully.

"I can roast a turkey and make a pudding as well as anybody, I guess.
The pies are all ready, and if we can't boil vegetables and so on, we
don't deserve any dinner," cried Tilly, burning to distinguish herself,
and bound to enjoy to the utmost her brief authority.

"Yes, yes!" cried all the boys, "let's have a dinner anyway; Ma won't
care, and the good victuals will spoil if they ain't eaten right up."

"Pa is coming to-night, so we won't have dinner till late; that will be
real genteel and give us plenty of time," added Tilly, suddenly
realizing the novelty of the task she had undertaken.

"Did you ever roast a turkey?" asked Roxy, with an air of deep interest.

"Should you darst to try?" said Rhody, in an awe-stricken tone.

"You will see what I can do. Ma said I was to use my jedgment about
things, and I'm going to. All you children have got to do is to keep out
of the way, and let Prue and me work. Eph, I wish you'd put a fire in
the best room, so the little ones can play in there. We shall want the
settin'-room for the table, and I won't have 'em pickin' 'round when we
get things fixed," commanded Tilly, bound to make her short reign a
brilliant one.

"I don't know about that. Ma didn't tell us to," began cautious Eph, who
felt that this invasion of the sacred best parlor was a daring step.

"Don't we always do it Sundays and Thanksgivings? Wouldn't Ma wish the
children kept safe and warm anyhow? Can I get up a nice dinner with four
rascals under my feet all the time? Come, now, if you want roast turkey
and onions, plum-puddin' and mince-pie, you'll have to do as I tell you,
and be lively about it."

Tilly spoke with such spirit, and her last suggestion was so
irresistible, that Eph gave in, and, laughing good-naturedly, tramped
away to heat up the best room, devoutly hoping that nothing serious
would happen to punish such audacity.

The young folks delightedly trooped in to destroy the order of that prim
apartment with housekeeping under the black horse-hair sofa, "horseback
riders" on the arms of the best rocking-chair, and an Indian war-dance
all over the well-waxed furniture. Eph, finding the society of the
peaceful sheep and cows more to his mind than that of two excited
sisters, lingered over his chores in the barn as long as possible, and
left the girls in peace.

Now Tilly and Prue were in their glory, and as soon as the breakfast
things were out of the way, they prepared for a grand cooking-time. They
were handy girls, though they had never heard of a cooking-school, never
touched a piano, and knew nothing of embroidery beyond the samplers
which hung framed in the parlor; one ornamented with a pink mourner
under a blue weeping-willow, the other with this pleasing verse, each
word being done in a different color, which gave the effect of a
distracted rainbow:

    "This sampler neat was worked by me,
     In my twelfth year, Prudence B."

Both rolled up their sleeves, put on their largest aprons, and got out
all the spoons, dishes, pots, and pans they could find, "so as to have
everything handy," as Prue said.

"Now, sister, we'll have dinner at five; Pa will be here by that time if
he is coming to-night, and be so surprised to find us all ready, for he
won't have had any very nice victuals if Gran'ma is so sick," said Tilly
importantly. "I shall give the children a piece at noon" (Tilly meant
luncheon); "doughnuts and cheese, with apple-pie and cider will please
'em. There's beans for Eph; he likes cold pork, so we won't stop to warm
it up, for there's lots to do, and I don't mind saying to you I'm
dreadful dubersome about the turkey."

"It's all ready but the stuffing, and roasting is as easy as can be. I
can baste first rate. Ma always likes to have me, I'm so patient and
stiddy, she says," answered Prue, for the responsibility of this great
undertaking did not rest upon her, so she took a cheerful view of
things.

"I know, but it's the stuffin' that troubles me," said Tilly, rubbing
her round elbows as she eyed the immense fowl laid out on a platter
before her. "I don't know how much I want, nor what sort of yarbs to put
in, and he's so awful big, I'm kind of afraid of him."

"I ain't! I fed him all summer, and he never gobbled at _me_. I feel
real mean to be thinking of gobbling him, poor old chap," laughed Prue,
patting her departed pet with an air of mingled affection and appetite.

"Well, I'll get the puddin' off my mind fust, for it ought to bile all
day. Put the big kettle on, and see that the spit is clean, while I get
ready."

Prue obediently tugged away at the crane, with its black hooks, from
which hung the iron tea-kettle and three-legged pot; then she settled
the long spit in the grooves made for it in the tall andirons, and put
the dripping-pan underneath, for in those days meat was roasted as it
should be, not baked in ovens.

Meantime Tilly attacked the plum-pudding. She felt pretty sure of coming
out right, here, for she had seen her mother do it so many times, it
looked very easy. So in went suet and fruit; all sorts of spice, to be
sure she got the right ones, and brandy instead of wine. But she forgot
both sugar and salt, and tied it in the cloth so tightly that it had no
room to swell, so it would come out as heavy as lead and as hard as a
cannon-ball, if the bag did not burst and spoil it all. Happily
unconscious of these mistakes, Tilly popped it into the pot, and proudly
watched it bobbing about before she put the cover on and left it to its
fate.

"I can't remember what flavorin' Ma puts in," she said, when she had got
her bread well soaked for the stuffing. "Sage and onions and apple-sauce
go with goose, but I can't feel sure of anything but pepper and salt for
a turkey."

"Ma puts in some kind of mint, I know, but I forget whether it is
spearmint, peppermint, or penny-royal," answered Prue, in a tone of
doubt, but trying to show her knowledge of "yarbs," or, at least, of
their names.

"Seems to me it's sweet marjoram or summer savory. I guess we'll put
both in, and then we are sure to be right. The best is up garret; you
run and get some, while I mash the bread," commanded Tilly, diving into
the mess.

Away trotted Prue, but in her haste she got catnip and wormwood, for the
garret was darkish, and Prue's little nose was so full of the smell of
the onions she had been peeling, that everything smelt of them. Eager to
be of use, she pounded up the herbs and scattered the mixture with a
liberal hand into the bowl.

"It doesn't smell just right, but I suppose it will when it is cooked,"
said Tilly, as she filled the empty stomach, that seemed aching for
food, and sewed it up with the blue yarn, which happened to be handy.
She forgot to tie down his legs and wings, but she set him by till his
hour came, well satisfied with her work.

"Shall we roast the little pig, too? I think he'd look nice with a
necklace of sausages, as Ma fixed one last Christmas," asked Prue,
elated with their success.

"I couldn't do it. I loved that little pig, and cried when he was
killed. I should feel as if I was roasting the baby," answered Tilly,
glancing toward the buttery where piggy hung, looking so pink and pretty
it certainly did seem cruel to eat him.

It took a long time to get all the vegetables ready, for, as the cellar
was full, the girls thought they would have every sort. Eph helped, and
by noon all was ready for cooking, and the cranberry-sauce, a good deal
scorched, was cooling in the lean-to.

Luncheon was a lively meal, and doughnuts and cheese vanished in such
quantities that Tilly feared no one would have an appetite for her
sumptuous dinner. The boys assured her they would be starving by five
o'clock, and Sol mourned bitterly over the little pig that was not to be
served up.

"Now you all go and coast, while Prue and I set the table and get out
the best chiny," said Tilly, bent on having her dinner look well, no
matter what its other failings might be.

Out came the rough sleds, on went the round hoods, old hats, red cloaks,
and moccasins, and away trudged the four younger Bassetts, to disport
themselves in the snow, and try the ice down by the old mill, where the
great wheel turned and splashed so merrily in the summer-time.

Eph took his fiddle and scraped away to his heart's content in the
parlor, while the girls, after a short rest, set the table and made all
ready to dish up the dinner when that exciting moment came. It was not
at all the sort of table we see now, but would look very plain and
countrified to us, with its green-handled knives and two-pronged steel
forks; its red-and-white china, and pewter platters, scoured till they
shone, with mugs and spoons to match, and a brown jug for the cider.
The cloth was coarse, but white as snow, and the little maids had seen
the blue-eyed flax grow, out of which their mother wove the linen they
had watched and watered while it bleached in the green meadow. They had
no napkins and little silver; but the best tankard and Ma's few wedding
spoons were set forth in state. Nuts and apples at the corners gave an
air, and the place of honor was left in the middle for the oranges yet
to come.

"Don't it look beautiful?" said Prue, when they paused to admire the
general effect.

"Pretty nice, I think. I wish Ma could see how well we can do it," began
Tilly, when a loud howling startled both girls, and sent them flying to
the window. The short afternoon had passed so quickly that twilight had
come before they knew it, and now, as they looked out through the
gathering dusk, they saw four small black figures tearing up the road,
to come bursting in, all screaming at once: "The bear, the bear! Eph,
get the gun! He's coming, he's coming!"

Eph had dropped his fiddle, and got down his gun before the girls could
calm the children enough to tell their story, which they did in a
somewhat incoherent manner. "Down in the holler, coastin', we heard a
growl," began Sol, with his eyes as big as saucers. "I see him fust
lookin' over the wall," roared Seth, eager to get his share of honor.

"Awful big and shaggy," quavered Roxy, clinging to Tilly, while Rhody
hid in Prue's skirts, and piped out: "His great paws kept clawing at us,
and I was so scared my legs would hardly go."

"We ran away as fast as we could go, and he come growling after us. He's
awful hungry, and he'll eat every one of us if he gets in," continued
Sol, looking about him for a safe retreat.

"Oh, Eph, don't let him eat us," cried both little girls, flying up
stairs to hide under their mother's bed, as their surest shelter.

"No danger of that, you little geese. I'll shoot him as soon as he
comes. Get out of the way, boys," and Eph raised the window to get good
aim.

"There he is! Fire away, and don't miss!" cried Seth, hastily following
Sol, who had climbed to the top of the dresser as a good perch from
which to view the approaching fray.

Prue retired to the hearth as if bent on dying at her post rather than
desert the turkey, now "browning beautiful," as she expressed it. But
Tilly boldly stood at the open window, ready to lend a hand if the enemy
proved too much for Eph.

All had seen bears, but none had ever come so near before, and even
brave Eph felt that the big brown beast slowly trotting up the door-yard
was an unusually formidable specimen. He was growling horribly, and
stopped now and then as if to rest and shake himself.

"Get the ax, Tilly, and if I should miss, stand ready to keep him off
while I load again," said Eph, anxious to kill his first bear in style
and alone; a girl's help didn't count.

Tilly flew for the ax, and was at her brother's side by the time the
bear was near enough to be dangerous. He stood on his hind legs, and
seemed to sniff with relish the savory odors that poured out of the
window.

"Fire, Eph!" cried Tilly, firmly.

"Wait till he rears again. I'll get a better shot, then," answered the
boy, while Prue covered her ears to shut out the bang, and the small
boys cheered from their dusty refuge up among the pumpkins.

But a very singular thing happened next, and all who saw it stood
amazed, for suddenly Tilly threw down the ax, flung open the door, and
ran straight into the arms of the bear, who stood erect to receive her,
while his growlings changed to a loud "Haw, haw!" that startled the
children more than the report of a gun.

"It's Gad Hopkins, tryin' to fool us!" cried Eph, much disgusted at the
loss of his prey, for these hardy boys loved to hunt, and prided
themselves on the number of wild animals and birds they could shoot in a
year.

"Oh, Gad, how could you scare us so?" laughed Tilly, still held fast in
one shaggy arm of the bear, while the other drew a dozen oranges from
some deep pocket in the buffalo-skin coat, and fired them into the
kitchen with such good aim that Eph ducked, Prue screamed, and Sol and
Seth came down much quicker than they went up.

"Wal, you see I got upsot over yonder, and the old horse went home while
I was floundering in a drift, so I tied on the buffalers to tote 'em
easy, and come along till I see the children playin' in the holler. I
jest meant to give 'em a little scare, but they run like partridges, and
I kep' up the joke to see how Eph would like this sort of company," and
Gad haw-hawed again.

"You'd have had a warm welcome if we hadn't found you out. I'd have put
a bullet through you in a jiffy, old chap," said Eph, coming out to
shake hands with the young giant, who was only a year or two older than
himself.

"Come in and set up to dinner with us. Prue and I have done it all
ourselves, and Pa will be along soon, I reckon," cried Tilly, trying to
escape.

"Couldn't, no ways. My folks will think I'm dead ef I don't get along
home, sence the horse and sleigh have gone ahead empty. I've done my
arrant and had my joke; now I want my pay, Tilly," and Gad took a hearty
kiss from the rosy cheeks of his "little sweetheart," as he called her.
His own cheeks tingled with the smart slap she gave him as she ran
away, calling out that she hated bears and would bring her ax next time.

"I ain't afeared; your sharp eyes found me out; and ef you run into a
bear's arms you must expect a hug," answered Gad, as he pushed back the
robe and settled his fur cap more becomingly.

"I should have known you in a minute if I hadn't been asleep when the
girls squalled. You did it well, though, and I advise you not to try it
again in a hurry, or you'll get shot," said Eph, as they parted, he
rather crestfallen and Gad in high glee.

"My sakes alive--the turkey is burnt one side, and the kettles have
biled over so the pies I put to warm are all ashes!" scolded Tilly, as
the flurry subsided and she remembered her dinner.

"Well, I can't help it. I couldn't think of victuals when I expected to
be eaten alive myself, could I?" pleaded poor Prue, who had tumbled into
the cradle when the rain of oranges began.

Tilly laughed, and all the rest joined in, so good humor was restored,
and the spirits of the younger ones were revived by sucks from the one
orange which passed from hand to hand with great rapidity, while the
older girls dished up the dinner. They were just struggling to get the
pudding out of the cloth when Roxy called out, "Here's Pa!"

"There's folks with him," added Rhody.

"Lots of 'em! I see two big sleighs chock full," shouted Seth, peering
through the dusk.

"It looks like a semintary. Guess Gramma's dead and come up to be buried
here," said Sol in a solemn tone. This startling suggestion made Tilly,
Prue, and Eph hasten to look out, full of dismay at such an ending of
their festival.

"If that is a funeral, the mourners are uncommon jolly," said Eph,
drily, as merry voices and loud laughter broke the white silence
without.

"I see Aunt Cinthy, and Cousin Hetty--and there's Mose and Amos. I do
declare, Pa's bringin' 'em all home to have some fun here," cried Prue,
as she recognized one familiar face after another.

"Oh, my patience! Ain't I glad I got dinner, and don't I hope it will
turn out good!" exclaimed Tilly, while the twins pranced with delight,
and the small boys roared:

"Hooray for Pa! Hooray for Thanksgivin'!"

The cheer was answered heartily, and in came Father, Mother, Baby, aunts
and cousins, all in great spirits, and all much surprised to find such a
festive welcome awaiting them.

"Ain't Gran'ma dead at all?" asked Sol, in the midst of the kissing and
hand-shaking.

"Bless your heart, no! It was all a mistake of old Mr. Chadwick's. He's
as deaf as an adder, and when Mrs. Brooks told him Mother was mendin'
fast, and she wanted me to come down to-day, certain sure, he got the
message all wrong, and give it to the fust person passin' in such a way
as to scare me 'most to death, and send us down in a hurry. Mother was
sittin' up as chirk as you please, and dreadful sorry you didn't all
come."

"So, to keep the house quiet for her, and give you a taste of the fun,
your Pa fetched us all up to spend the evenin', and we are goin' to have
a jolly time on't, to jedge by the looks of things," said Aunt Cinthy,
briskly finishing the tale when Mrs. Bassett paused for want of breath.

"What in the world put it into your head we was comin', and set you to
gettin' up such a supper?" asked Mr. Bassett, looking about him, well
pleased and much surprised at the plentiful table.

Tilly modestly began to tell, but the others broke in and sang her
praises in a sort of chorus, in which bears, pigs, pies, and oranges
were oddly mixed. Great satisfaction was expressed by all, and Tilly and
Prue were so elated by the commendation of Ma and the aunts, that they
set forth their dinner, sure everything was perfect.

But when the eating began, which it did the moment wraps were off, then
their pride got a fall; for the first person who tasted the stuffing (it
was big Cousin Mose, and that made it harder to bear) nearly choked over
the bitter morsel.

"Tilly Bassett, whatever made you put wormwood and catnip in your
stuffin'?" demanded Ma, trying not to be severe, for all the rest were
laughing, and Tilly looked ready to cry.

"I did it," said Prue, nobly taking all the blame, which caused Pa to
kiss her on the spot, and declare that it didn't do a might of harm, for
the turkey was all right.

"I never see onions cooked better. All the vegetables is well done, and
the dinner a credit to you, my dears," declared Aunt Cinthy, with her
mouth full of the fragrant vegetable she praised.

The pudding was an utter failure, in spite of the blazing brandy in
which it lay--as hard and heavy as one of the stone balls on Squire
Dunkin's great gate. It was speedily whisked out of sight, and all fell
upon the pies, which were perfect. But Tilly and Prue were much
depressed, and didn't recover their spirits till the dinner was over and
the evening fun well under way.

"Blind-man's buff," "Hunt the slipper," "Come, Philander," and other
lively games soon set every one bubbling over with jollity, and when Eph
struck up "Money Musk" on his fiddle, old and young fell into their
places for a dance. All down the long kitchen they stood, Mr. and Mrs.
Bassett at the top, the twins at the bottom, and then away they went,
heeling and toeing, cutting pigeon-wings, and taking their steps in a
way that would convulse modern children with their new-fangled romps
called dancing. Mose and Tilly covered themselves with glory by the
vigor with which they kept it up, till fat Aunt Cinthy fell into a
chair, breathlessly declaring that a very little of such exercise was
enough for a woman of her "heft."

Apples and cider, chat and singing, finished the evening, and after a
grand kissing all round, the guests drove away in the clear moonlight
which came just in time to cheer their long drive.

When the jingle of the last bell had died away, Mr. Bassett said
soberly, as they stood together on the hearth: "Children, we have
special cause to be thankful that the sorrow we expected was changed
into joy, so we'll read a chapter 'fore we go to bed, and give thanks
where thanks is due."

Then Tilly set out the light-stand with the big Bible on it, and a
candle on each side, and all sat quietly in the fire-light, smiling as
they listened with happy hearts to the sweet old words that fit all
times and seasons so beautifully.

When the good-nights were over, and the children in bed, Prue put her
arm around Tilly and whispered tenderly, for she felt her shake, and was
sure she was crying:

"Don't mind about the old stuffin' and puddin', deary--nobody cared, and
Ma said we really did do surprisin' well for such young girls."

The laughter Tilly was trying to smother broke out then, and was so
infectious, Prue could not help joining her, even before she knew the
cause of the merriment.

"I was mad about the mistakes, but don't care enough to cry. I'm
laughing to think how Gad fooled Eph and I found him out. I thought Mose
and Amos would have died over it when I told them, it was so funny,"
explained Tilly, when she got her breath.

"I was so scared that when the first orange hit me, I thought it was a
bullet, and scrabbled into the cradle as fast as I could. It was real
mean to frighten the little ones so," laughed Prue, as Tilly gave a
growl.

Here a smart rap on the wall of the next room caused a sudden lull in
the fun, and Mrs. Bassett's voice was heard, saying warningly, "Girls,
go to sleep immediate, or you'll wake the baby."

"Yes'm," answered two meek voices, and after a few irrepressible
giggles, silence reigned, broken only by an occasional snore from the
boys, or the soft scurry of mice in the buttery, taking their part in
this old-fashioned Thanksgiving.




II.

HOW IT ALL HAPPENED.


It was a small room, with nothing in it but a bed, two chairs, and a big
chest. A few little gowns hung on the wall, and the only picture was the
wintry sky, sparkling with stars, framed by the uncurtained window. But
the moon, pausing to peep, saw something pretty and heard something
pleasant. Two heads in little round nightcaps lay on one pillow, two
pairs of wide-awake blue eyes stared up at the light, and two tongues
were going like mill clappers.

"I'm so glad we got our shirts done in time! It seemed as if we never
should, and I don't think six cents is half enough for a great red
flannel thing with four button-holes--do you?" said one little voice,
rather wearily.

"No; but then we each made four, and fifty cents is a good deal of
money. Are you sorry we didn't keep our quarters for ourselves?" asked
the other voice, with an under-tone of regret in it.

"Yes, I am, till I think how pleased the children will be with our tree,
for they don't expect anything, and will be so surprised. I wish we had
more toys to put on it, for it looks so small and mean with only three
or four things."

"It won't hold any more, so I wouldn't worry about it. The toys are very
red and yellow, and I guess the babies won't know how cheap they are,
but like them as much as if they cost heaps of money."

This was a cheery voice, and as it spoke the four blue eyes turned
toward the chest under the window, and the kind moon did her best to
light up the tiny tree standing there. A very pitiful little tree it
was--only a branch of hemlock in an old flower-pot, propped up with bits
of coal, and hung with a few penny toys earned by the patient fingers of
the elder sisters, that the little ones should not be disappointed.

But in spite of the magical moonlight the broken branch, with its scanty
supply of fruit, looked pathetically poor, and one pair of eyes filled
slowly with tears, while the other pair lost their happy look, as if a
cloud had come over the sunshine.

"Are you crying, Dolly?"

"Not much, Polly."

"What makes you, dear?"

"I didn't know how poor we were till I saw the tree, and then I couldn't
help it," sobbed the elder sister, for at twelve she already knew
something of the cares of poverty, and missed the happiness that seemed
to vanish out of all their lives when father died.

"It's dreadful! I never thought we'd have to earn our tree, and only be
able to get a broken branch, after all, with nothing on it but three
sticks of candy, two squeaking dogs, a red cow, and an ugly bird with
one feather in its tail;" and overcome by a sudden sense of destitution,
Polly sobbed even more despairingly than Dolly.

"Hush, dear; we must cry softly, or mother will hear, and come up, and
then we shall have to tell. You know we said we wouldn't seem to mind
not having any Christmas, she felt so sorry about it."

"I _must_ cry, but I'll be quiet."

So the two heads went under the pillow for a few minutes, and not a
sound betrayed them as the little sisters cried softly in one another's
arms, lest mother should discover that they were no longer careless
children, but brave young creatures trying to bear their share of the
burden cheerfully.

When the shower was over, the faces came out shining like roses after
rain, and the voices went on again as before.

"Don't you wish there really was a Santa Claus, who knew what we wanted,
and would come and put two silver half-dollars in our stockings, so we
could go and see _Puss in Boots_ at the Museum to-morrow afternoon?"

"Yes, indeed; but we didn't hang up any stockings, you know, because
mother had nothing to put in them. It does seem as if rich people might
think of poor people now and then. Such little bits of things would
make us happy, and it couldn't be much trouble to take two small girls
to the play, and give them candy now and then."

"_I_ shall when I'm rich, like Mr. Chrome and Miss Kent. I shall go
round every Christmas with a big basket of goodies, and give _all_ the
poor children some."

"P'r'aps if we sew ever so many flannel shirts we may be rich by-and-by.
I should give mother a new bonnet first of all, for I heard Miss Kent
say no lady would wear such a shabby one. Mrs. Smith said fine bonnets
didn't make real ladies. I like her best, but I do want a locket like
Miss Kent's."

"I should give mother some new rubbers, and then I should buy a white
apron, with frills like Miss Kent's, and bring home nice bunches of
grapes and good things to eat, as Mr. Chrome does. I often smell them,
but he never gives _me_ any; he only says, 'Hullo, chick!' and I'd
rather have oranges any time."

"It will take us a long while to get rich, I'm afraid. It makes me tired
to think of it. I guess we'd better go to sleep now, dear."

"Good-night, Dolly."

"Good-night, Polly."

Two soft kisses were heard, a nestling sound followed, and presently the
little sisters lay fast asleep cheek against cheek, on the pillow wet
with their tears, never dreaming what was going to happen to them
to-morrow.

Now Miss Kent's room was next to theirs, and as she sat sewing she could
hear the children's talk, for they soon forgot to whisper. At first she
smiled, then she looked sober, and when the prattle ceased she said to
herself, as she glanced about her pleasant chamber:

"Poor little things! they think I'm rich, and envy me, when I'm only a
milliner earning my living. I ought to have taken more notice of them,
for their mother has a hard time, I fancy, but never complains. I'm
sorry they heard what I said, and if I knew how to do it without
offending her, I'd trim a nice bonnet for a Christmas gift, for she _is_
a lady, in spite of her old clothes. I can give the children some of the
things they want anyhow, and I will. The idea of those mites making a
fortune out of shirts at six cents apiece!"

Miss Kent laughed at the innocent delusion, but sympathized with her
little neighbors, for she knew all about hard times. She had good wages
now, but spent them on herself, and liked to be fine rather than neat.
Still, she was a good-hearted girl, and what she had overheard set her
to thinking soberly, then to acting kindly, as we shall see.

"If I hadn't spent all my money on my dress for the party to-morrow
night, I'd give each of them a half-dollar. As I can not, I'll hunt up
the other things they wanted, for it's a shame they shouldn't have a bit
of Christmas, when they tried so hard to please the little ones."

As she spoke she stirred about her room, and soon had a white apron, an
old carnelian heart on a fresh blue ribbon, and two papers of bonbons
ready. As no stockings were hung up, she laid a clean towel on the floor
before the door, and spread forth the small gifts to look their best.

Miss Kent was so busy that she did not hear a step come quietly up
stairs, and Mr. Chrome, the artist, peeped at her through the balusters,
wondering what she was about. He soon saw, and watched her with
pleasure, thinking that she never looked prettier than now.

Presently she caught him at it, and hastened to explain, telling what
she had heard, and how she was trying to atone for her past neglect of
these young neighbors. Then she said good-night, and both went into
their rooms, she to sleep happily, and he to smoke as usual.

But his eye kept turning to some of the "nice little bundles" that lay
on his table, as if the story he had heard suggested how he might follow
Miss Kent's example. I rather think he would not have disturbed himself
if he had not heard the story told in such a soft voice, with a pair of
bright eyes full of pity looking into his, for little girls were not
particularly interesting to him, and he was usually too tired to notice
the industrious creatures toiling up and down stairs on various errands,
or sewing at the long red seams.

Now that he knew something of their small troubles, he felt as if it
would please Miss Kent, and be a good joke, to do his share of the
pretty work she had begun.

So presently he jumped up, and, opening his parcels, took out two
oranges and two bunches of grapes, then he looked up two silver
half-dollars, and stealing into the hall, laid the fruit upon the towel,
and the money atop of the oranges. This addition improved the display
very much, and Mr. Chrome was stealing back, well pleased, when his eye
fell on Miss Kent's door, and he said to himself, "She too shall have a
little surprise, for she is a dear, kind-hearted soul."

In his room was a prettily painted plate, and this he filled with green
and purple grapes, tucked a sentimental note underneath, and leaving it
on her threshold, crept away as stealthily as a burglar.

The house was very quiet when Mrs. Smith, the landlady, came up to turn
off the gas. "Well, upon my word, here's fine doings, to be sure!" she
said, when she saw the state of the upper hall. "Now I wouldn't have
thought it of Miss Kent, she is such a giddy girl, nor of Mr. Chrome, he
is so busy with his own affairs. I meant to give those children each a
cake to-morrow, they are such good little things. I'll run down and get
them now, as my contribution to this fine set out."

Away trotted Mrs. Smith to her pantry, and picked out a couple of
tempting cakes, shaped like hearts and full of plums. There was a goodly
array of pies on the shelves, and she took two of them, saying, as she
climbed the stairs again, "They remembered the children, so I'll
remember them, and have my share of the fun."

So up went the pies, for Mrs. Smith had not much to give, and her spirit
was generous, though her pastry was not of the best. It looked very
droll to see pies sitting about on the thresholds of closed doors, but
the cakes were quite elegant, and filled up the corners of the towel
handsomely, for the apron lay in the middle, with the oranges right and
left, like two sentinels in yellow uniforms.

It was very late when the flicker of a candle came up stairs, and a pale
lady, with a sweet sad face, appeared, bringing a pair of red and a pair
of blue mittens for her Dolly and Polly. Poor Mrs. Blake did have a hard
time, for she stood all day in a great store that she might earn bread
for the poor children who staid at home and took care of one another.
Her heart was very heavy that night, because it was the first Christmas
she had ever known without gifts and festivity of some sort. But Petkin,
the youngest child, had been ill, times were very hard, the little
mouths gaped for food like the bills of hungry birds, and there was no
tender mate to help fill them.

If any elves had been hovering about the dingy hall just then, they
would have seen the mother's tired face brighten beautifully when she
discovered the gifts, and found that her little girls had been so kindly
remembered. Something more brilliant than the mock diamonds in Miss
Kent's best earrings fell and glittered on the dusty floor as Mrs. Blake
added the mittens to the other things, and went to her lonely room
again, smiling as she thought how she could thank them all in a sweet
and simple way.

Her windows were full of flowers, for the delicate tastes of the poor
lady found great comfort in their beauty. "I have nothing else to give,
and these will show how grateful I am," she said, as she rejoiced that
the scarlet geraniums were so full of gay clusters, the white
chrysanthemum stars were all out, and the pink roses at their loveliest.

They slept now, dreaming of a sunny morrow as they sat safely sheltered
from the bitter cold. But that night was their last, for a gentle hand
cut them all, and soon three pretty nosegays stood in a glass, waiting
for dawn, to be laid at three doors, with a few grateful words which
would surprise and delight the receivers, for flowers were rare in those
hard-working lives, and kind deeds often come back to the givers in
fairer shapes than they go.

Now one would think that there had been gifts enough, and no more could
possibly arrive, since all had added his or her mite except Betsey, the
maid, who was off on a holiday, and the babies fast asleep in their
trundle-bed, with nothing to give but love and kisses. Nobody dreamed
that the old cat would take it into her head that her kittens were in
danger, because Mrs. Smith had said she thought they were nearly old
enough to be given away. But she must have understood, for when all was
dark and still, the anxious mother went patting up stairs to the
children's door, meaning to hide her babies under their bed, sure they
would save them from destruction. Mrs. Blake had shut the door, however,
so poor Puss was disappointed; but finding a soft, clean spot among a
variety of curious articles, she laid her kits there, and kept them warm
all night, with her head pillowed on the blue mittens.

In the cold morning Dolly and Polly got up and scrambled into their
clothes, not with joyful haste to see what their stockings held, for
they had none, but because they had the little ones to dress while
mother got the breakfast.

Dolly opened the door, and started back with a cry of astonishment at
the lovely spectacle before her. The other people had taken in their
gifts, so nothing destroyed the magnificent effect of the treasures so
curiously collected in the night. Puss had left her kits asleep, and
gone down to get her own breakfast, and there, in the middle of the
ruffled apron, as if in a dainty cradle, lay the two Maltese darlings,
with white bibs and boots on, and white tips to the tiny tails curled
round their little noses in the sweetest way.

Polly and Dolly could only clasp their hands and look in rapturous
silence for a minute; then they went down on their knees and revelled in
the unexpected richness before them.

"I do believe there _is_ a Santa Claus, and that he heard us, for here
is everything we wanted," said Dolly, holding the carnelian heart in one
hand and the plummy one in the other.

"It must have been some kind of a fairy, for we didn't mention kittens,
but we wanted one, and here are two darlings," cried Polly, almost
purring with delight as the downy bunches unrolled and gaped till their
bits of pink tongues were visible.

"Mrs. Smith was one fairy, I guess, and Miss Kent was another, for that
is her apron. I shouldn't wonder if Mr. Chrome gave us the oranges and
the money: men always have lots, and his name is on this bit of paper,"
said Dolly.

"Oh, I'm _so_ glad! Now we shall have a Christmas like other people, and
I'll never say again that rich folks don't remember poor folks. Come and
show all our treasures to mother and the babies; they must have some,"
answered Polly, feeling that the world was all right, and life not half
as hard as she thought it last night.

Shrieks of delight greeted the sisters, and all that morning there was
joy and feasting in Mrs. Blake's room, and in the afternoon Dolly and
Polly went to the Museum, and actually saw _Puss in Boots_; for their
mother insisted on their going, having discovered how the hard-earned
quarters had been spent. This was such unhoped-for bliss that they could
hardly believe it, and kept smiling at one another so brightly that
people wondered who the happy little girls in shabby cloaks could be who
clapped their new mittens so heartily, and laughed till it was better
than music to hear them.

This was a very remarkable Christmas-day, and they long remembered it;
for while they were absorbed in the fortunes of the Marquis of Carabas
and the funny cat, who tucked his tail in his belt, washed his face so
awkwardly, and didn't know how to purr, strange things were happening at
home, and more surprises were in store for our little friends. You see,
when people once begin to do kindnesses, it is so easy and pleasant they
find it hard to leave off; and sometimes it beautifies them so that
they find they love one another very much--as Mr. Chrome and Miss Kent
did, though we have nothing to do with that except to tell how they made
the poor little tree grow and blossom.

They were very jolly at dinner, and talked a good deal about the Blakes,
who ate in their own rooms. Miss Kent told what the children said, and
it touched the soft spot in all their hearts to hear about the red
shirts, though they laughed at Polly's lament over the bird with only
one feather in its tail.

"I'd give them a better tree if I had any place to put it, and knew how
to trim it up," said Mr. Chrome, with a sudden burst of generosity,
which so pleased Miss Kent that her eyes shone like Christmas candles.

"Put it in the back parlor. All the Browns are away for a week, and
we'll help you trim it--won't we, my dear?" cried Mrs. Smith, warmly;
for she saw that he was in a sociable mood, and thought it a pity that
the Blakes should not profit by it.

"Yes, indeed; I should like it of all things, and it needn't cost much,
for I have some skill in trimmings, as you know." And Miss Kent looked
so gay and pretty as she spoke that Mr. Chrome made up his mind that
millinery must be a delightful occupation.

"Come on then, ladies, and we'll have a little frolic. I'm a lonely old
bachelor, with nowhere to go to-day, and I'd like some fun."

They had it, I assure you; for they all fell to work as busy as bees,
flying and buzzing about with much laughter as they worked their
pleasant miracle. Mr. Chrome acted more like the father of a large
family than a crusty bachelor, Miss Kent's skillful fingers flew as they
never did before, and Mrs. Smith trotted up and down as briskly as if
she were sixteen instead of being a stout old woman of sixty.

The children were so full of the play, and telling all about it, that
they forgot their tree till after supper; but when they went to look for
it they found it gone, and in its place a great paper hand with one
finger pointing down stairs, and on it these mysterious words in red
ink:

"Look in the Browns' back parlor!"

At the door of that interesting apartment they found their mother with
Will and Petkin, for another hand had suddenly appeared to them pointing
up. The door flew open quite as if it were a fairy play, and they went
in to find a pretty tree planted in a red box on the centre table,
lighted with candles, hung with gilded nuts, red apples, gay bonbons,
and a gift for each.

Mr. Chrome was hidden behind one folding-door, and fat Mrs. Smith
squeezed behind the other, and they both thought it a great improvement
upon the old-fashioned Santa Claus to have Miss Kent, in the white
dress she made for the party, with Mrs. Blake's roses in her hair, step
forward as the children gazed in silent rapture, and with a few sweet
words welcome them to the little surprise their friends had made.

There were many Christmas trees in the city that night, but none which
gave such hearty pleasure as the one which so magically took the place
of the broken branch and its few poor toys. They were all there,
however, and Dolly and Polly were immensely pleased to see that of all
her gifts Petkin chose the forlorn bird to carry to bed with her, the
one yellow feather being just to her taste.

Mrs. Blake put on her neat bonnet, and was so gratified that Miss Kent
thought it the most successful one she ever trimmed. She was well paid
for it by the thanks of one neighbor and the admiration of another; for
when she went to her party Mr. Chrome went with her, and said something
on the way which made her heart dance more lightly than her feet that
night.

Good Mrs. Smith felt that her house had covered itself with glory by
this event, and Dolly and Polly declared that it was the most perfect
and delightful surprise party ever seen.

It was all over by nine o'clock, and with good-night kisses for every
one the little girls climbed up to bed laden with treasures and too
happy for many words. But as they tied their round caps Dolly said,
thoughtfully:

"On the whole, I think it's rather nice to be poor when people are kind
to you."

"Well, I'd _rather_ be rich; but if I can't be, it is very good fun to
have Christmas trees like this one," answered truthful Polly, never
guessing that they had planted the seed from which the little pine-tree
grew so quickly and beautifully.

When the moon came to look in at the window on her nightly round, two
smiling faces lay on the pillow, which was no longer wet with tears, but
rather knobby with the mine of riches hidden underneath,--first fruits
of the neighborly friendship which flourished in that house until
another and a merrier Christmas came.




III.

THE DOLLS' JOURNEY FROM MINNESOTA TO MAINE.


Mr. Plum lived in St. Paul, Minnesota, U.S.A.

There were six little Plums, all girls, varying in ages from fourteen to
seven, and named Kate, Lucy, Susy, Lizzy, Marjory and Maggie. There was
no mamma, but Mrs. Gibbs, the housekeeper, was a kind old soul, and papa
did everything he could to make the small daughters good and happy.

One stormy Saturday afternoon the children were all together in the
school-room, and papa busy at his desk in the library, with the door
open because he liked to hear the pleasant voices and catch glimpses of
the droll plays that went on there.

Kate lay on the sofa reading "The Daisy Chain" for the fourth time.
Susy, Lucy and Lizzie were having a select tea party in their own
recess, the entrance to which was barricaded with chairs to keep out the
"babies," as they called the little ones, who were much offended at
being excluded and sat up in the cushioned window-seat pensively
watching the rain.

"If it had only waited till to-morrow we should have had time for our
journey; now we can't go till next Saturday. Flora is so disappointed
she would cry if I had not taught her to behave," said Maggie with a
sigh, as she surveyed the doll on her knee in its new summer suit.

"So is Dora. Just see how sweet she looks with her hat and cape on and
her travelling-bag all ready. Couldn't we play travel in the house? It
is such a pity to wait when the children are in such a hurry to go,"
answered Marjory, settling the tiny bag that held Dora's nightcap and
gown as well as the morsels of cake that were to serve for her lunch.

"No," said Maggie decidedly, "we can't do it, because there is no room
for carriages, and boats, and railroads, and hotels, and accidents. It
is a long journey from Minnesota to Maine, and we couldn't get it all
into one room I'm sure."

"I don't think papa would mind our coming into the library, if we didn't
ring the car bells very loud or scream much when the accidents happen,"
said Marjory, who hated to give up the plan they had been cherishing all
the week.

"What is it, little ones? Come and tell me what is the matter," called
Mr. Plum, hearing his name and the magic word "railroad," for he was the
president of one and had his hands full just then.

Down jumped the little girls and ran to perch on either arm of his
chair, pouring out their small tribulations as freely as if he had been
the most sympathizing of mothers.

"We planned to take a long, long journey round the garden with our dolls
to-day, and play go to Maine and see Aunt Maria. You know she asked us,
and we looked out the way on the map and got all ready, and now it rains
and we are dreadfully disappointed," said Maggie, while Marjory sighed
as she looked at the red D. worked on the inch square travelling-bag.

"As you can't go, why not send the dolls to make aunty a visit, and she
will send them back when they get homesick," proposed Mr. Plum, smiling,
as if a sudden idea had popped into his head.

"Really?" cried Maggie.

"How could we?" asked Marjory.

"They could go and come by mail, and tell you all about their adventures
when they got back," said papa.

Both children were speechless for a moment, then as the full splendor of
this proposition dawned upon them they clapped their hands, crying
eagerly:

"We will! we will! Let's do it at once."

"What? where? who?" asked Susy, Lucy and Lizzie, forgetting their tea
party to run and see what was going on.

They were told, and in their turn exclaimed so loudly that Kate came to
join in the fun.

After a great deal of talking and laughing, the dolls were prepared for
the long journey. They were common wooden-headed dollies, a hand long,
with stuffed bodies and stout legs ornamented with very small feet in
red and blue boots. Dora was a blonde and Flora a brunette, otherwise
they were just alike and nearly new. Usually when people go travelling
they put on their hats and cloaks, but these pilgrims, by papa's advice,
left all encumbrances behind them, for they were to travel in a peculiar
way, and blue gingham dresses were chosen for the expedition.

"It is possible that they may never come back. Accidents will happen you
know. Are you prepared for that?" asked Mr. Plum, pausing with the brown
paper spread out before him.

"I am," answered Maggie firmly, as she laid Flora on the table, her
black eyes staring as if rather alarmed at this sudden start.

Marjory hesitated a moment, clasping Dora to her bosom with a face full
of maternal anxiety. But Susy, Lucy and Lizzie cried: "Let her go, do
let her go, and if she is lost papa will give you a new doll."

"Good-by, my darling dear. Have a splendid time, and be sure you come
back to me," whispered Marjory, with a tender farewell kiss as she gave
up her child.

All stood watching silently while papa tied the dolls back to back with
the ribbon Kate pulled from her neck, then folded them carefully in
strong brown paper, leaving their heads out that they might see the
world as they went along. Being carefully fastened up with several turns
of cord, Mr. Plum directed the precious parcel to "Miss Maria Plum,
Portland, Maine. With care." Then it was weighed, stamped, and
pronounced ready for the post.

"I shall write and tell aunty they are coming, because she will want to
be prepared for such distinguished visitors," said papa, taking up his
pen with a glance at the six excited little faces round him.

Silence reigned while the letter was written, and as he sealed it up Mr.
Plum said solemnly, with his hand on the parcel:

"For the last time, shall they go?"

"Yes!" answered the Spartan mothers with one voice, while the other
sisters danced round them, and Kate patted the curly heads approvingly.

"Going, going, gone!" answered papa as he whisked on his coat and hat,
and slammed the door behind him.

The children clustered at the window to see him set out on this
momentous errand, and he often looked back waving his umbrella at them,
till he vanished round the corner, with a reassuring pat on the pocket
out of which dear Do and Flo popped their heads for a last look at their
sweet home.

"Now let us take out poor old Lucinda and Rose Augusta to play with. I
know their feelings were hurt at our leaving them for the new dolls,"
said Maggie, rummaging in the baby-house, whither Margery soon followed
her to reinstate the old darlings in the place of the departed new ones.

"Safely off," reported Mr. Plum, when he came into tea, "and we may
expect to hear from them in a week or two. Parcels go more slowly than
letters, and this is Aunty's busy season, so wait patiently and see what
will happen."

"We will," said the little girls; and they did, but week after week went
by and nothing was heard of the wanderers.

We, however, can follow them and learn much that their anxious mothers
never knew.

As soon as Flora and Dora recovered from the bewilderment occasioned by
the confusion of the post office, they found themselves in one of the
many leathern mail bags rumbling Eastward. As it was perfectly dark they
could not see their companions, so listened to the whispering and
rustling that went on about them. The newspapers all talked politics,
and some of them used such bad language that the dolls would have
covered their ears, if their hands had not been tied down. The letters
were better behaved and more interesting, for they told one another the
news they carried, because nothing is private in America, and even
gummed envelopes cannot keep gossip from leaking out.

"It is very interesting, but I should enjoy it more if I was not
grinding my nose against the rough side of this leather bag," whispered
Dora, who lay undermost just then.

"So should I, if a heavy book was not pinching my toes. I've tried to
kick it away, but it won't stir, and keeps droning on about reports and
tariffs and such dull things," answered Flora, with a groan.

"Do you like travelling?" asked Dora, presently, when the letters and
papers fell asleep, lulled by the motion of the cars.

"Not yet, but I shall when I can look about me. This bundle near by says
the mails are often sorted in the cars, and in that way we shall see
something of the world, I hope," answered Flora, cheering up, for, like
her mamma, she was of an enquiring turn.

The dolls took a nap of some hours, and were roused by a general
tumbling out on a long shelf, where many other parcels lay, and lively
men sent letters and papers flying here and there as if a whirlwind was
blowing. A long box lay beside the dolls who stood nearly erect leaning
against a pile of papers. Several holes were cut in the lid, and out of
one of them was thrust a little black nose, as if trying to get air.

"Dear me! what can be in it?" said Flora, who was nearest.

"I'm a poor little alligator, going to a boy in Chicago, if you please,
and I want my mother," sobbed a voice from the box, and there was a rap
on the lid as of an agitated tail.

"Mercy on us! I hope we shall not have to travel with the monster,"
whispered Dora, trying to see over her shoulder.

"I'm not afraid. He can't be very dreadful, for the box is not any
longer than we are. Natural history is very useful; I've heard mamma say
so, and I shall talk with him while we rest here," answered Flo, nodding
toward the eye which now took the place of the nose.

So the little alligator told her something of his home on the banks of a
great river, where he was just learning to play happily with his
brothers and sisters, when he was caught and sent away to pine in
captivity.

The dolls comforted him as well as they could, and a pair of baby's
shoes travelling in an envelope sympathized with him, while a shabby
bundle directed to "Michael Dolan, at Mrs. Judy Quin's, next door to Mr.
Pat Murphy, Boston, North street," told them to "Whisht and slape quite
till they came forninst the place."

"Such low people!" whispered Do to Flo, and both stood primly silent
till they were tumbled into another mail bag, and went rattling on again
with a new set of companions.

"I hope that poor baby will go safely and the boy be good to him," said
Flora, for the little alligator went with the live stock in some other
way.

"Thank goodness he didn't go with us! I shall dream about that black
nose and winking eye, I'm sure. The dangers of travelling are great, but
we are safe and comfortable now, I think," and Dora settled down in a
cozy corner of the bag, wondering when they should reach Chicago.

"I like adventures and hope we shall have some," answered Flora,
briskly, little dreaming how soon her wish was to be granted.

A few hours later there come a bump, a crash, a cry, and then all the
mail bags rolled one over the other with the car down an embankment into
a river.

"Now we are dead!" shrieked the poor dolls, clinging together as they
heard the splash of water, the shouting of men, the splintering of wood,
and the hiss of steam.

"Don't be frightened, ladies, mail bags are always looked after," said a
large envelope with an official seal and the name of a Senator on it.

"Any bones broken, dear madam?" asked a jaunty pink letter, with a scent
of musk about it, evidently a love-letter.

"I think one foot is hurt, and my clothes are dripping," sighed Dora,
faintly.

"Water won't hurt calico," called out a magazine full of fashion plates,
adding dolefully, as its gay colors began to run, "I shall be in a nice
mess if I ever get out of this. People will wear odd fashions if they
follow me this time."

"Hope they will telegraph news of this accident in time for the evening
papers," said a dingy sheet called the "Barahoo Thunderbolt," as it lay
atop of the heap in its yellow wrapper.

"Be calm, my friends, and wait with fortitude for death or deliverance,
as I do." With which philosophic remark "The St. Louis Cosmos" folded
the pages which for the first time since the paper was started, were not
dry.

Here the water rose over the topmost letter and a moist silence
prevailed till a sudden jerk fished up the bag, and before the dolls
could recover their wits they were spread out on the floor of a mail car
to dry, while several busy men sorted and saved such papers and letters
as still held together.

"Now we shall see something," said Flora, feeling the warm air blow over
her as they spun along, for a slight accident like this did not delay
the energetic Westerners a moment longer than absolutely necessary.

"I can't see you, dear, but I hope you look better than I do, for the
yellow of my hair has washed into my eyes and the red of my cheeks is
quite gone, I'm sure," answered Dora, as her wet dress flopped in the
breeze and the broken foot sticking up showed her that her blue boots
were ruined.

"I don't care a bit how I look. It's great fun now we are safe. Pop up
your head and see the wide prairie flying past. I do hope that poor baby
got away and swam home to his mother. The upset into the river was quite
to his taste, I fancy," said Flora, who was much excited by her
adventure and eager for more.

Presently one of the men set the dolls up in the corner of a window to
dry, and there they stood viewing the fine landscape with one eye while
the other watched the scene of devastation within. Everything was in
great confusion after the accident, so it is not strange that the dolls
were not missed when they slowly slid lower and lower till a sudden
lurch of the car sent them out of the window to roll into a green field
where cows were feeding and children picking strawberries.

"This is the end of us! Here we shall lie and mould forgotten by
everybody," said Dora, who always took a tragical view of things.

"Not a bit of it! I see cows eating toward us and they may give us a
lift. I've heard of their tossing people up, though I don't know just
how it's done. If they don't, we are in the path and some of those
children are sure to find us," answered Flora cheerfully, though she
stood on her head with a bunch of burrs pricking her nose.

She was right. A bright-eyed little German girl presently came trotting
along the path with a great basket full of berries on her head arranged
in pretty pottles ready for the market. Seeing the red cow sniffing at a
brown paper parcel she drove her away, picked it up and peeped in at the
open end.

The sight of two dolls in such a place made her feel as if fairies had
dropped them there for her. She could not read the direction and hurried
home to show her treasure to her brothers and sisters of whom there were
eight.

"What will become of us now!" exclaimed Dora, as eager hands slipped
them out of the wrapper and smoothed their damp skirts in a room that
seemed swarming with boys and girls of all sizes.

"Don't worry, we shall get on nicely, I'm sure, and learn German of
these young persons. It is a great relief to be able to stretch one's
limbs and stand up, isn't it?" answered Flora, undismayed by anything
that had happened as yet.

"Yes, dear, I love you but I _am_ tired of being tied to you all day. I
hope we shall live through this noise and get a little rest, but I give
up the idea of ever seeing Portland," answered Dora, staring with all
her blue eyes at the display of musical instruments about the room, and
longing to stop her ears, for several of the children were playing on
the violin, flute, horn or harp. They were street musicians, and even
the baby seemed to be getting ready to take part in the concert, for he
sat on the floor beside an immense bass horn taller than himself, with
his rosy lips at the mouth piece and his cheeks puffed out in vain
attempts to make a "boom! boom!" as brother Fritz did.

Flora was delighted, and gave skips on her red boots in time to the
lively tooting of the boys, while the girls gazed at the lovely dolls
and jabbered away with their yellow braids quivering with excitement.

The wrapper was laid aside till a neighbor who read English came in to
translate it. Meantime they enjoyed the new toys immensely, and even
despondent Dora was cheered up by the admiration she received; while
they in their turn were deeply interested in the pretty dolls' furniture
some of the children made.

Beds, tables and chairs covered the long bench, and round it sat the
neat-handed little maidens gluing, tacking and trimming, while they sang
and chatted at their work as busy and happy as a hive of bees.

All day the boys went about the streets playing, and in the evening
trooped off to the beer gardens to play again, for they lived in
Chicago, and the dolls had got so far on their way to Aunt Maria, as
they soon discovered.

For nearly two months they lived happily with Minna, Gretchen and
Nanerl, then they set out on their travels again, and this was the way
it happened. A little girl came to order a set of furniture for her new
baby-house, and seeing two shabby dolls reposing in a fine bed she asked
about them. Her mamma spoke German so Minna told how they were found,
and showed the old wrapper, saying that they always meant to send the
dolls on their way but grew so fond of them they kept putting it off.

"I am going as far as New York very soon and will take them along if you
like, for I think little Miss Maria Plum must have been expecting her
dolls all this time. Shall I?" asked the mamma, as she read the address
and saw the dash under "With care," as if the dollies were of great
importance to some one.

"Ja, ja," answered Minna, glad to oblige a lady who bought two whole
sets of their best furniture and paid for it at once.

So again the dolls were put in their brown paper cover and sent away
with farewell kisses.

"This now is genteel and just suits me," said Dora, as they drove along
with little Clara to the handsome house where she was staying.

"I have a feeling that she is a spoilt child, and we shall not be as
happy with her as with the dear Poppleheimers. We shall see," answered
Flora, wisely, for Clara had soon tossed the dolls into a corner and was
fretting because mamma would not buy her the big horn to blow on.

The party started for New York in a day or two, and to the delight of
Flo and Do they were left out of the trunks for Clara to play with on
the way, her own waxen Blanche Marie Annabel being too delicate to be
used.

"Oh my patience, this is worse than tumbling about in a mail-bag,"
groaned Dora, after hours of great suffering, for Clara treated the poor
dolls as if they had no feeling.

She amused herself with knocking their heads together, shutting them in
the window with their poor legs hanging out, swinging them by one arm,
and drawing lines with a pencil all over their faces till they looked as
if tattooed by savages. Even brave Flora was worn out and longed for
rest, finding her only comfort in saying, "I told you so," when Clara
banged them about, or dropped them on the dusty floor to be trampled on
by passing feet.

There they were left, and would have been swept away if a little dog had
not found them as the passengers were leaving the car and carried them
after his master, trotting soberly along with the bundle in his mouth,
for fortunately Clara had put them into the paper before she left them,
so they were still together in the trials of the journey.

"Hullo, Jip, what have you got?" asked the young man as the little dog
jumped up on the carriage seat and laid his load on his master's knee,
panting and wagging his tail as if he had done something to be praised
for.

"Dolls, I declare! What can a bachelor do with the poor things? Wonder
who Maria Plum is? Midge will like a look at them before we send them
along;" and into the young man's pocket they went, trembling with fear
of the dog, but very grateful for being rescued from destruction.

Jip kept his eye on them, and gave an occasional poke with his cold nose
to be sure they were there as they drove through the bustling streets of
New York to a great house with an inscription over the door.

"I do hope Midge will be a nicer girl than Clara. Children ought to be
taught to be kind to dumb dolls as well as dumb animals," said Dora, as
the young man ran up the steps and hurried along a wide hall.

"I almost wish we were at home with our own kind little mothers," began
Flo, for even her spirits were depressed by bad treatment, but just then
a door opened and she cried out in amazement, "Bless my heart, this man
has more children than even Mr. Poppleheimer!"

She might well think so, for all down both sides of the long room stood
little white beds with a small pale face on every pillow. All the eyes
that were open brightened when Jip and his master came in, and several
thin hands were outstretched to meet them.

"I've been good, Doctor, let me pat him first," cried one childish
voice.

"Did you bring me a flower, please?" asked another feeble one.

"I know he's got something nice for us, I see a bundle in his pocket,"
and a little fellow who sat up among his pillows gave a joyful cough as
he could not shout.

"Two dollies for Midge to play with. Jip found them, but I think the
little girl they are going to will lend them for a few days. We shall
not need them longer I'm afraid," added the young man to a rosy faced
nurse who came along with a bottle in her hand.

"Dear no, the poor child is very low to-day. But she will love to look
at the babies if she isn't strong enough to hold 'em," said the woman,
leading the way to a corner where the palest of all the pale faces lay
smiling on the pillow, and the thinnest of the thin hands were feebly
put up to greet the Doctor.

"So nice!" she whispered when the dolls were laid beside her, while Jip
proudly beat his tail on the floor to let her know that she owed the
welcome gift to him.

For an hour Flo and Do lay on the arm of poor Midge who never moved
except to touch them now and then with a tender little finger, or to
kiss them softly, saying, "Dear babies, it is very nice not to be all
alone. Are you comfy, darlings?" till she fell asleep still smiling.

"Sister, do you think this can be the Heaven we hear people talk about?
It is so still and white, and may be these children are angels,"
whispered Dora, looking at the sweet face turned toward her with the
long lashes lying on the colorless cheek, and the arms outstretched like
wings.

"No, dear, it is a hospital, I heard that man say so, and those are sick
children come to be cured. It is a sweet place, I think, and this child
much nicer than that horrid Clara," answered Flo, who was quicker to
hear, see and understand what went on than Dora.

"I love to lie here safe and warm, but there doesn't seem to be much
breath to rock me," said Do, who lay nearest the little bosom that very
slowly rose and fell with the feeble flutter of the heart below.

"Hush, we may disturb her," and lively Flo controlled her curiosity,
contenting herself with looking at the other children and listening to
their quiet voices, for pain seemed to have hushed them all.

For a week the dolls lay in Midge's bed, and though their breasts were
full of saw-dust and their heads were only wood, the sweet patience of
the little creature seemed to waken something like a heart in them, and
set them thinking, for dolls don't live in vain, I am firmly persuaded.

All day she tended them till the small hands could no longer hold them,
and through the weary nights she tried to murmur bits of lullabies lest
the dollies would not be able to sleep because of the crying or the
moans some of the poor babies could not repress. She often sent one or
the other to cheer up some little neighbor, and in this way Do and Flo
became small sisters of charity, welcomed eagerly, reluctantly returned,
and loved by all, although they never uttered a word and their dingy
faces could not express the emotion that stirred their saw-dust bosoms.

When Saturday night came they were laid in their usual place on Midge's
arm. She was too weak to kiss them now, and nurse laid their battered
cheeks against the lips that whispered faintly, "Be sure you send 'em to
the little girl, and tell her--tell her--all about it." Then she turned
her cheek to the pillow with a little sigh and lay so still the dolls
thought she had gone to sleep.

She had, but the sweet eyes did not open in the morning, and there was
no breath in the little breast to rock the dolls any more.

"I knew she was an angel, and now she has flown away," said Dora softly,
as they watched the white image carried out in the weeping nurse's
arms, with the early sunshine turning all the pretty hair to gold.

"I think that is what they call dying, sister. It is a much lovelier way
to end than as we do in the dust bin or rag-bag. I wonder if there is a
little Heaven anywhere for good dolls?" answered Flora, with what looked
like a tear on her cheek; but it was only a drop from the violets sent
by the kind Doctor last night.

"I hope so, for I think the souls of little children might miss us if
they loved us as dear Midge did," whispered Dora, trying to kiss the
blue flower in her hand, for the child had shared her last gift with
these friends.

"Why didn't you let her take them along, poor motherless baby?" asked
the doctor when he saw the dolls lying as she had left them.

"I promised her they should go to the girl they were sent to, and
please, I'd like to keep my word to the little darling," answered Nurse
with a sob.

"You shall," said the Doctor, and put them in his breast pocket with the
faded violets, for everybody loved the pauper child sent to die in a
hospital, because Christian charity makes every man and woman father and
mother to these little ones.

All day the dolls went about in the busy Doctor's pocket, and I think
the violets did them good, for the soft perfume clung to them long
afterward like the memory of a lovely life, as short and sweet as that
of the flowers.

In the evening they were folded up in a fresh paper and re-directed
carefully. The Doctor wrote a little note telling why he had kept them,
and was just about to put on some stamps when a friend came in who was
going to Boston in the morning.

"Anything to take along, Fred?" asked the newcomer.

"This parcel, if you will. I have a feeling that I'd rather not have it
knock about in a mail-bag," and the Doctor told him why.

It was pleasant to see how carefully the traveller put away the parcel
after that, and to hear him say that he was going through Boston to the
mountains for his holiday, and would deliver it in Portland to Miss Plum
herself.

"Now there is some chance of our getting there," said Flora, as they set
off next day in a new Russia leather bag.

On the way they overheard a long chat between some New York and Boston
ladies which impressed them very much. Flora liked to hear the
fashionable gossip about clothes and people and art and theatres, but
Dora preferred the learned conversation of the young Boston ladies, who
seemed to know a little of everything, or think they did.

"I hope Mamma will give me an entirely new wardrobe when I get home; and
we will have dolls' weddings and balls, and a play, and be as fine and
fashionable as those ladies down there," said Flora, after listening a
while.

"You have got your head full of dressy ideas and high life, sister. I
don't care for such things, but mean to cultivate my mind as fast as I
can. That girl says she is in college, and named over more studies than
I can count. I do wish we were to stop and see a little of the refined
society of Boston," answered Dora, primly.

"Pooh!" said Flo, "don't you try to be intellectual, for you are only a
wooden-headed doll. I mean to be a real Westerner, and just enjoy myself
as I please, without caring what other folks do or think. Boston is no
better than the rest of the world, I guess."

Groans from every article in the bag greeted this disrespectful speech,
and an avalanche of Boston papers fell upon the audacious doll. But Flo
was undaunted, and shouted from underneath the pile: "I don't care!
Minnesota forever!" till her breath gave out.

Dora was so mortified that she never said a word till they were let out
in a room at the Parker House. Here she admired everything, and read all
the evening in a volume of Emerson's Poems from the bag, for Mr. Mt.
Vernon Beacon was a Boston man, and never went anywhere without a wise
book or two in his pocket.

Flo turned up her nose at all she saw, and devoted herself to a long
chat with the smart bag which came from New York and was full of gossip.

The next afternoon they really got to Portland, and as soon as Mr.
Beacon had made his toilet he set out to find little Miss Plum. When the
parlor door opened to admit her he was much embarrassed, for, advancing
with a paternal smile and the dolls extended to the expected child, he
found himself face to face with a pretty young lady, who looked as if
she thought him a little mad.

A few words explained the errand, however, and when she read the note
Aunt Maria's bright eyes were full of tears as she said, hugging the
dilapidated dolls:

"I'll write the story of their travels, and send the dear old things
back to the children as soon as possible."

And so she did with Mr. Beacon's help, for he decided to try the air of
Portland, and spent his vacation there. The dolls were re-painted and
re-dressed till they were more beautiful than ever, and their clothes
fine enough to suit even Flo.

They were a good while doing this, and when all was ready, Aunt Maria
took it into her head to run out to St. Paul and surprise the children.
By a singular coincidence Mr. Beacon had railroad business in that
direction, so they set off together, with two splendid dolls done up in
a gay box.

All that was ever known about that journey was that these travellers
stopped at the hospital in New York, and went on better friends than
before after hearing from the good Doctor all the pathetic story of
little Midge.

The young Plums had long ago given up the hope of ever seeing Do and Flo
again, for they started in June and it was early in September when Aunt
Maria appeared before them without the least warning, accompanied by a
pleasant gentleman from Boston.

Six kisses had hardly resounded from Aunty's blooming cheeks when a most
attractive box was produced from the Russia leather bag, and the
wandering dolls restored to the arms of their enraptured mammas.

A small volume neatly written and adorned with a few pictures of the
most exciting incidents of the trip also appeared.

"Every one writes or prints a book in Boston, you know, so we did both,"
said Aunt Maria, laughing, as she handed over the remarkable history
which she had composed and Mr. Beacon illustrated.

It was read with intense interest, and was as true as most stories are
nowadays.

"Nothing more delightful can happen now!" exclaimed the children, as
they laid by the precious work and enthroned the travelled dolls in the
place of honor on the roof of the baby-house.

But something much more delightful did happen; for at Thanksgiving time
there was a wedding at the Plums'. Not a doll's wedding, as Flo had
planned, but a real one, for the gentleman from Boston actually married
Aunt Maria.

There were six bridesmaids, all in blue, and Flora and Dora, in the
loveliest of new pink gowns, were set aloft among the roses on the
wedding-cake, their proper place as everyone said, for there never would
have been any marriage at all but for this Doll's Journey From Minnesota
to Maine.




VI.

MORNING-GLORIES.


"What's that?"--and Daisy sat up in her little bed to listen; for she
had never heard a sound like it before.

It was very early, and the house was still. The sun was just rising, and
the morning-glories at the window were turning their blue and purple
cups to catch the welcome light. The sky was full of rosy clouds; dew
shone like diamonds on the waving grass, and the birds were singing as
they only sing at dawn. But softer, sweeter than any bird-voice was the
delicate music which Daisy heard. So airy and gay was the sound, it
seemed impossible to lie still with that fairy dancing-tune echoing
through the room. Out of bed scrambled Daisy, her sleepy eyes opening
wider and wider with surprise and pleasure as she listened and wondered.

"Where is it?" she said, popping her head out of the window. The
morning-glories only danced lightly on their stems, the robins chirped
shrilly in the garden below, and the wind gave Daisy a kiss; but none of
them answered her, and still the lovely music sounded close beside her.

"It's a new kind of bird, perhaps; or maybe it's a fairy hidden
somewhere. Oh, if it _is_ how splendid it will be!" cried Daisy; and she
began to look carefully in all the colored cups, under the leaves of the
woodbine, and in the wren's nest close by. There was neither fairy nor
bird to be seen; and Daisy stood wondering, when a voice cried out from
below:

"Why, little nightcap, what brings you out of your bed so early?"

"O Aunt Wee! do you hear it--that pretty music playing somewhere near! I
can't find it; but I think it's a fairy, don't you?" said Daisy, looking
down at the young lady standing in the garden with her hands full of
roses.

Aunt Wee listened, smiled, and shook her head.

"Don't you remember you said last night that you thought the world a
very stupid, grown-up place, because there were no giants and fairies in
it now? Well, perhaps there _are_ fairies, and they are going to show
themselves to you, if you watch well."

Daisy clapped her hands, and danced about on her little bare feet; for,
of all things in the world, she most wanted to see a fairy.

"What must I do to find them, Aunt Wee?" she cried, popping out her head
again with her cap half off, and her curly hair blowing in the wind.

"Why, you see, they frolic all night, and go to sleep at dawn; so we
must get up very early, if we want to catch the elves awake. They are
such delicate, fly-away little things, and we are so big and clumsy, we
shall have to look carefully, and perhaps hunt a long time before we
find even one," replied Aunt Wee, very gravely.

"Mamma says I'm quick at finding things; and you know all about fairies,
so I guess we'll catch one. Can't we begin now? It's very early, and
this music has waked me up; so I don't want to sleep any more. Will you
begin to hunt now?"

"But you don't like to get up early, or to walk in the fields; and, if
we mean to catch a fairy, we must be up and out by sunrise every fair
morning till we get one. Can you do this, lazy Daisy?" And Aunt Wee
smiled to herself as if something pleased her very much.

"Oh! I will, truly, get up, and not fret a bit, if you'll only help me
look. Please come now to dress me, and see if you can find what makes
the music."

Daisy was very much in earnest, and in such a hurry to be off that she
could hardly stand still to have her hair brushed, and thought there
were a great many unnecessary buttons and strings on her clothes that
day. Usually she lay late, got up slowly and fretted at every thing as
little girls are apt to do when they have had too much sleep. She wasn't
a rosy, stout Daisy; but had been ill, and had fallen into a way of
thinking she couldn't do anything but lie about, reading fairy-tales,
and being petted by every one. Mamma and papa had tried all sorts of
things to amuse and do her good; for she was their only little daughter,
and they loved her very dearly. But nothing pleased her long; and she
lounged about, pale and fretful, till Aunt Laura came. Daisy called her
"Wee" when she was a baby, and couldn't talk plainly; and she still used
the name because it suited the cheery little aunt so well.

"I don't see anything, and the music has stopped. I think some elf just
came to wake you up, and then flew away; so we won't waste any more time
in looking here," said Wee, as she finished dressing Daisy, who flew
about like a Will-o'-the-wisp all the while.

"Do you think it will come again to-morrow?" asked Daisy anxiously.

"I dare say you'll hear it, if you wake in time. Now get your hat, and
we will see what we can find down by the brook. I saw a great many
fireflies there last night, and fancy there was a ball; so we may find
some drowsy elf among the buttercups and clover."

Away rushed Daisy for her hat, and soon was walking gayly down the green
lane, looking about her as if she had never been there before; for every
thing seemed wonderfully fresh and lovely.

"How pink the clouds are, and how the dew twinkles in the grass! I never
saw it so before," she said.

"Because by the time you are up the pretty pink clouds are gone, and the
thirsty grass has drank the dew, or the sun has drawn it up to fall
again at night for the flowers' evening bath," replied Wee, watching the
soft color that began to touch Daisy's pale cheeks.

"I think we'd better look under that cobweb spread like a tent over the
white clovers. A fairy would be very likely to creep in there and
sleep."

Daisy knelt down and peeped carefully; but all she saw was a little
brown spider, who looked very much surprised to see visitors so early.

"I don't like spiders," said Daisy, much disappointed.

"There are things about spiders as interesting to hear as fairy tales,"
said Wee. "This is Mrs. Epeira Diadema; and she is a respectable,
industrious little neighbor. She spreads her tent, but sits under a leaf
near by, waiting for her breakfast. She wraps her eggs in a soft silken
bag, and hides them in some safe chink, where they lie till spring. The
eggs are prettily carved and ornamented, and so hard that the baby
spiders have to force their way out by biting the shell open and poking
their little heads through. The mother dies as soon as her eggs are
safely placed, and the spiderlings have to take care of themselves."

"How do you know about it, Aunt Wee? You talk as if Mrs. Eppyra--or
whatever her name is--had told you herself. Did she?" asked Daisy,
feeling more interested in the brown spider.

"No; I read it in a book, and saw pictures of the eggs, web, and family.
I had a live one in a bottle; and she spun silken ladders all up and
down, and a little room to sleep in. She ate worms and bugs, and was
very amiable and interesting till she fell ill and died."

"I should like to see the book; and have a spider-bottle, so I could
take care of the poor little orphans when they are born. Good-by, ma'am.
I shall call again; for you are 'most as good as a fairy there in your
pretty tent, with a white clover for your bed."

Daisy walked on a few steps, and then stopped to say:

"What does that bird mean by calling 'Hurry up, hurry up?' He keeps
flying before us, and looking back as if he wanted to show me
something."

"Let me hear what he says. I may be able to understand him, or the
bob-o-link that swings on the alder by the brook."

Wee listened a moment, while the birds twittered and chirped with all
their hearts. Presently Wee sang in a tone very like the bob-o-link's:

        "Daisy and Wee,
        Come here, and see
    What a dainty feast is spread:
        Down in the grass
        Where fairies pass,
    Here are berries ripe and red.

        "All wet with dew,
        They wait for you:
    Come hither, and eat your fill,
        While I gayly sing,
        In my airy swing,
    And the sun climbs up the hill."

"Did he really say that?" cried Daisy, watching the bob-o-link, who sat
swaying up and down on the green bough, and nodding his white-capped
head at her in the most friendly manner.

"Perhaps I didn't translate it rightly; for it is very hard to put
bird-notes into our language, because we haven't words soft and sweet
enough. But I really think there are berries over there, and we will see
if what he says is true," said Wee.

Over the wall they went, and there, on a sunny bank, found a bed of the
reddest, ripest berries ever seen.

"Thank you, thank you, for telling me to hurry up, and showing me such a
splendid feast," said Daisy, with her mouth full, as she nodded back at
the birds. "These are so much sweeter than those we buy. I'd carry some
home to mamma, if I only had a basket."

"You can pick this great leaf full, while I make you a basket," said
Wee.

Daisy soon filled the leaf, and then sat watching her aunt plait a
pretty basket of rushes. While she waited she looked about, and kept
finding something curious or pleasant to interest and amuse her. First
she saw a tiny rainbow in a dewdrop that hung on a blade of grass; then
she watched a frisky calf come down to drink on the other side of the
brook, and laughed to see him scamper away with his tail in the air.
Close by grew a pitcher-plant; and a yellow butterfly sat on the edge,
bathing its feet, Daisy said. Presently she discovered a little ground
bird sitting on her nest, and peeping anxiously, as if undecided whether
to fly away or trust her.

"I won't hurt you, little mother. Don't be afraid," whispered the child;
and, as if it understood, the bird settled down on her nest with a
comfortable chirp, while its mate hopped up to give her a nice plump
worm for breakfast.

"I love birds. Tell me something about them, Aunt Wee. You must know
many things; for they like you, and come when you call."

"Once upon a time," began Wee, while her fingers flew and the pretty
basket grew, "there was a great snow-storm, and all the country was
covered with a thick white quilt. It froze a little, so one could walk
over it, and I went out for a run. Oh, so cold it was, with a sharp
wind, and no sun or any thing green to make it pleasant! I went far away
over the fields, and sat down to rest. While I sat there, a little bird
came by, and stopped to rest also.

"'How do you do?' said I.

"'Chick-a-dee-dee,' said he.

"'A cold day,' said I.

"'Chick-a-dee-dee,' said he.

"'Aren't you afraid of starving, now the ground is covered and the trees
are bare?'

"'Chick-a-dee-dee, ma'am, chick-a-dee-dee!'" answered the bird in the
same cheerful tone. And it sounded as if he said, 'I shall be cared for.
I'm not afraid.'

"'What will you eat? There's nothing here or for miles round. I really
think you'll starve, birdie,' said I.

"Then he laughed, and gave me a merry look as he lit on a tall, dry weed
near by. He shook it hard with his little bill; when down fell a shower
of seeds, and there was dinner all ready on a snow-white cloth. All the
while he ate he kept looking up at me with his quick, bright eyes; and,
when he had done, he said, as plainly as a bird could say it:

    "'Cold winds may blow,
        And snows may fall,
      But well we know
        God cares for all.'"

"I like that little story, and shall always think of it when I hear the
chick-a-dee-dee." Daisy sat a moment with a thoughtful look in her eyes;
then she said slowly, as if sorry for the words:

"It isn't a stupid, grown-up world. It's a very pleasant, young world;
and I like it a great deal better this morning than I did last night."

"I'm glad of that; and, even if we don't find our fairy to-day, you will
have found some sunshine, Daisy, and that is almost as good. Now put in
the berries, and we'll go on."

How they hunted! They climbed trees to peep into squirrel-holes and
birds'-nests; they chased bees and butterflies to ask for news of the
elves; they waded in the brook, hoping to catch a water-sprite; they ran
after thistle-down, fancying a fairy might be astride; they searched the
flowers and ferns, questioned sun and wind, listened to robin and
thrush; but no one could tell them any thing of the little people,
though all had gay and charming bits of news about themselves. And Daisy
thought the world got younger and happier every minute.

When they came in to breakfast, papa and mamma looked at Daisy, and then
nodded with a smile at Aunt Wee; for, though Daisy's frock was soiled,
her boots wet, and her hair tumbled, her cheeks were rosy, eyes bright,
and voice so cheerful that they thought it better music than any in the
summer world without.

"Hunting fairies is a pleasant play, isn't it, Daisy?" said papa, as he
tasted the berries, and admired the green basket.

"Oh, yes! and we are going again to-morrow. Aunt Wee says we must try
seven days at least. I like it, and mean to keep on till I really find
my fairy."

"I think you will find something better than 'little vanishers,' dear,"
said mamma, filling up the bowl of bread and milk which Daisy was fast
emptying; for she certainly _had_ found an appetite.

"There it is again!" cried Daisy, flying out of bed the next morning
still earlier than the day before. Yes, there it was, the fairy music,
as blithe and sweet as ever; and the morning-glories rung their delicate
bells as if keeping time. Daisy felt rather sleepy, but remembered her
promise to Aunt Wee, and splashed into her tub, singing the bob-o-link's
song as she bathed.

"Where shall we go to-day?" she asked, as they went out into the garden.

"I think we'd better try a new place; so we'll go to the farmyard; and,
while we feed the hens, I'll listen to their chat, and perhaps can learn
something from it," replied Wee soberly.

"Do hens know about fairies? I thought they were very dull things, and
didn't care for any thing but eating corn and laying eggs," said Daisy,
surprised.

"Oh, dear, no! they are very sensible creatures, and see a deal of the
world in their daily walks. Hunting for insects gives them an excellent
chance to see fairies, if there are any. Here is some corn for the
biddies; and, after we have fed them, we will look for eggs, and so may
find a brownie or two."

Such a clatter as there was when they came to the barnyard; for every
thing was just awake, and in the best spirits. Ducks were paddling off
to the pond; geese to the meadow; and meek gray guinea-hens tripping
away to hunt bugs in the garden. A splendid cock stood on the wall, and
crowed so loud and clear that all the neighboring chanticleers replied.
The motherly hens clucked and scratched with their busy broods about
them, or sat and scolded in the coops because the chicks would gad
abroad. Doves cooed on the sunny roof, and smoothed their gleaming
feathers. Daisy's donkey nibbled a thistle by the wall, and a stately
peacock marched before the door with all his plumage spread. It made
Daisy laugh to see the airs the fowls put on as she scattered corn, and
threw meal and water to the chicks. Some pushed and gobbled; some stood
meekly outside the crowd, and got what they could; others seized a
mouthful, and ran away to eat it in a corner. The chicks got into the
pan entirely, and tumbled one over the other in their hurry to eat; but
the mammas saw that none went hungry. And the polite cock waited upon
them in the most gentlemanly manner, making queer little clucks and
gurgles as if he said:

"Allow me, madam, to offer you this kernel;" or, "Here, my dear, try
that bit." And sometimes he pecked a little, with a loud quaver,
evidently saying, "Come, come, children, behave yourselves, and don't
eat like pigs."

"What is she saying?" asked Daisy, pointing to an old gray hen in a
black turban, who was walking about alone, muttering to herself, as hens
often do in their promenades.

"She says a cat has made a nest, and hatched three kits up on the loft,
near her own nest; and she doesn't like it, because their mewing annoys
her," said Wee, after listening a minute.

"How nice! let's go and find them. But do you learn anything about the
fairies from the hen's chat?"

"No: they have been so busy setting, they have had no time for picnics
yet. But they will let us know, if they discover any."

In the barn, the cows were being milked; and Daisy had a mugful of it,
warm and sweet, out of the foaming pail.

"We'll take some to Mrs. Purr; for, I dare say, she doesn't like to
leave the kits long, and will enjoy a sip of something comfortable,"
said Wee, as Daisy climbed the ladder, and went rustling over the hay
to a corner, whence came a joyful "Mew!" What a charming sight it was,
to be sure! a snow-white cat lying in a cosy nest, and, by her, three
snow-white kits, wagging three very small gray tails.

"There never was any thing so lovely!" cried Daisy, as she sat with the
three downy balls in her lap, while the mamma gratefully lapped the new
milk from Aunt Wee's cup.

"Are they better than fairies?"

"Almost: for I know about pussies, and can cuddle them; but I couldn't a
fairy, you know, and they might be afraid of me. These dears are not
afraid, and I shall have such fun with them as they grow up. What
_shall_ we name them, auntie?"

"Snowball, Patpaw, and Wagtail would do, I think," said Wee, stroking
the cat, who rubbed against her, purring very loud.

"Yes: I like those names for my pets. But what is Mrs. Purr saying, with
her mouth up to your ear?" asked Daisy, who firmly believed that Aunt
Wee knew every thing.

"She tells me that when she went on a grasshopper hunt the other day, as
she ran through the meadow, she saw some lovely creatures all in blue,
with gauze wings, flying about over the river, and sitting in the
water-lilies. She thinks they may be fairies, and advises us to go and
look."

"So we will to-morrow," said Daisy. "Ask her, please, if I may take the
kits into the house, if I'll be very careful and give them a nice big
bed to sleep in."

"She says you may; but she must go too, else the kits will cry," said
Wee, after listening to Pussy's purr a minute.

Much pleased with her new pets, Daisy took them in her apron, and,
followed by their confiding mamma, marched to the house, and established
them in the old cradle which used to be hers. Pussy got in also; and,
when they were settled on a soft cushion, Daisy rocked them gently to
and fro. At first Mrs. Purr opened her yellow eyes, and looked rather
anxious: but, as nothing uncomfortable happened, she composed herself,
and soon quite liked the motion; for she fell asleep, and made a pretty
picture as she lay with her downy white babies on her downy white
breast.

When the sun rose next morning, he saw Daisy and Wee floating down the
river in their boat. "Bless me! here's company," said the sun, and began
at once to make them welcome in his most charming manner. He set the
waves to sparkling with a sudden shimmer; he shot long rays of light
through the dark hemlocks, till they looked like fairy trees; he touched
Daisy's hair and it turned to gold; he chased away the shadows that
lurked among the hills; he drew up the misty curtain that hovered over
the river; and, with the warmth of his kisses, waked the sleeping
lilies.

"Look, look, Aunt Wee! how they open, one by one, as the light shines on
them! We shan't have to wait any longer; for they get up with the sun,
as you do." As she spoke, Daisy caught a half-open lily, and drew it up,
fragrant and dripping, fresh from its sleep.

"They look like a fleet of fairy ships, anchored in this quiet harbor,
with sails half furled, and crews asleep. See the little sailors, in
their yellow jackets, lifting up their heads as the wind blows its
whistle, like a boatswain, to 'pipe all hands.'"

Daisy laughed at Aunt Wee's fancy, and stirred up the crew of the
Water-sprite, as she called her flower, till the white sails were all
set, and it was ready for a summer voyage.

"It is time we saw the fairies in blue, unless old Madam Purr deceived
us. I hope we _shall_ find one; for, though I enjoy every thing we see,
I do want my elf too."

"What is that?" cried Wee; and Daisy flew up so quickly that the boat
rocked like a cradle. A slender creature, in a blue dress, with gauzy
wings, darted by, and vanished among the rushes that nodded by the bank.

"Go nearer,--softly! softly!--and maybe it will fly out again. I really
think it was a fairy; for I never saw any thing like it before,"
whispered Daisy, much excited.

Wee rowed in among the green rushes and purple water-weeds, and out flew
half-a-dozen of the blue-bodied creatures. They didn't seem afraid, but
skimmed about the boat, as if curious to see what it was; and Daisy sat,
and stared with all her might. Presently one of the lovely things lit on
the lily in her hand, and she held her breath to watch it. A little
shadow of disappointment passed over her face as she looked; but it was
gone at once, and her voice was full of delight as she said softly:

"It's not a fairy, Aunt Wee; but it is very beautiful, with its slender
blue body, its lacy wings, and bright eyes. What name does it have?"

"We call it a dragon-fly; and it could tell you a pretty little story
about itself, could you understand it. In May the tiny eggs are dropped
on the water, and sink to the bottom, where little creatures are
born,--ugly, brown things, with six legs and no wings. They feed on
water-insects, and for a long time swim about in this state. When ready,
they climb up the stem of some plant, and sit in the sun till the ugly
brown shells drop away, and the lovely winged creatures appear. They
grow in an hour to be perfect dragon-flies, and float away to lead happy
lives in the sunshine by the river."

As if only waiting till the story was done, the dragon-fly flew off with
a whirr, and darted to and fro, hunting for its breakfast, glittering
splendidly as it flashed among the leaves or darted close above the
water. Daisy forgot her disappointment in a minute, and went fishing for
lilies; while the turtles came up to sun themselves on the rocks, the
merry little tadpoles wiggled in the shallow places, and a wild duck
paddled by with a brood of ducklings following in her wake.

"Oh, dear! it rains; and we can't go fairy-hunting at all," said Daisy
next morning, as the patter on the window-pane woke her up, and Aunt Wee
came in to dress her.

"Yes, we can, dear; jump up, and see what a funny place I'll take you
to."

Daisy thought the rain would be a capital excuse for lying in bed; for
she still liked to cuddle and drowse in her cosey, warm nest. But she
was curious to know where the curious place was; so she got up and
followed.

"Why, Aunt Wee, this is the garret; and there isn't any thing nice or
funny here," she said, as they climbed the stairs, and came into the big
attic, filled with all manner of old things.

"Isn't there? We'll soon see." And so they did: for Aunt Wee began to
play; and presently Daisy was shouting with fun as she sat on an old
saddle, with a hair-covered trunk for a horse, a big old-fashioned
bonnet on her head, and a red silk petticoat for a habit. Then they went
to sea in a great chest, and got wrecked on a desert island, where they
built a fort with boxes and bags, hunted bears with rusty guns, and had
to eat dried berries, herbs and nuts; for no other food could be found.
Aunt Wee got an old fiddle, and had a dancing-school, where Daisy
capered till she was tired. So they rummaged out some dusty books, and
looked at pictures so quietly that a little mouse came out of a drawer
and peeped about, thinking no one was there.

"Let's find the nest, since we don't find any fairy," said Wee; and,
opening the drawer, she turned over the things till she came to a pair
of old velvet shoes; and there in the toe of one, nicely cuddled under a
bit of flannel, lay four pink mites, which woke up, and stretched their
tiny legs, and squeaked such small squeaks one could hardly hear them.

"How cunning they are! I wish they would let me put them with the kits,
and have a nursery full of babies. Wouldn't it be nice to see them all
grow up?" said Daisy.

"I'm afraid they wouldn't grow up, if Mrs. Purr lived with them," began
Wee, but got no further; for just then the cat bounced into the drawer,
and ate up the mouselings in four mouthfuls. Daisy screamed; the
mother-mouse gave a doleful squeak, and ran into a hole; and Aunt Wee
tried to save the little ones. But it was too late: Purr had got her
breakfast, and sat washing her face after it, as if she had enjoyed it.

"Never mind, Daisy: she would have caught them by and by, and it's as
well to have them taken care of before they do any harm. There is the
bell: don't cry, but come and tell papa what a fine romp we've had."

"It doesn't rain, but it's dreadfully wet; so we'll go to the dairy, and
see if any sprites are hiding there," said Wee next day; and to the
dairy they went.

A pleasant place it was,--so clean and cool, and as full of sweet odors
as if the ghosts of buttercups and clover still haunted the milk which
they had helped to make. Dolly was churning, and Polly was making up
butter in nice little pats. Both were very kind, and let Daisy peep
everywhere. All round on white shelves stood the shining pans, full of
milk; the stone floor was wet; and a stream of water ran along a narrow
bed through the room, and in it stood jars of butter, pots of cream, and
cans of milk. The window was open, and hop-vines shook their green bells
before it. The birds sang outside, and maids sang inside, as the churn
and the wooden spatters kept time:

    "Brindle and Bess,
    White-star and Jess--
      Come, butter, come!
    Eat cowslips fine,
    Red columbine--
      Come, butter, come!
    Grasses green and tall,
    Clover, best of all,--
      Come, butter, come!
    And give every night
    Milk sweet and white--
      Come, butter, come!
    Make the churn go,
    See the lumps grow!--
      Come, butter, come!"

Daisy sang also, and turned the handle till she was tired; then she
helped Polly with the butter, and made four little pats,--one stamped
with a star for papa, one with a rose for mamma, a strawberry for Aunt
Wee, and a cow for herself. She skimmed a pitcher of cream with a
shallow shell, and liked the work so much she asked to have a little pan
of milk put by for her to take care of every day. Dolly promised, and
gave her a small shell and a low shelf all to herself. When she went in,
she carried her pretty pats in one hand, the cream-pot in the other, and
entered the breakfast room looking as brisk and rosy as a little
milkmaid.

It was a lovely morning when Daisy was next roused by the fairy music,
and the ponies were standing at the door. "Are we going far?" she
asked, as Wee put on her riding-skirt, and tied back her hair.

"Up to the mountain-top: it's only a mile; and we shall have time, if we
ride fast," answered Wee.

Away they went, through the green lane, over the bridge, and up the
steep hillside where the sheep fed and colts frisked as they passed by.
Higher and higher climbed Dandy and Prance, the ponies; and gayer and
gayer grew Daisy and Wee, as the fresh air blew over them, and the
morning-red glowed on their faces. When they reached the top, they sat
on a tall stone, and looked down into the valley on either side.

"This seems like a place to find giants, not fairies, it is so high and
big and splendid up here," said Daisy, as her eye roamed over river,
forest, town, and hill.

"There are giants here; and I brought you up to see them," answered Wee.

"Mercy, me! where are they?" cried Daisy, looking very curious and
rather frightened.

"There is one of them." And Wee pointed to the waterfall that went
dashing and foaming down into the valley. "That giant turns the wheels
of all the mills you see. Some of them grind grain for our bread, some
help to spin cloth for our clothes, some make paper, and others saw
trees into boards. That is a beautiful and busy giant, Daisy."

"So it is, and some day we'll go and see it work. Show me the others: I
like your giants 'most as well as those in the fairy-books."

"On this side you'll see another, called Steam. He is a very strong
fellow; for, with the help of gunpowder, he will break the granite
mountain in pieces, and carry it away. He works in the other mills, and
takes heavy loads of stone, cloth, paper, and wood all over the country.
Then, on the right of us is a third giant, called Electricity. He runs
along those wires, and carries messages from one end of the world to the
other. He goes under the sea and through the air; he brings news to
every one; runs day and night, yet never tires; and often helps sick
people with his lively magic."

"I like him best, I think; for he is more like a real, wonderful giant.
Is there any on that side of us?" asked Daisy, turning round to look
behind her.

"Yes: the best and most powerful of all lives in that big house with the
bell on the roof," said Wee, smiling.

"Why, that's only the schoolhouse."

"Education is a long word, dear; but you know what it means, and, as you
grow older, you will see what wonders it can work. It is a noble giant;
for in this country rich and poor are helped by it, and no one need
suffer for it unless they choose. It works more wonders than any other:
it changes little children into wise, good men and women, who rule the
world, and make happy homes everywhere; it helps write books, sing
songs, paint pictures, do good deeds, and beautify the world. Love and
respect it, my little Daisy, and be glad that you live now when such
giants lend a hand to dwarfs like us."

Daisy sat still a long time, looking all about her on the mountain-top;
and, when she rode away, she carried a new thought in her mind, which
she never forgot.

"This is the last day of the seven, and no fairies have been found. Do
you think I _ever_ shall see one?" said Daisy, on the Sunday morning
that ended her week's hunt.

"Not the kind you think of, for there are none such, Daisy; but you have
found two better and more beautiful ones than any fanciful sprites,"
said Wee.

"Have I? Where are they? What are their names?"

Aunt Wee drew her to the glass, and said, as she pointed to Daisy's
face:

"Here they are, and their names are Health and Happiness. There are many
ways of losing them, and they are hard to catch when once lost. I wanted
you to keep both, and tried to show you how. A happy, healthful hour in
the morning sweetens and brightens the whole day; and there is no
fairy-book half so wonderful as the lovely world all about us, if we
only know how to read it."

"Then all these mornings we were hunting after health and happiness,
instead of fairies, were we?"

"Yes: haven't you enjoyed it, and don't you think you have caught my
fairies?"

Daisy looked from a little picture of herself, which Wee had drawn some
time ago, to her image in the glass. One was dull and sad, pale and
cross; the other, rosy, gay, and smiling,--the likeness of a happy,
hearty little girl, wide-awake and in good tune. She understood the kind
joke; and, turning, kissed Aunt Wee, as she said, gratefully:

"I think I have caught your elves, and I'll try to keep them all my
life. But tell me one thing: was the music that woke me all a joke too?"

"No, dear: here it is, and now it is your own; for you have learned to
wake and listen to it."

Daisy looked, and saw Aunt Wee lean from the window, and take out of a
hollow nook, in the old tree close by, a little box. She set it on the
table, touched a spring, and the airy music sounded more beautiful than
ever.

"Is it mine, all mine?" cried Daisy.

"Yes: I hid it while I tried my little plan, and now you shall have it
for your own. See, here is the best elf I can give you, and she will
dance whenever you call her."

Wee pushed a golden pin, and up sprang a tiny figure, all crimson and
gold, with shining wings, and a garland on its dainty head. Softly
played the hidden music, and airily danced the little sylph till the
silvery chime died away; then, folding her delicate arms, she sank from
sight, leaving Daisy breathless with delight.




V.

SHADOW-CHILDREN.


Ned, Polly, and Will sat on the steps one sun-shiny morning, doing
nothing, except wish they had something pleasant to do.

"Something new, something never heard of before,--wouldn't that be
jolly?" said Ned, with a great yawn.

"It must be an amusing play, and one that we don't get tired of very
soon," added Polly gravely.

"And something that didn't be wrong, else mamma wouldn't like it," said
little Will, who was very good for a small boy.

As no one could suggest any thing to suit, they all sat silent a few
minutes. Suddenly Ned said, rather crossly, "I wish my shadow wouldn't
mock me. Every time I stretch or gape it does the same, and I don't like
it."

"Poor thing, it can't help that: it has to do just what you do, and be
your slave all day. I'm glad I ain't a shadow," said Polly.

"I try to run away from mine sometimes, but I can't ever. It will come
after me; and in the night it scares me, if it gets big and black," said
Will, looking behind him.

"Wouldn't it be fun to see shadows going about alone, and doing things
like people?" asked Polly.

"I just wish they would. I'd like to see ours cut capers; that would be
a jolly new game, wouldn't it?" said Ned.

No one had time to speak; for suddenly the three little shadows on the
sunny wall behind them stood up straight, and began to bow.

"Mercy, me!" cried Polly, staring at them.

"By Jove, that's odd!" said Ned, looking queer.

"Are they alive?" asked Will, a little frightened.

"Don't be alarmed: they won't hurt you," said a soft voice. "To-day is
midsummer-day, and whoever wishes a wish can have it till midnight. You
want to see your shadows by themselves; and you can, if you promise to
follow them as they have followed you so long. They will not get you
into harm; so you may safely try it, if you like. Do you agree for the
day to do as they do, and so have your wish?"

"Yes, we promise," answered the children.

"Tell no one till night, and be faithful shadows to the shadows."

The voice was silent, but with more funny little bows the shadows began
to move off in different directions. The children knew their own: for
Ned's was the tallest, and had its hands in its pockets; Polly's had a
frock on, and two bows where its hair was tied up; while Will's was a
plump little shadow in a blouse, with a curly head and a pug nose. Each
child went after its shadow, laughing, and enjoying the fun.

Ned's master went straight to the shed, took down a basket, and marched
away to the garden, where it began to move its hands as if busily
picking peas. Ned stopped laughing when he saw that, and looked rather
ashamed; for he remembered that his mother had asked him to do that
little job for her, and he had answered,--

"Oh, bother the old peas! I'm busy, and I can't."

"Who told you about this?" he asked, beginning to work.

The shadow shook its head, and pointed first to Ned's new jacket, then
to a set of nice garden tools near by, and then seemed to blow a kiss
from its shadowy fingers towards mamma, who was just passing the open
gate.

"Oh! you mean that she does lots for me; so I ought to do what I can for
her, and love her dearly," said Ned, getting a pleasanter face every
minute.

The shadow nodded, and worked away as busily as the bees, tumbling heels
over head in the great yellow squash blossoms, and getting as dusty as
little millers. Somehow Ned rather liked the work, with such an odd
comrade near by; for, though the shadow didn't really help a bit, it
seemed to try, and set an excellent example. When the basket was full,
the shadow took one handle, and Ned the other; and they carried it in.

"Thank you, dear. I was afraid we should have to give up our peas
to-day: I'm so busy, I can't stop," said mamma, looking surprised and
pleased.

Ned couldn't stop to talk; for the shadow ran away to the woodpile, and
began to chop with all its might.

"Well, I suppose I must; but I never saw such a fellow for work as this
shadow is. He isn't a bit like me, though he's been with me so long,"
said Ned, swinging the real hatchet in time with the shadowy one.

Polly's new mistress went to the dining-room, and fell to washing up the
breakfast cups. Polly hated that work, and sulkily began to rattle the
spoons and knock the things about. But the shadow wouldn't allow that;
and Polly had to do just what it did, though she grumbled all the while.

"She doesn't splash a bit, or make any clatter; so I guess she's a tidy
creature," said Polly. "How long she does rub each spoon and glass. We
never shall get done. What a fuss she makes with the napkins, laying
them all even in the drawer. And now she's at the salt-cellars, doing
them just as mamma likes. I wish she'd live here, and do my work for
me. Why, what's that?" And Polly stopped fretting to listen; for she
seemed to hear the sound of singing,--so sweet, and yet so very faint
she could catch no words, and only make out a cheerful little tune.

"Do you hear any one singing, mamma?" she asked.

"No: I wish I did." And mamma sighed; for baby was poorly, piles of
sewing lay waiting for her, Biddy was turning things topsy-turvy in the
kitchen for want of a word from the mistress, and Polly was looking
sullen.

The little girl didn't say any more, but worked quietly and watched the
shadow, feeling sure the faint song came from it. Presently she began to
hum the tune she caught by snatches; and, before she knew it, she was
singing away like a blackbird. Baby stopped crying, and mamma said,
smiling:

"Now I hear somebody singing, and it's the music I like best in the
world."

That pleased Polly; but, a minute after, she stopped smiling, for the
shadow went and took baby, or seemed to, and Polly really did. Now, baby
was heavy, and cross with its teeth; and Polly didn't feel like tending
it one bit. Mamma hurried away to the kitchen; and Polly walked up and
down the room with poor baby hanging over her arm, crying dismally, with
a pin in its back, a wet bib under its chin, and nothing cold and hard
to bite with its hot, aching gums, where the little teeth were trying to
come through.

"Do stop, you naughty, fretty baby. I'm tired of your screaming, and
it's high time you went to sleep. Bless me! what's Miss Shadow doing
with _her_ baby?" said Polly.

Miss Shadow took out the big pin and laid it away, put on a dry bib, and
gave _her_ baby a nice ivory ring to bite; then began to dance up and
down the room, till the shadowy baby clapped its hands and kicked
delightedly. Polly laughed, and did the same, feeling sorry she had been
so pettish. Presently both babies grew quiet, went to sleep, and were
laid in the cradle.

"Now, I hope we shall rest a little," said Polly, stretching her arms.

But, no: down sat the shadow, and began to sew, making her needle fly
like a real little seamstress.

"Oh, dear!" groaned Polly. "I promised to hem those handkerchiefs for
Ned, and so I must; but I do think handkerchiefs are the most pokey
things in the world to sew. I dare say you think you can sew faster than
I can. Just wait a bit, and see what I can do, miss," she said to the
shadow.

It took some time to find her thimble and needles and spools, for Polly
wasn't a very neat little girl; but she got settled at last, and
stitched away as if bent on beating her dumb friend.

Little Will's shadow went up to the nursery, and stopped before a basin
of water. "Oh! ah! ain't this drefful?" cried Will, with a shiver; for
he knew he'd got to have his face washed, because he wouldn't have it
done properly when he got up, but ran away. Now, Will was a good child;
but this one thing was his great trouble, and sometimes he couldn't bear
it. Jane was so rough. She let soap get in his eyes, and water run down
his neck, and she pinched his nose when she wiped him, and brushed his
hair so hard that really it _was_ dreadful; and even a bigger boy would
have found it hard to bear. He shivered and sighed: but Jane came in;
and, when he saw that the shadow stood still and took the scrubbing like
a little hero, he tried to do the same, and succeeded so well that Jane
actually patted his head and called him "a deary;" which was something
new, for old Nurse Jane was always very busy and rather cross.

Feeling that nothing worse could possibly happen to him, Will ran after
his shadow, as it flitted away into the barn, and began to feed the
chickens.

"There, now! I forgetted all about my chickeys, and the shadow 'membered
'em; and I'm glad of it," said Will, scattering dabs of meal and water
to the chirping, downy little creatures who pecked and fluttered at his
feet. Little shadow hunted for eggs, drove the turkeys out of the
garden, and picked a basket of chips: then it went to play with Sammy,
a neighbor's child; for, being a small shadow, it hadn't many jobs to
do, and plenty of active play was good for it.

Sammy was a rough little boy and rather selfish: so, when they played
ball, he wanted to throw all the time; and, when Will objected, he grew
angry and struck him. The blow didn't hurt Will's cheek much, but it did
his little feelings; and he lifted his hand to strike back, when he saw
his shadow go and kiss Sammy's shadow. All his anger was gone in a
minute, and he just put his arm round Sammy's neck and kissed him. This
kiss for a blow made him so ashamed that he began to cry, and couldn't
be comforted till he had given Will his best marble and a ride on his
pony.

About an hour before dinner, the three shadows and the children met in
the garden, and had a grand game of play, after they had told each other
what they had been doing since they parted. Now, the shadows didn't
forget baby even then, but got out the wagon, and Miss Baby, all fresh
from her nap, sat among her pillows like a queen, while Ned was horse,
Polly footman, and Will driver; and in this way she travelled all round
the garden and barn, up the lane and down to the brook, where she was
much delighted with the water sparkling along and the fine splash of the
stones they threw in.

When the dinner-bell rang, mamma saw four clean, rosy faces and four
smooth heads at the table; for the shadow-children made themselves neat,
without being told. Every one was merry and hungry and good-natured.
Even poor baby forgot her teeth, and played a regular rub-a-dub with her
spoon on her mug, and tried to tell about the fine things she saw on her
drive. The children said nothing about the new play, and no one observed
the queer actions of their shadows but themselves. They saw that there
was no gobbling, or stretching over, or spilling of things, among the
shadows; but that they waited to be helped, served others first, and ate
tidily, which was a great improvement upon the usual state of things.

It was Saturday afternoon: the day was fine, and mamma told them they
could go for a holiday frolic in the woods. "Don't go to the pond, and
be home early," she said.

"Yes, mamma; we'll remember," they answered, as they scampered away to
get ready.

"We shall go through the village, and Mary King will be looking out; so
I shall wear my best hat. Mamma won't see me, if I slip down the back
way; and I do so want Mary to know that my hat is prettier than hers,"
said Polly, up in her little room.

Now Polly was rather vain, and liked to prink; so she got out the new
hat, and spent some time in smoothing her braids and putting on her
blue ribbons. But when all was ready, and the boys getting impatient,
she found her shadow, with a sun-bonnet on, standing by the door, as if
to prevent her going out.

"You tiresome thing! do you mean that I mustn't wear my hat, but that
old bonnet?" asked Polly.

The shadow nodded and beckoned, and patted its head, as if it was all
right.

"I wish I hadn't promised to do as you do; then I could do as I like,
and not make a fright of myself," said Polly, rather sulkily, as she put
away the hat, and tied on the old bonnet with a jerk.

Once out in the lovely sunshine, she soon forgot the little
disappointment; and, as they didn't go through the village, but by a
green lane, where she found some big blackberries, she was quite
contented. Polly had a basket to hold fruit or flowers, Ned his
jackknife, and Will a long stick on which he rode, fancying that this
sort of horse would help his short legs along; so they picked, whittled,
and trotted their way to the wood, finding all manner of interesting
things on the road.

The wood was full of pleasant sights and sounds; for wild roses bloomed
all along the path, ferns and scarlet berries filled the little dells,
squirrels chattered, birds sang, and pines whispered musically
overhead.

"I'm going to stop here and rest, and make a wreath of these pretty wild
roses for baby: it's her birthday, and it will please mamma," said
Polly, sitting down on a mound of moss, with a lapful of flowers.

"I'm going to cut a fishing-pole, and will be back in a minute." And Ned
went crashing into the thickest part of the wood.

"I shall see where that rabbit went to, and maybe I'll find some
berries," said Will, trotting down the path the wild rabbit had gone.

The sound of the boys' steps died away, and Polly was wondering how it
would seem to live all alone in the wood, when a little girl came
trudging by, with a great pail of berries on her arm. She was a poor
child: her feet were bare, her gown was ragged, she wore an old shawl
over her head, and walked as if lame. Polly sat behind the ferns, and
the child did not see her till Polly called out. The sudden sound
startled her; and she dropped her pail, spilling the berries all over
the path. The little girl began to cry, and Polly to laugh, saying, in a
scornful tone:

"How silly to cry for a few berries!"

"I've been all day picking 'em," said the girl; "and I'm so tired and
hungry; 'cause I didn't dare to go home till my pail was full,--mother
scolds if I do,--and now they're all spoilt. Oh, dear! dear me!" And
she cried so hard that great tears fell on the moss.

Polly was sorry now, and sat looking at her till she saw her shadow down
on its knees, picking up the berries; then it seemed to fold its little
handkerchief round the girl's bruised foot, and give her something from
its pocket. Polly jumped up and imitated the kind shadow, even to giving
the great piece of gingerbread she had brought for fear she should be
hungry.

"Take this," she said gently. "I'm sorry I frightened you. Here are the
berries all picked up, and none the worse for falling in the grass. If
you'll take them to the white house on the hill, my mamma will buy them,
and then your mother won't scold you."

"Oh, thank you, miss! It's ever so good. I'll take the berries to your
mother, and bring her more whenever she likes," said the child
gratefully, as she walked away munching the gingerbread, and smiling
till there were little rainbows in her tears.

Meanwhile Ned had poked about in the bushes, looking for a good pole.
Presently he saw a willow down by the pond, and thought that would give
him a nice, smooth pole. He forgot his promise, and down he went to the
pond; where he cut his stick, and was whittling the end, when he saw a
boat by the shore. It was untied, and oars lay in it, as if waiting for
some one to come and row out.

"I'll just take a little pull across, and get those cardinal-flowers for
Polly," he said; and went to the boat.

He got in, and was about to push off, when he saw his shadow standing on
the shore.

"Don't be a fool; get in, and come along," he said to it, remembering
his promise now, but deciding to break it, and ask pardon afterwards.

But the shadow shook its head; pointed to the swift stream that ran
between the banks, the rocks and mud on the opposite side, and the leaky
boat itself.

"I ain't afraid: mamma won't mind, if I tell her I'm sorry; and it will
be such fun to row alone. Be a good fellow, and let me go," said Ned,
beckoning.

But the shadow would not stir, and Ned was obliged to mind. He did so
very reluctantly, and scolded the shadow well as he went back to Polly;
though all the time he felt he was doing right, and knew he should be
glad afterwards.

Will trotted after the rabbit, but didn't find it; he found a
bird's-nest instead with four little birds in it. He had an empty cage
at home, and longed for something to put in it; for kittens didn't like
it, and caterpillars and beetlebugs got away. He chose the biggest bird,
and, holding him carefully, walked away to find Polly. The poor
mother-bird chirped and fluttered in great distress; but Will kept on
till his little shadow came before him, and tried to make him turn
back.

"No, no, I want him," said Will. "I won't hurt him, and his mother has
three left: she won't mind if I take one."

Here the mother-bird chirped so loud it was impossible to help seeing
that she _did_ care very much; and the shadow stamped its foot and waved
its hand, as if ordering the young robber to carry back the baby-bird.
Will stood still, and thought a minute; but his little heart was a very
kind one, and he soon turned about, saying pleasantly:

"Yes, it _is_ naughty, and I won't do it. I'll ask mamma to get me a
canary, and will let this birdie stay with his brothers."

The shadow patted him on the shoulder, and seemed to be delighted as
Will put the bird in the nest and walked on, feeling much happier than
if he had kept it. A bush of purple berries grew by the path, and Will
stopped to pick some. He didn't know what they were, and mamma had often
told him never to eat strange things. But they smelt so good, and looked
so nice, he couldn't resist, and lifted one to his mouth, when little
shadow motioned for him to stop.

"Oh, dear! you don't let me do any thing I want to," sighed Will. "I
shall ask Polly if I tarn't eat these; and, if she says I may, I shall,
so now."

He ran off to ask Polly; but she said they were poisonous, and begged
him to throw them away.

"Good little shadow, to keep me safe!" cried Will. "I like you; and I'll
mind better next time, 'cause you are always right."

The shadow seemed to like this, and bobbed about so comically it made
Will laugh till his eyes were full of tears. Ned came back, and they
went on, having grand times in the wood. They found plenty of berries to
fill the basket; they swung down on slender birches, and got rolls of
white bark for canoes; they saw all sorts of wild-wood insects and
birds; and frolicked till they were tired. As they crossed a field, a
cow suddenly put down her head and ran at them, as if she was afraid
they meant to hurt her calf. All turned, and ran as fast as they could
toward the wall; but poor Will in his fright tumbled down, and lay
screaming. Ned and Polly had reached the wall, and, looking back, saw
that their shadows had not followed. Ned's stood before Will,
brandishing his pole; and Polly's was flapping a shadowy sun-bonnet with
all its might. As soon as they saw that, back they went,--Ned to
threaten till he broke his pole, and Polly to flap till the strings came
off. As if anxious to do its part, the bonnet flew up in the air, and
coming down lit on the cross cow's head; which so astonished her that
she ran away as hard as she could pelt.

"Wasn't that funny?" said Will, when they had tumbled over the wall, and
lay laughing in the grass on the safe side.

"I'm glad I wore the old bonnet; for I suppose my best hat would have
gone just the same," said Polly thankfully.

"The calf doesn't know its own mother with that thing on," laughed Ned.

"How brave and kind you were to come back and save me! I'd have been
deaded if you hadn't," said Will, looking at his brother and sister with
his little face full of grateful admiration.

They turned towards home after this flurry, feeling quite like heroes.
When they came to the corner where two roads met, Ned proposed they
should take the river-road; for, though the longest, it was much the
pleasantest.

"We shan't be home at supper-time," said Polly. "You won't be able to do
your jobs, Ned, nor I mine, and Will's chickens will have to go to bed
hungry."

"Never mind: it's a holiday, so let's enjoy it, and not bother,"
answered Ned.

"We promised mamma we'd come home early," said Will.

They stood looking at the two roads,--one sandy, hot, and hilly; the
other green and cool and level, along the river-side. They all chose the
pleasant path, and walked on till Ned cried out, "Why, where are our
shadows?"

They looked behind, before, and on either side; but nowhere could they
see them.

"They were with us at the corner," said Will.

"Let's run back, and try to find them," said Polly.

"No, let 'em go: I'm tired of minding mine, and don't care if I never
see it again," said Ned.

"Don't say so; for I remember hearing about a man who sold his shadow,
and then got into lots of trouble because he had none. We promised to
follow them, and we must," said Polly.

"I wish," began Ned in a pet; but Polly clapped her hand over his mouth,
saying:

"Pray, don't wish now; for it may come to pass as the man's wish in the
fairy tale did, and the black pudding flew up and stuck tight to his
wife's nose."

This made Ned laugh, and they all turned back to the corner. Looking up
the hilly road, they saw the three shadows trudging along, as if bent on
getting home in good time. Without saying a word, the children followed;
and, when they got to the garden gate, they all said at once:

"Aren't you glad you came?"

Under the elm-tree stood a pretty tea-table, covered with bread and
butter, custards, and berries, and in the middle a fine cake with
sugar-roses on the top; and mamma and baby, all nicely dressed, were
waiting to welcome them to the birthday feast. Polly crowned the little
queen, Ned gave her a willow whistle he had made, and Will some pretty,
bright pebbles he had found; and Miss Baby was as happy as a bird, with
her treasures.

A pleasant supper-time; then the small duties for each one; and then the
go-to-bed frolic. The nursery was a big room, and in the evening a
bright wood fire always burned there for baby. Mamma sat before it,
softly rubbing baby's little rosy limbs before she went to bed, singing
and telling stories meanwhile to the three children who pranced about in
their long nightgowns. This evening they had a gay time; for the shadows
amused them by all sorts of antics, and kept them laughing till they
were tired. As they sat resting on the big sofa, they heard a soft,
sweet voice singing. It wasn't mamma; for she was only talking to baby,
and this voice sang a real song. Presently they saw mamma's shadow on
the wall, and found it was the shadow-mother singing to the
shadow-children. They listened intently, and this is what they heard:

    "Little shadows, little shadows,
      Dancing on the chamber wall,
    While I sit beside the hearthstone
      Where the red flames rise and fall.
    Caps and nightgowns, caps and nightgowns,
      My three antic shadows wear;
    And no sound they make in playing,
      For the six small feet are bare.

    "Dancing gayly, dancing gayly,
      To and fro all together,
    Like a family of daisies
      Blown about in windy weather;
    Nimble fairies, nimble fairies,
      Playing pranks in the warm glow,
    While I sing the nursery ditties
      Childish phantoms love and know.

    "Now what happens, now what happens?
      One small shadow's tumbled down:
    I can see it on the carpet,
      Softly rubbing its hurt crown.
    No one whimpers, no one whimpers;
      A brave-hearted sprite is this:
    See! the others offer comfort
      In a silent, shadowy kiss.

    "Hush! they're creeping; hush! they're creeping,
      Up about my rocking-chair:
    I can feel their loving fingers
      Clasp my neck and touch my hair.
    Little shadows, little shadows,
      Take me captive, hold me tight,
    As they climb and cling and whisper,
      'Mother dear, good night! good night!'"

As the song ended, the real children, as well as the shadows, lovingly
kissed mamma, and said "Good-night;" then went away into their rooms,
said their prayers, and nestled down into their beds. Ned slept alone in
the room next that which Polly and Will had; and, after lying quiet a
little while, he called out softly:

"I say, Polly, are you asleep?"

"No: I'm thinking what a queer day we've had," answered Polly.

"It's been a good day, and I'm glad we tried our wish; for the shadows
showed us, as well as they could, what we ought to do and be. I shan't
forget it, shall you?" said Ned.

"No: I'm much obliged for the lesson."

"So is I," called out Will, in a very earnest, but rather a sleepy,
little voice.

"I wonder what mamma will say, when we tell her about it," said Ned.

"And I wonder if our shadows will come back to us at midnight, and
follow us as they used to do," added Polly.

"I shall be very careful where I lead my shadow; 'cause he's a good
little one, and set me a righter zarmple than ever I did him," said
Will, and then dropped asleep.

The others agreed with him, and resolved that their shadows should not
be ashamed of them. All were fast asleep; and no one but the moon saw
the shadows come stealing back at midnight, and, having danced about the
little beds, vanish as the clock struck twelve.




VI.

POPPY'S PRANKS.


She wasn't a wilfully naughty child, this harum-scarum Poppy, but very
thoughtless and very curious. She wanted to see every thing, do every
thing, and go every where: she feared nothing, and so was continually
getting into scrapes.

Her pranks began early; for, when she was about four, her mamma one day
gave her a pair of green shoes with bright buttons. Poppy thought there
never was any thing so splendid, and immediately wanted to go to walk.
But mamma was busy, and Poppy couldn't go alone any farther than the
garden. She showed her shoes to the servants, the cat, the doves, and
the flowers; and then opened the gate that the people in the street
might see the trim little feet she was so proud of. Now Poppy had been
forbidden to go out; but, when she saw Kitty Allen, her neighbor,
playing ball down the street, she forgot every thing but the desire to
show her new shoes; and away she went marching primly along as vain as a
little peacock, as she watched the bright buttons twinkle, and heard the
charming creak. Kitty saw her coming; and, being an ill-natured little
girl, took no notice, but called out to her brother Jack:

"Ain't some folks grand? If I couldn't have red shoes for my best, I
wouldn't have any, would you?"

They both laughed, and this hurt Poppy's feelings dreadfully. She tossed
her head, and tried to turn up her nose; but, it was so very small, it
couldn't be very scornful. She said nothing, but walked gravely by, as
if she was going on an errand, and hadn't heard a word. Round the corner
she went, thinking she would wait till Kitty was gone; as she didn't
like to pass again, fearing Jack might say something equally trying. An
organ-man with a monkey was playing near by; and Poppy was soon so busy
listening to the music, and watching the sad-looking monkey, that she
forgot home, shoes, and Kitty altogether.

She followed the man a long way; and, when she turned to go back, she
took the wrong street, and found herself by the park. Being fond of
dandelions, Poppy went in, and gathered her hands full, enjoying herself
immensely; for Betsy, the maid, never let her play in the pond, or roll
down the hill, or make dirt-pies, and now she did all these things,
besides playing with strange children and talking with any one she
pleased. If she had not had her luncheon just before she started, she
would have been very hungry; for dinner-time came, without her knowing
it.

By three o'clock, she began to think it was time to go home, and boldly
started off to find it. But poor little Poppy didn't know the way, and
went all wrong. She was very tired now, and hot and hungry, and wanted
to see mamma, and wondered why she didn't come to the brown house with
the white garden-gate. On and on she went, up streets and down, amusing
herself with looking in the shop-windows, and sitting to rest on
doorsteps. Once she asked a pleasant-faced little girl to show her the
way home; but, as she didn't know in what street it was, and said her
father's name was "papa," the girl couldn't help her: so she gave her a
bun and went away. Poppy ate her bun, and began to wonder what would
become of her; for night was coming on, and there didn't seem to be any
prospect of finding mamma or home or bed. Her courage was all gone now;
and, coming to a quiet place, she sat down on some high steps, and cried
till her little "hankchif," as she called it, was all wet.

Nobody minded her: and she felt very forlorn till a big black dog came
by, and seemed to understand the matter entirely; for he smelt of her
face, licked her hands, and then lay down by her with such a friendly
look in his brown eyes that Poppy was quite comforted. She told him her
story, patted his big head; and then, being fairly tired out, laid her
wet cheek on his soft back, and fell fast asleep.

It was quite dark when she woke; but a lamp was lighted near by, and
standing under it was a man ringing a great bell. Poppy sat up, and
wondered if anybody's supper was ready. The man had a paper; and, when
people stopped at the sound of the bell, he read in a loud voice:

"Lost! a little girl, four years old; curly brown hair, blue eyes; had
on a white frock and green shoes; calls herself Poppy."

He got no farther; for a little voice cried out of the dark, in a tone
of surprise:

"Why, dats me!"

The people all turned to look; and the big man put his bell in his
pocket, took her up very kindly, and said he'd carry her home.

"Is it far away?" asked Poppy, with a little sob.

"Yes, my dear; but I am going to give you some supper fust, along of my
little girl. I live close by; and, when we've had a bite, we'll go find
your ma."

Poppy was so tired and hungry, she was glad to find herself taken care
of, and let the man do as he liked. He took her to a funny little house,
and his wife gave her bread and molasses on a new tin plate with letters
all round the edge. Poppy thought it very fine, and enjoyed her supper,
though the man's little girl stared at her all the time with eyes as
blue as her mug.

While she ate, the man sent word to her father that she was found; and,
when both papa and mamma came hurrying in all out of breath with joy,
there sat Miss Poppy talking merrily, with her face well daubed with
molasses, her gown torn, her hands very dirty, and her shoes--ah, the
pretty new shoes!--all spoiled with mud and dust, scratched, and half
worn out, the buttons dull, and the color quite gone. No one cared for
it that night; for little runaway was kissed and petted, and taken home
to her own cosey bed as tenderly as if she had done nothing naughty, and
never frightened her parents out of their wits in her life.

But the next day,--dear me! what a sad time it was, to be sure! When
Poppy woke up, there hung the spoilt shoes over the mantle-piece; and,
as soon as she was dressed, papa came in with a long cord, one end of
which he tied round Poppy's waist, and the other to the arm of the sofa.

"I'm very sorry to have to tie you up, like a little dog; but I must, or
you will forget, and run away again, and make mamma ill."

Then he went away without his morning kiss, and Poppy was so very
unhappy she could hardly eat her breakfast. She felt better by and by,
and tried to play; but the cord kept pulling her back. She couldn't get
to the window; and, when she heard mamma passing the door, she tried to
run and meet her, but had to stop halfway, for the cord jerked her over.
Cousin Fanny came up, but Poppy was so ashamed to be tied that she
crept under the sofa and hid. All day she was a prisoner, and was a very
miserable little girl; but at night she was untied, and, when mamma took
her in her lap for the first time that day, Poppy held her fast, and
sobbed very penitently--

"O mamma! I drefful sorry I runned away. Fordive me one time more, and I
never will adain;" and she never did.

Two or three years after this, Poppy went to live in the country, and
tried some new pranks. One day she went with her sister Nelly to see a
man plough, for that sort of thing was new to her. While the man worked,
she saw him take out a piece of something brown, and bite off a bit.

"What's that?" asked Poppy.

"Tobaccer," said the man.

"Is it nice?" asked Poppy.

"Prime," said the man.

"Could you let me taste it?" asked curious Poppy.

"It will make you sick," said the man, laughing.

"It doesn't make _you_ sick. I'd like to try," said Poppy, nothing
daunted.

He gave her a piece; and Poppy ate it, though it didn't taste good at
all. She did it because Cy, her favorite playfellow, told her she'd die
if she did, and tried to frighten her.

"You darsn't eat any more," he said.

"Yes, I dare. See if I don't." And Poppy took another piece, just to
show how brave she was. Silly little Poppy!

"I ain't sick, and I shan't die, so now."

And Poppy pranced about as briskly as ever. But the man shook his head,
Nelly watched her anxiously, and Cy kept saying:

"Ain't you sick yet, say?"

For a little while Poppy felt all right; but presently she grew rather
pale, and began to look rather pensive. She stopped running, and walked
slower and slower, while her eyes got dizzy, and her hands and feet very
cold.

"Ain't you sick now, say?" repeated Cy; and Poppy tried to answer, "Oh,
dear! no;" but a dreadful feeling came over her, and she could only
shake her head, and hold on to Nelly.

"Better lay down a spell," said the man, looking a little troubled.

"I don't wish to dirty my clean frock," said Poppy faintly, as she
glanced over the wide-ploughed field, and longed for a bit of grass to
drop on. She kept on bravely for another turn; but suddenly stopped,
and, quite regardless of the clean pink gown, dropped down in a furrow,
looking so white and queer that Nelly began to cry. Poppy lay a minute,
then turned to Cy, and said very solemnly:

"Cy, run home, and tell my mother I'm dying."

Away rushed Cy in a great fright, and burst upon Poppy's mamma,
exclaiming breathlessly:

"O ma'am! Poppy's been and ate a lot of tobacco; and she's sick, layin'
in the field; and she says 'Come quick, 'cause she's dyin.'"

"Mercy on us! what will happen to that child next?" cried poor mamma,
who was used to Poppy's mishaps. Papa was away, and there was no
carriage to bring Poppy home in; so mamma took the little wheelbarrow,
and trundled away to get the suffering Poppy.

She couldn't speak when they got to her; and, only stopping to give the
man a lecture, mamma picked up her silly little girl, and the procession
moved off. First came Cy, as grave as a sexton; then the wheelbarrow
with Poppy, white and limp and speechless, all in a bunch; then mamma,
looking amused, anxious and angry; then Nelly, weeping as if her tender
heart was entirely broken; while the man watched them, with a grin,
saying to himself:

"Twarn't my fault. The child was a reg'lar fool to swaller it."

Poppy was dreadfully sick all night, but next day was ready for more
adventures and experiments. She swung on the garret stairs, and tumbled
down, nearly breaking her neck. She rubbed her eyes with red peppers, to
see if it _really_ would make them smart, as Cy said; and was led home
quite blind and roaring with pain. She got into the pigsty to catch a
young piggy, and was taken out in a sad state of dirt. She slipped into
the brook, and was half drowned; broke a window and her own head,
swinging a little flat-iron on a string; dropped baby in the coal-hod;
buried her doll, and spoilt her; cut off a bit of her finger, chopping
wood; and broke a tooth, trying to turn heels over head on a haycock.
These are only a few of her pranks, but one was nearly her last.

She wanted to go bare-footed, as the little country boys and girls did;
but mamma wasn't willing, and Poppy was much afflicted.

"It doesn't hurt Cy, and it won't hurt me, just for a little while," she
said.

"Say no more, Poppy. I never wish to see you barefooted," replied mamma.

"Well, you needn't: I'll go and do it in the barn," muttered Poppy, as
she walked away.

Into the barn she went, and played country girl to her heart's content,
in spite of Nelly's warnings. Nelly never got into scrapes, being a
highly virtuous young lady; but she enjoyed Poppy's pranks, and wept
over her misfortunes with sisterly fidelity.

"Now I'll be a bear, and jump at you as you go by," said Poppy, when
they were tired of playing steam-engine with the old winnowing machine.
So she got up on a beam; and Nelly, with a peck measure on her head for
a hat, and a stick for a gun, went bear-hunting, and banged away at the
swallows, the barrels, and the hencoops, till the bear was ready to eat
her. Presently, with a loud roar, the bear leaped; but Nelly wasn't
eaten that time, for Poppy cried out with pain:

"Oh! I jumped on a pitchfork, and it's in my foot! Take it out! take it
out!"

Poor little foot! There was a deep purple hole in the sole, and the
blood came, and Poppy fainted away, and Nelly screamed, and mamma ran,
and the neighbors rushed in, and there was _such_ a flurry. Poppy was
soon herself again, and lay on the sofa, with Nelly and Cy to amuse her.

"What did the doctor say to mamma in the other room about me?" whispered
Poppy, feeling very important at having such a bustle made on her
account. Nelly sniffed, but said nothing; Cy, however, spoke up briskly:

"He says you might have lockjaw."

"Is that bad?" asked Poppy gravely.

"Oh, ain't it, though! Your mouth shuts up, and you can't open it; and
you have fits and die."

"Always?" said Poppy, looking scared, and feeling of her mouth.

"'Most always, I guess. That's why your ma cried, and Nelly keeps
kissin' you."

Cy felt sorry, but rather enjoyed the excitement, and was sure, that, if
any one ever _could_ escape dying, it would be Poppy, for she always
"came alive" again after her worst mishaps. She looked very solemn for a
few minutes, and kept opening and shutting her mouth to see if it wasn't
stiff. Presently she said, in a serious tone and with a pensive air:

"Nelly, I'll give you my bead-ring: I shan't want it any more. And Cy
may have the little horse: he lost his tail; but I put on the lamb's
tail, and he is as good as ever. I wish to give away my things 'fore I
die; and, Nelly, won't you bring me the scissors?"

"What for?" said Nelly, sniffing more than ever.

"To cut off my hair for mamma. She'll want it, and I like to cut
things."

Nelly got the scissors; and Poppy cut away all she could reach, giving
directions about her property while she snipped.

"I wish papa to have my pictures and my piece of poetry I made. Give
baby my dolly and the quacking duck. Tell Billy, if he wants my
collection of bright buttons, he can have 'em; and give Hattie the
yellow plaster dog, with my love."

Here mamma came in with a poultice, and couldn't help laughing, though
tears stood in her eyes, as she saw Poppy's cropped head and heard her
last wishes.

"I don't think I shall lose my little girl yet, so we won't talk of it.
But Poppy must keep quiet, and let Nelly wait on her for a few days."

"Are fits bad, mamma? and does it hurt much to die?" asked Poppy
thoughtfully.

"If people are good while they live, it is not hard to die, dear," said
mamma, with a kiss; and Poppy hugged her, saying softly:

"Then I'll be very good; so I won't mind, if the jawlock does come."

And Poppy _was_ good,--oh, dreadfully good! for a week. Quite an angel
was Poppy; so meek and gentle, so generous and obedient, you really
wouldn't have known her. She loved everybody, forgave her playmates all
their sins against her, let Nelly take such of her precious treasures as
she liked, and pensively hoped baby would remember her when she was
gone. She hopped about with a crutch, and felt as if she was an object
of public interest; for all the old ladies sent to know how she was, the
children looked at her with respectful awe as one set apart and doomed
to fits, and Cy continually begged to know if her mouth was stiff.

Poppy didn't die, though she got all ready for it; and felt rather
disappointed when the foot healed, the jaws remained as active as ever,
and the fits didn't come. I think it did her good; for she never forgot
that week, and, though she was near dying several times after, she never
was so fit to go as she was then.

"Burney's making jelly: let's go and get our scrapings," said Poppy to
Nellie once, when mamma was away.

But Burney was busy and cross, and cooks are not as patient as mothers;
so when the children appeared, each armed with a spoon, and demanded
their usual feast, she wouldn't hear of it, and ordered them off.

"But we only want the scrapings of the pan, Burney: mamma always lets us
have them, when we help her make jelly; don't she, Nelly?" said Poppy,
trying to explain the case.

"Yes; and makes us our little potful too," added Nelly, persuasively.

"I don't want your help; so be off. Your ma can fuss with your pot, if
she chooses. I've no time."

"_I_ think Burney's the crossest woman in the world. It's mean to eat
all the scrapings herself; isn't it Nelly?" said Poppy, very loud, as
the cook shut the door in their faces. "Never mind: I know how to pay
her," she added, in a whisper, as they sat on the stairs bewailing their
wrongs. "She'll put her old jelly in the big closet, and lock the door;
but we can climb the plum tree, and get in at the window, when she takes
her nap."

"Should we dare to eat any?" asked Nelly, timid, but longing for the
forbidden fruit.

"_I_ should; just as much as ever I like. It's mamma's jelly, and she
won't mind. I don't care for old cross Burney," said Poppy, sliding down
the banisters by way of soothing her ruffled spirit.

So when Burney went to her room after dinner, the two rogues climbed in
at the window; and, each taking a jar, sat on the shelf, dipping in
their fingers and revelling rapturously. But Burney wasn't asleep, and,
hearing a noise below, crept down to see what mischief was going on.
Pausing in the entry to listen, she heard whispering, clattering of
glasses, and smacking of lips in the big closet; and in a moment knew
that her jelly was lost. She tried the door with her key; but sly Poppy
had bolted it on the inside, and, feeling quite safe, defied Burney from
among the jelly-pots, entirely reckless of consequences. Short-sighted
Poppy! she forgot Cy; but Burney didn't, and sent him to climb in at the
window, and undo the door. Feeling hurt that the young ladies hadn't
asked him to the feast, Cy hardened his heart against them, and
delivered them up to the enemy, regardless of Poppy's threats and
Nelly's prayers.

"Poppy proposed it, she broke the jar, and I didn't eat _much_. O
Burney! don't hurt her, please, but let me 'splain it to mamma when she
comes," sobbed Nelly, as Burney seized Poppy, and gave her a good
shaking.

"You go wash your face, Miss Nelly, and leave this naughty, naughty
child to me," said Burney; and took Poppy, kicking and screaming, into
the little library, where she--oh, dreadful to relate!--gave her a good
spanking, and locked her up.

Mamma never whipped, and Poppy was in a great rage at such an indignity.
The minute she was left alone, she looked about to see how she could be
revenged. A solar lamp stood on the table; and Poppy coolly tipped it
over, with a fine smash, calling out to Burney that she'd have to pay
for it, that mamma would be very angry, and that she, Poppy, was going
to spoil every thing in the room. But Burney was gone, and no one came
near her. She kicked the paint off the door, rattled the latch, called
Burney a "pig," and Cy "a badder boy than the man who smothered the
little princes in the Tower." Poppy was very fond of that story, and
often played it with Nelly and the dolls. Having relieved her feelings
in this way, Poppy rested, and then set about amusing herself. Observing
that the spilt oil made the table shine, she took her handkerchief and
polished up the furniture, as she had seen the maids do.

"Now, that looks nice; and I know mamma will be pleased 'cause I'm so
tidy," she said, surveying her work with pride, when she had thoroughly
greased every table, chair, picture-frame, book-back, and ornament in
the room. Plenty of oil still remained; and Poppy finished off by
oiling her hair, till it shone finely, and smelt--dear me, how it did
smell! If she had been a young whale, it couldn't have been worse. Poppy
wasn't particular about smells; but she got some in her mouth, and
didn't like the taste. There was no water to wash in; and her hands,
face, and pinafore were in a high state of grease. She was rather lonely
too; for, though mamma had got home, she didn't come to let Poppy out:
so the young rebel thought it was about time to surrender. She could
write pretty well, and was fond of sending penitent notes to mamma,
after being naughty: for mamma always answered them so kindly, and was
so forgiving, that Poppy's naughtiest mood was conquered by them sooner
than by any punishment; and Poppy kept the notes carefully in a little
cover, even after she was grown up. There was pen, ink, and paper in the
room; so, after various trials, Poppy wrote her note:--

    "dear Mamma.

    "i am sorry i Took bernys gelli. i have braked The lamP. The oyl
    maks A bad smel. i tHink i wil Bee sik iF i stay HeRe anny More.
    i LoVe yoU--your Trying To Bee GooD

    popy."

When she had finished, she lowered her note by a string, and bobbed it
up and down before the parlor window till Nelly saw and took it in.
Every one laughed over it; for, besides the bad spelling and the funny
periods, it was covered with oil-spots, blots, and tear marks; for Poppy
got tender-hearted toward the end, and cried a few very repentant tears
when she said, "I love you; your trying-to-be-good Poppy."

Mamma went up at once, and ordered no further punishment, but a thorough
scrubbing; which Poppy underwent very meekly, though Betsey put soap in
her eyes, pulled her hair, and scolded all the time. They were not
allowed any jelly for a long while; and Cy teased Poppy about her
hair-oil till the joke was quite worn out, and even cross Burney was
satisfied with the atonement.

When Poppy was eight, she got so very wild that no one could manage her
but mamma, and she was ill; so Poppy was sent away to grandpa's for a
visit. Now, grandpa was a very stately old gentleman, and every one
treated him with great respect; but Poppy wasn't at all afraid, and
asked all manner of impolite questions.

"Grandpa, why don't you have any hair on the top of your head?"--"O
grandpa! you _do_ snore _so_ loud when you take naps!"--"What makes you
turn out your feet so, when you walk?" and such things.

If grandpa hadn't been the best-natured old gentleman in the world, he
wouldn't have liked this: but he only laughed at Poppy, especially when
she spoke of his legs; for he was rather proud of them, and always wore
long black silk stockings, and told every one that the legs were so
handsome an artist put them in a picture of General Washington; which
was quite true, as any one may see when they look at the famous picture
in Boston.

Well, Poppy behaved herself respectably for a day or two; but the house
was rather dull, she missed Nelly, wanted to run in the street, and
longed to see mamma. She amused herself as well as she could with
picture-books, patchwork, and the old cat; but, not being a quiet,
proper, little Rosamond sort of a child, she got tired of hemming neat
pocket-handkerchiefs, and putting her needle carefully away when she had
done. She wanted to romp and shout, and slide down the banisters, and
riot about; so, when she couldn't be quiet another minute, she went up
into a great empty room at the top of the house, and cut up all sorts of
capers. Her great delight was to lean out of the window as far as she
could, and look at the people in the street, with her head upside down.
It was very dangerous, for a fall would have killed her; but the danger
was the fun, and Poppy hung out till her hands touched the ledge below,
and her face was as red as any real poppy's.

She was enjoying herself in this way one day, when an old gentleman,
who lived near, came home to dinner, and saw her.

"What in the world is that hanging out of the colonel's upper window?"
said he, putting on his spectacles. "Bless my soul! that child will kill
herself. Hallo, there! little girl; get in this minute!" he called to
Poppy, flourishing his hat to make her see him.

"What for?" answered Poppy, staring at him without moving an inch.

"You'll fall, and break your neck!" screamed the old gentleman.

"Oh, no, I shan't!" returned Poppy, much flattered by his interest, and
hanging out still further.

"Stop that, instantly, or I'll go in and inform the colonel!" roared the
old gentleman, getting angry.

"I don't care," shouted Poppy; and she didn't, for she knew grandpa
wasn't at home.

"Little gipsy! I'll settle her," muttered the old man, bustling up to
the steps, and ringing the bell, as if the house was on fire.

No one was in but the servants; and, when he'd told old Emily what the
matter was, she went up to "settle" Poppy. But Poppy was already
settled, demurely playing with her doll, and looking quite innocent.
Emily scolded; and Poppy promised never to do it again, if she might
stay and play in the big room. Being busy about dinner, Emily was glad
to be rid of her, and left her, to go and tell the old gentleman it was
all right.

"Ain't they crosspatches?" said Poppy to her doll. "Never mind, dear:
_you_ shall hang out, if I can't. I guess the old man won't order you
in, any way."

Full of this idea, Poppy took her long-suffering dolly, and, tying a
string to her neck, danced her out of the window. Now this dolly had
been through a great deal. Her head had been cut off (and put on again);
she had been washed, buried, burnt, torn, soiled, and banged about till
she was a mournful object. Poppy loved her very much; for she was two
feet tall, and had once been very handsome: so her trials only endeared
her to her little mamma. Away she went, skipping and prancing like
mad,--a funny sight, for Poppy had taken off her clothes, and she hadn't
a hair on her head.

Poppy went to another window of the room for this performance, because
in the opposite house lived five or six children, and she thought they
would enjoy the fun.

So they did, and so did the other people; for it was a boarding-house,
and all the people were at home for dinner. They came to the windows,
and looked and laughed at dolly's capers, and Poppy was in high feather
at the success of her entertainment.

All of a sudden she saw grandpa coming down the street, hands behind
his back, feet turned out, gold-headed cane under his arm, and the
handsome legs in the black silk stockings marching along in the most
stately manner. Poppy whisked dolly in before grandpa saw her, and
dodged down as he went by. This made the people laugh again, and grandpa
wondered what the joke was. The minute he went in out flew dolly,
dancing more frantically than ever; and the children shouted so loud
that grandpa went to see what the matter was. The street was empty; yet
there stood the people, staring out and laughing. Yes; they were
actually looking and laughing at _his_ house; and he didn't see what
there was to laugh at in that highly respectable mansion.

He didn't like it; and, clapping on his hat, he went out to learn what
the matter was. He looked over at the house, up at the sky, down at the
ground, and through the street; but nothing funny appeared, for Poppy
and dolly were hidden again, and the old gentleman was puzzled. He went
in and sat down to watch, feeling rather disturbed. Presently the fun
began again: the children clapped their hands, the people laughed, and
every one looked over at the house, in what he thought a very
impertinent way. This made him angry; and out he rushed a second time,
saying, as he marched across the street:

"If those saucy young fellows are making game of me, I'll soon stop
it."

Up to the door he went, gave a great pull at the bell, and, when the
servant came, he demanded why every one was laughing at his house. One
of the young men came and told him, and asked him to come in and see the
fun. Poppy didn't see grandpa go in, for she hid, and when she looked
out he was gone: so she boldly began the dancing; but, in the midst of a
lively caper, dolly went bounce into the garden below, for the string
fell from Poppy's hand when she suddenly saw grandpa at the window
opposite, laughing as heartily as any one at her prank.

She stared at him in a great fright, and looked so amazed that every one
enjoyed that joke better than the other; and poor Poppy didn't hear the
last of it for a long time.

Her next performance was to fall into the pond on the Common. She was
driving hoop down the hill, and went so fast she couldn't stop herself;
so splashed into the water, hoop and all. How dreadful it was to feel
the cold waves go over her head, shutting out the sun and air! The
ground was gone, and she could find no place for her feet, and could
only struggle and choke, and go down, down, with a loud roaring sound in
her ears. That would have been the end of Poppy, if a little black boy
hadn't jumped in and pulled her out. She was sick and dizzy, and looked
like a drowned kitten; but a kind lady took her home in a carriage.
After that mishap grandpa thought he wouldn't keep her any longer, for
fear she should come to some worse harm. So Miss Poppy was sent home,
much to her delight and much to mamma's also; for no matter where she
went, or how naughty she was, mamma was always glad to see the little
wanderer back, and to forgive and forget all Poppy's pranks.




VII.

WHAT THE SWALLOWS DID.


A man lay on a pile of new-made hay, in a great barn, looking up at the
swallows who darted and twittered above him. He envied the cheerful
little creatures; for he wasn't a happy man, though he had many friends,
much money, and the beautiful gift of writing songs that everybody loved
to sing. He had lost his wife and little child, and would not be
comforted; but lived alone, and went about with such a gloomy face that
no one liked to speak to him. He took no notice of friends and
neighbors; neither used his money for himself nor others; found no
beauty in the world, no happiness anywhere; and wrote such sad songs it
made one's heart ache to sing them.

As he lay alone on the sweet-smelling hay, with the afternoon sunshine
streaming in, and the busy birds chirping overhead, he said sadly to
himself:

"Happy swallows, I wish I were one of you; for you have no pains nor
sorrows, and your cares are very light. All summer you live gayly
together; and, when winter comes, you fly away to the lovely South,
unseparated still."

"Neighbors, do you hear what that lazy creature down there is saying?"
cried a swallow, peeping over the edge of her nest, and addressing
several others who sat on a beam near by.

"We hear, Mrs. Skim; and quite agree with you that he knows very little
about us and our affairs," answered one of the swallows with a shrill
chirp, like a scornful laugh. "We work harder than he does any day. Did
he build his own house, I should like to know? Does he get his daily
bread for himself? How many of his neighbors does he help? How much of
the world does he see, and who is the happier for his being alive?"

"Cares indeed!" cried another; "I wish he'd undertake to feed and teach
my brood. Much he knows about the anxieties of a parent." And the little
mother bustled away to get supper for the young ones, whose bills were
always gaping wide.

"Sorrows we have, too," softly said the fourth swallow. "He would not
envy _me_, if he knew how my nest fell, and all my children were killed;
how my dear husband was shot, and my old mother died of fatigue on our
spring journey from the South."

"Dear neighbor Dart, he _would_ envy you, if he knew how patiently you
bear your troubles; how tenderly you help us with our little ones; how
cheerfully you serve your friends; how faithfully you love your lost
mate; and how trustfully you wait to meet him again in a lovelier
country than the South."

As Skim spoke, she leaned down from her nest to kiss her neighbor; and,
as the little beaks met, the other birds gave a grateful and approving
murmur, for Neighbor Dart was much beloved by all the inhabitants of
Twittertown.

"I, for my part, don't envy _him_," said Gossip Wing, who was fond of
speaking her mind. "Men and women call themselves superior beings; but,
upon my word, I think they are vastly inferior to us. Now, look at that
man, and see how he wastes his life. There never was any one with a
better chance for doing good, and being happy; and yet he mopes and
dawdles his time away most shamefully."

"Ah! he has had a great sorrow, and it is hard to be gay with a heavy
heart, an empty home; so don't be too severe, Sister Wing." And the
white tie of the little widow's cap was stirred by a long sigh as Mrs.
Dart glanced up at the nook where her nest once stood.

"No, my dear, I won't; but really I do get out of patience when I see so
much real misery which that man might help, if he'd only forget himself
a little. It's my opinion he'd be much happier than he now is, wandering
about with a dismal face and a sour temper."

"I quite agree with you; and I dare say he'd thank any one for telling
him how he may find comfort. Poor soul! I wish he could understand me;
for I sympathize with him, and would gladly help him if I could."

And, as she spoke, kind-hearted Widow Dart skimmed by him with a
friendly chirp, which did comfort him; for, being a poet, he _could_
understand them, and lay listening, well pleased while the little
gossips chattered on together.

"I am so tied at home just now, that I know nothing of what is going on,
except the bits of news Skim brings me; so I enjoy your chat immensely.
I'm interested in your views on this subject, and beg you'll tell me
what you'd have that man do to better himself," said Mrs. Skim, settling
herself on her eggs with an attentive air.

"Well, my dear, I'll tell you; for I've seen a deal of the world, and
any one is welcome to my experience," replied Mrs. Wing, in an important
manner; for she was proud of her "views," and very fond of talking. "In
my daily flights about the place, I see a great deal of poverty and
trouble, and often wish I could lend a hand. Now, this man has plenty of
money and time; and he might do more good than I can tell, if he'd only
set about it. Because he is what they call a poet is no reason he should
go moaning up and down, as if he had nothing to do but make songs. We
sing, but we work also; and are wise enough to see the necessity of
both, thank goodness!"

"Yes, indeed, we do," cried all the birds in a chorus; for several more
had stopped to hear what was going on.

"Now, what I say is this," continued Mrs. Wing impressively. "If I were
that man, I'd make myself useful at once. There is poor little Will
getting more and more lame every day, because his mother can't send him
where he can be cured. A trifle of that man's money would do it, and he
ought to give it. Old Father Winter is half starved, alone there in his
miserable hovel; and no one thinks of the good old man. Why don't that
lazy creature take him home, and care for him, the little while he has
to live? Pretty Nell is working day and night, to support her father,
and is too proud to ask help, though her health and courage are going
fast. The man might make hers the gayest heart alive, by a little help.
There in a lonely garret lives a young man studying his life away,
longing for books and a teacher. The man has a library full, and might
keep the poor boy from despair by a little help and a friendly word. He
mourns for his own lost baby: I advise him to adopt the orphan whom
nobody will own, and who lies wailing all day untended on the poor-house
floor. Yes: if he wants to forget sorrow and find peace, let him fill
his empty heart and home with such as these, and life won't seem dark to
him any more."

"Dear me! how well you express yourself, Mrs. Wing; it's quite a
pleasure to hear you; and I heartily wish some persons could hear you,
it would do 'em a deal of good," said Mrs. Skim; while her husband gave
an approving nod as he dived off the beam, and vanished through the open
doors.

"I know it would comfort that man to do these things; for I have tried
the same cure in my small way, and found great satisfaction in it,"
began little Madame Dart, in her soft voice; but Mrs. Wing broke in,
saying with a pious expression of countenance:

"I flew into church one day, and sat on the organ enjoying the music;
for every one was singing, and I joined in, though I didn't know the
air. Opposite me were two great tablets with golden letters on them. I
can read a little, thanks to my friend, the learned raven; and so I
spelt out some of the words. One was, 'Love thy neighbor;' and as I sat
there, looking down on the people, I wondered how they could see those
words week after week, and yet pay so little heed to them. Goodness
knows, _I_ don't consider myself a perfect bird; far from it; for I know
I am a poor, erring fowl; but I believe I may say I _do_ love my
neighbor, though I _am_ 'an inferior creature.'" And Mrs. Wing bridled
up, as if she resented the phrase immensely.

"Indeed you do, gossip," cried Dart and Skim; for Wing was an excellent
bird, in spite of the good opinion she had of herself.

"Thank you: well, then, such being the known fact, I may give advice on
the subject as one having authority; and, if it were possible, I'd give
that man a bit of my mind."

"You have, madam, you have; and I shall not forget it. Thank you,
neighbors, and good night," said the man, as he left the barn, with the
first smile on his face which it had worn for many days.

"Mercy on us! I do believe the creature heard every thing we said,"
cried Mrs. Wing, nearly tumbling off the beam, in her surprise.

"He certainly did; so I'm glad I was guarded in my remarks," replied
Mrs. Skim, laughing at her neighbor's dismay.

"Dear me! dear me! what did I say?" cried Mrs. Wing, in a great twitter.

"You spoke with more than your usual bluntness, and some of your
expressions were rather strong, I must confess; but I don't think any
harm will come of it. We are of too little consequence for our
criticisms or opinions to annoy him," said Mrs. Dart consolingly.

"I don't know that, ma'am," returned Mrs. Wing, sharply: for she was
much ruffled and out of temper. "A cat may look at a king; and a bird
may teach a man, if the bird is the wisest. He may destroy my nest, and
take my life; but I feel that I have done my duty, and shall meet
affliction with a firmness which will be an example to that indolent,
ungrateful man."

In spite of her boasted firmness, Mrs. Wing dropped her voice, and
peeped over the beam, to be sure the man was gone before she called him
names; and then flew away, to discover what he meant to do about it.

For several days, there was much excitement in Twittertown; for news of
what had happened flew from nest to nest, and every bird was anxious to
know what revenge the man would take for the impertinent remarks which
had been made about him.

Mrs. Wing was in a dreadful state of mind, expecting an assault, and the
destruction of her entire family. Every one blamed her. Her husband
lectured; the young birds chirped, "Chatterbox, chatterbox," as she
passed; and her best friends were a little cool. All this made her very
meek for a time; and she scarcely opened her bill, except to eat.

A guard was set day and night, to see if any danger approached; and a
row of swallows might be seen on the ridgepole at all hours. If any one
entered the barn, dozens of little black heads peeped cautiously over
the edges of the nests, and there was much flying to and fro with
reports and rumors; for all the birds in the town soon knew that
something had happened.

The day after the imprudent conversation, a chimney-swallow came to call
on Mrs. Wing; and, the moment she was seated on the beam, she began:

"My dear creature, I feel for you in your trying position,--indeed I do,
and came over at once to warn you of your danger."

"Mercy on us! what is coming?" cried Mrs. Wing, covering her brood with
trembling wings, and looking quite wild with alarm.

"Be calm, my friend, and bear with firmness the consequences of your
folly," replied Mrs. Sooty-back, who didn't like Mrs. Wing, because
she prided herself on her family, and rather looked down on
chimney-swallows. "You know, ma'am, I live at the great house, and am in
the way of seeing and hearing all that goes on there. No fire is lighted
in the study now; but my landlord still sits on the hearth, and I can
overhear every word he says. Last evening, after my darlings were
asleep, and my husband gone out, I went down and sat on the andiron, as
I often do; for the fireplace is full of oak boughs, and I can peep out
unseen. My landlord sat there, looking a trifle more cheerful than
usual, and I heard him say, in a very decided tone:

"'I'll catch them, one and all, and keep them here; that is better than
pulling the place down, as I planned at first. Those swallows little
know what they have done; but I'll show them I don't forget.'"

On hearing this a general wail arose, and Mrs. Wing fainted entirely
away. Madam Sooty-back was quite satisfied with the effect she had
produced, and departed, saying loftily:

"I'm sorry for you, Mrs. Wing, and forgive your rude speech about my
being related to chimney-sweeps. One can't expect good manners from
persons brought up in mud houses, and entirely shut out from good
society. If I hear any thing more, I'll let you know."

Away she flew; and poor Mrs. Wing would have had another fit, if they
hadn't tickled her with a feather, and fanned her so violently that she
was nearly blown off her nest by the breeze they raised.

"What shall we do?" she cried.

"Nothing, but wait. I dare say, Mrs. Sooty-back is mistaken; at any
rate, we can't get away without leaving our children, for they can't fly
yet. Let us wait, and see what happens. If the worst comes, we shall
have done our duty, and will all die together."

As no one could suggest any thing better, Mrs. Dart's advice was taken,
and they waited. On the afternoon of the same day, Dr. Banks, a
sand-swallow, who lived in a subterranean village over by the great
sand-bank, looked in to see Mrs. Wing, and cheered her by the following
bit of news:

"The man was down at the poor-house to-day, and took away little Nan,
the orphan baby. I saw him carry her to Will's mother, and heard him ask
her to take care of it for a time. He paid her well, and she seemed glad
to do it; for Will needs help, and now he can have it. An excellent
arrangement, I think. Bless me, ma'am! what's the matter? Your pulse is
altogether too fast, and you look feverish."

No wonder the doctor looked surprised; for Mrs. Wing suddenly gave a
skip, and flapped her wings, with a shrill chirp, exclaiming, as she
looked about her triumphantly:

"Now, who was right? Who has done good, not harm, by what you call
'gossip'? Who has been a martyr, and patiently borne all kinds of blame,
injustice, and disrespect? Yes, indeed! the man saw the sense of my
words; he took my advice; he will show his gratitude by some good turn
yet; and, if half a dozen poor souls are helped, it will be my doing,
and mine alone."

Here she had to stop for breath; and her neighbors all looked at one
another, feeling undecided whether to own they were wrong, or to put
Mrs. Wing down. Every one twittered and chirped, and made a great noise;
but no one would give up, and all went to roost in a great state of
uncertainty. But, the next day, it became evident that Mrs. Wing was
right; for Major Bumble-bee came buzzing in to tell them that old Daddy
Winter's hut was empty, and his white head had been seen in the sunny
porch of the great house.

After this the swallows gave in; and, as no harm came to them, they had
a jubilee in honor of the occasion. Mrs. Wing was president, and
received a vote of thanks for the good she had done, and the credit she
had bestowed upon the town by her wisdom and courage. She was much
elated by all this; but her fright had been of service, and she bore her
honors more meekly than one would have supposed. To be sure, she cut
Mrs. Sooty-back when they met; assumed an injured air, when some of her
neighbors passed her; and said, "I told you so," a dozen times a day to
her husband, who got so many curtain lectures that he took to sleeping
on the highest rafter, pretending that the children's noise disturbed
him.

All sorts of charming things happened after that, and such a fine summer
never was known before; for not only did the birds rejoice, but people
also. A good spirit seemed to haunt the town, leaving help and happiness
wherever it passed. Some unseen hand scattered crumbs over the barn
floor, and left food at many doors. No dog or boy or gun marred the
tranquillity of the birds, insects, and flowers who lived on the great
estate. No want, care, or suffering, that love or money could prevent,
befell the poor folk whose cottages stood near the old house. Sunshine
and peace seemed to reign there; for its gloomy master was a changed man
now, and the happiness he earned for himself, by giving it to others,
flowed out in beautiful, blithe songs, and went singing away into the
world, making him friends, and bringing him honor in high places as well
as low.

He did not forget the wife and little child whom he had loved so well;
but he mourned no longer, for cheerful daisies grew above their graves,
and he knew that he should meet them in the lovely land where death can
never come. So, while he waited for that happy time to come, he made his
life a cheery song,--as every one may do, if they will; and went about
dropping kind words and deeds as silently and sweetly as the sky drops
sunshine and dew. Every one was his friend, but his favorites were the
swallows. Every day he went to see them, carrying grain and crumbs,
hearing their chat, sharing their joys and sorrows, and never tiring of
their small friendship; for to them, he thought, he owed all the content
now his.

When autumn leaves were red, and autumn winds blew cold, the inhabitants
of Twittertown prepared for their journey to the South. They lingered
longer than usual this year, feeling sorry to leave their friend. But
the fields were bare, the frosts began to pinch, and the young ones
longed to see the world; so they must go. The day they started, the
whole flock flew to the great house, to say good-by. Some dived and
darted round and round it, some hopped to and fro on the sere lawn, some
perched on the chimney-tops, and some clung to the window ledges; all
twittering a loving farewell.

Chirp, Dart, and Wing peeped everywhere, and everywhere found something
to rejoice over. In a cosey room, by a bright fire, sat Daddy Winter and
Nell's old father, telling stories of their youth, and basking in the
comfortable warmth. In the study, surrounded by the books he loved, was
the poor young man, happy as a king now, and learning many things which
no book could teach him; for he had found a friend. Then, down below was
Will's mother, working like a bee; for she was housekeeper, and enjoyed
her tasks as much as any mother-bird enjoys filling the little mouths of
her brood. Close by was pretty Nell, prettier than ever now; for her
heavy care was gone, and she sung as she sewed, thinking of the old
father, whom nothing could trouble any more.

But the pleasantest sight the three gossips saw was the man with Baby
Nan on his arm and Will at his side, playing in the once dreary nursery.
How they laughed and danced! for Will was up from his bed at last, and
hopped nimbly on his crutches, knowing that soon even they would be
unneeded. Little Nan was as plump and rosy as a baby should be, and
babbled like a brook, as the man went to and fro, cradling her in his
strong arms, feeling as if his own little daughter had come back when he
heard the baby voice call him father.

"Ah, how sweet it is!" cried Mrs. Dart, glad to see that he had found
comfort for his grief.

"Yes; indeed: it does one's heart good to see such a happy family,"
added Mrs. Skim, who was a very motherly bird.

"I don't wish to boast; but I _will_ say that I am satisfied with my
summer's work, and go South feeling that I leave an enviable reputation
behind me." And Mrs. Wing plumed herself with an air of immense
importance, as she nodded and bridled from her perch on the window-sill.

The man saw the three, and hastened to feed them for the last time,
knowing that they were about to go. Gratefully they ate, and chirped
their thanks; and then, as they flew away, the little gossips heard
their friend singing his good-by:

    "Swallow, swallow, neighbor swallow,
      Starting on your autumn flight,
    Pause a moment at my window,
      Twitter softly your good-night;
    For the summer days are over,
      All your duties are well done,
    And the happy homes you builded
      Have grown empty, one by one.

    "Swallow, swallow, neighbor swallow,
      Are you ready for your flight?
    Are all the feather cloaks completed?
      Are the little caps all right?
    Are the young wings strong and steady
      For the journey through the sky?
    Come again in early spring-time;
      And till then, good-by, good-by!"




VIII.

LITTLE GULLIVER.


Up in the light-house tower lived Davy, with Old Dan the keeper. Most
little boys would have found it very lonely; but Davy had three friends,
and was as happy as the day was long. One of Davy's friends was the
great lamp, which was lighted at sunset, and burnt all night, to guide
the ships into the harbor. To Dan it was only a lamp; but to the boy it
seemed a living thing, and he loved and tended it faithfully. Every day
he helped Dan clear the big wick, polish the brass work, and wash the
glass lantern which protected the flame. Every evening he went up to see
it lighted, and always fell asleep, thinking, "No matter how dark or
wild the night, my good Shine will save the ships that pass, and burn
till morning."

Davy's second friend was Nep, the Newfoundland, who was washed ashore
from a wreck, and had never left the island since. Nep was rough and
big, but had such a loyal and loving heart that no one could look in his
soft brown eyes and not trust him. He followed Davy's steps all day,
slept at his feet all night, and more than once had saved his life when
Davy fell among the rocks, or got caught by the rising tide.

But the dearest friend of all was a sea-gull. Davy found him, with a
broken wing, and nursed him carefully till he was well; then let him go,
though he was very fond of "Little Gulliver," as he called him in fun.
But the bird never forgot the boy, and came daily to talk with him,
telling all manner of wild stories about his wanderings by land and sea,
and whiling away many an hour that otherwise would have been very
lonely.

Old Dan was Davy's uncle,--a grim, gray man, who said little, did his
work faithfully, and was both father and mother to Davy, who had no
parents, and no friends beyond the island. That was his world; and he
led a quiet life among his playfellows,--the winds and waves. He seldom
went to the main land, three miles away; for he was happier at home. He
watched the sea-anemones open below the water, looking like
fairy-plants, brilliant and strange. He found curious and pretty shells,
and sometimes more valuable treasures, washed up from some wreck. He saw
little yellow crabs, ugly lobsters, and queer horse-shoes with their
stiff tails. Sometimes a whale or a shark swam by, and often sleek black
seals came up to bask on the warm rocks. He gathered lovely sea-weeds of
all kinds, from tiny red cobwebs to great scalloped leaves of kelp,
longer than himself. He heard the waves dash and roar unceasingly; the
winds howl or sigh over the island; and the gulls scream shrilly as they
dipped and dived, or sailed away to follow the ships that came and went
from all parts of the world.

With Nep and Gulliver he roamed about his small kingdom, never tired of
its wonders; or, if storms raged, he sat up in the tower, safe and dry,
watching the tumult of sea and sky. Often in long winter nights he lay
awake, listening to the wind and rain, that made the tower rock with
their violence; but he never was afraid, for Nep nestled at his feet,
Dan sat close by, and overhead the great lamp shone far out into the
night, to cheer and guide all wanderers on the sea.

Close by the tower hung the fog-bell, which, being wound up, would ring
all night, warningly. One day Dan found that something among the chains
was broken; and, having vainly tried to mend it, he decided to go to the
town, and get what was needed. He went once a week, usually, and left
Davy behind; for in the daytime there was nothing to do, and the boy was
not afraid to stay.

"A heavy fog is blowing up: we shall want the bell to-night, and I must
be off at once. I shall be back before dark, of course; so take care of
yourself, boy," said Dan.

Away went the little boat; and the fog shut down over it, as if a misty
wall had parted Davy from his uncle. As it was dull weather, he sat and
read for an hour or two; then fell asleep, and forgot everything till
Nep's cold nose on his hand waked him up. It was nearly dark; and,
hoping to find Dan had come, he ran down to the landing-place. But no
boat was there, and the fog was thicker than ever.

Dan never had been gone so long before, and Davy was afraid something
had happened to him. For a few minutes he was in great trouble; then he
cheered up, and took courage.

"It is sunset by the clock; so I'll light the lamp, and, if Dan is lost
in the fog, it will guide him home," said Davy.

Up he went, and soon the great star shone out above the black-topped
light-house, glimmering through the fog, as if eager to be seen. Davy
had his supper, but no Dan came. He waited hour after hour, and waited
all in vain. The fog thickened, till the lamp was hardly seen; and no
bell rung to warn the ships of the dangerous rocks. Poor Davy could not
sleep, but all night long wandered from the tower to the door, watching,
calling, and wondering; but Dan did not come.

At sunrise he put out the light, and, having trimmed it for the next
night, ate a little breakfast, and roved about the island hoping to see
some sign of Dan. The sun drew up the fog at last; and he could see the
blue bay, the distant town, and a few fishing-boats going out to sea.
But nowhere was the island-boat with gray Old Dan in it; and Davy's
heart grew heavier and heavier, as the day passed, and still no one
came. In the afternoon Gulliver appeared: to him Davy told his trouble,
and the three friends took counsel together.

"There is no other boat; and I couldn't row so far, if there was: so I
can't go to find Dan," said David sorrowfully.

"I'd gladly swim to town, if I could; but it's impossible to do it, with
wind and tide against me. I've howled all day, hoping some one would
hear me; but no one does, and I'm discouraged," said Nep, with an
anxious expression.

"I can do something for you; and I will, with all my heart. I'll fly to
town, if I don't see him in the bay, and try to learn what has become of
Dan. Then I'll come and tell you, and we will see what is to be done
next. Cheer up, Davy dear: I'll bring you tidings, if any can be had."
With these cheerful words, away sailed Gulliver, leaving Nep and his
master to watch and wait again.

The wind blew hard, and the broken wing was not quite well yet, else
Gulliver would have been able to steer clear of a boat that came swiftly
by. A sudden gust drove the gull so violently against the sail that he
dropped breathless into the boat; and a little girl caught him, before
he could recover himself.

"Oh, what a lovely bird! See his black cap, his white breast,
dove-colored wings, red legs and bill, and soft, bright eyes. I wanted a
gull; and I'll keep this one, for I don't think he is much hurt."

Poor Gulliver struggled, pecked and screamed; but little Dora held him
fast, and shut him in a basket till they reached the shore. Then she put
him in a lobster pot,--a large wooden thing, something like a cage,--and
left him on the lawn, where he could catch glimpses of the sea, and
watch the light-house tower, as he sat alone in this dreadful prison. If
Dora had known the truth, she would have let him go, and done her best
to help him; but she could not understand his speech, as Davy did, for
very few people have the power of talking with birds, beasts, insects,
and plants. To her, his prayers and cries were only harsh screams; and,
when he sat silent, with drooping head and ruffled feathers, she thought
he was sleepy: but he was mourning for Davy, and wondering what his
little friend would do.

For three long days and nights he was a prisoner, and suffered much. The
house was full of happy people, but no one took pity upon him. Ladies
and gentlemen talked learnedly about him; boys poked and pulled him;
little girls admired him, and begged his wings for their hats, if he
died. Cats prowled about his cage; dogs barked at him; hens cackled over
him; and a shrill canary jeered at him from the pretty pagoda in which
it hung, high above danger. In the evening there was music; and the poor
bird's heart ached as the sweet sounds came to him, reminding him of the
airier melodies he loved. Through the stillness of the night, he heard
the waves break on the shore; the wind came singing up from the sea; the
moon shone kindly on him, and he saw the water-fairies dancing on the
sand. But for three days no one spoke a friendly word to him, and he
pined away with a broken heart.

On the fourth night, when all was quiet, little Gulliver saw a black
shadow steal across the lawn, and heard a soft voice say to him:

"Poor bird, you'll die, if yer stays here; so I'se gwine to let yer go.
Specs little missy'll scold dreffle; but Moppet'll take de scoldin for
yer. Hi, dere! you is peart nuff now, kase you's in a hurry to go; but
jes wait till I gits de knots out of de string dat ties de door, and den
away you flies."

"But, dear, kind Moppet, won't you be hurt for doing this? Why do you
care so much for me? I can only thank you, and fly away."

As Gulliver spoke, he looked up at the little black face bent over him,
and saw tears in the child's sad eyes; but she smiled at him, and shook
her fuzzy head, as she whispered kindly:

"I don't want no tanks, birdie: I loves to let you go, kase you's a
slave, like I was once; and it's a dreffle hard ting, I knows. I got
away, and I means you shall. I'se watched you, deary, all dese days; and
I tried to come 'fore, but dey didn't give me no chance."

"Do you live here? I never see you playing with the other children,"
said the gull, as Moppet's nimble fingers picked away at the knots.

"Yes: I lives here, and helps de cook. You didn't see me, kase I never
plays; de chilen don't like me."

"Why not?" asked Gulliver, wondering.

"I'se black," said Moppet, with a sob.

"But that's silly in them," cried the bird, who had never heard of such
a thing. "Color makes no difference; the peeps are gray, the seals
black, and the crabs yellow; but we don't care, and are all friends. It
is very unkind to treat you so. Haven't you any friends to love you,
dear?"

"Nobody in de world keres fer me. Dey sold me way from my mammy when I
was a baby, and I'se knocked roun eber since. De oder chilen has folks
to lub an kere fer em, but Moppet's got no friends;" and here the black
eyes grew so dim with tears that the poor child couldn't see that the
last knot was out.

Gulliver saw it, and, pushing up the door, flew from his prison with a
glad cry; and, hopping into Moppet's hand, looked into the little dark
face with such grateful confidence that it cleared at once, and the
brightest smile it had worn for months broke over it as the bird nestled
its soft head against her cheek, saying gently:

"I'm your friend, dear; I love you, and I never shall forget what you
have done for me to-night. How can I thank you before I go?"

For a minute, Moppet could only hug the bird, and cry; for these were
the first kind words she had heard for a long time, and they went
straight to her lonely little heart.

"O my deary! I'se paid by dem words, and I don't want no tanks. Jes lub
me, and come sometimes to see me ef you can, it's so hard livin' in dis
yere place. I don't tink I'll bar it long. I wish I was a bird to fly
away, or a oyster safe in de mud, and free to do as I's a mind."

"I wish you could go and live with Davy on the island; he is so kind, so
happy, and as free as the wind. Can't you get away, Moppet?" whispered
Gulliver, longing to help this poor, friendless little soul. He told her
all his story; and they agreed that he should fly at once to the island,
and see if Dan was there; if not, he was to come back, and Moppet would
try to get some one to help find him. When this was done, Davy and Dan
were to take Moppet, if they could, and make her happy on the island.
Full of hope and joy, Gulliver said good-by, and spread his wings; but,
alas for the poor bird! he was too weak to fly. For three days he had
hardly eaten any thing, had found no salt water to bathe in, and had sat
moping in the cage till his strength was all gone.

"What shall I do? what shall I do?" he cried, fluttering his feeble
wings, and running to and fro in despair.

"Hush, birdie, I'll take kere ob you till you's fit to fly. I knows a
nice, quiet little cove down yonder, where no one goes; and dare you kin
stay till you's better. I'll come and feed you, and you kin paddle, and
rest, and try your wings, safe and free, honey."

As Moppet spoke, she took Gulliver in her arms, and stole away in the
dim light, over the hill, down to the lonely spot where nothing went but
the winds and waves, the gulls, and little Moppet, when hard words and
blows made heart and body ache. Here she left the bird, and, with a
loving "Good-night," crept home to her bed in the garret, feeling as
rich as a queen, and much happier; for she had done a kind thing, and
made a friend.

Next day, a great storm came: the wind blew a hurricane, the rain
poured, and the sea thundered on the coast. If he had been well,
Gulliver wouldn't have minded at all; but, being sick and sad, he spent
an anxious day, sitting in a cranny of the rock, thinking of Davy and
Moppet. It was so rough, even in the cove, that he could neither swim
nor fly, so feeble was he; and could find no food but such trifles as he
could pick up among the rocks. At nightfall the storm raged fiercer than
ever, and he gave up seeing Moppet; for he was sure she wouldn't come
through the pelting rain just to feed him. So he put his head under his
wing, and tried to sleep; but he was so wet and weak, so hungry and
anxious, no sleep came.

"What has happened to Davy alone on the island all this while? He will
fall ill with loneliness and trouble; the lamp won't be lighted, the
ships will be wrecked, and many people will suffer. O Dan, Dan, if we
could only find you, how happy we should be!"

As Gulliver spoke, a voice cried through the darkness:

"Is you dere, honey?" and Moppet came climbing over the rocks, with a
basket full of such bits as she could get. "Poor birdie, is you
starvin'? Here, jes go at dis, and joy yourself. Dere's fish and tings I
tink you'd like. How is you now, dear?"

"Better, Moppet; but, it's so stormy, I can't get to Davy; and I worry
about him," began Gulliver, pecking away at his supper: but he stopped
suddenly, for a faint sound came up from below, as if some one called,
"Help, help!"

"Hi! what's dat?" said Moppet, listening.

"Davy, Davy!" called the voice.

"It's Dan. Hurrah, we've found him!" and Gulliver dived off the rock so
reckless that he went splash into the water. But that didn't matter to
him; and he paddled away, like a little steamer with all the engines in
full blast. Down by the sea-side, between two stones, lay Dan, so
bruised and hurt he couldn't move, and so faint with hunger and pain he
could hardly speak. As soon as Gulliver called, Moppet scrambled down,
and fed the poor man with her scraps, brought him rain-water from a
crevice near by, and bound up his wounded head with her little apron.
Then Dan told them how his boat had been run down by a ship in the fog;
how he was hurt, and cast ashore in the lonely cove; how he had lain
there half dead, for no one heard his shouts, and he couldn't move; how
the storm brought him back to life, when he was almost gone, and the
sound of Moppet's voice told him help was near.

How glad they all were then! Moppet danced for joy; Gulliver screamed
and flapped his wings; and Dan smiled, in spite of pain, to think he
should see Davy again. He couldn't understand Gulliver; but Moppet told
him all the story, and, when he heard it, he was more troubled for the
boy than for himself.

"What will he do? He may get killed or scared, or try to come ashore. Is
the lamp alight?" he cried, trying to move, and falling back with a moan
of pain.

Gulliver flew up to the highest rock, and looked out across the dark
sea. Yes, there it was,--the steady star shining through the storm, and
saying plainly, "All is well."

"Thank heaven! if the lamp is burning, Davy is alive. Now, how shall I
get to him?" said Dan.

"Never you fret, massa: Moppet'll see to dat. You jes lay still till I
comes. Dere's folks in de house as'll tend to you, ef I tells em who and
where you is."

Off she ran, and soon came back with help. Dan was taken to the house,
and carefully tended; Moppet wasn't scolded for being out so late; and,
in the flurry, no one thought of the gull. Next morning, the cage was
found blown over, and every one fancied the bird had flown away. Dora
was already tired of him; so he was soon forgotten by all but Moppet.

In the morning it was clear; and Gulliver flew gladly to the tower where
Davy still watched and waited, with a pale face and heavy heart, for the
three days had been very hard to bear, and, but for Nep and Shine, he
would have lost his courage entirely. Gulliver flew straight into his
bosom, and, sitting there, told his adventures; while Davy laughed and
cried, and Nep stood by, wagging his tail for joy, while his eyes were
full of sympathy. The three had a very happy hour together, and then
came a boat to carry Davy ashore, while another keeper took charge of
the light till Dan was well.

Nobody ever knew the best part of the story but Moppet, Davy, and
Gulliver. Other people didn't dream that the boy's pet gull had any
thing to do with the finding of the man, or the good fortune that came
to Moppet. While Dan lay sick, she tended him, like a loving little
daughter; and, when he was well, he took her for his own. He did not
mind the black skin: he only saw the loneliness of the child, the tender
heart, the innocent, white soul; and he was as glad to be a friend to
her as if she had been as blithe and pretty as Dora.

It was a happy day when Dan and Davy, Moppet, Gulliver, and Nep sailed
away to the island; for that was still to be their home, with stout
young Ben to help.

The sun was setting; and they floated through waves as rosy as the rosy
sky. A fresh wind filled the sail, and ruffled Gulliver's white breast
as he sat on the mast-head crooning a cheery song to himself. Dan held
the tiller, and Davy lay at his feet, with Nep bolt upright beside him;
but the happiest face of all was Moppet's. Kneeling at the bow, she
leaned forward, with her lips apart, her fuzzy hair blown back, and her
eyes fixed on the island which was to be her home. Like a little black
figure-head of Hope, she leaned and looked, as the boat flew on, bearing
her away from the old life into the new.

As the sun sunk, out shone the lamp with sudden brightness, as if the
island bade them welcome. Dan furled the sail; and, drifting with the
tide, they floated in, till the waves broke softly on the shore, and
left them safe at home.




IX.

THE WHALE'S STORY.


Freddy sat thinking on the seat under the trees. It was a wide, white
seat, about four feet long, sloping from the sides to the middle,
something like a swing; and was not only comfortable but curious, for it
was made of a whale's bone. Freddy often sat there, and thought about it
for he was very much interested in it, and nobody could tell him any
thing of it, except that it had been there a long time.

"Poor old whale, I wonder how you got here, where you came from, and if
you were a good and happy creature while you lived," said Freddy,
patting the old bone with his little hand.

It gave a great creak; and a sudden gust of air stirred the trees, as if
some monster groaned and sighed. Then Freddy heard a strange voice, very
loud, yet cracked and queer, as if some one tried to talk with a broken
jaw.

"Freddy ahoy!" called the big voice. "I'll tell you all about it; for
you are the only person who ever pitied me, or cared to know any thing
about me."

"Why, can you talk?" asked Freddy, very much astonished and a little
frightened.

"Of course I can, for this is a part of my jaw-bone. I should talk
better if my whole mouth was here; but I'm afraid my voice would then be
so loud you wouldn't be able to hear it. I don't think any one but you
would understand me, any way. It isn't every one that can, you know; but
you are a thoughtful little chap, with a lively fancy as well as a kind
heart, so you shall hear my story."

"Thank you, I should like it very much, if you would please to speak a
little lower, and not sigh; for your voice almost stuns me, and your
breath nearly blows me away," said Freddy.

"I'll try: but it's hard to suit my tone to such a mite, or to help
groaning when I think of my sad fate; though I deserve it, perhaps,"
said the bone, more gently.

"Were you a naughty whale?" asked Freddy.

"I was proud, very proud, and foolish; and so I suffered for it. I dare
say you know a good deal about us. I see you reading often, and you seem
a sensible child."

"No: I haven't read about you yet, and I only know that you are the
biggest fish there is," replied Freddy.

The bone creaked and shook, as if it was laughing, and said in a tone
that showed it hadn't got over its pride yet:

"You're wrong there, my dear; we are not fishes at all, though stupid
mortals have called us so for a long time. We can't live without air; we
have warm, red blood; and we don't lay eggs,--so we are _not_ fishes. We
certainly _are_ the biggest creatures in the sea and out of it. Why,
bless you! some of us are nearly a hundred feet long; our tails alone
are fifteen or twenty feet wide; the biggest of us weigh five hundred
thousand pounds, and have in them the fat, bone, and muscle of a
thousand cattle. The lower jaw of one of my family made an arch large
enough for a man on horseback to ride under easily, and my cousins of
the sperm-family usually yield eighty barrels of oil."

"Gracious me, what monsters you are!" cried Freddy, taking a long
breath, while his eyes got bigger and bigger as he listened.

"Ah! you may well say so; we are a very wonderful and interesting
family. All our branches are famous in one way or another. Fin-backs,
sperms, and rights are the largest; then come the norwhals, the
dolphins, and porpoises,--which last, I dare say, you've seen."

"Yes: but tell me about the big ones, please. Which were you?" cried
Freddy.

"I was a Right whale, from Greenland. The Sperms live in warm places;
but to us the torrid zone is like a sea of fire, and we don't pass it.
Our cousins do; and go to the East Indies by way of the North Pole,
which is more than your famous Parrys and Franklins could do."

"I don't know about that; but I'd like to hear what you eat, and how you
live, and why you came here," said Freddy, who thought the whale rather
inclined to boast.

"Well, we haven't got any teeth,--our branch of the family; and we live
on creatures so small, that you could only see them with a microscope.
Yes, you may stare; but it's true, my dear. The roofs of our mouths are
made of whalebone, in broad pieces from six to eight feet long, arranged
one against the other; so they make an immense sieve. The tongue, which
makes about five barrels of oil, lies below, like a cushion of white
satin. When we want to feed, we rush through the water, which is full of
the little things we eat, and catch them in our sieve, spurting the
water through two holes in our heads. Then we collect the food with our
tongue, and swallow it; for, though we are so big, our throats are
small. We roam about in the ocean, leaping and floating, feeding and
spouting, flying from our enemies, or fighting bravely to defend our
young ones."

"Have you got any enemies? I shouldn't think you could have, you are so
large," said Freddy.

"But we have, and many too,--three who attack us in the water, and
several more that men use against us. The killer, the sword-fish, and
the thrasher trouble us at home. The killer fastens to us, and won't be
shaken off till he has worried us to death; the sword-fish stabs us with
his sword; and the thrasher whips us to death with his own slender, but
strong and heavy body. Then, men harpoon us, shoot or entrap us; and
make us into oil and candles and seats, and stiffening for gowns and
umbrellas," said the bone, in a tone of scorn.

Freddy laughed at the idea, and asked, "How about candles? I know about
oil and seats and umbrellas; but I thought candles were made of wax."

"I can't say much on that point: I only know that, when a sperm whale is
killed, they make oil out of the fat part as they do of ours; but the
Sperms have a sort of cistern in their heads, full of stuff like cream,
and rose-colored. They cut a hole in the skull, and dip it out; and
sometimes get sixteen or twenty barrels. This is made into what you call
spermaceti candles. _We_ don't have any such nonsense about us; but the
Sperms always were a light-headed set."

Here the bone laughed, in a cracked sort of roar, which sent Freddy
flying off the seat on to the grass, where he stayed, laughing also,
though he didn't see any joke.

"I beg your pardon, child. It isn't often that I laugh; for I've a
heavy heart somewhere, and have known trouble enough to make me as sad
as the sea is sometimes."

"Tell me about your troubles; I pity you very much, and like to hear you
talk," said Freddy, kindly.

"Unfortunately we are very easily killed, in spite of our size; and have
various afflictions besides death. We grow blind; our jaws are deformed
sometimes; our tails, with which we swim, get hurt; and we have
dyspepsia."

Freddy shouted at that; for he knew what dyspepsia was, because at the
sea-side there were many sickly people who were always groaning about
that disease.

"It's no laughing matter, I assure you," said the whale's bone. "We
suffer a great deal, and get thin and weak and miserable. I've sometimes
thought that's the reason we are blue."

"Perhaps, as you have no teeth, you don't chew your food enough, and so
have dyspepsia, like an old gentleman I know," said Freddy.

"That's not the reason; my cousins, the Sperms, have teeth, and
dyspepsia also."

"Are they blue?"

"No, black and white. But I was going to tell you my troubles. My father
was harpooned when I was very young, and I remember how bravely he
died. The Rights usually run away when they see a whaler coming; not
from cowardice,--oh, dear, no!--but discretion. The Sperms stay and
fight, and are killed off very fast; for they are a very headstrong
family. We fight when we can't help it; and my father died like a hero.
They chased him five hours before they stuck him; he tried to get away,
and dragged three or four boats and sixteen hundred fathoms of line from
eight in the morning till four at night. Then they got out another line,
and he towed the ship itself for more than an hour. There were fifteen
harpoons in him: he chewed up a boat, pitched several men overboard, and
damaged the vessel, before they killed him. Ah! he was a father to be
proud of."

Freddy sat respectfully silent for a few minutes, as the old bone seemed
to feel a great deal on the subject. Presently he went on again:

"The Sperms live in herds; but the Rights go in pairs, and are very fond
of one another. My wife was a charming creature, and we were very happy,
till one sad day, when she was playing with our child,--a sweet little
whaleling only twelve feet long, and weighing but a ton,--my son was
harpooned. His mamma, instead of flying, wrapped her fins round him, and
dived as far as the line allowed. Then she came up, and dashed at the
boats in great rage and anguish, entirely regardless of the danger she
was in. The men struck my son, in order to get her, and they soon
succeeded; but even then, in spite of her suffering, she did not try to
escape, but clung to little Spouter till both were killed. Alas! alas!"

Here the poor bone creaked so dismally, Freddy feared it would tumble to
pieces, and bring the story to an end too soon.

"Don't think of those sorrowful things," he said; "tell me how you came
to be here. Were you harpooned?"

"Not I; for I've been very careful all my life to keep out of the way of
danger: I'm not like one of my relations, who attacked a ship, gave it
such a dreadful blow that he made a great hole, the water rushed in, and
the vessel was wrecked. But he paid dearly for that prank; for a few
months afterward another ship harpooned him very easily, finding two
spears still in him, and a wound in his head. I forgot to mention, that
the Sperms have fine ivory teeth, and make ambergris,--a sort of stuff
that smells very nice, and costs a great deal. I give you these little
facts about my family, as you seem interested, and it's always well to
improve the minds of young people."

"You are very kind; but will you be good enough to tell about yourself?"
said Freddy again; for the bone seemed to avoid that part of the story,
as if he didn't want to tell it.

"Well, if I must, I must; but I'm sorry to confess what a fool I've
been. You know what coral is, don't you?"

"No," said Freddy, wondering why it asked.

"Then I must tell you, I suppose. There is a bit in the house
there,--that rough, white, stony stuff on the table in the parlor. It's
full of little holes, you know. Well, those holes are the front doors of
hundreds of little polypes, or coral worms, who build the great branches
of coral, and live there. They are of various shapes and colors,--some
like stars; some fine as a thread, and blue or yellow; others like
snails and tiny lobsters. Some people say the real coral-makers are
shaped like little oblong bags of jelly, closed at one end, the other
open, with six or eight little feelers, like a star, all around it. The
other creatures are boarders or visitors: these are the real workers,
and, when they sit in their cells and put out their feelers, they make
all manner of lovely colors under the water,--crimson, green, orange,
and violet. But if they are taken up or touched, the coral people go in
doors, and the beautiful hues disappear. They say there are many coral
reefs and islands built by these industrious people, in the South Seas;
but I can't go there to see, and I am contented with those I find in the
northern latitudes. I knew such a community of coral builders, and used
to watch them long ago, when they began to work. It was a charming
spot, down under the sea; for all manner of lovely plants grew there;
splendid fishes sailed to and fro; wonderful shells lay about; crimson
and yellow prawns, long, gliding green worms, and purple sea-urchins,
were there. When I asked the polypes what they were doing, and they
answered, 'Building an island,' I laughed at them; for the idea that
these tiny, soft atoms could make any thing was ridiculous. 'You may
roar; but you'll see that we are right, if you live long enough,' said
they. 'Our family have built thousands of islands and long reefs, that
the sea can't get over, strong as it is.' That amused me immensely; but
I wouldn't believe it, and laughed more than ever."

"It does seem very strange," said Freddy, looking at the branch of coral
which he had brought out to examine.

"Doesn't it? and isn't it hard to believe? I used to go, now and then,
to see how the little fellows got on, and always found them hard at it.
For a long while there was only a little plant without leaves, growing
slowly taller and taller; for they always build upward toward the light.
By and by, the small shrub was a tree: flying-fish roosted in its
branches; sea-cows lay under its shadow; and thousands of jolly little
polypes lived and worked in its white chambers. I was glad to see them
getting on so well; but still I didn't believe in the island story, and
used to joke them about their ambition. They were very good-natured, and
only answered me, 'Wait a little longer, Friend Right.' I had my own
affairs to attend to; so, for years at a time, I forgot the
coral-workers, and spent most of my life up Greenland way, for warm
climates don't agree with my constitution. When I came back, after a
long absence, I was astonished to see the tree grown into a large
umbrella-shaped thing, rising above the water. Sea-weed had washed up
and clung there; sea-birds had made nests there; land-birds and the
winds had carried seeds there, which had sprung up; trunks of trees had
been cast there by the sea; lizards, insects, and little animals came
with the trees, and were the first inhabitants; and, behold! it _was_ an
island."

"What did you say then?" asked Freddy.

"I was angry, and didn't want to own that I was wrong; so I insisted
that it wasn't a real island, without people on it. 'Wait a little
longer,' answered the polypes; and went on, building broader and broader
foundations. I flounced away in a rage, and didn't go back for a great
while. I hoped something would happen to the coral builders and their
island; but I was so curious that I couldn't keep away, and, on going
back there, I found a settlement of fishermen, and the beginning of a
thriving town. Now I should have been in a towering passion at this, if
in my travels I hadn't discovered a race of little creatures as much
smaller than polypes as a mouse is smaller than an elephant. I heard two
learned men talking about diatoms, as they sailed to Labrador; and I
listened. They said these people lived in both salt and fresh water, and
were found in all parts of the world. They were a glassy shell, holding
a soft, golden-yellow substance, and that they were so countless that
banks were made of them, and that a town here in these United States was
founded on them. They were the food of many little sea-animals, who, in
turn, fed us big creatures, and were very interesting and wonderful. I
saved up this story; and, when the polypes asked if they hadn't done
what they intended, I told them I didn't think it so very remarkable,
for the tiny diatoms made cities, and were far more astonishing animals
than they. I thought that would silence them; but they just turned
round, and informed me that my diatoms were plants, not animals,--so my
story was all humbug. Then I _was_ mad; and couldn't get over the fact
that these little rascals had done what we, the kings of the sea,
couldn't do. I wasn't content with being the biggest creature there: I
wanted to be the most skilful also. I didn't remember that every thing
has its own place and use, and should be happy in doing the work for
which it was made. I fretted over the matter a long while, and at last
decided to make an island myself."

"How could you?" asked Freddy.

"I had my plans; and thought them very wise ones. I was so bent on
outdoing the polypes that I didn't much care what happened; and so I
went to work in my clumsy way. I couldn't pile up stones, or build
millions of cells; so I just made an island of myself. I swam up into
the harbor yonder one night; covered my back with sea-weed; and lay
still on the top of the water. In the morning the gulls came to see what
it was, and pecked away at the weeds, telling me very soon that they
knew what I was after, and that I couldn't gull them. All the people on
shore turned out to see the wonder also; for a fisherman had carried the
tidings, and every one was wild to behold the new island. After staring
and chattering a long while, boats came off to examine the mystery.
Loads of scientific gentlemen worked away at me with microscopes,
hammers, acids, and all sorts of tests, to decide what I was; and kept
up such a fire of long words that I was 'most dead. They couldn't make
up their minds; and meanwhile news of the strange thing spread, and
every sort of person came to see me. The gulls kept telling them the
joke; but they didn't understand, and I got on capitally. Every night I
dined and fed and frolicked till dawn; then put on my sea-weeds, and
lay still to be stared at. I wanted some one to come and live on me;
then I should be equal to the island of the polypes. But no one came,
and I was beginning to be tired of fooling people, when I was fooled
myself. An old sailor came to visit me: he had been a whaler, and he
soon guessed the secret. But he said nothing till he was safely out of
danger; then he got all ready, and one day, as I lay placidly in the
sun, a horrible harpoon came flying through the air, and sunk deep into
my back. I forgot every thing but the pain, and dived for my life. Alas!
the tide was low; the harbor-bar couldn't be passed; and I found
hundreds of boats chasing me, till I was driven ashore down there on the
flats. Big and strong as we are, once out of water, and we are perfectly
helpless. I was soon despatched; and my bones left to whiten on the
sand. This was long ago; and, one by one, all my relics have been
carried off or washed away. My jaw-bone has been used as a seat here,
till it's worn out; but I couldn't crumble away till I'd told some one
my story. Remember, child, pride goeth before a fall."

Then, with a great creak, the bone tumbled to pieces; and found a
peaceful grave in the long green grass.




X.

A STRANGE ISLAND.


One day I lay rocking in my boat, reading a very famous book, which all
children know and love; and the name of which I'll tell you by and by.
So busily was I reading, that I never minded the tide; and presently
discovered that I was floating out to sea, with neither sail nor oar. At
first I was very much frightened; for there was no one in sight on land
or sea, and I didn't know where I might drift to. But the water was
calm, the sky clear, and the wind blew balmily; so I waited for what
should happen.

Presently I saw a speck on the sea, and eagerly watched it; for it drew
rapidly near, and seemed to be going my way. When it came closer, I was
much amazed; for, of all the queer boats I ever saw, this was the
queerest. It was a great wooden bowl, very cracked and old; and in it
sat three gray-headed little gentlemen with spectacles, all reading
busily, and letting the boat go where it pleased. Now, right in their
way was a rock; and I called out, "Sir, sir, take care."

But my call came too late: crash went the bowl, out came the bottom, and
down plumped all the little gentlemen into the sea. I tried not to
laugh, as the books, wigs, and spectacles flew about; and, urging my
boat nearer, I managed to fish them up, dripping and sneezing, and
looking like drowned kittens. When the flurry was over, and they had got
their breath, I asked who they were, and where they were going.

"We are from Gotham, ma'am," said the fattest one, wiping a very wet
face on a very wet handkerchief. "We were going to that island yonder.
We have often tried, but never got there: it's always so, and I begin to
think the thing can't be done."

I looked where he pointed; and, sure enough, there was an island where I
had never seen one before. I rubbed my eyes, and looked again. Yes:
there it was,--a little island, with trees and people on it; for I saw
smoke coming out of the chimney of a queerly-shaped house on the shore.

"What is the name of it?" I asked.

The little old gentleman put his finger on his lips, and said, with a
mysterious nod:

"I couldn't tell you, ma'am. It's a secret; but, if you manage to land
there, you will soon know."

The other old men nodded at the same time; and then all went to reading
again, with the water still dropping off the ends of their noses. This
made me very curious; and, as the tide drifted us nearer and nearer, I
looked well about me, and saw several things that filled me with a
strong desire to land on the island. The odd house, I found, was built
like a high-heeled shoe; and at every window I saw children's heads.
Some were eating broth; some were crying; and some had nightcaps on. I
caught sight of a distracted old lady flying about, with a ladle in one
hand, and a rod in the other; but the house was so full of children
(even up to the skylight,--out of which they popped their heads, and
nodded at me) that I couldn't see much of the mamma of this large
family: one seldom can, you know.

I had hardly got over my surprise at this queer sight, when I saw a cow
fly up through the air, over the new moon that hung there, and come down
and disappear in the woods. I really didn't know what to make of this,
but had no time to ask the old men what it meant; for a cat, playing a
fiddle, was seen on the shore. A little dog stood by, listening and
laughing; while a dish and a spoon ran away over the beach with all
their might. If the boat had not floated up to the land, I think I
should have swam there,--I was so anxious to see what was going on; for
there was a great racket on the island, and such a remarkable collection
of creatures, it was impossible to help staring.

As soon as we landed, three other gentlemen came to welcome the ones I
had saved, and seemed very glad to see them. They appeared to have just
landed from a tub in which was a drum, rub-a-dub-dubbing all by itself.
One of the new men had a white frock on, and carried a large knife; the
second had dough on his hands, flour on his coat, and a hot-looking
face; the third was very greasy, had a bundle of candles under his arm,
and a ball of wicking half out of his pocket. The six shook hands, and
walked away together, talking about a fair; and left me to take care of
myself.

I walked on through a pleasant meadow, where a pretty little girl was
looking sadly up at a row of sheep's tails hung on a tree. I also saw a
little boy in blue, asleep by a haycock; and another boy taking aim at a
cock-sparrow, who clapped his wings and flew away. Presently I saw two
more little girls: one sat by a fire warming her toes; and, when I asked
what her name was, she said pleasantly:

"Polly Flinders, ma'am."

The other one sat on a tuft of grass, eating something that looked very
nice; but, all of a sudden, she dropped her bowl, and ran away, looking
very much frightened.

"What's the matter with her?" I asked of a gay young frog who came
tripping along with his hat under his arm.

"Miss Muffit is a fashionable lady, and afraid of spiders, madam; also
of frogs." And he puffed himself angrily up, till his eyes quite
goggled in his head.

"And, pray, who are you, sir?" I asked, staring at his white vest, green
coat, and fine cravat.

"Excuse me, if I don't give my name, ma'am. My false friend, the rat,
got me into a sad scrape once; and Rowley insists upon it that a duck
destroyed me, which is all gammon, ma'am,--all gammon."

With that, the frog skipped away; and I turned into a narrow lane, which
seemed to lead toward some music. I had not gone far, when I heard the
rumbling of a wheelbarrow, and saw a little man wheeling a little woman
along. The little man looked very hot and tired; but the little woman
looked very nice, in a smart bonnet and shawl, and kept looking at a new
gold ring on her finger, as she rode along under her little umbrella. I
was wondering who they were, when down went the wheelbarrow; and the
little lady screamed so dismally that I ran away, lest I should get into
trouble,--being a stranger.

Turning a corner, I came upon a very charming scene, and slipped into a
quiet nook to see what was going on. It was evidently a wedding; and I
was just in time to see it, for the procession was passing at that
moment. First came a splendid cock-a-doodle, all in black and gold, like
a herald, blowing his trumpet, and marching with a very dignified step.
Then came a rook, in black, like a minister, with spectacles and white
cravat. A lark and bullfinch followed,--friends, I suppose; and then the
bride and bridegroom. Miss Wren was evidently a Quakeress; for she wore
a sober dress, and a little white veil, through which her bright eyes
shone. The bridegroom was a military man, in his scarlet uniform,--a
plump, bold-looking bird, very happy and proud just then. A goldfinch
gave away the bride, and a linnet was bridesmaid. The ceremony was very
fine; and, as soon as it was over, the blackbird, thrush and nightingale
burst out in a lovely song.

A splendid dinner followed, at which was nearly every bird that flies;
so you may imagine the music there was. They had currant-pie in
abundance; and cherry-wine, which excited a cuckoo so much, that he
became quite rude, and so far forgot himself as to pull the bride about.
This made the groom so angry that he begged his friend, the sparrow, to
bring his bow and arrow, and punish the ruffian. But, alas! Sparrow had
also taken a drop too much: he aimed wrong, and, with a dreadful cry,
Mr. Robin sank dying into the arms of his wife, little Jane.

It was too much for me; and, taking advantage of the confusion that
followed, I left the tragical scene as fast as possible.

A little farther on, I was shocked to see a goose dragging an old man
down some steps that led to a little house.

"Dear me! what's the matter here?" I cried.

"He won't say his prayers," screamed the goose.

"But perhaps he was never taught," said I.

"It's never too late to learn: he's had his chance; he won't be pious
and good, so away with him. Don't interfere, whatever you do: hold your
tongue, and go about your business," scolded the goose, who certainly
had a dreadful temper.

I dared say no more; and, when the poor old man had been driven away by
this foul proceeding, I went up the steps and peeped in; for I heard
some one crying, and thought the cross bird, perhaps, had hurt some one
else. A little old woman stood there, wringing her hands in great
distress; while a small dog was barking at her with all his might.

"Bless me! the fashions have got even here," thought I; for the old
woman was dressed in the latest style,--or, rather, she had overdone it
sadly; for her gown was nearly up to her knees, and she was nearly as
ridiculous an object as some of the young ladies I had seen at home. She
had a respectable bonnet on, however, instead of a straw saucer; and her
hair was neatly put under a cap,--not made into a knob on the top of her
head.

"My dear soul, what's the trouble?" said I, quite touched by her tears.

"Lud a mercy, ma'am! I've been to market with my butter and eggs,--for
the price of both is so high, one can soon get rich nowadays,--and,
being tired, I stopped to rest a bit, but fell asleep by the road.
Somebody--I think it's a rogue of a peddler who sold me wooden nutmegs,
and a clock that wouldn't go, and some pans that came to bits the first
time I used them--somebody cut my new gown and petticoat off all round,
in the shameful way you see. I thought I never should get home; for I
was such a fright, I actually didn't know myself. But, thinks I, my
doggy will know me; and then I shall be sure I'm I, and not some
boldfaced creature in short skirts. But, oh, ma'am! doggy _don't_ know
me; and I ain't myself, and I don't know what to do."

"He's a foolish little beast; so don't mind him, but have a cup of tea,
and go to bed. You can make your gown decent to-morrow; and, if I see
the tricksy peddler, I'll give him a scolding."

This seemed to comfort the old woman; though doggy still barked.

"My next neighbor has a dog who never behaves in this way," she said, as
she put her teapot on the coals. "He's a remarkable beast; and you'd
better stop to see him as you pass, ma'am. He's always up to some funny
prank or other."

I said I would; and, as I went by the next house, I took a look in at
the window. The closet was empty, I observed; but the dog sat smoking a
pipe, looking as grave as a judge.

"Where is your mistress?" asked I.

"Gone for some tripe," answered the dog, politely taking the pipe out of
his mouth, and adding, "I hope the smoke doesn't annoy you."

"I don't approve of smoking," said I.

"Sorry to hear it," said the dog, coolly.

I was going to lecture him on this bad habit; but I saw his mistress
coming with a dish in her hand, and, fearing she might think me rude to
peep in at her windows, I walked on, wondering what we were coming to
when even four-legged puppies smoked.

At the door of the next little house, I saw a market-wagon loaded with
vegetables, and a smart young pig just driving it away. I had heard of
this interesting family, and took a look as I passed by. A second tidy
pig sat blowing the fire; and a third was eating roast-beef, as if he
had just come in from his work. The fourth, I was grieved to see, looked
very sulky; for it was evident he had been naughty, and so lost his
dinner. The little pig was at the door, crying to get in; and it was
sweet to see how kindly the others let him in, wiped his tears, tied on
his bib, and brought him his bread and milk. I was very glad to see
these young orphans doing so well, and I knew my friends at home would
enjoy hearing from them.

A loud scream made me jump; and the sudden splash of water made me run
along, without stopping to pick up a boy and girl who came tumbling down
the hill, with an empty pail, bumping their heads as they rolled.
Smelling something nice, and feeling hungry, I stepped into a large room
near by,--a sort of eating-house, I fancy; for various parties seemed to
be enjoying themselves in their different ways. A small boy sat near the
door, eating a large pie; and he gave me a fine plum which he had just
pulled out. At one table was a fat gentleman cutting another pie, which
had a dark crust, through which appeared the heads of a flock of birds,
all singing gayly.

"There's no end to the improvements in cooking, and no accounting for
tastes," I added, looking at a handsomely-dressed lady, who sat near,
eating bread and honey.

As I passed this party, I saw behind the lady's chair a maid, with a
clothes-pin in her hand, and no nose. She sobbingly told me a bird had
nipped it off; and I gave her a bit of court-plaster, which I
fortunately had in my pocket.

Another couple were dividing their meat in a queer way; for one took all
the fat, and the other all the lean. The next people were odder still;
for the man looked rather guilty, and seemed to be hiding a three-peck
measure under his chair, while he waited for his wife to bring on some
cold barley-pudding, which, to my surprise, she was frying herself. I
also saw a queer moonstruck-looking man inquiring the way to Norridge;
and another man making wry faces over some plum-pudding, with which he
had burnt his mouth, because his friend came down too soon.

I ordered pease-porridge hot, and they brought it cold; but I didn't
wait for any thing else, being in a hurry to see all there was to be
seen on this strange island. Feeling refreshed, I strolled on, passing a
jolly old gentleman smoking and drinking, while three fiddlers played
before him. As I turned into a road that led toward a hill, a little
boy, riding a dapple-gray pony, and an old lady on a white horse, with
bells ringing somewhere, trotted by me, followed by a little girl, who
wished to know where she could buy a penny bun. I told her the best were
at Newmarch's, in Bedford Street, and she ran on, much pleased; but I'm
afraid she never found that best of bake-shops. I was going quietly
along, when the sound of another horse coming made me look round; and
there I saw a dreadful sight,--a wild horse, tearing over the ground,
with fiery eyes and streaming tail. On his back sat a crazy man, beating
him with a broom; a crazy woman was behind him, with her bonnet on wrong
side before, holding one crazy child in her lap, while another stood on
the horse; a third was hanging on by one foot, and all were howling at
the top of their voices as they rushed by. I scrambled over the wall to
get out of the way, and there I saw more curious sights. Two blind men
were sitting on the grass, trying to see two lame men who were hobbling
along as hard as they could; and, near by, a bull was fighting a bee in
the most violent manner. This rather alarmed me; and I scrambled back
into the road again, just as a very fine lady jumped over a
barberry-bush near by, and a gentleman went flying after, with a ring in
one hand and a stick in the other.

"What very odd people they have here!" I thought. Close by was a tidy
little house under the hill, and in it a tidy little woman who sold
things to eat. Being rather hungry, in spite of my porridge, I bought a
baked apple and a cranberry-pie; for she said they were good, and I
found she told the truth. As I sat eating my pie, some dogs began to
bark; and by came a troop of beggars, some in rags, and some in old
velvet gowns. A drunken grenadier was with them, who wanted a pot of
beer; but as he had no money, the old woman sent him about his business.

On my way up the hill, I saw a little boy crying over a dead pig, and
his sister, who seemed to be dead also. I asked his name, and he sobbed
out, "Johnny Pringle, ma'am;" and went on crying so hard I could do
nothing to comfort him. While I stood talking to him, a sudden gust of
wind blew up the road, and down came the bough of a tree; and, to my
surprise, a cradle with a baby in it also. The baby screamed dreadfully,
and I didn't know how to quiet it; so I ran back to the old woman, and
left it with her, asking if that was the way babies were taken care of
there.

"Bless you, my dear! its ma is making patty-cakes; and put it up there
to be out of the way of Tom Tinker's dog. I'll soon hush it up," said
the old woman; and, trotting it on her knee, she began to sing:

    "Hey! my kitten, my kitten,
    Hey! my kitten, my deary."

Feeling that the child was in good hands, I hurried away, for I saw
something was going on upon the hill-top. When I got to the hill-top, I
was shocked to find some people tossing an old woman in a blanket. I
begged them to stop; but one of the men, who, I found, was a Welchman,
by the name of Taffy, told me the old lady liked it.

"But why does she like it?" I asked in great surprise.

"Tom, the piper's son, will tell you: it's my turn to toss now," said
the man.

"Why, you see, ma'am," said Tom, "she is one of those dreadfully nice
old women, who are always fussing and scrubbing, and worrying people to
death, with everlastingly cleaning house. Now and then we get so tired
out with her that we propose to her to clean the sky itself. She likes
that; and, as this is the only way we can get her up, we toss till she
sticks somewhere, and then leave her to sweep cobwebs till she is ready
to come back and behave herself."

"Well, that is the oddest thing I ever heard. I know just such an old
lady, and when I go home I'll try your plan. It seems to me that you
have a great many queer old ladies on this island," I said to another
man, whom they called Peter, and who stood eating pumpkin all the time.

"Well, we do have rather a nice collection; but you haven't seen the
best of all. We expect her every minute; and Margery Daw is to let us
know the minute she lights on the island," replied Peter, with his mouth
full.

"Lights?" said I, "you speak as if she flew."

"She rides on a bird. Hurrah! the old sweeper has lit. Now the cobwebs
will fly. Don't hurry back," shouted the man; and a faint, far-off voice
answered, "I shall be back again by and by."

The people folded up the blanket, looking much relieved; and I was
examining a very odd house which was built by an ancient king called
Boggen, when Margery Daw, a dirty little girl, came up the hill,
screaming, at the top of her voice:

"She's come! she's come!"

Every one looked up; and I saw a large white bird slowly flying over the
island. On its back sat the nicest old woman that ever was seen: all the
others were nothing compared to her. She had a pointed hat on over her
cap, a red cloak, high-heeled shoes, and a crutch in her hand. She
smiled and nodded as the bird approached; and every one ran and nodded,
and screamed, "Welcome! welcome, mother!"

As soon as she touched the ground, she was so surrounded that I could
only see the top of her hat; for hundreds and hundreds of little
children suddenly appeared, like a great flock of birds,--rosy, happy,
pretty children; but all looked unreal, and among them I saw some who
looked like little people I had known long ago.

"Who are they?" I asked of a bonny lass, who was sitting on a cushion,
eating strawberries and cream.

"They are the phantoms of all the little people who ever read and loved
our mother's songs," said the maid.

"What did she write?" I asked, feeling very queer, and as if I was going
to remember something.

"Songs that are immortal; and you have them in your hand," replied the
bonny maid, smiling at my stupidity.

I looked; and there, on the cover of the book I had been reading so
busily when the tide carried me away, I saw the words "Mother Goose's
Melodies." I was so delighted that I had seen her I gave a shout, and
tried to get near enough to hug and kiss the dear old soul, as the swarm
of children were doing; but my cry woke me, and I was _so_ sorry to find
it all a dream!




XI.

FANCY'S FRIEND.


It was a wagon, shaped like a great square basket, on low wheels, and
drawn by a stout donkey. There was one seat, on which Miss Fairbairn the
governess sat; and all round her, leaning over the edge of the basket,
were children, with little wooden shovels and baskets in their hands,
going down to play on the beach. Away they went, over the common,
through the stony lane, out upon the wide, smooth sands. All the
children but one immediately fell to digging holes, and making ponds,
castles, or forts. They did this every day, and were never tired of it;
but little Fancy made new games for herself, and seldom dug in the sand.
She had a garden of sea-weed, which the waves watered every day: she had
a palace of pretty shells, where she kept all sorts of little
water-creatures as fairy tenants; she had friends and playmates among
the gulls and peeps, and learned curious things by watching crabs,
horse-shoes, and jelly-fishes; and every day she looked for a mermaid.

It was of no use to tell her that there were no mermaids: Fancy firmly
believed in them, and was sure she would see one some day. The other
children called the seals mermaids; and were contented with the queer,
shiny creatures who played in the water, lay on the rocks, and peeped at
them with soft, bright eyes as they sailed by. Fancy was not satisfied
with seals,--they were not pretty and graceful enough for her,--and she
waited and watched for a real mermaid. On this day she took a breezy run
with the beach-birds along the shore; she planted a pretty red weed in
her garden; and let out the water-beetles and snails who had passed the
night in her palace. Then she went to a rock that stood near the quiet
nook where she played alone, and sat there looking for a mermaid as the
tide came in; for it brought her many curious things, and it might
perhaps bring a mermaid.

As she looked across the waves that came tumbling one over the other,
she saw something that was neither boat nor buoy nor seal. It was a
queer-looking thing, with a wild head, a long waving tail, and something
like arms that seemed to paddle it along. The waves tumbled it about, so
Fancy could not see very well: but, the longer she looked, the surer she
was that this curious thing was a mermaid; and she waited eagerly for it
to reach the shore. Nearer and nearer it came, till a great wave threw
it upon the sand; and Fancy saw that it was only a long piece of kelp,
torn up by the roots. She was very much disappointed; but, all of a
sudden, her face cleared up, she clapped her hands, and began to dance
round the kelp, saying:

"I'll make a mermaid myself, since none will come to me."

Away she ran, higher up the beach, and, after thinking a minute, began
her work. Choosing a smooth, hard place, she drew with a stick the
outline of her mermaid; then she made the hair of the brown marsh-grass
growing near by, arranging it in long locks on either side the face,
which was made of her prettiest pink and white shells,--for she pulled
down her palace to get them. The eyes were two gray pebbles; the neck
and arms of larger, white shells; and the dress of sea-weed,--red,
green, purple, and yellow; very splendid, for Fancy emptied her garden
to dress her mermaid.

"People say that mermaids always have tails; and I might make one out of
this great leaf of kelp. But it isn't pretty, and I don't like it; for I
want mine to be beautiful: so I won't have any tail," said Fancy, and
put two slender white shells for feet, at the lower edge of the fringed
skirt. She laid a wreath of little star-fish across the brown hair, a
belt of small orange-crabs round the waist, buttoned the dress with
violet snail-shells, and hung a tiny white pebble, like a pearl, in
either ear.

"Now she must have a glass and a comb in her hand, as the song says,
and then she will be done," said Fancy, looking about her, well pleased.

Presently she found the skeleton of a little fish, and his backbone made
an excellent comb; while a transparent jelly-fish served for a glass,
with a frame of cockle-shells round it. Placing these in the hands of
her mermaid, and some red coral bracelets on her wrists, Fancy
pronounced her done; and danced about her, singing:

    "My pretty little mermaid,
      Oh! come, and play with me:
    I'll love you, I'll welcome you;
      And happy we shall be."

Now, while she had been working, the tide had crept higher and higher;
and, as she sung, one wave ran up and wet her feet.

"Oh, what a pity I didn't put her farther up!" cried Fancy; "the tide
will wash her all away; and I meant to keep her fresh, and show her to
Aunt Fiction. My poor mermaid!--I shall lose her; but perhaps she will
be happier in the sea: so I will let her go."

Mounting her rock, Fancy waited to see her work destroyed. But the sea
seemed to pity her; and wave after wave came up, without doing any harm.
At last one broke quite over the mermaid, and Fancy thought that would
be the end of her. But, no: instead of scattering shells, stones, and
weeds, the waves lifted the whole figure, without displacing any thing,
and gently bore it back into the sea.

"Good by! good by!" cried Fancy, as the little figure floated away;
then, as it disappeared, she put her hands before her face,--for she
loved her mermaid, and had given all her treasures to adorn her; and now
to lose her so soon seemed hard,--and Fancy's eyes were full of tears.
Another great wave came rolling in; but she did not look up to see it
break, and, a minute after, she heard steps tripping toward her over the
sand. Still she did not stir; for, just then, none of her playmates
could take the place of her new friend, and she didn't want to see them.

"Fancy! Fancy!" called a breezy voice, sweeter than any she had ever
heard. But she did not raise her head, nor care to know who called. The
steps came quite close; and the touch of a cold, wet hand fell on her
own. Then she looked up, and saw a strange little girl standing by her,
who smiled, showing teeth like little pearls, and said, in the breezy
voice:

"You wanted me to play with you, so I came."

"Who are you?" asked Fancy, wondering where she had seen the child
before.

"I'm your mermaid," said the child.

"But the water carried her away," cried Fancy.

"The waves only carried me out for the sea to give me life, and then
brought me back to you," answered the new comer.

"But are you really a mermaid?" asked Fancy, beginning to smile and
believe.

"I am really the one you made: look, and see if I'm not;" and the little
creature turned slowly round, that Fancy might be sure it was her own
work.

She certainly was very like the figure that once lay on the sand,--only
she was not now made of stones and shells. There was the long brown hair
blowing about her face, with a wreath of starry shells in it. Her eyes
were gray, her cheeks and lips rosy, her neck and arms white; and from
under her striped dress peeped little bare feet. She had pearls in her
ears, coral bracelets, a golden belt, and a glass and comb in her hands.

"Yes," said Fancy, drawing near, "you _are_ my little mermaid; but how
does it happen that you come to me at last?"

"Dear friend," answered the water-child, "you believed in me, watched
and waited long for me, shaped the image of the thing you wanted out of
your dearest treasures, and promised to love and welcome me. I could not
help coming; and the sea, that is as fond of you as you are of it,
helped me to grant your wish."

"Oh, I'm glad, I'm glad! Dear little mermaid, what is your name?" cried
Fancy, kissing the cool cheek of her new friend, and putting her arms
about her neck.

"Call me by my German cousin's pretty name,--Lorelei," answered the
mermaid, kissing back as warmly as she could.

"Will you come home and live with me, dear Lorelei?" asked Fancy, still
holding her fast.

"If you will promise to tell no one who and what I am, I will stay with
you as long as you love and believe in me. As soon as you betray me, or
lose your faith and fondness, I shall vanish, never to come back again,"
answered Lorelei.

"I promise: but won't people wonder who you are? and, if they ask me,
what shall I say?" said Fancy.

"Tell them you found me on the shore; and leave the rest to me. But you
must not expect other people to like and believe in me as you do. They
will say hard things of me; will blame you for loving me; and try to
part us. Can you bear this, and keep your promise faithfully?"

"I think I can. But why won't they like you?" said Fancy, looking
troubled.

"Because they are not like you, dear," answered the mermaid, with salt
tears in her soft eyes. "They have not your power of seeing beauty in
all things, of enjoying invisible delights, and living in a world of
your own. Your Aunt Fiction will like me; but your Uncle Fact won't. He
will want to know all about me; will think I'm a little vagabond; and
want me to be sent away somewhere, to be made like other children. I
shall keep out of his way as much as I can; for I'm afraid of him."

"I'll take care of you, Lorelei dear; and no one shall trouble you. I
hear Miss Fairbairn calling; so I must go. Give me your hand, and don't
be afraid."

Hand in hand the two went toward the other children, who stopped
digging, and stared at the new child. Miss Fairbairn, who was very wise
and good, but rather prim, stared too, and said, with surprise:

"Why, my dear, where did you find that queer child?"

"Down on the beach. Isn't she pretty?" answered Fancy, feeling very
proud of her new friend.

"She hasn't got any shoes on; so she's a beggar, and we mustn't play
with her," said one boy, who had been taught that to be poor was a very
dreadful thing.

"What pretty earrings and bracelets she's got!" said a little girl, who
thought a great deal of her dress.

"She doesn't look as if she knew much," said another child, who was kept
studying so hard that she never had time to dig and run, and make
dirt-pies, till she fell ill, and had to be sent to the sea-side.

"What's your name? and who are your parents?" asked Miss Fairbairn.

"I've got no parents; and my name is Lorelei," answered the mermaiden.

"You mean Luly; mind your pronunciation, child," said Miss Fairbairn,
who corrected every one she met in something or other. "Where do you
live?"

"I haven't got any home now," said Lorelei, smiling at the lady's tone.

"Yes, you have: my home is yours; and you are going to stay with me
always," cried Fancy, heartily. "She is my little sister, Miss
Fairbairn: I found her; and I'm going to keep her, and make her happy."

"Your uncle won't like it, my dear." And Miss Fairbairn shook her head
gravely.

"Aunt will; and Uncle won't mind, if I learn my lessons well, and
remember the multiplication table all right. He was going to give me
some money, so I might learn to keep accounts; but I'll tell him to keep
the money, and let me have Lorelei instead."

"Oh, how silly!" cried the boy who didn't like bare feet.

"No, she isn't; for, if she's kind to the girl, maybe she'll get some of
her pretty things," said the vain little girl.

"Keeping accounts is a very useful and important thing. I keep mine; and
mamma says I have great arth-met-i-cal talent," added the pale child,
who studied too much.

"Come, children; it's time for dinner. Fancy, you can take the girl to
the house; and your uncle will do what he thinks best about letting you
keep her," said Miss Fairbairn, piling them into the basket-wagon.

Fancy kept Lorelei close beside her; and as soon as they reached the
great hotel, where they all were staying with mothers and fathers,
uncles or aunts, she took her to kind Aunt Fiction, who was interested
at once in the friendless child so mysteriously found. She was satisfied
with the little she could discover, and promised to keep her,--for a
time, at least.

"We can imagine all kinds of romantic things about her; and, by and by,
some interesting story may be found out concerning her. I can make her
useful in many ways; and she shall stay."

As Aunt Fiction laid her hand on the mermaid's head, as if claiming her
for her own, Uncle Fact came stalking in, with his note-book in his
hand, and his spectacles on his nose. Now, though they were married,
these two persons were very unlike. Aunt Fiction was a graceful,
picturesque woman; who told stories charmingly, wrote poetry and novels,
was very much beloved by young folks, and was the friend of some of the
most famous people in the world. Uncle Fact was a grim, grave, decided
man; whom it was impossible to bend or change. He was very useful to
every one; knew an immense deal; and was always taking notes of things
he saw and heard, to be put in a great encyclopædia he was making. He
didn't like romance, loved the truth, and wanted to get to the bottom of
every thing. He was always trying to make little Fancy more sober,
well-behaved, and learned; for she was a freakish, dreamy, yet very
lovable and charming child. Aunt Fiction petted her to her heart's
content, and might have done her harm, if Uncle Fact had not had a hand
in her education; for the lessons of both were necessary to her, as to
all of us.

"Well, well, well! who is this?" he said briskly, as he turned his keen
eyes and powerful glasses on the new comer.

Aunt Fiction told him all the children had said; but he answered
impatiently:

"Tut, tut! my dear: I want the facts of the case. You are apt to
exaggerate; and Fancy is not to be relied on. If the child isn't a fool,
she must know more about herself than she pretends. Now, answer truly,
Luly, where did you come from?"

But the little mermaid only shook her head, and answered as before,
"Fancy found me on the beach, and wants me to stay with her. I'll do
her no harm: please, let me stay."

"She has evidently been washed ashore from some wreck, and has forgotten
all about herself. Her wonderful beauty, her accent, and these ornaments
show that she is some foreign child," said Aunt Fiction, pointing to the
earrings.

"Nonsense! my dear: those are white pebbles, not pearls; and, if you
examine them, you will find that those bracelets are the ones you gave
Fancy as a reward for so well remembering the facts I told her about
coral," said the uncle, who had turned Lorelei round and round, pinched
her cheek, felt her hair, and examined her frock through the glasses
which nothing escaped.

"She may stay, and be my little playmate, mayn't she? I'll take care of
her; and we shall be very happy together," cried Fancy eagerly.

"One can't be sure of that till one has tried. You say you will take
care of her: have you got any money to pay her board, and buy her
clothes?" asked her uncle.

"No; but I thought you'd help me," answered Fancy wistfully.

"Never say you'll do a thing till you are sure you can," said Uncle
Fact, as he took notes of the affair, thinking they might be useful by
and by. "I've no objection to your keeping the girl, if, after making
inquiries about her, she proves to be a clever child. She can stay
awhile; and, when we go back to town, I'll put her in one of our charity
schools, where she can be taught to earn her living. Can you read,
Luly?"

"No," said the mermaid, opening her eyes.

"Can you write and cipher?"

"What is that?" asked Lorelei innocently.

"Dear me! what ignorance!" cried Uncle Fact.

"Can you sew, or tend babies?" asked Aunt Fiction gently.

"I can do nothing but play and sing, and comb my hair."

"I see! I see!--some hand-organ man's girl. Well, I'm glad you keep your
hair smooth,--that's more than Fancy does," said Uncle Fact.

"Let us hear you sing," whispered his little niece; and, in a voice as
musical as the sound of ripples breaking on the shore, Lorelei sung a
little song that made Fancy dance with delight, charmed Aunt Fiction,
and softened Uncle Fact's hard face in spite of himself.

"Very well, very well, indeed: you have a good voice. I'll see that you
have proper teaching; and, by and by, you can get your living by giving
singing-lessons," he said, turning over the leaves of his book, to look
for the name of a skilful teacher; for he had lists of every useful
person, place, and thing under the sun.

Lorelei laughed at the idea; and Fancy thought singing for gold, not
love, a hard way to get one's living.

Inquiries were made; but nothing more was discovered, and neither of the
children would speak: so the strange child lived with Fancy, and made
her very happy. The other children didn't care much about her; for with
them she was shy and cold, because she knew, if the truth was told, they
would not believe in her. Fancy had always played a good deal by
herself, because she never found a mate to suit her; now she had one,
and they enjoyed each other very much. Lorelei taught her many things
besides new games; and Aunt Fiction was charmed with the pretty stories
Fancy repeated to her, while Uncle Fact was astonished at the knowledge
of marine plants and animals which she gained without any books. Lorelei
taught her to swim, like a fish; and the two played such wonderful
pranks in the water that people used to come down to the beach when they
bathed. In return, Fancy tried to teach her friend to read and write and
sew; but Lorelei couldn't learn much, though she loved her little
teacher dearly, and every evening sung her to sleep with beautiful
lullabies.

There was a great deal of talk about the curious stranger; for her ways
were odd, and no one knew what to make of her. She would eat nothing
but fruit and shell-fish, and drink nothing but salt water. She didn't
like tight clothes; but would have run about in a loose, green robe,
with bare feet and flying hair, if Uncle Fact would have allowed it.
Morning, noon, and night, she plunged into the sea,--no matter what the
weather might be; and she would sleep on no bed but one stuffed with
dried sea-weed. She made lovely chains of shells; found splendid bits of
coral; and dived where no one else dared, to bring up wonderful plants
and mosses. People offered money for these things; but she gave them all
to Fancy and Aunt Fiction, of whom she was very fond. It was curious to
see the sort of people who liked both Fancy and her friend,--poets,
artists; delicate, thoughtful children; and a few old people, who had
kept their hearts young in spite of care and time and trouble. Dashing
young gentlemen, fine young ladies, worldly-minded and money-loving men
and women, and artificial, unchildlike children, the two friends avoided
carefully; and these persons either made fun of them, neglected them
entirely, or seemed to be unconscious that they were alive. The others
they knew at a glance; for their faces warmed and brightened when the
children came, they listened to their songs and stories, joined in their
plays, and found rest and refreshment in their sweet society.

"This will do for a time; as Fancy is getting strong, and not entirely
wasting her days, thanks to me! But our holiday is nearly over; and, as
soon as I get back to town, I'll take that child to the Ragged Refuge,
and see what they can make of her," said Uncle Fact, who was never quite
satisfied about Lorelei; because he could find out so little concerning
her. He was walking over the beach as he said this, after a hard day's
work on his encyclopædia. He sat down on a rock in a quiet place; and,
instead of enjoying the lovely sunset, he fell to studying the course of
the clouds, the state of the tide, and the temperature of the air, till
the sound of voices made him peep over the rock. Fancy and her friend
were playing there, and the old gentleman waited to see what they were
about. Both were sitting with their little bare feet in the water;
Lorelei was stringing pearls, and Fancy plaiting a crown of pretty green
rushes.

"I wish I could go home, and get you a string of finer pearls than
these," said Lorelei; "but it is too far away, and I cannot swim now as
I used to do."

"I must look into this. The girl evidently knows all about herself, and
can tell, if she chooses," muttered Uncle Fact, getting rather excited
over this discovery.

"Never mind the pearls: I'd rather have you, dear," said Fancy lovingly.
"Tell me a story while we work, or sing me a song; and I'll give you my
crown."

"I'll sing you a little song that has got what your uncle calls a moral
to it," said Lorelei, laughing mischievously. Then, in her breezy little
voice, she sang the story of--

THE ROCK AND THE BUBBLE.

        Oh! a bare, brown rock
          Stood up in the sea,
        The waves at its feet
          Dancing merrily.

        A little bubble
          Came sailing by,
        And thus to the rock
          Did it gayly cry,--

        "Ho! clumsy brown stone,
          Quick, make way for me:
        I'm the fairest thing
          That floats on the sea.

        "See my rainbow-robe,
          See my crown of light,
        My glittering form,
          So airy and bright.

        "O'er the waters blue,
          I'm floating away,
        To dance by the shore
          With the foam and spray.

        "Now, make way, make way;
          For the waves are strong,
        And their rippling feet
          Bear me fast along."

        But the great rock stood
          Straight up in the sea:
        It looked gravely down,
          And said pleasantly,--

        "Little friend, you must
          Go some other way;
        For I have not stirred
          This many a long day.

        "Great billows have dashed,
          And angry winds blown;
        But my sturdy form
          Is not overthrown.

        "Nothing can stir me
          In the air or sea;
        Then, how can I move,
          Little friend, for thee?"

        Then the waves all laughed,
          In their voices sweet;
        And the sea-birds looked,
          From their rocky seat,

        At the bubble gay,
          Who angrily cried,
        While its round cheek glowed
          With a foolish pride,--

        "You _shall_ move for me;
          And you shall not mock
        At the words I say,
          You ugly, rough rock!

        "Be silent, wild birds!
          Why stare you so?
        Stop laughing, rude waves,
          And help me to go!

        "For I am the queen
          Of the ocean here,
        And this cruel stone
          Cannot make me fear."

        Dashing fiercely up,
          With a scornful word,
        Foolish bubble broke;
          But rock never stirred.

        Then said the sea-birds,
          Sitting in their nests,
        To the little ones
          Leaning on their breasts,--

        "Be not like Bubble,
          Headstrong, rude, and vain,
        Seeking by violence
          Your object to gain;

        "But be like the rock,
          Steadfast, true, and strong,
        Yet cheerful and kind,
          And firm against wrong.

        "Heed, little birdlings,
          And wiser you'll be
        For the lesson learned
          To-day by the sea."

"Well, to be sure the song _has_ got a moral, if that silly Fancy only
sees it," said Uncle Fact, popping up his bald head again as the song
ended.

"I thank you: that's a good little song for me. But, Lorelei, are you
sorry you came to be my friend?" cried Fancy; for, as she bent to lay
the crown on the other's head, she saw that she was looking wistfully
down into the water that kissed her feet.

"Not yet: while you love me, I am happy, and never regret that I ceased
to be a mermaid for your sake," answered Lorelei, laying her soft cheek
against her friend's.

"How happy I was the day my play-mermaid changed to a real one!" said
Fancy. "I often want to tell people all about that wonderful thing, and
let them know who you really are: then they'd love you as I do, instead
of calling you a little vagabond."

"Few would believe our story; and those that did would wonder at
me,--not love me as you do. They would put me in a cage, and make a show
of me; and I should be so miserable I should die. So don't tell who I
am, will you?" said Lorelei earnestly.

"Never," cried Fancy, clinging to her. "But, my deary, what will you do
when uncle sends you away from me, as he means to do as soon as we go
home? I can see you sometimes; but we cannot be always together, and
there is no ocean for you to enjoy in the city."

"I shall bear it, if I can, for your sake; if I cannot, I shall come
back here, and wait till you come again next year."

"No, no! I will not be parted from you; and, if uncle takes you away,
I'll come here, and be a mermaid with you," cried Fancy.

The little friends threw their arms about each other, and were so full
of their own feelings that they never saw Uncle Fact's tall shadow flit
across them, as he stole away over the soft sand. Poor old gentleman! he
was in a sad state of mind, and didn't know what to do; for in all his
long life he had never been so puzzled before.

"A mermaid indeed!" he muttered. "I always thought that child was a
fool, and now I'm sure of it. She thinks she is a mermaid, and has made
Fancy believe it. I've told my wife a dozen times that she let Fancy
read too many fairy tales and wonder-books. Her head is full of
nonsense, and she is just ready to believe any ridiculous story that is
told her. Now, what on earth shall I do? If I put Luly in an asylum,
Fancy will break her heart, and very likely they will both run away. If
I leave them together, Luly will soon make Fancy as crazy as she is
herself, and I shall be mortified by having a niece who insists that her
playmate is a mermaid. Bless my soul! how absurd it all is!"

Aunt Fiction had gone to town to see her publishers about a novel she
had written, and he didn't like to tell the queer story to any one else;
so Uncle Fact thought it over, and decided to settle the matter at
once. When the children came in, he sent Fancy to wait for him in the
library, while he talked alone with Lorelei. He did his best; but he
could do nothing with her,--she danced and laughed, and told the same
tale as before, till the old gentleman confessed that he had heard their
talk on the rocks: then she grew very sad, and owned that she _was_ a
mermaid. This made him angry, and he wouldn't believe it for an instant;
but told her it was impossible, and she must say something else.

Lorelei could say nothing else, and wept bitterly when he would not
listen; so he locked her up and went to Fancy, who felt as if something
dreadful was going to happen when she saw his face. He told her all he
knew, and insisted that Lorelei was foolish or naughty to persist in
such a ridiculous story.

"But, uncle, I really did make a mermaid; and she really did come alive,
for I saw the figure float away, and then Lorelei appeared," said Fancy,
very earnestly.

"It's very likely you made a figure, and called it a mermaid: it would
be just the sort of thing you'd do," said her uncle. "But it is
impossible that any coming alive took place, and I won't hear any such
nonsense. You didn't see this girl come out of the water; for she says
you never looked up, till she touched you. She was a real child, who
came over the beach from somewhere; and you fancied she looked like
your figure, and believed the silly tale she told you. It is my belief
that she is a sly, bad child; and the sooner she is sent away the better
for you."

Uncle Fact was so angry and talked so loud, that Fancy felt frightened
and bewildered; and began to think he might be right about the mermaid
part, though she hated to give up the little romance.

"If I agree that she _is_ a real child, won't you let her stay, uncle?"
she said, forgetting that, if she lost her faith, her friend was lost
also.

"Ah! then you have begun to come to your senses, have you? and are ready
to own that you don't believe in mermaids and such rubbish?" cried Uncle
Fact, stopping in his tramp up and down the room.

"Why, if you say there never were and never can be any, I suppose I
_must_ give up my fancy; but I'm sorry," sighed the child.

"That's my sensible girl! Now, think a minute, my dear, and you will
also own that it is best to give up the child as well as the mermaid,"
said her uncle briskly.

"Oh! no: we love one another; and she is good, and I can't give her up,"
cried Fancy.

"Answer me a few questions; and I'll prove that she isn't good, that you
don't love her, and that you _can_ give her up," said Uncle Fact, and
numbered off the questions on his fingers as he spoke.

"Didn't Luly want you to deceive us, and every one else, about who she
was?"

"Yes, sir."

"Don't you like to be with her better than with your aunt or myself?"

"Yes, sir."

"Hadn't you rather hear her songs and stories than learn your lessons?"

"Yes, sir."

"Isn't it wrong to deceive people, to love strangers more than those who
are a father and mother to you, and to like silly tales better than
useful lessons?"

"Yes, sir."

"Very well. Then, don't you see, that, if Luly makes you do these wrong
and ungrateful things, she is not a good child, nor a fit playmate for
you?"

Fancy didn't answer; for she couldn't feel that it was so, though he
made it seem so. When Uncle Fact talked in that way, she always got
confused and gave up; for she didn't know how to argue. He was right in
a certain way; but she felt as if she was right also in another way,
though she could not prove it: so she hung her head, and let her tears
drop on the carpet one by one.

Uncle Fact didn't mean to be unkind, but he did mean to have his own
way; and, when he saw the little girl's sad face, he took her on his
knee, and said, more mildly:

"Do you remember the story about the German Lorelei, who sung so
sweetly, and lured people to death in the Rhine?"

"Yes, uncle; and I like it," answered Fancy, looking up.

"Well, my dear, your Lorelei will lead you into trouble, if you follow
her. Suppose she is what you think her,--a mermaid: it is her delight to
draw people into the water, where, of course, they drown. If she is what
I think her,--a sly, bad child, who sees that you are very simple, and
who means to get taken care of without doing any thing useful,--she will
spoil you in a worse way than if you followed her into the sea. I've got
no little daughter of my own, and I want to keep you as safe and happy
as if you were mine. I don't like this girl, and I want you to give her
up for my sake. Will you, Fancy?"

While her uncle said these things, all the beauty seemed to fall away
from her friend, all the sweetness from their love, and all her faith in
the little dream which had made her so happy. Mermaids became
treacherous, unlovely, unreal creatures; and Lorelei seemed like a
naughty, selfish child, who deceived her, and made her do wrong things.
Her uncle had been very kind to her all her life; and she loved him, was
grateful, and wanted to show that she was, by pleasing him. But her
heart clung to the friend she had made, trusted, and loved; and it
seemed impossible to give up the shadow, even though the substance was
gone. She put her hands before her face for a moment; then laid her arms
about the old man's neck, and whispered, with a little sob:

"I'll give her up; but you'll be kind to her, because I was fond of her
once."

As the last word left Fancy's lips, a long, sad cry sounded through the
room; Lorelei sprung in, gave her one kiss, and was seen to run swiftly
toward the beach, wringing her hands. Fancy flew after; but, when she
reached the shore, there was nothing to be seen but the scattered
pebbles, shells, and weeds that made the mock mermaid, floating away on
a receding wave.

"Do you believe now?" cried Fancy, weeping bitterly, as she pointed to
the wreck of her friend, and turned reproachfully toward Uncle Fact, who
had followed in great astonishment.

The old gentleman looked well about him; then shook his head, and
answered decidedly:

"No, my dear, I _don't_. It's an odd affair; but, I've no doubt, it will
be cleared up in a natural way sometime or other."

But there he was mistaken; for this mystery never _was_ cleared up.
Other people soon forgot it, and Fancy never spoke of it; yet she made
very few friends, and, though she learned to love and value Uncle Fact
as well as Aunt Fiction, she could not forget her dearest playmate. Year
after year she came back to the sea-side; and the first thing she always
did was to visit the place where she used to play, and stretch her arms
toward the sea, crying tenderly:

"O my little friend! come back to me!"

But Lorelei never came again.


THE END.

       *       *       *       *       *


LOUISA M. ALCOTT'S FAMOUS BOOKS

[Illustration: "Sing, Tessa; sing!" cried Tommo, twanging away with all
his might.--PAGE 47.]

AUNT JO'S SCRAP-BAG: Containing "My Boys," "Shawl-Straps," "Cupid and
Chow-Chow," "My Girls," "Jimmy's Cruise in the Pinafore," "An
Old-Fashioned Thanksgiving." 6 vols. Price of each, $1.00.

ROBERTS BROTHERS, PUBLISHERS, _Boston_.

       *       *       *       *       *


LOUISE CHANDLER MOULTON'S STORIES.

[Illustration]

BED-TIME STORIES.

    MORE BED-TIME STORIES.

        NEW BED-TIME STORIES.

WITH ILLUSTRATIONS BY ADDIE LEDYARD.

Three volumes in a box. Price, $3.75.

_ROBERTS BROTHERS_, _Publishers_, BOSTON.

       *       *       *       *       *


AUNT JO'S SCRAP-BAG.

CUPID AND CHOW-CHOW, ETC.

[Illustration: SCRAP-BAG. VOL III.]

BY LOUISA M. ALCOTT,

AUTHOR OF "LITTLE WOMEN," "AN OLD-FASHIONED GIRL," "LITTLE MEN,"
"HOSPITAL SKETCHES."


BOSTON:

ROBERTS BROTHERS.

1881.

       *       *       *       *       *


Jean Ingelow's Prose Story Books.

In 5 vols. 16mo, uniformly bound.

STUDIES FOR STORIES FROM GIRLS' LIVES. Illustrated, Price, $1.25.

    "A rare source of delight for all who can find pleasure in
    really good works of prose fiction.... They are prose poems,
    carefully meditated, and exquisitely couched in by a teacher
    ready to sympathize with every joy and sorrow."--_Athenæum._

STORIES TOLD TO A CHILD. Illustrated. Price, $1.25.

STORIES TOLD TO A CHILD. Second Series. Illustrated. Price, $1.25.

    "This is one of the most charming juvenile books ever laid on
    our table. Jean Ingelow, the noble English poet, second only to
    Mrs. Browning, bends easily and gracefully from the heights of
    thought and fine imagination to commune with the minds and
    hearts of children; to sympathize with their little joys and
    sorrows; to feel for their temptations. She is a safe guide for
    the little pilgrims; for her paths, though 'paths of
    pleasantness,' lead straight upward."--_Grace Greenwood in "The
    Little Pilgrim."_


A SISTER'S BYE-HOURS. Illustrated. Price, $1.25.

    "Seven short stories of domestic life by one of the most popular
    of the young authors of the day,--an author who has her heart in
    what she writes,--Jean Ingelow. And there is heart in these
    stories, and healthy moral lessons, too. They are written in the
    author's most graceful and affecting style, will be read with
    real pleasure, and, when read, will leave more than momentary
    impressions."--_Brooklyn Union._


MOPSA THE FAIRY. A Story. With Eight Illustrations. Price, $1.25.

    "Miss Ingelow is, to our mind, the most charming of all living
    writers for children, and 'Mopsa' alone ought to give her a kind
    of pre-emptive right to the love and gratitude of our young
    folks. It requires genius to conceive a purely imaginary work
    which must of necessity deal with the supernatural, without
    running into a mere riot of fantastic absurdity; but genius Miss
    Ingelow has, and the story of Jack is as careless and joyous,
    but as delicate, as a picture of childhood.

    "The young people should be grateful to Jean Ingelow and those
    other noble writers, who, in our day, have taken upon themselves
    the task of supplying them with literature, if for no other
    reason, that these writers have saved them from the ineffable
    didacticism which, till within the last few years, was
    considered the only food fit for the youthful
    mind."--_Eclectic._

_Sold everywhere. Mailed, postpaid, by the Publishers._

ROBERTS BROTHERS, BOSTON.

       *       *       *       *       *


_Messrs. Roberts Brothers' Publications._

CASTLE BLAIR:

A STORY OF YOUTHFUL DAYS.

BY FLORA L. SHAW.

16mo. Cloth. Price $1.00

    "There is quite a lovely little book just come out about
    children,--'Castle Blair!' ... The book is good, and lovely, and
    true, having the best description of a noble child in it
    (Winnie) that I ever read; and nearly the best description of
    the next best thing,--a noble dog," says John Ruskin, the
    distinguished art critic.

    "'Castle Blair,' a story of youthful days, by Flora L. Shaw, is
    an Irish story. A charming young girl--half French, half
    English--comes from France, at the age of eighteen, to live with
    her bachelor uncle at Castle Blair, which is in possession of
    five children of an absent brother of this uncle. The children
    are in a somewhat wild and undisciplined condition, but they are
    as interesting children as can be imagined, and some of them
    winning to an extraordinary degree. They are natural children,
    in manner and in talk; but the book differs from some American
    books about children, in that it is pervaded by an air of
    refinement and good-breeding. The story is altogether
    delightful, quite worthy, from an American point of view, of all
    Mr. Ruskin says of it; and if circulation were determined by
    merit, it would speedily outstrip a good many now popular
    children's books which have a vein of commonness, if not of
    vulgarity."--_Hartford Courant._

    "It is not too much to say that nothing more interesting or more
    wholesome is offered this year for older boys and girls. It is a
    charming story, in which the author has delineated character as
    carefully, and with as keen an artistic sense, as if she had
    been writing a novel. Her book is a novel, indeed, with children
    and the lives of children, instead of men and women and their
    lives, for its theme."--_New York Evening Post._

_Our publications are to be had of all Booksellers. When not to be
found, send directly to_

ROBERTS BROTHERS, PUBLISHERS, =BOSTON.=

       *       *       *       *       *


_Messrs. Roberts Brothers' Publications._

NELLY'S SILVER MINE.

BY H. H.

With Illustrations. 16mo, cloth. Price $1.50.

    "The sketches of life, especially of its odd and out-of-the-way
    aspects, by H. H. always possess so vivid a reality that they
    appear more like the actual scenes than any copy by pencil or
    photograph. They form a series of living pictures, radiant with
    sunlight and fresh as morning dew. In this new story the fruits
    of her fine genius are of Colorado growth, and though without
    the antique flavor of her recollections of Rome and Venice, are
    as delicious to the taste as they are tempting to the eye, and
    afford a natural feast of exquisite quality."--_N. Y. Tribune._

    "This charming little book, written for children's entertainment
    and instruction, is equally delightful to the fathers and
    mothers. It is life in New England, and the racy history of a
    long railway journey to the wilds of Colorado. The children are
    neither imps nor angels, but just such children as are found in
    every happy home. The pictures are so graphically drawn that we
    feel well acquainted with Rob and Nelly, have travelled with
    them and climbed mountains and found silver mines, and know all
    about the rude life made beautiful by a happy family, and can
    say of Nelly, with their German neighbor, Mr. Kleesman, 'Ach
    well, she haf better than any silver mine in her own
    self.'"--_Chicago Inter-Ocean._

    "In 'Nelly's Silver Mine' Mrs. Helen Hunt Jackson has given us a
    true classic for the nursery and the school-room, but its
    readers will not be confined to any locality. Its vivid
    portraiture of Colorado life and its truth to child-nature give
    it a charm which the most experienced cannot fail to feel. It
    will stand by the side of Miss Edgeworth and Mrs. Barbauld in
    all the years to come."--_Mrs. Caroline H. Dall._

    "We heartily commend the book for its healthy spirit, its lively
    narrative, and its freedom from most of the faults of books for
    children."--_Atlantic Monthly._

_Our publications are to be had of all Booksellers. When not to be
found, send directly to_

ROBERTS BROTHERS, BOSTON.






AUNT JO'S SCRAP-BAG.

VOL V.

JIMMY'S CRUISE IN THE PINAFORE, ETC.

BY LOUISA M. ALCOTT,

AUTHOR OF "LITTLE WOMEN," "AN OLD-FASHIONED GIRL," "LITTLE MEN,"
"HOSPITAL SKETCHES."


BOSTON:
ROBERTS BROTHERS.
1880.

_Copyright_,
BY LOUISA M. ALCOTT.
1879.

UNIVERSITY PRESS:
JOHN WILSON AND SON, CAMBRIDGE.


       *       *       *       *       *


[Illustration: SIR JOSEPH PORTER, K.C.B.]

  I am the monarch of the Sea,
  The ruler of the Queen's Navee,--
  When at anchor here I ride,
  My bosom swells with pride,
And I snap my fingers at a foeman's taunts.


[Illustration: COUSIN HEBE.]

And so do his sisters, and his cousins, and his aunts
  His sisters and his cousins!
  Whom he reckons by the dozens,
And his aunts!


[Illustration: RALPH RACKSTRAW.]

"I am the lowliest tar
  That sails the water.
And you, proud maiden, are
  My captain's daughter."


[Illustration: JOSEPHINE.]

"Refrain, audacious tar.
  Your suit from pressing;
Remember what you are,
  And whom addressing."


[Illustration: LITTLE BUTTERCUP.]

For I am called Little Buttercup,--dear Little Buttercup,
  Though I never could tell why;
But still I'm called Buttercup,--poor Little Buttercup,
  Sweet Little Buttercup I!


[Illustration: CAPTAIN CORCORAN.]

Fair moon, to thee I sing
  Bright regent of the heavens;
Say, why is every thing
  Either at sixes or at sevens!


[Illustration: BILL BOBSTAY, THE BOS'N]

He is an Englishman!
  For he himself has said it,
  And it's greatly to his credit
That he is an Englishman.


[Illustration: DICK DEADEYE.]

"I'm ugly too, aint I?"


       *       *       *       *       *


CONTENTS.


   I. JIMMY'S CRUISE IN THE PINAFORE                          5

  II. TWO LITTLE TRAVELLERS                                  27

 III. A JOLLY FOURTH                                         38

  IV. SEVEN BLACK CATS                                       52

   V. ROSA'S TALE                                            67

  VI. LUNCH                                                  89

 VII. A BRIGHT IDEA                                         105

VIII. HOW THEY CAMPED OUT                                   119

  IX. MY LITTLE SCHOOL-GIRL                                 141

   X. WHAT A SHOVEL DID                                     154

  XI. CLAMS                                                 168

 XII. KITTY'S CATTLE SHOW                                   182

XIII. WHAT BECOMES OF THE PINS                              189


[Illustration: TOM TUCKER, MIDSHIPMITE.]




AUNT JO'S SCRAP-BAG.




I.

JIMMY'S CRUISE IN THE PINAFORE.


HOW HE SHIPPED.

A boy sat on a door-step in a despondent attitude, with his eyes fixed
on a pair of very shabby shoes, and his elbows resting on his knees, as
if to hide the big patches there. But it was not the fact that his toes
were nearly out and his clothes dilapidated which brought the wrinkles
to his forehead and the tears to his eyes, for he was used to that
state of things, and bore it without complaint. The prospect was a dull
one for a lively lad full of the spring longings which sunny April
weather always brings. But it was not the narrow back-street where noisy
children played and two or three dusty trees tried to bud without
sunshine, that made him look so dismal. Nor was it the knowledge that a
pile of vests was nearly ready for him to trudge away with before he
could really rest after doing many errands to save mother's weary feet.

No, it was a burden that lay very heavily on his heart, and made it
impossible to even whistle as he waited. Above the sounds that filled
the street he heard a patient moan from the room within; and no matter
what object his eyes rested on, he saw with sorrowful distinctness a
small white face turned wistfully toward the window, as if weary of the
pillow where it had laid so long.

Merry little Kitty, who used to sing and dance from morning till night,
was now so feeble and wasted that he could carry her about like a baby.
All day she lay moaning softly, and her one comfort was when "brother"
could come and sing to her. That night he could not sing; his heart was
so full, because the doctor had said that the poor child must have
country air as soon as possible, else she never would recover from the
fever which left her such a sad little ghost of her former self. But,
alas, there was no money for the trip, and mother was sewing day and
night to earn enough for a week at least of blessed country air and
quiet. Jimmy did his best to help, but could find very little to do, and
the pennies came in so slowly he was almost in despair.

There was no father to lend a strong hand, and Mrs. Nelson was one of
the "silent poor," who cannot ask for charity, no matter how much they
may need it. The twelve-year-old boy considered himself the man of the
family, and manfully carried as many burdens as his young shoulders
would bear; but this was a very heavy one, so it is no wonder that he
looked sober. Holding his curly head in his hands, as if to keep it from
flying asunder with the various plans working inside, he sat staring at
the dusty bricks in a desperate frame of mind.

Warm days were coming, and every hour was precious, for poor Kitty pined
in the close room, and all he could do was to bring her dandelions and
bits of green grass from the Common when she begged to go in the fields
and pick "pretties" for herself. He loved the little sister dearly,
and, as he remembered her longing, his eyes filled, and he doubled up
both fists with an air of determination, muttering to himself,--

"She _shall_ go! I don't see any other way, and I'll do it!"

The plan which had been uppermost lately was this. His father had been a
sailor, and Jimmy proposed to run away to sea as cabin boy. His wages
were to be paid before he went, so mother and Kitty could be in the
country while he was gone, and in a few months he would come sailing
gayly home to find the child her rosy self again. A very boyish and
impossible plan, but he meant it, and was in just the mood to carry it
out,--for every other attempt to make money had failed.

"I'll do it as sure as my name is Jim Nelson. I'll take a look at the
ships this very night, and go in the first one that will have me," he
said, with a resolute nod of the head, though his heart sank within him
at the thought. "I wonder which kind of captains pay boys best? I guess
I'll try a steamer; they make short trips. I heard the cannon to-day, so
one is in, and I'll try for a place before I go to bed."

Little did desperate Jimmy guess what ship he would really sail in, nor
what a prosperous voyage he was about to make; for help was coming that
very minute, as it generally does, sooner or later, to generous people
who are very much in earnest.

First a shrill whistle was heard, at the sound of which he looked up
quickly; then a rosy-faced girl of about his own age came skipping down
the street, swinging her hat by one string; and, as Jimmy watched her
approach, a smile began to soften the grim look he wore, for Willy
Bryant was his best friend and neighbor, being full of courage, fun, and
kindness. He nodded, and made room for her on the step,--the place she
usually occupied at spare moments when they got lessons and recounted
their scrapes to each other.

But to-night Willy seemed possessed of some unusually good piece of news
which she chose to tell in her own lively fashion, for, instead of
sitting down, she began to dance a sailor's hornpipe, singing gayly,
"I'm little Buttercup, sweet little Buttercup," till her breath gave
out.

"What makes you so jolly, Will?" asked Jimmy, as she dropped down
beside him and fanned herself with the ill-used hat.

"Such fun--you'll never guess--just what we wanted--if your mother only
will! You'll dance, too, when you know," panted the girl, smiling like a
substantial sort of fairy come to bring good luck.

"Fire away, then. It will have to be extra nice to set me off. I don't
feel a bit like jigs now," answered Jimmy, as the gloom obscured his
face again, like a cloud over the sun.

"You know 'Pinafore'?" began Will, and getting a quick nod for an
answer, she poured forth the following tale with great rapidity: "Well,
some folks are going to get it up with children to do it, and they want
any boys and girls that can sing to go and be looked at to-morrow, and
the good ones will be picked out, and dressed up, and taught how to act,
and have the nicest time that ever was. Some of our girls are going, and
so am I, and you sing and must come, too, and have some fun. Won't it be
jolly?"

"I guess it would; but I can't. Mother needs me every minute out of
school," began Jimmy, with a shake of the head, having made up his mind
some time ago that he must learn to do without fun.

"But we shall be paid for it," cried Will, clapping her hands with the
double delight of telling the best part of her story, and seeing Jimmy's
sober face clear suddenly as if the sun had burst forth with great
brilliancy.

"Really? How much? Can I sing well enough?" and he clutched her arm
excitedly, for this unexpected ray of hope dazzled him.

"Some of them will have ten dollars a week, and some more,--the real
nice ones, like Lee, the singing boy, who is a wonder," answered Will,
in the tone of one well informed on such points.

"Ten dollars!" gasped Jimmy, for the immensity of the sum took his
breath away. "Could _I_ get that? How long? Where do we go? Do they
really want us fellows? Are you sure it's all true?"

"It was all in the paper, and Miss Pym, the teacher who boards at our
house, told Ma about it. The folks advertised for school-children, sixty
of 'em, and will really pay; and Ma said I could go and try, and all
the money I get I'm going to put in a bank and have for my own. Don't
you believe me now?"

Miss Pym and the newspapers settled the matter in Jimmy's mind, and made
him more anxious than before about the other point.

"Do you think _I_ would have any chance?" he asked, still holding Will,
who seemed inclined for another dance.

"I know you would. Don't you do splendidly at school? And didn't they
want you for a choir boy, only your mother couldn't spare you?" answered
Will, decidedly; for Jimmy did love music, and had a sweet little pipe
of his own, as she well knew.

"Mother will have to spare me now, if they pay like that. I can work all
day and do without sleep to earn money this way. Oh, Will, I'm so glad
you came, for I was just ready to run away to sea. There didn't seem
anything else to do," whispered Jimmy in a choky sort of tone, as hopes
and fears struggled together in his boyish mind.

"Run as fast as you like, and I'll go too. We'll sail in the 'Pinafore,'
and come home with our pockets full of money.

"'Sing, hey, the merry maiden and the tar!'"

burst out Will, who was so full of spirits she could not keep still
another minute.

Jimmy joined in, and the fresh voices echoed through the street so
pleasantly that Mrs. Peters stopped scolding her six squabbling
children, while Kitty's moaning changed to a feeble little sound of
satisfaction, for "brother's" lullabies were her chief comfort and
delight.

"We shall lose school, you know, for we act in the afternoon, not the
evening. I don't care; but you will, you like to study so well. Miss Pym
didn't like it at first, but Ma said it would help the poor folks, and a
little fun wouldn't hurt the children. I thought of you right away, and
if you don't get as much money as I do, you shall have some of mine, so
Kitty can go away soon."

Will's merry face grew very sweet and kind as she said that, and Jimmy
was glad his mother called him just then, because he did not know how
to thank this friend in need. When he came out with the parcel of vests
he looked like a different boy, for Mrs. Nelson had told him to go and
find out all about it, and had seemed as much dazzled by the prospect as
he did, sewing was such weary work.

Their interview with Miss Pym was a most encouraging one, and it was
soon settled that Jimmy should go with Will to try for a place on the
morrow.

"And I'll get it, too!" he said to himself, as he kissed Kitty's thin
cheek, full of the sweet hope that he might be the means of bringing
back life and color to the little face he loved so well.

He was so excited he could not sleep, and beguiled the long hours by
humming under his breath all the airs he knew belonging to the already
popular opera. Next morning he flew about his work as if for a wager,
and when Will came for him there was not a happier heart in all the city
than the hopeful one that thumped under Jimmy's threadbare best jacket.

Such a crowd of girls and boys as they found at the hall where they
were told to apply for inspection; such a chirping and piping went on
there, it sounded like a big cage full of larks and linnets; and by and
by, when the trial was over, such a smiling troop of children as was
left to be drilled by the energetic gentlemen who had the matter in
hand. Among this happy band stood our Jimmy, chosen for his good voice,
and Will, because of her bright face and lively, self-possessed manners.
They could hardly wait to be dismissed, and it was a race home to see
who should be first to tell the good news. Jimmy tried to be quiet on
Kitty's account, but failed entirely; and it was a pleasant sight to see
the boy run into his mother's arms, crying joyfully,--

"I'm in! I'm in! Ten dollars a week! Hurrah!"

"I can hardly believe it!" And weary Mrs. Nelson dropped her needle to
indulge in a few moments of delightful repose.

"If it goes well they may want us for a month or six weeks," the man
said. "Just think, maybe I'll get fifty or sixty dollars! and Baby will
get well right off," cried Jimmy, in an arithmetical sort of rapture,
as he leaned above Kitty, who tried to clap her little hands without
quite knowing what the joy was all about.


HOW HE SAILED.

After that day Jimmy led a very happy life, for he loved music and
enjoyed the daily drill with his mates, though it was long before he saw
the inside of the theatre. Will knew a good deal about it, for an
actor's family had boarded with her mother, and the little girl had been
behind the scenes. But to Jimmy, who had only seen one fairy play, all
was very strange when at last he went upon the stage; for the glittering
world he expected was gone, and all was dusty, dark, and queer, with
trap-doors underfoot, machinery overhead, and a wilderness of scenery
jumbled together in the drollest way. He was all eyes and ears, and
enjoyed himself immensely as he came and went, sung and acted, with the
troop of lads who made up the sailor chorus. It was a real ship to him,
in spite of painted cannon, shaky masts, and cabin doors that led
nowhere. He longed to run up the rigging; but as that was forbidden,
for fear of danger, he contented himself by obeying orders with nautical
obedience, singing with all his might, and taking great satisfaction in
his blue suit with the magical letters "H. M. S. Pinafore" round his
cap.

Day by day all grew more and more interesting. His mother was never
tired of hearing his adventures, he sung Kitty to sleep with the new
songs, and the neighbors took such a friendly interest in his success
that they called him Lord Nelson, and predicted that he would be as
famous as his great namesake.

When the grand day came at last, and the crew of jolly young tars stood
ready to burst forth with the opening chorus,

"We sail the ocean blue,
  Our saucy ship's a beauty;
We're gallant men and true,
  And bound to do our duty!"

Jimmy hardly knew whether he stood on his head or his heels at first,
for, in spite of many rehearsals, everything seemed changed. Instead of
daylight, gas shone everywhere, the empty seats were full, the
orchestra playing splendidly, and when the curtain rose, a sea of
friendly faces welcomed them, and the pleasant sound of applause made
the hearts under the blue jackets dance gayly.

How those boys did sing! how their eyes shone, and their feet kept time
to the familiar strains! with what a relish they hitched up their
trousers and lurched about, or saluted and cheered as the play demanded.
With what interest they watched the microscopic midshipmite, listened to
Rafe as his sweet voice melodiously told the story of his hapless love,
and smiled on pretty Josephine, who was a regular bluebird without the
scream.

"Ain't this fun?" whispered Jimmy's next neighbor, taking advantage of a
general burst of laughter, as the inimitable little bumboat woman
advertised her wares with captivating drollery.

"Right down jolly!" answered Jimmy, feeling that a series of somersaults
across the stage would be an immense relief to the pent-up emotions of
his boyish soul. For under all the natural excitement of the hour deep
down lay the sweet certainty that he was earning health for Kitty, and
it made his heart sing for joy more blithely than any jovial chorus to
which he lent his happy voice.

But his bliss was not complete till the stately Sir Joseph, K. C. B.,
had come aboard, followed by "his sisters and his cousins and his
aunts;" for among that flock of devoted relatives in white muslin and
gay ribbons was Will. Standing in the front row, her bright face was
good to see, for her black eyes sparkled, every hair on her head curled
its best, her cherry bows streamed in the breeze, and her feet pranced
irresistibly at the lively parts of the music. She longed to dance the
hornpipe which the little Quaker aunt did so capitally, but, being
denied that honor, distinguished herself by the comic vigor with which
she "polished up the handle of the big front door," and did the other
"business" recorded by the gallant "ruler of the Queen's Navee."

She and Jimmy nodded to each other behind the Admiral's august back, and
while Captain Corcoran was singing to the moon, and Buttercup suffering
the pangs of "Wemorse," the young people had a gay time behind the
scenes. Jimmy and Will sat upon a green baize bank to compare notes,
while the relatives flew about like butterflies, and the sailors talked
base-ball, jack-knives, and other congenial topics, when not envying Sir
Joseph his cocked hat, and the Captain his epaulettes.

It was a very successful launch, and the merry little crew set sail with
a fair wind and every prospect of a prosperous voyage. When the first
performance was over, our two children left their fine feathers behind
them, like Cinderella when the magic hour struck, and went gayly home,
feeling much elated, for they knew they should go back to fresh
triumphs, and were earning money by their voices like Jenny Lind and
Mario. How they pitied other boys and girls who could not go in at that
mysterious little door; how important they felt as parts of the
spectacle about which every one was talking, and what millionnaires they
considered themselves as they discussed their earnings and planned what
to do with the prospective fortunes.

That was the beginning of many busy, happy weeks for both the
children,--weeks which they long remembered with great pleasure, as did
older and wiser people; for that merry, innocent little opera proved
that theatres can be made the scenes of harmless amusement, and opened
to a certain class of young people a new and profitable field for their
talents. So popular did this small company become that the piece went on
through the summer vacation, and was played in the morning as well as
afternoon to satisfy the crowds who wished to see and hear it.

Never had the dear old Boston Museum, which so many of us have loved and
haunted for years, seen such a pretty sight as one of those morning
performances. It was the perfection of harmless merry-making, and the
audience was as pleasant a spectacle as that upon the stage. Fathers and
mothers stole an hour from their busy lives to come and be children with
their children, irresistibly attracted and charmed by the innocent fun,
the gay music that bewitched the ear one could hardly tell why, and the
artless acting of those who are always playing parts, whether the
nursery or the theatre is their stage.

The windows stood open, and sunshine and fresh air came in to join the
revel. Babies crowed and prattled, mammas chatted together, old people
found they had not forgotten how to laugh, and boys and girls rejoiced
over the discovery of a new delight for holidays. It was good to be
there, and in spite of all the discussion in papers and parlors, no harm
came to the young mariners, but much careful training of various sorts,
and well-earned wages that went into pockets which sorely needed a
silver lining.


HOW THE VOYAGE ENDED.

So the good ship "Pinafore" sailed and sailed for many prosperous weeks,
and when at last she came into port and dropped anchor for the season
she was received with a salute of general approbation for the successful
engagement out of which she came with her flags flying and not one of
her gallant crew killed or wounded. Well pleased with their share of the
glory, officers and men went ashore to spend their prize money with
true sailor generosity, all eager to ship again for another cruise in
the autumn.

But long before that time Able Seaman James Nelson had sent his family
into the country, mother begging Will to take good care of her dear boy
till he could join them, and Kitty throwing kisses as she smiled
good-by, with cheeks already the rosier for the comforts "brother" had
earned for her. Jimmy would not desert his ship while she floated, but
managed to spend his Sundays out of town, often taking Will with him as
first mate; and, thanks to her lively tongue, friends were soon made for
the new-comers. Mrs. Nelson found plenty of sewing, Kitty grew strong
and well in the fine air, and the farmer with whom they lived, seeing
what a handy lad the boy was, offered him work and wages for the autumn,
so all could be independent and together. With this comfortable prospect
before him, Jimmy sang away like a contented blackbird, never tiring of
his duty, for he was a general favorite, and Kitty literally strewed his
way with flowers gathered by her own grateful little hands.

When the last day came, he was in such spirits that he was found doing
double-shuffles in corners, hugging the midshipmite, who was a little
girl of about Kitty's age, and treating his messmates to peanuts with a
lavish hand. Will had her hornpipe, also, when the curtain was down,
kissed every one of the other "sisters, cousins, and aunts," and joined
lustily in the rousing farewell cheers given by the crew.

A few hours later, a cheerful-looking boy might have been seen trudging
toward one of the railway-stations. A new hat, brave in blue streamers,
was on his head; a red balloon struggled to escape from one hand; a
shabby carpet-bag, stuffed full, was in the other; and a pair of shiny
shoes creaked briskly, as if the feet inside were going on a very
pleasant errand.

About this young traveller, who walked with a sailor-like roll and
lurch, revolved a little girl chattering like a magpie, and occasionally
breaking into song, as if she couldn't help it.

"Be sure you come next Saturday; it won't be half such fun if you don't
go halves," said the boy, beaming at her as he hauled down the
impatient balloon, which seemed inclined to break from its moorings

"'Yes, I know
That is so!'"

hummed the girl with a skip to starboard, that she might bear a hand
with the bag. "Keep some cherries for me, and don't forget to give Kit
the doll I dressed for her."

"I shouldn't have been going myself if it hadn't been for you, Will. I
never shall forget that," said Jimmy, whom intense satisfaction rendered
rather more sedate than his friend.

"Running away to sea is great fun,

'With a tar that ploughs the water!'"

sung Will in spite of herself.

"'And a gallant captain's daughter,'"

echoed Jimmy, smiling across the carpet-bag. Then both joined in an
irrepressible chorus of "Dash it! Dash it!" as a big man nearly upset
them and a dog barked madly at the balloon.

Being safely landed in the train, Jimmy hung out of the window till the
last minute, discussing his new prospects with Will, who stood on tiptoe
outside, bubbling over with fun.

"I'll teach you to make butter and cheese, and you shall be my
dairy-woman, for I mean to be a farmer," he said, just as the bell rang.

"All right, I'd like that ever so much." And then the irrepressible
madcap burst out, to the great amusement of the passengers,--

"'For you might have been a Roosian,
A Frenchman, Turk or Proosian,
        Or an Ital-i-an.'"

And Jimmy could not resist shouting back, as the train began to move,--

"'But in spite of all temptations
To belong to other nations,
    I'm an Amer-i-can.'"

Then he subsided, to think over the happy holiday before him and the
rich cargo of comfort, independence, and pleasure he had brought home
from his successful cruise in the "Pinafore."




II.

TWO LITTLE TRAVELLERS.


The first of these true histories is about Annie Percival,--a very dear
and lovely child, whose journey interested many other children, and is
still remembered with gratitude by those whom she visited on a far-off
island.

Annie was six when she sailed away to Fayal with her mother, grandmamma,
and "little Aunt Ruth," as she called the young aunty who was still a
school-girl. Very cunning was Annie's outfit, and her little trunk was a
pretty as well as a curious sight, for everything was so small and
complete it looked as if a doll was setting off for Europe. Such a wee
dressing-case, with bits of combs and brushes for the curly head; such a
cosey scarlet wrapper for the small woman to wear in her berth, with
slippers to match when she trotted from state-room to state-room; such
piles of tiny garments laid nicely in, and the owner's initials on the
outside of the trunk; not to mention the key on a ribbon in her pocket,
as grown up as you please.

I think the sight of that earnest, sunshiny face must have been very
pleasant to all on board, no matter how seasick they might be, and the
sound of the cheery little voice, as sweet as the chirp of a bird,
especially when she sung the funny song about the "Owl and the pussy-cat
in the pea-green boat," for she had charming ways, and was always making
quaint, wise, or loving remarks.

Well, "they sailed and they sailed," and came at last to Fayal, where
everything was so new and strange that Annie's big brown eyes could
hardly spare time to sleep, so busy were they looking about. The donkeys
amused her very much, so did the queer language and ways of the
Portuguese people round her, especially the very droll names given to
the hens of a young friend. The biddies seemed to speak the same dialect
as at home, but evidently they understood Spanish also, and knew their
own names, so it was fun to go and call Rio, Pico, Cappy, Clarissa,
Whorfie, and poor Simonena, whose breast-bone grew out so that she
could not eat and had to be killed.

But the thing which made the deepest impression on Annie was a visit to
a charity-school at the old convent of San Antonio. It was kept by some
kind ladies, and twenty-five girls were taught and cared for in the big,
bare place, that looked rather gloomy and forlorn to people from happy
Boston, where charitable institutions are on a noble scale, as everybody
knows.

Annie watched all that went on with intelligent interest, and when they
were shown into the play-room she was much amazed and afflicted to find
that the children had nothing to play with but a heap of rags, out of
which they made queer dolls, with ravelled twine for hair, faces rudely
drawn on the cloth, and funny boots on the shapeless legs. No other toys
appeared, but the girls sat on the floor of the great stone room,--for
there was no furniture,--playing contentedly with their poor dolls, and
smiling and nodding at "the little Americana," who gravely regarded this
sad spectacle, wondering how they could get on without china and waxen
babies, tea-sets, and pretty chairs and tables to keep house with.

The girls thought that she envied them their dolls, and presently one
came shyly up to offer two of their best, leaving the teacher to explain
in English their wish to be polite to their distinguished guest. Like
the little gentlewoman she was, Annie graciously accepted the ugly bits
of rag with answering nods and smiles, and carried them away with her as
carefully as if they were of great beauty and value.

But when she was at home she expressed much concern and distress at the
destitute condition of the children. Nothing but rags to play with
seemed a peculiarly touching state of poverty to her childish mind, and
being a generous creature she yearned to give of her abundance to "all
the poor orphans who didn't have any nice dollies." She had several pets
of her own, but not enough to go round even if she sacrificed them, so
kind grandmamma, who had been doing things of this sort all her life,
relieved the child's perplexity by promising to send twenty-five fine
dolls to Fayal as soon as the party returned to Boston, where these
necessaries of child-life are cheap and plenty.

Thus comforted, Annie felt that she could enjoy her dear Horta and Chica
Pico Fatiera, particular darlings rechristened since her arrival. A
bundle of gay bits of silk, cloth, and flannel, and a present of money
for books, were sent out to the convent by the ladies. A treat of little
cheeses for the girls to eat with their dry bread was added, much to
Annie's satisfaction, and helped to keep alive her interest in the
school of San Antonio.

After many pleasant adventures during the six months spent in the city,
our party came sailing home again all the better for the trip, and Annie
so full of tales to tell that it was a never-failing source of amusement
to hear her hold forth to her younger brother in her pretty way,
"splaining and 'scribing all about it."

Grandmamma's promise was faithfully kept, and Annie brooded blissfully
over the twenty-five dolls till they were dressed, packed, and sent away
to Fayal. A letter of thanks soon came back from the teacher, telling
how surprised and delighted the girls were, and how they talked of
Annie as if she were a sort of fairy princess who in return for two poor
rag-babies sent a miraculous shower of splendid china ladies with gay
gowns and smiling faces.

This childish charity was made memorable to all who knew of it by the
fact that three months after she came home from that happy voyage Annie
took the one from which there is no return. For this journey there was
needed no preparation but a little white gown, a coverlet of flowers,
and the casket where the treasure of many hearts was tenderly laid away.
All alone, but not afraid, little Annie crossed the unknown sea that
rolls between our world and the Islands of the Blest, to be welcomed
there, I am sure, by spirits as innocent as her own, leaving behind her
a very precious memory of her budding virtues and the relics of a short,
sweet life.

Every one mourned for her, and all her small treasures were so carefully
kept that they still exist. Poor Horta, in the pincushion arm-chair,
seems waiting patiently for the little mamma to come again; the two
rag-dolls lie side by side in grandma's scrap-book, since there is now
no happy voice to wake them into life; and far away in the convent of
San Antonio the orphans carefully keep their pretty gifts in memory of
the sweet giver. To them she is a saint now, not a fairy princess; for
when they heard of her death they asked if they might pray for the soul
of the dear little Americana, and the teacher said, "Pray rather for the
poor mother who has lost so much." So the grateful orphans prayed and
the mother was comforted, for now another little daughter lies in her
arms and kisses away the lonely pain at her heart.

       *       *       *       *       *

The second small traveller I want to tell about lived in the same city
as the first, and her name was Maggie Woods. Her father was an
Englishman who came to America to try his fortune, but did not find it;
for, when Maggie was three months old, the great Chicago fire destroyed
their home; soon after, the mother died; then the father was drowned,
and Maggie was left all alone in a strange country.

She had a good aunt in England, however, who took great pains to
discover the child after the death of the parents, and sent for her to
come home and be cared for. It was no easy matter to get a five-years'
child across the Atlantic, for the aunt could not come to fetch her, and
no one whom she knew was going over. But Maggie had found friends in
Chicago; the American consul at Manchester was interested in the case,
and every one was glad to help the forlorn baby, who was too young to
understand the pathos of her story.

After letters had gone to and fro, it was decided to send the child to
England in charge of the captain of a steamer, trusting to the kindness
of all fellow-travellers to help her on her way.

The friends in Chicago bestirred themselves to get her ready, and then
it was that Annie's mother found that she could do something which would
have delighted her darling, had she been here to know of it. Laid
tenderly away were many small garments belonging to the other little
pilgrim, whose journeying was so soon ended; and from among all these
precious things Mrs. Percival carefully chose a comfortable outfit for
that cold March voyage.

The little gray gown went, and the red hood, the warm socks, and the
cosey wraps no longer needed by the quiet sleeper under the snow.
Perhaps something of her loving nature lingered about the clothes, and
helped to keep the orphan warm and safe, for Annie's great delight was
to pet and help all who needed comfort and protection.

When all was ready, Maggie's small effects were packed in a light
basket, so that she could carry it herself if need be. A card briefly
telling the story was fastened on the corner, and a similar paper
recommending her to the protection of all kind people, was sewed to the
bosom of her frock. Then, not in the least realizing what lay before
her, the child was consigned to the conductor of the train to be
forwarded to persons in New York who would see her safely on board the
steamer.

I should dearly like to have seen the little maid and the big basket as
they set out on that long trip as tranquilly as if for a day's visit;
and it is a comfort to know that before the train started, the persons
who took her there had interested a motherly lady in the young
traveller, who promised to watch over her while their ways were the
same.

All went well, and Maggie was safely delivered to the New York friends,
who forwarded her to the steamer, well supplied with toys and comforts
for the voyage, and placed in charge of captain and stewardess. She
sailed on the 3d of March, and on the 12th landed at Liverpool, after a
pleasant trip, during which she was the pet of all on board.

The aunt welcomed her joyfully, and the same day the child reached her
new home, the Commercial Inn, Compstall, after a journey of over four
thousand miles. The consul and owners of the steamer wanted to see the
adventurous young lady who had come so far alone, and neighbors and
strangers made quite a lion of her, for all kindly hearts were
interested, and the protective charity which had guided and guarded her
in two hemispheres and across the wide sea, made all men fathers, all
women mothers, to the little one till she was safe.

Her picture lies before me as I write,--a pretty child standing in a
chair, with a basket of toys on the table before her; curly hair pushed
back from the face, pensive eyes, and a pair of stout little feet
crossed one over the other as if glad to rest. I wish I could put the
photograph into the story, because the small heroine is an interesting
one, and still lives with the good aunt, who is very fond and proud of
her, and writes pleasant accounts of her progress to the friends in
America.

So ends the journey of my second small traveller, and when I think of
her safe and happy in a good home, I always fancy that (if such things
may be) in the land which is lovelier than even beautiful old England,
Maggie's mother watches over little Annie.




III.

A JOLLY FOURTH.


Door-step parties were the fashion that year, and it was while a dozen
young folks sat chatting on Annie Hadwin's steps in the twilight that
they laid the plan which turned out such a grand success in the end.

"For my part, I am glad we are to be put on a short allowance of
gunpowder, and that crackers are forbidden, they are such a nuisance,
burning holes in clothes, frightening horses, and setting houses afire,"
said sober Fred from the gate, where he and several other fellows were
roosting socially together.

"It won't seem a bit like a regular Fourth without the salutes three
times during the day. They are afraid the old cannon will kick, and blow
off some other fellow's arm, as it did last year," added Elly Dickens,
the beau of the party, as he pulled down his neat wristbands, hoping
Maud admired the new cuff-buttons in them.

"What shall we do in the evening, since the ball is given up? Just
because the old folks are too tired to enjoy dancing, we can't have any,
and I think it is too bad," said pretty Belle, impatiently, for she
danced like a fairy and was never tired.

"The authorities didn't dare to stop our races in the morning. There
would have been an insurrection if they had," called out long Herbert
from the grass, where he lay at the feet of black-eyed Julia.

"We _must_ do something to finish off with. Come, somebody suggest a
new, nice, safe, and jolly plan for the evening," cried Grace, who liked
fun, and had just slipped a little toad into Jack Spratt's pocket as a
pleasant surprise when he felt for his handkerchief.

"Let us offer a prize for the brightest idea. Five minutes for
meditation, then all suggest a plan, and the best one shall be adopted,"
proposed Annie, glad to give a lively turn to her party.

All agreed, and sudden silence followed the chatter, broken now and
then by an exclamation of "I've got it! No, I haven't," which produced a
laugh at the impetuous party.

"Time's up," announced Fred, looking at "the turnip," as his big
old-fashioned watch was called. Every one had a proposal more or less
original, and much discussion followed; but it was finally decided that
Herbert's idea of floating about in boats to enjoy the fireworks on the
hill would be romantic, reposeful, and on the whole satisfactory.

"Each boat might have a colored lantern; that would look pretty, and
then there would be no danger of running into our neighbors in the
dark," said Annie, who was a little timid on the water in a wherry.

"Why not have lots, and make a regular 'feast of lanterns,' as they do
in China? I was reading about it the other day, and can show you how to
do it. Won't it be gay?" And Fred the bookworm nearly tumbled off his
perch, as an excited gesture emptied his pockets of the library books
which served as ballast.

"Yes! yes!" cried the other lads, with various demonstrations of
delight as the new fancy grew upon their lively minds.

"Fred and Annie must have the prize, for their idea is the most
brilliant one. Nan can give the flag to the winner of the race, and
'Deacon' can lead the boats, for _I_ think it would be fine to have a
procession on the river. Fireworks are an old story, so let us surprise
the town by something regularly splendid," proposed Elly, fired in his
turn with a bright idea.

"We will! we will!" cried the rest, and at once plunged into the affair
with all the ardor of their years.

"Let us dress up," said Julia, who liked theatricals.

"In different characters," added Maud, thinking how well her long yellow
hair would look as a mermaid.

"And all sing as we go under the bridges," put in Annie, who adored
music.

"What a pity the boats can't dance, it would be so lovely to see them
waltzing round like fireflies!" said Belle, still longing for the ball.

"A lot of fellows are coming up to spend the day with us, and we ought
to have some sort of a picnic; city folks think so much of such things,"
said Herbert the hospitable, for his house and barn were the favorite
resorts of all his mates, and three gentle little sisters always came
into his plans if possible.

"I've got two girl cousins coming, and they would like it, I guess. I
should any way, for Jack will go tagging after Grace and leave me to
take care of them. Let's have a picnic, by all means," said lazy Fred,
who thought all girls but one great plagues.

"I shouldn't wonder if all our people liked that plan, and we might have
a town picnic as we did once before. Let every one ask his or her
mother, and see if we can't do it," suggested Annie, eager for a whole
day of merry-making.

The door-step party was late in breaking up that night; and if half the
plans proposed had been carried out, that town would have been
considered a large lunatic asylum. Wiser heads remodelled the wild
plans, however, and more skilful hands lent their aid, so that only the
possible was attempted, though the older folks had bright ideas as well
as the boys and girls, and gave the finishing touches to the affair.

The Fourth was a fine day, with a fresh air, cloudless sky, and no dust.
The town was early astir, though neither sunrise cannon nor the Antiques
and Horribles disturbed the dawn with their clamor. The bells rang
merrily, and at eight all flocked to the Town Hall to hear the
Declaration of Independence read by the good and great man of the town,
whose own wise and noble words go echoing round the world, teaching the
same lesson of justice, truth, and courage as that immortal protest. An
Ode by the master of the revels was sung, then every one shouted America
with hearty good-will, and before the echoes had fairly died away, the
crowd streamed forth to the river-side; for these energetic people were
bound to make a day of it.

At nine the races began, and both green banks of the stream were lined
with gay groups eagerly watching "our boys" as they swept by in
wherries, paddled in canoes, or splashed and tumbled in and out of their
tubs amid shouts of laughter from the spectators. The older fellows did
the scientific, and their prizes were duly awarded by the judges. But
our young party had their share of fun, and Fred and Herbert, who were
chums in everything, won the race for the little flag yearly given to
the lads for any success on the river. Then the weary heroes loaded the
big dory with a cargo of girls, and with the banner blowing gayly in the
wind, rowed away to the wide meadow, where seven oaks cast shade enough
to shelter a large picnic. And a large one they had, for the mammas took
kindly to the children's suggestion, agreeing to club together in a
social lunch, each contributing her stores, her family, and her guests,
all being happy together in the free and easy way so pleasant and
possible in summer weather.

A merry company they were, and it was a comfortable sight to see the
tired fathers lying in the shade, while the housewives forgot their
cares for a day, the young folks made table-setting and dishwashing a
joke by doing it together, and the children frolicked to their hearts'
content. Even the babies were trundled to the party by proud mammas and
took naps in their carriages, or held receptions for admiring friends
and neighbors with infantile dignity.

A social, sensible time, and when sunset came all turned homeward to
make ready for the evening festivities. It was vaguely rumored that the
pretty rustic bridge was to be illuminated, for the older people had
taken up the idea and had _their_ surprises ready as well as the young
folks. A band was stationed by the river-side, a pretty villa on the
hill blazed out with lines of light, and elms and apple-trees bore red
and golden lanterns, like glorified fruit. The clerk of the weather was
evidently interested in this novel entertainment, for the evening was
windless, dark, and cool, so the arch of light that spanned the shadowy
river shone splendidly. Fireworks soared up from the hill-top beyond,
fireflies lent their dancing sparks to illuminate the meadows, and the
three bridges were laden with the crowds, who greeted each new surprise
with cries of admiration.

Higher up the stream, where two branches met about a rocky island, elves
seemed gathering for a summer revel.

From all the landings that lined either shore brilliant boats glided to
the rendezvous; some hung with luminous globes of blue and silver, some
with lanterns fiery-red, flower-shaped, golden, green, or variegated, as
if a rainbow were festooned about the viewless masts. Up and down they
flashed, stealing out from dusky nooks and floating in their own
radiance, as they went to join the procession that wound about the
island like a splendid sea-serpent uncoiling itself from sleep and
darkness.

"Isn't it beautiful?" cried even the soberest of the townsfolk, as all
turned their backs on the shining bridge and bursting rockets to admire
the new spectacle, which was finer than its most enthusiastic advocate
expected. All felt proud of their success as they looked, and even the
children forgot to shout while watching the pretty pageant that
presently came floating by, with music, light, and half-seen figures so
charming, grotesque, or romantic that the illusion was complete.

First, a boat so covered with green boughs and twinkling yellow sparks
that it looked like a floating island by starlight or a cage of
singing-birds, for music came from within and fresh voices, led by
Annie, sang sweetly as it sailed along. Then a gondola of lovely
Venetian ladies, rowed by the handsome artist, who was the pride of the
town. Next a canoe holding three dusky Indians, complete in war-paint,
wampum, and tomahawks, paddled before the brilliant barge in which
Cleopatra sat among red cushions, fanned by two pretty maids. Julia's
black eyes sparkled as she glanced about her, feeling very queen-like
with a golden crown on her head, all the jewelry she could muster on her
neck and arms, and grandmother's yellow brocade shining in the light.
Belle and Grace waved their peacock fans like two comely little Egyptian
damsels, and the many-colored lanterns made a pretty picture of the
whole.

A boatful of jolly little tars followed, with Tom Brown, Jr., as
skipper. Then a party of fairies in white, with silver wings and wands,
and lanterns like moon and stars.

Lou Pope, as Lady of the Lake, rowed her own boat, with Jack for a droll
little Harper, twanging his zitter for want of a better instrument.

A black craft hung with lurid red lanterns and manned by a crew of
ferocious pirates in scarlet shirts, dark beards, and an imposing
display of pistols and cutlasses in their belts, not to mention the
well-known skull and cross-bones on the flag flying at the masthead,
produced a tremendous effect as the crew clashed their arms and roared
the blood-thirstiest song they could find. All the boys cheered that,
and all the horses pranced as the pirates fired off their pistols,
causing timid ladies to shriek, and prudent drivers to retire from the
bridges with their carriage-loads of company.

A Chinese junk (or what was intended to look like one, but really
resembled a mud-scow), with a party of Mandarins, rich in fans,
umbrellas, and pigtails, taking tea on board in a blaze of fantastic
lanterns, delighted the children.

Then a long low boat came sliding by softly, lighted with pale blue
lamps, and on a white couch lay "Elaine," the letter in her hand, the
golden hair streaming to her knees, and at her feet the dwarf
sorrowfully rowing her down to Camelot. Every one recognized that, for
the master of the revels got it up as no one else could; and Maud
laughed to herself as the floating tableau went under the bridge, and
she heard people rushing to the other side, waiting eagerly to see the
"lily maid" appear and glide away, followed by applause, as one of the
prettiest sights seen that night.

There were eighty boats in all, and as the glittering train wound along
the curves of the river smooth and dark as a mirror, the effect was
truly beautiful, especially when they all congregated below the
illuminated bridge, making an island of many-colored light. An enchanted
island it seemed to lookers-on, for music and laughter came from it, and
a strange mixture of picturesque faces and figures flitted to and fro.

Elaine sat up and ate bonbons with the faithful dwarf; Ellen Douglas
ducked the Harper; the Chinamen invited Cleopatra to tea; the mermaids
pelted the pirates with water-lilies; the gallant gondolier talked art
with the Venetian ladies; and the jolly little tars danced hornpipes,
regardless of danger; while the three Indians, Fred, Herbert, and Elly,
whooped and tomahawked right and left as if on the war-path.

A regular Midsummer Night's Dream frolic, which every one enjoyed
heartily, while the band played patriotic airs, the pretty villa shone
like a fairy palace, and the sky was full of dazzling meteors, falling
stars, and long-tailed comets, as the rockets whizzed and blazed from
the hill-tops.

Just as the fun was at its height the hurried clang of a bell startled
the merry-makers, and a cry of "Fire!" came from the town, causing a
general stampede. "Post-office all afire! Men wanted!" shouted a
breathless boy, racing through the crowd toward the river. Then great
was the scampering, for shops stood thickly all about the post-office,
and distracted merchants hastily collected their goods, while the
firemen smashed windows, ran up and down ladders, broke in doors, and
poured streams of water with generous impartiality over everybody and
everything in the neighborhood, and the boys flew about, as if this
unexpected display of fireworks suited them exactly.

Such noble exertions could not fail of success, and the fire was happily
extinguished before the river was pumped dry. Then every one went home,
and, feeling the need of refreshment after their labors, had supper all
over again, to the great delight of the young folks, who considered this
a most appropriate finish to an exciting day.

But the merriest party of all was the one gathered on Fred's piazza to
eat cake and talk over the fun. Such a droll group as they were. The
Indians were sadly dilapidated as to feathers and paint, beside being
muddy to the knees, having landed in hot haste. Poor Cleopatra had been
drenched by the hose, but though very damp still sparkled with
unextinguishable gayety. Elaine had tied herself up in a big shawl,
having lost her hat overboard. Jack and Grace wore one waterproof, and
Annie was hoarse with leading her choir of birds on the floating island.
Also several of the pirates wore their beards twisted round behind for
the sake of convenience in eating.

All were wet, warm, and weary, but all rejoiced over the success of the
day's delights, and it was unanimously agreed that this had been the
jolliest Fourth they had ever known.




IV.

SEVEN BLACK CATS.


They all came uninvited, they all led eventful lives, and all died
tragical deaths; so out of the long list of cats whom I have loved and
lost, these seven are the most interesting and memorable.

I have no prejudice against color, but it so happened that our pussies
were usually gray or maltese. One white one, who _would_ live in the
coal-bin, was a failure, and we never repeated the experiment. Black
cats had not been offered us, so we had no experience of them till
number one came to us in this wise.

Sitting at my window, I saw a very handsome puss come walking down the
street in the most composed and dignified manner. I watched him with
interest, wondering where he was going.

Pausing now and then, he examined the houses as he passed, as if looking
for a particular number, till, coming to our gate, he pushed it open,
and walked in. Straight up to the door he came, and finding it shut sat
down to wait till some one opened it for him.

Much amused, I went at once, and he came directly in, after a long stare
at me, and a few wavings of his plumy tail. It was evidently the right
place, and, following me into the parlor, he perched himself on the rug,
blinked at the fire, looked round the room, washed his face, and then,
lying down in a comfortable sprawl, he burst into a cheerful purr, as if
to say,--

"It's all right; the place suits me, and I'm going to stay."

His coolness amused me very much, and his beauty made me glad to keep
him. He was not a common cat, but, as we afterward discovered, a Russian
puss. His fur was very long, black, and glossy as satin; his tail like a
graceful plume, and his eyes as round and yellow as two little moons.
His paws were very dainty, and white socks and gloves, with a neat
collar and shirt-bosom, gave him the appearance of an elegant young
beau, in full evening dress. His face was white, with black hair parted
in the middle; and whiskers, fiercely curled up at the end, gave him a
martial look.

Every one admired him, and a vainer puss never caught a mouse. If he saw
us looking at him, he instantly took an attitude; gazed pensively at the
fire, as if unconscious of our praises; crouched like a tiger about to
spring, and glared, and beat the floor with his tail; or lay luxuriously
outstretched, rolling up his yellow eyes with a sentimental expression
that was very funny.

We named him the Czar, and no tyrannical emperor of Russia ever carried
greater desolation and terror to the souls of his serfs, than this royal
cat did to the hearts and homes of the rats and mice over whom he ruled.

The dear little mice who used to come out to play so confidingly in my
room, live in my best bonnet-box, and bring up their interesting young
families in the storeroom, now fell an easy prey to the Czar, who made
nothing of catching half a dozen a day.

Brazen-faced old rats, gray in sin, who used to walk boldly in and out
of the front door, ravage our closets, and racket about the walls by
night, now paused in their revels, and felt that their day was over.
Czar did not know what fear was, and flew at the biggest, fiercest rat
that dared to show his long tail on the premises. He fought many a
gallant fight, and slew his thousands, always bringing his dead foe to
display him to us, and receive our thanks.

It was sometimes rather startling to find a large rat reposing in the
middle of your parlor; not always agreeable to have an excited cat
bounce into your lap, lugging a half-dead rat in his mouth; or to have
visitors received by the Czar, tossing a mouse on the door-steps, like a
playful child with its cup and ball.

He was not fond of petting, but allowed one or two honored beings to
cuddle him. My work-basket was his favorite bed, for a certain fat
cushion suited him for a pillow, and, having coolly pulled out all the
pins, the rascal would lay his handsome head on the red mound, and wink
at me with an irresistibly saucy expression that made it impossible to
scold.

All summer we enjoyed his pranks and admired his manly virtues; but in
the winter we lost him, for, alas! he found his victor in the end, and
fell a victim to his own rash daring.

One morning after a heavy snow-fall, Czar went out to take a turn up and
down the path. As he sat with his back to the gate, meditatively
watching some doves on the shed-roof, a big bull-dog entered the yard,
and basely attacked him in the rear. Taken by surprise, the dear fellow
did his best, and hit out bravely, till he was dragged into the deep
snow where he could not fight, and there so cruelly maltreated that he
would have been murdered outright, if I had not gone to the rescue.

Catching up a broom, I belabored the dog so energetically that he was
forced to turn from the poor Czar to me. What would have become of me I
don't know, for the dog was in a rage, and evidently meditating a grab
at my ankles, when his master appeared and ordered him off.

Never was a boy better scolded than that one, for I poured forth vials
of wrath upon his head as I took up my bleeding pet, and pointed to his
wounds as indignantly as Antony did to Cæsar's.

The boy fled affrighted, and I bore my poor Czar in to die. All day he
lay on his cushion, patient and quiet, with his torn neck tied up in a
soft bandage, a saucer of cream close by, and an afflicted mistress to
tend and stroke him with tender lamentations.

We had company in the evening, and my interesting patient was put into
another room. Once, in the midst of conversation, I thought I heard a
plaintive mew, but could not go to see, and soon forgot all about it;
but when the guests left, my heart was rent by finding Czar stretched
out before the door quite dead.

Feeling death approach, he had crept to say good-by, and with a farewell
mew had died before the closed door, a brave and faithful cat to the
end.

He was buried with great pomp, and before his grave was green, little
Blot came to take his place, though she never filled it. Blot's career
was a sad and brief one. Misfortune marked her for its own, and life was
one too many for her.

I saw some boys pelting a wretched object with mud. I delivered a
lecture on cruelty to animals, confiscated the victim, and, wrapping
her in a newspaper, bore the muddy little beast away in triumph. Being
washed and dried, she turned out a thin black kit, with dirty blue bows
tied in her ears. As I don't approve of ear-rings, I took hers out, and
tried to fatten her up, for she was a forlorn creature at first.

But Blot would not grow plump. Her early wrongs preyed upon her, and she
remained a thin, timid, melancholy little cat all her days. I could not
win her confidence. She had lost her faith in mankind, and I don't blame
her. She always hid in corners, quaked when I touched her, took her food
by stealth, and sat in a forlorn bunch in cold nooks, down cellar or
behind the gate, mewing despondently to herself, as if her woes must
find a vent. She would _not_ be easy and comfortable. No cushion could
allure, no soft beguilements win her to purr, no dainty fare fill out
her rusty coat, no warmth or kindness banish the scared look from her
sad green eyes, no ball or spool lure her to play, or cause her to wag
her mortified thin tail with joy.

Poor, dear little Blot! She was a pathetic spectacle, and her end was
quite in keeping with the rest of her hard fate. Trying one day to make
her come and be cuddled, she retreated to the hearth, and when I pursued
her, meaning to catch and pet her, she took a distracted skip right into
a bed of hot coals. One wild howl, and another still more distracted
skip brought her out again, to writhe in agony with four burnt paws and
a singed skin.

"We must put the little sufferer out of her pain," said a strong-minded
friend; and quenched little Blot's life and suffering together in a pail
of water.

I laid her out sweetly in a nice box, with a doll's blanket folded round
her, and, bidding the poor dear a long farewell, confided her to old
MacCarty for burial. He was my sexton, and I could trust him to inter my
darlings decently, and not toss them disrespectfully into a dirt-cart or
over a bridge.

My dear Mother Bunch was an entire contrast to Blot. Such a fat, cosey
old mamma you never saw, and her first appearance was so funny, I never
think of her without laughing.

In our back kitchen was an old sideboard, with two little doors in the
lower part. Some bits of carpet were kept there, but we never expected
to let that small mansion till, opening the door one day, I found Mrs.
Bunch and her young family comfortably settled.

I had never seen this mild black cat before, and I fancy no one had ever
seen her three roly-poly, jet-black kits. Such a confiding puss I never
met, for when I started back, surprised, Mrs. Bunch merely looked at me
with an insinuating purr, and began to pick at my carpet, as if to
say,--

"The house suited me; I'll take it, and pay rent by allowing you to
admire and pet my lovely babies."

I never thought of turning her out, and there she remained for some
months, with her children growing up around her, all as fat and funny,
black and amiable, as herself.

Three jollier kits were never born, and a more devoted mother never
lived. I put her name on the door of her house, and they lived on most
comfortably together, even after they grew too big for their
accommodations, and tails and legs hung out after the family had
retired.

I really did hope they would escape the doom that seemed to pursue my
cats, but they did not, for all came to grief in different ways. Cuddle
Bunch had a fit, and fell out of the window, killing herself instantly.
Othello, her brother, was shot by a bad boy, who fired pistols at all
the cats in the neighborhood, as good practice for future gunning
expeditions.

Little Purr was caught in a trap, set for a woodchuck, and so hurt she
had to be gently chloroformed out of life. Mother Bunch still remained,
and often used to go and sit sadly under the tree where her infants were
buried,--an afflicted, yet resigned parent.

Her health declined, but we never had the heart to send her away, and it
wouldn't have done any good if we had tried. We did it once, and it was
a dead failure. At one time the four cats were so wearing that my
honored father, who did not appreciate the dears, resolved to clear the
house of the whole family; so he packed them in a basket, and carried
them "over the hills and far away," like the "Babes in the Wood." Coming
to a lonely spot, he let them out, and returned home, much relieved in
mind. Judge of his amazement when the first thing he saw was Mrs. Bunch
and her children, sitting on the steps resting after their run home.

We all laughed at the old gentleman so that he left them in peace, and
even when the mamma alone remained, feeble and useless, her bereavement
made her sacred.

When we shut up the house, and went to the city for the winter, we gave
Mother Bunch to the care of a kind neighbor, who promised to guard her
faithfully. Returning in the spring, one of my first questions was,--

"How is old Pussy?"

Great was my anguish when my neighbor told me that she was no more. It
seems the dear thing pined for her old home, and kept returning to it in
spite of age or bad weather.

Several times she was taken back when she ran away, but at last they
were tired of fussing over her, and let her go. A storm came on, and
when they went to see what had become of her, they found her frozen, in
the old sideboard, where I first discovered her with her kits about
her.

As a delicate attention to me, Mrs. Bunch's skin was preserved, and
presented when the tale was told. I kept it some time, but the next
Christmas I made it into muffs for several dolls, who were sent me to
dress; and very nice little muffs the pretty black fur made, lined with
cherry silk, and finished off with tiny tassels.

I loved the dear old puss, but I knew the moths would get her skin if I
kept it, and preferred to rejoice the hearts of several small friends
with dolls in full winter costume. I am sure Mrs. Bunch would have
agreed with me, and not felt that I treated her remains with disrespect.

The last of my cats was the blackest of all, and such a wild thing we
called him the Imp. He tumbled into the garret one day through a broken
scuttle, and took possession of the house from that time forth, acting
as if bewitched.

He got into the furnace pipes, but could not get out, and kept me up one
whole night, giving him air and light, food and comfort, through a
little hole in the floor, while waiting for a carpenter to come and saw
him out.

He got a sad pinch in his tail, which made it crooked forever after. He
fell into the soft-soap barrel, and was fished out a deplorable
spectacle. He was half strangled by a fine collar we put on him, and was
found hanging by it on a peg.

People sat down on him, for he would lie in chairs. No one loved him
much, for he was not amiable in temper, but bit and scratched if
touched, worried the bows off our slippers in his play, and if we did
not attend to him at once, he complained in the most tremendous bass
growl I ever heard.

He was not beautiful, but very impressive; being big, without a white
hair on him. One eye was blue and one green, and the green one was
always half shut, as if he was winking at you, which gave him a rowdy
air comical to see. Then he swaggered in his walk, never turned out for
any one, and if offended fell into rages fit to daunt the bravest soul.

Yes, the Imp was truly an awful animal; and when a mischievous cousin of
ours told us he wanted a black cat, without a single white hair on it,
to win a wager with, we at once offered ours.

It seems that sailors are so superstitious they will not sail in a ship
with a black cat; and this rogue of a cousin was going to send puss off
on a voyage, unknown to any one but the friend who took him, and when
the trip was safely over, he was to be produced as a triumphant proof of
the folly of the nautical superstition.

So the Imp was delivered to his new master, and sailed away packed up in
an old fishing-basket, with his head poked out of a hole in the cover.

We waited anxiously to hear how the joke ended; but unfortunately the
passage was very rough, his guardian too ill to keep him safe and quiet,
so the irrepressible fellow escaped from prison, and betrayed himself by
growling dismally, as he went lurching across the deck to the great
dismay of the sailors.

They chased, caught, and tossed the poor Imp overboard without loss of
time. And when the joke came out, they had the best of it, for the
weather happened to improve, and the rest of the voyage was prosperous.
So, of course, they laid it all to the loss of the cat, and were more
fixed in their belief than ever.

We were sorry that poor old Imp met so sad a fate, but did not mourn him
long, for he had not won our hearts as some of our other pets had.

He was the last of the seven black cats, and we never had another; for I
really did feel as if there was something uncanny about them after my
tragical experiences with Czar, Blot, Mother Bunch's family, and the
martyred Imp.




V.

ROSA'S TALE.


"Now, I believe every one has had a Christmas present and a good time.
Nobody has been forgotten, not even the cat," said Mrs. Ward to her
daughter, as she looked at Pobbylinda, purring on the rug, with a new
ribbon round her neck and the remains of a chicken bone between her
paws.

It was very late, for the Christmas-tree was stripped, the little folks
abed, the baskets and bundles left at poor neighbors' doors, and
everything ready for the happy day which would begin as the clock struck
twelve. They were resting after their labors, while the yule log burned
down; but the mother's words reminded Belinda of one good friend who had
received no gift that night.

"We've forgotten Rosa! Her mistress is away, but she _shall_ have a
present nevertheless. Late as it is, she will like some apples and cake
and a Merry Christmas from the family."

Belinda jumped up as she spoke, and, having collected such remnants of
the feast as a horse would relish, she put on her hood, lighted a
lantern, and trotted off to the barn.

As she opened the door of the loose box in which Rosa was kept, she saw
her eyes shining in the dark as she lifted her head with a startled air.
Then, recognizing a friend, she rose and came rustling through the straw
to greet her late visitor. She was evidently much pleased with the
attention, and rubbed her nose against Miss Belinda gratefully, but
seemed rather dainty, and poked over the contents of the basket, as if a
little suspicious, though apples were her favorite treat.

Knowing that she would enjoy the little feast more if she had company
while she ate it, for Rosa was a very social beast, Miss Belinda hung up
the lantern, and, sitting down on an inverted bucket, watched her as she
munched contentedly.

"Now really," said Miss Belinda, when telling her story afterwards, "I
am not sure whether I took a nap and dreamed what follows, or whether
it actually happened, for strange things do occur at Christmas time, as
every one knows.

"As I sat there the town clock struck twelve, and the sound reminded me
of the legend which affirms that all dumb animals are endowed with
speech for one hour after midnight on Christmas eve, in memory of the
animals about the manger when the blessed Child was born.

"'I wish the pretty fancy was a fact, and our Rosa could speak, if only
for an hour, because I am sure she has an interesting history, and I
long to know it.'

"I said this aloud, and to my utter amazement the bay mare stopped
eating, fixed her intelligent eyes upon my face, and answered in a
language I understood perfectly well,--

"'You shall know it, for whether the legend is true or not I feel as if
I could confide in you and tell you all I feel. I was lying awake
listening to the fun in the house, thinking of my dear mistress over the
sea and feeling very sad, for I heard you say I was to be sold. That
nearly broke my heart, for no one has ever been so kind to me as Miss
Merry, and nowhere shall I be taken care of, nursed, and loved as I have
been since she bought me. I know I am getting old, and stiff in the
knees, and my forefoot is lame, and sometimes I'm cross when my shoulder
aches; but I do try to be a patient, grateful beast. I've got fat with
good living, my work is not hard, I dearly love to carry those who have
done so much for me, and I'll tug for them till I die in harness, if
they will only keep me.'

"I was so astonished at this address that I tumbled off the pail, and
sat among the straw staring up at Rosa, as dumb as if I had lost the
power she had gained. She seemed to enjoy my surprise, and added to it
by letting me hear a genuine _horse laugh_, hearty, shrill, and clear,
as she shook her pretty head, and went on talking rapidly in the
language which I now perceived to be a mixture of English and the
peculiar dialect of the horse-country Gulliver visited.

"'Thank you for remembering me to-night, and in return for the goodies
you bring I'll tell my story as fast as I can, for I have often longed
to recount the trials and triumphs of my life. Miss Merry came last
Christmas eve to bring me sugar, and I wanted to speak, but it was too
early and I could not say a word, though my heart was full.'

"Rosa paused an instant, and her fine eyes dimmed as if with tender
tears at the recollection of the happy year which had followed the day
she was bought from the drudgery of a livery-stable to be a lady's pet.
I stroked her neck as she stooped to sniff affectionately at my hood,
and said eagerly,--

"'Tell away, dear, I'm full of interest, and understand every word you
say.'

"Thus encouraged, Rosa threw up her head, and began with an air of pride
which plainly proved, what we had always suspected, that she belonged to
a good family.

"'My father was a famous racer, and I am very like him; the same color,
spirit, and grace, and but for the cruelty of man I might have been as
renowned as he. I was a very happy colt, petted by my master, tamed by
love, and never struck a blow while he lived. I gained one race for him,
and promised so well that when he died I brought a great price. I
mourned for him, but was glad to be sent to my new owner's racing-stable
and made much of, for people predicted that I should be another
Goldsmith Maid or Flora Temple. Ah, how ambitious and proud I was in
those days! Vain of my good blood, my speed, and my beauty; for indeed I
_was_ handsome then, though you may find it hard to believe now.' And
Rosa sighed regretfully as she stole a look at me, and took the attitude
which showed to advantage the fine lines about her head and neck.

"'I do not find it hard, for we have always said you had splendid points
about you. Miss Merry saw them, though you were a skeleton, when she
bought you; so did the skilful Cornish blacksmith when he shod you. And
it is easy to see that you belong to a good family by the way you hold
your head without a check-rein and carry your tail like a plume,' I
said, with a look of admiration which comforted her as much as if she
had been a _passée_ belle.

"'I must hurry over this part of my story, because, though brilliant,
it was very brief, and ended in a way which made it the bitterest
portion of my life,' continued Rosa. 'I won several races, and great
fame was predicted for me. You may guess how high my reputation was when
I tell you that before my last fatal trial thousands were bet on me, and
my rival trembled in his shoes. I was full of spirit, eager to show my
speed and sure of success. Alas, how little I knew of the wickedness of
human nature then, how dearly I bought the knowledge, and how it has
changed my whole life! You do not know much about such matters, of
course, and I won't digress to tell you all the tricks of the trade;
only beware of jockeys and never bet.

"'I was kept carefully out of every one's way for weeks, and only taken
out for exercise by my trainer. Poor Bill! I was fond of him, and he was
so good to me that I never have forgotten him, though he broke his neck
years ago. A few nights before the great race, as I was getting a good
sleep, carefully tucked away in my roomy stall, some one stole in and
gave me a warm mash. It was dark, I was half awake, and I ate it like a
fool, though I knew by instinct that it was not Bill who fed it to me. I
was a confiding creature then, and as all sorts of queer things had been
done to prepare me I thought it was all right. But it was not, and that
deceit has caused me to be suspicious about my food ever since, for the
mash was dosed in some way; it made me very ill, and my enemies nearly
triumphed, thanks to this cowardly trick.

"'Bill worked over me day and night, that I might be fit to run. I did
my best to seem well and gay, but there was not time for me to regain my
lost strength and spirit, and pride alone kept me up. "I'll win for my
master if I die in doing it," I said to myself, and when the hour came
pranced to my place trying to look as well as ever, though my heart was
very heavy and I trembled with excitement. "Courage, my lass, and we'll
beat in spite of their black tricks," whispered Bill, as he sprung to
his place.

"'I lost the first heat, but won the second, and the sound of the
cheering gave me strength to walk away without staggering, though my
legs shook under me. What a splendid minute that was when, encouraged
and refreshed by my faithful Bill, I came on the track again! I knew my
enemies began to fear, for I had borne myself so bravely they fancied I
was quite well, and now, excited by that first success, I was mad with
impatience to be off and cover myself with glory.'

"Rosa looked as if the 'splendid minute' had come again, for she arched
her neck, opened wide her red nostrils, and pawed the straw with one
little foot, while her eyes shone with sudden fire, and her ears were
pricked up as if to catch again the shouts she heard that day.

"'I wish I had been there to see you!' I exclaimed, quite carried away
by her ardor.

"'I wish you had, for I won, I won! The big black horse did his best,
but I had vowed to win or die, and I kept my word, for I beat him by a
head, and then dropped as if dead. I might as well have died then,
people thought, for the poison, the exertion, and the fall ruined me for
a racer. My master cared no more for me, and would have had me shot if
Bill had not saved my life. I was pronounced good for nothing, and he
bought me cheap. I was lame and useless for a long time, but his patient
care did wonders, and just as I was able to be of use to him he was
killed.

"'A gentleman in want of a saddle-horse purchased me because my easy
gait and quiet temper suited him; for I was meek enough now, and my size
fitted me to carry his delicate daughter.

"'For more than a year I served little Miss Alice, rejoicing to see how
rosy her pale cheeks became, how upright her feeble figure grew, thanks
to the hours spent with me; for my canter rocked her as gently as if she
were in a cradle, and fresh air was the medicine she needed. She often
said she owed her life to me, and I liked to think so, for she made _my_
life a very easy one.

"'But somehow my good times never lasted long, and when Miss Alice went
West I was sold. I had been so well treated that I _looked_ as handsome
and gay as ever, though my shoulder never was strong again, and I often
had despondent moods, longing for the excitement of the race-course with
the instinct of my kind; so I was glad when, attracted by my spirit and
beauty, a young army officer bought me and I went to the war. Ah! you
never guessed that, did you? Yes, I did my part gallantly and saved my
master's life more than once. You have observed how martial music
delights me, but you don't know that it is because it reminds me of the
proudest hour of my life. I've told you about the saddest; let me relate
this also, and give me a pat for the brave action which won my master
his promotion, though I got no praise for my part of the achievement.

"'In one of the hottest battles my captain was ordered to lead his men
to a most perilous exploit. They hesitated, so did he; for it must cost
many lives, and, brave as they were, they paused an instant. But _I_
settled the point, for I was wild with the sound of drums, the smell of
powder, the excitement of the hour, and, finding myself sharply reined
in, I rebelled, took the bit between my teeth, and dashed straight away
into the midst of the fight, spite of all my rider could do. The men
thought their captain led them on, and with a cheer they followed,
carrying all before them.

"'What happened just after that I never could remember, except that I
got a wound here in my neck and a cut on my flank; the scar is there
still, and I'm proud of it, though buyers always consider it a blemish.
But when the battle was won my master was promoted on the field, and I
carried him up to the general as he sat among his officers under the
torn flags.

"'Both of us were weary and wounded, both were full of pride at what we
had done; but _he_ got all the praise and the honor, _I_ only a careless
word and a better supper than usual.

"'I thought no one knew what I had done, and resented the ingratitude of
your race; for it was the horse, not the man, who led that forlorn hope,
and I did think I should have a rosette at least, when others got stars
and bars for far less dangerous deeds. Never mind, my master knew the
truth, and thanked me for my help by keeping me always with him till the
sad day when he was shot in a skirmish, and lay for hours with none to
watch and mourn over him but his faithful horse.

"'Then I knew how much he loved and thanked me, for his hand stroked me
while it had the strength, his eye turned to me till it grew too dim for
seeing, and when help came, among the last words he whispered to a
comrade were these, "Be kind to Rosa and send her safely home; she has
earned her rest."

"'I _had_ earned it, but I did not get it, for when I was sent home the
old mother's heart was broken at the loss of her son, and she did not
live long to cherish me. Then my hard times began, for my next owner was
a fast young man, who ill used me in many ways, till the spirit of my
father rose within me, and I gave my brutal master a grand runaway and
smash-up.

"'To tame me down, I was sold for a car horse; and that almost killed
me, for it was dreadful drudgery to tug, day after day, over the hard
pavement with heavy loads behind me, uncongenial companions beside me,
and no affection to cheer my life.

"'I have often longed to ask why Mr. Bergh does not try to prevent such
crowds from piling into those cars; and now I beg you to do what you can
to stop such an unmerciful abuse.

"'In snow-storms it was awful, and more than one of my mates dropped
dead with overwork and discouragement. I used to wish I could do the
same, for my poor feet, badly shod, became so lame I could hardly walk
at times, and the constant strain on the up grades brought back the old
trouble in my shoulder worse than ever.

"'Why they did not kill me I don't know, for I was a miserable creature
then; but there must be something attractive about me, I fancy, for
people always seem to think me worth saving. What can it be, ma'am?'

"'Now, Rosa, don't be affected; you know you are a very engaging little
animal, and if you live to be forty will still have certain pretty ways
about you, that win the hearts of women, if not of men. _They_ see your
weak points, and take a money view of the case; but _we_ sympathize with
your afflictions, are amused with your coquettish airs, and like your
affectionate nature. Now hurry up and finish, for I find it a trifle
cold out here.'

"I laughed as I spoke, for Rosa eyed me with a sidelong glance and
gently waved the docked tail, which was her delight; for the sly thing
liked to be flattered and was as fond of compliments as a girl.

"'Many thanks. I will come now to the most interesting portion of my
narrative. As I was saying, instead of knocking me on the head I was
packed off to New Hampshire, and had a fine rest among the green hills,
with a dozen or so of weary friends. It was during this holiday that I
acquired the love of nature which Miss Merry detected and liked in me,
when she found me ready to study sunsets with her, to admire new
landscapes, and enjoy bright summer weather.

"'In the autumn a livery-stable keeper bought me, and through the winter
fed me up till I was quite presentable in the spring. It was a small
town, but through the summer many city people visited there, so I was
kept on the trot while the season lasted, because ladies could drive me.
You, Miss Belinda, were one of the ladies, and I never shall forget,
though I have long ago forgiven it, how you laughed at my queer gait the
day you hired me.

"'My tender feet and stiff knees made me tread very gingerly, and amble
along with short mincing steps, which contrasted oddly, I know, with my
proudly waving tail and high-carried head. You liked me nevertheless,
because I didn't rattle you down the steep hills, was not afraid of
locomotives, and stood patiently while you gathered flowers and enjoyed
the lovely prospects.

"'I have always felt a regard for you since you did not whip me, and
admired my eyes, which, I may say without vanity, have always been
considered unusually fine. But no one ever won my whole heart like Miss
Merry, and I never shall forget the happy day when she came to the
stable to order a saddle-horse. Her cheery voice made me prick up my
ears, and when she said, after looking at several showy beasts, "No,
they don't suit me. This one now has the right air; can I ride her?" my
heart danced within me and I looked round with a whinny of delight. She
understood my welcome, and came right up to me, patted me, peered into
my face, rubbed my nose, and looked at my feet with an air of interest
and sympathy, that made me feel as if I'd like to carry her round the
world.

"'Ah, what rides we had after that! What happy hours trotting gayly
through the green woods, galloping over the breezy hills, or pacing
slowly along quiet lanes, where I often lunched luxuriously on
clover-tops, while Miss Merry took a sketch of some picturesque bit with
me in the foreground.

"'I liked that, and we had long chats at such times, for she seemed to
understand me perfectly. She was never frightened when I danced for
pleasure on the soft turf, never chid me when I snatched a bite from the
young trees as we passed through sylvan ways, never thought it a trouble
to let me wet my tired feet in babbling brooks, or to dismount and take
out the stones that plagued me.

"'Then how well she rode! So firm yet light a seat, so steady a hand, so
agile a foot to spring on and off, and such infectious spirits, that no
matter how despondent or cross I might be, in five minutes I felt gay
and young again when dear Miss Merry was on my back.'

"Here Rosa gave a frisk that sent the straw flying, and made me shrink
into a corner, while she pranced about the box with a neigh which waked
the big brown colt next door, and set poor Buttercup to lowing for her
calf, the loss of which she had forgotten for a little while in sleep.

"'Ah, Miss Merry never ran away from me! She knew my heels were to be
trusted, and she let me caper as I would, glad to see me lively. Never
mind, Miss Belinda, come out and I'll be sober, as befits my years,'
laughed Rosa, composing herself, and adding, so like a woman that I
could not help smiling in the dark,--

"'When I say "years" I beg you to understand that I am _not_ as old as
that base man declared, but just in the prime of life for a horse. Hard
usage has made me seem old before my time, and I am good for years of
service yet.'

"'Few people have been through as much as you have, Rosa, and you
certainly _have_ earned the right to rest,' I said consolingly, for her
little whims and vanities amused me much.

"'You know what happened next,' she continued; 'but I must seize this
opportunity to express my thanks for all the kindness I've received
since Miss Merry bought me, in spite of the ridicule and dissuasion of
all her friends.

"'I know I didn't look like a good bargain, for I _was_ very thin and
lame and shabby; but she saw and loved the willing spirit in me, pitied
my hard lot, and felt that it would be a good deed to buy me even if she
never got much work out of me.

"'I shall always remember that, and whatever happens to me hereafter, I
never shall be as proud again as I was the day she put my new saddle and
bridle on, and I was led out, sleek, plump, and handsome, with blue
rosettes at my ears, my tail cut in the English style, and on my back
Miss Merry in her London hat and habit, all ready to head a cavalcade of
eighteen horsemen and horsewomen. _We_ were the most perfect pair of
all, and when the troop caracoled down the wide street six abreast, _my_
head was the highest, _my_ rider the straightest, and _our_ two hearts
the friendliest in all the goodly company.

"'Nor is it pride and love alone that binds me to her, it is gratitude
as well, for did not she often bathe my feet herself, rub me down, water
me, blanket me, and daily come to see me when I was here alone for weeks
in the winter time? Didn't she study horses' feet and shoes, that I
might be cured if possible? Didn't she write to the famous friend of my
race for advice, and drive me seven miles to get a good smith to shoe me
well? Have not my poor contracted feet grown much better, thanks to the
weeks of rest without shoes which she gave me? Am I not fat and
handsome, and, barring the stiff knees, a very presentable horse? If I
am, it is all owing to her; and for that reason I want to live and die
in her service.

"'_She_ doesn't want to sell me, and only bade you do it because you
didn't want the care of me while she is gone. Dear Miss Belinda, please
keep me! I'll eat as little as I can. I won't ask for a new blanket,
though your old army one is very thin and shabby. I'll trot for you all
winter, and try not to show it if I am lame. I'll do anything a horse
can, no matter how humble, to earn my living, only don't, pray don't
send me away among strangers who have neither interest nor pity for me!'

"Rosa had spoken rapidly, feeling that her plea must be made now or
never, for before another Christmas she might be far away and speech of
no use to win her wish. I was much touched, though she was only a
horse; for she was looking earnestly at me as she spoke, and made the
last words very eloquent by preparing to bend her stiff knees and lie
down at my feet. I stopped her, and answered, with an arm about her neck
and her soft nose in my hand,--

"'You shall _not_ be sold, Rosa! you shall go and board at Mr. Town's
great stable, where you will have pleasant society among the eighty
horses who usually pass the winter there. Your shoes shall be taken off,
and you shall rest till March at least. The best care will be taken of
you, dear, and I will come and see you; and in the spring you shall
return to us, even if Miss Merry is not here to welcome you.'

"'Thanks, many, many thanks! But I wish I could do something to earn my
board. I hate to be idle, though rest _is_ delicious. Is there nothing I
can do to repay you, Miss Belinda? Please answer quickly, for I know the
hour is almost over,' cried Rosa, stamping with anxiety; for, like all
her sex, she wanted the last word.

"'Yes, you can,' I cried, as a sudden idea popped into my head. 'I'll
write down what you have told me, and send the little story to a certain
paper I know of, and the money I get for it will pay your board. So rest
in peace, my dear; you _will_ have earned your living, and may feel that
your debt is paid.'

"Before she could reply the clock struck one, and a long sigh of
satisfaction was all the response in her power. But we understood each
other now, and, cutting a lock from her mane for Miss Merry, I gave Rosa
a farewell caress and went away, wondering if I had made it all up, or
if she had really broken a year's silence and freed her mind.

"However that may be, here is the tale, and the sequel to it is, that
the bay mare has really gone to board at a first-class stable,"
concluded Miss Belinda. "I call occasionally and leave my card in the
shape of an apple, finding Madam Rosa living like an independent lady,
with her large box and private yard on the sunny side of the barn, a
kind ostler to wait upon her, and much genteel society from the city
when she is inclined for company.

"What more could any reasonable horse desire?"




VI.

LUNCH.


"Sister Jerusha, it really does wear upon me to see those dear boys eat
such bad pies and stuff day after day when they ought to have good
wholesome things for lunch. I actually ache to go and give each one of
'em a nice piece of bread-and-butter or one of our big cookies," said
kind Miss Mehitable Plummer, taking up her knitting after a long look at
the swarm of boys pouring out of the grammar school opposite, to lark
about the yard, sit on the posts, or dive into a dingy little shop close
by, where piles of greasy tarts and cakes lay in the window. They would
not have allured any but hungry school-boys, and ought to have been
labelled Dyspepsia and Headache, so unwholesome were they.

Miss Jerusha looked up from her seventeenth patchwork quilt, and
answered, with a sympathetic glance over the way,--

"If we had enough to go round I'd do it myself, and save these poor
deluded dears from the bilious turns that will surely take them down
before vacation comes. That fat boy is as yellow as a lemon now, and no
wonder, for I've seen him eat half a dozen dreadful turnovers for one
lunch."

Both old ladies shook their heads and sighed, for they led a very quiet
life in the narrow house that stood end to the street, squeezed in
between two stores, looking as out of place as the good spinsters would
have done among the merry lads opposite. Sitting at the front windows
day after day, the old ladies had learned to enjoy watching the boys,
who came and went, like bees to a hive, month by month. They had their
favorites, and beguiled many a long hour speculating on the looks,
manners, and probable station of the lads. One lame boy was Miss
Jerusha's pet, though she never spoke to him, and a tall bright-faced
fellow, who rather lorded it over the rest, quite won Miss Hetty's old
heart by helping her across the street on a slippery day. They longed to
mend some of the shabby clothes, to cheer up the dull discouraged ones,
advise the sickly, reprove the rude, and, most of all, feed those who
persisted in buying lunch at the dirty bake-shop over the way.

The good souls were famous cooks, and had many books full of all manner
of nice receipts, which they seldom used, as they lived simply and saw
little company. A certain kind of molasses cookie made by their honored
mother,--a renowned housewife in her time,--and eaten by the sisters as
children, had a peculiar charm for them. A tin box was always kept full,
though they only now and then nibbled one, and preferred to give them
away to poor children, as they trotted to market each day. Many a time
had Miss Hetty felt sorely tempted to treat the boys, but was a little
timid, for they were rough fellows, and she regarded them much as a
benevolent tabby would a party of frisky puppies.

To-day the box was full of fresh cookies, crisp, brown, and sweet; their
spicy odor pervaded the room, and the china-closet door stood
suggestively open. Miss Hetty's spectacles turned that way, then went
back to the busy scene in the street, as if trying to get courage for
the deed. Something happened just then which decided her, and sealed
the doom of the bilious tarts and their maker.

Several of the younger lads were playing marbles on the sidewalk, for
Hop Scotch, Leap Frog, and friendly scuffles were going on in the yard,
and no quiet spot could be found. The fat boy sat on a post near by,
and, having eaten his last turnover, fell to teasing the small fellows
peacefully playing at his feet. One was the shabby lame boy, who hopped
to and fro with his crutch, munching a dry cracker, with now and then a
trip to the pump to wash it down. He seldom brought any lunch, and
seemed to enjoy this poor treat so much that the big bright-faced chap
tossed him a red apple as he came out of the yard to get his hat, thrown
there by the mate he had been playfully thrashing.

The lame child eyed the pretty apple lovingly, and was preparing to take
the first delicious bite, when the fat youth with a dexterous kick sent
it flying into the middle of the street, where a passing wheel crushed
it down into the mud.

"It's a shame! He _shall_ have something good! The scamp!" And with this
somewhat confused exclamation Miss Hetty threw down her work, ran to
the closet, then darted to the front door, embracing the tin box, as if
the house was on fire and that contained her dearest treasures.

"Sakes alive, what _is_ the matter with sister?" ejaculated Miss
Jerusha, going to the window just in time to see the fat boy tumble off
the post as the tall lad came to the rescue, while the cripple went
hopping across the street in answer to a kindly quavering voice that
called out to him,--

"Come here, boy, and get a cookie,--a dozen if you want 'em."

"Sister's done it at last!" And, inspired by this heroic example, Miss
Jerusha threw up the window, saying, as she beckoned to the avenger,--

"You too, because you stood by that poor little boy. Come right over and
help yourself."

Charley Howe laughed at the indignant old ladies, but, being a
gentleman, took off his hat and ran across to thank them for their
interest in the fray. Several other lads followed as irresistibly as
flies to a honey-pot, for the tin box was suggestive of cake, and they
waited for no invitation.

Miss Hetty was truly a noble yet a droll sight, as she stood there, a
trim little old lady, with her cap-strings flying in the wind, her rosy
old face shining with good-will, as she dealt out cookies with a lavish
hand, and a kind word to all.

"Here's a nice big one for you, my dear. I don't know your name, but I
do your face, and I like to see a big boy stand up for the little ones,"
she said, beaming at Charley as he came up.

"Thank you, ma'am. That's a splendid one. We don't get anything so nice
over there." And Charley gratefully bolted the cake in three mouthfuls,
having given away his own lunch.

"No, indeed! One of these is worth a dozen of those nasty pies. I hate
to see you eating them, and I don't believe your mothers know how bad
they are," said Miss Hetty, diving for another handful into the depths
of the box, which was half empty already.

"Wish you'd teach old Peck how you make 'em. We'd be glad enough to buy
these and let the cockroach pies alone," said Charley, accepting another
and enjoying the fun, for half the fellows were watching the scene from
over the way.

"Cockroach pies! You don't mean to say?" cried Miss Hetty, nearly
dropping her load in her horror at the idea, for she had heard of
fricasseed frogs and roasted locusts, and thought a new delicacy had
been found.

"We find 'em in the apple-sauce sometimes, and nails and bits of barrel
in the cake, so some of us don't patronize Peck," replied Charley; and
little Briggs the cripple added eagerly,--

"I never do; my mother won't let me."

"He never has any money, that's why," bawled Dickson, the fat boy,
dodging behind the fence as he spoke.

"Never you mind, sonny, you come here every day, and _I'll_ see that you
have a good lunch. Apples too, _red ones_, if you like them, with your
cake," answered Miss Hetty, patting his head and sending an indignant
glance across the street.

"Cry-baby! Molly-coddle! Grandma's darling!" jeered Dickson, and then
fled, for Charley fired a ball at him with such good aim it narrowly
escaped his nose.

"That boy will have the jaundice as sure as fate, and he deserves it,"
said Miss Hetty, sternly, as she dropped the lid on the now empty box;
for while she was talking the free-and-easy young gentlemen had been
helping themselves.

"Thank you very much, ma'am, for my cookie. I won't forget to call
to-morrow." And little Briggs shook hands with as innocent a face as if
his jacket pocket was not bulging in a most suspicious manner.

"You'll get your death a cold, Hetty," called Miss Jerusha, and, taking
the hint, Charley promptly ended the visit.

"Sheer off, fellows. We are no end obliged, ma'am, and I'll see that
Briggs isn't put upon by sneaks."

Then the boys ran off, and the old lady retired to her parlor to sink
into her easy-chair, as much excited by this little feat as if she had
led a forlorn hope to storm a battery.

"I'll fill both those big tins to-morrow, and treat every one of the
small boys, if I'm spared," she panted, with a decided nod, as she
settled her cap and composed her neat black skirts, with which the wind
had taken liberties, as she stood on the steps.

"I'm not sure it isn't our duty to make and sell good, wholesome lunches
to those boys. We can afford to do it cheap, and it wouldn't be much
trouble. Just put the long table across the front entry for half an hour
every day, and let them come and get a bun, a cookie, or a buttered
biscuit. It could be done, sister," said Miss Jerusha, longing to
distinguish herself in some way also.

"It _shall_ be done, sister!" And Miss Hetty made up her mind at that
moment to devote some of her time and skill to rescuing those blessed
boys from the unprincipled Peck and his cockroach pies.

It was pleasant, as well as droll, to see how heartily the good souls
threw themselves into the new enterprise, how bravely they kept each
other up when courage showed signs of failing, and how rapidly they
became convinced that it was a duty to provide better food for the
future defenders and rulers of their native land.

"You can't expect the dears to study with clear heads if they are not
fed properly, and half the women in the world never think that what
goes into children's stomachs affects their brains," declared Miss
Hetty, as she rolled out vast sheets of dough next day, emphasizing her
remarks with vigorous flourishes of the rolling-pin.

"Our blessed mother understood how to feed a family. Fourteen stout boys
and girls, all alive and well, and you and I as smart at seventy one and
two, as most folks at forty. Good, plain victuals and plenty of 'em is
the secret of firm health," responded Miss Jerusha, rattling a pan of
buns briskly into the oven.

"We'd better make some Brighton Rock. It is gone out of fashion, but our
brothers used to be dreadful fond of it, and boys are about alike all
the world over. Ma's _resate_ never fails, and it will be a new treat
for the little dears."

"S'pose we have an extra can of milk left and give 'em a good mugful?
Some of those poor things look as if they never got a drop. Peck sells
beer, and milk is a deal better. Shall we, sister?"

"We'll try it, Jerushy. In for a penny, in for a pound."

And upon that principle the old ladies did the thing handsomely,
deferring the great event till Monday, that all might be in apple-pie
order. They said nothing of it when the lads came on Friday morning, and
all Saturday, which was a holiday at school, was a very busy one with
them.

"Hullo! Miss Hetty _has_ done it now, hasn't she? Look at that, old
Peck, and tremble!" exclaimed Charley to his mates, as he came down the
street on Monday morning, and espied a neat little sign on the sisters'
door, setting forth the agreeable fact that certain delectable articles
of food and drink could be had within at reasonable prices during
recess.

No caps were at the windows, but behind the drawn curtains two beaming
old faces were peeping out to see how the boys took the great
announcement. Whoever remembers Hawthorne's half-comic, half-pathetic
description of poor Hepsibah Pyncheon's hopes and fears, when arranging
her gingerbread wares in the little shop, can understand something of
the excitement of the sisters that day, as the time drew near when the
first attempt was to be made.

"Who will set the door open?" said Miss Hetty when the fateful moment
came, and boys began to pour out into the yard.

"I will!" And, nerving herself to the task, Miss Jerusha marched boldly
round the table, set wide the door, and then, as the first joyful whoop
from the boys told that the feast was in view, she whisked back into the
parlor panic-stricken.

"There they come,--hundreds of them, I should think by the sound!" she
whispered, as the tramp of feet came nearer, and the clamor of voices
exclaiming,--

"What bully buns!" "Ain't those cookies rousers?" "New stuff too, looks
first-rate." "I told you it wasn't a joke." "Wonder how Peck likes it?"
"Dickson sha'n't come in." "You go first, Charley." "Here's a cent for
you, Briggs; come on and trade like the rest of us."

"I'm so flurried I couldn't make change to save my life," gasped Miss
Jerusha from behind the sofa, whither she had fled.

"It is _my_ turn now. Be calm, and we shall soon get used to it."

Bracing herself to meet the merry chaff of the boys, as new and trying
to the old lady as real danger would have been, Miss Hetty stepped forth
into the hall to be greeted by a cheer, and then a chorus of demands for
everything so temptingly set forth upon her table. Intrenched behind a
barricade of buns, she dealt out her wares with rapidly increasing speed
and skill, for as fast as one relay of lads were satisfied another came
up, till the table was bare, the milk-can ran dry, and nothing was left
to tell the tale but an empty water-pail and a pile of five-cent pieces.

"I hope I didn't cheat any one, but I was flurried, sister, they were so
very noisy and so hungry. Bless their dear hearts; they are full now, I
trust." And Miss Hetty looked over her glasses at the crumby
countenances opposite, meeting many nods and smiles in return, as her
late customers enthusiastically recommended her establishment to the
patronage of those who had preferred Peck's questionable dainties.

"The Brighton Rock was a success; we must have a good store for
to-morrow, and more milk. Briggs drank it like a baby, and your nice
boy proposed my health like a little gentleman, as he is," replied Miss
Jerusha, who had ventured out before it was too late, and done the
honors of the can with great dignity, in spite of some inward
trepidation at the astonishing feats performed with the mug.

"Peck's nose is out of joint, if I may use so vulgar an expression, and
_our_ lunch a triumphant success. Boys know what is good, and we need
not fear to lose their custom as long as we can supply them. I shall
order a barrel of flour at once, and heat up the big oven. We have put
our hand to the work and must not turn back, for our honor is pledged
now."

With which lofty remark Miss Hetty closed the door, trying to look
utterly unconscious of the anxious Peck, who was flattening his nose
against his dingy window-pane to survey his rivals over piles of unsold
pastry.

The little venture _was_ a success, and all that winter the old ladies
did their part faithfully, finding the task more to their taste than
everlasting patchwork and knitting, and receiving a fair profit on
their outlay, being shrewd managers, and rich in old-fashioned thrift,
energy, and industry.

The boys revelled in wholesome fare, and soon learned to love "the
Aunties," as they were called, while such of the parents as took an
interest in the matter showed their approval in many ways most
gratifying to the old ladies.

The final triumph, however, was the closing of Peck's shop for want of
custom, for few besides the boys patronized him. None mourned for him,
and Dickson proved the truth of Miss Hetty's prophecy by actually having
a bilious fever in the spring.

But a new surprise awaited the boys; for when they came flocking back
after the summer vacation, there stood the little shop, brave in new
paint and fittings, full of all the old goodies, and over the door a
smart sign, "Plummer & Co."

"By Jove, the Aunties are bound to cover themselves with glory. Let's go
in and hear all about it. Behave now, you fellows, or I'll see about it
afterward," commanded Charley, as he paused to peer in through the clean
windows at the tempting display.

In they trooped, and, tapping on the counter, stood ready to greet the
old ladies as usual, but to their great surprise a pretty young woman
appeared, and smilingly asked what they would have.

"We want the Aunties, if you please. Isn't this their shop?" said little
Briggs, bitterly disappointed at not finding his good friends.

"You will find them over there at home as usual. Yes, this is their
shop, and I'm their niece. My husband is the Co., and we run the shop
for the aunts. I hope you'll patronize us, gentlemen."

"We will! we will! Three cheers for Plummer & Co.!" cried Charley,
leading off three rousers, that made the little shop ring again, and
brought two caps to the opposite windows, as two cheery old faces smiled
and nodded, full of satisfaction at the revolution so successfully
planned and carried out.




VII.

A BRIGHT IDEA.


"No answer to my advertisement, mamma, and I must sit with idle hands
for another day," said Clara with a despondent sigh, as the postman
passed the door.

"You needn't do that, child, when I'm suffering for a new cap, and no
one can suit me so well as you, if you have the spirits to do it,"
answered her mother from the sofa, where she spent most of her time
bewailing her hard lot.

"Plenty of spirits, mamma, and what is still more necessary, plenty of
materials; so I'll toss you up 'a love of a cap' before you know it."

And putting her own disappointment out of sight, pretty Clara fell to
work with such good-will that even poor, fretful Mrs. Barlow cheered up
in spite of herself.

"What a mercy it is that when everything else is swept away in this
dreadful failure I still have you, dear, and no dishonest banker can rob
me of my best treasure," she said fondly, as she watched her daughter
with tearful eyes.

"No one shall part us, mamma; and if I can only get something to do we
can be independent and happy in spite of our losses; for now the first
shock and worry is over, I find a curious sort of excitement in being
poor and having to work for my living. I was so tired of pleasure and
idleness I really quite long to work at something, if I could only find
it."

But though Clara spoke cheerfully, she had a heavy heart; for during the
month which had followed the discovery that they were nearly penniless,
she had been through a great deal for a tenderly nurtured girl of
three-and-twenty. Leaving a luxurious home for two plainly furnished
rooms, and trying to sustain her mother with hopeful plans, had kept her
busy for a time; but now she had nothing to do but wait for replies to
her modest advertisements as governess, copyist, or reader.

"I do wish I'd been taught a trade, mamma, or some useful art by which
I could earn our bread now. Rich people ought to remember that money
takes to itself wings, and so prepare their children to face poverty
bravely. If half the sums spent on my music and dress had been used in
giving me a single handicraft, what a blessing it would be to us now!"
she said, thoughtfully, as she sewed with rapid fingers, unconsciously
displaying the delicate skill of one to whom dress was an art and a
pleasure.

"If you were not so proud we might accept Cousin John's offer and be
quite comfortable," returned her mother, in a reproachful tone.

"No; we should soon feel that we were a burden, and that would be worse
than living on bread and water. Let us try to help ourselves first, and
then, if we fail, we cannot be accused of indolence. I know papa would
wish it, so please let me try."

"As you like; _I_ shall not be a burden to any one long." And Mrs.
Barlow looked about for her handkerchief.

But Clara prevented the impending shower by skilfully turning the poor
lady's thoughts to the new cap which was ready to try on.

"Isn't it pretty? Just the soft effect that is so becoming to your dear,
pale face. Take a good look at it, and tell me whether you'll have pale
pink bows or lavender."

"It is very nice, child; you always suit me, you've such charming taste.
I'll have lavender, for though it's not so becoming as pink, it is more
appropriate to our fallen fortunes," answered her mother, smiling in
spite of herself, as she studied effects in the mirror.

"No, let us have it pink, for I want my pretty mother to look her best,
though no one sees her but me, and I'm so glad to know that I _can_ make
caps well if I can't do anything else," said Clara, rummaging in a box
for the desired shade.

"No one ever suited me so well, and if you were not a lady, you might
make a fortune as a milliner, for you have the taste of a Frenchwoman,"
said Mrs. Barlow, adding, as she took her cap off, "Don't you remember
how offended Madame Pigat was when she found out that you altered all
her caps before I wore them, and how she took some of your hints and got
all the credit of them?"

"Yes, mamma," was all Clara answered, and then sat working so silently
that it was evident her thoughts were as busy as her hands. Presently
she said, "I must go down to our big box for the ribbon, there is none
here that I like," and, taking a bunch of keys, she went slowly away.

In the large parlor below stood several trunks and cases belonging to
Mrs. Barlow, and left there for her convenience, as the room was unlet.

Clara opened several of these, and rapidly turned over their contents,
as if looking for something beside pale pink ribbon. Whatever it was she
appeared to find it, for, dropping the last lid with a decided bang, she
stood a moment looking about the large drawing-room with such
brightening eyes it was evident that they saw some invisible beauty
there; then a smile broke over her face, and she ran up stairs to waken
her mother from a brief doze, by crying joyfully, as she waved a curl of
gay ribbon over her head,--

"I've got it, mamma, I've got it!"

"Bless the child! what have you got,--a letter?" cried Mrs. Barlow,
starting up.

"No; but something better still,--a new way to get a living. I'll be a
milliner, and you shall have as many caps as you like. Now don't laugh,
but listen; for it is a splendid idea, and you shall have all the credit
of it, because you suggested it."

"I've materials enough," she continued, "to begin with; for when all
else went, they left us our finery, you know, and now we can live on it
instead of wearing it. Yes, I'll make caps and sell them, and that will
be both easier and pleasanter than to go out teaching and leave you here
alone."

"But how _can_ you sell them?" asked her mother, half bewildered by the
eagerness with which the new plan was unfolded.

"That's the best of all, and I only thought of it when I was among the
boxes. Why not take the room below and lay out all our fine things
temptingly, instead of selling them one by one as if we were ashamed of
it?

"As I stood there just now, I saw it all. Mrs. Smith would be glad to
let the room, and I could take it for a month, just to try how my plan
works; and if it _does_ go well, why can I not make a living as well as
Madame?"

"But, child, what will people say?"

"That I'm an honest girl, and lend me a hand, if they are friends worth
having."

Mrs. Barlow was not convinced, and declared she would hide herself if
any one came; but after much discussion consented to let the trial be
made, though predicting utter failure, as she retired to her sofa to
bewail the sad necessity for such a step.

Clara worked busily for several days to carry into execution her plan;
then she sent some notes to a dozen friends, modestly informing them
that her "opening" would take place on a certain day.

"Curiosity will bring them, if nothing else," she said, trying to seem
quite cool and gay, though her heart fluttered with anxiety as she
arranged her little stock in the front parlor.

In the bay-window was her flower-stand, where the white azaleas, red
geraniums, and gay nasturtiums seemed to have bloomed their loveliest to
help the gentle mistress who had tended them so faithfully, even when
misfortune's frost had nipped her own bright roses. Overhead swung a
pair of canaries in their garlanded cage, singing with all their might,
as if, like the London 'prentice-boys in old times, they cried, "What do
you lack? Come buy, come buy!"

On a long table in the middle of the room, a dozen delicate caps and
head-dresses were set forth. On another lay garlands of French flowers
bought for pretty Clara's own adornment. Several dainty ball-dresses,
imported for the gay winter she had expected to pass, hung over chairs
and couch, also a velvet mantle Mrs. Barlow wished to sell, while some
old lace, well-chosen ribbons, and various elegant trifles gave color
and grace to the room.

Clara's first customer was Mrs. Tower,--a stout florid lady, full of the
good-will and the real kindliness which is so sweet in times of trouble.

"My dear girl, how are you, and how is mamma? Now this is charming. Such
a capital idea, and just what is needed; a quiet place, where one can
come and be made pretty without all the world's knowing how we do it."
And greeting Clara even more cordially than of old, the good lady
trotted about, admiring everything, just as she used to do when she
visited the girl in her former home to see and exclaim over any fresh
arrival of Paris finery.

"I'll take this mantle off your hands with pleasure, for I intended to
import one, and this saves me so much trouble. Put it up for me, dear,
at the price mamma paid for it, not a cent less, because it has never
been worn, and I've no duties to pay on it, so it is a good bargain for
me."

Then, before Clara could thank her, she turned to the head-gear, and
fell into raptures over a delicate affair, all blonde and
forget-me-nots.

"Such a sweet thing! I _must_ have it before any one else snaps it up.
Try it on, love, and give it a touch if it doesn't fit."

Clara knew it would be vain to remonstrate, for Mrs. Tower had not a
particle of taste, and insisted on wearing blue, with the complexion of
a lobster. On it went, and even the wearer could not fail to see that
something was amiss.

"It's not the fault of the cap, dear. I always was a fright, and my
dreadful color spoils whatever I put on, so I have things handsome, and
give up any attempt at beauty," she said, shaking her head at herself in
the glass.

"You need not do that, and I'll show you what I mean, if you will give
me leave; for, with your fine figure and eyes, you can't help being an
elegant woman. See, now, how I'll make even this cap becoming." And
Clara laid the delicate flowers among the blonde behind, where the
effect was unmarred by the over-red cheeks, and nothing but a soft ruche
lay over the dark hair in front.

"There, isn't that better?" she asked, with her own blooming face so
full of interest it was a pleasure to see her.

"Infinitely better; really becoming, and just what I want with my new
silver-gray satin. Dear me, what a thing taste is!" And Mrs. Tower
regarded herself with feminine satisfaction in her really fine eyes.

Here a new arrival interrupted them, and Clara went to meet several
girls belonging to what had lately been her own set. The young ladies
did not quite know how to behave; for, though it seemed perfectly
natural to be talking over matters of dress with Clara, there was an air
of proud humility about her that made them feel ill at ease, till
Nellie, a lively, warm-hearted creature, broke the ice by saying, with a
little quiver in her gay voice,--

"It's no use, girls; we've either got to laugh or cry, and I think, on
the whole, it would be best for all parties to laugh, and then go on
just as we used to do;" which she did so infectiously that the rest
joined, and then began to chatter as freely as of old.

"I speak for the opal silk, Clara, for papa has promised me a Worth
dress, and I was green with envy when this came," cried Nellie, secretly
wishing she wore caps, that she might buy up the whole dozen.

"You would be green with disgust if I let you have it, for no brunette
could wear that most trying of colors, and I was rash to order it. You
are very good, dear Nell, but I won't let you sacrifice yourself to
friendship in that heroic style," answered Clara, with a grateful kiss.

"But the others are blue and lilac, both more trying than anything with
a shade of pink in it. If you won't let me have this, you must invent
me the most becoming thing ever seen; for the most effective dress I had
last winter was the gold-colored one with the wreath of laburnums, which
you chose for me," persisted Nellie, bound to help in some way.

"I bespeak something sweet for New Year's Day. You know my style," said
another young lady, privately resolving to buy the opal dress, when the
rest had gone.

"Consider yourself engaged to get up my bridesmaids' costumes, for I
never shall forget what a lovely effect those pale green dresses
produced at Alice's wedding. She looked like a lily among its leaves,
some one said, and you suggested them, I remember," added a third
damsel, with the dignity of a bride-elect.

So it went on, each doing what she could to help, not with condolence,
but approbation, and the substantial aid that is so easy to accept when
gilded by kind words and cheery sympathy.

A hard winter, but a successful one; and when spring came, and all her
patrons were fitted out for mountains, seaside, or springs, Clara folded
her weary hands content. But Mrs. Barlow saw with anxiety how pale the
girl's cheeks had grown, how wistfully she eyed the green grass in the
park, and how soon the smile died on the lips that tried to say
cheerfully,--

"No, mamma, dear, I dare not spend in a summer trip the little sum I
have laid by for the hard times that may come. I shall do very well, but
I can't help remembering the happy voyage we meant to make this year,
and how much good it would do _you_."

Watching the unselfish life of her daughter had taught Mrs. Barlow to
forget her own regrets, inspired her with a desire to do her part, and
made her ashamed of her past indolence.

Happening to mention her maternal anxieties to Mrs. Tower, that good
lady suggested a plan by which the seemingly impossible became a fact,
and Mrs. Barlow had the pleasure of surprising Clara with a "bright
idea," as the girl had once surprised her.

"Come, dear, bestir yourself, for we must sail in ten days to pass our
summer in or near Paris. I've got commissions enough to pay our way,
and we can unite business and pleasure in the most charming manner."

Clara could only clasp her hands and listen, as her mother unfolded her
plan, telling how she was to get Maud's trousseau, all Mrs. Tower's
winter costumes, and a long list of smaller commissions from friends and
patrons who had learned to trust and value the taste and judgment of the
young _modiste_.

So Clara had her summer trip, and came home bright and blooming in the
early autumn, ready to take up her pretty trade again, quite unconscious
that, while trying to make others beautiful, she was making her own life
a very lovely one.




VIII.

HOW THEY CAMPED OUT.


"It looks so much like snow I think it would be wiser to put off your
sleighing party, Gwen," said Mrs. Arnold, looking anxiously out at the
heavy sky and streets still drifted by the last winter storm.

"Not before night, mamma; we don't mind its being cloudy, we like it,
because the sun makes the snow so dazzling when we get out of town. "We
can't give it up now, for here comes Patrick with the boys." And Gwen
ran down to welcome the big sleigh, which just then drove up with four
jolly lads skirmishing about inside.

"Come on!" called Mark, her brother, knocking his friends right and
left, to make room for the four girls who were to complete the party.

"What do you think of the weather, Patrick?" asked Mrs. Arnold from the
window, still undecided about the wisdom of letting her flock go off
alone, papa having been called away after the plan was made.

"Faith, ma'm, it's an illigant day barring the wind, that's a thrifle
could to the nose. I'll have me eye on the childer, ma'm, and there'll
be no throuble at all, at all," replied the old coachman, lifting a
round red face out of his muffler, and patting little Gus on the
shoulder, as he sat proudly on the high seat holding the whip.

"Be careful, dears, and come home early."

With which parting caution mamma shut the window, and watched the young
folks drive gayly away, little dreaming what would happen before they
got back.

The wind was more than a "thrifle could," for when they got out of the
city it blew across the open country in bitter blasts, and made the
eight little noses almost as red as old Pat's, who had been up all night
at a wake, and was still heavy-headed with too much whiskey, though no
one suspected it.

The lads enjoyed themselves immensely snowballing one another; for the
drifts were still fresh enough to furnish soft snow, and Mark, Bob, and
Tony had many a friendly tussle in it as they went up hills, or paused
to breathe the horses after a swift trot along a level bit of road.
Little Gus helped drive till his hands were benumbed in spite of the new
red mittens, and he had to descend among the girls, who were cuddled
cosily under the warm robes, telling secrets, eating candy, and laughing
at the older boys' pranks.

Sixteen-year-old Gwendoline was matron of the party, and kept excellent
order among the girls; for Ruth and Alice were nearly her own age, and
Rita a most obedient younger sister.

"I say, Gwen, we are going to stop at the old house on the way home and
get some nuts for this evening. Papa said we might, and some of the big
Baldwins too. I've got baskets, and while we fellows fill them you girls
can look round the house," said Mark, when the exhausted young gentlemen
returned to their seats.

"That will be nice. I want to get some books, and Rita has been very
anxious about one of her dolls, which she is sure was left in the
nursery closet. If we are going to stop we ought to be turning back,
Pat, for it is beginning to snow and will be dark early," answered Gwen,
suddenly realizing that great flakes were fast whitening the roads and
the wind had risen to a gale.

"Shure and I will, miss dear, as soon as iver I can; but it's round a
good bit we must go, for I couldn't be turning here widout upsettin' the
whole of yez, it's that drifted. Rest aisy, and I'll fetch up at the
ould place in half an hour, plaze the powers," said Pat, who had lost
his way and wouldn't own it, being stupid with a sup or two he had
privately taken on the way, to keep the chill out of his bones he said.

On they went again, with the wind at their backs, caring little for the
snow that now fell fast, or the gathering twilight, since they were
going toward home they thought. It was a very long half-hour before Pat
brought them to the country-house, which was shut up for the winter.
With difficulty they ploughed their way up to the steps, and scrambled
on to the piazza, where they danced about to warm their feet till Mark
unlocked the door and let them in, leaving Pat to enjoy a doze on his
seat.

"Make haste, boys; it is cold and dark here, and we must get home. Mamma
will be so anxious, and it really is going to be a bad storm," said
Gwen, whose spirits were damped by the gloom of the old house, and who
felt her responsibility, having promised to be home early.

Off went the boys to attic and cellar, being obliged to light the
lantern left here for the use of whoever came now and then to inspect
the premises. The girls, having found books and doll, sat upon the
rolled-up carpets, or peeped about at the once gay and hospitable rooms,
now looking very empty and desolate with piled-up furniture, shuttered
windows, and fireless hearths.

"If we were going to stay long I'd have a fire in the library. Papa
often does when he comes out, to keep the books from moulding," began
Gwen, but was interrupted by a shout from without, and, running to the
door, saw Pat picking himself out of a drift while the horses were
galloping down the avenue at full speed.

"Be jabbers, them villains give a jump when that fallin' branch struck
'em, and out I wint, bein' tuk unknownst, just thinkin' of me poor
cousin Mike. May his bed above be aisy the day! Whist now, miss dear!
I'll fetch 'em back in a jiffy. Stop still till I come, and kape them
b'ys quite."

With a blow to settle his hat, Patrick trotted gallantly away into the
storm, and the girls went in to tell the exciting news to the lads, who
came whooping back from their search, with baskets of nuts and apples.

"Here's a go!" cried Mark. "Old Pat will run half-way to town before he
catches the horses, and we are in for an hour or two at least."

"Then do make a fire, for we shall die of cold if we have to wait long,"
begged Gwen, rubbing Rita's cold hands, and looking anxiously at little
Gus, who was about making up his mind to roar.

"So we will, and be jolly till the blunderbuss gets back. Camp down,
girls, and you fellows, come and hold the lantern while I get wood and
stuff. It is so confoundedly dark, I shall break my neck down the shed
steps." And Mark led the way to the library, where the carpet still
remained, and comfortable chairs and sofas invited the chilly visitors
to rest.

"How can you light your fire when you get the wood?" asked Ruth, a
practical damsel, who looked well after her own creature comforts and
was longing for a warm supper.

"Papa hides the matches in a tin box, so the rats won't get at them.
Here they are, and two or three bits of candle for the sticks on the
chimney-piece, if he forgets to have the lantern trimmed. Now we will
light up, and look cosey when the boys come back."

And producing the box from under a sofa-cushion, Gwen cheered the hearts
of all by lighting two candles, rolling up the chairs, and making ready
to be comfortable. Thoughtful Alice went to see if Pat was returning,
and found a buffalo-robe lying on the steps. Returning with this, she
reported that there was no sign of the runaways, and advised making
ready for a long stay.

"How mamma will worry!" thought Gwen, but made light of the affair,
because she saw Rita looked timid, and Gus shivered till his teeth
chattered.

"We will have a nice time, and play we are shipwrecked people or Arctic
explorers. Here comes Dr. Kane and the sailors with supplies of wood,
so we can thaw our pemmican and warm our feet. Gus shall be the little
Esquimaux boy, all dressed in fur, as he is in the picture we have at
home," she said, wrapping the child in the robe, and putting her own
sealskin cap on his head to divert his mind.

"Here we are! Now for a jolly blaze, boys; and if Pat doesn't come back
we can have our fun here instead of at home," cried Mark, well pleased
with the adventure, as were his mates.

So they fell to work, and soon a bright fire was lighting up the room
with its cheerful shine, and the children gathered about it, quite
careless of the storm raging without, and sure that Pat would come in
time.

"I'm hungry," complained Gus as soon as he was warm.

"So am I," added Rita from the rug, where the two little ones sat
toasting themselves.

"Eat an apple," said Mark.

"They are so hard and cold I don't like them," began Gus.

"Roast some!" cried Ruth.

"And crack nuts," suggested Alice.

"Pity we can't cook something in real camp style; it would be such fun,"
said Tony, who had spent weeks on Monadnock, living upon the supplies he
and his party tugged up the mountain on their backs.

"We shall not have time for anything but what we have. Put down your
apples and crack away, or we shall be obliged to leave them," advised
Gwen, coming back from an observation at the front door with an anxious
line on her forehead; for the storm was rapidly increasing, and there
was no sign of Pat or the horses.

The rest were in high glee, and an hour or two slipped quickly away as
they enjoyed the impromptu feast and played games. Gus recalled them to
the discomforts of their situation by saying with a yawn and a
whimper,--

"I'm so sleepy! I want my own bed and mamma."

"So do I!" echoed Rita, who had been nodding for some time, and longed
to lie down and sleep comfortably anywhere.

"Almost eight o'clock! By Jove, that old Pat _is_ taking his time, I
think. Wonder if he has got into trouble? We can't do anything, and may
as well keep quiet here," said Mark, looking at his watch and beginning
to understand that the joke was rather a serious one.

"Better make a night of it and all go to sleep. Pat can wake us up when
he comes. The cold makes a fellow _so_ drowsy." And Bob gave a stretch
that nearly rent him asunder.

"I will let the children nap on the sofa. They are so tired of waiting,
and may as well amuse themselves in that way as in fretting. Come, Gus
and Rita, each take a pillow, and I'll cover you up with my shawl."

Gwen made the little ones comfortable, and they were off in five
minutes. The others kept up bravely till nine o'clock, then the bits of
candles were burnt out, the stories all told, nuts and apples had lost
their charm, and weariness and hunger caused spirits to fail
perceptibly.

"I've eaten five Baldwins, and yet I want more. Something filling and
good. Can't we catch a rat and roast him?" proposed Bob, who was a
hearty lad and was ravenous by this time.

"Isn't there anything in the house?" asked Ruth, who dared not eat nuts
for fear of indigestion.

"Not a thing that I know of except a few pickles in the storeroom; we
had so many, mamma left some here," answered Gwen, resolving to
provision the house before she left it another autumn.

"Pickles alone are rather sour feed. If we only had a biscuit now, they
wouldn't be bad for a relish," said Tony, with the air of a man who had
known what it was to live on burnt bean-soup and rye flapjacks for a
week.

"I saw a keg of soft-soap in the shed. How would that go with the
pickles?" suggested Bob, who felt equal to the biggest and acidest
cucumber ever grown.

"Mamma knew an old lady who actually did eat soft-soap and cream for her
complexion," put in Alice, whose own fresh face looked as if she had
tried the same distasteful remedy with success.

The boys laughed, and Mark, who felt that hospitality required him to do
something for his guests, said briskly,--

"Let us go on a foraging expedition while the lamp holds out to burn,
for the old lantern is almost gone and then we are done for. Come on,
Bob; your sharp nose will smell out food if there is any."

"Don't set the house afire, and bring more wood when you come, for we
must have light of some kind in this poky place," called Gwen, with a
sigh, wishing every one of them were safely at home and abed.

A great tramping of boots, slamming of doors, and shouting of voices
followed the departure of the boys, as well as a crash, a howl, and then
a roar of laughter, as Bob fell down the cellar stairs, having opened
the door in search of food and poked his nose in too far. Presently they
came back, very dusty, cobwebby, and cold, but triumphantly bearing a
droll collection of trophies. Mark had a piece of board and the lantern,
Tony a big wooden box and a tin pail, Bob fondly embraced a pickle jar
and a tumbler of jelly which had been forgotten on a high shelf in the
storeroom.

"Meal, pickles, jam, and boards. What a mess, and what are we to do with
it all?" cried the girls, much amused at the result of the expedition.

"Can any of you make a hoe cake?" demanded Mark.

"No, indeed! I can make caramels and cocoanut-cakes," said Ruth,
proudly.

"I can make good toast and tea," added Alice.

"I can't cook anything," confessed Gwen, who was unusually accomplished
in French, German, and music.

"Girls aren't worth much in the hour of need. Take hold, Tony, you are
the chap for me." And Mark disrespectfully turned his back on the young
ladies, who could only sit and watch the lads work.

"He can't do it without water," whispered Ruth.

"Or salt," answered Alice.

"Or a pan to bake it in," added Gwen; and then all smiled at the dilemma
they foresaw.

But Tony was equal to the occasion, and calmly went on with his task,
while Mark arranged the fire and Bob opened the pickles. First the new
cook filled the pail with snow till enough was melted to wet the meal;
this mixture was stirred with a pine stick till thick enough, then
spread on the board and set up before the bed of coals to brown.

"It never will bake in the world." "He can't turn it, so it won't be
done on both sides." "Won't be fit to eat any way!" And with these dark
hints the girls consoled themselves for their want of skill.

But the cake did bake a nice brown, Tony did turn it neatly with his
jack-knife and the stick, and when it was done cut it into bits, added
jelly, and passed it round on an old atlas; and every one said,--

"It really does taste good!"

Two more were baked, and eaten with pickles for a change, then all were
satisfied, and after a vote of thanks to Tony they began to think of
sleep.

"Pat has gone home and told them we are all right, and mamma knows we
can manage here well enough for one night, so don't worry, Gwen, but
take a nap, and I'll lie on the rug and see to the fire."

Mark's happy-go-lucky way of taking things did not convince his sister;
but as she could do nothing, she submitted and made her friends as
comfortable as she could.

All had plenty of wraps, so the girls nestled into the three large
chairs, Bob and Tony rolled themselves up in the robe, with their feet
to the fire, and were soon snoring like weary hunters. Mark pillowed his
head on a log, and was sound asleep in ten minutes in spite of his
promise to be sentinel.

Gwen's chair was the least easy of the three, and she could not forget
herself like the rest, but sat wide awake, watching the blaze, counting
the hours, and wondering why no one came to them.

The wind blew fiercely, the snow beat against the blinds, rats scuttled
about the walls, and now and then a branch fell upon the roof with a
crash. Weary, yet excited, the poor girl imagined all sorts of mishaps
to Pat and the horses, recalled various ghost stories she had heard, and
wondered if it was on such a night as this that a neighbor's house had
been robbed. So nervous did she get at last that she covered up her face
and resolutely began to count a thousand, feeling that anything was
better than having to wake Mark and own she was frightened.

Before she knew it she fell into a drowse and dreamed that they were
all cast away on an iceberg and a polar bear was coming up to devour
Gus, who innocently called to the big white dog and waited to caress
him.

"A bear! a bear! oh, boys, save him!" murmured Gwen in her sleep, and
the sound of her own distressed voice waked her.

The fire was nearly out, for she had slept longer than she knew, the
room was full of shadows, and the storm seemed to have died away. In the
silence which now reigned, unbroken even by a snore, Gwen heard a sound
that made her start and tremble. Some one was coming softly up the back
stairs. All the outer doors were locked, she was sure; all the boys lay
in their places, for she could see and count the three long figures and
little Gus in a bunch on the sofa. The girls had not stirred, and this
was no rat's scamper, but a slow and careful tread, stealing nearer and
nearer to the study door, left ajar when the last load of wood was
brought in.

"Pat would knock or ring, and papa would speak, so that we might not be
scared. I want to scream, but I won't till I see that it really is some
one," thought Gwen, while her heart beat fast and her eyes were fixed on
the door, straining to see through the gloom.

The steps drew nearer, paused on the threshold, and then a head appeared
as the door noiselessly swung wider open. A man's head in a fur cap, but
it was neither papa nor Pat nor Uncle Ed. Poor Gwen would have called
out then, but her voice was gone, and she could only lie back, looking,
mute and motionless. A tiny spire of flame sprung up and flickered for a
moment on the tall dark figure in the doorway, a big man with a beard,
and in his hand something that glittered. Was it a pistol or a dagger or
a dark lantern? thought the girl, as the glimmer died away, and the
shadows returned to terrify her.

The man seemed to look about him keenly for a moment, then vanished, and
the steps went down the hall to the front door, which was opened from
within and some one admitted quietly. Whispers were heard, and then feet
approached again, accompanied by a gleam of light.

"Now I must scream!" thought Gwen; and scream she did with all her
might, as two men entered, one carrying a lantern, the other a bright
tin can.

"Boys! Robbers! Fire! Tramps! Oh, do wake up!" cried Gwen, frantically
pulling Mark by the hair, and Bob and Tony by the legs, as the quickest
way of rousing them.

Then there was a scene! The boys sprung up and rubbed their eyes, the
girls hid theirs and began to shriek, while the burglars laughed aloud,
and poor Gwen, quite worn out, fainted away on the rug. It was all over
in a minute, however; for Mark had his wits about him, and his first
glance at the man with the lantern allayed his fears.

"Hullo, Uncle Ed! We are all right. Got tired of waiting for you, so we
went to sleep."

"Stop screaming, girls, and quiet those children! Poor little Gwen is
badly frightened. Get some snow, Tom, while I pick her up," commanded
the uncle, and order was soon established.

The boys were all right at once, and Ruth and Alice devoted themselves
to the children, who were very cross and sleepy in spite of their
fright. Gwen was herself in a moment, and so ashamed of her scare that
she was glad there was no more light to betray her pale cheeks.

"I should have known you, uncle, at once, but to see a strange man
startled me, and he didn't speak, and I thought that can was a pistol,"
stammered Gwen, when she had collected her wits a little.

"Why, that's my old friend and captain, Tom May. Don't you remember him,
child? He thought you were all asleep, so crept out to tell me and let
me in."

"How did he get in himself?" asked Gwen, glad to turn the conversation.

"Found the shed door open, and surprised the camp by a flank movement.
You wouldn't do for picket duty, boys," laughed Captain Tom, enjoying
the dismay of the lads.

"Oh, thunder! I forgot to bolt it when we first went for the wood. Had
to open it, the place was so plaguy dark," muttered Bob, much disgusted.

"Where's Pat?" asked Tony, with great presence of mind, feeling anxious
to shift all blame to his broad shoulders.

Uncle Ed shook the snow from his hair and clothes, and, poking up the
fire, leisurely sat down and took Gus on his knee before he
replied,--"Serve out the grog, Tom, while I spin my yarn."

Round went the can of hot coffee, and a few sips brightened up the young
folks immensely, so that they listened with great interest to the tale
of Pat's mishaps.

"The scamp was half-seas over when he started, and deserves all he got.
In the first place he lost his way, then tumbled overboard, and let the
horses go. He floundered after them a mile or two, then lost his
bearings in the storm, pitched into a ditch, broke his head, and lay
there till found. The fellows carried him to a house off the road, and
there he is in a nice state; for, being his countrymen, they dosed him
with whiskey till he was 'quite and aisy,' and went to sleep, forgetting
all about you, the horses, and his distracted mistress at home. The
animals were stopped at the cross-roads, and there we found them after a
lively cruise round the country. Then we hunted up Pat; but what with
the blow and too many drops of 'the crayther,' his head was in a muddle,
and we could get nothing out of him. So we went home again, and then
your mother remembered that you had mentioned stopping here, and we
fitted out a new craft and set sail, prepared for a long voyage. Your
father was away, so Tom volunteered, and here we are."

"A jolly lark! now let us go home and go to bed," proposed Mark, with a
gape.

"Isn't it most morning?" asked Tony, who had been sleeping like a
dormouse.

"Just eleven. Now pack up and let us be off. The storm is over, the moon
coming out, and we shall find a good supper waiting for the loved and
lost. Bear a hand, Tom, and ship this little duffer, for he's off
again."

Uncle Ed put Gus into the captain's arms, and, taking Rita himself, led
the way to the sleigh which stood at the door. In they all bundled, and
after making the house safe, off they went, feeling that they had had a
pretty good time on the whole.

"I will learn cooking and courage, before I try camping out again,"
resolved Gwen, as she went jingling homeward; and she kept her word.




IX.

MY LITTLE SCHOOL-GIRL.


The first time that I saw her was one autumn morning as I rode to town
in a horse-car. It was early, and my only fellow-passenger was a crusty
old gentleman, who sat in a corner, reading his paper; so when the car
stopped, I glanced out to see who came next, hoping it would be a
pleasanter person. No one appeared for a minute, and the car stood
still, while both driver and conductor looked in the same direction
without a sign of impatience. I looked also, but all I could see was a
little girl running across the park, as girls of twelve or thirteen
seldom run nowadays, if any one can see them.

"Are you waiting for her?" I asked of the pleasant-faced conductor, who
stood with his hand on the bell, and a good-natured smile in his eyes.

"Yes, ma'am, we always stop for little missy," he answered; and just
then up she came, all rosy and breathless with her run.

"Thank you very much. I'm late to-day, and was afraid I should miss my
car," she said, as he helped her in with a fatherly air that was
pleasant to see.

Taking a corner seat, she smoothed the curly locks, disturbed by the
wind, put on her gloves, and settled her books in her lap, then modestly
glanced from the old gentleman in the opposite corner to the lady near
by. Such a bright little face as I saw under the brown hat-rim, happy
blue eyes, dimples in the ruddy cheeks, and the innocent expression
which makes a young girl so sweet an object to old eyes.

The crusty gentleman evidently agreed with me, for he peeped over the
top of the paper at his pleasant little neighbor as she sat studying a
lesson, and cheering herself with occasional sniffs at a posy of
mignonette in her button-hole.

When the old gentleman caught my eye, he dived out of sight with a loud
"Hem!" but he was peeping again directly, for there was something
irresistibly attractive about the unconscious lassie opposite; and one
could no more help looking at her than at a lovely flower or a playful
kitten.

Presently she shut her book with a decided pat, and an air of relief
that amused me. She saw the half-smile I could not repress, seemed to
understand my sympathy, and said with a laugh,--

"It _was_ a hard lesson, but I've got it!"

So we began to talk about school and lessons, and I soon discovered that
the girl was a clever scholar, whose only drawback was, as she confided
to me, a "love of fun."

We were just getting quite friendly, when several young men got in, one
of whom stared at the pretty child till even she observed it, and showed
that she did by the color that came and went in her cheeks. It annoyed
me as much as if she had been my own little daughter, for I like
modesty, and have often been troubled by the forward manners of
schoolgirls, who seem to enjoy being looked at. So I helped this one
out of her little trouble by making room between the old gentleman and
myself, and motioning her to come and sit there.

She understood at once, thanked me with a look, and nestled into the
safe place so gratefully, that the old gentleman glared over his
spectacles at the rude person who had disturbed the serenity of the
child.

Then we rumbled along again, the car getting fuller and fuller as we got
down town. Presently an Irishwoman, with a baby, got in, and before I
could offer my seat, my little school-girl was out of hers, with a
polite--

"Please take it, ma'am; I can stand perfectly well."

It was prettily done, and I valued the small courtesy all the more,
because it evidently cost the bashful creature an effort to stand up
alone in a car full of strangers; especially as she could not reach the
strap to steady herself, and found it difficult to stand comfortably.

Then it was that the crusty man showed how he appreciated my girl's good
manners, for he hooked his cane in the strap, and gave it to her,
saying, with a smile that lighted up his rough face like sunshine,--

"Hold on to that, my dear."

"Ah," thought I, "how little we can judge from appearances! This grim
old soul is a gentleman, after all."

Turning her face towards us, the girl held on to the stout cane, and
swayed easily to and fro as we bumped over the rails. The Irishwoman's
baby, a sickly little thing, was attracted by the flowers, and put out a
small hand to touch them, with a wistful look at the bright face above.

"Will baby have some?" said my girl, and made the little creature happy
with some gay red leaves.

"Bless your heart, honey, it's fond he is of the like o' them, and
seldom he gets any," said the mother, gratefully, as she settled baby's
dirty hood, and wrapped the old shawl round his feet.

Baby stared hard at the giver of posies, but his honest blue eyes gave
no offence, and soon the two were so friendly that baby boldly clutched
at the bright buttons on her sack, and crowed with delight when he got
one, while we all smiled at the pretty play, and were sorry when the
little lady, with a bow and a smile to us, got out at the church corner.

"Now, I shall probably never see that child again, yet what a pleasant
picture she leaves in my memory!" I thought to myself, as I caught a
last glimpse of the brown hat going round the corner.

But I did see her again many times that winter; for not long after, as I
passed down a certain street near my winter quarters, I came upon a
flock of girls, eating their luncheon as they walked to and fro on the
sunny side,--pretty, merry creatures, all laughing and chattering at
once, as they tossed apples from hand to hand, munched candy, or
compared cookies. I went slowly, to enjoy the sight, as I do when I meet
a party of sparrows on the Common, and was wondering what would become
of so many budding women, when, all of a sudden, I saw _my_ little
school-girl.

Yes, I knew her in a minute, for she wore the same brown hat, and the
rosy face was sparkling with fun, as she told secrets with a chosen
friend, while eating a wholesome slice of bread-and-butter as only a
hungry school-girl could.

She did not recognize me, but I took a good look at her as I went by,
longing to know what the particular secret was that ended in such a gale
of laughter.

After that, I often saw my girl as I took my walks abroad, and one day
could not resist speaking to her when I met her alone; for usually her
mates clustered round her like bees about their queen, which pleased me,
since it showed how much they loved the sunshiny child.

I had a paper of grapes in my hand, and when I saw her coming, whisked
out a handsome bunch, all ready to offer, for I had made up my mind to
speak this time. She was reading a paper, but looked up to give me the
inside of the walk.

Before her eyes could fall again, I held out the grapes and said, just
as I had heard her say more than once to a schoolmate at lunch-time,
"Let's go halves."

She understood at once, laughed, and took the bunch, saying with
twinkling eyes,--

"Oh, thank you! they are beauties!"

Then, as we went on to the corner together, I told her why I did it, and
recalled the car-ride.

"I'd forgotten all about that, but my conductor is very kind, and always
waits for me," she said, evidently surprised that a stranger should take
an interest in her small self.

I did not have half time enough with her, for a bell rang, and away she
skipped, looking back to nod and smile at the queer lady who had taken a
fancy to her.

A few days afterward a fine nosegay of flowers was left at the door for
me, and when I asked the servant who sent them he answered,--

"A little girl asked if a lame lady didn't live here, and when I said
yes, she told me to give you these, and say the grapes were very nice."

I knew at once who it was, and enjoyed the funny message immensely; for
when one leads a quiet life, little things interest and amuse.

Christmas was close by, and I planned a return for the flowers, of a
sort, that I fancied my young friend would appreciate.

I knew that Christmas week would be a holiday, so, the day before it
began, I went to the school just before recess, and left a frosted plum
cake, directed to "Miss Goldilocks, from she knows who."

At first I did not know how to address my nice white parcel, for I never
had heard the child's name. But after thinking over the matter, I
remembered that she was the only girl there with yellow curls hanging
down her back, so I decided to risk the cake with the above direction.

The maid who took it in (for my girl went to a private school) smiled,
and said at once she knew who I meant. I left my cake, and strolled
round the corner to the house of a friend, there to wait and watch for
the success of my joke, for the girls always went that way at recess.

Presently the little hats began to go bobbing by, the silent street to
echo with laughter, and the sidewalk to bloom with gay gowns, for the
girls were all out in winter colors now.

From behind a curtain I peeped at them, and saw, with great
satisfaction, that nearly all had bits of my cake in their hands, and
were talking it over with the most flattering interest. My particular
little girl, with a friend on each arm, passed so near me that I could
see the happy look in her eyes, and hear her say, with a toss of the
bright hair,--

"Mother will plan it for me, and I can get it done by New Year. Won't it
be fun to hang it on the door some day, and then run?"

I fancied that she meant to make something for me, and waited with
patience, wondering how this odd frolic with my little school-girl would
end.

New Year's Day came and passed, but no gift hung on my door; so I made
up my mind it was all a mistake, and, being pretty busy about that time,
thought no more of the matter till some weeks later, as I came into town
one day after a visit in the country.

I am fond of observing faces, and seldom forget one if anything has
particularly attracted my attention to it. So this morning, as I rode
along, I looked at the conductor, as there was no one else to observe,
and he had a pleasant sort of face. Somehow, it looked familiar, and
after thinking idly about it for a minute, I remembered where I had
seen it before.

He was the man who waited for "little missy," and I at once began to
hope that she would come again, for I wanted to ask about the holidays,
remembering how "fond of fun" she was.

When we came to the South End Square, where I met her first, I looked
out, expecting to see the little figure running down the wide path
again, and quite willing to wait for it a long time if necessary. But no
one was to be seen but two boys and a dog. The car did not stop, and
though the conductor looked out that way, his hand was not on the strap,
and no smile on his face.

"Don't you wait for the little girl now?" I asked, feeling disappointed
at not seeing my pretty friend again.

"I wish I could, ma'am," answered the man, understanding at once, though
of course he did not remember me.

"New rules, perhaps?" I added, as he did not explain, but stood
fingering his punch, and never minding an old lady, wildly waving her
bag at him from the sidewalk.

"No, ma'am; but it's no use waiting for little missy any more,
because"--here he leaned in and said, very low,--"she is dead;" then
turned sharply round, rung the bell, put the old lady in and shut the
door.

How grieved I was to have that pleasant friendship end so sadly, for I
had planned many small surprises for my girl, and now I could do no
more, could never know all about her, never see the sunny face again, or
win another word from lips that seemed made for smiling.

Only a little school-girl, yet how many friends she seemed to have,
making them unconsciously by her gentle manners, generous actions, and
innocent light-heartedness. I could not bear to think what home must be
without her, for I am sure I was right in believing her a good, sweet
child, because real character shows itself in little things, and the
heart that always keeps in tune makes its music heard everywhere.

The busy man of the horse-car found time to miss her, the schoolmates
evidently mourned their queen, for when I met them they walked quietly,
talked low, and several wore black bows upon the sleeve; while I,
although I never knew her name, or learned a single fact about her, felt
the sweetness of her happy nature, and have not yet forgotten my little
school-girl.




X.

WHAT A SHOVEL DID.


As my friend stood by the window, watching the "soft falling snow," I
saw him smile,--a thoughtful yet a very happy smile, and, anxious to
know what brought it, I asked,--

"What do you see out there?"

"Myself," was the answer that made me stare in surprise, as I joined him
and looked curiously into the street.

All I saw was a man shovelling snow; and, thoroughly puzzled, I turned
to Richard, demanding an explanation. He laughed, and answered
readily,--

"While we wait for Kate and the children, I'll tell you a little
adventure of mine. It may be useful to you some day.

"Fifteen years ago, on a Sunday morning like this, I stood at the window
of a fireless, shabby little room, without one cent in my pocket, and
no prospect of getting one.

"I had gone supperless to bed, and spent the long night asking, 'What
shall I do?' and, receiving no reply but that which is so hard for eager
youth to accept, 'Wait and trust.'

"I was alone in the world, with no fortune but my own talent, and even
that I was beginning to doubt, because it brought no money. For a year I
had worked and hoped, with a brave spirit; had written my life into
poems and tales; tried a play; turned critic and reviewed books; offered
my pen and time to any one who would employ them, and now was ready for
the hardest literary work, and the poorest pay, for starvation stared me
in the face.

"All my ventures failed, and my paper boats freighted with so many high
hopes, went down one after another, leaving me to despair. The last
wreck lay on my table then,--a novel, worn with much journeying to and
fro, on which I had staked my last chance, and lost it.

"As I stood there at my window, cold and hungry, solitary and
despairing, I said to myself, in a desperate mood,--

"'It is all a mistake; I have no talent, and there is no room in the
world for me, so the quicker I get out of it the better.'

"Just then a little chap came from a gate opposite, with a shovel on his
shoulder, and trudged away, whistling shrilly, to look for a job. I
watched him out of sight, thinking bitterly,--

"'Now look at the injustice of it! Here am I, a young man full of
brains, starving because no one will give me a chance; and there is that
ignorant little fellow making a living with an old shovel!'"

A voice seemed to answer me, saying,--

"'Why don't you do the same? If brains don't pay, try muscles, and thank
God that you have health.'

"Of course it was only my own pluck and common sense; but I declare to
you I was as much struck by the new idea as if a strange voice _had_
actually spoken; and I answered, heartily,--

"'As I live I _will_ try it! and not give up while there is any honest
work for these hands to do.'

"With sudden energy I put on my shabbiest clothes,--and they were _very_
shabby, of course, added an old cap and rough comforter, as disguise,
and stole down to the shed where I had seen a shovel. It was early, and
the house was very quiet, for the other lodgers were hard workers all
the week, and took their rest Sunday morning.

"Unseen by the sleepy girl making her fires, I got the shovel and stole
away by the back gate, feeling like a boy out on a frolic. It was bitter
cold, and a heavy snow-storm had raged all night. The streets were full
of drifts, and the city looked as if dead, for no one was stirring yet
but milkmen, and other poor fellows like me, seeking for an early job.

"I made my way to the West End, and was trying to decide at which of the
tall houses to apply first, when the door of one opened, and a pretty
housemaid appeared, broom in hand.

"At sight of the snowy wilderness she looked dismayed, and with a few
unavailing strokes of her broom at the drift on the steps, was about to
go in, when her eye fell on me.

"My shovel explained my mission, and she beckoned with an imperious wave
of her duster to the shabby man opposite. I ploughed across, and
received in silence the order to--

"'Clear them steps and sidewalk, and sweep 'em nice, for our folks
always go to church, rain or shine.'

"Then leaving her broom outside, the maid slammed the door with a
shiver, and I fell to work manfully. It was a heavy job, and my hands,
unused to any heavier tool than a pen, were soon blistered; but I tugged
away, and presently found myself much stimulated by the critical and
approving glances bestowed upon me by the pretty girl, taking breakfast
in the basement with a buxom cook and a friend, who had evidently
dropped in on her way home from early Mass.

"I was a young fellow, and in spite of my late despair, the fun of the
thing tickled me immensely, and I laughed behind my old tippet, as I
shovelled and swept with a vigor that caused the stout cook to smile
upon me.

"When the job was done, and I went to the lower door for my well-earned
pay, the maid said, with condescension, as she glanced coquettishly at
my ruddy face and eyes that twinkled under the old cap, I suspect,--

"'You can wait here while I run up, and get the money, if master is
awake.'

"'Ye haven't the heart of a woman, Mary, to kape the poor crater out
there when it's kilt wid the could he is,' said the buxom cook; adding,
in a motherly tone, 'Come in wid yez, my man, and set till the fire, for
it's bitter weather the day.'

"'Faix an' it is, ma'm, thankin' ye kindly,' I answered, with a fine
brogue, for as a lad I had played the Irishman with success.

"The good soul warmed to me at once, and, filling a mug with coffee,
gave it to me with a hearty--

"'A hot sup will do you no harrum, me b'y, and sure in the blessid
Christmas time that's just fore-ninst us, the master won't begrudge ye a
breakfast; so take a biscuit and a sassage, for it's like ye haven't had
a mouthful betwixt your lips the day.'

"'That I will,' said I; 'and it's good luck and a long life to ye I'm
drinkin' in this illegint coffee.'

"'Bless the b'y! but it's a grateful heart he has, and a blue eye as
like my Pat as two pays,' cried the cook, regarding me with increasing
favor, as I bolted the breakfast which I should have been too proud to
accept from any hand less humble.

"Here the guest asked a question concerning Pat, and instantly the
mother gushed into praises of her boy, telling in a few picturesque
words, as only an Irishwoman could do it, how Pat had come to 'Ameriky'
first when things went hard with them in the 'ould country,' and how
good he was in sending home his wages till she could join him.

"How she came, but could not find her 'b'y, because of the loss of the
letter with his address, and how for a year she waited and watched, sure
that he would find her at last. How the saints had an eye on him, and
one happy day answered her prayers in a way that she considered 'aquil
to any merrycle ever seen.' For, looking up from her work, who should
she see, in a fine livery, sitting on the box of a fine carriage at the
master's door, but 'her own b'y, like a king in his glory.'

"'Arrah, ye should have seen me go up thim steps, Katy, and my Pat come
off that box like an angel flyin', and the way he tuk me in his arms,
never mindin' his illigint coat, and me all dirt a-blackin' me range.
Ah'r, but I was a happy crayter that day!'

"Here the good soul stopped to wipe away the tears that were shining on
her fat cheeks, and Mary appeared with a dollar, 'for master said it was
a tough job and well done.'

"'May his bed be aisy above, darlin', and many thanks, and the
compliments of the sayson to ye, ladies.'

"With which grateful farewell I trudged away, well pleased at the
success of my first attempt. Refreshed and cheered by the kindness of my
humble hostess, I took heart, and worked away at my next job with
redoubled energy, and by the time the first bells rang for church, I had
three dollars in my pocket. My blood danced in my veins, and all my
despair seemed shovelled away with the snow I had cleared from other
people's paths.

"My back ached, and my palms were sore, but heart and soul were in tune
again, and hurrying home, I dressed and went to church, feeling that a
special thanksgiving was due for the lesson I had learned.

"Christmas garlands hung upon the walls, Christmas music rolled through
the church, and Christmas sermon, prayer, and psalm cheered the hearts
of all. But the shabby young man in the back seat found such beauty and
comfort in the service of that day that he never forgot it, for it was
the turning-point of his life."

My friend fell silent for a minute, and I sat, contrasting that past of
his, with the happy present, for he was a prosperous man now, with an
honored name, a comfortable fortune, and best of all, a noble wife, and
some brave lads to follow in his footsteps.

Presently I could not resist asking,--

"Did you go on shovelling, Dick?"

"Not long, for there was no need of it, thanks to Pat's mother," he
answered smiling.

"Come, I _must_ have all the story, for I know it has a sequel!"

"A very happy one. Yes, I owe to that kind soul and her little story,
the turn that Fortune gave her wheel. Nay, rather say, the touch of
nature that makes the whole world kin. For when I went home that day, I
sat down and made a simple tale from the hint she gave, and something of
her own humor and pathos must have got into it, for it was accepted, and
more stories solicited, to my great surprise.

"I wrote it to please myself, for I was in a happy mood; and though my
room was cold, the sun shone; though my closet was bare, honest money
was in my pocket, and I felt as rich as a king.

"I remember I laughed at myself as I posted the manuscript on Monday
morning, called it infatuation, and thought no more of it for days,
being busy with my new friend, the shovel.

"Snow was gone, but coal remained, and I put in tons of it with a will,
for this active labor was the tonic my overwrought nerves needed, and my
spirits rose wonderfully, as muscles earned the daily bread that brains
had failed to win.

"Ah! but they brought me something better than bread, dearer than fame;
and to that old shovel I owe the happiness of my life! The very day I
got the letter accepting the little story, I was gaily putting in my
last ton of coal, for I felt that now I might take up the pen again,
since in a kitchen I had discovered the magic that wins listeners.

"Bless my heart! how I worked and how I whistled, I was so happy, and
felt so lifted above all doubt and fear by the knowledge that my talent
was _not_ a failure, and the fact that my own strong arms could keep the
wolf from the door!

"I was so busy that I had not observed a lady watching me from the
window. She had opened it to feed the hungry sparrows, and my whistle
caught her ear, for it was an air she knew, and had heard a certain
young man sing before he dropped out of her circle, and left her
wondering sadly what had befallen him.

"All this I learned afterward; then I unconsciously piped away till my
job was done, wiped my hot face, and went in to get my money. To my
surprise I was told to 'go into the dining room, and missis would
attend to it.'

"I went and found myself face to face, not with 'missis,' but the woman
I had loved hopelessly but faithfully all that hard year, since I had
gone away to fight my battle alone.

"For a moment I believed she did not know me, in my shabby suit and
besmirched face. But she did, and with a world of feeling in her own
sweet face, she offered me, not money, but her hand, saying in a voice
that made my heart leap up,--

"'Richard, I was afraid you had gone down as so many disappointed young
men go when their ambitious hopes fail; but I am so glad, so proud to
see in your face that you still work and wait, like a brave and honest
man. I _must_ speak to you!'

"What could I do after that but hold the white hand fast in both my
grimy ones, while I told my little story, and the hope that had come at
last. Heaven knows I told it very badly, for those tender eyes were upon
me all the time, so full of unspoken love and pity, admiration and
respect, that I felt like one in a glorified dream, and forgot I was a
coal-heaver.

"That was the last of it, though, and the next time I came to see my
Kate it was with clean hands, that carried her, as a first love-token,
the little tale which was the foundation-stone of this happy home."

He stopped there, and his face brightened beautifully, for the sound of
little feet approached, and childish voices cried eagerly,--

"Papa! papa! the snow has come! May we go and shovel off the steps?"

"Yes, my lads, and mind you do it well; for some day you may have to
earn your breakfast," answered Dick, as three fine boys came prancing
in, full of delight at the first snow-fall.

"These fellows have a passion for shovelling which they inherit from
their father," he added, with a twinkle of the eye that told Mrs. Kate
what we had been talking about.

It was sweet to see with what tender pride she took the hand he
stretched out to her, and holding it in both her own, said, with her
eyes upon her boys,--

"I hope they _will_ inherit not only their father's respect for honest
work, but the genius that can see and paint truth and beauty in the
humble things of this world."




XI.

CLAMS.

A GHOST STORY.


"I haven't a room in the house, ma'am, but if you don't mind going down
to the cottage, and coming up here to your meals, I can accommodate you,
and would be glad to," said Mrs. Grant, in answer to my demand for
board.

"Where is the cottage?" and I looked about me, feeling ready to accept
anything in the way of shelter, after the long, hot journey from
broiling Boston, to breezy York Harbor.

"Right down there, just a step, you see. It's all in order, and next
week it will be full, for many folks prefer it because of the quiet."

At the end of a precipitous path, which offered every facility for
accidents of all sorts, from a sprained ankle to a broken neck, stood
the cottage, a little white building with a pretty woodbine over the
porch, gay flowers in the garden, and the blue Atlantic rolling up at
the foot of the cliff.

"A regular 'Cottage by the Sea.' It will suit me exactly if I can have
that front upper room. I don't mind being alone, so have my trunk taken
down, please, and I'll get ready for tea," said I, congratulating myself
on my good luck. Alas, how little I knew what a night of terror I was to
pass in that picturesque abode!

An hour later, refreshed by my tea and invigorated by the delicious
coolness, I plunged recklessly into the gayeties of the season, and
accepted two invitations for the evening,--one to a stroll on Sunset
Hill, the other to a clam-bake on the beach.

The stroll came first, and while my friend paused at one of the
fishily-fragrant houses by the way, to interview her washerwoman, I went
on to the hill-top, where a nautical old gentleman with a spy-glass,
welcomed me with the amiable remark,--

"Pretty likely place for a prospeck."

Entering into a conversation with this ancient mariner, I asked if he
knew any legend or stories concerning the old houses all about us.

"Sights of 'em; but it aint allers the _old_ places as has the most
stories concernin' 'em. Why, that cottage down yonder aint more 'n fifty
year old, and they say there's been a lot of ghosts seen there, owin' to
a man's killin' of himself in the back bedroom."

"What, that house at the end of the lane?" I asked, with sudden
interest.

"Jes' so; nice place, but lonesome and dampish. Ghosts and toadstools is
apt to locate in houses of that sort," placidly responded the venerable
tar.

The dampness scared me more than the goblins, for I never saw a ghost
yet, but I had been haunted by rheumatism, and found it a hard fiend to
exorcise.

"I've taken a room there, so I'm rather interested in knowing what
company I'm to have."

"Took a room, hev you? Wal, I dare say you won't be troubled. Some folks
have a knack of seeing sperrits, and then agin some hasn't. My wife is
uncommon powerful that way, but I aint; my sight's dreadful poor for
that sort of critter."

There was such a sly twinkle in the starboard eye of the old fellow as
he spoke, that I laughed outright, and asked, sociably,--

"Has she ever seen the ghosts of the cottage? I think _I_ have rather a
knack that way, and I'd like to know what to expect."

"No, her sort is the rappin' kind. Down yonder the only ghost I take
much stock in is old Bezee Tucker's. He killed himself in the back
bedroom, and some folks say they've heard him groanin' there nights, and
a drippin' sound; he bled to death, you know. It was kep' quiet at the
time, and is forgotten now by all but a few old chaps like me. Bezee was
allers civil to the ladies, so I guess he won't bother you, ma'am;" and
the old fellow laughed.

"If he does, I'll let you know;" and with that I departed, for my friend
called to me that the beach party was clamoring for our company.

In the delights of that festive hour, I forgot the croaking of the
ancient mariner, for I was about to taste a clam for the first time in
my life, and it was a most absorbing moment. Perched about on the rocks
like hungry penguins, we watched the jovial cooks with breathless
interest, as they struggled with refractory frying-pans, fish that
stubbornly refused to brown, steaming seaweed and hot stones.

A certain captivating little Margie waited upon me so prettily that I
should have been tempted to try a sea porcupine unskinned if she had
offered it, so irresistible was her chirping way of saying, "Oh, here's
a perfectly lovely one! Do take him by his little black head and eat him
quick."

So beguiled, I indulged recklessly in clams, served hot between two
shells, little dreaming what a price I was to pay for that marine
banquet.

We kept up till late, and then I was left at my own door by my friend,
who informed me that York was a very primitive, safe place, where people
slept with unlocked doors, and nothing ever went amiss o'nights.

I said nothing of the ghosts, being ashamed to own that I quaked a
little at the idea of the "back bedroom," as I shut out the friendly
faces and bolted myself in.

A lamp and matches stood in the hall, and lighting the lamp, I whisked
up stairs with suspicious rapidity, locked my door and retired to bed,
firmly refusing to own even to myself that I had ever heard the name of
Bezee Tucker.

Being very tired, I soon fell asleep; but fried potatoes and a dozen or
two of hot clams are not viands best fitted to insure quiet repose, so a
fit of nightmare brought me to a realizing sense of my indiscretion.

From a chaos of wild dreams was finally evolved a gigantic clam, whose
mission it was to devour me as I had devoured its relatives. The sharp
shells gaped before me, a solemn voice said, "Take her by her little
head and eat her quick." Retribution was at hand, and, with a despairing
effort to escape by diving, I bumped my head smartly against the wall,
and woke up feeling as if there was an earthquake under the bed.

Collecting my scattered wits, I tried to compose myself to slumber
again; but alas! that fatal feast had murdered sleep, and I vainly tried
to lull my wakeful senses with the rustle of woodbine leaves about the
window, and the breaking waves upon the beach.

In one of the pauses between the ebb and flow of the waves, I heard a
curious sound in the house,--a muffled sort of moan, coming at regular
intervals. And, as I sat up to make out where it was, another sound
caught my attentive ear. Drip, drip, drip, went something out in the
hall, and in an instant the tale told me on Sunset Hill came back with
unpleasant vividness.

"Nonsense! it is raining, and the roof leaks," I said to myself, while a
disagreeable thrill went through me, and fancy, aided by indigestion,
began to people the house with uncanny inmates.

No rain had fallen for weeks, and peeping through my curtain I saw the
big, bright stars shining in a cloudless sky; so that explanation
failed, and still the drip, drip, drip went on. Likewise the moaning, so
distinctly now that it was evident the little back bedroom was next the
chamber in which I was quaking at that identical moment.

"Some one is sleeping there," I said, and then recollected that all the
rooms were locked, and all the keys but mine in Mrs. Grant's pocket up
at the house.

"Well, let the goblins enjoy themselves; I won't disturb them if they
let me alone. Some of the ladies thought me brave to dare to sleep here,
and it will never do to own I was scared by a foolish story and an odd
sound."

So down I lay, and said the multiplication table industriously for
several minutes, trying to turn a deaf ear to the outer world, and curb
my unruly thoughts. But it was a failure, and, when I found myself
saying over and over "Four times twelve is twenty-four," I gave up
affecting courage, and went in for a good honest scare.

As a cheerful subject for midnight meditation I kept thinking of B.
Tucker, in spite of every effort to abstain. In vain I recalled the fact
that the departed gentleman was "allers civil to the ladies." I still
was in mortal fear lest he might think it necessary to come and
apologize in person for "bothering" me.

Presently a clock struck three, and I involuntarily gave a groan that
beat the ghost's all hollow, so full of anguish was I at the thought of
several hours of weary waiting in such awesome suspense.

I was not sure at what time the daylight would appear, and bitterly
regretted not gathering useful information about sunrise, tides, and
such things, instead of listening to the foolish gossip of Uncle Peter
on the hill-top.

Minute after minute dragged slowly on, and I was just thinking that I
should be obliged to shout "Fire!" as the only means of relief in my
power, when a stealthy step under the window gave me a new sensation.

This was a start, not a scare, for the new visitor was a human foe, and
I had little fear of such, being possessed of good lungs, strong arms,
and a Roman dagger nearly as big as a carving-knife. That step broke the
spell, and, creeping noiselessly to the window, I peeped out to see a
dark figure coming up the stem of the tall tree close by, hand over
hand, like a sailor or a monkey.

"Two can play at that game, my friend; you scare me, and I'll scare
you;" and with an actual sense of relief in breaking the oppressive
silence, I suddenly flung up the curtain, and, leaning out, brandished
my dagger with what I intended to be an awe-inspiring screech, but,
owing to the flutter of my breath, the effort ended in a curious
mixture of howl and bray.

A most effective sound nevertheless; for the rascal dropped as if shot,
and, with one upward glance at the white figure dimly seen in the
starlight, fled as if a legion of goblins were at his heels.

"What next?" thought I, wondering whether tragedy or comedy would close
this eventful night.

I sat and waited, chilly, but valiant, while the weird sounds went on
within, and silence reigned without, till the cheerful crow of the
punctual "cockadoo," as Margie called him, announced the dawn and laid
the ghosts. A red glow in the east banished my last fear, and, wrapping
the drapery of my couch about me, I soon lay down to quiet slumber,
quite worn out.

The sun shining in my face waked me; a bell ringing spasmodically warned
me to hurry, and a childish voice calling out, "Bet-fast is most weady,
Miss Wee," assured me that sweet little spirits haunted the cottage as
well as ghostly ones.

As I left my room to join Margie, who was waiting in the porch, and
looking like a rosy morning-glory half-way up the woodbine trellis, I
saw two things which caused me to feel that the horrors of the night
were not all imaginary.

Just outside the back bedroom door was a damp place, as if that part of
the floor had been newly washed; and when, goaded by curiosity, I peeped
through the keyhole of the haunted chamber, my eye distinctly saw an
open razor lying on a dusty table.

My vision was limited to that one object, but it was quite enough, and I
went up the hill brooding darkly over the secret hidden in my breast. I
longed to tell some one, but was ashamed, and, when asked why so pale
and absent-minded, I answered, with a gloomy smile,--

"It is the clams."

All day I hid my sufferings pretty well, but as night approached, and I
thought of another lonely vigil in the haunted cottage, my heart began
to fail, and, when we sat telling stories in the dusk, a brilliant idea
came into my head.

I would relate my ghost story, and rouse the curiosity of the listeners
to such a pitch that some of them would offer to share my quarters, in
hopes of seeing the spirit of the restless Tucker.

Cheered by this delusive fancy, when my turn came I made a thrilling
tale of the night's adventures, and, having worked my audience up to a
flattering state of excitement, paused for applause.

It came in a most unexpected form, however, for Mrs. Grant burst out
laughing, and the two boys, Johnny and Joe, rolled off the piazza in
convulsions of merriment.

Much disgusted at this unseemly demonstration, I demanded the cause of
it, and involuntarily joined in the general shout when Mrs. Grant
demolished my ghost by informing me that Bezee Tucker lived, died in,
and haunted the tumble-down house at the _other_ end of the lane.

"Then who or what made those mysterious noises?" I asked, relieved but
rather nettled at the downfall of my romance.

"My brother Seth," replied Mrs. Grant, still laughing. "I thought you
might be afraid to be there all alone, so he slipped into the bedroom,
and I forgot to tell you. He's a powerful snorer, and that's one of the
awful sounds. The other was the dripping of salt water; for you wanted
some, and the girl got it in a leaky pail. Seth wiped up the slops when
he came out early in the morning."

I said nothing about the keyhole view of the harmless razor, but,
feeling that I did deserve some credit for my heroic reception of the
burglar, I mildly asked if it was the custom in York for men as well as
turkeys to roost in trees.

An explosion from the boys extinguished my last hope of glory, for as
soon as he could speak Joe answered, unable to resist the joke, though
telling it betrayed his own transgressions.

"Johnny planned to be up awful early, and pick the last cherries off
that tree. I wanted to get ahead of him, so I sneaked down before light
to humbug him, for I was going a-fishing, and we have to be off by
four."

"Did you get your cherries?" I asked, bound to have some of the laugh on
my side.

"Guess I didn't," grumbled Joe, rubbing his knees, while Johnny added,
with an exulting chuckle,--

"He got a horrid scare and a right good scraping, for he didn't know any
one was down there. Couldn't go fishing either, he was so lame, and I
had the cherries after all. Served him right, didn't it?"

No answer was necessary, for the two lads indulged in a friendly scuffle
among the hay-cocks, while Mrs. Grant went off to repeat the tale in the
kitchen, whence the sound of a muffled roar soon assured me that Seth
was enjoying the joke as well as the rest of us.




XII.

KITTY'S CATTLE SHOW.


Little Kitty was an orphan, and she lived in the poor-house, where she
ran errands, tended babies, and was everybody's servant. A droll,
happy-hearted child, who did her best to be good, and was never tired of
hoping that something pleasant would happen.

She had often heard of Cattle Shows, but had never been to one, though
she lived in a town where there was one every year.

As October came, and people began to get ready for the show, Kitty was
seized with a strong desire to go, and asked endless questions about it
of old Sam, who lived in the house.

"Did you say anybody could go in for nothing if they took something to
show?" she asked.

"Yes; and them that has the best fruit, or cows, or butter, or whatever
it is, they gets a premium," said Sam, chopping away.

"What's a primmynum?" asked Kitty, forgetting to pick up chips, in her
interest.

"It's money; some gets a lot, and some only a dollar, or so."

"I wish I had something nice to show, but I don't own anything but
puss," and the little girl stroked the plump, white kitten that was
frisking all over her.

"Better send her; she's pretty enough to fetch a prize anywheres," said
Sam, who was fond of both Kittys.

"Do they have cats there?" asked the child, soberly.

"Ought to, if they don't, for, if cats aint cattle, I don't see what
they be," and old Sam laughed, as if he had made a joke.

"I mean to take her and see the show, any way, for that will be
splendid, even if she don't get any money! O, puss, will you go, and
behave well, and get a primmynum for me, so I can buy a book of
stories?" cried Kitty, upsetting her basket in her sudden skip at the
fine plan.

Puss turned a somersault, raced after a chicken, and then rushed up her
mistress' back, and, perching demurely on her shoulder, peeped into her
face, as if asking if pranks like these wouldn't win a prize anywhere.

"You are going to take Mr. Green's hens for him; can't I go with you? I
won't be any trouble, and I do so want to see the fun," added Kitty,
after thinking over her plan a few minutes.

Now, Sam meant to take her, but had not told her so yet, and now, being
a waggish old fellow, he thought he would let her take her cat, for the
joke of it, so he said soberly,--

"Yes, I'll tuck you in somewheres, and you'd better put puss into the
blackbird's old cage, else she will get scared, and run away. You stand
it among the chicken-coops, and folks will admire her, I aint a doubt."

Innocent little Kitty was in raptures at the prospect, though the people
in the house laughed at her. But she firmly believed it was all right,
and made her preparations with solemn care.

The old cage was scrubbed till the wires shone, then she trimmed it up
with evergreen, and put a bed of scarlet leaves for snowy puss to lie
on. Puss was washed, and combed, and decked with a blue bow on the grand
day, and, when she had been persuaded to enter her pretty prison, the
effect was charming.

A happier little lass was seldom seen than Kitty when, dressed in her
clean, blue check frock, and the old hat, with a faded ribbon, she rode
away with Sam; and behind, among the hen-coops, was Miss Puss, much
excited by the clucking and fluttering of her fellow-travellers.

When the show grounds were reached, Kitty thought the bustle and the
noise quite as interesting as the cattle; and when, after putting his
poultry in its place, Sam led her up into the great hall where the fruit
and flowers were, she began to imagine that the fairy tales were coming
true.

While she stood staring at some very astonishing worsted-work pictures,
a lady, who was arranging fruit near by, upset a basket of fine peaches,
and they rolled away under tables and chairs.

"I'll pick 'em up, ma'am," cried Kitty, who loved to be useful; and down
she went on her hands and knees, and carefully picked up every runaway.

"What is your name, my obliging little girl?" asked the lady, as she
brushed up the last yellow peach.

"Kitty; and I live at the poor-house; and I never saw a Cattle Show
before, 'cause I didn't have any thing to bring," said the child,
feeling as important with her cat as a whole agricultural society.

"What did you bring,--patchwork?"

"O, no, ma'am, a lovely cat, and she is down stairs with the hens,--all
white, with blue eyes and a blue bow," cried Kitty.

"I want to see her," said a little girl, popping her head up from behind
the table, where she had bashfully hidden from the stranger.

The lady consented, and the children went away together.

While they were gone, Sam came to find his little friend, and the kind
lady, amused at the cat story, asked about the child.

"She aint no friends but me and the kitten, so I thought I'd give the
poor little soul a bit of pleasure. The quarter I'll get for fetching
Green's hens will get Kitty some dinner, and a book maybe, or something
to remember Cattle Show by. Shouldn't wonder if I earned a trifle more
doing chores round to-day; if so, I shall give it to her for a premium,
'cause I fetched the cat for fun, and wouldn't like to disappoint the
child."

As Sam laughed, and rubbed his rough hands over the joke of surprising
Kitty, the lady looked at his kind old face, and resolved to give him a
pleasure, too, and of the sort he liked.

She was rich and generous, and, when her little girl came back, begging
her to buy the lovely kitten, she said she would, and put five dollars
into Sam's hands, telling him that was Kitty's premium, to be used in
buying clothes and comforts for the motherless child.

Kitty was quite willing to sell puss, for five dollars seemed a splendid
fortune to her. Such a happy day as that was, for she saw everything,
had a good dinner, bought "Babes in the Wood" of a peddler, and, best of
all, made friends.

Miss Puss was brought up by her new mistress, and put on a table among
the flowers, where the pretty cage and the plump, tricksy kitten
attracted much attention, for the story was told, and the little girl's
droll contribution much laughed over.

But the poor-house people didn't laugh, for they were so surprised and
delighted at this unexpected success that they were never tired of
talking about Kitty's Cattle Show.




XIII.

WHAT BECOMES OF THE PINS.


Miss Ellen was making a new pincushion, and a very pretty one it
promised to be, for she had much taste, and spent half her time
embroidering chair-covers, crocheting tidies, and all sorts of dainty
trifles. Her room was full of them; and she often declared that she did
wish some one would invent a new sort of fancy-work, since she had tried
all the old kinds till she was tired of them. Painting china, carving
wood, button-holing butterflies and daisies onto Turkish towelling, and
making peacock-feather trimming, amused her for a time; but as she was
not very successful she soon gave up trying these branches, and wondered
if she would not take a little plain sewing for a change.

The old cushion stood on her table beside the new one; which was ready
for its trimming of lace and ribbon. A row of delicate new pins also lay
waiting to adorn the red satin mound, and in the old blue one still
remained several pins that had evidently seen hard service.

Miss Ellen was putting a dozen needles into her book, having just picked
them out of the old cushion, and, as she quilted them through the
flannel leaves, she said half aloud,--

"It is very evident where the needles go, but I really do wish I knew
what becomes of the pins."

"I can tell you," answered a small, sharp voice, as a long brass pin
tried to straighten itself up in the middle of a faded blue cornflower,
evidently prepared to address the meeting.

Miss Ellen stared much surprised, for she had used this big pin a good
deal lately, but never heard it speak before. As she looked at it she
saw for the first time that its head had a tiny face, with silvery hair,
two merry eyes, and a wee mouth out of which came the metallic little
voice that pierced her ear, small as it was.

"Dear me!" she said; then added politely, "if you can tell I should be
very happy to hear, for it has long been a great mystery, and no one
could explain it."

The old pin tried to sit erect, and the merry eye twinkled as it went on
like a garrulous creature, glad to talk after long silence:--

"Men make many wonderful discoveries, my dear, but they have never found
that out, and never will, because we belong to women, and only a
feminine ear can hear us, a feminine mind understand our mission, or
sympathize with our trials, experiences, and triumphs. For we have all
these as well as human beings, and there really is not much difference
between us when we come to look into the matter."

This was such a curious statement that Miss Ellen forgot her work to
listen intently, and all the needles fixed their eyes on the audacious
pin. Not a whit abashed it thus continued:--

"I am called 'Granny' among my friends, because I have had a long and
eventful life. I am hearty and well, however, in spite of this crick in
my back, and hope to serve you a good while yet, for you seem to
appreciate me, stout and ordinary as I look.

"Yes, my dear, pins and people _are_ alike, and that rusty
darning-needle need not stare so rudely, for I shall prove what I say.
We are divided into classes by birth and constitution, and each can do
much in its own sphere. I am a shawl pin, and it would be foolish in me
to aspire to the duties of those dainty lace pins made to fasten a
collar. I am contented with my lot, however, and, being of a strong make
and enterprising spirit, have had many adventures, some perils, and
great satisfactions since I left the factory long ago. I well remember
how eagerly I looked about me when the paper in which I lived, with some
hundreds of relations, was hung up in a shop window, to display our
glittering ranks and tempt people to buy. At last a purchaser came, a
dashing young lady who bought us with several other fancy articles, and
carried us away in a smart little bag, humming and talking to herself,
in what I thought a very curious way.

"When we were taken out I was all in a flutter to see where I was and
what would happen next. There were so many of us, I could hardly hope to
go first, for I was in the third row, and most people take us in order.
But Cora was a hasty, careless soul, and pulled us out at random, so I
soon found myself stuck up in a big untidy cushion, with every sort of
pin you can imagine. Such a gay and giddy set I never saw, and really,
my dear, their ways and conversation were quite startling to an ignorant
young thing like me. Pearl, coral, diamond, jet, gold, and silver heads,
were all around me as well as vulgar brass knobs, jaunty black pins,
good for nothing as they snap at the least strain, and my own relations,
looking eminently neat and respectable among this theatrical rabble. For
I will not disguise from you, Miss Ellen, that my first mistress was an
actress, and my life a very gay one at the beginning. Merry, kind, and
careless was the pretty Cora, and I am bound to confess I enjoyed myself
immensely, for I was taken by chance with half a dozen friends to pin up
the folds of her velvet train and mantle, in a fairy spectacle where she
played the queen. It was very splendid, and, snugly settled among the
soft folds, I saw it all, and probably felt that I too had my part;
humble as it was, it was faithfully performed, and I never once deserted
my post for six weeks.

"Among the elves who went flitting about with silvery wings and spangled
robes was one dear child who was the good genius of the queen, and was
always fluttering near her, so I could not help seeing and loving the
dear creature. She danced and sung, came out of flowers, swung down from
trees, popped up from the lower regions, and finally, when all the
queen's troubles are over, flew away on a golden cloud, smiling through
a blaze of red light, and dropping roses as she vanished.

"When the play ended, I used to see her in an old dress, a thin shawl,
and shabby hat, go limping home with a tired-looking woman who dressed
the girls.

"I thought a good deal about 'Little Viola,' as they called her,--though
her real name was Sally, I believe,--and one dreadful night I played a
heroic part, and thrill now when I remember it."

"Go on, please, I long to know," said Miss Ellen, dropping the
needle-book into her lap, and leaning forward to listen better.

"One evening the theatre took fire," continued the old pin impressively.
"I don't know how, but all of a sudden there was a great uproar, smoke,
flames, water pouring, people running frantically about, and such a wild
panic I lost my small wits for a time. When I recovered them, I found
Cora was leaning from a high window, with something wrapped closely in
the velvet mantle that I pinned upon the left shoulder just under a
paste buckle that only sparkled while _I_ did all the work.

"A little golden head lay close by me, and a white face looked up from
the crimson folds, but the sweet eyes were shut, the lips were drawn
with pain, a horrible odor of burnt clothes came up to me, and the small
hand that clutched Cora's neck was all blistered with the cruel fire
which would have devoured the child if my brave mistress had not rescued
her at the risk of her own life. _She_ could have escaped at first, but
she heard Sally cry to her through the blinding smoke, and went to find
and rescue her. I dimly recalled that, and pressed closer to the white
shoulder, full of pride and affection for the kind soul whom I had often
thought too gay and giddy to care for anything but pleasure.

"Now she was calling to the people in the street to put up a ladder,
and, as she leaned and called, I could see the crowds far down, the
smoke and flame bursting out below, and hear the hiss of water as it
fell upon the blazing walls. It was a most exciting moment, as we hung
there, watching the gallant men fix the long ladder, and one come
climbing up till we could see his brave face, and hear him shout
cheerily,--

"'Swing from the window-sill, I'll catch you.'

"But Cora answered, as she showed the little yellow head that shone in
the red glare,--

"'No, save the child first!'

"'Drop her then, and be quick: it's hot work here,' and the man held up
his arms with a laugh, as the flames licked out below as if to eat away
the frail support he stood on.

"All in one breathless moment, Cora had torn off the mantle, wrapped the
child in it, bound her girdle about it, and finding the gaudy band would
not tie, caught out the first pin that came to hand, and fastened it.
_I_ was that pin; and I felt that the child's life almost depended upon
me, for as the precious bundle dropped into the man's hands he caught it
by the cloak, and, putting it on his shoulder, went swiftly down. The
belt strained, the velvet tore, I felt myself bending with the weight,
and expected every minute to see the child slip, and fall on the stones
below. But I held fast, I drove my point deeply in, I twisted myself
round so that even the bend should be a help, and I called to the man,
'Hold tight, I'm trying my best, but what can one pin do!'

"Of course he did not hear me, but I really believe my desperate efforts
were of some use; for, we got safely down, and were hurried away to the
hospital where other poor souls had already gone.

"The good nurse who undid that scorched, drenched, and pitiful bundle,
stuck me in her shawl, and resting there, I saw the poor child laid in a
little bed, her burns skilfully cared for, and her scattered senses
restored by tender words and motherly kisses. How glad I was to hear
that she would live, and still more rejoiced to learn next day that Cora
was near by, badly burned but not in danger, and anxious to see the
child she had saved.

"Nurse Benson took the little thing in her arms to visit my poor
mistress, and I went too. But alas! I never should have known the gay
and blooming girl of the day before. Her face and hands were terribly
burnt, and she would never again be able to play the lovely queen on any
stage, for her fresh beauty was forever lost.

"Hard days for all of us; I took my share of trouble with the rest,
though I only suffered from the strain to my back. Nurse Benson
straightened me out and kept me in use, so I saw much of pain and
patience in that great house, because the little gray shawl which I
fastened covered a tender heart, and on that motherly bosom many aching
heads found rest, many weary creatures breathed their last, and more
than one unhappy soul learned to submit.

"Among these last was poor Cora, for it was very hard to give up beauty,
health, and the life she loved, so soon. Yet I do not think she ever
regretted the sacrifice when she saw the grateful child well and safe,
for little Sally was her best comforter, and through the long weeks she
lay there half blind and suffering, the daily visit of the little one
cheered her more than anything else. The poor mother was lost in the
great fire, and Cora adopted the orphan as her own, and surely she had a
right to what she had so dearly bought.

"They went away together at last, one quite well and strong again, the
other a sad wreck, but a better woman for the trial, I think, and she
carried comfort with her. Poor little Sally led her, a faithful guide, a
tender nurse, a devoted daughter to her all her life."

Here the pin paused, out of breath, and Miss Ellen shook a bright drop
off the lace that lay in her lap, as she said in a tone of real
interest,--

"What happened next? How long did you stay in the hospital?"

"I stayed a year, for Nurse used me one day to pin up a print at the
foot of a poor man's bed, and he took such comfort in it they let it
hang till he died. A lovely picture of a person who held out his arms to
all the suffering and oppressed, and they gathered about him to be
comforted and saved. The forlorn soul had led a wicked life, and now lay
dying a long and painful death, but something in that divine face taught
him to hope for pardon, and when no eye but mine saw him in the lonely
nights he wept, and prayed, and struggled to repent. I think he was
forgiven, for when at last he lay dead a smile was on his lips that
never had been there before. Then the print was taken down, and I was
used to pin up a bundle of red flannel by one of the women, and for
months I lay in a dark chest, meditating on the lessons I had already
learned.

"Suddenly I was taken out, and when a queer round pin-ball of the
flannel had been made by a nice old lady, I was stuck in it with a party
of fat needles, and a few of my own race, all with stout bodies and big
heads.

"'The dear boy is clumsy with his fingers, and needs strong things to
use,' said the old lady, as she held the tomato cushion in both hands
and kissed it before she put it into a soldier's 'comfort bag.'

"'Now I shall have a lively time!' I thought, and looked gaily about me,
for I liked adventures, and felt that I was sure of them now.

"I cannot begin to tell you all I went through with that boy, for he was
brave as a lion and got many hard knocks. We marched, and camped, and
fought, and suffered, but we _never_ ran away, and when at last a Minie
ball came smashing through the red cushion (which Dick often carried in
his pocket as a sort of charm to keep him safe, for men seldom use
pins), I nearly lost my head, for the stuffing flew out, and we were all
knocked about in a dreadful way. The cushion and the old wallet together
saved Dick's life, however, for the ball did not reach his brave heart,
and the last I saw of him as I fell out of the hasty hand that felt for
a wound was a soft look in the brave bright eyes, as he said to himself
with a smile,--

"'Dear old mother hasn't lost her boy yet, thank God!'

"A colored lad picked me up, as I lay shining on the grass, and pins
being scarce in those parts, gave me to his mammy, who kept me to fasten
her turban. Quite a new scene I found, for in the old cabin were a dozen
children and their mothers making ready to go North. The men were all
away fighting or serving the army, so mammy led the little troop, and
they marched off one day following the gay turban like a banner, for she
had a valiant soul, and was bound to find safety and freedom for her
children at all risks.

"In my many wanderings to and fro, I never made so strange a journey as
that one, but I enjoyed it, full of danger, weariness and privation as
it was; and every morning when mammy put on the red and yellow
handkerchief I was proud to sit aloft on that good gray head, and lead
the forlorn little army toward a land of liberty.

"We got there at last, and she fell to work over a washtub to earn the
bread for the hungry mouths. I had stood by her through all those weary
weeks, and did not want to leave her now, but went off pinning a paper
round some clean clothes on a Saturday morning.

"'Now I wonder what will come next!' I thought, as Thomas Jefferson, or
'Jeff,' as they called him, went whistling away with the parcel through
the streets.

"Crossing the park, he spied a lovely butterfly which had strayed in
from the country; caught and pinned it on his hat to please little Dinah
when he got home. The pretty creature soon writhed its delicate life
away, but its beauty attracted the eye of a pale girl hurrying along
with a roll of work under her arm.

"'Will you sell me that?' she asked, and Jeff gladly consented,
wondering what she would do with it. So did I, but when we got to her
room I soon saw, for she pinned the impaled butterfly against a bit of
blue paper, and painted it so well that its golden wings seemed to
quiver as they did in life. A very poor place it was, but full of lovely
things, and I grew artistic with just looking about me at the pictures
on the walls, the flowers blooming on plates and panels, birds and
insects kept for copies, and gay bits of stuff used as back-grounds.

"But more beautiful than anything she made was the girl's quiet, busy
life alone in the big city; for, she was hoping to be an artist, and
worked day and night to compass her desire. So poor, but so happy, I
used to wonder why no one helped her and kept her from such hard, yet
patient, waiting. But no one did, and I could watch her toiling away as
I held the butterfly against the wall, feeling as if it was a symbol of
herself, beating her delicate wings in that close place till her heart
was broken, by the cruel fate that held her there when she should have
been out in the free sunshine. But she found a good customer for her
pretty work, in a rich lady who had nothing to do but amuse herself, and
spent much time and money in fancy-work.

"I know all about it; for, one day an order came from the great store
where her designs were often bought, and she was very happy painting
some purple pansies upon velvet, and she copied her yellow butterfly to
float above them.

"The poor insect was very dry, and crumbled at a touch, so my task there
was done, and as my mistress rolled up the packet, she took me to fasten
it securely, singing as she did so, for every penny was precious.

"We all went together to the rich lady, and she embroidered the flowers
on a screen very like that one yonder. I thought she would throw me
away, I was so battered now, but she took a fancy to use me in various
ways about her canvas work, and I lived with her all winter. A kind
lady, my dear, but I often wished I could suggest to her better ways of
spending her life than everlasting fancy-work. She never seemed to see
the wants of those about her, never lent an ear to the poor, or found
delight in giving of her abundance to those who had little, to brighten
their lives; but sighed because she had nothing to do when the world was
full of work, and she blessed with so many good gifts to use and to
enjoy. I hope she will see her mistake some day, and not waste all her
life on trifles, else she will regret it sadly by and by."

Here the pin paused with a keen glance at Miss Ellen, who had suddenly
begun to sew with a bright color in her cheeks, for the purple pansies
were on the screen that stood before her fire-place, and she recognized
the portrait of herself in that last description. But she did not fancy
being lectured by a pin, so she asked with a smile as she plaited up her
lace,--

"That is all very interesting, but you have not yet told me what becomes
of the pins, Granny."

"Pins, like people, shape their own lives, in a great measure, my dear,
and go to their reward when they are used up. The good ones sink into
the earth and turn to silver, to come forth again in a new and precious
form. The bad ones crumble away to nothing in cracks and dust heaps,
with no hope of salvation, unless some human hand lifts them up and
gives them a chance to try again. Some are lazy, and slip out of sight
to escape service, some are too sharp, and prick and scratch wherever
they are. Others are poor, weak things, who bend up and lose their heads
as soon as they are used. Some obtrude themselves on all occasions, and
some are never to be found in times of need. All have the choice to wear
out or to rust out. I chose the former, and have had a useful, happy
life so far. I'm not as straight as I once was, but I'm bright still, my
point is sharp, my head firm, and age has not weakened me much, I hope,
but made me wiser, better, and more contented to do my duty wherever I
am, than when I left my native paper long ago."

Before Miss Ellen could express her respect for the worthy old pin, a
dismal groan was heard from the blue cushion, and a small voice croaked
aloud,--

"Alas, alas, I chose to rust out, and here I am, a miserable, worthless
thing, whom no one can use or care for. Lift the ruffle, and behold a
sad contrast to the faithful, honest, happy Granny, who has told us such
a varied tale."

"Bless me, what possesses everything to-day!" exclaimed Miss Ellen,
looking under the frill of the old cushion to see who was speaking now.
There to be sure she found a pin hidden away, and so rusty that she
could hardly pull it out. But it came creaking forth at the third tug,
and when it was set up beside Granny, she cried out in her cheery way,--

"Try Dr. Emery, he can cure most cases of rust, and it is never too late
to mend, neighbor."

"Too late for me!" sighed the new comer. "The rust of idleness has eaten
into my vitals while I lay in my silken bed, and my chance is gone
forever. I was bright, and strong, and sharp once, but I feared work and
worry, and I hid, growing duller, dimmer, and more useless every day. I
am good for nothing, throw me away, and let the black pins mourn for a
wasted life."

"No," said Miss Ellen, "you are not useless, for you two shall sit
together in my new cushion, a warning to me, as well as to the other
pins, to choose the right way in time, and wear out with doing our duty,
rather than rust out as so many do. Thank you, Granny, for your little
lecture. I will not forget it, but go at once and find that poor girl,
and help her all I can. Rest here, you good old soul, and teach these
little things to follow your example."

As she spoke, Miss Ellen set the two pins in the middle of the red satin
cushion, stuck the smaller pins round them, and hastened to put on her
shawl lest something should prevent her from going.

"Take me with you; I'm not tired, I love to work! use me, dear mistress,
and let me help in the good work!" cried Granny, with a lively skip that
sent her out upon the bureau.

So Miss Ellen pinned her shawl with the old pin instead of the fine
brooch she had in her hand, and they went gaily away together, leaving
the rusty one to bemoan itself, and all the little ones to privately
resolve that they would not hide away from care and labor, but take
their share bravely and have a good record to show when they went, at
last where the good pins go.

THE END.


       *       *       *       *       *


LOUISA M. ALCOTT'S FAMOUS BOOKS.


LITTLE MEN; OR, LIFE AT PLUMFIELD WITH JO'S BOYS. Price, $1.50.

[Illustration: "'I'm not hurt, all right in a minute,' he said, sitting
up, a little pale and dizzy, as the boys gathered round him, full of
admiration and alarm."--PAGE 251.]


       *       *       *       *       *


LOUISA M. ALCOTT'S FAMOUS BOOKS


WORK:

_A STORY OF EXPERIENCE._

[Illustration]

"An endless significance lies in work; in idleness alone is there perpetual
despair."--CARLYLE.

PRICE, $1.75.


       *       *       *       *       *


LOUISA M. ALCOTT'S FAMOUS BOOKS.


ROSE IN BLOOM.

[Illustration]

A SEQUEL TO

"EIGHT COUSINS."

Price $1.50.


       *       *       *       *       *


AUNT JO'S SCRAP-BAG.


CUPID AND CHOW-CHOW, ETC.

[Illustration]

BY LOUISA M. ALCOTT,

AUTHOR OF "LITTLE WOMEN," "AN OLD-FASHIONED GIRL," "LITTLE MEN,"
"HOSPITAL SKETCHES."


       *       *       *       *       *


LOUISA M. ALCOTT'S FAMOUS BOOKS.


[Illustration: "Sing, Tessa; sing!" cried Tommo, twanging away with all
his might.--PAGE 47.]

AUNT JO'S SCRAP-BAG: Containing "My Boys," "Shawl-Straps," "Cupid and
Chow-Chow," "My Girls," "Jimmy's Cruise in the Pinafore." 5 vols. Price
of each, $1.00.


       *       *       *       *       *


LOUISA M. ALCOTT'S FAMOUS BOOKS.

[Illustration: "One hand stirred gruel for sick America, and the other
hugged baby Africa."--PAGE 76.]

HOSPITAL SKETCHES. Price, $1.50.


       *       *       *       *       *


MICE AT PLAY.


[Illustration: "I pulled it full of water, and then I poked the pipe end
into her ear, and then I let it fly."]

"WHEN THE CAT'S AWAY, THE MICE WILL PLAY."

A STORY FOR THE WHOLE FAMILY.

By NEIL FOREST. Price $1.50.


       *       *       *       *       *


LOUISA M. ALCOTT'S FAMOUS BOOKS.


[Illustration]

AN OLD-FASHIONED GIRL.

PRICE $1.50.


       *       *       *       *       *


LOUISA M. ALCOTT'S FAMOUS BOOKS.


LITTLE WOMEN; OR, MEG, JO, BETH, AND AMY. Parts First and Second. Price
of each, $1.50.

[Illustration: JO IN A VORTEX.--Every few weeks she would shut herself
up in her room, put on her scribbling suit, and "fall into a vortex," as
she expressed it.--PAGE 44.]


       *       *       *       *       *


SUSAN COOLIDGE'S POPULAR BOOKS.


[Illustration: NANNY'S SUBSTITUTE.

Nanny at the Fair, taking orders and carrying trays.--PAGE 171.]

MISCHIEF'S THANKSGIVING,

_AND OTHER STORIES_.

WITH ILLUSTRATIONS BY ADDIE LEDYARD.

_One handsome square 16mo volume, bound in cloth, black and gilt
lettered. Price $1.50._


       *       *       *       *       *


BOB BROWN'S BOY-BOOK.


[Illustration: "WILL BRADLEY AND I."]

WE BOYS.

Written by one of us for the amusement of Pa's and Ma's in general, Aunt
Lovisa in particular.

PRICE $1.00.


       *       *       *       *       *


H. H.'S YOUNG FOLKS' BOOK.


BITS OF TALK,
_IN VERSE AND PROSE_,
FOR YOUNG FOLKS.

BY H. H.,

AUTHOR OF "BITS OF TALK ABOUT HOME MATTERS," "BITS OF TRAVEL," "VERSES."

[Illustration:

     "----in all the lands
No such morning-glory."

--PAGE 133.]

PRICE $1.00.


       *       *       *       *       *


JOLLY GOOD TIMES;


[Illustration]

OR,

CHILD LIFE ON A FARM.

BY P. THORNE. Price $1.25.


       *       *       *       *       *


LOUISE CHANDLER MOULTON'S STORIES.


[Illustration: JUST A LITTLE BIT OF CHRISTMAS.--PAGE 153.]

BED-TIME STORIES.

MORE BED-TIME STORIES.

_With Illustrations by Addie Ledyard._

Two handsome square 16mo volumes, bound in cloth, black and gilt
lettered. Price, $1.50 each.


       *       *       *       *       *


HAMERTON'S BOY-BOOK.


[Illustration]

HARRY BLOUNT. Passages in a Boy's Life on Land and Sea. By PHILIP
GILBERT HAMERTON. Price $1.50.


       *       *       *       *       *


SUSAN COOLIDGE'S POPULAR BOOKS.


[Illustration: ENTERING PARADISE.--PAGE 23.

So in they marched, Katy and Cecy heading the procession, and Dorry,
with his great trailing bunch of boughs, bringing up the rear.]

WHAT KATY DID. With Illustrations by Addie Ledyard. One handsome, square
16mo volume, bound in cloth, black and gilt lettered. Price, $1.50.


_These books are sold by all booksellers and newsdealers
everywhere. When not to be found, send the advertised amount by
mail, to the Publishers_,

ROBERTS BROTHERS, PUBLISHERS,

_Boston_.



Behind a Mask _or_ A Woman's Power By A.M. Barnard




_chapter I_


JEAN MUIR

"Has she come?"

"No, Mamma, not yet."

"I wish it were well over. The thought of it worries and excites me. A
cushion for my back, Bella."

And poor, peevish Mrs. Coventry sank into an easy chair with a nervous
sigh and the air of a martyr, while her pretty daughter hovered about
her with affectionate solicitude.

"Who are they talking of, Lucia?" asked the languid young man lounging
on a couch near his cousin, who bent over her tapestry work with a happy
smile on her usually haughty face.

"The new governess, Miss Muir. Shall I tell you about her?"

"No, thank you. I have an inveterate aversion to the whole tribe. I've
often thanked heaven that I had but one sister, and she a spoiled child,
so that I have escaped the infliction of a governess so long."

"How will you bear it now?" asked Lucia.

"Leave the house while she is in it."

"No, you won't. You're too lazy, Gerald," called out a younger and more
energetic man, from the recess where he stood teasing his dogs.

"I'll give her a three days' trial; if she proves endurable I shall not
disturb myself; if, as I am sure, she is a bore, I'm off anywhere,
anywhere out of her way."

"I beg you won't talk in that depressing manner, boys. I dread the
coming of a stranger more than you possibly can, but Bella _must_ not be
neglected; so I have nerved myself to endure this woman, and Lucia is
good enough to say she will attend to her after tonight."

"Don't be troubled, Mamma. She is a nice person, I dare say, and when
once we are used to her, I've no doubt we shall be glad to have her,
it's so dull here just now. Lady Sydney said she was a quiet,
accomplished, amiable girl, who needed a home, and would be a help to
poor stupid me, so try to like her for my sake."

"I will, dear, but isn't it getting late? I do hope nothing has
happened. Did you tell them to send a carriage to the station for
her, Gerald?"

"I forgot it. But it's not far, it won't hurt her to walk" was the
languid reply.

"It was indolence, not forgetfulness, I know. I'm very sorry; she will
think it so rude to leave her to find her way so late. Do go and see
to it, Ned."

"Too late, Bella, the train was in some time ago. Give your orders to me
next time. Mother and I'll see that they are obeyed," said Edward.

"Ned is just at an age to make a fool of himself for any girl who
comes in his way. Have a care of the governess, Lucia, or she will
bewitch him."

Gerald spoke in a satirical whisper, but his brother heard him and
answered with a good-humored laugh.

"I wish there was any hope of your making a fool of yourself in that
way, old fellow. Set me a good example, and I promise to follow it. As
for the governess, she is a woman, and should be treated with common
civility. I should say a little extra kindness wouldn't be amiss,
either, because she is poor, and a stranger."

"That is my dear, good-hearted Ned! We'll stand by poor little Muir,
won't we?" And running to her brother, Bella stood on tiptoe to offer
him a kiss which he could not refuse, for the rosy lips were pursed up
invitingly, and the bright eyes full of sisterly affection.

"I do hope she has come, for, when I make an effort to see anyone, I
hate to make it in vain. Punctuality is _such_ a virtue, and I know this
woman hasn't got it, for she promised to be here at seven, and now it is
long after," began Mrs. Coventry, in an injured tone.

Before she could get breath for another complaint, the clock struck
seven and the doorbell rang.

"There she is!" cried Bella, and turned toward the door as if to go and
meet the newcomer.

But Lucia arrested her, saying authoritatively, "Stay here, child. It is
her place to come to you, not yours to go to her."

"Miss Muir," announced a servant, and a little black-robed figure stood
in the doorway. For an instant no one stirred, and the governess had
time to see and be seen before a word was uttered. All looked at her,
and she cast on the household group a keen glance that impressed them
curiously; then her eyes fell, and bowing slightly she walked in. Edward
came forward and received her with the frank cordiality which nothing
could daunt or chill.

"Mother, this is the lady whom you expected. Miss Muir, allow me to
apologize for our apparent neglect in not sending for you. There was a
mistake about the carriage, or, rather, the lazy fellow to whom the
order was given forgot it. Bella, come here."

"Thank you, no apology is needed. I did not expect to be sent for." And
the governess meekly sat down without lifting her eyes.

"I am glad to see you. Let me take your things," said Bella, rather
shyly, for Gerald, still lounging, watched the fireside group with
languid interest, and Lucia never stirred. Mrs. Coventry took a second
survey and began:

"You were punctual, Miss Muir, which pleases me. I'm a sad invalid, as
Lady Sydney told you, I hope; so that Miss Coventry's lessons will be
directed by my niece, and you will go to her for directions, as she
knows what I wish. You will excuse me if I ask you a few questions, for
Lady Sydney's note was very brief, and I left everything to her
judgment."

"Ask anything you like, madam," answered the soft, sad voice.

"You are Scotch, I believe."

"Yes, madam."

"Are your parents living?"

"I have not a relation in the world."

"Dear me, how sad! Do you mind telling me your age?"

"Nineteen." And a smile passed over Miss Muir's lips, as she folded her
hands with an air of resignation, for the catechism was evidently to be
a long one.

"So young! Lady Sydney mentioned five-and-twenty, I think, didn't
she, Bella?"

"No, Mamma, she only said she thought so. Don't ask such questions. It's
not pleasant before us all," whispered Bella.

A quick, grateful glance shone on her from the suddenly lifted eyes of
Miss Muir, as she said quietly, "I wish I was thirty, but, as I am not,
I do my best to look and seem old."

Of course, every one looked at her then, and all felt a touch of pity at
the sight of the pale-faced girl in her plain black dress, with no
ornament but a little silver cross at her throat. Small, thin, and
colorless she was, with yellow hair, gray eyes, and sharply cut,
irregular, but very expressive features. Poverty seemed to have set its
bond stamp upon her, and life to have had for her more frost than
sunshine. But something in the lines of the mouth betrayed strength, and
the clear, low voice had a curious mixture of command and entreaty in
its varying tones. Not an attractive woman, yet not an ordinary one;
and, as she sat there with her delicate hands lying in her lap, her head
bent, and a bitter look on her thin face, she was more interesting than
many a blithe and blooming girl. Bella's heart warmed to her at once,
and she drew her seat nearer, while Edward went back to his dogs that
his presence might not embarrass her.

"You have been ill, I think," continued Mrs. Coventry, who considered
this fact the most interesting of all she had heard concerning the
governess.

"Yes, madam, I left the hospital only a week ago."

"Are you quite sure it is safe to begin teaching so soon?"

"I have no time to lose, and shall soon gain strength here in the
country, if you care to keep me."

"And you are fitted to teach music, French, and drawing?"

"I shall endeavor to prove that I am."

"Be kind enough to go and play an air or two. I can judge by your touch;
I used to play finely when a girl."

Miss Muir rose, looked about her for the instrument, and seeing it at
the other end of the room went toward it, passing Gerald and Lucia as if
she did not see them. Bella followed, and in a moment forgot everything
in admiration. Miss Muir played like one who loved music and was perfect
mistress of her art. She charmed them all by the magic of this spell;
even indolent Gerald sat up to listen, and Lucia put down her needle,
while Ned watched the slender white fingers as they flew, and wondered
at the strength and skill which they possessed.

"Please sing," pleaded Bella, as a brilliant overture ended.

With the same meek obedience Miss Muir complied, and began a little
Scotch melody, so sweet, so sad, that the girl's eyes filled, and Mrs.
Coventry looked for one of her many pocket-handkerchiefs. But suddenly
the music ceased, for, with a vain attempt to support herself, the
singer slid from her seat and lay before the startled listeners, as
white and rigid as if struck with death. Edward caught her up, and,
ordering his brother off the couch, laid her there, while Bella chafed
her hands, and her mother rang for her maid. Lucia bathed the poor
girl's temples, and Gerald, with unwonted energy, brought a glass of
wine. Soon Miss Muir's lips trembled, she sighed, then murmured,
tenderly, with a pretty Scotch accent, as if wandering in the past,
"Bide wi' me, Mither, I'm sae sick an sad here all alone."

"Take a sip of this, and it will do you good, my dear," said Mrs.
Coventry, quite touched by the plaintive words.

The strange voice seemed to recall her. She sat up, looked about her, a
little wildly, for a moment, then collected herself and said, with a
pathetic look and tone, "Pardon me. I have been on my feet all day, and,
in my eagerness to keep my appointment, I forgot to eat since morning.
I'm better now; shall I finish the song?"

"By no means. Come and have some tea," said Bella, full of pity
and remorse.

"Scene first, very well done," whispered Gerald to his cousin.

Miss Muir was just before them, apparently listening to Mrs. Coventry's
remarks upon fainting fits; but she heard, and looked over her shoulders
with a gesture like Rachel. Her eyes were gray, but at that instant they
seemed black with some strong emotion of anger, pride, or defiance. A
curious smile passed over her face as she bowed, and said in her
penetrating voice, "Thanks. The last scene shall be still better."

Young Coventry was a cool, indolent man, seldom conscious of any
emotion, any passion, pleasurable or otherwise; but at the look, the
tone of the governess, he experienced a new sensation, indefinable, yet
strong. He colored and, for the first time in his life, looked abashed.
Lucia saw it, and hated Miss Muir with a sudden hatred; for, in all the
years she had passed with her cousin, no look or word of hers had
possessed such power. Coventry was himself again in an instant, with no
trace of that passing change, but a look of interest in his usually
dreamy eyes, and a touch of anger in his sarcastic voice.

"What a melodramatic young lady! I shall go tomorrow."

Lucia laughed, and was well pleased when he sauntered away to bring her
a cup of tea from the table where a little scene was just taking place.
Mrs. Coventry had sunk into her chair again, exhausted by the flurry of
the fainting fit. Bella was busied about her; and Edward, eager to feed
the pale governess, was awkwardly trying to make the tea, after a
beseeching glance at his cousin which she did not choose to answer. As
he upset the caddy and uttered a despairing exclamation, Miss Muir
quietly took her place behind the urn, saying with a smile, and a shy
glance at the young man, "Allow me to assume my duty at once, and serve
you all. I understand the art of making people comfortable in this way.
The scoop, please. I can gather this up quite well alone, if you will
tell me how your mother likes her tea."

Edward pulled a chair to the table and made merry over his mishaps,
while Miss Muir performed her little task with a skill and grace that
made it pleasant to watch her. Coventry lingered a moment after she had
given him a steaming cup, to observe her more nearly, while he asked a
question or two of his brother. She took no more notice of him than if
he had been a statue, and in the middle of the one remark he addressed
to her, she rose to take the sugar basin to Mrs. Coventry, who was quite
won by the modest, domestic graces of the new governess.

"Really, my dear, you are a treasure; I haven't tasted such tea since my
poor maid Ellis died. Bella never makes it good, and Miss Lucia always
forgets the cream. Whatever you do you seem to do well, and that is
_such_ a comfort."

"Let me always do this for you, then. It will be a pleasure, madam." And
Miss Muir came back to her seat with a faint color in her cheek which
improved her much.

"My brother asked if young Sydney was at home when you left," said
Edward, for Gerald would not take the trouble to repeat the question.

Miss Muir fixed her eyes on Coventry, and answered with a slight tremor
of the lips, "No, he left home some weeks ago."

The young man went back to his cousin, saying, as he threw himself
down beside her, "I shall not go tomorrow, but wait till the three
days are out."

"Why?" demanded Lucia.

Lowering his voice he said, with a significant nod toward the governess,
"Because I have a fancy that she is at the bottom of Sydney's mystery.
He's not been himself lately, and now he is gone without a word. I
rather like romances in real life, if they are not too long, or
difficult to read."

"Do you think her pretty?"

"Far from it, a most uncanny little specimen."

"Then why fancy Sydney loves her?"

"He is an oddity, and likes sensations and things of that sort."

"What do you mean, Gerald?"

"Get the Muir to look at you, as she did at me, and you will understand.
Will you have another cup, Juno?"

"Yes, please." She liked to have him wait upon her, for he did it to no
other woman except his mother.

Before he could slowly rise, Miss Muir glided to them with another cup
on the salver; and, as Lucia took it with a cold nod, the girl said
under her breath, "I think it honest to tell you that I possess a quick
ear, and cannot help hearing what is said anywhere in the room. What you
say of me is of no consequence, but you may speak of things which you
prefer I should not hear; therefore, allow me to warn you." And she was
gone again as noiselessly as she came.

"How do you like that?" whispered Coventry, as his cousin sat looking
after the girl, with a disturbed expression.

"What an uncomfortable creature to have in the house! I am very sorry I
urged her coming, for your mother has taken a fancy to her, and it will
be hard to get rid of her," said Lucia, half angry, half amused.

"Hush, she hears every word you say. I know it by the expression of her
face, for Ned is talking about horses, and she looks as haughty as ever
you did, and that is saying much. Faith, this is getting interesting."

"Hark, she is speaking; I want to hear," and Lucia laid her hand on her
cousin's lips. He kissed it, and then idly amused himself with turning
the rings to and fro on the slender fingers.

"I have been in France several years, madam, but my friend died and I
came back to be with Lady Sydney, till--" Muir paused an instant, then
added, slowly, "till I fell ill. It was a contagious fever, so I went of
my own accord to the hospital, not wishing to endanger her."

"Very right, but are you sure there is no danger of infection now?"
asked Mrs. Coventry anxiously.

"None, I assure you. I have been well for some time, but did not leave
because I preferred to stay there, than to return to Lady Sydney."

"No quarrel, I hope? No trouble of any kind?"

"No quarrel, but--well, why not? You have a right to know, and I will
not make a foolish mystery out of a very simple thing. As your family,
only, is present, I may tell the truth. I did not go back on the young
gentleman's account. Please ask no more."

"Ah, I see. Quite prudent and proper, Miss Muir. I shall never allude to
it again. Thank you for your frankness. Bella, you will be careful not
to mention this to young friends; girls gossip sadly, and it would annoy
Lady Sydney beyond everything to have this talked of."

"Very neighborly of Lady S. to send the dangerous young lady here,
where there are _two_ young gentlemen to be captivated. I wonder why
she didn't keep Sydney after she had caught him," murmured Coventry to
his cousin.

"Because she had the utmost contempt for a titled fool." Miss Muir
dropped the words almost into his ear, as she bent to take her shawl
from the sofa corner.

"How the deuce did she get there?" ejaculated Coventry, looking as if he
had received another sensation. "She has spirit, though, and upon my
word I pity Sydney, if he did try to dazzle her, for he must have got a
splendid dismissal."

"Come and play billiards. You promised, and I hold you to your word,"
said Lucia, rising with decision, for Gerald was showing too much
interest in another to suit Miss Beaufort.

"I am, as ever, your most devoted. My mother is a charming woman, but I
find our evening parties slightly dull, when only my own family are
present. Good night, Mamma." He shook hands with his mother, whose pride
and idol he was, and, with a comprehensive nod to the others, strolled
after his cousin.

"Now they are gone we can be quite cozy, and talk over things, for I
don't mind Ned any more than I do his dogs," said Bella, settling
herself on her mother's footstool.

"I merely wish to say, Miss Muir, that my daughter has never had a
governess and is sadly backward for a girl of sixteen. I want you to
pass the mornings with her, and get her on as rapidly as possible. In
the afternoon you will walk or drive with her, and in the evening sit
with us here, if you like, or amuse yourself as you please. While in the
country we are very quiet, for I cannot bear much company, and when my
sons want gaiety, they go away for it. Miss Beaufort oversees the
servants, and takes my place as far as possible. I am very delicate and
keep my room till evening, except for an airing at noon. We will try
each other for a month, and I hope we shall get on quite comfortably
together."

"I shall do my best, madam."

One would not have believed that the meek, spiritless voice which
uttered these words was the same that had startled Coventry a few
minutes before, nor that the pale, patient face could ever have kindled
with such sudden fire as that which looked over Miss Muir's shoulder
when she answered her young host's speech.

Edward thought within himself, Poor little woman! She has had a hard
life. We will try and make it easier while she is here; and began his
charitable work by suggesting that she might be tired. She acknowledged
she was, and Bella led her away to a bright, cozy room, where with a
pretty little speech and a good-night kiss she left her.

When alone Miss Muir's conduct was decidedly peculiar. Her first act was
to clench her hands and mutter between her teeth, with passionate force,
"I'll not fail again if there is power in a woman's wit and will!" She
stood a moment motionless, with an expression of almost fierce disdain
on her face, then shook her clenched hand as if menacing some unseen
enemy. Next she laughed, and shrugged her shoulders with a true French
shrug, saying low to herself, "Yes, the last scene _shall_ be better
than the first. _Mon dieu_, how tired and hungry I am!"

Kneeling before the one small trunk which held her worldly possessions,
she opened it, drew out a flask, and mixed a glass of some ardent
cordial, which she seemed to enjoy extremely as she sat on the carpet,
musing, while her quick eyes examined every corner of the room.

"Not bad! It will be a good field for me to work in, and the harder the
task the better I shall like it. _Merci_, old friend. You put heart and
courage into me when nothing else will. Come, the curtain is down, so I
may be myself for a few hours, if actresses ever are themselves."

Still sitting on the floor she unbound and removed the long abundant
braids from her head, wiped the pink from her face, took out several
pearly teeth, and slipping off her dress appeared herself indeed, a
haggard, worn, and moody woman of thirty at least. The metamorphosis was
wonderful, but the disguise was more in the expression she assumed than
in any art of costume or false adornment. Now she was alone, and her
mobile features settled into their natural expression, weary, hard,
bitter. She had been lovely once, happy, innocent, and tender; but
nothing of all this remained to the gloomy woman who leaned there
brooding over some wrong, or loss, or disappointment which had darkened
all her life. For an hour she sat so, sometimes playing absently with
the scanty locks that hung about her face, sometimes lifting the glass
to her lips as if the fiery draught warmed her cold blood; and once she
half uncovered her breast to eye with a terrible glance the scar of a
newly healed wound. At last she rose and crept to bed, like one worn out
with weariness and mental pain.




_chapter II_


A GOOD BEGINNING

Only the housemaids were astir when Miss Muir left her room next morning
and quietly found her way into the garden. As she walked, apparently
intent upon the flowers, her quick eye scrutinized the fine old house
and its picturesque surroundings.

"Not bad," she said to herself, adding, as she passed into the adjoining
park, "but the other may be better, and I will have the best."

Walking rapidly, she came out at length upon the wide green lawn which
lay before the ancient hall where Sir John Coventry lived in solitary
splendor. A stately old place, rich in oaks, well-kept shrubberies, gay
gardens, sunny terraces, carved gables, spacious rooms, liveried
servants, and every luxury befitting the ancestral home of a rich and
honorable race. Miss Muir's eyes brightened as she looked, her step grew
firmer, her carriage prouder, and a smile broke over her face; the smile
of one well pleased at the prospect of the success of some cherished
hope. Suddenly her whole air changed, she pushed back her hat, clasped
her hands loosely before her, and seemed absorbed in girlish admiration
of the fair scene that could not fail to charm any beauty-loving eye.
The cause of this rapid change soon appeared. A hale, handsome man,
between fifty and sixty, came through the little gate leading to the
park, and, seeing the young stranger, paused to examine her. He had only
time for a glance, however; she seemed conscious of his presence in a
moment, turned with a startled look, uttered an exclamation of surprise,
and looked as if hesitating whether to speak or run away. Gallant Sir
John took off his hat and said, with the old-fashioned courtesy which
became him well, "I beg your pardon for disturbing you, young lady.
Allow me to atone for it by inviting you to walk where you will, and
gather what flowers you like. I see you love them, so pray make free
with those about you."

With a charming air of maidenly timidity and artlessness, Miss Muir
replied, "Oh, thank you, sir! But it is I who should ask pardon for
trespassing. I never should have dared if I had not known that Sir John
was absent. I always wanted to see this fine old place, and ran over the
first thing, to satisfy myself."

"And _are_ you satisfied?" he asked, with a smile.

"More than satisfied--I'm charmed; for it is the most beautiful spot I
ever saw, and I've seen many famous seats, both at home and abroad," she
answered enthusiastically.

"The Hall is much flattered, and so would its master be if he heard
you," began the gentleman, with an odd expression.

"I should not praise it to him--at least, not as freely as I have to
you, sir," said the girl, with eyes still turned away.

"Why not?" asked her companion, looking much amused.

"I should be afraid. Not that I dread Sir John; but I've heard so many
beautiful and noble things about him, and respect him so highly, that I
should not dare to say much, lest he should see how I admire and--"

"And what, young lady? Finish, if you please."

"I was going to say, love him. I will say it, for he is an old man, and
one cannot help loving virtue and bravery."

Miss Muir looked very earnest and pretty as she spoke, standing there
with the sunshine glinting on her yellow hair, delicate face, and
downcast eyes. Sir John was not a vain man, but he found it pleasant to
hear himself commended by this unknown girl, and felt redoubled
curiosity to learn who she was. Too well-bred to ask, or to abash her by
avowing what she seemed unconscious of, he left both discoveries to
chance; and when she turned, as if to retrace her steps, he offered her
the handful of hothouse flowers which he held, saying, with a gallant
bow, "In Sir John's name let me give you my little nosegay, with thanks
for your good opinion, which, I assure you, is not entirely deserved,
for I know him well."

Miss Muir looked up quickly, eyed him an instant, then dropped her eyes,
and, coloring deeply, stammered out, "I did not know--I beg your
pardon--you are too kind, Sir John."

He laughed like a boy, asking, mischievously, "Why call me Sir John? How
do you know that I am not the gardener or the butler?"

"I did not see your face before, and no one but yourself would say that
any praise was undeserved," murmured Miss Muir, still overcome with
girlish confusion.

"Well, well, we will let that pass, and the next time you come we will
be properly introduced. Bella always brings her friends to the Hall, for
I am fond of young people."

"I am not a friend. I am only Miss Coventry's governess." And Miss Muir
dropped a meek curtsy. A slight change passed over Sir John's manner.
Few would have perceived it, but Miss Muir felt it at once, and bit her
lips with an angry feeling at her heart. With a curious air of pride,
mingled with respect, she accepted the still offered bouquet, returned
Sir John's parting bow, and tripped away, leaving the old gentleman to
wonder where Mrs. Coventry found such a piquant little governess.

"That is done, and very well for a beginning," she said to herself as
she approached the house.

In a green paddock close by fed a fine horse, who lifted up his head and
eyed her inquiringly, like one who expected a greeting. Following a
sudden impulse, she entered the paddock and, pulling a handful of
clover, invited the creature to come and eat. This was evidently a new
proceeding on the part of a lady, and the horse careered about as if
bent on frightening the newcomer away.

"I see," she said aloud, laughing to herself. "I am not your master, and
you rebel. Nevertheless, I'll conquer you, my fine brute."

Seating herself in the grass, she began to pull daisies, singing idly
the while, as if unconscious of the spirited prancings of the horse.
Presently he drew nearer, sniffing curiously and eyeing her with
surprise. She took no notice, but plaited the daisies and sang on as if
he was not there. This seemed to pique the petted creature, for, slowly
approaching, he came at length so close that he could smell her little
foot and nibble at her dress. Then she offered the clover, uttering
caressing words and making soothing sounds, till by degrees and with
much coquetting, the horse permitted her to stroke his glossy neck and
smooth his mane.

It was a pretty sight--the slender figure in the grass, the
high-spirited horse bending his proud head to her hand. Edward Coventry,
who had watched the scene, found it impossible to restrain himself any
longer and, leaping the wall, came to join the group, saying, with
mingled admiration and wonder in countenance and voice, "Good morning,
Miss Muir. If I had not seen your skill and courage proved before my
eyes, I should be alarmed for your safety. Hector is a wild, wayward
beast, and has damaged more than one groom who tried to conquer him."

"Good morning, Mr. Coventry. Don't tell tales of this noble creature,
who has not deceived my faith in him. Your grooms did not know how to
win his heart, and so subdue his spirit without breaking it."

Miss Muir rose as she spoke, and stood with her hand on Hector's neck
while he ate the grass which she had gathered in the skirt of her dress.

"You have the secret, and Hector is your subject now, though heretofore
he has rejected all friends but his master. Will you give him his
morning feast? I always bring him bread and play with him before
breakfast."

"Then you are not jealous?" And she looked up at him with eyes so bright
and beautiful in expression that the young man wondered he had not
observed them before.

"Not I. Pet him as much as you will; it will do him good. He is a
solitary fellow, for he scorns his own kind and lives alone, like his
master," he added, half to himself.

"Alone, with such a happy home, Mr. Coventry?" And a softly
compassionate glance stole from the bright eyes.

"That was an ungrateful speech, and I retract it for Bella's sake.
Younger sons have no position but such as they can make for themselves,
you know, and I've had no chance yet."

"Younger sons! I thought--I beg pardon." And Miss Muir paused, as if
remembering that she had no right to question.

Edward smiled and answered frankly, "Nay, don't mind me. You thought I
was the heir, perhaps. Whom did you take my brother for last night?"

"For some guest who admired Miss Beaufort. I did not hear his name, nor
observe him enough to discover who he was. I saw only your land mother,
your charming little sister, and--"

She stopped there, with a half-shy, half-grateful look at the young man
which finished the sentence better than any words. He was still a boy,
in spite of his one-and-twenty years, and a little color came into his
brown cheek as the eloquent eyes met his and fell before them.

"Yes, Bella is a capital girl, and one can't help loving her. I know
you'll get her on, for, really, she is the most delightful little dunce.
My mother's ill health and Bella's devotion to her have prevented our
attending to her education before. Next winter, when we go to town, she
is to come out, and must be prepared for that great event, you know," he
said, choosing a safe subject.

"I shall do my best. And that reminds me that I should report myself to
her, instead of enjoying myself here. When one has been ill and shut up
a long time, the country is so lovely one is apt to forget duty for
pleasure. Please remind me if I am negligent, Mr. Coventry."

"That name belongs to Gerald. I'm only Mr. Ned here," he said as they
walked toward the house, while Hector followed to the wall and sent a
sonorous farewell after them.

Bella came running to meet them, and greeted Miss Muir as if she had
made up her mind to like her heartily. "What a lovely bouquet you have
got! I never can arrange flowers prettily, which vexes me, for Mamma is
so fond of them and cannot go out herself. You have charming taste," she
said, examining the graceful posy which Miss Muir had much improved by
adding feathery grasses, delicate ferns, and fragrant wild flowers to
Sir John's exotics.

Putting them into Bella's hand, she said, in a winning way, "Take them
to your mother, then, and ask her if I may have the pleasure of making
her a daily nosegay; for I should find real delight in doing it, if it
would please her."

"How kind you are! Of course it would please her. I'll take them to her
while the dew is still on them." And away flew Bella, eager to give both
the flowers and the pretty message to the poor invalid.

Edward stopped to speak to the gardener, and Miss Muir went up the steps
alone. The long hall was lined with portraits, and pacing slowly down it
she examined them with interest. One caught her eye, and, pausing before
it, she scrutinized it carefully. A young, beautiful, but very haughty
female face. Miss Muir suspected at once who it was, and gave a decided
nod, as if she saw and caught at some unexpected chance. A soft rustle
behind her made her look around, and, seeing Lucia, she bowed, half
turned, as if for another glance at the picture, and said, as if
involuntarily, "How beautiful it is! May I ask if it is an ancestor,
Miss Beaufort?"

"It is the likeness of my mother" was the reply, given with a softened
voice and eyes that looked up tenderly.

"Ah, I might have known, from the resemblance, but I scarcely saw you
last night. Excuse my freedom, but Lady Sydney treated me as a friend,
and I forget my position. Allow me."

As she spoke, Miss Muir stooped to return the handkerchief which had
fallen from Lucia's hand, and did so with a humble mien which touched
the other's heart; for, though a proud, it was also a very generous one.

"Thank you. Are you better, this morning?" she said, graciously. And
having received an affirmative reply, she added, as she walked on, "I
will show you to the breakfast room, as Bella is not here. It is a very
informal meal with us, for my aunt is never down and my cousins are very
irregular in their hours. You can always have yours when you like,
without waiting for us if you are an early riser."

Bella and Edward appeared before the others were seated, and Miss Muir
quietly ate her breakfast, feeling well satisfied with her hour's
work. Ned recounted her exploit with Hector, Bella delivered her
mother's thanks for the flowers, and Lucia more than once recalled,
with pardonable vanity, that the governess had compared her to her
lovely mother, expressing by a look as much admiration for the living
likeness as for the painted one. All kindly did their best to make the
pale girl feel at home, and their cordial manner seemed to warm and
draw her out; for soon she put off her sad, meek air and entertained
them with gay anecdotes of her life in Paris, her travels in Russia
when governess in Prince Jermadoff's family, and all manner of witty
stories that kept them interested and merry long after the meal was
over. In the middle of an absorbing adventure, Coventry came in,
nodded lazily, lifted his brows, as if surprised at seeing the
governess there, and began his breakfast as if the ennui of another
day had already taken possession of him. Miss Muir stopped short, and
no entreaties could induce her to go on.

"Another time I will finish it, if you like. Now Miss Bella and I should
be at our books." And she left the room, followed by her pupil, taking
no notice of the young master of the house, beyond a graceful bow in
answer to his careless nod.

"Merciful creature! she goes when I come, and does not make life
unendurable by moping about before my eyes. Does she belong to the
moral, the melancholy, the romantic, or the dashing class, Ned?" said
Gerald, lounging over his coffee as he did over everything he attempted.

"To none of them; she is a capital little woman. I wish you had seen her
tame Hector this morning." And Edward repeated his story.

"Not a bad move on her part," said Coventry in reply. "She must be an
observing as well as an energetic young person, to discover your chief
weakness and attack it so soon. First tame the horse, and then the
master. It will be amusing to watch the game, only I shall be under the
painful necessity of checkmating you both, if it gets serious."

"You needn't exert yourself, old fellow, on my account. If I was not
above thinking ill of an inoffensive girl, I should say you were the
prize best worth winning, and advise you to take care of your own heart,
if you've got one, which I rather doubt."

"I often doubt it, myself; but I fancy the little Scotchwoman will not
be able to satisfy either of us upon that point. How does your highness
like her?" asked Coventry of his cousin, who sat near him.

"Better than I thought I should. She is well-bred, unassuming, and very
entertaining when she likes. She has told us some of the wittiest
stories I've heard for a long time. Didn't our laughter wake you?"
replied Lucia.

"Yes. Now atone for it by amusing me with a repetition of these
witty tales."

"That is impossible; her accent and manner are half the charm," said
Ned. "I wish you had kept away ten minutes longer, for your appearance
spoilt the best story of all."

"Why didn't she go on?" asked Coventry, with a ray of curiosity.

"You forget that she overheard us last night, and must feel that you
consider her a bore. She has pride, and no woman forgets speeches like
those you made," answered Lucia.

"Or forgives them, either, I believe. Well, I must be resigned to
languish under her displeasure then. On Sydney's account I take a slight
interest in her; not that I expect to learn anything from her, for a
woman with a mouth like that never confides or confesses anything. But I
have a fancy to see what captivated him; for captivated he was, beyond a
doubt, and by no lady whom he met in society. Did you ever hear anything
of it, Ned?" asked Gerald.

"I'm not fond of scandal or gossip, and never listen to either." With
which remark Edward left the room.

Lucia was called out by the housekeeper a moment after, and Coventry
left to the society most wearisome to him, namely his own. As he
entered, he had caught a part of the story which Miss Muir had been
telling, and it had excited his curiosity so much that he found himself
wondering what the end could be and wishing that he might hear it.

What the deuce did she run away for, when I came in? he thought. If she
_is_ amusing, she must make herself useful; for it's intensely dull, I
own, here, in spite of Lucia. Hey, what's that?

It was a rich, sweet voice, singing a brilliant Italian air, and singing
it with an expression that made the music doubly delicious. Stepping out
of the French window, Coventry strolled along the sunny terrace,
enjoying the song with the relish of a connoisseur. Others followed, and
still he walked and listened, forgetful of weariness or tune. As one
exquisite air ended, he involuntarily applauded. Miss Muir's face
appeared for an instant, then vanished, and no more music followed,
though Coventry lingered, hoping to hear the voice again. For music was
the one thing of which he never wearied, and neither Lucia nor Bella
possessed skill enough to charm him. For an hour he loitered on the
terrace or the lawn, basking in the sunshine, too indolent to seek
occupation or society. At length Bella came out, hat in hand, and nearly
stumbled over her brother, who lay on the grass.

"You lazy man, have you been dawdling here all this time?" she said,
looking down at him.

"No, I've been very busy. Come and tell me how you've got on with the
little dragon."

"Can't stop. She bade me take a run after my French, so that I might be
ready for my drawing, and so I must."

"It's too warm to run. Sit down and amuse your deserted brother, who has
had no society but bees and lizards for an hour."

He drew her down as he spoke, and Bella obeyed; for, in spite of his
indolence, he was one to whom all submitted without dreaming of refusal.

"What have you been doing? Muddling your poor little brains with all
manner of elegant rubbish?"

"No, I've been enjoying myself immensely. Jean is _so_ interesting, so
kind and clever. She didn't bore me with stupid grammar, but just talked
to me in such pretty French that I got on capitally, and like it as I
never expected to, after Lucia's dull way of teaching it."

"What did you talk about?"

"Oh, all manner of things. She asked questions, and I answered, and she
corrected me."

"Questions about our affairs, I suppose?"

"Not one. She don't care two sous for us or our affairs. I thought she
might like to know what sort of people we were, so I told her about
Papa's sudden death, Uncle John, and you, and Ned; but in the midst of
it she said, in her quiet way, 'You are getting too confidential, my
dear. It is not best to talk too freely of one's affairs to strangers.
Let us speak of something else.'"

"What were you talking of when she said that, Bell?"

"You."

"Ah, then no wonder she was bored."

"She was tired of my chatter, and didn't hear half I said; for she was
busy sketching something for me to copy, and thinking of something more
interesting than the Coventrys."

"How do you know?"

"By the expression of her face. Did you like her music, Gerald?"

"Yes. Was she angry when I clapped?"

"She looked surprised, then rather proud, and shut the piano at once,
though I begged her to go on. Isn't Jean a pretty name?"

"Not bad; but why don't you call her Miss Muir?"

"She begged me not. She hates it, and loves to be called Jean, alone.
I've imagined such a nice little romance about her, and someday I shall
tell her, for I'm sure she has had a love trouble."

"Don't get such nonsense into your head, but follow Miss Muir's
well-bred example and don't be curious about other people's affairs. Ask
her to sing tonight; it amuses me."

"She won't come down, I think. We've planned to read and work in my
boudoir, which is to be our study now. Mamma will stay in her room, so
you and Lucia can have the drawing room all to yourselves."

"Thank you. What will Ned do?"

"He will amuse Mamma, he says. Dear old Ned! I wish you'd stir about and
get him his commission. He is so impatient to be doing something and yet
so proud he won't ask again, after you have neglected it so many times
and refused Uncle's help."

"I'll attend to it very soon; don't worry me, child. He will do very
well for a time, quietly here with us."

"You always say that, yet you know he chafes and is unhappy at being
dependent on you. Mamma and I don't mind; but he is a man, and it frets
him. He said he'd take matters into his own hands soon, and then you may
be sorry you were so slow in helping him."

"Miss Muir is looking out of the window. You'd better go and take your
run, else she will scold."

"Not she. I'm not a bit afraid of her, she's so gentle and sweet. I'm
fond of her already. You'll get as brown as Ned, lying here in the
sun. By the way, Miss Muir agrees with me in thinking him handsomer
than you."

"I admire her taste and quite agree with her."

"She said he was manly, and that was more attractive than beauty in a
man. She does express things so nicely. Now I'm off." And away danced
Bella, humming the burden of Miss Muir's sweetest song.

"'Energy is more attractive than beauty in a man.' She is right, but how
the deuce _can_ a man be energetic, with nothing to expend his energies
upon?" mused Coventry, with his hat over his eyes.

A few moments later, the sweep of a dress caught his ear. Without
stirring, a sidelong glance showed him Miss Muir coming across the
terrace, as if to join Bella. Two stone steps led down to the lawn. He
lay near them, and Miss Muir did not see him till close upon him. She
started and slipped on the last step, recovered herself, and glided on,
with a glance of unmistakable contempt as she passed the recumbent
figure of the apparent sleeper. Several things in Bella's report had
nettled him, but this look made him angry, though he would not own it,
even to himself.

"Gerald, come here, quick!" presently called Bella, from the rustic seat
where she stood beside her governess, who sat with her hand over her
face as if in pain.

Gathering himself up, Coventry slowly obeyed, but involuntarily
quickened his pace as he heard Miss Muir say, "Don't call him; _he_ can
do nothing"; for the emphasis on the word "he" was very significant.

"What is it, Bella?" he asked, looking rather wider awake than usual.

"You startled Miss Muir and made her turn her ankle. Now help her to the
house, for she is in great pain; and don't lie there anymore to frighten
people like a snake in the grass," said his sister petulantly.

"I beg your pardon. Will you allow me?" And Coventry offered his arm.

Miss Muir looked up with the expression which annoyed him and answered
coldly, "Thank you, Miss Bella will do as well."

"Permit me to doubt that." And with a gesture too decided to be
resisted, Coventry drew her arm through his and led her into the house.
She submitted quietly, said the pain would soon be over, and when
settled on the couch in Bella's room dismissed him with the briefest
thanks. Considering the unwonted exertion he had made, he thought she
might have been a little more grateful, and went away to Lucia, who
always brightened when he came.

No more was seen of Miss Muir till teatime; for now, while the family
were in retirement, they dined early and saw no company. The governess
had excused herself at dinner, but came down in the evening a little
paler than usual and with a slight limp in her gait. Sir John was there,
talking with his nephew, and they merely acknowledged her presence by
the sort of bow which gentlemen bestow on governesses. As she slowly
made her way to her place behind the urn, Coventry said to his brother,
"Take her a footstool, and ask her how she is, Ned." Then, as if
necessary to account for his politeness to his uncle, he explained how
he was the cause of the accident.

"Yes, yes. I understand. Rather a nice little person, I fancy. Not
exactly a beauty, but accomplished and well-bred, which is better for
one of her class."

"Some tea, Sir John?" said a soft voice at his elbow, and there was Miss
Muir, offering cups to the gentlemen.

"Thank you, thank you," said Sir John, sincerely hoping she had
overheard him.

As Coventry took his, he said graciously, "You are very forgiving, Miss
Muir, to wait upon me, after I have caused you so much pain."

"It is my duty, sir" was her reply, in a tone which plainly said, "but
not my pleasure." And she returned to her place, to smile, and chat, and
be charming, with Bella and her brother.

Lucia, hovering near her uncle and Gerald, kept them to herself, but
was disturbed to find that their eyes often wandered to the cheerful
group about the table, and that their attention seemed distracted by
the frequent bursts of laughter and fragments of animated conversation
which reached them. In the midst of an account of a tragic affair which
she endeavored to make as interesting and pathetic as possible, Sir
John burst into a hearty laugh, which betrayed that he had been
listening to a livelier story than her own. Much annoyed, she said
hastily, "I knew it would be so! Bella has no idea of the proper manner
in which to treat a governess. She and Ned will forget the difference
of rank and spoil that person for her work. She is inclined to be
presumptuous already, and if my aunt won't trouble herself to give Miss
Muir a hint in time, I shall."

"Wait until she has finished that story, I beg of you," said Coventry,
for Sir John was already off.

"If you find that nonsense so entertaining, why don't you follow Uncle's
example? I don't need you."

"Thank you. I will." And Lucia was deserted.

But Miss Muir had ended and, beckoning to Bella, left the room, as if
quite unconscious of the honor conferred upon her or the dullness she
left behind her. Ned went up to his mother, Gerald returned to make his
peace with Lucia, and, bidding them good-night, Sir John turned
homeward. Strolling along the terrace, he came to the lighted window of
Bella's study, and wishing to say a word to her, he half pushed aside
the curtain and looked in. A pleasant little scene. Bella working
busily, and near her in a low chair, with the light falling on her fair
hair and delicate profile, sat Miss Muir reading aloud. "Novels!"
thought Sir John, and smiled at them for a pair of romantic girls. But
pausing to listen a moment before he spoke, he found it was no novel,
but history, read with a fluency which made every fact interesting,
every sketch of character memorable, by the dramatic effect given to it.
Sir John was fond of history, and failing eyesight often curtailed his
favorite amusement. He had tried readers, but none suited him, and he
had given up the plan. Now as he listened, he thought how pleasantly the
smoothly flowing voice would wile away his evenings, and he envied Bella
her new acquisition.

A bell rang, and Bella sprang up, saying, "Wait for me a minute. I must
run to Mamma, and then we will go on with this charming prince."

Away she went, and Sir John was about to retire as quietly as he came,
when Miss Muir's peculiar behavior arrested him for an instant. Dropping
the book, she threw her arms across the table, laid her head down upon
them, and broke into a passion of tears, like one who could bear
restraint no longer. Shocked and amazed, Sir John stole away; but all
that night the kindhearted gentleman puzzled his brains with conjectures
about his niece's interesting young governess, quite unconscious that
she intended he should do so.




_chapter III_


PASSION AND PIQUE

For several weeks the most monotonous tranquillity seemed to reign at
Coventry House, and yet, unseen, unsuspected, a storm was gathering.
The arrival of Miss Muir seemed to produce a change in everyone, though
no one could have explained how or why. Nothing could be more
unobtrusive and retiring than her manners. She was devoted to Bella,
who soon adored her, and was only happy when in her society. She
ministered in many ways to Mrs. Coventry's comfort, and that lady
declared there never was such a nurse. She amused, interested and won
Edward with her wit and womanly sympathy. She made Lucia respect and
envy her for her accomplishments, and piqued indolent Gerald by her
persistent avoidance of him, while Sir John was charmed with her
respectful deference and the graceful little attentions she paid him in
a frank and artless way, very winning to the lonely old man. The very
servants liked her; and instead of being, what most governesses are, a
forlorn creature hovering between superiors and inferiors, Jean Muir
was the life of the house, and the friend of all but two.

Lucia disliked her, and Coventry distrusted her; neither could exactly
say why, and neither owned the feeling, even to themselves. Both watched
her covertly yet found no shortcoming anywhere. Meek, modest, faithful,
and invariably sweet-tempered--they could complain of nothing and
wondered at their own doubts, though they could not banish them.

It soon came to pass that the family was divided, or rather that two
members were left very much to themselves. Pleading timidity, Jean Muir
kept much in Bella's study and soon made it such a pleasant little nook
that Ned and his mother, and often Sir John, came in to enjoy the music,
reading, or cheerful chat which made the evenings so gay. Lucia at first
was only too glad to have her cousin to herself, and he too lazy to care
what went on about him. But presently he wearied of her society, for she
was not a brilliant girl, and possessed few of those winning arts which
charm a man and steal into his heart. Rumors of the merry-makings that
went on reached him and made him curious to share them; echoes of fine
music went sounding through the house, as he lounged about the empty
drawing room; and peals of laughter reached him while listening to
Lucia's grave discourse.

She soon discovered that her society had lost its charm, and the more
eagerly she tried to please him, the more signally she failed. Before
long Coventry fell into a habit of strolling out upon the terrace of an
evening, and amusing himself by passing and repassing the window of
Bella's room, catching glimpses of what was going on and reporting the
result of his observations to Lucia, who was too proud to ask admission
to the happy circle or to seem to desire it.

"I shall go to London tomorrow, Lucia," Gerald said one evening, as he
came back from what he called "a survey," looking very much annoyed.

"To London?" exclaimed his cousin, surprised.

"Yes, I must bestir myself and get Ned his commission, or it will be all
over with him."

"How do you mean?"

"He is falling in love as fast as it is possible for a boy to do it.
That girl has bewitched him, and he will make a fool of himself very
soon, unless I put a stop to it."

"I was afraid she would attempt a flirtation. These persons always do,
they are such a mischief-making race."

"Ah, but there you are wrong, as far as little Muir is concerned. She
does not flirt, and Ned has too much sense and spirit to be caught by a
silly coquette. She treats him like an elder sister, and mingles the
most attractive friendliness with a quiet dignity that captivates the
boy. I've been watching them, and there he is, devouring her with his
eyes, while she reads a fascinating novel in the most fascinating
style. Bella and Mamma are absorbed in the tale, and see nothing; but
Ned makes himself the hero, Miss Muir the heroine, and lives the love
scene with all the ardor of a man whose heart has just waked up. Poor
lad! Poor lad!"

Lucia looked at her cousin, amazed by the energy with which he spoke,
the anxiety in his usually listless face. The change became him, for it
showed what he might be, making one regret still more what he was.
Before she could speak, he was gone again, to return presently,
laughing, yet looking a little angry.

"What now?" she asked.

"'Listeners never hear any good of themselves' is the truest of
proverbs. I stopped a moment to look at Ned, and heard the following
flattering remarks. Mamma is gone, and Ned was asking little Muir to
sing that delicious barcarole she gave us the other evening.

"'Not now, not here,' she said.

"'Why not? You sang it in the drawing room readily enough,' said Ned,
imploringly.

"'That is a very different thing,' and she looked at him with a little
shake of the head, for he was folding his hands and doing the
passionate pathetic.

"'Come and sing it there then,' said innocent Bella. 'Gerald likes your
voice so much, and complains that you will never sing to him.'

"'He never asks me,' said Muir, with an odd smile.

"'He is too lazy, but he wants to hear you.'

"'When he asks me, I will sing--if I feel like it.' And she shrugged her
shoulders with a provoking gesture of indifference.

"'But it amuses him, and he gets so bored down here,' began stupid
little Bella. 'Don't be shy or proud, Jean, but come and entertain the
poor old fellow.'

"'No, thank you. I engaged to teach Miss Coventry, not to amuse Mr.
Coventry' was all the answer she got.

"'You amuse Ned, why not Gerald? Are you afraid of him?' asked Bella.

"Miss Muir laughed, such a scornful laugh, and said, in that
peculiar tone of hers, 'I cannot fancy anyone being _afraid_ of your
elder brother.'

"'I am, very often, and so would you be, if you ever saw him angry,' And
Bella looked as if I'd beaten her.

"'Does he ever wake up enough to be angry?' asked that girl, with an air
of surprise. Here Ned broke into a fit of laughter, and they are at it
now, I fancy, by the sound."

"Their foolish gossip is not worth getting excited about, but I
certainly would send Ned away. It's no use trying to get rid of 'that
girl,' as you say, for my aunt is as deluded about her as Ned and Bella,
and she really does get the child along splendidly. Dispatch Ned, and
then she can do no harm," said Lucia, watching Coventry's altered face
as he stood in the moonlight, just outside the window where she sat.

"Have you no fears for me?" he asked smiling, as if ashamed of his
momentary petulance.

"No, have you for yourself?" And a shade of anxiety passed over her
face.

"I defy the Scotch witch to enchant me, except with her music," he
added, moving down the terrace again, for Jean was singing like a
nightingale.

As the song ended, he put aside the curtain, and said, abruptly, "Has
anyone any commands for London? I am going there tomorrow."

"A pleasant trip to you," said Ned carelessly, though usually his
brother's movements interested him extremely.

"I want quantities of things, but I must ask Mamma first." And Bella
began to make a list.

"May I trouble you with a letter, Mr. Coventry?"

Jean Muir turned around on the music stool and looked at him with the
cold keen glance which always puzzled him.

He bowed, saying, as if to them all, "I shall be off by the early train,
so you must give me your orders tonight."

"Then come away, Ned, and leave Jean to write her letter."

And Bella took her reluctant brother from the room.

"I will give you the letter in the morning," said Miss Muir, with a
curious quiver in her voice, and the look of one who forcibly suppressed
some strong emotion.

"As you please." And Coventry went back to Lucia, wondering who Miss
Muir was going to write to. He said nothing to his brother of the
purpose which took him to town, lest a word should produce the
catastrophe which he hoped to prevent; and Ned, who now lived in a sort
of dream, seemed to forget Gerald's existence altogether.

With unwonted energy Coventry was astir seven next morning. Lucia gave
him his breakfast, and as he left the room to order the carriage, Miss
Muir came gliding downstairs, very pale and heavy-eyed (with a
sleepless, tearful night, he thought) and, putting a delicate little
letter into his hand, said hurriedly, "Please leave this at Lady
Sydney's, and if you see her, say 'I have remembered.'"

Her peculiar manner and peculiar message struck him. His eye
involuntarily glanced at the address of the letter and read young
Sydney's name. Then, conscious of his mistake, he thrust it into his
pocket with a hasty "Good morning," and left Miss Muir standing with
one hand pressed on her heart, the other half extended as if to recall
the letter.

All the way to London, Coventry found it impossible to forget the
almost tragical expression of the girl's face, and it haunted him
through the bustle of two busy days. Ned's affair was put in the way of
being speedily accomplished, Bella's commissions were executed, his
mother's pet delicacies provided for her, and a gift for Lucia, whom
the family had given him for his future mate, as he was too lazy to
choose for himself.

Jean Muir's letter he had not delivered, for Lady Sydney was in the
country and her townhouse closed. Curious to see how she would receive
his tidings, he went quietly in on his arrival at home. Everyone had
dispersed to dress for dinner except Miss Muir, who was in the garden,
the servant said.

"Very well, I have a message for her"; and, turning, the "young master,"
as they called him, went to seek her. In a remote corner he saw her
sitting alone, buried in thought. As his step roused her, a look of
surprise, followed by one of satisfaction, passed over her face, and,
rising, she beckoned to him with an almost eager gesture. Much amazed,
he went to her and offered the letter, saying kindly, "I regret that I
could not deliver it. Lady Sydney is in the country, and I did not like
to post it without your leave. Did I do right?"

"Quite right, thank you very much--it is better so." And with an air of
relief, she tore the letter to atoms, and scattered them to the wind.

More amazed than ever, the young man was about to leave her when she
said, with a mixture of entreaty and command, "Please stay a moment. I
want to speak to you."

He paused, eyeing her with visible surprise, for a sudden color dyed her
cheeks, and her lips trembled. Only for a moment, then she was quite
self-possessed again. Motioning him to the seat she had left, she
remained standing while she said, in a low, rapid tone full of pain and
of decision:

"Mr. Coventry, as the head of the house I want to speak to you, rather
than to your mother, of a most unhappy affair which has occurred during
your absence. My month of probation ends today; your mother wishes me to
remain; I, too, wish it sincerely, for I am happy here, but I ought not.
Read this, and you will see why."

She put a hastily written note into his hand and watched him intently
while he read it. She saw him flush with anger, bite his lips, and knit
his brows, then assume his haughtiest look, as he lifted his eyes and
said in his most sarcastic tone, "Very well for a beginning. The boy has
eloquence. Pity that it should be wasted. May I ask if you have replied
to this rhapsody?"

"I have."

"And what follows? He begs you 'to fly with him, to share his fortunes,
and be the good angel of his life.' Of course you consent?"

There was no answer, for, standing erect before him, Miss Muir regarded
him with an expression of proud patience, like one who expected
reproaches, yet was too generous to resent them. Her manner had its
effect. Dropping his bitter tone, Coventry asked briefly, "Why do you
show me this? What can I do?"

"I show it that you may see how much in earnest 'the boy' is, and how
open I desire to be. You can control, advise, and comfort your brother,
and help me to see what is my duty."

"You love him?" demanded Coventry bluntly.

"No!" was the quick, decided answer.

"Then why make him love you?"

"I never tried to do it. Your sister will testify that I have endeavored
to avoid him as I--" And he finished the sentence with an unconscious
tone of pique, "As you have avoided me."

She bowed silently, and he went on:

"I will do you the justice to say that nothing can be more blameless
than your conduct toward myself; but why allow Ned to haunt you evening
after evening? What could you expect of a romantic boy who had nothing
to do but lose his heart to the first attractive woman he met?"

A momentary glisten shone in Jean Muir's steel-blue eyes as the last
words left the young man's lips; but it was gone instantly, and her
voice was full of reproach, as she said, steadily, impulsively, "If the
'romantic boy' had been allowed to lead the life of a man, as he longed
to do, he would have had no time to lose his heart to the first
sorrowful girl whom he pitied. Mr. Coventry, the fault is yours. Do not
blame your brother, but generously own your mistake and retrieve it in
the speediest, kindest manner."

For an instant Gerald sat dumb. Never since his father died had anyone
reproved him; seldom in his life had he been blamed. It was a new
experience, and the very novelty added to the effect. He saw his fault,
regretted it, and admired the brave sincerity of the girl in telling him
of it. But he did not know how to deal with the case, and was forced to
confess not only past negligence but present incapacity. He was as
honorable as he was proud, and with an effort he said frankly, "You are
right, Miss Muir. I _am_ to blame, yet as soon as I saw the danger, I
tried to avert it. My visit to town was on Ned's account; he will have
his commission very soon, and then he will be sent out of harm's way.
Can I do more?"

"No, it is too late to send him away with a free and happy heart. He
must bear his pain as he can, and it may help to make a man of him," she
said sadly.

"He'll soon forget," began Coventry, who found the thought of gay Ned
suffering an uncomfortable one.

"Yes, thank heaven, that is possible, for men."

Miss Muir pressed her hands together, with a dark expression on her
half-averted face. Something in her tone, her manner, touched Coventry;
he fancied that some old wound bled, some bitter memory awoke at the
approach of a new lover. He was young, heart-whole, and romantic, under
all his cool nonchalance of manner. This girl, who he fancied loved his
friend and who was, beloved by his brother, became an object of interest
to him. He pitied her, desired to help her, and regretted his past
distrust, as a chivalrous man always regrets injustice to a woman. She
was happy here, poor, homeless soul, and she should stay. Bella loved
her, his mother took comfort in her, and when Ned was gone, no one's
peace would be endangered by her winning ways, her rich accomplishments.
These thoughts swept through his mind during a brief pause, and when he
spoke, it was to say gently:

"Miss Muir, I thank you for the frankness which must have been painful
to you, and I will do my best to be worthy of the confidence which you
repose in me. You were both discreet and kind to speak only to me. This
thing would have troubled my mother extremely, and have done no good. I
shall see Ned, and try and repair my long neglect as promptly as
possible. I know you will help me, and in return let me beg of you to
remain, for he will soon be gone."

She looked at him with eyes full of tears, and there was no coolness in
the voice that answered softly, "You are too kind, but I had better go;
it is not wise to stay."

"Why not?"

She colored beautifully, hesitated, then spoke out in the clear, steady
voice which was her greatest charm, "If I had known there were sons in
this family, I never should have come. Lady Sydney spoke only of your
sister, and when I found two gentlemen, I was troubled, because--I am so
unfortunate--or rather, people are so kind as to like me more than I
deserve. I thought I could stay a month, at least, as your brother spoke
of going away, and you were already affianced, but--"

"I am not affianced."

Why he said that, Coventry could not tell, but the words passed his lips
hastily and could not be recalled. Jean Muir took the announcement oddly
enough. She shrugged her shoulders with an air of extreme annoyance, and
said almost rudely, "Then you should be; you will be soon. But that is
nothing to me. Miss Beaufort wishes me gone, and I am too proud to
remain and become the cause of disunion in a happy family. No, I will
go, and go at once."

She turned away impetuously, but Edward's arm detained her, and Edward's
voice demanded, tenderly, "Where will you go, my Jean?"

The tender touch and name seemed to rob her of her courage and calmness,
for, leaning on her lover, she hid her face and sobbed audibly.

"Now don't make a scene, for heaven's sake," began Coventry impatiently,
as his brother eyed him fiercely, divining at once what had passed, for
his letter was still in Gerald's hand and Jean's last words had reached
her lover's ear.

"Who gave you the right to read that, and to interfere in my affairs?"
demanded Edward hotly.

"Miss Muir" was the reply, as Coventry threw away the paper.

"And you add to the insult by ordering her out of the house," cried Ned
with increasing wrath.

"On the contrary, I beg her to remain."

"The deuce you do! And why?"

"Because she is useful and happy here, and I am unwilling that your
folly should rob her of a home which she likes."

"You are very thoughtful and devoted all at once, but I beg you will not
trouble yourself. Jean's happiness and home will be my care now."

"My dear boy, do be reasonable. The thing is impossible. Miss Muir sees
it herself; she came to tell me, to ask how best to arrange matters
without troubling my mother. I've been to town to attend to your
affairs, and you may be off now very soon."

"I have no desire to go. Last month it was the wish of my heart. Now
I'll accept nothing from you." And Edward turned moodily away from
his brother.

"What folly! Ned, you _must_ leave home. It is all arranged and cannot
be given up now. A change is what you need, and it will make a man of
you. We shall miss you, of course, but you will be where you'll see
something of life, and that is better for you than getting into
mischief here."

"Are you going away, Jean?" asked Edward, ignoring his brother entirely
and bending over the girl, who still hid her face and wept. She did not
speak, and Gerald answered for her.

"No, why should she if you are gone?"

"Do you mean to stay?" asked the lover eagerly of Jean.

"I wish to remain, but--" She paused and looked up. Her eyes went from
one face to the other, and she added, decidedly, "Yes, I must go, it is
not wise to stay even when you are gone."

Neither of the young men could have explained why that hurried glance
affected them as it did, but each felt conscious of a willful desire to
oppose the other. Edward suddenly felt that his brother loved Miss Muir,
and was bent on removing her from his way. Gerald had a vague idea that
Miss Muir feared to remain on his account, and he longed to show her
that he was quite safe. Each felt angry, and each showed it in a
different way, one being violent, the other satirical.

"You are right, Jean, this is not the place for you; and you must let me
see you in a safer home before I go," said Ned, significantly.

"It strikes me that this will be a particularly safe home when your
dangerous self is removed," began Coventry, with an aggravating smile of
calm superiority.

"And _I_ think that I leave a more dangerous person than myself behind
me, as poor Lucia can testify."

"Be careful what you say, Ned, or I shall be forced to remind you that I
am master here. Leave Lucia's name out of this disagreeable affair, if
you please."

"You _are_ master here, but not of me, or my actions, and you have no
right to expect obedience or respect, for you inspire neither. Jean, I
asked you to go with me secretly; now I ask you openly to share my
fortune. In my brother's presence I ask, and _will_ have an answer."

He caught her hand impetuously, with a defiant look at Coventry, who
still smiled, as if at boy's play, though his eyes were kindling and his
face changing with the still, white wrath which is more terrible than
any sudden outburst. Miss Muir looked frightened; she shrank away from
her passionate young lover, cast an appealing glance at Gerald, and
seemed as if she longed to claim his protection yet dared not.

"Speak!" cried Edward, desperately. "Don't look to him, tell me truly,
with your own lips, do you, can you love me, Jean?"

"I have told you once. Why pain me by forcing another hard reply," she
said pitifully, still shrinking from his grasp and seeming to appeal to
his brother.

"You wrote a few lines, but I'll not be satisfied with that. You shall
answer; I've seen love in your eyes, heard it in your voice, and I know
it is hidden in your heart. You fear to own it; do not hesitate, no one
can part us--speak, Jean, and satisfy me."

Drawing her hand decidedly away, she went a step nearer Coventry, and
answered, slowly, distinctly, though her lips trembled, and she
evidently dreaded the effect of her words, "I will speak, and speak
truly. You have seen love in my face; it is in my heart, and I do not
hesitate to own it, cruel as it is to force the truth from me, but this
love is not for you. Are you satisfied?"

He looked at her with a despairing glance and stretched his hand toward
her beseechingly. She seemed to fear a blow, for suddenly she clung to
Gerald with a faint cry. The act, the look of fear, the protecting
gesture Coventry involuntarily made were too much for Edward, already
excited by conflicting passions. In a paroxysm of blind wrath, he caught
up a large pruning knife left there by the gardener, and would have
dealt his brother a fatal blow had he not warded it off with his arm.
The stroke fell, and another might have followed had not Miss Muir with
unexpected courage and strength wrested the knife from Edward and flung
it into the little pond near by. Coventry dropped down upon the seat,
for the blood poured from a deep wound in his arm, showing by its rapid
flow that an artery had been severed. Edward stood aghast, for with the
blow his fury passed, leaving him overwhelmed with remorse and shame.

Gerald looked up at him, smiled faintly, and said, with no sign of
reproach or anger, "Never mind, Ned. Forgive and forget. Lend me a hand
to the house, and don't disturb anyone. It's not much, I dare say." But
his lips whitened as he spoke, and his strength failed him. Edward
sprang to support him, and Miss Muir, forgetting her terrors, proved
herself a girl of uncommon skill and courage.

"Quick! Lay him down. Give me your handkerchief, and bring some water,"
she said, in a tone of quiet command. Poor Ned obeyed and watched her
with breathless suspense while she tied the handkerchief tightly around
the arm, thrust the handle of his riding whip underneath, and pressed it
firmly above the severed artery to stop the dangerous flow of blood.

"Dr. Scott is with your mother, I think. Go and bring him here" was
the next order; and Edward darted away, thankful to do anything to
ease the terror which possessed him. He was gone some minutes, and
while they waited Coventry watched the girl as she knelt beside him,
bathing his face with one hand while with the other she held the
bandage firmly in its place. She was pale, but quite steady and
self-possessed, and her eyes shone with a strange brilliancy as she
looked down at him. Once, meeting his look of grateful wonder, she
smiled a reassuring smile that made her lovely, and said, in a soft,
sweet tone never used to him before, "Be quiet. There is no danger. I
will stay by you till help comes."

Help did come speedily, and the doctor's first words were "Who
improvised that tourniquet?"

"She did," murmured Coventry.

"Then you may thank her for saving your life. By Jove! It was capitally
done"; and the old doctor looked at the girl with as much admiration as
curiosity in his face.

"Never mind that. See to the wound, please, while I ran for bandages,
and salts, and wine."

Miss Muir was gone as she spoke, so fleetly that it was in vain to call
her back or catch her. During her brief absence, the story was told by
repentant Ned and the wound examined.

"Fortunately I have my case of instruments with me," said the doctor,
spreading on the bench a long array of tiny, glittering implements of
torture. "Now, Mr. Ned, come here, and hold the arm in that way, while I
tie the artery. Hey! That will never do. Don't tremble so, man, look
away and hold it steadily."

"I can't!" And poor Ned turned faint and white, not at the sight but
with the bitter thought that he had longed to kill his brother.

"I will hold it," and a slender white hand lifted the bare and bloody
arm so firmly, steadily, that Coventry sighed a sigh of relief, and Dr.
Scott fell to work with an emphatic nod of approval.

It was soon over, and while Edward ran in to bid the servants beware of
alarming their mistress, Dr. Scott put up his instruments and Miss Muir
used salts, water, and wine so skillfully that Gerald was able to walk
to his room, leaning on the old man, while the girl supported the
wounded arm, as no sling could be made on the spot. As he entered the
chamber, Coventry turned, put out his left hand, and with much feeling
in his fine eyes said simply, "Miss Muir, I thank you."

The color came up beautifully in her pale cheeks as she pressed the hand
and without a word vanished from the room. Lucia and the housekeeper
came bustling in, and there was no lack of attendance on the invalid. He
soon wearied of it, and sent them all away but Ned, who remorsefully
haunted the chamber, looking like a comely young Cain and feeling like
an outcast.

"Come here, lad, and tell me all about it. I was wrong to be
domineering. Forgive me, and believe that I care for your happiness more
sincerely than for my own."

These frank and friendly words healed the breach between the two
brothers and completely conquered Ned. Gladly did he relate his love
passages, for no young lover ever tires of that amusement if he has a
sympathizing auditor, and Gerald _was_ sympathetic now. For an hour did
he lie listening patiently to the history of the growth of his brother's
passion. Emotion gave the narrator eloquence, and Jean Muir's character
was painted in glowing colors. All her unsuspected kindness to those
about her was dwelt upon; all her faithful care, her sisterly interest
in Bella, her gentle attentions to their mother, her sweet forbearance
with Lucia, who plainly showed her dislike, and most of all, her
friendly counsel, sympathy, and regard for Ned himself.

"She would make a man of me. She puts strength and courage into me as no
one else can. She is unlike any girl I ever saw; there's no
sentimentality about her; she is wise, and kind, and sweet. She says
what she means, looks you straight in the eye, and is as true as steel.
I've tried her, I know her, and--ah, Gerald, I love her so!"

Here the poor lad leaned his face into his hands and sighed a sigh that
made his brother's heart ache.

"Upon my soul, Ned, I feel for you; and if there was no obstacle on her
part, I'd do my best for you. She loves Sydney, and so there is nothing
for it but to bear your fate like a man."

"Are you sure about Sydney? May it not be some one else?" and Ned eyed
his brother with a suspicious look.

Coventry told him all he knew and surmised concerning his friend, not
forgetting the letter. Edward mused a moment, then seemed relieved, and
said frankly, "I'm glad it's Sydney and not you. I can bear it better."

"Me!" ejaculated Gerald, with a laugh.

"Yes, you; I've been tormented lately with a fear that you cared for
her, or rather, she for you."

"You jealous young fool! We never see or speak to one another scarcely,
so how could we get up a tender interest?"

"What do you lounge about on that terrace for every evening? And why
does she get fluttered when your shadow begins to come and go?"
demanded Edward.

"I like the music and don't care for the society of the singer, that's
why I walk there. The fluttering is all your imagination; Miss Muir
isn't a woman to be fluttered by a man's shadow." And Coventry glanced
at his useless arm.

"Thank you for that, and for not saying 'little Muir,' as you generally
do. Perhaps it was my imagination. But she never makes fun of you now,
and so I fancied she might have lost her heart to the 'young master.'
Women often do, you know."

"She used to ridicule me, did she?" asked Coventry, taking no notice of
the latter part of his brother's speech, which was quite true
nevertheless.

"Not exactly, she was too well-bred for that. But sometimes when Bella
and I joked about you, she'd say something so odd or witty that it was
irresistible. You're used to being laughed at, so you don't mind, I
know, just among ourselves."

"Not I. Laugh away as much as you like," said Gerald. But he did mind,
and wanted exceedingly to know what Miss Muir had said, yet was too
proud to ask. He turned restlessly and uttered a sigh of pain.

"I'm talking too much; it's bad for you. Dr. Scott said you must be
quiet. Now go to sleep, if you can."

Edward left the bedside but not the room, for he would let no one take
his place. Coventry tried to sleep, found it impossible, and after a
restless hour called his brother back.

"If the bandage was loosened a bit, it would ease my arm and then I
could sleep. Can you do it, Ned?"

"I dare not touch it. The doctor gave orders to leave it till he came in
the morning, and I shall only do harm if I try."

"But I tell you it's too tight. My arm is swelling and the pain is
intense. It can't be right to leave it so. Dr. Scott dressed it in a
hurry and did it too tight. Common sense will tell you that," said
Coventry impatiently.

"I'll call Mrs. Morris; she will understand what's best to be done." And
Edward moved toward the door, looking anxious.

"Not she, she'll only make a stir and torment me with her chatter. I'll
bear it as long as I can, and perhaps Dr. Scott will come tonight. He
said he would if possible. Go to your dinner, Ned. I can ring for Neal
if I need anything. I shall sleep if I'm alone, perhaps."

Edward reluctantly obeyed, and his brother was left to himself. Little
rest did he find, however, for the pain of the wounded arm grew
unbearable, and, taking a sudden resolution, he rang for his servant.

"Neal, go to Miss Coventry's study, and if Miss Muir is there, ask her
to be kind enough to come to me. I'm in great pain, and she understand
wounds better than anyone else in the house."

With much surprise in his face, the man departed and a few moments after
the door noiselessly opened and Miss Muir came in. It had been a very
warm day, and for the first time she had left off her plain black dress.
All in white, with no ornament but her fair hair, and a fragrant posy of
violets in her belt, she looked a different woman from the meek, nunlike
creature one usually saw about the house. Her face was as altered as her
dress, for now a soft color glowed in her cheeks, her eyes smiled shyly,
and her lips no longer wore the firm look of one who forcibly repressed
every emotion. A fresh, gentle, and charming woman she seemed, and
Coventry found the dull room suddenly brightened by her presence. Going
straight to him, she said simply, and with a happy, helpful look very
comforting to see, "I'm glad you sent for me. What can I do for you?"

He told her, and before the complaint was ended, she began loosening the
bandages with the decision of one who understood what was to be done and
had faith in herself.

"Ah, that's relief, that's comfort!" ejaculated Coventry, as the last
tight fold fell away. "Ned was afraid I should bleed to death if he
touched me. What will the doctor say to us?"

"I neither know nor care. I shall say to him that he is a bad surgeon to
bind it so closely, and not leave orders to have it untied if necessary.
Now I shall make it easy and put you to sleep, for that is what you
need. Shall I? May I?"

"I wish you would, if you can."

And while she deftly rearranged the bandages, the young man watched her
curiously. Presently he asked, "How came you to know so much about
these things?"

"In the hospital where I was ill, I saw much that interested me, and
when I got better, I used to sing to the patients sometimes."

"Do you mean to sing to me?" he asked, in the submissive tone men
unconsciously adopt when ill and in a woman's care.

"If you like it better than reading aloud in a dreamy tone," she
answered, as she tied the last knot.

"I do, much better," he said decidedly.

"You are feverish. I shall wet your forehead, and then you will be quite
comfortable." She moved about the room in the quiet way which made it a
pleasure to watch her, and, having mingled a little cologne with water,
bathed his face as unconcernedly as if he had been a child. Her
proceedings not only comforted but amused Coventry, who mentally
contrasted her with the stout, beer-drinking matron who had ruled over
him in his last illness.

"A clever, kindly little woman," he thought, and felt quite at his ease,
she was so perfectly easy herself.

"There, now you look more like yourself," she said with an approving nod
as she finished, and smoothed the dark locks off his forehead with a
cool, soft hand. Then seating herself in a large chair near by, she
began to sing, while tidily rolling up the fresh bandages which had been
left for the morning. Coventry lay watching her by the dim light that
burned in the room, and she sang on as easily as a bird, a dreamy,
low-toned lullaby, which soothed the listener like a spell. Presently,
looking up to see the effect of her song, she found the young man wide
awake, and regarding her with a curious mixture of pleasure, interest,
and admiration.

"Shut your eyes, Mr. Coventry," she said, with a reproving shake of the
head, and an odd little smile.

He laughed and obeyed, but could not resist an occasional covert glance
from under his lashes at the slender white figure in the great velvet
chair. She saw him and frowned.

"You are very disobedient; why won't you sleep?"

"I can't, I want to listen. I'm fond of nightingales."

"Then I shall sing no more, but try something that has never failed yet.
Give me your hand, please."

Much amazed, he gave it, and, taking it in both her small ones, she sat
down behind the curtain and remained as mute and motionless as a statue.
Coventry smiled to himself at first, and wondered which would tire
first. But soon a subtle warmth seemed to steal from the soft palms that
enclosed his own, his heart beat quicker, his breath grew unequal, and a
thousand fancies danced through his brain. He sighed, and said dreamily,
as he turned his face toward her, "I like this." And in the act of
speaking, seemed to sink into a soft cloud which encompassed him about
with an atmosphere of perfect repose. More than this he could not
remember, for sleep, deep and dreamless, fell upon him, and when he
woke, daylight was shining in between the curtains, his hand lay alone
on the coverlet, and his fair-haired enchantress was gone.




_chapter IV_


A DISCOVERY

For several days Coventry was confined to his room, much against his
will, though everyone did their best to lighten his irksome captivity.
His mother petted him, Bella sang, Lucia read, Edward was devoted, and
all the household, with one exception, were eager to serve the young
master. Jean Muir never came near him, and Jean Muir alone seemed to
possess the power of amusing him. He soon tired of the others, wanted
something new; recalled the piquant character of the girl and took a
fancy into his head that she would lighten his ennui. After some
hesitation, he carelessly spoke of her to Bella, but nothing came of
it, for Bella only said Jean was well, and very busy doing something
lovely to surprise Mamma with. Edward complained that he never saw
her, and Lucia ignored her existence altogether. The only intelligence
the invalid received was from the gossip of two housemaids over their
work in the next room. From them he learned that the governess had
been "scolded" by Miss Beaufort for going to Mr. Coventry's room; that
she had taken it very sweetly and kept herself carefully out of the
way of both young gentlemen, though it was plain to see that Mr. Ned
was dying for her.

Mr. Gerald amused himself by thinking over this gossip, and quite
annoyed his sister by his absence of mind.

"Gerald, do you know Ned's commission has come?"

"Very interesting. Read on, Bella."

"You stupid boy! You don't know a word I say," and she put down the book
to repeat her news.

"I'm glad of it; now we must get him off as soon as possible--that is, I
suppose he will want to be off as soon as possible." And Coventry woke
up from his reverie.

"You needn't check yourself, I know all about it. I think Ned was very
foolish, and that Miss Muir has behaved beautifully. It's quite
impossible, of course, but I wish it wasn't, I do so like to watch
lovers. You and Lucia are so cold you are not a bit interesting."

"You'll do me a favor if you'll stop all that nonsense about Lucia and
me. We are not lovers, and never shall be, I fancy. At all events, I'm
tired of the thing, and wish you and Mamma would let it drop, for the
present at least."

"Oh Gerald, you know Mamma has set her heart upon it, that Papa desired
it, and poor Lucia loves you so much. How can you speak of dropping what
will make us all so happy?"

"It won't make me happy, and I take the liberty of thinking that this is
of some importance. I'm not bound in any way, and don't intend to be
till I am ready. Now we'll talk about Ned."

Much grieved and surprised, Bella obeyed, and devoted herself to Edward,
who very wisely submitted to his fate and prepared to leave home for
some months. For a week the house was in a state of excitement about his
departure, and everyone but Jean was busied for him. She was scarcely
seen; every morning she gave Bella her lessons, every afternoon drove
out with Mrs. Coventry, and nearly every evening went up to the Hall to
read to Sir John, who found his wish granted without exactly knowing how
it had been done.

The day Edward left, he came down from bidding his mother good-bye,
looking very pale, for he had lingered in his sister's little room with
Miss Muir as long as he dared.

"Good-bye, dear. Be kind to Jean," he whispered as he kissed his sister.

"I will, I will," returned Bella, with tearful eyes.

"Take care of Mamma, and remember Lucia," he said again, as he touched
his cousin's beautiful cheek.

"Fear nothing. I will keep them apart," she whispered back, and
Coventry heard it.

Edward offered his hand to his brother, saying, significantly, as he
looked him in the eye, "I trust you, Gerald."

"You may, Ned."

Then he went, and Coventry tired himself with wondering what Lucia
meant. A few days later he understood.

Now Ned is gone, little Muir will appear, I fancy, he said to himself;
but "little Muir" did not appear, and seemed to shun him more carefully
than she had done her lover. If he went to the drawing room in the
evening hoping for music, Lucia alone was there. If he tapped at Bella's
door, there was always a pause before she opened it, and no sign of Jean
appeared though her voice had been audible when he knocked. If he went
to the library, a hasty rustle and the sound of flying feet betrayed
that the room was deserted at his approach. In the garden Miss Muir
never failed to avoid him, and if by chance they met in hall or
breakfast room, she passed him with downcast eyes and the briefest,
coldest greeting. All this annoyed him intensely, and the more she
eluded him, the more he desired to see her--from a spirit of opposition,
he said, nothing more. It fretted and yet it entertained him, and he
found a lazy sort of pleasure in thwarting the girl's little maneuvers.
His patience gave out at last, and he resolved to know what was the
meaning of this peculiar conduct. Having locked and taken away the key
of one door in the library, he waited till Miss Muir went in to get a
book for his uncle. He had heard her speak to Bella of it, knew that she
believed him with his mother, and smiled to himself as he stole after
her. She was standing in a chair, reaching up, and he had time to see a
slender waist, a pretty foot, before he spoke.

"Can I help you, Miss Muir?"

She started, dropped several books, and turned scarlet, as she said
hurriedly, "Thank you, no; I can get the steps."

"My long arm will be less trouble. I've got but one, and that is tired
of being idle, so it is very much at your service. What will you have?"

"I--I--you startled me so I've forgotten." And Jean laughed, nervously,
as she looked about her as if planning to escape.

"I beg your pardon, wait till you remember, and let me thank you for the
enchanted sleep you gave me ten days ago. I've had no chance yet, you've
shunned me so pertinaciously."

"Indeed I try not to be rude, but--" She checked herself, and turned her
face away, adding, with an accent of pain in her voice, "It is not my
fault, Mr. Coventry. I only obey orders."

"Whose orders?" he demanded, still standing so that she could not
escape.

"Don't ask; it is one who has a right to command where you are
concerned. Be sure that it is kindly meant, though it may seem folly
to us. Nay, don't be angry, laugh at it, as I do, and let me run
away, please."

She turned, and looked down at him with tears in her eyes, a smile on
her lips, and an expression half sad, half arch, which was altogether
charming. The frown passed from his face, but he still looked grave and
said decidedly, "No one has a right to command in this house but my
mother or myself. Was it she who bade you avoid me as if I was a madman
or a pest?"

"Ah, don't ask. I promised not to tell, and you would not have me break
my word, I know." And still smiling, she regarded him with a look of
merry malice which made any other reply unnecessary. It was Lucia, he
thought, and disliked his cousin intensely just then. Miss Muir moved as
if to step down; he detained her, saying earnestly, yet with a smile,
"Do you consider me the master here?"

"Yes," and to the word she gave a sweet, submissive intonation which
made it expressive of the respect, regard, and confidence which men find
pleasantest when women feel and show it. Unconsciously his face
softened, and he looked up at her with a different glance from any he
had ever given her before.

"Well, then, will you consent to obey me if I am not tyrannical or
unreasonable in my demands?"

"I'll try."

"Good! Now frankly, I want to say that all this sort of thing is very
disagreeable to me. It annoys me to be a restraint upon anyone's liberty
or comfort, and I beg you will go and come as freely as you like, and
not mind Lucia's absurdities. She means well, but hasn't a particle of
penetration or tact. Will you promise this?"

"No."

"Why not?"

"It is better as it is, perhaps."

"But you called it folly just now."

"Yes, it seems so, and yet--" She paused, looking both confused and
distressed.

Coventry lost patience, and said hastily, "You women are such enigmas I
never expect to understand you! Well, I've done my best to make you
comfortable, but if you prefer to lead this sort of life, I beg you
will do so."

"I _don't_ prefer it; it is hateful to me. I like to be myself, to have
my liberty, and the confidence of those about me. But I cannot think it
kind to disturb the peace of anyone, and so I try to obey. I've promised
Bella to remain, but I will go rather than have another scene with Miss
Beaufort or with you."

Miss Muir had burst out impetuously, and stood there with a sudden fire
in her eyes, sudden warmth and spirit in her face and voice that amazed
Coventry. She was angry, hurt, and haughty, and the change only made her
more attractive, for not a trace of her former meek self remained.
Coventry was electrified, and still more surprised when she added,
imperiously, with a gesture as if to put him aside, "Hand me that book
and move away. I wish to go."

He obeyed, even offered his hand, but she refused it, stepped lightly
down, and went to the door. There she turned, and with the same
indignant voice, the same kindling eyes and glowing cheeks, she said
rapidly, "I know I have no right to speak in this way. I restrain myself
as long as I can, but when I can bear no more, my true self breaks
loose, and I defy everything. I am tired of being a cold, calm machine;
it is impossible with an ardent nature like mine, and I shall try no
longer. I cannot help it if people love me. I don't want their love. I
only ask to be left in peace, and why I am tormented so I cannot see.
I've neither beauty, money, nor rank, yet every foolish boy mistakes my
frank interest for something warmer, and makes me miserable. It is my
misfortune. Think of me what you will, but beware of me in time, for
against my will I may do you harm."

Almost fiercely she had spoken, and with a warning gesture she hurried
from the room, leaving the young man feeling as if a sudden thunder-gust
had swept through the house. For several minutes he sat in the chair she
left, thinking deeply. Suddenly he rose, went to his sister, and said,
in his usual tone of indolent good nature, "Bella, didn't I hear Ned ask
you to be kind to Miss Muir?"

"Yes, and I try to be, but she is so odd lately."

"Odd! How do you mean?"

"Why, she is either as calm and cold as a statue, or restless and queer;
she cries at night, I know, and sighs sadly when she thinks I don't
hear. Something is the matter."

"She frets for Ned perhaps," began Coventry.

"Oh dear, no; it's a great relief to her that he is gone. I'm afraid
that she likes someone very much, and someone don't like her. Can it be
Mr. Sydney?"

"She called him a 'titled fool' once, but perhaps that didn't mean
anything. Did you ever ask her about him?" said Coventry, feeling rather
ashamed of his curiosity, yet unable to resist the temptation of
questioning unsuspecting Bella.

"Yes, but she only looked at me in her tragical way, and said, so
pitifully, 'My little friend, I hope you will never have to pass through
the scenes I've passed through, but keep your peace unbroken all your
life.' After that I dared say no more. I'm very fond of her, I want to
make her happy, but I don't know how. Can you propose anything?"

"I was going to propose that you make her come among us more, now Ned is
gone. It must be dull for her, moping about alone. I'm sure it is for
me. She is an entertaining little person, and I enjoy her music very
much. It's good for Mamma to have gay evenings; so you bestir yourself,
and see what you can do for the general good of the family."

"That's all very charming, and I've proposed it more than once, but
Lucia spoils all my plans. She is afraid you'll follow Ned's example,
and that is so silly."

"Lucia is a--no, I won't say fool, because she has sense enough when she
chooses; but I wish you'd just settle things with Mamma, and then Lucia
can do nothing but submit," said Gerald angrily.

"I'll try, but she goes up to read to Uncle, you know, and since he has
had the gout, she stays later, so I see little of her in the evening.
There she goes now. I think she will captivate the old one as well as
the young one, she is so devoted."

Coventry looked after her slender black figure, just vanishing through
the great gate, and an uncomfortable fancy took possession of him, born
of Bella's careless words. He sauntered away, and after eluding his
cousin, who seemed looking for him, he turned toward the Hall, saying to
himself, I will see what is going on up here. Such things have happened.
Uncle is the simplest soul alive, and if the girl is ambitious, she can
do what she will with him.

Here a servant came running after him and gave him a letter, which he
thrust into his pocket without examining it. When he reached the Hall,
he went quietly to his uncle's study. The door was ajar, and looking in,
he saw a scene of tranquil comfort, very pleasant to watch. Sir John
leaned in his easy chair with one foot on a cushion. He was dressed with
his usual care and, in spite of the gout, looked like a handsome,
well-preserved old gentleman. He was smiling as he listened, and his
eyes rested complacently on Jean Muir, who sat near him reading in her
musical voice, while the sunshine glittered on her hair and the soft
rose of her cheek. She read well, yet Coventry thought her heart was not
in her task, for once when she paused, while Sir John spoke, her eyes
had an absent expression, and she leaned her head upon her hand, with an
air of patient weariness.

Poor girl! I did her great injustice; she has no thought of captivating
the old man, but amuses him from simple kindness. She is tired. I'll put
an end to her task; and Coventry entered without knocking.

Sir John received him with an air of polite resignation, Miss Muir with
a perfectly expressionless face.

"Mother's love, and how are you today, sir?"

"Comfortable, but dull, so I want you to bring the girls over this
evening, to amuse the old gentleman. Mrs. King has got out the
antique costumes and trumpery, as I promised Bella she should have
them, and tonight we are to have a merrymaking, as we used to do when
Ned was here."

"Very well, sir, I'll bring them. We've all been out of sorts since the
lad left, and a little jollity will do us good. Are you going back, Miss
Muir?" asked Coventry.

"No, I shall keep her to give me my tea and get things ready. Don't read
anymore, my dear, but go and amuse yourself with the pictures, or
whatever you like," said Sir John; and like a dutiful daughter she
obeyed, as if glad to get away.

"That's a very charming girl, Gerald," began Sir John as she left the
room. "I'm much interested in her, both on her own account and on her
mother's."

"Her mother's! What do you know of her mother?" asked Coventry, much
surprised.

"Her mother was Lady Grace Howard, who ran away with a poor Scotch
minister twenty years ago. The family cast her off, and she lived and
died so obscurely that very little is known of her except that she left
an orphan girl at some small French pension. This is the girl, and a
fine girl, too. I'm surprised that you did not know this."

"So am I, but it is like her not to tell. She is a strange, proud
creature. Lady Howard's daughter! Upon my word, that is a discovery,"
and Coventry felt his interest in his sister's governess much increased
by this fact; for, like all wellborn Englishmen, he valued rank and
gentle blood even more than he cared to own.

"She has had a hard life of it, this poor little girl, but she has a
brave spirit, and will make her way anywhere," said Sir John admiringly.

"Did Ned know this?" asked Gerald suddenly.

"No, she only told me yesterday. I was looking in the _Peerage_ and
chanced to speak of the Howards. She forgot herself and called Lady
Grace her mother. Then I got the whole story, for the lonely little
thing was glad to make a confidant of someone."

"That accounts for her rejection of Sydney and Ned: she knows she is
their equal and will not snatch at the rank which is hers by right. No,
she's not mercenary or ambitious."

"What do you say?" asked Sir John, for Coventry had spoken more to
himself than to his uncle.

"I wonder if Lady Sydney was aware of this?" was all Gerald's answer.

"No, Jean said she did not wish to be pitied, and so told nothing to the
mother. I think the son knew, but that was a delicate point, and I asked
no questions."

"I shall write to him as soon as I discover his address. We have been so
intimate I can venture to make a few inquiries about Miss Muir, and
prove the truth of her story."

"Do you mean to say that you doubt it?" demanded Sir John angrily.

"I beg your pardon, Uncle, but I must confess I have an instinctive
distrust of that young person. It is unjust, I dare say, yet I cannot
banish it."

"Don't annoy me by expressing it, if you please. I have some penetration
and experience, and I respect and pity Miss Muir heartily. This dislike
of yours may be the cause of her late melancholy, hey, Gerald?" And Sir
John looked suspiciously at his nephew.

Anxious to avert the rising storm, Coventry said hastily as he turned
away, "I've neither time nor inclination to discuss the matter now, sir,
but will be careful not to offend again. I'll take your message to
Bella, so good-bye for an hour, Uncle."

And Coventry went his way through the park, thinking within himself, The
dear old gentleman is getting fascinated, like poor Ned. How the deuce
does the girl do it? Lady Howard's daughter, yet never told us; I don't
understand that.




_chapter V_


HOW THE GIRL DID IT

At home he found a party of young friends, who hailed with delight the
prospect of a revel at the Hall. An hour later, the blithe company
trooped into the great saloon, where preparations had already been made
for a dramatic evening.

Good Sir John was in his element, for he was never so happy as when his
house was full of young people. Several persons were chosen, and in a
few moments the curtains were withdrawn from the first of these
impromptu tableaux. A swarthy, darkly bearded man lay asleep on a tiger
skin, in the shadow of a tent. Oriental arms and drapery surrounded him;
an antique silver lamp burned dimly on a table where fruit lay heaped in
costly dishes, and wine shone redly in half-emptied goblets. Bending
over the sleeper was a woman robed with barbaric splendor. One hand
turned back the embroidered sleeve from the arm which held a scimitar;
one slender foot in a scarlet sandal was visible under the white tunic;
her purple mantle swept down from snowy shoulders; fillets of gold bound
her hair, and jewels shone on neck and arms. She was looking over her
shoulder toward the entrance of the tent, with a steady yet stealthy
look, so effective that for a moment the spectators held their breath,
as if they also heard a passing footstep.

"Who is it?" whispered Lucia, for the face was new to her.

"Jean Muir," answered Coventry, with an absorbed look.

"Impossible! She is small and fair," began Lucia, but a hasty "Hush, let
me look!" from her cousin silenced her.

Impossible as it seemed, he was right nevertheless; for Jean Muir it
was. She had darkened her skin, painted her eyebrows, disposed some wild
black locks over her fair hair, and thrown such an intensity of
expression into her eyes that they darkened and dilated till they were
as fierce as any southern eyes that ever flashed. Hatred, the deepest
and bitterest, was written on her sternly beautiful face, courage glowed
in her glance, power spoke in the nervous grip of the slender hand that
held the weapon, and the indomitable will of the woman was
expressed--even the firm pressure of the little foot half hidden in the
tiger skin.

"Oh, isn't she splendid?" cried Bella under her breath.

"She looks as if she'd use her sword well when the time comes," said
someone admiringly.

"Good night to Holofernes; his fate is certain," added another.

"He is the image of Sydney, with that beard on."

"Doesn't she look as if she really hated him?"

"Perhaps she does."

Coventry uttered the last exclamation, for the two which preceded it
suggested an explanation of the marvelous change in Jean. It was not all
art: the intense detestation mingled with a savage joy that the object
of her hatred was in her power was too perfect to be feigned; and having
the key to a part of her story, Coventry felt as if he caught a glimpse
of the truth. It was but a glimpse, however, for the curtain dropped
before he had half analyzed the significance of that strange face.

"Horrible! I'm glad it's over," said Lucia coldly.

"Magnificent! Encore! Encore!" cried Gerald enthusiastically.

But the scene was over, and no applause could recall the actress. Two or
three graceful or gay pictures followed, but Jean was in none, and each
lacked the charm which real talent lends to the simplest part.

"Coventry, you are wanted," called a voice. And to everyone's surprise,
Coventry went, though heretofore he had always refused to exert himself
when handsome actors were in demand.

"What part am I to spoil?" he asked, as he entered the green room, where
several excited young gentlemen were costuming and attitudinizing.

"A fugitive cavalier. Put yourself into this suit, and lose no time
asking questions. Miss Muir will tell you what to do. She is in the
tableau, so no one will mind you," said the manager pro tem, throwing a
rich old suit toward Coventry and resuming the painting of a moustache
on his own boyish face.

A gallant cavalier was the result of Gerald's hasty toilet, and when
he appeared before the ladies a general glance of admiration was
bestowed upon him.

"Come along and be placed; Jean is ready on the stage." And Bella ran
before him, exclaiming to her governess, "Here he is, quite splendid.
Wasn't he good to do it?"

Miss Muir, in the charmingly prim and puritanical dress of a Roundhead
damsel, was arranging some shrubs, but turned suddenly and dropped the
green branch she held, as her eye met the glittering figure advancing
toward her.

"You!" she said with a troubled look, adding low to Bella, "Why did you
ask _him?_ I begged you not."

"He is the only handsome man here, and the best actor if he likes. He
won't play usually, so make the most of him." And Bella was off to
finish powdering her hair for "The Marriage à la Mode."

"I was sent for and I came. Do you prefer some other person?" asked
Coventry, at a loss to understand the half-anxious, half-eager
expression of the face under the little cap.

It changed to one of mingled annoyance and resignation as she said, "It
is too late. Please kneel here, half behind the shrubs; put down your
hat, and--allow me--you are too elegant for a fugitive."

As he knelt before her, she disheveled his hair, pulled his lace collar
awry, threw away his gloves and sword, and half untied the cloak that
hung about his shoulders.

"That is better; your paleness is excellent--nay, don't spoil it. We are
to represent the picture which hangs in the Hall. I need tell you no
more. Now, Roundheads, place yourselves, and then ring up the curtain."

With a smile, Coventry obeyed her; for the picture was of two lovers,
the young cavalier kneeling, with his arm around the waist of the girl,
who tries to hide him with her little mantle, and presses his head to
her bosom in an ecstasy of fear, as she glances back at the approaching
pursuers. Jean hesitated an instant and shrank a little as his hand
touched her; she blushed deeply, and her eyes fell before his. Then, as
the bell rang, she threw herself into her part with sudden spirit. One
arm half covered him with her cloak, the other pillowed his head on the
muslin kerchief folded over her bosom, and she looked backward with such
terror in her eyes that more than one chivalrous young spectator longed
to hurry to the rescue. It lasted but a moment; yet in that moment
Coventry experienced another new sensation. Many women had smiled on
him, but he had remained heart-whole, cool, and careless, quite
unconscious of the power which a woman possesses and knows how to use,
for the weal or woe of man. Now, as he knelt there with a soft arm about
him, a slender waist yielding to his touch, and a maiden heart throbbing
against his cheek, for the first time in his life he felt the
indescribable spell of womanhood, and looked the ardent lover to
perfection. Just as his face assumed this new and most becoming aspect,
the curtain dropped, and clamorous encores recalled him to the fact that
Miss Muir was trying to escape from his hold, which had grown painful in
its unconscious pressure. He sprang up, half bewildered, and looking as
he had never looked before.

"Again! Again!" called Sir John. And the young men who played the
Roundheads, eager to share in the applause begged for a repetition in
new attitudes.

"A rustle has betrayed you, we have fired and shot the brave girl, and
she lies dying, you know. That will be effective; try it, Miss Muir,"
said one. And with a long breath, Jean complied.

The curtain went up, showing the lover still on his knees, unmindful of
the captors who clutched him by the shoulder, for at his feet the girl
lay dying. Her head was on his breast, now, her eyes looked full into
his, no longer wild with fear, but eloquent with the love which even
death could not conquer. The power of those tender eyes thrilled
Coventry with a strange delight, and set his heart beating as rapidly as
hers had done. She felt his hands tremble, saw the color flash into his
cheek, knew that she had touched him at last, and when she rose it was
with a sense of triumph which she found it hard to conceal. Others
thought it fine acting; Coventry tried to believe so; but Lucia set her
teeth, and, as the curtain fell on that second picture, she left her
place to hurry behind the scenes, bent on putting an end to such
dangerous play. Several actors were complimenting the mimic lovers. Jean
took it merrily, but Coventry, in spite of himself, betrayed that he was
excited by something deeper than mere gratified vanity.

As Lucia appeared, his manner changed to its usual indifference; but he
could not quench the unwonted fire of his eyes, or keep all trace of
emotion out of his face, and she saw this with a sharp pang.

"I have come to offer my help. You must be tired, Miss Muir. Can I
relieve you?" said Lucia hastily.

"Yes, thank you. I shall be very glad to leave the rest to you, and
enjoy them from the front."

So with a sweet smile Jean tripped away, and to Lucia's dismay
Coventry followed.

"I want you, Gerald; please stay," she cried.

"I've done my part--no more tragedy for me tonight." And he was gone
before she could entreat or command.

There was no help for it; she must stay and do her duty, or expose her
jealousy to the quick eyes about her. For a time she bore it; but the
sight of her cousin leaning over the chair she had left and chatting
with the governess, who now filled it, grew unbearable, and she
dispatched a little girl with a message to Miss Muir.

"Please, Miss Beaufort wants you for Queen Bess, as you are the only
lady with red hair. Will you come?" whispered the child, quite
unconscious of any hidden sting in her words.

"Yes, dear, willingly though I'm not stately enough for Her Majesty, nor
handsome enough," said Jean, rising with an untroubled face, though she
resented the feminine insult.

"Do you want an Essex? I'm all dressed for it," said Coventry, following
to the door with a wistful look.

"No, Miss Beaufort said _you_ were not to come. She doesn't want you
both together," said the child decidedly.

Jean gave him a significant look, shrugged her shoulders, and went away
smiling her odd smile, while Coventry paced up and down the hall in a
curious state of unrest, which made him forgetful of everything till the
young people came gaily out to supper.

"Come, bonny Prince Charlie, take me down, and play the lover as
charmingly as you did an hour ago. I never thought you had so much
warmth in you," said Bella, taking his arm and drawing him on
against his will.

"Don't be foolish, child. Where is--Lucia?"

Why he checked Jean's name on his lips and substituted another's, he
could not tell; but a sudden shyness in speaking of her possessed him,
and though he saw her nowhere, he would not ask for her. His cousin came
down looking lovely in a classical costume; but Gerald scarcely saw her,
and, when the merriment was at its height, he slipped away to discover
what had become of Miss Muir.

Alone in the deserted drawing room he found her, and paused to watch her
a moment before he spoke; for something in her attitude and face struck
him. She was leaning wearily back in the great chair which had served
for a throne. Her royal robes were still unchanged, though the crown was
off and all her fair hair hung about her shoulders. Excitement and
exertion made her brilliant, the rich dress became her wonderfully, and
an air of luxurious indolence changed the meek governess into a charming
woman. She leaned on the velvet cushions as if she were used to such
support; she played with the jewels which had crowned her as carelessly
as if she were born to wear them; her attitude was full of negligent
grace, and the expression of her face half proud, half pensive, as if
her thoughts were bittersweet.

One would know she was wellborn to see her now. Poor girl, what a
burden a life of dependence must be to a spirit like hers! I wonder
what she is thinking of so intently. And Coventry indulged in another
look before he spoke.

"Shall I bring you some supper, Miss Muir?"

"Supper!" she ejaculated, with a start. "Who thinks of one's body when
one's soul is--" She stopped there, knit her brows, and laughed faintly
as she added, "No, thank you. I want nothing but advice, and that I dare
not ask of anyone."

"Why not?"

"Because I have no right."

"Everyone has a right to ask help, especially the weak of the strong.
Can I help you? Believe me, I most heartily offer my poor services."

"Ah, you forget! This dress, the borrowed splendor of these jewels, the
freedom of this gay evening, the romance of the part you played, all
blind you to the reality. For a moment I cease to be a servant, and for
a moment you treat me as an equal."

It was true; he _had_ forgotten. That soft, reproachful glance touched
him, his distrust melted under the new charm, and he answered with real
feeling in voice and face, "I treat you as an equal because you _are_
one; and when I offered help, it is not to my sister's governess alone,
but to Lady Howard's daughter."

"Who told you that?" she demanded, sitting erect.

"My uncle. Do not reproach him. It shall go no further, if you forbid
it. Are you sorry that I know it?"

"Yes."

"Why?"

"Because I will not be pitied!" And her eyes flashed as she made a
half-defiant gesture.

"Then, if I may not pity the hard fate which has befallen an innocent
life, may I admire the courage which meets adverse fortune so bravely,
and conquers the world by winning the respect and regard of all who see
and honor it?"

Miss Muir averted her face, put up her hand, and answered hastily, "No,
no, not that! Do not be kind; it destroys the only barrier now left
between us. Be cold to me as before, forget what I am, and let me go on
my way, unknown, unpitied, and unloved!"

Her voice faltered and failed as the last word was uttered, and she bent
her face upon her hand. Something jarred upon Coventry in this speech,
and moved him to say, almost rudely, "You need have no fears for me.
Lucia will tell you what an iceberg I am."

"Then Lucia would tell me wrong. I have the fatal power of reading
character; I know you better than she does, and I see--" There she
stopped abruptly.

"What? Tell me and prove your skill," he said eagerly.

Turning, she fixed her eyes on him with a penetrating power that made
him shrink as she said slowly, "Under the ice I see fire, and warn you
to beware lest it prove a volcano."

For a moment he sat dumb, wondering at the insight of the girl; for she
was the first to discover the hidden warmth of a nature too proud to
confess its tender impulses, or the ambitions that slept till some
potent voice awoke them. The blunt, almost stern manner in which she
warned him away from her only made her more attractive; for there was no
conceit or arrogance in it, only a foreboding fear emboldened by past
suffering to be frank. Suddenly he spoke impetuously:

"You are right! I am not what I seem, and my indolent indifference is
but the mask under which I conceal my real self. I could be as
passionate, as energetic and aspiring as Ned, if I had any aim in
life. I have none, and so I am what you once called me, a thing to
pity and despise."

"I never said that!" cried Jean indignantly.

"Not in those words, perhaps; but you looked it and thought it, though
you phrased it more mildly. I deserved it, but I shall deserve it no
longer. I am beginning to wake from my disgraceful idleness, and long
for some work that shall make a man of me. Why do you go? I annoy you
with my confessions. Pardon me. They are the first I ever made; they
shall be the last."

"No, oh no! I am too much honored by your confidence; but is it wise, is
it loyal to tell _me_ your hopes and aims? Has not Miss Beaufort the
first right to be your confidante?"

Coventry drew back, looking intensely annoyed, for the name recalled
much that he would gladly have forgotten in the novel excitement of the
hour. Lucia's love, Edward's parting words, his own reserve so strangely
thrown aside, so difficult to resume. What he would have said was
checked by the sight of a half-open letter which fell from Jean's dress
as she moved away. Mechanically he took it up to return it, and, as he
did so, he recognized Sydney's handwriting. Jean snatched it from him,
turning pale to the lips as she cried, "Did you read it? What did you
see? Tell me, tell me, on your honor!"

"On my honor, I saw nothing but this single sentence, 'By the love I
bear you, believe what I say.' No more, as I am a gentleman. I know the
hand, I guess the purport of the letter, and as a friend of Sydney, I
earnestly desire to help you, if I can. Is this the matter upon which
you want advice?"

"Yes."

"Then let me give it?"

"You cannot, without knowing all, and it is so hard to tell!"

"Let me guess it, and spare you the pain of telling. May I?" And
Coventry waited eagerly for her reply, for the spell was still upon him.

Holding the letter fast, she beckoned him to follow, and glided before
him to a secluded little nook, half boudoir, half conservatory. There
she paused, stood an instant as if in doubt, then looked up at him with
confiding eyes and said decidedly, "I will do it; for, strange as it may
seem, you are the only person to whom I _can_ speak. You know Sydney,
you have discovered that I am an equal, you have offered your help. I
accept it; but oh, do not think me unwomanly! Remember how alone I am,
how young, and how much I rely upon your sincerity, your sympathy!"

"Speak freely. I am indeed your friend." And Coventry sat down beside
her, forgetful of everything but the soft-eyed girl who confided in him
so entirely.

Speaking rapidly, Jean went on, "You know that Sydney loved me, that I
refused him and went away. But you do not know that his importunities
nearly drove me wild, that he threatened to rob me of my only treasure,
my good name, and that, in desperation, I tried to kill myself. Yes,
mad, wicked as it was, I did long to end the life which was, at best, a
burden, and under his persecution had become a torment. You are shocked,
yet what I say is the living truth. Lady Sydney will confirm it, the
nurses at the hospital will confess that it was not a fever which
brought me there; and here, though the external wound is healed, my
heart still aches and burns with the shame and indignation which only a
proud woman can feel."

She paused and sat with kindling eyes, glowing cheeks, and both hands
pressed to her heaving bosom, as if the old insult roused her spirit
anew. Coventry said not a word, for surprise, anger, incredulity, and
admiration mingled so confusedly in his mind that he forgot to speak,
and Jean went on, "That wild act of mine convinced him of my indomitable
dislike. He went away, and I believed that this stormy love of his would
be cured by absence. It is not, and I live in daily fear of fresh
entreaties, renewed persecution. His mother promised not to betray where
I had gone, but he found me out and wrote to me. The letter I asked you
to take to Lady Sydney was a reply to his, imploring him to leave me in
peace. You failed to deliver it, and I was glad, for I thought silence
might quench hope. All in vain; this is a more passionate appeal than
ever, and he vows he will never desist from his endeavors till I give
another man the right to protect me. I _can_ do this--I am sorely
tempted to do it, but I rebel against the cruelty. I love my freedom, I
have no wish to marry at this man's bidding. What can I do? How cart I
free myself? Be my friend, and help me!"

Tears streamed down her cheeks, sobs choked her words, and she clasped
her hands imploringly as she turned toward the young man in all the
abandonment of sorrow, fear, and supplication. Coventry found it hard to
meet those eloquent eyes and answer calmly, for he had no experience in
such scenes and knew not how to play his part. It is this absurd dress
and that romantic nonsense which makes me feel so unlike myself, he
thought, quite unconscious of the dangerous power which the dusky room,
the midsummer warmth and fragrance, the memory of the "romantic
nonsense," and, most of all, the presence of a beautiful, afflicted
woman had over him. His usual self-possession deserted him, and he could
only echo the words which had made the strongest impression upon him:

"You _can_ do this, you are tempted to do it. Is Ned the man who can
protect you?"

"No" was the soft reply.

"Who then?"

"Do not ask me. A good and honorable man; one who loves me well, and
would devote his life to me; one whom once it would have been happiness
to marry, but now--"

There her voice ended in a sigh, and all her fair hair fell down about
her face, hiding it in a shining veil.

"Why not now? This is a sure and speedy way of ending your distress. Is
it impossible?"

In spite of himself, Gerald leaned nearer, took one of the little hands
in his, and pressed it as he spoke, urgently, compassionately, nay,
almost tenderly. From behind the veil came a heavy sigh, and the brief
answer, "It is impossible."

"Why, Jean?"

She flung her hair back with a sudden gesture, drew away her hand, and
answered, almost fiercely, "Because I do not love him! Why do you
torment me with such questions? I tell you I am in a sore strait and
cannot see my way. Shall I deceive the good man, and secure peace at the
price of liberty and truth? Or shall I defy Sydney and lead a life of
dread? If he menaced my life, I should not fear; but he menaces that
which is dearer than life--my good name. A look, a word can tarnish it;
a scornful smile, a significant shrug can do me more harm than any blow;
for I am a woman--friendless, poor, and at the mercy of his tongue. Ah,
better to have died, and so have been saved the bitter pain that has
come now!"

She sprang up, clasped her hands over her head, and paced despairingly
through the little room, not weeping, but wearing an expression more
tragical than tears. Still feeling as if he had suddenly stepped into a
romance, yet finding a keen pleasure in the part assigned him, Coventry
threw himself into it with spirit, and heartily did his best to console
the poor girl who needed help so much. Going to her, he said as
impetuously as Ned ever did, "Miss Muir--nay, I will say Jean, if that
will comfort you--listen, and rest assured that no harm shall touch you
if I can ward it off. You are needlessly alarmed. Indignant you may well
be, but, upon my life, I think you wrong Sydney. He is violent, I know,
but he is too honorable a man to injure you by a light word, an unjust
act. He did but threaten, hoping to soften you. Let me see him, or write
to him. He is my friend; he will listen to me. Of that I am sure."

"Be sure of nothing. When a man like Sydney loves and is thwarted in his
love, nothing can control his headstrong will. Promise me you will not
see or write to him. Much as I fear and despise him, I will submit,
rather than any harm should befall you--or your brother. You promise me,
Mr. Coventry?"

He hesitated. She clung to his arm with unfeigned solicitude in her
eager, pleading face, and he could not resist it.

"I promise; but in return you must promise to let me give what help I
can; and, Jean, never say again that you are friendless."

"You are so kind! God bless you for it. But I dare not accept
your friendship; she will not permit it, and I have no right to
mar her peace."

"Who will not permit it?" he demanded hotly.

"Miss Beaufort."

"Hang Miss Beaufort!" exclaimed Coventry, with such energy that Jean
broke into a musical laugh, despite her trouble. He joined in it, and,
for an instant they stood looking at one another as if the last barrier
were down, and they were friends indeed. Jean paused suddenly, with the
smile on her lips, the tears still on her cheek, and made a warning
gesture. He listened: the sound of feet mingled with calls and laughter
proved that they were missed and sought.

"That laugh betrayed us. Stay and meet them. I cannot." And Jean darted
out upon the lawn. Coventry followed; for the thought of confronting so
many eyes, so many questions, daunted him, and he fled like a coward.
The sound of Jean's flying footsteps guided him, and he overtook her
just as she paused behind a rose thicket to take breath.

"Fainthearted knight! You should have stayed and covered my retreat.
Hark! they are coming! Hide! Hide!" she panted, half in fear, half in
merriment, as the gay pursuers rapidly drew nearer.

"Kneel down; the moon is coming out and the glitter of your embroidery
will betray you," whispered Jean, as they cowered behind the roses.

"Your arms and hair will betray you. 'Come under my plaiddie,' as the
song says." And Coventry tried to make his velvet cloak cover the white
shoulders and fair locks.

"We are acting our parts in reality now. How Bella will enjoy the thing
when I tell her!" said Jean as the noises died away.

"Do not tell her," whispered Coventry.

"And why not?" she asked, looking up into the face so near her own, with
an artless glance.

"Can you not guess why?"

"Ah, you are so proud you cannot bear to be laughed at."

"It is not that. It is because I do not want you to be annoyed by silly
tongues; you have enough to pain you without that. I am your friend,
now, and I do my best to prove it."

"So kind, so kind! How can I thank you?" murmured Jean. And she
involuntarily nestled closer under the cloak that sheltered both.

Neither spoke for a moment, and in the silence the rapid beating of two
hearts was heard. To drown the sound, Coventry said softly, "Are you
frightened?"

"No, I like it," she answered, as softly, then added abruptly, "But why
do we hide? There is nothing to fear. It is late. I must go. You are
kneeling on my train. Please rise."

"Why in such haste? This flight and search only adds to the charm of the
evening. I'll not get up yet. Will you have a rose, Jean?"

"No, I will not. Let me go, Mr. Coventry, I insist. There has been
enough of this folly. You forget yourself."

She spoke imperiously, flung off the cloak, and put him from her. He
rose at once, saying, like one waking suddenly from a pleasant dream, "I
do indeed forget myself."

Here the sound of voices broke on them, nearer than before. Pointing to
a covered walk that led to the house, he said, in his usually cool, calm
tone, "Go in that way; I will cover your retreat." And turning, he went
to meet the merry hunters.

Half an hour later, when the party broke up, Miss Muir joined them in
her usual quiet dress, looking paler, meeker, and sadder than usual.
Coventry saw this, though he neither looked at her nor addressed her.
Lucia saw it also, and was glad that the dangerous girl had fallen back
into her proper place again, for she had suffered much that night. She
appropriated her cousin's arm as they went through the park, but he was
in one of his taciturn moods, and all her attempts at conversation were
in vain. Miss Muir walked alone, singing softly to herself as she
followed in the dusk. Was Gerald so silent because he listened to that
fitful song? Lucia thought so, and felt her dislike rapidly deepening
to hatred.

When the young friends were gone, and the family were exchanging
good-nights among themselves, Jean was surprised by Coventry's offering
his hand, for he had never done it before, and whispering, as he held
it, though Lucia watched him all the while, "I have not given my
advice, yet."

"Thanks, I no longer need it. I have decided for myself."

"May I ask how?"

"To brave my enemy."

"Good! But what decided you so suddenly?"

"The finding of a friend." And with a grateful glance she was gone.




_chapter VI_


ON THE WATCH

"If you please, Mr. Coventry, did you get the letter last night?" were
the first words that greeted the "young master" as he left his room
next morning.

"What letter, Dean? I don't remember any," he answered, pausing, for
something in the maid's manner struck him as peculiar.

"It came just as you left for the Hall, sir. Benson ran after you with
it, as it was marked 'Haste.' Didn't you get it, sir?" asked the woman,
anxiously.

"Yes, but upon my life, I forgot all about it till this minute. It's in
my other coat, I suppose, if I've not lost it. That absurd masquerading
put everything else out of my head." And speaking more to himself than
to the maid, Coventry turned back to look for the missing letter.

Dean remained where she was, apparently busy about the arrangement of
the curtains at the hall window, but furtively watching meanwhile with a
most unwonted air of curiosity.

"Not there, I thought so!" she muttered, as Coventry impatiently thrust
his hand into one pocket after another. But as she spoke, an expression
of amazement appeared in her face, for suddenly the letter was
discovered.

"I'd have sworn it wasn't there! I don't understand it, but she's a deep
one, or I'm much deceived." And Dean shook her head like one perplexed,
but not convinced.

Coventry uttered an exclamation of satisfaction on glancing at the
address and, standing where he was, tore open the letter.

    _Dear C:

    I'm off to Baden. Come and join me, then you'll be out of harm's way;
    for if you fall in love with J.M. (and you can't escape if you stay
    where she is), you will incur the trifling inconvenience of having
    your brains blown out by

    Yours truly, F.R. Sydney_

"The man is mad!" ejaculated Coventry, staring at the letter while an
angry flush rose to his face. "What the deuce does he mean by writing to
me in that style? Join him--not I! And as for the threat, I laugh at it.
Poor Jean! This headstrong fool seems bent on tormenting her. Well,
Dean, what are you waiting for?" he demanded, as if suddenly conscious
of her presence.

"Nothing, sir; I only stopped to see if you found the letter. Beg
pardon, sir."

And she was moving on when Coventry asked, with a suspicious look, "What
made you think it was lost? You seem to take an uncommon interest in my
affairs today."

"Oh dear, no, sir. I felt a bit anxious, Benson is so forgetful, and it
was me who sent him after you, for I happened to see you go out, so I
felt responsible. Being marked that way, I thought it might be important
so I asked about it."

"Very well, you can go, Dean. It's all right, you see."

"I'm not so sure of that," muttered the woman, as she curtsied
respectfully and went away, looking as if the letter had _not_
been found.

Dean was Miss Beaufort's maid, a grave, middle-aged woman with keen eyes
and a somewhat grim air. Having been long in the family, she enjoyed all
the privileges of a faithful and favorite servant. She loved her young
mistress with an almost jealous affection. She watched over her with the
vigilant care of a mother and resented any attempt at interference on
the part of others. At first she had pitied and liked Jean Muir, then
distrusted her, and now heartily hated her, as the cause of the
increased indifference of Coventry toward his cousin. Dean knew the
depth of Lucia's love, and though no man, in her eyes, was worthy of her
mistress, still, having honored him with her regard, Dean felt bound to
like him, and the late change in his manner disturbed the maid almost as
much as it did the mistress. She watched Jean narrowly, causing that
amiable creature much amusement but little annoyance, as yet, for Dean's
slow English wit was no match for the subtle mind of the governess. On
the preceding night, Dean had been sent up to the Hall with costumes and
had there seen something which much disturbed her. She began to speak of
it while undressing her mistress, but Lucia, being in an unhappy mood,
had so sternly ordered her not to gossip that the tale remained untold,
and she was forced to bide her tune.

Now I'll see how _she_ looks after it; though there's not much to be got
out of _her_ face, the deceitful hussy, thought Dean, marching down the
corridor and knitting her black brows as she went.

"Good morning, Mrs. Dean. I hope you are none the worse for last night's
frolic. You had the work and we the play," said a blithe voice behind
her; and turning sharply, she confronted Miss Muir. Fresh and smiling,
the governess nodded with an air of cordiality which would have been
irresistible with anyone but Dean.

"I'm quite well, thank you, miss," she returned coldly, as her keen eye
fastened on the girl as if to watch the effect of her words. "I had a
good rest when the young ladies and gentlemen were at supper, for while
the maids cleared up, I sat in the 'little anteroom.'"

"Yes, I saw you, and feared you'd take cold. Very glad you didn't. How
is Miss Beaufort? She seemed rather poorly last night" was the tranquil
reply, as Jean settled the little frills about her delicate wrists. The
cool question was a return shot for Dean's hint that she had been where
she could oversee the interview between Coventry and Miss Muir.

"She is a bit tired, as any _lady_ would be after such an evening.
People who are _used_ to _play-acting_ wouldn't mind it, perhaps, but
Miss Beaufort don't enjoy _romps_ as much as _some_ do."

The emphasis upon certain words made Dean's speech as impertinent as she
desired. But Jean only laughed, and as Coventry's step was heard behind
them, she ran downstairs, saying blandly, but with a wicked look, "I
won't stop to thank you now, lest Mr. Coventry should bid me
good-morning, and so increase Miss Beaufort's indisposition."

Dean's eyes flashed as she looked after the girl with a wrathful face,
and went her way, saying grimly, "I'll bide my time, but I'll get the
better of her yet."

Fancying himself quite removed from "last night's absurdity," yet
curious to see how Jean would meet him, Coventry lounged into the
breakfast room with his usual air of listless indifference. A languid
nod and murmur was all the reply he vouchsafed to the greetings of
cousin, sister, and governess as he sat down and took up his paper.

"Have you had a letter from Ned?" asked Bella, looking at the note which
her brother still held.

"No" was the brief answer.

"Who then? You look as if you had received bad news."

There was no reply, and, peeping over his arm, Bella caught sight of the
seal and exclaimed, in a disappointed tone, "It is the Sydney crest. I
don't care about the note now. Men's letters to each other are not
interesting."

Miss Muir had been quietly feeding one of Edward's dogs, but at the name
she looked up and met Coventry's eyes, coloring so distressfully that he
pitied her. Why he should take the trouble to cover her confusion, he
did not stop to ask himself, but seeing the curl of Lucia's lip, he
suddenly addressed her with an air of displeasure, "Do you know that
Dean is getting impertinent? She presumes too much on her age and your
indulgence, and forgets her place."

"What has she done?" asked Lucia coldly.

"She troubles herself about my affairs and takes it upon herself to keep
Benson in order."

Here Coventry told about the letter and the woman's evident curiosity.

"Poor Dean, she gets no thanks for reminding you of what you had
forgotten. Next time she will leave your letters to their fate, and
perhaps it will be as well, if they have such a bad effect upon your
temper, Gerald."

Lucia spoke calmly, but there was an angry color in her cheek as she
rose and left the room. Coventry looked much annoyed, for on Jean's face
he detected a faint smile, half pitiful, half satirical, which disturbed
him more than his cousin's insinuation. Bella broke the awkward silence
by saying, with a sigh, "Poor Ned! I do so long to hear again from him.
I thought a letter had come for some of us. Dean said she saw one
bearing his writing on the hall table yesterday."

"She seems to have a mania for inspecting letters. I won't allow it. Who
was the letter for, Bella?" said Coventry, putting down his paper.

"She wouldn't or couldn't tell, but looked very cross and told me
to ask you."

"Very odd! I've had none," began Coventry.

"But I had one several days ago. Will you please read it, and my reply?"
And as she spoke, Jean laid two letters before him.

"Certainly not. It would be dishonorable to read what Ned intended for
no eyes but your own. You are too scrupulous in one way, and not enough
so in another, Miss Muir." And Coventry offered both the letters with
an air of grave decision, which could not conceal the interest and
surprise he felt.

"You are right. Mr. Edward's note _should_ be kept sacred, for in it the
poor boy has laid bare his heart to me. But mine I beg you will read,
that you may see how well I try to keep my word to you. Oblige me in
this, Mr. Coventry; I have a right to ask it of you."

So urgently she spoke, so wistfully she looked, that he could not refuse
and, going to the window, read the letter. It was evidently an answer to
a passionate appeal from the young lover, and was written with
consummate skill. As he read, Gerald could not help thinking, If this
girl writes in this way to a man whom she does _not_ love, with what a
world of power and passion would she write to one whom she _did_ love.
And this thought kept returning to him as his eye went over line after
line of wise argument, gentle reproof, good counsel, and friendly
regard. Here and there a word, a phrase, betrayed what she had already
confessed, and Coventry forgot to return the letter, as he stood
wondering who was the man whom Jean loved.

The sound of Bella's voice recalled him, for she was saying, half
kindly, half petulantly, "Don't look so sad, Jean. Ned will outlive it,
I dare say. You remember you said once men never died of love, though
women might. In his one note to me, he spoke so beautifully of you, and
begged me to be kind to you for his sake, that I try to be with all my
heart, though if it was anyone but you, I really think I should hate
them for making my dear boy so unhappy."

"You are too kind, Bella, and I often think I'll go away to relieve you
of my presence; but unwise and dangerous as it is to stay, I haven't the
courage to go. I've been so happy here." And as she spoke, Jean's head
dropped lower over the dog as it nestled to her affectionately.

Before Bella could utter half the loving words that sprang to her lips,
Coventry came to them with all languor gone from face and mien, and
laying Jean's letter before her, he said, with an undertone of deep
feeling in his usually emotionless voice, "A right womanly and eloquent
letter, but I fear it will only increase the fire it was meant to
quench. I pity my brother more than ever now."

"Shall I send it?" asked Jean, looking straight up at him, like one who
had entire reliance on his judgment.

"Yes, I have not the heart to rob him of such a sweet sermon upon
self-sacrifice. Shall I post it for you?"

"Thank you; in a moment." And with a grateful look, Jean dropped her
eyes. Producing her little purse, she selected a penny, folded it in a
bit of paper, and then offered both letter and coin to Coventry, with
such a pretty air of business, that he could not control a laugh.

"So you won't be indebted to me for a penny? What a proud woman you are,
Miss Muir."

"I am; it's a family failing." And she gave him a significant glance,
which recalled to him the memory of who she was. He understood her
feeling, and liked her the better for it, knowing that he would have
done the same had he been in her place. It was a little thing, but if
done for effect, it answered admirably, for it showed a quick insight
into his character on her part, and betrayed to him the existence of a
pride in which he sympathized heartily. He stood by Jean a moment,
watching her as she burnt Edward's letter in the blaze of the spirit
lamp under the urn.

"Why do you do that?" he asked involuntarily.

"Because it is my duty to forget" was all her answer.

"Can you always forget when it becomes a duty?"

"I wish I could! I wish I could!"

She spoke passionately, as if the words broke from her against her will,
and, rising hastily, she went into the garden, as if afraid to stay.

"Poor, dear Jean is very unhappy about something, but I can't discover
what it is. Last night I found her crying over a rose, and now she runs
away, looking as if her heart was broken. I'm glad I've got no lessons."

"What kind of a rose?" asked Coventry from behind his paper as
Bella paused.

"A lovely white one. It must have come from the Hall; we have none like
it. I wonder if Jean was ever going to be married, and lost her lover,
and felt sad because the flower reminded her of bridal roses."

Coventry made no reply, but felt himself change countenance as he
recalled the little scene behind the rose hedge, where he gave Jean the
flower which she had refused yet taken. Presently, to Bella's surprise,
he flung down the paper, tore Sydney's note to atoms, and rang for his
horse with an energy which amazed her.

"Why, Gerald, what has come over you? One would think Ned's restless
spirit had suddenly taken possession of you. What are you going to do?"

"I'm going to work" was the unexpected answer, as Coventry turned toward
her with an expression so rarely seen on his fine face.

"What has waked you up all at once?" asked Bella, looking more and
more amazed.

"You did," he said, drawing her toward him.

"I! When? How?"

"Do you remember saying once that energy was better than beauty in a
man, and that no one could respect an idler?"

"I never said anything half so sensible as that. Jean said something
like it once, I believe, but I forgot. Are you tired of doing nothing,
at last, Gerald?"

"Yes, I neglected my duty to Ned, till he got into trouble, and now I
reproach myself for it. It's not too late to do other neglected tasks,
so I'm going at them with a will. Don't say anything about it to anyone,
and don't laugh at me, for I'm in earnest, Bell."

"I know you are, and I admire and love you for it, my dear old boy,"
cried Bella enthusiastically, as she threw her arms about his neck and
kissed him heartily. "What will you do first?" she asked, as he stood
thoughtfully smoothing the bright head that leaned upon his shoulder,
with that new expression still clear and steady in his face.

"I'm going to ride over the whole estate, and attend to things as a
master should; not leave it all to Bent, of whom I've heard many
complaints, but have been too idle to inquire about them. I shall
consult Uncle, and endeavor to be all that my father was in his time. Is
that a worthy ambition, dear?"

"Oh, Gerald, let me tell Mamma. It will make her so happy. You are her
idol, and to hear you say these things, to see you look so like dear
Papa, would do more for her spirits than all the doctors in England."

"Wait till I prove what my resolution is worth. When I have really done
something, then I'll surprise Mamma with a sample of my work."

"Of course you'll tell Lucia?"

"Not on any account. It is a little secret between us, so keep it till I
give you leave to tell it."

"But Jean will see it at once; she knows everything that happens, she is
so quick and wise. Do you mind her knowing?"

"I don't see that I can help it if she is so wonderfully gifted. Let her
see what she can, I don't mind her. Now I'm off." And with a kiss to his
sister, a sudden smile on his face, Coventry sprang upon his horse and
rode away at a pace which caused the groom to stare after him in blank
amazement.

Nothing more was seen of him till dinnertime, when he came in so
exhilarated by his brisk ride and busy morning that he found some
difficulty in assuming his customary manner, and more than once
astonished the family by talking animatedly on various subjects which
till now had always seemed utterly uninteresting to him. Lucia was
amazed, his mother delighted, and Bella could hardly control her desire
to explain the mystery; but Jean took it very calmly and regarded him
with the air of one who said, "I understand, but you will soon tire of
it." This nettled him more than he would confess, and he exerted himself
to silently contradict that prophecy.

"Have you answered Mr. Sydney's letter?" asked Bella, when they were all
scattered about the drawing room after dinner.

"No," answered her brother, who was pacing up and down with restless
steps, instead of lounging near his beautiful cousin.

"I ask because I remembered that Ned sent a message for him in my last
note, as he thought you would know Sydney's address. Here it is,
something about a horse. Please put it in when you write," and Bella
laid the note on the writing table nearby.

"I'll send it at once and have done with it," muttered Coventry and,
seating himself, he dashed off a few lines, sealed and sent the letter,
and then resumed his march, eyeing the three young ladies with three
different expressions, as he passed and repassed. Lucia sat apart,
feigning to be intent upon a book, and her handsome face looked almost
stern in its haughty composure, for though her heart ached, she was too
proud to own it. Bella now lay on the sofa, half asleep, a rosy little
creature, as unconsciously pretty as a child. Miss Muir sat in the
recess of a deep window, in a low lounging chair, working at an
embroidery frame with a graceful industry pleasant to see. Of late she
had worn colors, for Bella had been generous in gifts, and the pale blue
muslin which flowed in soft waves about her was very becoming to her
fair skin and golden hair. The close braids were gone, and loose curls
dropped here and there from the heavy coil wound around her well-shaped
head. The tip of one dainty foot was visible, and a petulant little
gesture which now and then shook back the falling sleeve gave glimpses
of a round white arm. Ned's great hound lay nearby, the sunshine
flickered on her through the leaves, and as she sat smiling to herself,
while the dexterous hands shaped leaf and flower, she made a charming
picture of all that is most womanly and winning; a picture which few
men's eyes would not have liked to rest upon.

Another chair stood near her, and as Coventry went up and down, a strong
desire to take it possessed him. He was tired of his thoughts and wished
to be amused by watching the changes of the girl's expressive face,
listening to the varying tones of her voice, and trying to discover the
spell which so strongly attracted him in spite of himself. More than
once he swerved from his course to gratify his whim, but Lucia's
presence always restrained him, and with a word to the dog, or a glance
from the window, as pretext for a pause, he resumed his walk again.
Something in his cousin's face reproached him, but her manner of late
was so repellent that he felt no desire to resume their former
familiarity, and, wishing to show that he did not consider himself
bound, he kept aloof. It was a quiet test of the power of each woman
over this man; they instinctively felt it, and both tried to conquer.
Lucia spoke several times, and tried to speak frankly and affably; but
her manner was constrained, and Coventry, having answered politely,
relapsed into silence. Jean said nothing, but silently appealed to eye
and ear by the pretty picture she made of herself, the snatches of song
she softly sang, as if forgetting that she was not alone, and a shy
glance now and then, half wistful, half merry, which was more alluring
than graceful figure or sweet voice. When she had tormented Lucia and
tempted Coventry long enough, she quietly asserted her supremacy in a
way which astonished her rival, who knew nothing of the secret of her
birth, which knowledge did much to attract and charm the young man.
Letting a ball of silk escape from her lap, she watched it roll toward
the promenader, who caught and returned it with an alacrity which added
grace to the trifling service. As she took it, she said, in the frank
way that never failed to win him, "I think you must be tired; but if
exercise is necessary, employ your energies to some purpose and put your
mother's basket of silks in order. They are in a tangle, and it will
please her to know that you did it, as your brother used to do."

"Hercules at the distaff," said Coventry gaily, and down he sat in the
long-desired seat. Jean put the basket on his knee, and as he surveyed
it, as if daunted at his task, she leaned back, and indulged in a
musical little peal of laughter charming to hear. Lucia sat dumb with
surprise, to see her proud, indolent cousin obeying the commands of a
governess, and looking as if he heartily enjoyed it. In ten minutes she
was as entirely forgotten as if she had been miles away; for Jean seemed
in her wittiest, gayest mood, and as she now treated the "young master"
like an equal, there was none of the former meek timidity. Yet often her
eyes fell, her color changed, and the piquant sallies faltered on her
tongue, as Coventry involuntarily looked deep into the fine eyes which
had once shone on him so tenderly in that mimic tragedy. He could not
forget it, and though neither alluded to it, the memory of the previous
evening seemed to haunt both and lend a secret charm to the present
moment. Lucia bore this as long as she could, and then left the room
with the air of an insulted princess; but Coventry did not, and Jean
feigned not to see her go. Bella was fast asleep, and before he knew how
it came to pass, the young man was listening to the story of his
companion's life. A sad tale, told with wonderful skill, for soon he was
absorbed in it. The basket slid unobserved from his knee, the dog was
pushed away, and, leaning forward, he listened eagerly as the girl's low
voice recounted all the hardships, loneliness, and grief of her short
life. In the midst of a touching episode she started, stopped, and
looked straight before her, with an intent expression which changed to
one of intense contempt, and her eye turned to Coventry's, as she said,
pointing to the window behind him, "We are watched."

"By whom?" he demanded, starting up angrily.

"Hush, say nothing, let it pass. I am used to it."

"But _I_ am not, and I'll not submit to it. Who was it, Jean?" he
answered hotly.

She smiled significantly at a knot of rose-colored ribbon, which a
little gust was blowing toward them along the terrace. A black frown
darkened the young man's face as he sprang out of the long window and
went rapidly out of sight, scrutinizing each green nook as he passed.
Jean laughed quietly as she watched him, and said softly to herself,
with her eyes on the fluttering ribbon, "That was a fortunate accident,
and a happy inspiration. Yes, my dear Mrs. Dean, you will find that
playing the spy will only get your mistress as well as yourself into
trouble. You would not be warned, and you must take the consequences,
reluctant as I am to injure a worthy creature like yourself."

Soon Coventry was heard returning. Jean listened with suspended breath
to catch his first words, for he was not alone.

"Since you insist that it was you and not your mistress, I let it pass,
although I still have my suspicions. Tell Miss Beaufort I desire to see
her for a few moments in the library. Now go, Dean, and be careful for
the future, if you wish to stay in my house."

The maid retired, and the young man came in looking both ireful
and stern.

"I wish I had said nothing, but I was startled, and spoke involuntarily.
Now you are angry, and I have made fresh trouble for poor Miss Lucia.
Forgive me as I forgive her, and let it pass. I have learned to bear
this surveillance, and pity her causeless jealousy," said Jean, with a
self-reproachful air.

"I will forgive the dishonorable act, but I cannot forget it, and I
intend to put a stop to it. I am not betrothed to my cousin, as I told
you once, but you, like all the rest, seem bent on believing that I am.
Hitherto I have cared too little about the matter to settle it, but now
I shall prove beyond all doubt that I am free."

As he uttered the last word, Coventry cast on Jean a look that affected
her strangely. She grew pale, her work dropped on her lap, and her eyes
rose to his, with an eager, questioning expression, which slowly changed
to one of mingled pain and pity, as she turned her face away, murmuring
in a tone of tender sorrow, "Poor Lucia, who will comfort her?"

For a moment Coventry stood silent, as if weighing some fateful purpose
in his mind. As Jean's rapt sigh of compassion reached his ear, he had
echoed it within himself, and half repented of his resolution; then his
eye rested on the girl before him looking so lonely in her sweet
sympathy for another that his heart yearned toward her. Sudden fire shot
into his eye, sudden warmth replaced the cold sternness of his face, and
his steady voice faltered suddenly, as he said, very low, yet very
earnestly, "Jean, I have tried to love her, but I cannot. Ought I to
deceive her, and make myself miserable to please my family?"

"She is beautiful and good, and loves you tenderly; is there no hope for
her?" asked Jean, still pale, but very quiet, though she held one hand
against her heart, as if to still or hide its rapid beating.

"None," answered Coventry.

"But can you not learn to love her? Your will is strong, and most men
would not find it a hard task."

"I cannot, for something stronger than my own will controls me."

"What is that?" And Jean's dark eyes were fixed upon him, full of
innocent wonder.

His fell, and he said hastily, "I dare not tell you yet."

"Pardon! I should not have asked. Do not consult me in this matter; I am
not the person to advise you. I can only say that it seems to me as if
any man with an empty heart would be glad to have so beautiful a woman
as your cousin."

"My heart is not empty," began Coventry, drawing a step nearer, and
speaking in a passionate voice. "Jean, I _must_ speak; hear me. I cannot
love my cousin, because I love you."

"Stop!" And Jean sprang up with a commanding gesture. "I will not hear
you while any promise binds you to another. Remember your mother's
wishes, Lucia's hopes, Edward's last words, your own pride, my humble
lot. You forget yourself, Mr. Coventry. Think well before you speak,
weigh the cost of this act, and recollect who I am before you insult me
by any transient passion, any false vows."

"I have thought, I do weigh the cost, and I swear that I desire to woo
you as humbly, honestly as I would any lady in the land. You speak of my
pride. Do I stoop in loving my equal in rank? You speak of your lowly
lot, but poverty is no disgrace, and the courage with which you bear it
makes it beautiful. I should have broken with Lucia before I spoke, but
I could not control myself. My mother loves you, and will be happy in my
happiness. Edward must forgive me, for I have tried to do my best, but
love is irresistible. Tell me, Jean, is there any hope for me?"

He had seized her hand and was speaking impetuously, with ardent face
and tender tone, but no answer came, for as Jean turned her eloquent
countenance toward him, full of maiden shame and timid love, Dean's prim
figure appeared at the door, and her harsh voice broke the momentary
silence, saying, sternly, "Miss Beaufort is waiting for you, sir."

"Go, go at once, and be kind, for my sake, Gerald," whispered Jean, far
he stood as if deaf and blind to everything but her voice, her face.

As she drew his head down to whisper, her cheek touched his, and
regardless of Dean, he kissed it, passionately, whispering back, "My
little Jean! For your sake I can be anything."

"Miss Beaufort is waiting. Shall I say you will come, sir?" demanded
Dean, pale and grim with indignation.

"Yes, yes, I'll come. Wait for me in the garden, Jean." And Coventry
hurried away, in no mood for the interview but anxious to have it over.

As the door closed behind him, Dean walked up to Miss Muir, trembling
with anger, and laying a heavy hand on her arm, she said below her
breath, "I've been expecting this, you artful creature. I saw your game
and did my best to spoil it, but you are too quick for me. You think
you've got him. There you are mistaken; for as sure as my name is Hester
Dean, I'll prevent it, or Sir John shall."

"Take your hand away and treat me with proper respect, or you will be
dismissed from this house. Do you know who I am?" And Jean drew herself
up with a haughty air, which impressed the woman more deeply than her
words. "I am the daughter of Lady Howard and, if I choose it, can be the
wife of Mr. Coventry."

Dean drew back amazed, yet not convinced. Being a well-trained servant,
as well as a prudent woman, she feared to overstep the bounds of
respect, to go too far, and get her mistress as well as herself into
trouble. So, though she still doubted Jean, and hated her more than
ever, she controlled herself. Dropping a curtsy, she assumed her usual
air of deference, and said, meekly, "I beg pardon, miss. If I'd known, I
should have conducted myself differently, of course, but ordinary
governesses make so much mischief in a house, one can't help mistrusting
them. I don't wish to meddle or be overbold, but being fond of my dear
young lady, I naturally take her part, and must say that Mr. Coventry
has not acted like a gentleman."

"Think what you please, Dean, but I advise you to say as little as
possible if you wish to remain. I have not accepted Mr. Coventry yet,
and if he chooses to set aside the engagement his family made for him, I
think he has a right to do so. Miss Beaufort would hardly care to marry
him against his will, because he pities her for her unhappy love," and
with a tranquil smile, Miss Muir walked away.




_chapter VII_


THE LAST CHANCE

"She will tell Sir John, will she? Then I must be before her, and hasten
events. It will be as well to have all sure before there can be any
danger. My poor Dean, you are no match for me, but you may prove
annoying, nevertheless."

These thoughts passed through Miss Muir's mind as she went down the
hall, pausing an instant at the library door, for the murmur of voices
was heard. She caught no word, and had only time for an instant's
pause as Dean's heavy step followed her. Turning, Jean drew a chair
before the door, and, beckoning to the woman, she said, smiling still,
"Sit here and play watchdog. I am going to Miss Bella, so you can nod
if you will."

"Thank you, miss. I will wait for my young lady. She may need me when
this hard time is over." And Dean seated herself with a resolute face.

Jean laughed and went on; but her eyes gleamed with sudden malice, and
she glanced over her shoulder with an expression which boded ill for the
faithful old servant.

"I've got a letter from Ned, and here is a tiny note for you," cried
Bella as Jean entered the boudoir. "Mine is a very odd, hasty letter,
with no news in it, but his meeting with Sydney. I hope yours is better,
or it won't be very satisfactory."

As Sydney's name passed Bella's lips, all the color died out of Miss
Muir's face, and the note shook with the tremor of her hand. Her very
lips were white, but she said calmly, "Thank you. As you are busy,
I'll go and read my letter on the lawn." And before Bella could speak,
she was gone.

Hurrying to a quiet nook, Jean tore open the note and read the few
blotted lines it contained.

_I have seen Sydney; he has told me all; and, hard as I found it to
believe, it was impossible to doubt, for he has discovered proofs which
cannot be denied. I make no reproaches, shall demand no confession or
atonement, for I cannot forget that I once loved you. I give you three
days to find another home, before I return to tell the family who you
are. Go at once, I beseech you, and spare me the pain of seeing your
disgrace._

Slowly, steadily she read it twice over, then sat motionless, knitting
her brows in deep thought. Presently she drew a long breath, tore up the
note, and rising, went slowly toward the Hall, saying to herself, "Three
days, only three days! Can it be accomplished in so short a time? It
shall be, if wit and will can do it, for it is my last chance. If this
fails, I'll not go back to my old life, but end all at once."

Setting her teeth and clenching her hands, as if some memory stung her,
she went on through the twilight, to find Sir John waiting to give her a
hearty welcome.

"You look tired, my dear. Never mind the reading tonight; rest yourself,
and let the book go," he said kindly, observing her worn look.

"Thank you, sir. I am tired, but I'd rather read, else the book will not
be finished before I go."

"Go, child! Where are you going?" demanded Sir John, looking anxiously
at her as she sat down.

"I will tell you by-and-by, sir." And opening the book, Jean read for a
little while.

But the usual charm was gone; there was no spirit in the voice of the
reader, no interest in the face of the listener, and soon he said,
abruptly, "My dear, pray stop! I cannot listen with a divided mind. What
troubles you? Tell your friend, and let him comfort you."

As if the kind words overcame her, Jean dropped the book, covered up her
face, and wept so bitterly that Sir John was much alarmed; for such a
demonstration was doubly touching in one who usually was all gaiety and
smiles. As he tried to soothe her, his words grew tender, his solicitude
full of a more than paternal anxiety, and his kind heart overflowed with
pity and affection for the weeping girl. As she grew calmer, he urged
her to be frank, promising to help and counsel her, whatever the
affliction or fault might be.

"Ah, you are too kind, too generous! How can I go away and leave my one
friend?" sighed Jean, wiping the tears away and looking up at him with
grateful eyes.

"Then you do care a little for the old man?" said Sir John with an eager
look, an involuntary pressure of the hand he held.

Jean turned her face away, and answered, very low, "No one ever was
so kind to me as you have been. Can I help caring for you more than I
can express?"

Sir John was a little deaf at times, but he heard that, and looked well
pleased. He had been rather thoughtful of late, had dressed with unusual
care, been particularly gallant and gay when the young ladies visited
him, and more than once, when Jean paused in the reading to ask a
question, he had been forced to confess that he had not been listening;
though, as she well knew, his eyes had been fixed upon her. Since the
discovery of her birth, his manner had been peculiarly benignant, and
many little acts had proved his interest and goodwill. Now, when Jean
spoke of going, a panic seized him, and desolation seemed about to fall
upon the old Hall. Something in her unusual agitation struck him as
peculiar and excited his curiosity. Never had she seemed so interesting
as now, when she sat beside him with tearful eyes, and some soft trouble
in her heart which she dared not confess.

"Tell me everything, child, and let your friend help you if he can."
Formerly he said "father" or "the old man," but lately he always spoke
of himself as her "friend."

"I will tell you, for I have no one else to turn to. I must go away
because Mr. Coventry has been weak enough to love me."

"What, Gerald?" cried Sir John, amazed.

"Yes; today he told me this, and left me to break with Lucia; so I ran
to you to help me prevent him from disappointing his mother's hopes
and plans."

Sir John had started up and paced down the room, but as Jean paused he
turned toward her, saying, with an altered face, "Then you do not love
him? Is it possible?"

"No, I do not love him," she answered promptly.

"Yet he is all that women usually find attractive. How is it that you
have escaped, Jean?"

"I love someone else" was the scarcely audible reply.

Sir John resumed his seat with the air of a man bent on getting at a
mystery, if possible.

"It will be unjust to let you suffer for the folly of these boys, my
little girl. Ned is gone, and I was sure that Gerald was safe; but now
that his turn has come, I am perplexed, for he cannot be sent away."

"No, it is I who must go; but it seems so hard to leave this safe and
happy home, and wander away into the wide, cold world again. You have
all been too kind to me, and now separation breaks my heart."

A sob ended the speech, and Jean's head went down upon her hands again.
Sir John looked at her a moment, and his fine old face was full of
genuine emotion, as he said slowly, "Jean, will you stay and be a
daughter to the solitary old man?"

"No, sir" was the unexpected answer.

"And why not?" asked Sir John, looking surprised, but rather pleased
than angry.

"Because I could not be a daughter to you; and even if I could, it would
not be wise, for the gossips would say you were not old enough to be the
adopted father of a girl like me. Sir John, young as I am, I know much
of the world, and am sure that this kind plan is impractical; but I
thank you from the bottom of my heart."

"Where will you go, Jean?" asked Sir John, after a pause.

"To London, and try to find another situation where I can do no harm."

"Will it be difficult to find another home?"

"Yes. I cannot ask Mrs. Coventry to recommend me, when I have innocently
brought so much trouble into her family; and Lady Sydney is gone, so I
have no friend."

"Except John Coventry. I will arrange all that. When will you go, Jean?"

"Tomorrow."

"So soon!" And the old man's voice betrayed the trouble he was trying
to conceal.

Jean had grown very calm, but it was the calmness of desperation. She
had hoped that the first tears would produce the avowal for which she
waited. It had not, and she began to fear that her last chance was
slipping from her. Did the old man love her? If so, why did he not
speak? Eager to profit by each moment, she was on the alert for any
hopeful hint, any propitious word, look, or act, and every nerve was
strung to the utmost.

"Jean, may I ask one question?" said Sir John.

"Anything of me, sir."

"This man whom you love--can he not help you?"

"He could if he knew, but he must not."

"If he knew what? Your present trouble?"

"No. My love."

"He does not know this, then?"

"No, thank heaven! And he never will."

"Why not?"

"Because I am too proud to own it."

"He loves you, my child?"

"I do not know--I dare not hope it," murmured Jean.

"Can I not help you here? Believe me, I desire to see you safe and
happy. Is there nothing I can do?"

"Nothing, nothing."

"May I know the name?"

"No! No! Let me go; I cannot bear this questioning!" And Jean's
distressful face warned him to ask no more.

"Forgive me, and let me do what I may. Rest here quietly. I'll write a
letter to a good friend of mine, who will find you a home, if you
leave us."

As Sir John passed into his inner study, Jean watched him with
despairing eyes and wrung her hands, saying to herself, Has all my
skill deserted me when I need it most? How can I make him understand,
yet not overstep the bounds of maiden modesty? He is so blind, so
timid, or so dull he will not see, and time is going fast. What shall I
do to open his eyes?

Her own eyes roved about the room, seeking for some aid from inanimate
things, and soon she found it. Close behind the couch where she sat hung
a fine miniature of Sir John. At first her eye rested on it as she
contrasted its placid comeliness with the unusual pallor and disquiet of
the living face seen through the open door, as the old man sat at his
desk trying to write and casting covert glances at the girlish figure he
had left behind him. Affecting unconsciousness of this, Jean gazed on as
if forgetful of everything but the picture, and suddenly, as if obeying
an irresistible impulse, she took it down, looked long and fondly at it,
then, shaking her curls about her face, as if to hide the act, pressed
it to her lips and seemed to weep over it in an uncontrollable paroxysm
of tender grief. A sound startled her, and like a guilty thing, she
turned to replace the picture; but it dropped from her hand as she
uttered a faint cry and hid her face, for Sir John stood before her,
with an expression which she could not mistake.

"Jean, why did you do that?" he asked, in an eager, agitated voice.

No answer, as the girl sank lower, like one overwhelmed with shame.
Laying his hand on the bent head, and bending his own, he whispered,
"Tell me, is the name John Coventry?"

Still no answer, but a stifled sound betrayed that his words had
gone home.

"Jean, shall I go back and write the letter, or may I stay and tell you
that the old man loves you better than a daughter?"

She did not speak, but a little hand stole out from under the falling
hair, as if to keep him. With a broken exclamation he seized it, drew
her up into his arms, and laid his gray head on her fan: one, too happy
for words. For a moment Jean Muir enjoyed her success; then, fearing
lest some sudden mishap should destroy it, she hastened to make all
secure. Looking up with well-feigned timidity and half-confessed
affection, she said softly, "Forgive me that I could not hide this
better. I meant to go away and never tell it, but you were so kind it
made the parting doubly hard. Why did you ask such dangerous questions?
Why did you look, when you should have been writing my dismissal?"

"How could I dream that you loved me, Jean, when you refused the only
offer I dared make? Could I be presumptuous enough to fancy you would
reject young lovers for an old man like me?" asked Sir John,
caressing her.

"You are not old, to me, but everything I love and honor!" interrupted
Jean, with a touch of genuine remorse, as this generous, honorable
gentleman gave her both heart and home, unconscious of deceit. "It is I
who am presumptuous, to dare to love one so far above me. But I did not
know how dear you were to me till I felt that I must go. I ought not to
accept this happiness. I am not worthy of it; and you will regret your
kindness when the world blames you for giving a home to one so poor, and
plain, and humble as I."

"Hush, my darling. I care nothing for the idle gossip of the world. If
you are happy here, let tongues wag as they will. I shall be too busy
enjoying the sunshine of your presence to heed anything that goes on
about me. But, Jean, you are sure you love me? It seems incredible
that I should win the heart that has been so cold to younger, better
men than I."

"Dear Sir John, be sure of this, I love you truly. I will do my best to
be a good wife to you, and prove that, in spite of my many faults, I
possess the virtue of gratitude."

If he had known the strait she was in, he would have understood the
cause of the sudden fervor of her words, the intense thankfulness that
shone in her face, the real humility that made her stoop and kiss the
generous hand that gave so much. For a few moments she enjoyed and let
him enjoy the happy present, undisturbed. But the anxiety which devoured
her, the danger which menaced her, soon recalled her, and forced her to
wring yet more from the unsuspicious heart she had conquered.

"No need of letters now," said Sir John, as they sat side by side, with
the summer moonlight glorifying all the room. "You have found a home for
life; may it prove a happy one."

"It is not mine yet, and I have a strange foreboding that it never will
be," she answered sadly.

"Why, my child?"

"Because I have an enemy who will try to destroy my peace, to poison
your mind against me, and to drive me out from my paradise, to suffer
again all I have suffered this last year."

"You mean that mad Sydney of whom you told me?"

"Yes. As soon as he hears of this good fortune to poor little Jean, he
will hasten to mar it. He is my fate; I cannot escape him, and wherever
he goes my friends desert me; for he has the power and uses it for my
destruction. Let me go away and hide before he comes, for, having shared
your confidence, it will break my heart to see you distrust and turn
from me, instead of loving and protecting."

"My poor child, you are superstitious. Be easy. No one can harm you now,
no one would dare attempt it. And as for my deserting you, that will
soon be out of my power, if I have my way."

"How, dear Sir John?" asked Jean, with a flutter of intense relief at
her heart, for the way seemed smoothing before her.

"I will make you my wife at once, if I may. This will free you from
Gerald's love, protect you from Sydney's persecution, give you a safe
home, and me the right to cherish and defend with heart and hand. Shall
it be so, my child?"

"Yes; but oh, remember that I have no friend but you! Promise me to be
faithful to the last--to believe in me, to trust me, protect and love
me, in spite of all misfortunes, faults, and follies. I will be true as
steel to you, and make your life as happy as it deserves to be. Let us
promise these things now, and keep the promises unbroken to the end."

Her solemn air touched Sir John. Too honorable and upright himself to
suspect falsehood in others, he saw only the natural impulse of a lovely
girl in Jean's words, and, taking the hand she gave him in both of his,
he promised all she asked, and kept that promise to the end. She paused
an instant, with a pale, absent expression, as if she searched herself,
then looked up clearly in the confiding face above her, and promised
what she faithfully performed in afteryears.

"When shall it be, little sweetheart? I leave all to you, only let it be
soon, else some gay young lover will appear, and take you from me," said
Sir John, playfully, anxious to chase away the dark expression which had
stolen over Jean's face.

"Can you keep a secret?" asked the girl, smiling up at him, all her
charming self again.

"Try me."

"I will. Edward is coming home in three days. I must be gone before he
comes. Tell no one of this; he wishes to surprise them. And if you love
me, tell nobody of your approaching marriage. Do not betray that you
care for me until I am really yours. There will be such a stir, such
remonstrances, explanations, and reproaches that I shall be worn out,
and run away from you all to escape the trial. If I could have my wish,
I would go to some quiet place tomorrow and wait till you come for me. I
know so little of such things, I cannot tell how soon we may be married;
not for some weeks, I think."

"Tomorrow, if we like. A special license permits people to marry when
and where they please. My plan is better than yours. Listen, and tell me
if it can be carried out. I will go to town tomorrow, get the license,
invite my friend, the Reverend Paul Fairfax, to return with me, and
tomorrow evening you come at your usual time, and, in the presence of my
discreet old servants, make me the happiest man in England. How does
this suit you, my little Lady Coventry?"

The plan which seemed made to meet her ends, the name which was the
height of her ambition, and the blessed sense of safety which came to
her filled Jean Muir with such intense satisfaction that tears of real
feeling stood in her eyes, and the glad assent she gave was the truest
word that had passed her lips for months.

"We will go abroad or to Scotland for our honeymoon, till the storm
blows over," said Sir John, well knowing that this hasty marriage would
surprise or offend all his relations, and feeling as glad as Jean to
escape the first excitement.

"To Scotland, please. I long to see my father's home," said Jean, who
dreaded to meet Sydney on the continent.

They talked a little longer, arranging all things, Sir John so intent on
hurrying the event that Jean had nothing to do but give a ready assent
to all his suggestions. One fear alone disturbed her. If Sir John went
to town, he might meet Edward, might hear and believe his statements.
Then all would be lost. Yet this risk must be incurred, if the marriage
was to be speedily and safely accomplished; and to guard against the
meeting was Jean's sole care. As they went through the park--for Sir
John insisted upon taking her home--she said, clinging to his arm:

"Dear friend, bear one thing in mind, else we shall be much annoyed, and
all our plans disarranged. Avoid your nephews; you are so frank your
face will betray you. They both love me, are both hot-tempered, and in
the first excitement of the discovery might be violent. You must incur
no danger, no disrespect for my sake; so shun them both till we are
safe--particularly Edward. He will feel that his brother has wronged
him, and that you have succeeded where he failed. This will irritate
him, and I fear a stormy scene. Promise to avoid both for a day or two;
do not listen to them, do not see them, do not write to or receive
letters from them. It is foolish, I know; but you are all I have, and I
am haunted by a strange foreboding that I am to lose you."

Touched and flattered by her tender solicitude, Sir John promised
everything, even while he laughed at her fears. Love blinded the good
gentleman to the peculiarity of the request; the novelty, romance, and
secrecy of the affair rather bewildered though it charmed him; and the
knowledge that he had outrivaled three young and ardent lovers
gratified his vanity more than he would confess. Parting from the girl
at the garden gate, he turned homeward, feeling like a boy again, and
loitered back, humming a love lay, quite forgetful of evening damps,
gout, and the five-and-fifty years which lay so lightly on his
shoulders since Jean's arms had rested there. She hurried toward the
house, anxious to escape Coventry; but he was waiting for her, and she
was forced to meet him.

"How could you linger so long, and keep me in suspense?" he said
reproachfully, as he took her hand and tried to catch a glimpse of her
face in the shadow of her hat brim. "Come and rest in the grotto. I have
so much to say, to hear and enjoy."

"Not now; I am too tired. Let me go in and sleep. Tomorrow we will talk.
It is damp and chilly, and my head aches with all this worry." Jean
spoke wearily, yet with a touch of petulance, and Coventry, fancying
that she was piqued at his not coming for her, hastened to explain with
eager tenderness.

"My poor little Jean, you do need rest. We wear you out, among us, and
you never complain. I should have come to bring you home, but Lucia
detained me, and when I got away I saw my uncle had forestalled me. I
shall be jealous of the old gentleman, if he is so devoted. Jean, tell
me one thing before we part; I am free as air, now, and have a right to
speak. Do you love me? Am I the happy man who has won your heart? I
dare to think so, to believe that this telltale face of yours has
betrayed you, and to hope that I have gained what poor Ned and wild
Sydney have lost."

"Before I answer, tell me of your interview with Lucia. I have a right
to know," said Jean.

Coventry hesitated, for pity and remorse were busy at his heart when he
recalled poor Lucia's grief. Jean was bent on hearing the humiliation of
her rival. As the young man paused, she frowned, then lifted up her face
wreathed in softest smiles, and laying her hand on his arm, she said,
with most effective emphasis, half shy, half fond, upon his name,
"Please tell me, Gerald!"

He could not resist the look, the touch, the tone, and taking the little
hand in his, he said rapidly, as if the task was distasteful to him, "I
told her that I did not, could not love her; that I had submitted to my
mother's wish, and, for a time, had felt tacitly bound to her, though no
words had passed between us. But now I demanded my liberty, regretting
that the separation was not mutually desired."

"And she--what did she say? How did she bear it?" asked Jean, feeling
in her own woman's heart how deeply Lucia's must have been wounded by
that avowal.

"Poor girl! It was hard to bear, but her pride sustained her to the end.
She owned that no pledge tied me, fully relinquished any claim my past
behavior had seemed to have given her, and prayed that I might find
another woman to love me as truly, tenderly as she had done. Jean, I
felt like a villain; and yet I never plighted my word to her, never
really loved her, and had a perfect right to leave her, if I would."

"Did she speak of me?"

"Yes."

"What did she say?"

"Must I tell you?"

"Yes, tell me everything. I know she hates me and I forgive her, knowing
that I should hate any woman whom _you_ loved."

"Are you jealous, dear?"

"Of you, Gerald?" And the fine eyes glanced up at him, full of a
brilliancy that looked like the light of love.

"You make a slave of me already. How do you do it? I never obeyed a
woman before. Jean, I think you are a witch. Scotland is the home of
weird, uncanny creatures, who take lovely shapes for the bedevilment of
poor weak souls. Are you one of those fair deceivers?"

"You are complimentary," laughed the girl. "I _am_ a witch, and one
day my disguise will drop away and you will see me as I am, old, ugly,
bad and lost. Beware of me in time. I've warned you. Now love me at
your peril."

Coventry had paused as he spoke, and eyed her with an unquiet look,
conscious of some fascination which conquered yet brought no happiness.
A feverish yet pleasurable excitement possessed him; a reckless mood,
making him eager to obliterate the past by any rash act, any new
experience which his passion brought. Jean regarded him with a wistful,
almost woeful face, for one short moment; then a strange smile broke
over it, as she spoke in a tone of malicious mockery, under which lurked
the bitterness of a sad truth. Coventry looked half bewildered, and his
eye went from the girl's mysterious face to a dimly lighted window,
behind whose curtains poor Lucia hid her aching heart, praying for him
the tender prayers that loving women give to those whose sins are all
forgiven for love's sake. His heart smote him, and a momentary feeling
of repulsion came over him, as he looked at Jean. She saw it, felt
angry, yet conscious of a sense of relief; for now that her own safety
was so nearly secured, she felt no wish to do mischief, but rather a
desire to undo what was already done, and be at peace with all the
world. To recall him to his allegiance, she sighed and walked on, saying
gently yet coldly, "Will you tell me what I ask before I answer your
question, Mr. Coventry?"

"What Lucia said of you? Well, it was this. 'Beware of Miss Muir. We
instinctively distrusted her when we had no cause. I believe in
instincts, and mine have never changed, for she has not tried to delude
me. Her art is wonderful; I feel yet cannot explain or detect it, except
in the working of events which her hand seems to guide. She has brought
sorrow and dissension into this hitherto happy family. We are all
changed, and this girl has done it. Me she can harm no further; you she
will ruin, if she can. Beware of her in tune, or you win bitterly repent
your blind infatuation!'"

"And what answer did you make?" asked Jean, as the last words came
reluctantly from Coventry's lips.

"I told her that I loved you in spite of myself, and would make you my
wife in the face of all opposition. Now, Jean, your answer."

"Give me three days to think of it. Good night." And gliding from him,
she vanished into the house, leaving him to roam about half the night,
tormented with remorse, suspense, and the old distrust which would
return when Jean was not there to banish it by her art.




_chapter VIII_


SUSPENSE

All the next day, Jean was in a state of the most intense anxiety, as
every hour brought the crisis nearer, and every hour might bring defeat,
for the subtlest human skill is often thwarted by some unforeseen
accident. She longed to assure herself that Sir John was gone, but no
servants came or went that day, and she could devise no pretext for
sending to glean intelligence. She dared not go herself, lest the
unusual act should excite suspicion, for she never went till evening.
Even had she determined to venture, there was no time, for Mrs. Coventry
was in one of her nervous states, and no one but Miss Muir could amuse
her; Lucia was ill, and Miss Muir must give orders; Bella had a studious
fit, and Jean must help her. Coventry lingered about the house for
several hours, but Jean dared not send him, lest some hint of the truth
might reach him. He had ridden away to his new duties when Jean did not
appear, and the day dragged on wearisomely. Night came at last, and as
Jean dressed for the late dinner, she hardly knew herself when she stood
before her mirror, excitement lent such color and brilliancy to her
countenance. Remembering the wedding which was to take place that
evening, she put on a simple white dress and added a cluster of white
roses in bosom and hair. She often wore flowers, but in spite of her
desire to look and seem as usual, Bella's first words as she entered the
drawing room were "Why, Jean, how like a bride you look; a veil and
gloves would make you quite complete!"

"You forget one other trifle, Bell," said Gerald, with eyes that
brightened as they rested on Miss Muir.

"What is that?" asked his sister.

"A bridegroom."

Bella looked to see how Jean received this, but she seemed quite
composed as she smiled one of her sudden smiles, and merely said, "That
trifle will doubtless be found when the time comes. Is Miss Beaufort too
ill for dinner?"

"She begs to be excused, and said you would be willing to take her
place, she thought."

As innocent Bella delivered this message, Jean glanced at Coventry, who
evaded her eye and looked ill at ease.

A little remorse will do him good, and prepare him for repentance after
the grand _coup_, she said to herself, and was particularly gay at
dinnertime, though Coventry looked often at Lucia's empty seat, as if he
missed her. As soon as they left the table, Miss Muir sent Bella to her
mother; and, knowing that Coventry would not linger long at his wine,
she hurried away to the Hall. A servant was lounging at the door, and of
him she asked, in a tone which was eager in spite of all efforts to be
calm, "Is Sir John at home?"

"No, miss, he's just gone to town."

"Just gone! When do you mean?" cried Jean, forgetting the relief she
felt in hearing of his absence in surprise at his late departure.

"He went half an hour ago, in the last train, miss."

"I thought he was going early this morning; he told me he should be back
this evening."

"I believe he did mean to go, but was delayed by company. The steward
came up on business, and a load of gentlemen called, so Sir John could
not get off till night, when he wasn't fit to go, being worn out, and
far from well."

"Do you think he will be ill? Did he look so?" And as Jean spoke, a
thrill of fear passed over her, lest death should rob her of her prize.

"Well, you know, miss, hurry of any kind is bad for elderly gentlemen
inclined to apoplexy. Sir John was in a worry all day, and not like
himself. I wanted him to take his man, but he wouldn't; and drove off
looking flushed and excited like. I'm anxious about him, for I know
something is amiss to hurry him off in this way."

"When will he be back, Ralph?"

"Tomorrow noon, if possible; at night, certainly, he bid me tell anyone
that called."

"Did he leave no note or message for Miss Coventry, or someone of
the family?"

"No, miss, nothing."

"Thank you." And Jean walked back to spend a restless night and rise to
meet renewed suspense.

The morning seemed endless, but noon came at last, and under the
pretense of seeking coolness in the grotto, Jean stole away to a slope
whence the gate to the Hall park was visible. For two long hours she
watched, and no one came. She was just turning away when a horseman
dashed through the gate and came galloping toward the Hall. Heedless of
everything but the uncontrollable longing to gain some tidings, she ran
to meet him, feeling assured that he brought ill news. It was a young
man from the station, and as he caught sight of her, he drew bridle,
looking agitated and undecided.

"Has anything happened?" she cried breathlessly.

"A dreadful accident on the railroad, just the other side of
Croydon. News telegraphed half an hour ago," answered the man,
wiping his hot face.

"The noon train? Was Sir John in it? Quick, tell me all!"

"It was that train, miss, but whether Sir John was in it or not, we
don't know; for the guard is killed, and everything is in such confusion
that nothing can be certain. They are at work getting out the dead and
wounded. We heard that Sir John was expected, and I came up to tell Mr.
Coventry, thinking he would wish to go down. A train leaves in fifteen
minutes; where shall I find him? I was told he was at the Hall."

"Ride on, ride on! And find him if he is there. I'll run home and look
for him. Lose no time. Ride! Ride!" And turning, Jean sped back like a
deer, while the man tore up the avenue to rouse the Hall.

Coventry was there, and went off at once, leaving both Hall and house in
dismay. Fearing to betray the horrible anxiety that possessed her, Jean
shut herself up in her room and suffered untold agonies as the day wore
on and no news came. At dark a sudden cry rang through the house, and
Jean rushed down to learn the cause. Bella was standing in the hall,
holding a letter, while a group of excited servants hovered near her.

"What is it?" demanded Miss Muir, pale and steady, though her heart
died within her as she recognized Gerald's handwriting. Bella gave
her the note, and hushed her sobbing to hear again the heavy tidings
that had come.

    _Dear Bella:

    Uncle is safe; he did not go in the noon train. But several persons
    are sure that Ned was there. No trace of him as yet, but many bodies
    are in the river, under the ruins of the bridge, and I am doing my
    best to find the poor lad, if he is there. I have sent to all his
    haunts in town, and as he has not been seen, I hope it is a false
    report and he is safe with his regiment. Keep this from my mother
    till we are sure. I write you, because Lucia is ill. Miss Muir will
    comfort and sustain you. Hope for the best, dear.

    Yours, G.C._

Those who watched Miss Muir as she read these words wondered at the
strange expressions which passed over her face, for the joy which
appeared there as Sir John's safety was made known did not change to
grief or horror at poor Edward's possible fate. The smile died on her
lips, but her voice did not falter, and in her downcast eyes shone an
inexplicable look of something like triumph. No wonder, for if this
was true, the danger which menaced her was averted for a time, and the
marriage might be consummated without such desperate haste. This sad
and sudden event seemed to her the mysterious fulfilment of a secret
wish; and though startled she was not daunted but inspirited, for fate
seemed to favor her designs. She did comfort Bella, control the
excited household, and keep the rumors from Mrs. Coventry all that
dreadful night.

At dawn Gerald came home exhausted, and bringing no tiding of the
missing man. He had telegraphed to the headquarters of the regiment and
received a reply, stating that Edward had left for London the previous
day, meaning to go home before returning. The fact of his having been at
the London station was also established, but whether he left by the
train or not was still uncertain. The ruins were still being searched,
and the body might yet appear.

"Is Sir John coming at noon?" asked Jean, as the three sat together in
the rosy hush of dawn, trying to hope against hope.

"No, he had been ill, I learned from young Gower, who is just from town,
and so had not completed his business. I sent him word to wait till
night, for the bridge won't be passable till then. Now I must try and
rest an hour; I've worked all night and have no strength left. Call me
the instant any messenger arrives."

With that Coventry went to his room, Bella followed to wait on him, and
Jean roamed through house and grounds, unable to rest. The morning was
far spent when the messenger arrived. Jean went to receive his tidings,
with the wicked hope still lurking at her heart.

"Is he found?" she asked calmly, as the man hesitated to speak.

"Yes, ma'am."

"You are sure?"

"I am certain, ma'am, though some won't say till Mr. Coventry
comes to look."

"Is he alive?" And Jean's white lips trembled as she put the question.

"Oh no, ma'am, that warn't possible, under all them stones and water.
The poor young gentleman is so wet, and crushed, and torn, no one
would know him, except for the uniform, and the white hand with the
ring on it."

Jean sat down, very pale, and the man described the finding of the poor
shattered body. As he finished, Coventry appeared, and with one look of
mingled remorse, shame, and sorrow, the elder brother went away, to find
and bring the younger home. Jean crept into the garden like a guilty
thing, trying to hide the satisfaction which struggled with a woman's
natural pity, for so sad an end for this brave young life.

"Why waste tears or feign sorrow when I must be glad?" she muttered, as
she paced to and fro along the terrace. "The poor boy is out of pain,
and I am out of danger."

She got no further, for, turning as she spoke, she stood face to face
with Edward! Bearing no mark of peril on dress or person, but stalwart
and strong as ever, he stood there looking at her, with contempt and
compassion struggling in his face. As if turned to stone, she remained
motionless, with dilated eyes, arrested breath, and paling cheek. He did
not speak but watched her silently till she put out a trembling hand, as
if to assure herself by touch that it was really he. Then he drew back,
and as if the act convinced as fully as words, she said slowly, "They
told me you were dead."

"And you were glad to believe it. No, it was my comrade, young Courtney,
who unconsciously deceived you all, and lost his life, as I should have
done, if I had not gone to Ascot after seeing him off yesterday."

"To Ascot?" echoed Jean, shrinking back, for Edward's eye was on her,
and his voice was stern and cold.

"Yes; you know the place. I went there to make inquiries concerning you
and was well satisfied. Why are you still here?"

"The three days are not over yet. I hold you to your promise. Before
night I shall be gone; till then you will be silent, if you have honor
enough to keep your word."

"I have." Edward took out his watch and, as he put it back, said with
cool precision, "It is now two, the train leaves for London at half-past
six; a carriage will wait for you at the side door. Allow me to advise
you to go then, for the instant dinner is over I shall speak." And with
a bow he went into the house, leaving Jean nearly suffocated with a
throng of contending emotions.

For a few minutes she seemed paralyzed; but the native energy of the
woman forbade utter despair, till the last hope was gone. Frail as that
now was, she still clung to it tenaciously, resolving to win the game in
defiance of everything. Springing up, she went to her room, packed her
few valuables, dressed herself with care, and then sat down to wait. She
heard a joyful stir below, saw Coventry come hurrying back, and from a
garrulous maid learned that the body was that of young Courtney. The
uniform being the same as Edward's and the ring, a gift from him, had
caused the men to believe the disfigured corpse to be that of the
younger Coventry. No one but the maid came near her; once Bella's voice
called her, but some one checked the girl, and the call was not
repeated. At five an envelope was brought her, directed in Edward's
hand, and containing a check which more than paid a year's salary. No
word accompanied the gift, yet the generosity of it touched her, for
Jean Muir had the relics of a once honest nature, and despite her
falsehood could still admire nobleness and respect virtue. A tear of
genuine shame dropped on the paper, and real gratitude filled her heart,
as she thought that even if all else failed, she was not thrust out
penniless into the world, which had no pity for poverty.

As the clock struck six, she heard a carriage drive around and went down
to meet it. A servant put on her trunk, gave the order, "To the station,
James," and she drove away without meeting anyone, speaking to anyone,
or apparently being seen by anyone. A sense of utter weariness came over
her, and she longed to lie down and forget. But the last chance still
remained, and till that failed, she would not give up. Dismissing the
carriage, she seated herself to watch for the quarter-past-six train
from London, for in that Sir John would come if he came at all that
night. She was haunted by the fear that Edward had met and told him. The
first glimpse of Sir John's frank face would betray the truth. If he
knew all, there was no hope, and she would go her way alone. If he knew
nothing, there was yet time for the marriage; and once his wife, she
knew she was safe, because for the honor of his name he would screen and
protect her.

Up rushed the train, out stepped Sir John, and Jean's heart died within
her. Grave, and pale, and worn he looked, and leaned heavily on the arm
of a portly gentleman in black. The Reverend Mr. Fairfax, why has he
come, if the secret is out? thought Jean, slowly advancing to meet them
and fearing to read her fate in Sir John's face. He saw her, dropped his
friend's arm, and hurried forward with the ardor of a young man,
exclaiming, as he seized her hand with a beaming face, a glad voice, "My
little girl! Did you think I would never come?"

She could not answer, the reaction was too strong, but she clung to him,
regardless of time or place, and felt that her last hope had not failed.
Mr. Fairfax proved himself equal to the occasion. Asking no questions,
he hurried Sir John and Jean into a carriage and stepped in after them
with a bland apology. Jean was soon herself again, and, having told her
fears at his delay, listened eagerly while he related the various
mishaps which had detained him.

"Have you seen Edward?" was her first question.

"Not yet, but I know he has come, and have heard of his narrow escape. I
should have been in that train, if I had not been delayed by the
indisposition which I then cursed, but now bless. Are you ready, Jean?
Do you repent your choice, my child?"

"No, no! I am ready, I am only too happy to become your wife, dear,
generous Sir John," cried Jean, with a glad alacrity, which touched the
old man to the heart, and charmed the Reverend Mr. Fairfax, who
concealed the romance of a boy under his clerical suit.

They reached the Hall. Sir John gave orders to admit no one and after a
hasty dinner sent for his old housekeeper and his steward, told them of
his purpose, and desired them to witness his marriage. Obedience had
been the law of their lives, and Master could do nothing wrong in their
eyes, so they played their parts willingly, for Jean was a favorite at
the Hall. Pale as her gown, but calm and steady, she stood beside Sir
John, uttering her vows in a clear tone and taking upon herself the vows
of a wife with more than a bride's usual docility. When the ring was
fairly on, a smile broke over her face. When Sir John kissed and called
her his "little wife," she shed a tear or two of sincere happiness; and
when Mr. Fairfax addressed her as "my lady," she laughed her musical
laugh, and glanced up at a picture of Gerald with eyes full of
exultation. As the servants left the room, a message was brought from
Mrs. Coventry, begging Sir John to come to her at once.

"You will not go and leave me so soon?" pleaded Jean, well knowing why
he was sent for.

"My darling, I must." And in spite of its tenderness, Sir John's manner
was too decided to be withstood.

"Then I shall go with you," cried Jean, resolving that no earthly power
should part them.




_chapter IX_


LADY COVENTRY

When the first excitement of Edward's return had subsided, and before
they could question him as to the cause of this unexpected visit, he
told them that after dinner their curiosity should be gratified, and
meantime he begged them to leave Miss Muir alone, for she had received
bad news and must not be disturbed. The family with difficulty
restrained their tongues and waited impatiently. Gerald confessed his
love for Jean and asked his brother's pardon for betraying his trust. He
had expected an outbreak, but Edward only looked at him with pitying
eyes, and said sadly, "You too! I have no reproaches to make, for I know
what you will suffer when the truth is known."

"What do you mean?" demanded Coventry.

"You will soon know, my poor Gerald, and we will comfort one another."

Nothing more could be drawn from Edward till dinner was over, the
servants gone, and all the family alone together. Then pale and grave,
but very self-possessed, for trouble had made a man of him, he produced
a packet of letters, and said, addressing himself to his brother, "Jean
Muir has deceived us all. I know her story; let me tell it before I read
her letters."

"Stop! I'll not listen to any false tales against her. The poor girl has
enemies who belie her!" cried Gerald, starting up.

"For the honor of the family, you must listen, and learn what fools she
has made of us. I can prove what I say, and convince you that she has
the art of a devil. Sit still ten minutes, then go, if you will."

Edward spoke with authority, and his brother obeyed him with a
foreboding heart.

"I met Sydney, and he begged me to beware of her. Nay, listen, Gerald! I
know she has told her story, and that you believe it; but her own
letters convict her. She tried to charm Sydney as she did us, and nearly
succeeded in inducing him to marry her. Rash and wild as he is, he is
still a gentleman, and when an incautious word of hers roused his
suspicions, he refused to make her his wife. A stormy scene ensued, and,
hoping to intimidate him, she feigned to stab herself as if in despair.
She did wound herself, but failed to gain her point and insisted upon
going to a hospital to die. Lady Sydney, good, simple soul, believed the
girl's version of the story, thought her son was in the wrong, and when
he was gone, tried to atone for his fault by finding Jean Muir another
home. She thought Gerald was soon to marry Lucia, and that I was away,
so sent her here as a safe and comfortable retreat."

"But, Ned, are you sure of all this? Is Sydney to be believed?" began
Coventry, still incredulous.

"To convince you, I'll read Jean's letters before I say more. They
were written to an accomplice and were purchased by Sydney. There was
a compact between the two women, that each should keep the other
informed of all adventures, plots and plans, and share whatever good
fortune fell to the lot of either. Thus Jean wrote freely, as you
shall judge. The letters concern us alone. The first was written a few
days after she came.

    _"Dear Hortense:

    "Another failure. Sydney was more wily than I thought. All was going
    well, when one day my old fault beset me, I took too much wine, and
    I carelessly owned that I had been an actress. He was shocked, and
    retreated. I got up a scene, and gave myself a safe little wound, to
    frighten him. The brute was not frightened, but coolly left me to my
    fate. I'd have died to spite him, if I dared, but as I didn't, I
    lived to torment him. As yet, I have had no chance, but I will not
    forget him. His mother is a poor, weak creature, whom I could use as
    I would, and through her I found an excellent place. A sick mother,
    silly daughter, and two eligible sons. One is engaged to a handsome
    iceberg, but that only renders him more interesting in my eyes,
    rivalry adds so much to the charm of one's conquests. Well, my dear,
    I went, got up in the meek style, intending to do the pathetic; but
    before I saw the family, I was so angry I could hardly control
    myself. Through the indolence of Monsieur the young master, no
    carriage was sent for me, and I intend he shall atone for that
    rudeness by-and-by. The younger son, the mother, and the girl
    received me patronizingly, and I understood the simple souls at
    once. Monsieur (as I shall call him, as names are unsafe) was
    unapproachable, and took no pains to conceal his dislike of
    governesses. The cousin was lovely, but detestable with her pride,
    her coldness, and her very visible adoration of Monsieur, who let
    her worship him, like an inanimate idol as he is. I hated them both,
    of course, and in return for their insolence shall torment her with
    jealousy, and teach him how to woo a woman by making his heart ache.
    They are an intensely proud family, but I can humble them all, I
    think, by captivating the sons, and when they have committed
    themselves, cast them off, and marry the old uncle, whose title
    takes my fancy."_

"She never wrote that! It is impossible. A woman could not do it," cried
Lucia indignantly, while Bella sat bewildered and Mrs. Coventry
supported herself with salts and fan. Coventry went to his brother,
examined the writing, and returned to his seat, saying, in a tone of
suppressed wrath, "She did write it. I posted some of those letters
myself. Go on, Ned."

    _"I made myself useful and agreeable to the amiable ones, and
    overheard the chat of the lovers. It did not suit me, so I fainted
    away to stop it, and excite interest in the provoking pair. I
    thought I had succeeded, but Monsieur suspected me and showed me
    that he did. I forgot my meek role and gave him a stage look. It had
    a good effect, and I shall try it again. The man is well worth
    winning, but I prefer the title, and as the uncle is a hale,
    handsome gentleman, I can't wait for him to die, though Monsieur is
    very charming, with his elegant languor, and his heart so fast
    asleep no woman has had power to wake it yet. I told my story, and
    they believed it, though I had the audacity to say I was but
    nineteen, to talk Scotch, and bashfully confess that Sydney wished
    to marry me. Monsieur knows S. and evidently suspects something. I
    must watch him and keep the truth from him, if possible.

    "I was very miserable that night when I got alone. Something in the
    atmosphere of this happy home made me wish I was anything but what I
    am. As I sat there trying to pluck up my spirits, I thought of the
    days when I was lovely and young, good and gay. My glass showed me
    an old woman of thirty, for my false locks were off, my paint gone,
    and my face was without its mask. Bah! how I hate sentiment! I drank
    your health from your own little flask, and went to bed to dream
    that I was playing Lady Tartuffe--as I am. Adieu, more soon."_

No one spoke as Edward paused, and taking up another letter, he read on:

    _"My Dear Creature:

    "All goes well. Next day I began my task, and having caught a hint
    of the character of each, tried my power over them. Early in the
    morning I ran over to see the Hall. Approved of it highly, and took
    the first step toward becoming its mistress, by piquing the
    curiosity and flattering the pride of its master. His estate is his
    idol; I praised it with a few artless compliments to himself, and he
    was charmed. The cadet of the family adores horses. I risked my neck
    to pet his beast, and_ he _was charmed. The little girl is romantic
    about flowers; I made a posy and was sentimental, and_ she _was
    charmed. The fair icicle loves her departed mamma, I had raptures
    over an old picture, and she thawed. Monsieur is used to being
    worshipped. I took no notice of him, and by the natural perversity
    of human nature, he began to take notice of me. He likes music; I
    sang, and stopped when he'd listened long enough to want more. He is
    lazily fond of being amused; I showed him my skill, but refused to
    exert it in his behalf. In short, I gave him no peace till he began
    to wake up. In order to get rid of the boy, I fascinated him, and he
    was sent away. Poor lad, I rather liked him, and if the title had
    been nearer would have married him._

"Many thanks for the honor." And Edward's lip curled with intense scorn.
But Gerald sat like a statue, his teeth set, his eyes fiery, his brows
bent, waiting for the end.

    _"The passionate boy nearly killed his brother, but I turned the
    affair to good account, and bewitched Monsieur by playing nurse,
    till Vashti (the icicle) interfered. Then I enacted injured virtue,
    and kept out of his way, knowing that he would miss me, I mystified
    him about S. by sending a letter where S. would not get it, and got
    up all manner of soft scenes to win this proud creature. I get on
    well and meanwhile privately fascinate Sir J. by being daughterly
    and devoted. He is a worthy old man, simple as a child, honest as
    the day, and generous as a prince. I shall be a happy woman if I win
    him, and you shall share my good fortune; so wish me success._

"This is the third, and contains something which will surprise you,"
Edward said, as he lifted another paper.

    _"Hortense:

    "I've done what I once planned to do on another occasion. You know
    my handsome, dissipated father married a lady of rank for his second
    wife. I never saw Lady H----d but once, for I was kept out of the
    way. Finding that this good Sir J. knew something of her when a
    girl, and being sure that he did not know of the death of her little
    daughter, I boldly said I was the child, and told a pitiful tale of
    my early life. It worked like a charm; he told Monsieur, and both
    felt the most chivalrous compassion for Lady Howard's daughter,
    though before they had secretly looked down on me, and my real
    poverty and my lowliness. That boy pitied me with an honest warmth
    and never waited to learn my birth. I don't forget that and shall
    repay it if I can. Wishing to bring Monsieur's affair to a
    successful crisis, I got up a theatrical evening and was in my
    element. One little event I must tell you, because I committed an
    actionable offense and was nearly discovered. I did not go down to
    supper, knowing that the moth would return to flutter about the
    candle, and preferring that the fluttering should be done in
    private, as Vashti's jealousy is getting uncontrollable. Passing
    throught the gentlemen's dressing room, my quick eye caught sight of
    a letter lying among the costumes. It was no stage affair, and an
    odd sensation of fear ran through me as I recognized the hand of S.
    I had feared this, but I believe in chance; and having found the
    letter, I examined it. You know I can imitate almost any hand. When
    I read in this paper the whole story of my affair with S., truly
    told, and also that he had made inquiries into my past life and
    discovered the truth, I was in a fury. To be so near success and
    fail was terrible, and I resolved to risk everything. I opened the
    letter by means of a heated knife blade under the seal, therefore
    the envelope was perfect; imitating S.'s hand, I penned a few lines
    in his hasty style, saying he was at Baden, so that if Monsieur
    answered, the reply would not reach him, for he is in London, it
    seems. This letter I put into the pocket whence the other must have
    fallen, and was just congratulating myself on this narrow escape,
    when Dean, the maid of Vashti, appeared as if watching me. She had
    evidently seen the letter in my hand, and suspected something. I
    took no notice of her, but must be careful, for she is on the watch.
    After this the evening closed with strictly private theatricals, in
    which Monsieur and myself were the only actors. To make sure that he
    received my version of the story first, I told him a romantic story
    of S.'s persecution, and he believed it. This I followed up by a
    moonlight episode behind a rose hedge, and sent the young gentleman
    home in a half-dazed condition. What fools men are!"_

"She is right!" muttered Coventry, who had flushed scarlet with
shame and anger, as his folly became known and Lucia listened in
astonished silence.

"Only one more, and my distasteful task will be nearly over," said
Edward, unfolding the last of the papers. "This is not a letter, but a
copy of one written three nights ago. Dean boldly ransacked Jean Muir's
desk while she was at the Hall, and, fearing to betray the deed by
keeping the letter, she made a hasty copy which she gave me today,
begging me to save the family from disgrace. This makes the chain
complete. Go now, if you will, Gerald. I would gladly spare you the pain
of hearing this."

"I will not spare myself; I deserve it. Read on," replied Coventry,
guessing what was to follow and nerving himself to hear it. Reluctantly
his brother read these lines:

    _"The enemy has surrendered! Give me joy, Hortense; I can be the
    wife of this proud monsieur, if I will. Think what an honor for the
    divorced wife of a disreputable actor. I laugh at the farce and
    enjoy it, for I only wait till the prize I desire is fairly mine, to
    turn and reject this lover who has proved himself false to brother,
    mistress, and his own conscience. I resolved to be revenged on both,
    and I have kept my word. For my sake he cast off the beautiful woman
    who truly loved him; he forgot his promise to his brother, and put
    by his pride to beg of me the worn-out heart that is not worth a
    good man's love. Ah well, I am satisfied, for Vashti has suffered
    the sharpest pain a proud woman can endure, and will feel another
    pang when I tell her that I scorn her recreant lover, and give him
    back to her, to deal with as she will."_

Coventry started from his seat with a fierce exclamation, but Lucia
bowed her face upon her hands, weeping, as if the pang had been sharper
than even Jean foresaw.

"Send for Sir John! I am mortally afraid of this creature. Take her
away; do something to her. My poor Bella, what a companion for you! Send
for Sir John at once!" cried Mrs. Coventry incoherently, and clasped her
daughter in her arms, as if Jean Muir would burst in to annihilate the
whole family. Edward alone was calm.

"I have already sent, and while we wait, let me finish this story. It is
true that Jean is the daughter of Lady Howard's husband, the pretended
clergyman, but really a worthless man who married her for her money. Her
own child died, but this girl, having beauty, wit and a bold spirit,
took her fate into her own hands, and became an actress. She married an
actor, led a reckless life for some years; quarreled with her husband,
was divorced, and went to Paris; left the stage, and tried to support
herself as governess and companion. You know how she fared with the
Sydneys, how she has duped us, and but for this discovery would have
duped Sir John. I was in time to prevent this, thank heaven. She is
gone; no one knows the truth but Sydney and ourselves; he will be
silent, for his own sake; we will be for ours, and leave this dangerous
woman to the fate which will surely overtake her."

"Thank you, it has overtaken her, and a very happy one she finds it."

A soft voice uttered the words, and an apparition appeared at the door,
which made all start and recoil with amazement--Jean Muir leaning on the
arm of Sir John.

"How dare you return?" began Edward, losing the self-control so long
preserved. "How dare you insult us by coming back to enjoy the mischief
you have done? Uncle, you do not know that woman!"

"Hush, boy, I will not listen to a word, unless you remember where you
are," said Sir John with a commanding gesture.

"Remember your promise: love me, forgive me, protect me, and do not
listen to their accusations," whispered Jean, whose quick eye had
discovered the letters.

"I will; have no fears, my child," he answered, drawing her nearer as he
took his accustomed place before the fire, always lighted when Mrs.
Coventry was down.

Gerald, who had been pacing the room excitedly, paused behind Lucia's
chair as if to shield her from insult; Bella clung to her mother; and
Edward, calming himself by a strong effort, handed his uncle the
letters, saying briefly, "Look at those, sir, and let them speak."

"I will look at nothing, hear nothing, believe nothing which can in any
way lessen my respect and affection for this young lady. She has
prepared me for this. I know the enemy who is unmanly enough to belie
and threaten her. I know that you both are unsuccessful lovers, and this
explains your unjust, uncourteous treatment now. We all have committed
faults and follies. I freely forgive Jean hers, and desire to know
nothing of them from your lips. If she has innocently offended, pardon
it for my sake, and forget the past."

"But, Uncle, we have proofs that this woman is not what she seems. Her
own letters convict her. Read them, and do not blindly deceive
yourself," cried Edward, indignant at his uncle's words.

A low laugh startled them all, and in an instant they saw the cause of
it. While Sir John spoke, Jean had taken the letters from the hand which
he had put behind him, a favorite gesture of his, and, unobserved, had
dropped them on the fire. The mocking laugh, the sudden blaze, showed
what had been done. Both young men sprang forward, but it was too late;
the proofs were ashes, and Jean Muir's bold, bright eyes defied them, as
she said, with a disdainful little gesture. "Hands off, gentlemen! You
may degrade yourselves to the work of detectives, but I am not a
prisoner yet. Poor Jean Muir you might harm, but Lady Coventry is beyond
your reach."

"Lady Coventry!" echoed the dismayed family, in varying tones of
incredulity, indignation, and amazement.

"Aye, my dear and honored wife," said Sir John, with a protecting arm
about the slender figure at his side; and in the act, the words, there
was a tender dignity that touched the listeners with pity and respect
for the deceived man. "Receive her as such, and for my sake, forbear all
further accusation," he continued steadily. "I know what I have done. I
have no fear that I shall repent it. If I am blind, let me remain so
till time opens my eyes. We are going away for a little while, and when
we return, let the old life return again, unchanged, except that Jean
makes sunshine for me as well as for you."

No one spoke, for no one knew what to say. Jean broke the silence,
saying coolly, "May I ask how those letters came into your possession?"

"In tracing out your past life, Sydney found your friend Hortense. She
was poor, money bribed her, and your letters were given up to him as
soon as received. Traitors are always betrayed in the end," replied
Edward sternly.

Jean shrugged her shoulders, and shot a glance at Gerald, saying with
her significant smile, "Remember that, monsieur, and allow me to hope
that in wedding you will be happier than in wooing. Receive my
congratulations, Miss Beaufort, and let me beg of you to follow my
example, if you would keep your lovers."

Here all the sarcasm passed from her voice, the defiance from her eye,
and the one unspoiled attribute which still lingered in this woman's
artful nature shone in her face, as she turned toward Edward and Bella
at their mother's side.

"You have been kind to me," she said, with grateful warmth. "I thank you
for it, and will repay it if I can. To you I will acknowledge that I am
not worthy to be this good man's wife, and to you I will solemnly
promise to devote my life to his happiness. For his sake forgive me, and
let there be peace between us."

There was no reply, but Edward's indignant eyes fell before hers. Bella
half put out her hand, and Mrs. Coventry sobbed as if some regret
mingled with her resentment. Jean seemed to expect no friendly
demonstration, and to understand that they forbore for Sir John's sake,
not for hers, and to accept their contempt as her just punishment.

"Come home, love, and forget all this," said her husband, ringing the
bell, and eager to be gone. "Lady Coventry's carriage."

And as he gave the order, a smile broke over her face, for the sound
assured her that the game was won. Pausing an instant on the threshold
before she vanished from their sight, she looked backward, and fixing on
Gerald the strange glance he remembered well, she said in her
penetrating voice, "Is not the last scene better than the first?"



COMIC TRAGEDIES

Jo and Meg



                       [Illustration: JO AND MEG.

                    COPIES OF EARLY DAGUERREOTYPES.

"It was at this period of her life that she was violently attacked by a
mania for the stage, and writing and enacting dramas. Her older sister,
Anna, had the same taste, and assisted her in carrying out all her
plans."
                               _Mrs. Cheney's Life of Louisa M. Alcott._]




                            COMIC TRAGEDIES


                       WRITTEN BY "JO" AND "MEG"
                              AND ACTED BY
                           THE "LITTLE WOMEN"


                                 BOSTON
                            ROBERTS BROTHERS
                                  1893




                           _Copyright, 1893_,
                           By Anna B. Pratt.


                           University Press:
                 John Wilson and Son, Cambridge, U.S.A.




                               CONTENTS.
                                                                Page

    A Foreword, by Meg .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   7

    Norna; or, The Witch's Curse   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .  17

    The Captive of Castile; or, The Moorish
        Maiden's Vow   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .  97

    The Greek Slave    .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .     149

    Ion    .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .     211

    Bianca: an Operatic Tragedy    .   .   .   .   .   .   .     261

    The Unloved Wife; or, Woman's Faith    .   .   .   .   .     279




                           A FOREWORD BY MEG.

In the good old times, when "Little Women" worked and played together,
the big garret was the scene of many dramatic revels. After a long day
of teaching, sewing, and "helping mother," the greatest delight of the
girls was to transform themselves into queens, knights, and cavaliers of
high degree, and ascend into a world of fancy and romance. Cinderella's
godmother waved her wand, and the dismal room became a fairy-land.
Flowers bloomed, forests arose, music sounded, and lovers exchanged
their vows by moonlight. Nothing was too ambitious to attempt; armor,
gondolas, harps, towers, and palaces grew as if by magic, and wonderful
scenes of valor and devotion were enacted before admiring audiences.

Jo, of course, played the villains, ghosts, bandits, and disdainful
queens; for her tragedy-loving soul delighted in the lurid parts, and no
drama was perfect in her eyes without a touch of the demonic or
supernatural. Meg loved the sentimental rôles, the tender maiden with
the airy robes and flowing locks, who made impossible sacrifices for
ideal lovers, or the cavalier, singing soft serenades and performing
lofty acts of gallantry and prowess. Amy was the fairy sprite, while
Beth enacted the page or messenger when the scene required their aid.

But the most surprising part of the performance was the length of the
cast and the size of the company; for Jo and Meg usually acted the whole
play, each often assuming five or six characters, and with rapid change
of dress becoming, in one scene, a witch, a soldier, a beauteous lady,
and a haughty noble. This peculiar arrangement accounts for many queer
devices, and the somewhat singular fact that each scene offers but two
actors, who vanish and reappear at most inopportune moments, and in a
great variety of costume. Long speeches were introduced to allow a
ruffian to become a priest, or a lovely damsel to disguise herself in
the garb of a sorceress; while great skill was required to preserve the
illusion, and astonish the audience by these wonderful transformations.

The young amateur of to-day, who can easily call to her aid all the arts
of the costumer and scene-maker, will find it hard to understand the
difficulties of this little company; for not only did they compose
their plays, but they were also their own carpenters, scene-painters,
property-men, dress-makers, and managers. In place of a well-appointed
stage, with the brilliant lights and inspiring accessories of a mimic
theatre, the "Little Women" had a gloomy garret or empty barn, and were
obliged to exercise all their ingenuity to present the scenes of their
ambitious dramas.

But it is surprising what fine effects can be produced with old sheets,
bright draperies, and a judicious arrangement of lights, garlands, and
picturesque properties; and Jo's dramatic taste made her an admirable
stage-manager. Meg was especially handy with saw and hammer, and acted
as stage-carpenter,--building balconies, thrones, boats, and towers
after peculiar designs of her own. Bureaus, tables, and chairs, piled
aloft and arched with dark shawls, made dungeon walls and witch's cave,
or formed a background for haunted forest and lonely glen. Screens of
white cloth furnished canvas on which little Amy's skilful hand depicted
palace halls, or romantic scene for lovers' tryst; and Beth's deft
fingers were most apt in constructing properties for stage adornment,
and transforming the frailest material into dazzling raiment. For the
costumes were a serious consideration. No money could be spared from the
slender purse to supply the wardrobes of these aspiring actors, and many
were the devices to clothe the little company.

Thus a robe in one scene became a cloak in the next, and the drapery of
a couch in the third; while a bit of lace served as mantle, veil, or
turban, as best suited the turn of the play. Hats covered with old
velvet, and adorned with feathers plucked from the duster, made most
effective headgear for gay cavalier or tragic villain. From colored
cotton were manufactured fine Greek tunics and flowing trains; and
remarkable court costumes were evolved from an old sofa-covering, which
had seen better days, and boasted a little gold thread and embroidery.

Stars of tin, sewed upon dark cambric, made a suit of shining armor.
Sandals were cut from old boots. Strips of wood and silver paper were
fashioned into daggers, swords, and spears, while from cardboard were
created helmets, harps, guitars, and antique lamps, that were considered
masterpieces of stage art.

Everything available was pressed into service; colored paper, odds and
ends of ribbon, even tin cans and their bright wrappings were treasures
to the young actors, and all reappeared as splendid properties.

At first a store of red curtains, some faded brocades, and ancient
shawls comprised the stage wardrobe; but as the fame of the performances
spread abroad, contributions were made to the little stock, and the
girls became the proud possessors of a velvet robe, a plumed hat adorned
with silver, long yellow boots, and a quantity of mock pearls and tinsel
ornaments.

Such wealth determined them to write a play which should surpass all
former efforts, give Jo a chance to stalk haughtily upon the stage in
the magnificent boots, and Meg to appear in gorgeous train and diadem of
jewels.

"The Witch's Curse" was the result, and it was produced with astounding
effect, quite paralyzing the audience by its splendid gloom. Jo called
it the "lurid drama," and always considered it her masterpiece. But it
cost hours of thought and labor; for to construct a dungeon, a haunted
chamber, a cavern, and a lonely forest taxed to the uttermost the
ingenuity of the actors. To introduce into one short scene a bandit, two
cavaliers, a witch, and a fairy spirit--all enacted by two
people--required some skill, and lightning change of costume. To call
up the ghostly visions and mysterious voices which should appall the
guilty Count Rodolpho, was a task of no small difficulty. But inspired
by the desire to outshine themselves, the children accomplished a play
full of revenge, jealousy, murder, and sorcery, of all which indeed they
knew nothing but the name.

Hitherto their dramas had been of the most sentimental description,
given to the portrayal of woman's devotion, filial affection, heroism,
and self-sacrifice. Indeed, these "Comic Tragedies" with their highflown
romance and fantastic ideas of love and honor, are most characteristic
of the young girls whose lives were singularly free from the experiences
of many maidens of their age.

Of the world they knew nothing; lovers were ideal beings, clothed with
all the beauty of their innocent imaginations. Love was a blissful
dream; constancy, truth, courage, and virtue quite every-day affairs of
life. Their few novels furnished the romantic element; the favorite
fairy-tales gave them material for the supernatural; and their strong
dramatic taste enabled them to infuse both fire and pathos into their
absurd situations.

Jo revelled in catastrophe, and the darker scenes were her delight; but
she usually required Meg to "do the love-part," which she considered
quite beneath her pen. Thus their productions were a queer mixture of
sentiment and adventure, with entire disregard of such matters as
grammar, history, and geography,--all of which were deemed of no
importance by these aspiring dramatists.

From the little stage library, still extant, the following plays have
been selected as fair examples of the work of these children of sixteen
and seventeen. With some slight changes and omissions, they remain as
written more than forty years ago by Meg and Jo, so dear to the hearts
of many other "Little Women."

    Concord, Mass., 1893.




                  [Illustration: THE THEATRE OF 1848.

"Those Concord days were the happiest of my life. Plays in the barn were
a favorite amusement."
                                                    _L. M. Alcott._]




  NORNA; OR, THE WITCH'S CURSE.

                              CHARACTERS.

    Count Rodolpho .   .   .   .   .    _A Haughty Noble._

    Count Louis    .   .   .   .   .    _Lover of Leonore._

    Adrian .   .   .   .   .   .   .    _The Black Mask._

    Hugo   .   .   .   .   .   .   .    _A Bandit._

    Gaspard    .   .   .   .   .   .    _Captain of the Guard._

    Angelo     .   .   .   .   .   .    _A Page._

    Theresa    .   .   .   .   .   .    _Wife to Rodolpho._

    Leonore    .   .   .   .   .   .    _In love with Louis._

    Norna      .   .   .   .   .   .    _A Witch._


                            COMIC TRAGEDIES.


                     NORNA; OR, THE WITCH'S CURSE.


                              SCENE FIRST.

    [_A room in the castle of_ Rodolpho. Theresa _discovered alone,
    and in tears._]

Theresa. I cannot pray; my aching heart finds rest alone in tears. Ah,
what a wretched fate is mine! Forced by a father's will to wed a
stranger ere I learned to love, one short year hath taught me what a
bitter thing it is to wear a chain that binds me unto one who hath
proved himself both jealous and unkind. The fair hopes I once cherished
are now gone, and here a captive in my splendid home I dwell forsaken,
sorrowing and alone [_weeps_]. [_Three taps upon the wall are heard._]
Ha, my brother's signal! What can bring him hither at this hour? Louis,
is it thou? Enter; "all's well."

    [_Enter_ Count Louis _through a secret panel in the wall,
    hidden by a curtain. He embraces_ Theresa.

Theresa. Ah, Louis, what hath chanced? Why art thou here? Some danger
must have brought thee; tell me, dear brother. Let me serve thee.

Louis. Sister dearest, thy kindly offered aid is useless now. Thou canst
not help me; and I must add another sorrow to the many that are thine. I
came to say farewell, Theresa.

Theresa. Farewell! Oh, brother, do not leave me! Thy love is all now
left to cheer my lonely life. Wherefore must thou go? Tell me, I beseech
thee!

Louis. Forgive me if I grieve thee. I will tell thee all. Thy husband
hates me, for I charged him with neglect and cruelty to thee; and he
hath vowed revenge for my bold words. He hath whispered false tales to
the king, he hath blighted all my hopes of rank and honor. I am banished
from the land, and must leave thee and Leonore, and wander forth an
outcast and alone. But--let him beware!--I shall return to take a deep
revenge for thy wrongs and my own. Nay, sister, grieve not thus. I have
sworn to free thee from his power, and I will keep my vow. Hope on and
bear a little longer, dear Theresa, and ere long I will bear thee to a
happy home [_noise is heard without_]. Ha! what is that? Who comes?

Theresa. 'Tis my lord returning from the court. Fly, Louis, fly! Thou
art lost if he discover thee. Heaven bless and watch above thee.
Remember poor Theresa, and farewell.

Louis. One last word of Leonore. I have never told my love, yet she hath
smiled on me, and I should have won her hand. Ah, tell her this, and bid
her to be true to him who in his exile will hope on, and yet return to
claim the heart he hath loved so faithfully. Farewell, my sister.
Despair not,--I shall return.

             [_Exit_ Louis _through the secret panel; drops his dagger._

Theresa. Thank Heaven, he is safe!--but oh, my husband, this last deed
of thine is hard to bear. Poor Louis, parted from Leonore, his fair
hopes blighted, all by thy cruel hand. Ah, he comes! I must be calm.

                                                      [_Enter_ Rodolpho.

Rod. What, weeping still? Hast thou no welcome for thy lord save tears
and sighs? I'll send thee to a convent if thou art not more gay!

Theresa. I'll gladly go, my lord. I am weary of the world. Its gayeties
but make my heart more sad.

Rod. Nay, then I will take thee to the court, and there thou _must_ be
gay. But I am weary; bring me wine, and smile upon me as thou used to
do. Dost hear me? Weep no more. [_Seats himself._ Theresa _brings wine
and stands beside him. Suddenly he sees the dagger dropped by_ Louis.]
Ha! what is that? 'Tis none of mine. How came it hither? Answer, I
command thee!

Theresa. I cannot. I must not, dare not tell thee.

Rod. Darest thou refuse to answer? Speak! Who hath dared to venture
hither? Is it thy brother? As thou lovest life, I bid thee speak.

Theresa. I am innocent, and will not betray the only one now left me on
the earth to love. Oh, pardon me, my lord; I will obey in all but this.

Rod. Thou _shalt_ obey. I'll take thy life but I will know. Thy brother
must be near,--this dagger was not here an hour ago. Thy terror hath
betrayed him. I leave thee now to bid them search the castle. But if I
find him not, I shall return; and if thou wilt not then confess, I'll
find a way to make thee. Remember, I have vowed,--thy secret or thy
life!

                                                       [_Exit_ Rodolpho.

Theresa. My life I freely yield thee, but my secret--never. Oh, Louis, I
will gladly die to save thee. Life hath no joy for me; and in the grave
this poor heart may forget the bitter sorrows it is burdened with
[_sinks down weeping_].

                                                      [_Enter_ Rodolpho.

Rod. The search is vain. He hath escaped. Theresa, rise, and answer me.
To whom belonged the dagger I have found? Thy tears avail not; I will be
obeyed. Kneel not to me, I will not pardon. Answer, or I swear I'll make
thee dumb forever.

Theresa. No, no! I will not betray. Oh, husband, spare me! Let not the
hand that led me to the altar be stained with blood I would so gladly
shed for thee. I cannot answer thee.

Rod. [_striking her_]. Then die: thy constancy is useless. I will find
thy brother and take a fearful vengeance yet.

Theresa. I am faithful to the last. Husband, I forgive thee.

                                                        [Theresa _dies._

Rod. 'Tis done, and I am rid of her forever; but 'tis an ugly deed. Poor
fool, there was a time when I could pity thee, but thou hast stood
'twixt me and Lady Leonore, and now I am free. I must conceal the form,
and none shall ever know the crime.

                                                       [_Exit_ Rodolpho.

                [_The panel opens and_ Norna _enters._]

Norna. Heaven shield us! What is this? His cruel hand hath done the
deed, and I am powerless to save. Poor, murdered lady, I had hoped to
spare thee this, and lead thee to a happier home. Perchance, 'tis better
so. The dead find rest, and thy sad heart can ache no more. Rest to thy
soul, sweet lady. But for _thee_, thou cruel villain, I have in store a
deep revenge for all thy sinful deeds. If there be power in spell or
charm, I'll conjure fearful dreams upon thy head. I'll follow thee
wherever thou mayst go, and haunt thy sleep with evil visions. I'll
whisper strange words that shall appall thee; dark phantoms shall rise
up before thee, and wild voices ringing in thine ear shall tell thee of
thy sins. By all these will I make life like a hideous dream, and death
more fearful still. Like a vengeful ghost I will haunt thee to thy
grave, and so revenge thy wrongs, poor, murdered lady. Beware, Rodolpho!
Old Norna's curse is on thee.

    [_She bears away_ Theresa's _body through the secret door, and
        vanishes._

                                CURTAIN.


                         NOTE TO SCENE SECOND.

The mysterious cave was formed of old furniture, covered with dark
draperies, an opening being left at the back wherein the spirits called
up by Norna might appear. A kitchen kettle filled with steaming water
made an effective caldron over which the sorceress should murmur her
incantations; flaming pine-knots cast a lurid glare over the scene; and
large boughs, artfully arranged about the stage, gave it the appearance
of a "gloomy wood."

When Louis "retires within," he at once arrays himself in the white
robes of the vision, and awaits the witch's call to rise behind the
aperture in true dramatic style. He vanishes, quickly resumes his own
attire, while Norna continues to weave her spells, till she sees he is
ready to appear once more as the disguised Count Louis.


                             SCENE SECOND.

    [_A wood._ Norna's _cave among the rocks._ _Enter_ Louis
            _masked._]

Louis. Yes; 'tis the spot. How dark and still! She is not here. Ho,
Norna, mighty sorceress! I seek thy aid.

Norna [_rising from the cave_]. I am here.

Louis. I seek thee, Norna, to learn tidings of one most dear to me. Dost
thou know aught of Count Rodolpho's wife? A strange tale hath reached me
that not many nights ago she disappeared, and none know whither she hath
gone. Oh, tell me, is this true?

Norna. It is most true.

Louis. And canst thou tell me whither she hath gone? I will reward thee
well.

Norna. I can. She lies within her tomb, in the chapel of the castle.

Louis. Dead!--it cannot be! They told me she had fled away with some
young lord who had won her love. Was it not true?

Norna. It is false as the villain's heart who framed the tale. _I_ bore
the murdered lady to her tomb, and laid her there.

Louis. Murdered? How? When? By whom? Oh, tell me I beseech thee!

Norna. Her husband's cruel hand took the life he had made a burden. I
heard him swear it ere he dealt the blow.

Louis. Wherefore did he kill her? Oh, answer quickly or I shall go mad
with grief and hate.

_Norna._ I can tell thee little. From my hiding-place I heard her vow
never to confess whose dagger had been found in her apartment, and her
jealous lord, in his wild anger, murdered her.

Louis. 'Twas mine. Would it had been sheathed in mine own breast ere it
had caused so dark a deed! Ah, Theresa, why did I leave thee to a fate
like this?

Norna. Young man, grieve not; it is too late to save, but there is left
to thee a better thing than grief.

Louis. Oh, what?

Norna. Revenge!

Louis. Thou art right. I'll weep no more. Give me thine aid, O mighty
wizard, and I will serve thee well.

Norna. Who art thou? The poor lady's lover?

Louis. Ah, no; far nearer and far deeper was the love I bore her, for I
am her brother.

Norna. Ha, that's well! Thou wilt join me, for I have made a vow to rest
not till that proud, sinful lord hath well atoned for this deep crime.
Spirits shall haunt him, and the darkest phantoms that my art can raise
shall scare his soul. Wilt thou join me in my work?

Louis. I will,--but stay! thou hast spoken of spirits. Dread sorceress,
is it in thy power to call them up?

Norna. It is. Wilt see my skill. Stand back while I call up a phantom
which thou canst not doubt.

    [Louis _retires within the cave._ Norna _weaves a spell above
        her caldron._

    Norna. O spirit, from thy quiet tomb,
    I bid thee hither through the gloom,
    In winding-sheet, with bloody brow,
    Rise up and hear our solemn vow.
    I bid thee, with my magic power,
    Tell the dark secret of that hour
    When cruel hands, with blood and strife,
    Closed the sad dream of thy young life.
    Hither--appear before our eyes.
    Pale spirit, I command thee _rise_.

                                           [_Spirit of_ Theresa _rises._

    Shadowy spirit, I charge thee well,
    By my mystic art's most potent spell,
    To haunt throughout his sinful life,
    The mortal who once called thee wife.
    At midnight hour glide round his bed,
    And lay thy pale hand on his head.
    Whisper wild words in his sleeping ear,
    And chill his heart with a deadly fear.
    Rise at his side in his gayest hour,
    And his guilty soul shall feel thy power.
    Stand thou before him in day and night,
    And cast o'er his life a darksome blight;
    For with all his power and sin and pride,
    He shall ne'er forget his murdered bride.
    Pale, shadowy form, wilt thou obey?
                                            [_The spirit bows its head._
    To thy ghostly work away--away!
                                                 [_The spirit vanishes._
    The spell is o'er, the vow is won,
    And, sinful heart, _thy_ curse begun.
                                                      [_Re-enter_ Louis.

Louis. 'Tis enough! I own thy power, and by the spirit of my murdered
sister I have looked upon, I swear to aid thee in thy dark work.

Norna. 'Tis well; and I will use my power to guard thee from the danger
that surrounds thee. And now, farewell. Remember,--thou hast sworn.


                                                          [_Exit_ Louis.

                                CURTAIN.


                              SCENE THIRD.

                      [_Another part of the wood.
                           Enter_ Rodolpho.]

Rod. They told me that old Norna's cave was 'mong these rocks, and yet I
find it not. By her I hope to learn where young Count Louis is
concealed. Once in my power, he shall not escape to whisper tales of
evil deeds against me. Stay! some one comes. I'll ask my way.

                                                [_Enter_ Louis _masked._

Ho, stand, good sir. Canst guide me to the cell of Norna, the old
sorceress?

Louis. It were little use to tell thee; thou wouldst only win a deeper
curse than that she hath already laid upon thee.

Rod. Hold! who art thou that dare to speak thus to Count Rodolpho?

Louis. That thou canst never know; but this I tell thee: I am thy
deadliest foe, and, aided by the wizard Norna, seek to work thee evil,
and bring down upon thy head the fearful doom thy sin deserves. Wouldst
thou know more,--then seek the witch, and learn the hate she bears thee.

Rod. Fool! thinkst thou I fear thee or thy enchantments? Draw, and
defend thyself! Thou shalt pay dearly for thine insolence to me!
                                                     [_Draws his sword._

Louis. I will not stain my weapon with a murderer's blood. I leave thee
to the fate that gathers round thee.

                                                         [_Exit_ Louis.

Rod. "Murderer," said he. I am betrayed,--yet no one saw the deed. Yet,
stay! perchance 'twas he who bore Theresa away. He has escaped me, and
will spread the tale. Nay, why should I fear? Courage! One blow, and I
am safe! [_Rushes forward. Spirit of_ Theresa _rises._] What's
that?--her deathlike face,--the wound my hand hath made! Help! help!
help!

                                     [_Rushes out. The spirit vanishes._

                                CURTAIN.


                             SCENE FOURTH.

                 [_Room in the castle of_ Rodolpho.
                           Rodolpho _alone._]

Rod. I see no way save that. Were young Count Louis dead she would
forget the love that had just begun, and by sweet words and gifts I may
yet win her. The young lord must die [_a groan behind the curtain_]. Ha!
what is that? 'Tis nothing; fie upon my fear! I'll banish all
remembrance of the fearful shape my fancy conjured up within the forest.
I'll not do the deed myself,--I have had enough of blood. Hugo the
bandit: he is just the man,--bold, sure of hand, and secret. I will
bribe him well, and when the deed is done, find means to rid me of him
lest he should play me false. I saw him in the courtyard as I entered.
Perchance he is not yet gone. Ho, without there! Bid Hugo here if he be
within the castle.--He is a rough knave, but gold will make all sure.

                                                          [_Enter_ Hugo.

Hugo. What would my lord with me?

Rod. I ask a favor of thee. Nay, never fear, I'll pay thee well. Wouldst
earn a few gold pieces?

Hugo. Ay, my lord, most gladly would I.

Rod. Nay, sit, good Hugo. Here is wine; drink, and refresh thyself.

Hugo. Thanks, my lord. How can I serve you?

            [Rodolpho _gives wine,_ Hugo _sits and drinks._]

Rod. Dost thou know Count Louis, whom the king lately banished?

Hugo. Nay, my lord; I never saw him.

Rod. [_aside_]. Ha! that is well. It matters not; 'tis not of him I
speak. Take more wine, good Hugo. Listen, there is a certain lord,--one
whom I hate. I seek his life. Here is gold--thou hast a dagger, and can
use it well. Dost understand me?

Hugo. Ay, my lord, most clearly. Name the place and hour; count out the
gold,--I and my dagger then are thine.

Rod. 'Tis well. Now harken. In the forest, near old Norna's cave, there
is a quiet spot. Do thou go there to-night at sunset. Watch well, and
when thou seest a tall figure wrapped in a dark cloak, and masked,
spring forth, and do the deed. Then fling the body down the rocks, or
hide it in some secret place. Here is one half the gold; more shall be
thine when thou shalt show some token that the deed is done.

Hugo. Thanks, Count; I'll do thy bidding. At sunset in the forest,--I'll
be there, and see he leaves it not alive. Good-even, then, my lord.

Rod. Hugo, use well thy dagger, and gold awaits thee. Yet, stay! I'll
meet thee in the wood, and pay thee there. They might suspect if they
should see thee here again so soon. I'll meet thee there, and so
farewell.

Hugo. Adieu, my lord.

                                                          [_Exit_ Hugo].

Rod. Yes; all goes well. My rival dead, and Leonore is mine. With her I
may forget the pale face that now seems ever looking into mine. I can
almost think the deep wound shows in her picture yonder. But this is
folly! Shame on thee, Rodolpho. I'll think of it no more. [_Turns to
drink._ Theresa's _face appears within the picture, the wound upon her
brow._] Ha! what is that? Am I going mad? See the eyes move,--it is
Theresa's face! Nay, I will not look again. Yes, yes; 'tis there! Will
this sad face haunt me forever?

Theresa. Forever! Forever!

Rod. Fiends take me,--'tis her voice! It is no dream. Ah, let me go
away--away!

                    [Rodolpho _rushes wildly out._]

                                CURTAIN.


                          NOTE TO SCENE FIFTH.

The apparently impossible transformations of this scene (when played by
two actors only) may be thus explained:--

The costumes of Louis and Norna, being merely loose garments, afford
opportunities for rapid change; and the indulgent audience overlooking
such minor matters as boots and wigs, it became an easy matter for Jo to
transform herself into either of the four characters which she assumed
on this occasion.

Beneath the flowing robes of the sorceress Jo was fully dressed as Count
Rodolpho. Laid conveniently near were the black cloak, hat, and mask of
Louis,--also the white draperies required for the ghostly Theresa.

Thus, Norna appears in long, gray robe, to which are attached the hood
and elf-locks of the witch. Seeing Hugo approach she conceals herself
among the trees, thus gaining time to don the costume of Louis, and
appear to Hugo who awaits him.

Hugo stabs and drags him from the stage. Louis then throws off his
disguise and becomes Rodolpho, fully dressed for his entrance a moment
later.

As Hugo does not again appear, it is an easy matter to assume the
character of the spectre and produce the sights and sounds which terrify
the guilty Count; then slipping on the witch's robe, be ready to glide
forth and close the scene with dramatic effect.


                            SCENE FIFTH.

                  [_The wood near_ Norna's _cave._
                          _Enter_ Norna.]

Norna. It is the hour I bid him come with the letter for Lady Leonore.
Poor youth, his sister slain, his life in danger, and the lady of his
love far from him, 'tis a bitter fate. But, if old Norna loses not her
power, he shall yet win his liberty, his love, and his revenge. Ah, he
comes,--nay, 'tis the ruffian Hugo. I will conceal myself,--some evil is
afoot [_hides among the trees_].

                                                          [_Enter_ Hugo.

Hugo. This is the spot. Here will I hide, and bide my time [_conceals
himself among the rocks_].

                                                         [_Enter_ Louis.

Louis. She is not here. I'll wait awhile and think of Leonore. How will
she receive this letter? Ah, could she know how, 'mid all my grief and
danger, her dear face shines in my heart, and cheers me on. [Hugo
_steals out, and as he turns, stabs him._] Ha, villain, thou hast killed
me! I am dying! God bless thee, Leonore! Norna, remember, vengeance on
Rodolpho! [_Falls_]

Hugo. Nay, nay, thou wilt take no revenge; thy days are ended, thanks to
this good steel. Now, for the token [_takes letter from_ Louis's
_hand_]. Ah, this he cannot doubt. I will take this ring too; 'tis a
costly one. I'll hide the body in the thicket yonder, ere my lord
arrives [_drags out the body_].

                                                      [_Enter_ Rodolpho.

Rod. Not here? Can he have failed? Here is blood--it may be his. I'll
call. Hugo, good Hugo, art thou here?

Hugo [_stealing from the trees_]. Ay, my lord, I am here. All is safely
done: the love-sick boy lies yonder in the thicket, dead as steel can
make him. And here is the token if you doubt me, and the ring I just
took from his hand [_gives letter_].

Rod. Nay, nay, I do not doubt thee; keep thou the ring. I am content
with this. Tell me, did he struggle with thee when thou dealt the blow?

Hugo. Nay, my lord; he fell without a groan, and murmuring something of
revenge on thee, he died. Hast thou the gold?

Rod. Yes, yes, I have it. Take it, and remember I can take thy life as
easily as thou hast his, if thou shouldst whisper what hath been this
day done. Now go; I've done with thee.

Hugo. And I with thee. Adieu, my lord.

                                                           [_Exit_ Hugo.

Rod. Now am I safe,--no mortal knows of Theresa's death by my hand, and
Leonore is mine.

Voice [_within the wood]._ Never--never!

Rod. Curses on me! Am I bewitched? Surely, I heard a voice; perchance
'twas but an echo [_a wild laugh rings through the trees_]. Fiends take
the wood! I'll stay no longer! [_Turns to fly._ Theresa's _spirit
rises._] 'Tis there,--help, help--[_Rushes wildly out._]

                                                         [_Enter_ Norna.

Norna. Ha, ha! fiends shall haunt thee, thou murderer! Another sin upon
thy soul,--another life to be avenged! Poor, murdered youth, now gone to
join thy sister. I will lay thee by her side and then to my work. He
hath raised another ghost to haunt him. Let him beware!

                                                          [_Exit_ Norna.

                                CURTAIN.


                              SCENE SIXTH.

                 [_Chamber in the castle of_ Lady Leonore.
                           _Enter_ Leonore.]

Leonore. Ah, how wearily the days go by. No tidings of Count Louis, and
Count Rodolpho urges on his suit so earnestly. I must accept his hand
to-day, or refuse his love, and think no more of Louis. I know not how
to choose. Rodolpho loves me: I am an orphan and alone, and in his
lovely home I may be happy. I have heard it whispered that he is both
stern and cruel, yet methinks it cannot be,--he is so tender when with
me. Ah, would I could forget Count Louis! He hath never told his love,
and doubtless thinks no more of her who treasures up his gentle words,
and cannot banish them, even when another offers a heart and home few
would refuse. How shall I answer Count Rodolpho when he comes? I do not
love him as I should, and yet it were no hard task to learn with so fond
a teacher. Shall I accept his love, or shall I reject?

                                              [Norna _suddenly appears._

Norna. Reject.

Leonore. Who art thou? Leave me, or I call for aid.

Norna. Nay, lady, fear not. I come not here to harm thee, but to save
thee from a fate far worse than death. I am old Norna of the forest, and
though they call me witch and sorceress, I am a woman yet, and with a
heart to pity and to love. I would save thy youth and beauty from the
blight I fear will fall upon thee.

Leonore. Save me! from what? How knowest thou I am in danger; and from
what wouldst thou save me, Norna?

Norna. From Lord Rodolpho, lady.

Leonore. Ah! and why from him? Tell on, I'll listen to thee now. He hath
offered me his heart and hand. Why should I not accept them, Norna?

Norna. That heart is filled with dark and evil passions, and that hand
is stained with blood. Ay, lady, well mayst thou start. I will tell thee
more. The splendid home he would lead thee to is darkened by a fearful
crime, and his fair palace haunted by the spirit of a murdered wife.

                                                   [Leonore _starts up._

Leonore. Wife, sayest thou? He told me he was never wed. Mysterious
woman, tell me more! How dost thou know 'tis true, and wherefore was it
done? I have a right to know. Oh, speak, and tell me all!

Norna. For that have I come hither. He hath been wed to a lady, young
and lovely as thyself. He kept her prisoner in his splendid home, and by
neglect and cruelty he broke as warm and true a heart as ever beat in
woman's breast. Her brother stole unseen to cheer and comfort her, and
this aroused her lord's suspicions, and he bid her to confess who was
her unknown friend. She would not yield her brother to his hate, and he
in his wild anger murdered her. I heard his cruel words, her prayers for
mercy, and I stood beside the lifeless form and marked the blow his evil
hand had given her. And there I vowed I would avenge the deed, and for
this have I come hither to warn thee of thy danger. He loves thee only
for thy wealth, and when thou art his, will wrong thee as he hath the
meek Theresa.

Leonore. How shall I ever thank thee for this escape from sorrow and
despair? I did not love him, but I am alone, and his kind words were
sweet and tender. I thought with him I might be happy yet, but--Ah, how
little did I dream of sin like this! Thank Heaven, 'tis not too late!

Norna. How wilt thou answer Lord Rodolpho now?

Leonore. I will answer him with all the scorn and loathing that I feel.
I fear him not, and he shall learn how his false vows are despised, and
his sins made known.

Norna. 'Tis well; but stay,--be thou not too proud. Speak fairly, and
reject him courteously; for he will stop at nought in his revenge if
thou but rouse his hatred. And now, farewell. I'll watch above thee, and
in thy hour of danger old Norna will be nigh. Stay, give me some token,
by which thou wilt know the messenger I may find cause to send thee. The
fierce Count will seek to win thee, and repay thy scorn by all the evil
his cruel heart can bring.

Leonore. Take this ring, and I will trust whoever thou mayst send with
it. I owe thee much, and, believe me, I am grateful for thy care, and
will repay thee by my confidence and truth. Farewell, old Norna; watch
thou above the helpless, and thine old age shall be made happy by my
care.

Norna. Heaven bless thee, gentle lady. Good angels guard thee. Norna
will not forget.

                                                          [_Exit_ Norna.

Leonore. 'Tis like a dream, so strange, so terrible,--he whom I thought
so gentle, and so true is stained with fearful crimes! Poor, murdered
lady! Have I escaped a fate like thine? Ah, I hear his step! Now, heart,
be firm and he shall enter here no more.

                                                      [_Enter_ Rodolpho.

Rod. Sweet lady, I am here to learn my fate. I have told my love, and
thou hast listened; I have asked thy hand, and thou hast not refused it.
I have offered all that I possess,--my home, my heart. Again I lay them
at thy feet, beloved Leonore. Oh, wilt thou but accept them, poor tho'
they be, and in return let me but claim this fair hand as mine own?

                                [_Takes her hand and kneels before her._

Leonore [_withdrawing her hand_]. My lord, forgive me, but I cannot
grant it. When last we met thou didst bid me ask my heart if it could
love thee. It hath answered, "Nay." I grieve I cannot make a fit return
for all you offer, but I have no love to give, and without it this poor
hand were worthless. There are others far more fit to grace thy home
than I. Go, win thyself a loving bride, and so forget Leonore.

Rod. What hath changed thee thus since last we met. Then wert thou kind,
and listened gladly to my love. Now there is a scornful smile upon thy
lips, and a proud light in thine eye. What means this? Why dost thou
look so coldly on me, Leonore? Who has whispered false tales in thine
ear? Believe them not. I am as true as Heaven to thee; then do not cast
away the heart so truly thine. Smile on me, dearest; thou art my first,
last, only love.

Leonore. 'Tis false, my lord! Hast thou so soon forgot _Theresa_?

Rod. What! Who told thee that accursed tale? What dost thou mean,
Leonore?

Leonore. I mean thy sinful deeds are known. Thou hast asked me why I
will not wed thee, and I answer, I will not give my hand unto a
murderer.

Rod. Murderer! No more of this! Thy tale is false; forget it, and I will
forgive the idle words. Now listen; I came hither to receive thy answer
to my suit. Think ere thou decide. Thou art an orphan, unprotected and
alone. I am powerful and great. Wilt thou take my love, and with it
honor, wealth, happiness, and ease, or my hate, which will surely follow
thee and bring down desolation on thee and all thou lovest? Now choose,
my hatred, or my love.

Leonore. My lord, I scorn thy love, and I defy thy hate. Work thy will,
I fear thee not. I am not so unprotected as thou thinkest. There are
unseen friends around me who will save in every peril, and who are sworn
to take revenge on thee for thy great sins. This is my answer;
henceforth we are strangers; now leave me. I would be alone.

Rod. Not yet, proud lady. If thou wilt not love, I'll make thee learn to
fear the heart thou hast so scornfully cast away. Let thy friends guard
thee well; thou wilt need their care when I begin my work of vengeance.
Thou mayst smile, but thou shalt rue the day when Count Rodolpho asked
and was refused. But I will yet win thee, and then beware! And when thou
dost pray for mercy on thy knees, remember the haughty words thou hast
this day spoken.

Leonore. Do thy worst, murderer; spirits will watch above me, and thou
canst not harm. Adieu, my lord.

                                                        [_Exit_ Leonore.

Rod. Foiled again! Some demon works against me. Who could have told her
of Theresa? A little longer, and I should have won a rich young bride,
and now this tale of murder mars it all. But I will win her yet, and
wring her proud heart till she shall bend her haughty head and sue for
mercy.

How shall it be done? Stay! Ha, I see a way!--the letter Louis would
have sent her ere he died. She knows not of his death, and I will send
this paper bidding her to meet her lover in the forest. She cannot doubt
the lines his own hand traced. She will obey,--and I'll be there to lead
her to my castle. I'll wed her, and she may scorn, weep, and pray in
vain. Ha, ha! proud Leonore, spite of thy guardian spirits thou shalt be
mine, and then for my revenge!

                                                       [_Exit_ Rodolpho.

                                CURTAIN.


                             SCENE SEVENTH.

                           [Leonore's _room_.
                   _Enter_ Leonore _with a letter_.]

Leonore. 'Tis strange; an unknown page thrust this into my hand while
kneeling in the chapel. Ah, surely, I should know this hand! 'Tis
Louis's, and at last he hath returned, and still remembers Leonore
[_opens letter and reads_].

     Dearest Lady,--I am banished from the land by Count Rodolpho's
     false tales to the king; and thus I dare not venture near thee.
     But by the love my lips have never told, I do conjure thee to
     bestow one last look, last word, on him whose cruel fate it is
     to leave all that he most fondly loves. If thou wilt grant this
     prayer, meet me at twilight in the glen beside old Norna's
     cave. She will be there to guard thee. Dearest Leonore, before
     we part, perchance forever, grant this last boon to one who in
     banishment, in grief and peril, is forever thy devoted
                                                          Louis.

He loves me, and mid danger still remembers. Ah, Louis, there is nothing
thou canst ask I will not gladly grant. I'll go; the sun is well-nigh
set, and I can steal away unseen to whisper hope and comfort ere we part
forever. Now, Count Rodolpho, thou hast given me another cause for hate.
Louis, I can love thee tho' thou art banished and afar.

Hark! 'tis the vesper-bell. Now, courage, heart, and thou shalt mourn no
longer.

                                                        [_Exit_ Leonore.

                                CURTAIN.


                             SCENE EIGHTH.

                      [_Glen near_ Norna's _cave.
                            Enter_ Leonore.]

Leonore. Norna is not here, nor Louis. Why comes he not? Surely 'tis the
place. Norna! Louis! art thou here?

                                            [_Enter_ Rodolpho, _masked_.

Rod. I am here, dear lady. Do not fear me; I may not unmask even to
thee, for spies may still be near me. Wilt thou pardon, and still trust
me tho' thou canst not see how fondly I am looking on thee. See! here is
my ring, my dagger. Oh, Leonore, do not doubt me!

Leonore. I do trust thee; canst thou doubt it now? Oh, Louis! I feared
thou wert dead. Why didst thou not tell me all before. And where wilt
thou go, and how can I best serve thee? Nought thou canst ask my love
shall leave undone.

Rod. Wilt thou let me guide thee to yonder tower? I fear to tell thee
here, and old Norna is there waiting for thee. Come, love, for thy
Louis's sake, dare yet a little more, and I will tell thee how thou
canst serve me. Wilt thou not put thy faith in me, Leonore?

Leonore. I will. Forgive me, if I seem to fear thee; but thy voice
sounds strangely hollow, and thine eyes look darkly on me from behind
this mask. Thou wilt lay it by when we are safe, and then I shall forget
this foolish fear that hangs upon me.

Rod. Thine own hands shall remove it, love. Come, it is not far. Would I
might guide thee thus through life! Come, dearest!

                                                                [_Exit._

                                CURTAIN.


                              SCENE NINTH.

              [_Castle of_ Rodolpho. _The haunted chamber.
                  Enter_ Rodolpho _leading_ Leonore.]

Leonore. Where art thou leading me, dear Louis? Thy hiding-place is a
pleasant one, but where is Norna? I thought she waited for us.

Rod. She will soon be here. Ah, how can I thank thee for this joyful
hour, Leonore. I can forget all danger and all sorrow now.

Leonore. Nay, let me cast away this mournful mask! I long to look upon
thy face once more. Wilt thou let me, Louis?

Rod. Ay, look upon me if thou wilt;--dost like it, lady? [_Drops his
disguise._ Leonore _shrieks, and rushes to the door, but finds it
locked_.] 'Tis useless; there are none to answer to thy call. All here
are my slaves, and none dare disobey. Where are thy proud words now?
hast thou no scornful smile for those white lips, no anger in those
beseeching eyes? Where are thy friends? Why come they not to aid thee?
Said I not truly my revenge was sure?

Leonore. Oh, pardon me, and pity! See, I will kneel to thee, pray, weep,
if thou wilt only let me go. Forgive my careless words! Oh, Count
Rodolpho, take me home, and I will forget this cruel jest [_kneels_].

Rod. Ha, ha! It is no jest, and thou hast no home but this. Didst thou
not come willingly? I used no force; and all disguise is fair in love.
Nay, kneel not to me. Did I not say thou wouldst bend thy proud head,
and sue for mercy, and I would deny it? Where is thy defiance now?

Leonore [_rising_]. I'll kneel no more to thee. The first wild fear is
past, and thou shalt find me at thy feet no more. As I told thee _then_,
I tell thee _now_,--thine I will never be; and think not I will fail or
falter at thy threats. Contempt of thee is too strong for fear.

Rod. Not conquered yet. Time will teach thee to speak more courteously
to thy master. Ah, thou mayst well look upon these bawbles. They were
thy lover's once. This ring was taken from his lifeless hand; this
dagger from his bleeding breast, as he lay within the forest whence I
led thee. This scroll I found next his heart when it had ceased to beat.
I lured thee hither with it, and won my sweet revenge. [Leonore _sinks
down weeping._] Now rest thee; for when the castle clock strikes ten, I
shall come to lead thee to the altar. The priest is there,--this ring
shall wed thee. Farewell, fair bride; remember,--there is no escape, and
thou art mine forever.

Leonore [_starting up_]. Never! I shall be free when thou mayst think
help past forever. There is a friend to help me, and an arm to save,
when earthly aid is lost. Thine I shall never be! Thou mayst seek me; I
shall be gone.

Rod. Thou wilt need thy prayers. I shall return,--remember, when the
clock strikes ten, I come to win my bride.

                                                                [_Exit._

Leonore. He has gone, and now a few short hours of life are left to me;
for if no other help shall come, death can save me from a fate I loathe.
Ah, Louis, Louis, thou art gone forever! Norna, where is thy promise now
to guard me? Is there no help? Nor tears nor prayers can melt that cruel
heart, and I am in his power. Ha! what is that?--_his_ dagger, taken
from his dying breast. How gladly would he have drawn it forth to save
his poor Leonore! Alas, that hand is cold forever! But I must be calm.
He shall see how a weak woman's heart can still defy him, and win
liberty by death [_takes the dagger; clock strikes ten_]. It is the
hour,--the knell of my young life. Hark! they come. Louis, thy Leonore
ere long will join thee, never more to part.

          [_The secret panel opens._ Adrian _enters masked._]

Adrian. Stay, lady! stay thy hand! I come to save thee. Norna sends
me,--see, thy token; doubt not, nor delay; another moment, we are lost.
Oh, fly, I do beseech thee!

Leonore. Heaven bless thee; I will come. Kind friend, I put a helpless
maiden's trust in thee.

Adrian. Stay not! away, away!

          [_Exit through the secret panel, which disappears._
              Enter_ Rodolpho.

Rod. Is my fair bride ready? Ha! Leonore, where art thou?

Voice. Gone,--gone forever!

Rod. Girl, mock me not; come forth, I say. Thou shalt not escape me.
Leonore, answer! Where is my bride?

Voice [_behind the curtains_]. Here--

Rod. Why do I fear? She is there concealed [_lifts the curtain; spirit
of_ Theresa _rises_]. The fiends! what is that? The spirit haunts me
still!

Voice. Forever, forever--

Rod. [_rushes to the door but finds it locked_]. What ho! without
there! Beat down the door! Pedro! Carlos! let me come forth! They do not
come! Nay, 'tis my fancy; I will forget it all. Still, the door is fast;
Leonore is gone. _Who_ groans so bitterly? Wild voices are sounding in
the air, ghastly faces are looking on me as I turn, unseen hands bar the
door, and dead men are groaning in mine ears. I'll not look, not listen;
'tis some spell set on me. Let it pass!

                             [_Throws himself down and covers his face._

Voice.  The spell will not cease,
        The curse will not fly,
        And spirits shall haunt
        Till the murderer shall die.

Rod. Again, spirit or demon, wherefore dost thou haunt me, and what art
thou? [Theresa's _spirit rises._] Ha! am I gone mad? Unbar the door!
Help! help! [_Falls fainting to the floor._]

                                                         [_Enter_ Norna.

Norna. Lie there, thou sinful wretch! Old Norna's curse ends but with
thy life.

                                                             [_Tableau._

                                CURTAIN.


                              SCENE TENTH.

                  [_A room in the castle of_ Rodolpho.
                           _Enter_ Rodolpho.]

Rod. Dangers seem thickening round me. Some secret spy is watching me
unseen,--I fear 'tis Hugo, spite the gold I gave him, and the vows he
made. A higher bribe may win the secret from him, and then I am undone.
Pedro hath told me that a stranger, cloaked and masked, was lurking near
the castle on the night when Leonore so strangely vanished [_a laugh_].
Ha!--what's that?--methought I heard that mocking laugh again! I am
grown fearful as a child since that most awful night. Well, well, let it
pass! If Hugo comes to-night, obedient to the message I have sent, I'll
see he goes not hence alive. This cup shalt be thy last, good Hugo!
[_Puts poison in the wine-cup._] He comes,--now for my revenge!
[_Enter_ Hugo.] Ah, Hugo, welcome! How hath it fared with thee since
last we met? Thou lookest weary,--here is wine; sit and refresh thyself.

Hugo. I came not hither, Count Rodolpho, to seek wine, but gold. Hark
ye! I am poor; thou art rich, but in my power, for proud and noble
though thou art, the low-born Hugo can bring death and dishonor on thy
head by whispering one word to the king. Ha!--now give me gold or I will
betray thee.

Rod. Thou bold villain, what means this? I paid thee well, and thou
didst vow to keep my secret. Threaten me not. Thou art in my power, and
shall never leave this room alive. I fear thee not. My menials are at
hand,--yield thyself; thou art fairly caught, and cannot now escape me.

Hugo. Nay, not so fast, my lord. One blast upon my horn, and my brave
band, concealed below, will answer to my call. Ha! ha! thou art caught,
my lord. Thy life is in my hands, and thou must purchase it by fifty
good pistoles paid down to me; if not, I will charge thee with the crime
thou didst bribe me to perform, and thus win a rich reward. Choose,--thy
life is nought to me.

Rod. Do but listen, Hugo. I have no gold; smile if thou wilt, but I am
poor. This castle only is mine own, and I am seeking now a rich young
bride whose wealth will hide my poverty. Be just, good Hugo, and forgive
the harsh words I have spoken. Wait till I am wed, and I will pay thee
well.

Hugo. That will I not. I'll have no more of thee, false lord! The king
will well reward me, and thou mayst keep thy gold. Farewell! Thou wilt
see me once again.

Rod. Stay, Hugo, stay! Give me but time; I may obtain the gold. Wait a
little, and it shall be thine. Wilt thou not drink? 'Tis the wine thou
likest so well. See! I poured it ready for thee.

Hugo. Nay; I will serve myself. Wine of thy mixing would prove too
strong for me [_sits down and drinks._ Rodolpho _paces up and down
waiting a chance to stab him_]. Think quickly, my good lord; I must be
gone [_turns his head._ R. _raises his dagger._ Hugo _rising_]. I'll
wait no more; 'tis growing late, and I care not to meet the spirits
which I hear now haunt thy castle. Well, hast thou the gold?

Rod. Not yet; but if thou wilt wait--

Hugo. I tell thee I will not. I'll be deceived no longer. Thou art mine,
and I'll repay thy scornful words and sinful deeds by a prisoner's cell.
And so, adieu, my lord. Escape is useless, for thou wilt be watched.
Hugo is the master now!

                                                           [_Exit_ Hugo.

Rod. Thou cunning villain, I'll outwit thee yet. I will disguise myself,
and watch thee well, and when least thou thinkest it, my dagger shall be
at thy breast. And now one thing remains to me, and that is flight. I
must leave all and go forth poor, dishonored, and alone; sin on my
head, and fear within my heart. Will the sun never set? How slow the
hours pass! In the first gloom of night, concealed in yonder old monk's
robe, I'll silently glide forth, and fly from Hugo and this haunted
house. Courage, Rodolpho, thou shalt yet win a name and fortune for
thyself. Now let me rest awhile; I shall need strength for the perils of
the night [_lies down and sleeps_].

                                                         [_Enter_ Norna.

Norna. Poor fool! thy greatest foe is here,--her thou shalt not escape.
Hugo shall be warned, and thou alone shalt fall.

                        [_She makes signs from the window and vanishes._

Rod. [_awakes and rises_]. Ah, what fearful dreams are mine!
Theresa--Louis--still they haunt me! Whither shall I turn? Who comes?
[_Enter_ Gaspard.] Art thou another phantom sent to torture me?

Gasp. 'Tis I, leader of the king's brave guards, sent hither to arrest
thee, my lord; for thou art charged with murder.

Rod. Who dares to cast so foul a stain on Count Rodolpho's name.

Gasp. My lord, yield thyself. The king may show thee mercy yet--

Rod. I will yield, and prove my innocence, and clear mine honor to the
king. Reach me my cloak yonder, and I am ready.

    [Gaspard _turns to seek the cloak._ Rodolpho _leaps from the
        window and disappears._

Gasp. Ha! he hath escaped,--curses on my carelessness! [_Rushes to the
window._] Ho, there! surround the castle, the prisoner hath fled! We'll
have him yet, the blood-stained villain!

                 [_Exit_ Gaspard. _Shouts and clashing of swords heard._

                                CURTAIN.


                            SCENE ELEVENTH.

                            [Norna's _cave._
                        Leonore _and_ _Adrian_.]

Adrian. Dear lady, can I do nought to while away the lonely hours? Shall
I go forth and bring thee flowers, or seek thy home and bear away thy
bird, thy lute, or aught that may beguile thy solitude? It grieves me
that I can do so little for thee.

Leonore. Nay, 'tis I should grieve that I can find no way to show my
gratitude to thee, my brave deliverer. But wilt thou not tell me who
thou art? I would fain know to whom I owe my life and liberty.

Adrian. Nay, that I may not tell thee. I have sworn a solemn vow, and
till that is fulfilled I may not cast aside this sorrowful disguise.
Meanwhile, thou mayst call me Adrian. Wilt thou pardon and trust me
still?

Leonore. Canst thou doubt my faith in thee? Thou and old Norna are the
only friends now left to poor Leonore. I put my whole heart's trust in
thee. But if thou canst not tell me of thyself, wilt tell me why thou
hast done so much for me, a friendless maiden?

Adrian. I fear it will cause thee sorrow, lady; and thou hast grief
enough to bear.

Leonore. Do not fear. I would so gladly know--

Adrian. Forgive me if I make thee weep: I had a friend,--most dear to
me. He loved a gentle lady, but ere he could tell her this, he died, and
bid me vow to watch above her whom he loved, and guard her with my life.
I took the vow: that lady was thyself, that friend Count Louis.

Leonore. Ah, Louis! Louis! that heart thou feared to ask is buried with
thee.

Adrian. Thou didst love him, lady?

Leonore. Love him? Most gladly would I lie down within my grave
tonight, could I but call him back to life again.

Adrian. Grieve not; thou hast one friend who cannot change,--one who
through joy and sorrow will find his truest happiness in serving thee.
Hist! I hear a step: I will see who comes.

                                                        [_Exit_ Adrian.

Leonore. Kind, watchful friend, how truly do I trust thee!

                                                     [_Re-enter_ Adrian.

Adrian. Conceal thyself, dear lady, with all speed. 'Tis Count Rodolpho.
Let me lead thee to the inner cave,--there thou wilt be safe.

             [_They retire within; noise heard without. Enter_ Rodolpho.

Rod. At last I am safe. Old Norna will conceal me till I can find means
to leave the land. Ha!--voices within there. Ho, there! old wizard,
hither! I have need of thee!

                                                        [_Enter_ Adrian.

Adrian. What wouldst thou?

Rod. Nought. Get thee hence! I seek old Norna.

Adrian. Thou canst not see her; she is not here.

Rod. Not here? 'Tis false,--I heard a woman's voice within there. Let me
pass!

Adrian. 'Tis not old Norna, and thou canst not pass.

Rod. Ah, then, who might it be, my most mysterious sir?

Adrian. The Lady Leonore.

Rod. Ha!--how came she hither? By my soul, thou liest! Stand back and
let me go. She is mine!

Adrian. Thou canst only enter here above my lifeless body. Leonore is
here, and I am her protector and thy deadliest foe. 'Tis for thee to
yield and leave this cell.

Rod. No more of this,--thou hast escaped me once. Draw and defend
thyself, if thou hast courage to meet a brave man's sword!

Adrian. But for Leonore I would not stoop so low, or stain my sword; but
for her sake I'll dare all, and fight thee to the last.

                            [_They fight their way out. Enter_ Rodolpho.

Rod. At length fate smiles upon me. I am the victor,--and now for
Leonore! All danger is forgotten in the joy of winning my revenge on
this proud girl! Thou art mine at last, Leonore, and mine forever!
[_Rushes towards the inner cave. Spirit of_ Theresa _rises._] There 'tis
again! I will not fly,--I do defy it! [_Attempts to pass. Spirit touches
him; he drops his sword and rushes wildly away._] 'Tis vain: I
cannot--dare not pass. It comes, it follows me. Whither shall I fly?

                                        [_Exit. Enter_ Adrian _wounded._

Adrian. I have saved her once again,--but oh, this deathlike faintness
stealing o'er me robs me of my strength. Thou art safe, Leonore, and I
am content. [_Falls fainting._]

                                                       [_Enter_ Leonore.

Leonore. They are gone. Ah, what has chanced? I heard his voice, and now
'tis still as death. Where is my friend? God grant he be not hurt! I'll
venture forth and seek him [_sees_ Adrian _unconscious before her_]. Oh,
what is this? Adrian, kind friend, dost thou not hear me? There is blood
upon his hand! Can he be dead? No, no! he breathes, he moves; this mask,
I will remove it,--surely he will forgive.

                             [_Attempts to unmask him; he prevents her._

Adrian [_reviving_]. Nay, nay; it must not be. I am better now. The blow
but stunned me,--it will pass away. And thou art safe?

Leonore. I feared not for myself, but thee. Come, rest thee here, thy
wound is bleeding; let me bind it with my kerchief, and bring thee wine.
Let me serve thee who hath done so much for me. Art better now! Can I do
aught else for thee?

Adrian. No more, dear lady. Think not of me, and listen while I tell
thee of the dangers that surround thee. Count Rodolpho knows thou art
here, and may return with men and arms to force thee hence. My single
arm could then avail not, though I would gladly die for thee. Where then
can I lead thee,--no place can be too distant, no task too hard for him
whose joy it is to serve thee.

Leonore. Alas! I know not. I dare not seek my home while Count Rodolpho
is my foe; my servants would be bribed,--they would betray me, and thou
wouldst not be there to save. Adrian, I have no friend but thee. Oh,
pity and protect me!

Adrian. Most gladly will I, dearest lady. Thou canst never know the joy
thy confidence hath wakened in my heart. I will save and guard thee with
my life. I will guide thee to a peaceful home where no danger can
approach, and only friends surround thee. Thy Louis dwelt there once,
and safely mayst thou rest till danger shall be past. Will this please
thee?

Leonore. Oh, Adrian, thou kind, true friend, how can I tell my
gratitude, and where find truer rest than in _his_ home, where gentle
memories of him will lighten grief. Then take me there, and I will prove
my gratitude by woman's fondest friendship, and my life-long trust.

Adrian. Thanks, dear lady. I need no other recompense than the joy 'tis
in my power to give thee. I will watch faithfully above thee, and when
thou needest me no more, I'll leave thee to the happiness thy gentle
heart so well deserves. Now rest, while I seek out old Norna, and
prepare all for our flight. The way we have to tread is long and weary.
Rest thee, dear lady.

Leonore. Adieu, dear friend. I will await thee ready for our pilgrimage,
and think not I shall fail or falter, though the path be long, and
dangers gather round us. I shall not fear, for thou wilt be there. God
bless thee, Adrian.

                                                             [_Tableau._

                                CURTAIN.


                             SCENE TWELFTH.

                    [_Room in the castle of_ Louis.
                    Leonore _singing to her lute._]

    The weary bird mid stormy skies,
      Flies home to her quiet nest,
    And 'mid the faithful ones she loves,
      Finds shelter and sweet rest.

    And thou, my heart, like to tired bird,
      Hath found a peaceful home,
    Where love's soft sunlight gently falls,
      And sorrow cannot come.

Leonore. 'Tis strange that I can sing, but in this peaceful home my
sorrow seems to change to deep and quiet joy. Louis seems ever near, and
Adrian's silent acts of tenderness beguile my solitary hours, and daily
grow more dear to me. He guards me day and night, seeking to meet my
slightest wish, and gather round me all I hold most dear. [_Enter a_
Page.] Angelo, what wouldst thou?

Page. My master bid me bring these flowers and crave thee to accept them
lady.

Leonore. Bear him my thanks, and tell him that his gift is truly
welcome. [_Exit_ Page.] These are the blossoms he was gathering but now
upon the balcony; he hath sent the sweetest and the fairest [_a letter
falls from the nosegay_]. But what is here? He hath never sent me aught
like this before [_opens and reads the letter_].

    Dearest Lady,--Wilt thou pardon the bold words I here address
    to thee, and forgive me if I grieve one on whom I would bestow
    only the truest joy. In giving peace to thy heart I have lost
    mine own. I was thy guide and comforter, and soon, unknown to
    thee, thy lover. I love thee, Leonore, fondly and truly; and
    here I ask, wilt thou accept the offering of a heart that will
    forever cherish thee. If thou canst grant this blessed boon,
    fling from the casement the white rose I send thee; but if thou
    canst not accept my love, forgive me for avowing it, and drop
    the cypress bough I have twined about the rose. I will not pain
    thee to refuse in words,--the mournful token is enough. Ask
    thine own heart if thou, who hast loved Louis, can feel aught
    save friendship for the unknown, nameless stranger, who through
    life and death is ever
        Thy loving                                       Adrian.

Oh, how shall I reply to this,--how blight a love so tender and so true?
I have longed to show my gratitude, to prove how I have revered this
noble friend. The hour has come when I may make his happiness, and prove
my trust. And yet my heart belongs to Louis, and I cannot love another.
Adrian was his friend; he loved him, and confided me to him. Nobly hath
he fulfilled that trust, and where could I find a truer friend than he
who hath saved me from danger and from death, and now gives me the power
to gladden and to bless his life. Adrian, if thou wilt accept a sister's
love and friendship, they shall be thine. Louis, forgive me if I wrong
thee; for though I yield my hand, my heart is thine forever. This rose,
Adrian, to thee; this mournful cypress shall be mine in memory of my
blighted hopes [_goes to the_ _window and looks out_]. See! he is
waiting yonder by the fountain for the token that shall bring him joy or
sorrow. Thou noble friend, thy brave, true heart shall grieve no longer,
for thus will Leonore repay the debt of gratitude she owes thee [_flings
the rose from the window_]. He hath placed it in his bosom, and is
coming hither to pour forth his thanks for the poor gift bestowed. I
will tell him all, and if he will accept, then I am his.

                                        [_Enter_ Adrian _with the rose_.

Adrian. Dear lady, how can I tell thee the joy thou hast given me. This
blessed flower from thy dear hand hath told thy pardon and consent. Oh,
Leonore, canst thou love a nameless stranger who is so unworthy the
great boon thou givest.

Leonore. Listen, Adrian, ere thou dost thank me for a divided heart.
Thou hast been told my love for Louis; he was thy friend, and well thou
knowest how true and tender was the heart he gave me. He hath gone, and
with him rests my first deep love. Thou art my only friend and my
protector; thou hast won my gratitude and warmest friendship. I can
offer thee a sister's pure affection,--my hand is thine; and here I
pledge thee that as thou hast watched o'er me, so now thy happiness
shall be my care, thy love my pride and joy. Here is my hand,--wilt thou
accept it, Adrian?

Adrian. I will. I would not seek to banish from thy heart the silent
love thou bearest Louis. I am content if thou wilt trust me with thy
happiness, and give me the sweet right to guide and guard thee through
the pilgrimage of life. God bless thee, dearest.

Leonore. Dear Adrian, can I do nought for thee? I have now won the right
to cheer thy sorrows. Have faith in thy Leonore.

Adrian. Thou hast a right to know all, and ere long thou shalt. My
mysterious vow will now soon be fulfilled, and then no doubt shall part
us. Thou hast placed thy trust in me, and I have not betrayed it, and
now I ask a greater boon of thy confiding heart. Wilt thou consent to
wed me ere I cast aside this mask forever? Believe me, thou wilt not
regret it,--'tis part of my vow; one last trial, and I will prove to
thee thou didst not trust in vain. Forgive if I have asked too much.
Nay, thou canst not grant so strange a boon.

Leonore. I can--I will. I did but pause, for it seemed strange thou
couldst not let me look upon thy face. But think not that I fear to
grant thy wish. Thy heart is pure and noble, and that thou canst not
mask. As I trusted thee through my despair, so now I trust thee in my
joy. Canst thou ask more, dear friend?

Adrian. Ever trust me thus! Ah, Leonore, how can I repay thee? My love,
my life, are all I can give thee for the blessed gift thou hast
bestowed. A time will come when all this mystery shall cease and we
shall part no more. Now must I leave thee, dearest. Farewell! Soon will
I return.

                                                         [_Exit_ Adrian.

Leonore. I will strive to be a true and loving wife to thee, dear
Adrian; for I have won a faithful friend in thee forever.


                                CURTAIN.


                           SCENE THIRTEENTH.

                 [_Hall in the castle of_ Count Louis.
                 _Enter_ Leonore, _in bridal robes_.]

Leonore. At length the hour hath come, when I shall look upon the face
of him whom I this day have sworn to love and honor as a wife. I have,
perchance, been rash in wedding one I know not, but will not cast a
doubt on him who hath proved the noble heart that beats within his
breast. I am his, and come what may, the vows I have this day made shall
be unbroken. Ah, he comes; and now shall I gaze upon my husband's face!

                                                        [_Enter_ Adrian.

Adrian. Dearest, fear not. Thou wilt not trust me less when thou hast
looked upon the face so long concealed. My vow is ended, thou art won.
Thy hand is mine; Leonore, I claim thy heart.

                [_Unmasks._ Leonore _screams and falls upon his breast_.

Leonore. Louis, Louis! 'Tis a blessed dream!

Louis. No dream, my Leonore; it is thy living Louis who hath watched
above thee, and now claims thee for his own. Ah, dearest, I have tried
thee too hardly,--pardon me!

Leonore. Oh, Louis, husband, I have nought to pardon; my life, my
liberty, my happiness,--all, all, I owe to thee. How shall I repay thee?
[_Weeps upon his bosom._]

Louis. By banishing these tears, dear love, and smiling on me as you
used to do. Here, love, sit beside me while I tell thee my most strange
tale, and then no longer shalt thou wonder. Art happy now thy Adrian
hath flung by his mask?

Leonore. Happy! What deeper joy can I desire than that of seeing thy
dear face once more? But tell me, Louis, how couldst thou dwell so long
beside me and not cheer my bitter sorrow when I grieved for thee.

Louis. Ah, Leonore, thou wouldst not reproach me, didst thou know how
hard I struggled with my heart, lest I should by some tender word, some
fond caress, betray myself when thou didst grieve for me.

Leonore. Why didst thou fear to tell thy Leonore? She would have aided
and consoled thee. Why didst thou let me pine in sorrow at thy side,
when but a word had filled my heart with joy?

Louis. Dearest, I dared not. Thou knowest I was banished by the hate of
that fiend Rodolpho. I had a fair and gentle sister, whom he wed, and
after cruelty and coldness that I dread to think of now, he murdered
her. I sought old Norna's aid. She promised it, and well hath kept her
word. When Count Rodolpho's ruffian left me dying in the forest, she
saved, and brought me back to life. She bade me take a solemn vow not to
betray myself, and to aid her in her vengeance on the murderer of
Theresa. Nor could I own my name and rank, lest it should reach the king
who had banished me. The vow I took, and have fulfilled.

Leonore. And is there no danger now? Art thou safe, dear Louis, from the
Count?

Louis. Fear not, my love. He will never harm us more; his crimes are
known. The king hath pardoned me. I have won thee back. He is an
outcast, and old Norna's spells have well-nigh driven him mad. My
sister, thou art well avenged! Alas! alas! would I could have saved, and
led thee hither to this happy home.

Leonore. Ah, grieve not, Louis; she is happy now, and thy Leonore will
strive to fill her place. Hast thou told me all?

Louis. Nay, love. Thou knowest how I watched above thee, but thou canst
never know the joy thy faithful love for one thou mourned as dead hath
brought me. I longed to cast aside the dark disguise I had vowed to
wear, but dared not while Rodolpho was at liberty. Now all is safe. I
have tried thy love, and found it true. Oh, may I prove most worthy of
it, dearest.

Leonore. Louis, how can I love too faithfully the friend who, 'mid his
own grief and danger, loved and guarded me. I trusted thee as Adrian; as
Louis I shall love thee until death.

Louis. And I shall prize most tenderly the faithful heart that trusted
me through doubt and mystery. Now life is bright and beautiful before
us, and may you never sorrow that thou gav'st thy heart to Louis, and
thy hand to Adrian the "Black Mask."

                                CURTAIN.


                           SCENE FOURTEENTH.

                           [_A dungeon cell._
                       Rodolpho _chained, asleep.
                             Enter_ Norna.]

    Norna. Thy fate is sealed, thy course is run,
           And Norna's work is well-nigh done.

                                                [_Vanishes. Enter_ Hugo.

Rod. [_awaking_]. Mine eyes are bewildered by the forms I have looked
upon in sleep. Methought old Norna stood beside me, whispering evil
spells, calling fearful phantoms to bear me hence.

Hugo [_coming forward_]. Thy evil conscience gives thee little rest, my
lord.

Rod. [_starting up_]. Who is there? Stand back! I'll sell my life most
dearly. Ah, 'tis no dream,--I am fettered! Where is my sword?

Hugo. In my safe keeping, Count Rodolpho, lest in thy rage thou may'st
be tempted to add another murder to thy list of sins. [Rodolpho _sinks
down in despair._] Didst think thou couldst escape? Ah, no; although
most swift of foot and secret, Hugo hath watched and followed thee. I
swore to win both gold and vengeance. The king hath offered high reward
for thy poor head, and it is mine. Methinks it may cheer your solitude
my lord, so I came hither on my way to bear thy death warrant to the
captain of the guard. What wilt thou give for this? Hark ye! were this
destroyed, thou might'st escape ere another were prepared. How dost thou
like the plot?

Rod. And wilt thou save me, Hugo? Give me not up to the king! I'll be
thy slave. All I possess is thine. I'll give thee countless gold. Ah,
pity, and save me, Hugo!

Hugo. Ha, ha! I did but jest. Thinkest thou I could forego the joy of
seeing thy proud head laid low? Where was thy countless gold when I did
ask it of thee? No, no; thou canst not tempt me to forget my vengeance.
'Tis Hugo's turn to play the master now. Mayst thou rest well, and so,
good even, my lord.

                                                            [_Exit_ Hugo.

Rod. Thus end my hopes of freedom. My life is drawing to a close, and
all my sins seem rising up before me. The forms of my murdered victims
flit before me, and their dying words ring in mine ears,--Leonore
praying for mercy at my feet; old Norna whispering curses on my soul.
How am I haunted and betrayed! Oh, fool, fool that I have been! My
pride, my passion, all end in this! Hated, friendless, and alone, the
proud Count Rodolpho dies a felon's death. 'Tis just, 'tis just!
[_Enter_ Louis _masked._] What's that? Who spoke? Ah, 'tis mine unknown
foe. What wouldst thou here?

Louis. Thou didst bribe one Hugo to murder the young Count Louis, whom
thou didst hate. He did thy bidding, and thy victim fell; but Norna
saved, and healed his wounds. She told him of his murdered sister's
fate, and he hath joined her in her work of vengeance, and foiled thee
in thy sinful plots. I saved Leonore, and guarded her till I had won her
heart and hand, and in her love find solace for the sorrow thou hast
caused. Dost doubt the tale? Look on thine unknown foe, and find it true
[_unmasks_].

Rod. Louis, whom I hated, and would kill,--thou here, thou husband of
Leonore, happy and beloved! It is too much, too much! If thou lovest
life, depart. I'm going mad: I see wild phantoms whirling round me,
voices whispering fearful words within mine ears. Touch me not,--there
is blood upon my hands! Will this dream last forever?

Louis. May Heaven pity thee! Theresa, thou art avenged.

                                                          [_Exit_ Louis.

Rod. Ah, these are fearful memories for a dying hour! [_Casts himself
upon the floor._]

                                                         [_Enter_ Norna.

Norna. Sinful man, didst think thy death-bed could be peaceful? As they
have haunted thee in life, so shall spirits darken thy last hour. _I_
bore thy murdered wife to a quiet grave, and raised a spirit to affright
and haunt thee to thy death. _I_ freed the Lady Leonore; _I_ mocked and
haunted thee in palace, wood, and cell; _I_ warned Hugo, and betrayed
thee to his power; and _I_ brought down this awful doom upon thee. As
thou didst refuse all mercy to thy victims, so shall mercy be denied to
thee. Remorse and dark despair shall wring thy heart, and thou shalt die
unblessed, unpitied, unforgiven. Thy victims are avenged, and Norna's
work is done.

                                                      [Norna _vanishes._

Rod. Ha! ha! 'tis gone,--yet stay, 'tis Louis' ghost! How darkly his
eyes shine on me! See, see,--the demons gather round me! How fast they
come! Old Norna is there, muttering her spells. Let me go free! Unbind
these chains! Hugo, Louis, Leonore, Theresa,--thou art avenged!

                 [_Falls dead._ Norna _glides in and stands beside him._

                                                             [_Tableau._


                                CURTAIN.




                           CAPTIVE OF CASTILE;

                                   OR,

                       THE MOORISH MAIDEN'S VOW.


                              CHARACTERS.
    Bernardo   .   .   .   .   .   .    _Lord of Castile._

    Ernest L'Estrange  .   .   .   .    _An English Lord._

    Hernando   .   .   .   .   .   .    _A Priest._

    Selim  .   .   .   .   .   .   .    _A Slave._

    Zara   .   .   .   .   .   .   .    _Daughter to Bernardo._


                          CAPTIVE OF CASTILE;

                                   OR

                       THE MOORISH MAIDEN'S VOW.


                              SCENE FIRST.

                     [_A thick wood. Storm coming on.
                            Enter_ Ernest.]

Ernest. This summer sky, darkened by storm, is a fit emblem of my life.
O happy England, why did I leave thee; why let dreams of fame and honor
win me from a home, to wander now a lonely and bewildered fugitive? But
why do I repine? Life, health, and a brave heart yet are mine; and 'mid
all my peril, God may send some joy to cheer me on to happiness and
honor. Hist! a footstep. 'Tis a light one, but a Moorish foe steals
like a serpent on his prey. I'll hide me here, and if need be I'll sell
my life as a brave man should [_conceals himself among the trees_].

                                               [_Enter_ Zara, _weeping._

Zara. Heaven shield me! Whither shall I turn? Alone in this wild forest,
where may I find a friend to help. The dark storm gathers fast, and I am
shelterless. The fierce Spaniard may be wandering nigh, and I dare not
call for aid. Mistress of a hundred slaves, here must I perish for one
to lead me. Father, the faint heart turns to thee when earthly help is
past; hear and succor thy poor child now, who puts her trust in thee.

Ernest [_coming forward_]. Lady, thy prayer is heard. God hath not sent
me here in vain. How may I best serve thee?

Zara. Gentle stranger, pity and protect a hapless maid who puts her
faith in thee. Guide me from this wild wood, and all the thanks a
grateful heart can give are thine.

Ernest. I ask no higher honor than to shield so fair a flower from the
storm, or from rude hands that may harm it. But how chanced it, lady,
that thou art wandering thus unattended? 'Tis unsafe for youth and
beauty while the Spanish army is so near.

Zara. It was a foolish fancy led me hither, and dearly am I punished.
Journeying from a distant convent to my father's home, while my
attendants rested by a spring I wandered through the wood, unthinking of
the danger, till turning to retrace my steps, I found myself lost and
alone. I feared to call, and but for thee, kind stranger, might have
never seen my home again. Ask not my name, but tell me thine, that in my
prayers I may remember one who has so aided me.

Ernest. It were uncourteous to refuse thy bidding, lady. Ernest
L'Estrange is the name now honored by the poor service I may do thee. In
the Spanish army I came hither, and fear I have seen the last of home
or friends. The Moors now seek my life, and ere I can rejoin my ranks, I
may be a slave. But the storm draws nearer. Let me lead thee to some
shelter, lady.

Zara. Methinks I see a glimmer yonder. Let us seek it, for with thee I
fear no longer. I can only give thee thanks, most noble stranger; yet a
day may come when she for whom thou dost now risk thy life may find a
fit return, worthy thy courtesy to one so helpless and forlorn.

                                              [_Exit_ Ernest _and_ Zara.

                                CURTAIN.


                             SCENE SECOND.

            [_Room in the castle of_ Bernardo. Zara _alone_].

Zara. 'Tis strange how the thought haunts me still. Long months have
passed since last I saw that noble face, and yet those gentle eyes look
on me! Ernest!--'tis a sweet English name, and 'twas a noble English
heart that felt such tender pity for a helpless maid. Hark! my father's
step! He comes to tell of victories gained, of kingdoms won. Oh, would
he might bring some word of him I have so longed to see and thank once
more!

                                      [_Enter_ Bernardo _with a casket._

Ber. Joyful tidings, Zara! Grenada is free. Here, love, are gems for
thee; they have shone on many a fair lady's neck, but none more fair
than thine. And here are things more precious far to me than all their
gold and gems,--a goodly list of prisoners taken in the fight, and sent
to cool their Spanish blood in our deepest cells. Ah, many a proud name
is here,--Ferdinand Navarre, Carlos of Arragon, Lord L'Estrange, and
Baron Lisle. But, child, what ails thee?

Zara [_starting up_]. L'Estrange! Is he a prisoner too? Hast thou read
aright? Father, Father, it was he who saved me from a bitter death in
yonder forest. I never told his name lest it should anger thee. For my
sake spare him, and let the gratitude thou hast felt for that kind deed
soften thy heart to the brave stranger.

Ber. Nay, Zara! He is thy country's foe, and must be sacrificed to save
her honor. 'Twas a simple deed thou hast spoken of. What brave man but
would save a fair girl from storms or danger? 'Tis a foolish thought,
love; let it pass.

Zara. Oh, Father! I who never bent the knee to man before, implore thee
thus [_kneels_]. Be merciful! Leave not the English lord to the dark and
fearful doom that waits him. I know too well the life-long captivity,
more terrible than death itself, that is his fate. Oh, speak! Say he is
forgiven, Father!

Ber. Nay, what wild dream is this? Listen, child! I tell thee he must
suffer the captivity he merits as thy country's foe. He hath borne arms
against thy king, slain thy kindred, brought woe and desolation thro'
the land our fathers gave us. And thou wouldst plead for him! Shame on
thee! Thou art no true daughter of thy suffering country if thou canst
waste one tear on those who were well lodged in our most dreary
dungeons. Call thy pride to aid thee, Zara, and be worthy of thy noble
name.

Zara. Father, thou hast often told me woman's lot was 'mid the quiet
scenes of home, and that no thoughts of fame or glory should lie within
a heart where only gentleness and love should dwell; but I have learned
to honor bravery and noble deeds, and I would pledge my troth for the
noble stranger. See the English knight, and if he win thee not to
gratitude, thou art not the tender father who, through long years, hath
so loved and cherished thy motherless child.

Ber. Nay, Zara, nay; honor is a sterner master than a father's love. I
cannot free the captive till the king who hath sealed his doom shall
pardon also. The prisoners are men of rank, and for thy country's sake
must die. Forget thy foolish fancy, child, and set thy young heart on
some fairer toys than these false English lords. Adieu, love; I must to
the council.

                                                       [_Exit_ Bernardo.

Zara. Ah, there was a time when Zara's lightest wish was gladly granted.
This cruel war hath sadly changed my father; he hath forgotten all his
generous pity for suffering and sorrow. But my work is yet undone, and
the stranger is a captive. He _shall_ be free, and I will pay the debt
of gratitude I owe him. I will brave my father's anger; but whom can I
trust to aid me? Ha! Selim! He is old and faithful, and will obey
[_claps her hands_].

                                                         [_Enter_ Selim.

Selim. Your bidding, lady.

Zara. Selim, thou hast known me from my birth, and served me well. I
have done thee many a kindness. Wilt thou grant me one that shalt repay
all that I have ever shown to thee?

Selim. Lady, thou hast made a slave's life happy by thy care, and
through the long years I have served thee, hast never bid me do aught
that was not right. If my poor services can aid thee now, they are most
gladly thine.

Zara. Listen, Selim, while I tell thee what I seek. Thou knowest an
English soldier saved and led me from the forest yonder, and thou
knowest how my father thanked and blessed the unknown friend who had so
aided me. Yet now, when it is in his power to show the gratitude he
felt, he will not, and has doomed the man he once longed to honor to a
lonely cell to pine away a brave heart's life in sorrow and captivity. I
would show that gentle stranger that a woman never can forget. I would
free him. Thou hast the keys. This is the service I now crave of thee.

Selim. Lady, canst thou ask me to betray the trust my lord, thy father,
hath been pleased to place in me? Ask anything but this, and gladly will
I obey thee.

Zara. Ah, must I ever ask and be refused? Selim, listen! Thou hast a
daughter; she is fair and young, and thou hast often sighed that she
should be a slave. If thou wilt aid me now, the hour the chains fall
from the English captive's limbs, that hour shalt see thy daughter free,
and never more a slave. If thou wilt win this joy for her, then grant my
prayer, and she is free.

Selim. Oh, lady, lady, tempt me not! much as I love my child, I love
mine honor more. I cannot aid thee to deceive thy father.

Zara. Nay, Selim, I do not ask it of thee. The proud name my father
bears shall ne'er be stained by one false deed of mine. I ask thee but
to lead me to the prisoner's cell, that I may offer freedom, and tell
him woman's gratitude can never fail, nor woman's heart forget. And if
my father ask thee aught of this, thou shalt answer freely. Tell him
all, and trust his kindness to forgive; and if evil come _I_ will bear
it bravely,--thou shalt not suffer. Thou shalt win thy fair child's
freedom, and my fadeless thanks.

Selim. Thou hast conquered, lady; and for the blessed gift that is my
reward, I will brave all but treachery and dishonor. Thou shalt find thy
truest slaves in the old man and his daughter [_kneels and gives the
keys_].

Zara. Thanks, good Selim, thanks; thou shalt find a grateful friend in
her thou hast served so well. I will disguise me as a female slave, and
thou shalt lead me to the cell. Now go; I will join thee anon. [_Exit_
Selim.] Oh, Ernest, Ernest! thy brave heart shall pine no longer.
Another hour, and thou art free. Chains cannot bind, nor dungeons hold
when woman's love and gratitude are thine.

                                                               [_Exit._

                                CURTAIN.


                              SCENE THIRD.

                [_Dungeon in the castle of_ Bernardo.
                   Ernest L'Estrange, _chained._]

Ernest. So end my dreams of fame and honor! A life-long captive, or a
sultan's slave are all that fate has left me now. Yet, 'mid disgrace and
sorrow, one thought can cheer me yet, and one sweet vision brighten e'en
my dreary lot. I have served my country well, and won the thanks of
Spain's most lovely daughter. Sweet lady, little does she dream amid her
happiness that memories of her are all now left to cheer a captive's
heart. But hist!--a footstep on the stair. Perchance they come to lead
me forth to new captivity or death. [_Enter_ Zara, _disguised as a
slave_] Ah, who comes here to cheer the cell of the poor captive?

Zara. Captive no longer, if life and liberty be dear to thee. Say but
the word, and ere the sun sets thou shalt be free amid the hills of
Spain.

Ernest. Who art thou, coming like a spirit to my lonely cell, bringing
hopes of freedom? Tell me, what hath moved thee to such pity for an
unknown stranger?

Zara. Not unknown to her I serve. She hath not forgot thee, noble
stranger. When thou didst lead her from the dim wood, she said a day
might come when she, so weak and helpless then, might find some fit
reward for one who risked his life for her. That hour hath come, and she
hath sent her poor slave hither, and with her thanks and blessing to
speed thee on thy way.

Ernest. And is she near, and did she send thee to repay my simple deed
with one like this? Ah, tell her name! Where doth she dwell, and whence
the power to set me free?

Zara. I may not tell thee more than this. Her father is Bernardo of
Castile. She heard thy name among the captives doomed, and seeks to save
thee; for if thou dost not fly, a most cruel death awaits thee. Listen
to her prayer, and cast these chains away.

Ernest. It cannot be. Much as I love my freedom, I love my honor more;
and I am bound until my conqueror shall give back my plighted word, to
seek no freedom till he shall bid me go. Nay, do not sigh, kind friend;
I am no longer sad. From this day forth captivity is sweet. Tell thy
fair mistress all my thanks are hers; but I may not take the gift she
offers, for with freedom comes dishonor, and I cannot break my word to
her stern father. Tell her she hath made my fetters light, this cell a
happy home, by the sweet thought that she is near and still remembers
one who looks upon the hour when first we met as the happiest he hath
known.

Zara. If there be power in woman's gratitude, thou shalt yet be free,
and with thine honor yet unstained. She will not rest till all the debt
she owes thee is repaid. Farewell, and think not Zara will forget
[_turns to go; her veil falls_].

Ernest [_starting_]. Lady!--and is it thou? Ah, leave me not! Let me
thank thee for the generous kindness which has made a lone heart happy
by the thought that even in this wild land there is still one to
remember the poor stranger.

Zara. Pardon what may seem to thee unmaidenly and bold; but thou wert in
danger; there were none whom I could trust. Gratitude hath bid me come,
and I am here. Again I ask, nay, I implore thee, let me have the joy of
giving freedom to one brave English heart. England is thy home: wouldst
thou not tread its green shores once again? Are there no fond hearts
awaiting thy return? Ah, can I not tempt thee by all that man most
loves, to fly?

Ernest. Lady, my own heart pleads more earnestly than even thy sweet
voice; but those kind eyes were better dimmed with tears for my sad
death than be turned coldly from me as one who had stained the high name
he bore. And liberty were dearly purchased if I left mine honor here
behind. Ask me no more; for till thy father sets me free, I am his
prisoner here. Ah, dearest lady, thou hast made this lone cell bright,
and other chains than these now hold me here.

Zara. Then it must be. Much as I grieve for thy captivity, I shall honor
thee the more for thy unfailing truth, more prized than freedom, home,
or friends. And though I cannot save thee now, thou shalt find a Moorish
maiden true and fearless as thyself. Farewell! May happy thoughts of
home cheer this dark cell till I have won the power to set thee free.

                                                           [_Exit_ Zara.

Ernest. Liberty hath lost its charms since thou art near me, lovely
Zara. These chains are nothing now, for the fetters that thy beauty,
tenderness, and grace have cast about my heart are stronger far.


                                CURTAIN.


                             SCENE FOURTH.

                           [Zara's _chamber_.
                           _Enter_ Bernardo.]

Ber. [_unfolding a scroll_]. At length 't is done, and here I hold the
doom of those proud lords who have so scorned my race. The hour has
come, and Bernardo is revenged. What, ho! Zara, where art thou?

                                                          [_Enter_ Zara.

Zara. Dear father, what hath troubled thee, and how can Zara cheer and
comfort thee?

Ber. 'Tis joy, not sorrow, Zara, gives this fierce light to mine eye. I
have hated, and am avenged. This one frail scroll is dearer far to me
than all the wealth of Spain, for 'tis the death-knell of the English
lords.

Zara. Must they all die, my father?

Ber. Ay, Zara,--all; ere to-morrow's sun shall set they will sleep
forever, and a good deed will be well done. I hate them, and their
paltry lives can ill repay the sorrow they have wrought.

Zara. Let me see the fatal paper. [_Takes the scroll; aside._] Yes,
_his_ name is here. Ah, how strange that these few lines can doom brave
hearts to such a death! [_Aloud._] Father, 'tis a fearful thing to hold
such power over human life. Ah, bid me tear the scroll, and win for thee
the thanks of those thy generous pity saves.

Ber. [_seizing the paper_]. Not for thy life, child! Revenge is sweet,
and I have waited long for mine. The king hath granted this; were it
destroyed, the captives might escape ere I could win another. Nay, Zara,
this is dearer to me than thy most priceless gems. To-night it shall be
well guarded 'neath my pillow. Go to thy flowers, child. These things
are not for thee,--thou art growing pale and sad. Remember, Zara, thou
art nobly born, and let no foolish pity win thee to forget it.

                                                       [_Exit_ Bernardo.

Zara. Oh, Father, Father, whom I have so loved and honored, now so cold,
so pitiless. The spirit of revenge hath entered thy kind heart, and
spread an evil blight o'er all the flowers that blossomed there. I
cannot win him back to tenderness, and Ernest, thou must perish. I
cannot save thee,--perhaps 'tis better so; but oh, 'twill be a bitter
parting! [_Weeps._] Nay, nay, it shall _not_ be! When this wild hate
hath passed, my father will repent. Alas! 't will be too late. _I_ will
save him from that sorrow when he shall find he hath wronged a noble
heart, and slain the friend he should have saved. But stay! how shall I
best weave my plot? That fatal paper, once destroyed, I will implore and
plead so tenderly, my father will repent; and ere another scroll can
reach his hands, I will have won thy freedom, Ernest! This night
beneath his pillow it will be; and I, like a midnight thief, must steal
to that couch, and take it hence. Yet, it shall be done, for it will
save thee, Father, from a cruel deed, and gain a brave heart's freedom.
Ernest, 'tis for thee! for thee!


                                CURTAIN.


                              SCENE FIFTH.

                       [_Chamber in the castle._
                  Bernardo _sleeping_. _Enter_ Zara.]

Zara. He sleeps calmly as a child. Why do I tremble? 'T is a deed of
mercy I would do, and thou wilt thank me that I dared to disobey, and
spare thee from life-long regret. The paper,--yes, 'tis here! Forgive
me, Father; 'tis to save thee from an evil deed thy child comes stealing
thus at dead of night to take what thou hast toiled so long to win.
Sleep on! no dark dream can break thy slumber now; the spirit of revenge
shall pass away, and I will win thee back to pity and to love once more.
Now, Ernest, thou art saved, and ere to-morrow's sun shall rise this
warrant for thy death shall be but ashes, and my task be done.

                                                           [_Exit_ Zara.


                                CURTAIN.


                              SCENE SIXTH.

                           [Zara's _chamber_.
                             Zara _alone_].

Zara. The long, sleepless night at length hath passed. The paper is
destroyed, and now nought remains but to confess the deed, and brave my
father's anger.

                                                      [_Enter_ Bernardo.

Ber. Zara!

Zara [_starts_]. Why so stern, my father? Hath thy poor Zara angered
thee?

Ber. I have trusted thee as few would trust a child. Thou art fair and
gentle, and I had thought true. Never, Zara, till now hast thou deceived
me; and if thou wouldst keep thy father's love and trust, I bid thee
answer truly. Didst thou, in the dead of night steal to my pillow, and
bear hence the paper I had told thee would be there? Thy slave girl,
Zillah, missed thee from thy couch, and saw thee enter there. She
feared to follow, but none other came within my chamber, and this morn
the scroll is gone. Now answer, Zara! Didst thou take the warrant, and
where is it now?

Zara. Burnt to ashes, and scattered to the winds. I have never stained
my soul with falsehood, and I will not now. Oh, Father! I have loved and
honored thee through the long years thou hast watched above me. How
could I love on when thou hadst stained with blood that hand that
blessed me when a child, how honor when thou hadst repaid noble deeds
with death? Forgive me that I plead for those thou hast doomed! I alone
am guilty,--let thine anger fall on me; but, Father, I implore thee,
leave this evil deed undone. [_Kneels._]

Ber. Thou canst plead well for thy father's and thy country's foe. What
strange fancy hath possessed thee, Zara? Thou hast never wept, tho' many
a Christian knight hath pined and died within these walls; and even
now, methinks, thou speakest more of gratitude than mercy, and seem
strangely earnest for the English lord who did thee some small service
long ago. Speak, Zara! wouldst thou save them _all_? Were I to grant
thee all their lives save his, wouldst thou be content to let _him_ die?

Zara. Nay, Father; but for his tender care thou wouldst have no daughter
now to stand before thee, pleading for the life he bravely risked in
saving mine. Oh, would I had died amid the forest leaves ere I had
brought such woe to him, and lived to lose my father's love! [_Weeps._]

Ber. Listen, Zara! Little as I know of woman's heart, I have learned to
read thine own; and if I err not, thou hast dared to love this stranger.
Ha! is it so? Girl, I command thee to forget that love, and leave him to
his fate!

Zara. Never! I will not forget the love that like a bright star hath
come to cheer my lonely heart. I will _not_ forget the noble friend
who, 'mid his fiercest foes, could brave all dangers to restore an
unknown maiden to her home. And when I offered liberty (for I have
disobeyed and dared to seek his cell), he would not break the word he
had plighted, Father, unto thee. He bade me tempt him not, for death
were better than dishonor. Ah, canst thou doom him to a felon's death?
Then do it; and the hour that sees that true heart cease to beat, that
hour thou hast lost the child who would have loved and clung to thee
through life.

Ber. Child, thou hast moved me strangely. I would grant thy prayer, but
thou shalt never wed one of that accursed race. I bear no hate to the
young lord, save that he is thy country's foe; and if he gains his
freedom, he will win thee too. By Allah! it shall never be. Yet, listen,
Zara! If I grant his life wilt thou ask no more?

Zara. 'T is all I ask; grant me but this, and I will give thee all the
gratitude and love this poor heart can bestow.

Ber. Then 'tis done. Yet hold! the price that thou must pay for this
dear boon is large. Thou must swear never to see him more; must banish
love, nay, even memory of that fatal hour when first he saw and saved
thee. If thou wilt vow to wed none but one of thine own race, his life
and liberty are thine to give. Speak, Zara! Wilt thou do all this?

Zara. Oh, Father, Father, anything but this! Pity, gratitude, and love
have bound me to him, and the fetters thou hast cast around him are not
stronger than the deep affection he hath wakened in my heart. Ah, why
wilt thou not give life and liberty to him, and joy to thy child? I will
not take the vow.

Ber. Then his fate is sealed. Thy girl's heart is too selfish to forego
its own joy for his sake. Thou dost not love enough to sacrifice thy
happiness to win his freedom. I had thought more nobly of thee, Zara.

Zara. I _will_ be worthy all thou mayst have thought me; but thou canst
little know the desolation thou hast brought me. Thou shalt see how
deeply thou hast wronged me, and my love. I will bear all, suffer all,
if it will win the life and liberty of him I love so deeply and so well.

Ber. Would to Heaven thou hadst never seen this English stranger! Again,
and for the last time, Zara, I ask thee, Wilt thou leave the captive to
his fate, and seek another heart to love?

Zara. Never! I could mourn his death with bitter tears; but oh, my love
is worthy a deeper sacrifice! He shall never suffer one sad hour if I
may spare him, and never know that liberty to him will bring such
life-long sorrow unto me.

Ber. Then thou wilt take the vow I bid thee?

Zara. I will.

Ber. Then swear by all thou dost hold most dear, and by thy mother's
spirit, to wed one only of thy father's race; and through joy and
sorrow, thro' youth and age, to keep thy vow unbroken until death.

Zara. I swear; and may the spirit of that mother look in pity on the
child whose love hath made her life so dark a path to tread.

Ber. May thou find comfort, Zara! I would have spared thee this, but now
it cannot be. Yet thy reward shall well repay thee for thy sacrifice.
The English knight is free, and thou shalt restore him unto life and
liberty. May Allah bless thee, child!

                                                       [_Exit_ Bernardo.

Zara. 'Tis over! The bright dream is past. Oh, Ernest! few will love
thee as I have done; few suffer for thee all that I so gladly bear; and
none can honor thy true, noble heart more tenderly than she whose hard
lot it is to part from thee forever. Still amid my blighted hopes one
thought can brighten my deep sorrow,--this sacrifice but renders me
more worthy of thee, Ernest. Now farewell, love; my poor heart may
grieve for its lost joy, and look for comfort but in Heaven.


                                CURTAIN.


                             SCENE SEVENTH.

                              [_The cell._
                    Ernest _chained_. _Enter_ Zara.]

Zara. My lord, I seek thee with glad tidings.

Ernest. Why so pale, dear lady? Let no care for me dim thine eye, or
chase the roses from thy cheek. I would not barter this dark cell while
thou art here for a monarch's fairest home.

Zara. Thou wilt gladly leave it when I tell thee thy captivity is o'er,
and I am here to set thee free. I have won thy liberty, and thou mayst
fly with honor all unstained; for here my father grants thy pardon, and
now bids thee go.

Ernest. How can I thank thee for thy tenderness and pity; how may I best
show the gratitude I owe thee for the priceless boon of freedom thou
hast this day given?

Zara. Nay, spare thy thanks! I have but paid the debt I owed thee, and
'tis but life for life. Now haste; for ere the sunset hour thou must be
beyond the city gates, and on thy way to home and happiness [_takes off
his chains_]. And now, brave heart, thou art free, and Zara's task is
done [_turns to go_].

Ernest. Stay, lady! thou hast loosed the chains that bound these hands,
but oh, thou hast cast a stronger one around my heart; and with my
liberty comes love, and thoughts of thee, thy beauty, tenderness, and
all thou hast done for me. Lady, thou hast cast away my fetters, but I
am captive still [_he kneels_]. Ah, listen, Zara, while I tell thee of
the love that like a sweet flower hath blossomed in this dreary cell,
and made e'en liberty less precious than one word, one smile from thee.

Zara. I may not listen,--'tis too late, and 'tis a sin for me to hear
thee. Ah, ask me not why, but hasten hence, and leave me to the fate
thou canst not lighten.

Ernest. Never! I will not leave thee till I have won the right to cheer
and comfort her who has watched so fearlessly o'er me. Tell me all, and
let me share thy sorrow, Zara.

Zara. Ah, no! It cannot be! Thou canst not break my solemn vow. Go!
leave me! Heaven bless thee, and farewell!

Ernest. A solemn vow! Hast thou bound thyself to win my freedom? Then
never will I leave this cell till thou hast told me all. I swear it, and
I will keep the oath.

Zara. Ernest, I implore thee, fly, or it may be too late. Thou canst not
help me, and I will not tell thee. Ah, leave me! I cannot save thee if
thou tarry now.

Ernest. Never, till thou hast told me by what noble sacrifice thou hast
saved this worthless life of mine. Let me free thee from thy sorrow,
Zara, or help thee bear it. Thou hast won my pardon, and I will not go
till thou hast told me how.

Zara. And wilt thou promise to go hence when I have told thee all, and
let me have the joy of knowing thou art safe?

Ernest. I _will_ leave thee, Zara, if thou canst bid me go. Now tell me
all thy sorrow, love, and let me share it with thee.

Zara. Ernest, I sought to save thee; for I had learned to love the noble
stranger who had done so kind a deed for me. I sought to win my father
back to gratitude. I wept and sued in vain,--he would not grant thy
life, the boon for which I prayed. Alone I watched above thee, and when
the warrant for thy death was sent, I took it from his pillow and
destroyed it. Thou wast safe. My father charged me with the deed; and
when I told him all, he bid me love no more, and leave thee to thy fate.
He bid me show how strong my woman's heart could be, and told me if I
yet desired thy freedom, I might win it if I took a solemn vow to wed
none but of my father's race. I took the vow, and thou art free. Ah, no
more!--and let us part while yet I have the strength to say farewell.

Ernest. And is it yet too late? Canst thou not take back the vow, and
yet be mine? I cannot leave thee,--rather be a captive here till thou
shalt set me free. Come, Zara, fly with me, and leave the father who
would blight thy life to satisfy a fierce revenge. Ah, come and let me
win thee back to love and happiness.

Zara. Ernest, tempt me not. By that sad vow I swore by all my future
hopes, and by my dead mother's spirit, I would never listen to thy words
of love. And stern and cruel tho' my father be, I cannot leave him now.
Deep and bitter though this sorrow be, 'tis nobler far to bear the
burden than to cast it down and seek in idle joys to banish penitence;
for thorns would lie amid the flowers. Farewell! Forget me, and in happy
England find some other heart to gladden with thy love. Oh, may she
prove as fond and faithful as thy Moorish Zara.

Ernest. I will plead no more, nor add to that sad heart another sorrow.
I will be worthy such true love, and though we meet no more on earth, in
all my wanderings sweet tender thoughts of thee shall dwell within my
heart. I will bear my sorrow as a brave man should. The life thou hast
saved and brightened by thy love shall yet be worthy thee. Farewell! May
all the blessings a devoted heart can give rest on thee, dearest. Heaven
bless thee, and grant that we shall meet again.

                                                                [_Exit._

Zara. Gone, gone, forever! Oh, Father, couldst thou know the deep grief
and despair thy cruelty has brought two loving hearts, thou wouldst
relent, and call them back to happiness. Where can I look for comfort
now? [_Weeps._] I will seek the good priest who hath so long watched
above the motherless child. I must find rest in some kind heart, and he
will cheer, and teach me how to suffer silently. I will seek old
Hernando's cell.

                                                           [_Exit_ Zara.


                                CURTAIN.


                             SCENE EIGHTH.

                         [_Cell of the priest._
                   Hernando _reading_. _Enter_ Zara.]

Zara. Father, I have come for help and counsel. Wilt thou give it now as
thou hast ever done to her who comes to learn of thee how best to bear a
sorrow cheerfully and well?

Her. Speak on, dear child. I know thy sorrow. Thou hast loved, and
sacrificed thy own life's joy to win a brave heart's freedom. Thou hast
done nobly and well; thy sorrow will but render thee more worthy of the
happiness thou hast so truly won.

Zara. No, no; we shall never meet again on earth. Ah, holy father, they
who told thee of my love for one who well might win the noblest heart,
have told thee but the lightest part of the deep grief that bears me
down. Listen to me, Father, and then give me comfort if thou canst. To
win my lover's freedom, I have sworn a solemn oath to wed none but of my
father's race. Ernest came from sunny England, and I am the daughter of
a Moorish lord. Alas, 'tis vain to hope! The vow is given, and must be
kept.

Her. Ay, Zara, and it may be kept; but these sad tears will change to
sighs of joy when I have told thee all. Then thou wilt bless the vow
which brings thee sorrow now.

Zara. Oh, speak! Tell me what joy canst thou give to lighten grief like
mine! Give me not too much hope; for if it fail, despair thou canst not
banish will cast a deeper gloom o'er this poor heart. Now, tell me all.

Her. Calm thyself, poor child; it will be well with thee, and thou shalt
yet blossom in thy loveliness beside the heart thou hast won. I will
tell thee the true tale of thy fair mother's life. She loved and wed a
stranger, and thus won the hatred of her Moorish kindred, who sought to
win her for their prince's bride. And when she fled away with him to
whom her true heart's love was given, they vowed a fierce revenge. Years
passed away; she drooped and died. Thy father perished bravely on the
field of battle, and left his child to me. I stood beside thy mother's
dying bed, and vowed to guard her babe till thou wert safe among thy
Moorish kindred. I have watched thee well, and thou art worthy all the
happiness thy true heart hath won. Bernardo of Castile is but thy
mother's friend; thy father was an English lord, and thou canst keep thy
vow, and yet wed the brave young Englishman who hath won thy love.

Zara. Heaven pardon this wild, wilful heart that should mourn the sorrow
sent, when such deep joy as this is given. Ah, Father, how can I best
thank thee for the blessed comfort thou hast given?

Her. Thy joy, dear child, is my reward. When thou art safe with him
thou lovest, my task on earth is done, and I shall pass away with happy
thoughts of the sweet flower that bloomed beside the old man's path
through life, and cheered it with her love. Bless thee, my Zara, and may
the spirit of thy mother watch above thee in the happy home thou hast
gained by thy noble sacrifice.

Zara. Oh, Father, may the joy thy words have brought me brighten thine
own life as they have mine. The blessings of a happy heart be on thee.
Farewell, Father!

                                       [_Kneels, kisses his hand. Exit._


                                CURTAIN.


                              SCENE NINTH.

                         [_Hall in the castle._
                             _Enter_ Zara.]

Zara. Selim said the packet would be here [_takes the paper_]. Ah, 'tis
from Ernest! He is near me,--we may meet again [_opens letter and
reads_].

    Lady,--Thy father will this night betray the city to the
    Spanish king, who hath promised his life and liberty for this
    treachery. He will not keep his oath, and thy father will be
    slain. Then bid him fly, and save all he most loves, for no
    mercy will be shown to those within the walls when once the
    Spanish army enters there. Save thyself. Heaven bless thee.
                                                            Ernest.

Brave and true unto the last! O heart! thou mayst well beat proudly, for
thou hast won a noble prize in the love of Ernest L'Estrange. Time
flies; this night the city is betrayed, and we must fly. Bernardo, lord
of fair Castile, is a traitor. Ah, thank Heaven he is _not_ my father!
Yet for the love I bore him as a child, he shall be saved; and I will
cheer and comfort him now that the dark hour of his life has come.

                                                      [_Enter_ Bernardo.

Ber. Zara, why dost thou look thus on me? I come to bid thee gather all
thou dost most prize, for the army is before the city, and we may be
conquered ere to-morrow's sun shall set.

Zara. Seek not to deceive me. I know all; and the love I bore thee as my
father is now turned to pity and contempt for the traitor who will this
night betray Castile.

Ber. Girl, beware, lest thy wild folly anger me too far! What meanest
thou? Who has dared to tell thee this?

Zara. Thou wouldst betray, and art thyself betrayed; and were it not for
him whom thou hast wronged and hunted, ere to-morrow's dawn thou wouldst
be no more, and I a homeless wanderer. Here! read the scroll, and see
how well the false king keeps his word he plighted thee for thy deed of
treachery.

Ber. [_reads, and drops the paper_]. Lost! lost! Fool that I was to
trust the promise of a king! Disgraced, dishonored, and betrayed! Where
find a friend to help me now? [_Weeps._]

Zara. Here,--in the child who clings to thee through danger, treachery,
and death. Trust to the love of one whom once thou loved, and who still
longs to win thee back to happiness and honor.

Ber. Nay, child, I trust thee not. I have deceived thee and blighted all
thy hopes of love. Thou canst not care for the dishonored traitor. Go!
tell my guilt to those I would this night deliver up to death, and win a
deep revenge for all the wrong I have done thee. I am in thy power now.

Zara [_tearing the paper_]. And thus do I use it! No eye shall ever read
these words that do betray thee; no tongue call down dishonor on thy
head. Thy plot is not yet known, and ere to-night the gates may be well
guarded. Thou mayst fly in safety, and none ever know the stain upon thy
name. Thou whom I once called father, this is my revenge. I know all the
wrong thou hast done me,--the false vow I made to save the life of him I
loved. Zara's pity and forgiveness are thine, freely given; and her
prayer is that thou mayst find happiness in some fair land where only
gentle thoughts and loving memories may be thine.

Ber. Thou hast conquered, Zara; my proud heart is won by thy tender pity
and most generous pardon to one who hath so deeply wronged thee. But I
will repay the debt I owe thee. Thou shalt find again the loving father
and the faithful friend of thy young life. Thou shalt know how well
Bernardo can atone for all the sorrow he hath brought thee.

Zara. And I will be again thy faithful child.

Ber. 'Tis well; and now, my Zara, ere the dawn of another day we must
be far beyond the city gates. Selim shall guide us, and once free,
together we will seek another and a happier home. Courage, my child, and
haste thee. I will prepare all for our flight. Remember, when the turret
bell strikes seven, we meet again.

                                           [_Embraces_ Zara, _and exit_.

Zara. Farewell! I will not fail thee. Love, joy, and hope may fade, but
duty still remains. Oh, Ernest, couldst thou but see thy own true Zara
now! Wouldst thou could aid me! [_Enter_ Ernest _disguised_.] Ah, who
comes? A stranger. Speak! thine errand!

Ernest [_kneeling, presents a scroll_]. An English knight without the
gates did bid me seek thee with this scroll. May it please thee, read.

Zara [_opens and reads_].

    Lady,--Thou mayst trust the messenger. He will lead thee in
    safety to one who waits for thee. Delay not; danger is around
    thee.
        Thine,                                           Ernest.

Ah, here! so near me! Hope springs anew within my heart. Yes, I will go.
Homeless, friendless no more! Happy Zara! joy now awaits thee. Yet
stay!--my promise to Bernardo! I cannot leave him thus in danger, and
alone. What shall I do? Oh, Ernest, where art thou now?

Ernest [_throwing off disguise, and kneeling before her_]. Here, dearest
Zara! here at thy feet, to offer thee a true heart's fond devotion. To
thee I owe life, liberty, and happiness. Ah, let me thus repay the debt
of gratitude. Thy love shalt be my bright reward; my heart thy refuge
from all danger now. Wilt thou not trust me?

Zara. Ernest, thou knowest my heart is thine, and that to thee I trust
with joy my life and happiness. No vow stands now between us. I am
thine.

Ernest. Then let us hence. All is prepared; thy father shall be saved.
This night shall see us on our way to liberty; and in a fairer land we
may forget the danger, sorrow, and captivity that have been ours. Come,
dearest, let me lead thee.

Zara. I come; and, Ernest, 'mid the joy and bright hopes of the future,
let us not forget the sorrow and the sacrifice that hath won for us this
happiness; and mayst thou ne'er regret the hour that gave to thee the
love of the Moorish maiden, Zara.


                                CURTAIN.




                            THE GREEK SLAVE.


                              CHARACTERS.

    Constantine    .   .   .   .   .    _Prince betrothed to Irene._

    Queen Zelneth  .   .   .   .   .    _His Mother._

    Irene  .   .   .   .   .   .   .    _The Greek Princess._

    Ione   .   .   .   .   .   .   .    _The Greek Slave._

    Helon  .   .   .   .   .   .   .    _A Priest._

    Rienzi .   .   .   .   .   .   .    _A Traitor._


                            THE GREEK SLAVE.


                              SCENE FIRST.

                  [_Apartment in the palace of_ Irene.
                   Irene, _reclining upon a divan._]

Irene. How strange a fate is mine! Young, fair, and highborn, I may not
choose on whom I will bestow my love! Betrothed to a prince whom I have
never seen; compelled to honor and obey one whom my heart perchance can
never love, alas! alas!

And yet, they tell me that Constantine is noble, brave, and good. What
more can I desire? Ah, if he do but love me I shall be content [_noise
without; she rises_]. Hark! 'tis his messenger approaching with letters
from the queen, his mother. I will question this ambassador, and learn
yet more of this young prince, my future husband [_seats herself with
dignity_].

                         [_Enter_ Rienzi. _Kneels, presenting a letter._

Rienzi. The queen, my mistress, sends thee greeting, lady, and this
scroll. May it please thee, read. I await your pleasure.

Irene [_takes the letter and reads_]. My lord, with a woman's curiosity,
I fain would ask thee of thy prince, whose fate the gods have linked
with mine. Tell me, is he tender, true, and noble? Answer truly, I do
command thee.

Rienzi. Lady, he is tender as a woman, gentle as thy heart could wish,
just and brave as a king should ever be. The proudest lady in all Greece
were well matched with our noble Constantine.

Irene. And is he fair to look upon? Paint me his likeness, if thou
canst.

Rienzi. I can but ill perform that office. Thou must see if thou wouldst
rightly know him. The gods have blessed him with a fair and stately
form, a noble face, dark locks, and a king-like brow that well befits
the crown that rests upon it. This is he, our brave young prince; one to
honor, lady; one to trust and--love.

Irene. 'Tis a noble man thou hast painted. One more question and thou
mayst retire. Hath he ever spoken of her who is to be his wife? Nay, why
do I fear to ask thee? Does he love her?

Rienzi. Lady, I beg thee ask me not. Who could fail to love when once he
had looked upon thee?

Irene. Thou canst not thus deceive me. Answer truly: What doth he think
of this betrothal and approaching marriage?

Rienzi. He hath not seen thee, princess, knows of thee nothing save that
thou art beautiful, and one day to become his wife. But he is young, and
hath no wish to wed, and even his mother's prayers have failed to win
his free consent to this most cherished plan, that by uniting thy fair
kingdom unto his, he can gain power over other lands and beautify our
own.

Irene. Perchance his heart is given to another. Has no fair Grecian
maiden won the love he cannot offer me?

Rienzi. Nay, lady. He loves nought but his mother, his subjects, and his
native land. But soon we trust, when thou art by his side, a deeper love
will wake within him, and thou wilt be dearer than country, home, or
friends.

Irene. 'Tis well; thou mayst retire. I will send answer by thee to thy
queen, and seek some gift that may be worthy her acceptance. And now,
adieu! [Rienzi _bows and retires._] He does not love me, then, and I
must wed a cold and careless lord. And yet--so tender to all others, he
could not be unkind to me alone.

Oh, that I could win his love unknown, and then when truly mine, to cast
away the mask, and be myself again. Stay! let me think. Ah, yes; I see a
way. Surely the gods have sent the thought! I will disguise me as a
slave, and as a gift sent to his mother, I can see and learn to know
him well. I will return with the ambassador, Rienzi. I spake to him of a
gift. He little thinks in the veiled slave he shall bear away, the
princess is concealed. Yes, Constantine, as a nameless girl will Irene
win thy heart; and when as a wife she stands beside thee, thou shalt
love her for herself alone.

                                                             [_Tableau._

                                CURTAIN.


                             SCENE SECOND.

                 [_A room in the palace of_ The Queen.
                          The Queen _alone._]

Queen. Why comes he not? They told me that our ambassador to the
Princess Irene had returned, and bore a gift for me. Would that it were
a picture of herself! They say she is wondrous fair; and could my
wayward son but gaze upon her, his heart might yet be won. [_Enter_
Irene, _disguised as the slave,_ Ione.] Ah, a stranger! Who art thou?

                                   [Ione _kneels and presents a letter._

Queen [_reads the letter_]. Ah, welcome! Thy mistress tells me she hath
chosen from among her train the fairest and most faithful of her slaves,
as a gift for me. With thanks do I accept thee. Lift thy veil, child,
that I may see how our maidens do compare with thee. [Ione _lifts her
veil._ The Queen _gazes in surprise at her beauty._] Thou art too
beautiful to be a slave. What is thy name?

Ione. Ione; may it please thee, lady.

Queen. 'Tis a fit name for one so fair; and thy country, maiden?

Ione. With the princess, my kind mistress, have I dwelt for many happy
years; and honored by her choice now offer my poor services to thee.

Queen. What canst thou do, Ione? Thou art too fair and delicate to bear
the heavy water-urn or gather fruit.

Ione. I can weave garlands, lady; touch the harp, and sing sweet songs;
can bear thee wine, and tend thy flowers. I can be true and faithful,
and no task will be too hard for thy grateful slave, Ione.

Queen. Thou shalt find a happy home with me, and never grieve for thy
kind mistress. And now, listen while I tell thee what thy hardest task
shall be. I will confide in thee, Ione, for thou art no common slave,
but a true and gentle woman whom I can trust and love. Thou hath heard
thy lady is betrothed to my most noble son; and yet, I grieve to say, he
loves her not. Nay, in the struggle 'gainst his heart, hath lost all
gayety and strength, and even the name Irene will chase the smile away.
He loves no other, yet will not offer her his hand when the heart that
should go with it feels no love for her who is to be his wife. I honor
this most noble feeling; yet could he know the beauty and the worth of
thy fair lady, he yet might love. Thou shalt tell him this: all the kind
deeds she hath done, the gentle words she hath spoken; all her
loveliness and truth thou shalt repeat; sing thou the songs she loved;
weave round his cups the flowers she wears; and strive most steadfastly
to gain a place within his heart for love and Lady Irene. Canst thou,
wilt thou do this, Ione?

Ione. Dear lady, all that my poor skill can do shall yet be tried. I
will not rest till he shall love my mistress as she longs to be
beloved.

Queen. If thou canst win my son to health and happiness again, thou
shalt be forever my most loved, most trusted friend. The gods bless
thee, child, and give thy work success! Now rest thee here. I will come
ere long to lead thee to the prince.

                                                      [_Exit_ The Queen.

Ione. All goes well; and what an easy task is mine! To minister to him
whom I already love; to sing to him, weave garlands for his brow, and
tell him of the thoughts stirring within my heart. Yes, I most truly
long to see him whom all love and honor. The gods be with me, and my
task will soon be done.

                                CURTAIN.


                              SCENE THIRD.

                     [_Another room in the palace._
                     Constantine, _sad and alone._]

Con. Another day is well-nigh passed, and nearer draws the fate I dread.
Why must I give up all the bright dreams of my youth, and wed a woman
whom I cannot love?

They tell me she is young and fair, but I seek more than that in her who
is to pass her life beside me. Youth and beauty fade, but a noble
woman's love can never die. Oh, Irene, if thou couldst know how hard a
thing it is to take thee, princess though thou art! [_Enter_ Ione.] Ah,
lady, thou hast mistaken thy way! Let me lead thee to the queen's
apartments.

Ione. Nay, my lord; I have come from her. She bid me say it was her will
that I, her slave, should strive with my poor skill to while away the
time till she could join thee.

Con. Thou, a slave? By the gods! methought it was some highborn
lady,--nay, even the Princess Irene herself, seeking the queen, my
mother.

Ione. She was my mistress, and bestowed me as a gift upon the queen.
This scroll is from her hand. May it please thee, read it [_kneels and
presents letter_].

Con. Rise, fair maiden! I would rather listen to thy voice. May I ask
thee to touch yon harp? I am weary, and a gentle strain will sooth my
troubled spirit. Stay! let me place it for thee.

    [_Prince moves the harp and gazes upon_ Ione _as she sings and
        plays._

    The wild birds sing in the orange groves,
      And brightly bloom the flowers;
    The fair earth smiles 'neath a summer sky
      Through the joyous fleeting hours.
    But oh! in the slave girl's lonely heart,
      Sad thoughts and memories dwell,
    And tears fall fast as she mournfully sings,
      Home, dear home, farewell!

    Though the chains they bind be all of flowers,
      Where no hidden thorn may be,
    Still the free heart sighs 'neath its fragrant bonds,
      And pines for its liberty.
    And sweet, sad thoughts of the joy now gone,
      In the slave girl's heart shall dwell,
    As she mournfully sings to her sighing harp,
      Native land, native land, farewell!

Con. 'Tis a plaintive song. Is it thine own lot thou art mourning? If
so, thou art a slave no longer.

Ione. Nay, my lord. It was one my Lady Irene loved, and thus I thought
would please thee.

Con. Then never sing it more,--speak not her name! Nay, forgive me if I
pain thee. She was thy mistress, and thou didst love her. Was she kind
to thee? By what name shall I call thee?

Ione. Ione, your Highness. Ah, yes; she was too kind. She never spake a
cruel word, nor chid me for my many faults. Never can I love another as
I loved my gentle mistress.

Con. And is she very fair? Has she no pride, no passion or disdain to
mar her loveliness? She is a princess; is she a true and tender woman
too?

Ione. Though a princess, 'neath her royal robes there beats a warm, true
heart, faithful and fond, longing to be beloved and seeking to be worthy
such great joy when it shall come. Thou ask'st me of her beauty.
Painters place her face among their fairest works, and sculptors carve
her form in marble. Yes, she is beautiful; but 'tis not that thou
wouldst most care for. Couldst thou only know her!--pardon, but I think
thou couldst not bear so cold a heart within thy breast as now.

Con. Ah, do not cease! say on! There is that in the music of thy voice
that soothes and comforts me. Come, sit beside me, fair Ione, and I will
tell thee why I do not love thy princess.

Ione. You do forget, my lord, I am a slave; I will kneel here.

    [_Prince reclines upon a couch._ Ione _kneels beside him._

Con. Listen! From a boy I have been alone; no loving sister had I, no
gentle friend,--only cold councillors or humble slaves. My mother was a
queen, and 'mid the cares of State, tho' fondly loving me, her only son,
could find no time to win me from my lonely life.

Thus, tho' dwelling 'neath a palace roof with every wish supplied, I
longed most fondly for a friend. And now, ere long, a crown will rest
upon my head, a nation bend before me as their king. And now more
earnestly than ever do I seek one who can share with me the joys and
cares of my high lot,--a woman true and noble, to bless me with her
love.

Ione. And could not the Princess Irene be to thee all thou hast dreamed?

Con. I fear I cannot love her. They told me she was beautiful and
highborn; and when I sought to learn yet more, 'twas but to find she
was a cold, proud woman, fit to be a queen, but not a loving wife. Thus
I learned to dread the hour when I must wed. Yet 'tis my mother's will;
my country's welfare calls for the sacrifice, and I must yield myself.

Ione. They who told thee she was proud and cold do all speak falsely.
Proud she is to those who bow before her but to gain some honor for
themselves, and cold to such as love her for her royalty alone. But if a
fond and faithful heart, and a soul that finds its happiness in noble
deeds can make a queen, Irene is worthy of the crown she will wear. And
now, if it please thee, I will seek the garden; for thy mother bid me
gather flowers for the feast. Adieu, my lord! [_She bows, her veil
falls_; Constantine _hands it to her._] Nay, kings should not bend to
serve a slave, my lord.

Con. I do forget myself most strangely. There, take thy veil, and leave
me [_turns_ _aside_]. Nay, forgive me if I seem unkind, but I cannot
treat thee as a slave. Come, I will go with thee to the garden; thou art
too fair to wander unprotected and alone. Come, Ione [_leads her out_].

                                CURTAIN.


                             SCENE FOURTH.

                      [_The gardens of the palace._
                       Ione _weaving a garland._]

Ione. The rose is Love's own flower, and I will place it in the wreath I
weave for thee, O Constantine! Would I could bring it to thy heart as
easily! And yet, methinks, if all goes on as now, the slave Ione will
ere long win a prince's love. He smiles when I approach, and sighs when
I would leave him; listens to my songs, and saves the withered flowers I
gave him days ago. How gentle and how kind! Ah, noble Constantine, thou
little thinkest the slave thou art smiling on is the "proud, cold"
Princess Irene, who will one day show thee what a fond, true wife she
will be to thee [_sings_].

                                       [_Enter_ Helon; _kneels to_ Ione.

Ione. Helon, my father's friend! thou here! Ah, hush! Betray me not! I
am no princess now. Rise, I do beseech thee! Kneel not to me.

Helon. Dear lady, why this secrecy? What dost thou here, disguised, in
the palace where thou art soon to reign a queen?

Ione. Hark! is all still? Yes; none are nigh! Speak low. I'll tell thee
all. Thou knowest the young prince loves me not,--nay, do not sigh; I
mean the princess, not the slave Ione, as I now call myself. Well, I
learned this, and vowed to win the heart he could not give; and so in
this slave's dress I journeyed hither with Rienzi, the ambassador, as a
gift unto the queen.

Thus, as a poor and nameless slave, I seek to win the noble Constantine
to life and love. Dost understand my plot, and wilt thou aid me, Father
Helon?

Helon. 'Tis a strange thought! None but a woman would have planned it.
Yes, my child, I will aid thee, and thou yet shall gain the happiness
thy true heart well deserves. We will talk of this yet more anon. I
came hither to see the prince. They told me he was pale and ill, in
sorrow for his hated lot. Say, is this so?

Ione. Ah, yes, most true; and I am cause of all this sorrow. Father,
tell me, cannot I by some great deed give back his health, and never
have the grief of knowing that he suffered because I was his bride? How
can I avert this fate? I will do all, bear all, if he may be saved.

Helon. Grieve not, my child; he will live, and learn to love thee
fondly. The cares of a kingdom are too much for one so young; but he
would have happiness throughout his native land, and toiling for the
good of others he hath hidden his sorrow in his own heart, and pined for
tenderness and love. Thou hast asked if thou couldst save him. There is
one hope, if thou canst find a brave friend that fears no danger when a
good work leads him on. Listen, my daughter! In a deep and lonely glen,
far beyond the palace gates, there grows an herb whose magic power 'tis
said brings new life and strength to those who wreathe it round their
head in slumber. Yet none dare seek the spot, for spirits are said to
haunt the glen, and not a slave in all the palace but grows pale at
mention of the place. I am old and feeble, or I had been there long ere
this. And now, my child, who canst thou send?

Ione. I will send one who fears not spirit or demon; one who will gladly
risk e'en life itself for the brave young prince.

Helon. Blessed be the hand that gathers, thrice blessed be he who dares
the dangers of the way. Bring hither him thou speakest of. I would see
him.

Ione. She stands before thee. Nay, start not, Father. _I_ will seek the
dreaded glen and gather there the magic flowers that may bring health to
Constantine and happiness to me. I will away; bless, and let me go.

Helon. Thou, a woman delicate and fair! Nay, nay, it must not be, my
child! Better he should die than thou shouldst come to harm. I cannot
let thee go.

Ione. Thou canst not keep me now. Thou hast forgot I am a slave, and
none may guess beneath this veil a princess is concealed. I will take my
water-urn, and with the other slaves pass to the spring beyond the city
gates; then glide unseen into the haunted glen. Now, tell me how looks
the herb, that I may know it.

Helon. 'Tis a small, green plant that blossoms only by the broad, dark
stream, dashing among the rocks that fill the glen. But let me once
again implore thee not to go. Ah, fatal hour when first I told thee!
'Tis sending thee to thy death! Stay, stay, my child, or let me go with
thee.

Ione. It cannot be; do thou remain, and if I come not back ere set of
sun, do thou come forth to seek me. Tell Constantine I loved him, and so
farewell. I return successful, or I return no more.

                                                     [Ione _rushes out._

Helon. Thou brave and noble one to dare so much for one who loves thee
not! I'll go and pray the gods to watch above thee, and bring thee
safely back.

                                                          [_Exit_ Helon.

                                CURTAIN.


                              SCENE FIFTH.

                     [_A terrace beside the palace.
                          Enter_ Constantine.]

Con. Why comes she not? I watched her slender form when with the other
slaves she went forth to the fountain yonder. I knew her by the rosy
veil and snow-white arm that bore the water-urn. The morning sun shone
brightly on the golden hair, and seemed more beautiful for resting
there; and now 'tis nearly set, and yet she comes not. Why should I
grieve because my mother's slave forgets me? Shame on thee, Constantine!
How weak and childish have I grown! This fever gives no rest when Ione
is not here to sing sweet songs, and cheer the weary hours. Ah, she
comes! [_Enter_ Ione _with basket of flowers._] Where hast thou been,
Ione? The long day passed so slowly, and I missed thee sadly from my
side. But thou art pale; thy locks are damp! What has chanced to thee?
Speak, I beseech thee!

Ione. 'Tis nothing; calm thyself, my lord. I am well, and bring thee
from the haunted glen the magic flowers whose power I trust will win
thee health and happiness. May it please thee to accept them [_kneels,
and gives the flowers_].

Con. Thou, thou, Ione? Hast thou been to that fearful spot, where mortal
foot hath feared to tread? The gods be blessed, thou art safe again! How
can I thank thee? Ah, why didst thou risk so much for my poor life? It
were not worth the saving if thine were lost.

Ione. My lord, a loving nation looks to thee for safety and protection.
I am but a feeble woman, and none would grieve if I were gone; none weep
for the friendless slave, Ione.

Con. Oh, say not thus! Tears would be shed for thee, and one heart
would grieve for her who risked so much for him. Speak not of death or
separation, for I cannot let thee go.

Ione. I will not leave thee yet, till I have won thy lost health back.
The old priest, Helon, bid me seek the herbs, and bind them in a garland
for thy brow. If thou wilt place it there, and rest awhile, I am repaid.

Con. If thy hand gave it, were it deadly poison I would place it there.
Now sing, Ione; thy low sweet voice will bring me pleasant dreams, and
the healing sleep will be the deeper with thy music sounding in mine
ears.

    [_The prince reclines upon the terrace._ Ione _weaves a garland
        and sings._

    Flowers, sweet flowers, I charge thee well,
    O'er the brow where ye bloom cast a healing spell;
    From the shadowy glen where spirits dwell,
    I have borne thee here, thy power to tell.
    Flowers, pale flowers, o'er the brow where ye lie,
    Cast thy sweetest breath ere ye fade and die.

    [Ione _places the garland on the head of the prince, who falls
        asleep. She sits beside him softly singing._

                                CURTAIN.


                              SCENE SIXTH.

                       [The Queen's _apartment._
                          The Queen _alone._]

Queen. 'Tis strange what power this slave hath gained o'er Constantine.
She hath won him back to health again, and never have I seen so gay a
smile upon his lips as when she stood beside him in the moonlight
singing to her harp. And yet, tho' well and strong again, he takes no
interest in his native land. He comes no more to council hall or feast,
but wanders 'mong his flowers with Ione. How can I rouse him to the
danger that is near! The Turkish sultan and his troops are on their way
to conquer Greece, and he, my Constantine, who should be arming for the
fight, sits weaving garlands with the lovely slave girl! Ah, a thought
hath seized me! Why cannot she who hath such power o'er him rouse up
with noble words the brave heart slumbering in his breast? I hear her
light step in the hall. Ione, Ione,--come hither! I would speak with
thee.

                                                          [_Enter_ Ione.

Ione. Your pleasure, dearest lady.

Queen. Ione, thou knowest how I love thee for the brave deeds thou hast
done. Thou hast given health unto my son, hath won him back to
happiness. Thou hast conquered his aversion to the princess, and he will
gladly wed her when the hour shall come. Is it not so?

Ione. Dear lady, that I cannot tell thee. He never breathes her name,
and if I speak of her as thou hast bid me, he but sighs, and grows more
sad; and yet I trust, nay, I well know that when he sees her he will
gladly give his hand to one who loves him as the princess will. Then do
not grieve, but tell thy slave how she may serve thee.

Queen. Oh, Ione, if thou couldst wake him from the quiet dream that
seems to lie upon his heart. His country is in danger, and he should be
here to counsel and command. Go, tell him this in thine own gentle
words; rouse him to his duty, and thou shalt see how brave a heart is
there. Thou hast a wondrous power to sadden or to cheer. Oh, use it
well, and win me back my noble Constantine! Canst thou do this, Ione?

Ione. I will; and strive most earnestly to do thy bidding. But of what
danger didst thou speak? No harm to him, I trust?

Queen. The Turkish troops are now on their way to carry woe and
desolation into Greece, and he, the prince, hath taken no part in the
councils. His nobles mourn at his strange indifference, and yet he heeds
them not.

I know not why, but some new happiness hath come to him, and all else is
forgot. But time is passing. I will leave thee to thy work, and if thou
art successful, thou wilt have won a queen's most fervent gratitude.
Adieu, my child!

                                                      [_Exit_ The Queen.

Ione. Yes, Constantine, thy brave heart shall awake; and when thy
country is once safe again, I'll come to claim the love that now I feel
is mine.

                                                           [_Exit_ Ione.

                                CURTAIN.


                            SCENE SEVENTH.

                       [_Apartment in the palace.
                 Enter_ Ione _with sword and banner._]

Ione. Now may the gods bless and watch above thee, Constantine; give
strength to thine arm, courage to thy heart, and victory to the cause
for which thou wilt venture all. Ah, could I but go with thee, thy
shield would then be useless, for with mine own breast would I shelter
thee, and welcome there the arrows meant for thee.

He comes; now let me rouse him from this dream, and try my power o'er
his heart.

                                                   [_Enter_ Constantine.

Con. What high thoughts stirring in thy heart hath brought the clear
light to thine eye, Ione, the bright glow to thy cheek? What mean these
arms? Wouldst thou go forth to meet the Turks? Thy beauty would subdue
them sooner than the sword thou art gazing on so earnestly.

Ione. Thou hast bade me speak, my lord, and I obey; but pardon thy slave
if in her wish to serve she seem too bold. Thy mother and thy subjects
wonder at thy seeming indifference when enemies are nigh. Thine army
waits for thee to lead them forth; thy councillors sit silent, for their
prince is gone. While grief and terror reign around, he is wandering
'mong his flowers, or listening to the music of his harp. Ah, why is
this? What hath befallen thee? Thou art no longer pale and feeble, yet
there seems a spell set on thee. Ah, cast it off, and show them that
thou hast no fear.

Con. I am no coward, Ione; but there is a spell upon me. 'Tis a holy
one, and the chain that holds me here I cannot break,--for it is _love_.
I have lost the joy I once took in my subjects and my native land, and
am content to sit beside thee, and listen to the music of thy voice.

Ione. Then let that voice arouse thee. Oh, fling away the chain that
keeps thee from thy duty, and be again the noble prince who thought but
of his people. Oh, let me plead for those who sorrow for thy care, and
here let me implore thee to awaken from thy dream and be thyself again
[_she kneels_].

Con. Oh, not to me! Rise, I beseech thee, rise! Thou hast led me to my
duty; I will obey thee.

Ione. I would have thee gird on thy sword, and with shield upon thine
arm, and banner in thy hand, go forth and conquer like a king. Show
those who doubt thee that their fears are false,--that thou art worthy
of their love. Lead forth thy troops, and save thy country from the woe
that now draws nigh. Victory surely will be theirs when thou shalt lead
them on.

Con. Give me my sword, unfurl my banner, and say farewell. I will return
victorious, or no more. Thy voice hath roused me from my idle but most
lovely dream, and thy brave words shall cheer me on till I have won the
honor of my people back. Pity and forgive my fault; and ah, remember in
thy prayers one who so passionately loves thee. Farewell! farewell!

    [_Kisses her robe and rushes out._ Ione _sinks down._

                                CURTAIN.


                             SCENE EIGHTH.

                         [_On the battlements._
                     Ione, _watching the battle._]

Ione. The battle rages fiercely at the city gates, and the messengers
are fearful of defeat. I cannot rest while Constantine is in such peril.
Let me watch here and pray for him. Ah, I can see his white plume waving
in the thickest of the fight, where the blows fall heaviest and the
danger is most great. The gods guard him in this fearful hour! See how
small the brave band grows; they falter and retreat. One blow now
bravely struck may turn the tide of battle. It shall be done! I will arm
the slaves now in the palace, and lead them on to victory or death. We
may win--and if _not_, I shall die in saving thee, Constantine!

                                                    [Ione _rushes out._

                                CURTAIN.


                             SCENE NINTH.

                         [_The castle terrace.
                          Enter_ Constantine.]

Con. The victory is ours, and Greece again is free, thanks to the gods,
and to the brave unknown who led on my slaves, and saved us when all
hope seemed gone. Who could have been the fearless stranger? Like an
avenging spirit came the mysterious leader, carrying terror and
destruction to the Turkish ranks. My brave troops rallied and we won the
day. Yet when I sought him, he was gone, and none could tell me where.
He hath won my deepest gratitude, and the honor of all Greece for this
brave deed.

But where is Ione? Why comes she not to bid me welcome home? Ah, could
she know that thoughts of her gave courage to my heart, and strength to
my weak arm, and led me on that I might be more worthy her! Ah, yonder
comes the stranger; he may not think to see me here. I will step aside.

           [Constantine _retires. Enter_ Ione _in armor, bearing sword._

Ione. The gods be thanked! the brave young prince hath conquered. From
the flying Turk I won his banner back, and now my task is done. I must
fling by this strange disguise and be myself again. I must bind up my
wound and seek to rest, for I am faint and weary. Ah, what means this
sudden dimness of mine eyes, this faintness--can it be death? 'T is
welcome,--Constantine, it is for thee!

                                [Ione _faints_; Constantine _rushes in._

Con. Ione, Ione, look up and listen to the blessings of my grateful
heart for all thou hast dared and done for me. So pale, so still! Ah,
must she die now I have learned to love so fervently and well? Ione,
awake!

                                                         [Ione _rouses._

Ione. Pardon this weakness; I will retire, my lord.

Con. Ah, do not leave me till I have poured out my gratitude. My country
owes its liberty to thee: then let me here before thee offer up my
country's thanks, and tell thee what my heart hath striven to hide. Dear
Ione, listen, I do beseech thee! [_Kneels._]

Ione. My lord, remember Lady Irene.

Con. [_starting up_]. Why comes she thus between my happiness and me?
Why did she send thee hither? Thou hast made the chain that binds her to
me heavier to be borne; the sorrow of my heart more bitter still. Nay,
do not weep. I will be calm. Thou art pale and faint, Ione,--lean thus
on me.

Ione. Nay, leave me; I cannot listen to thee. Go, I pray thee, go!

Con. Not till thou hast pardoned me. I have made thee weep, and every
tear that falls reproaches me for my rash words. Forget them, and
forgive me.

Ione. Ask not forgiveness of thy slave, my lord. 'Tis I who have
offended. And think not thus of Lady Irene, who in her distant home hath
cherished tender thoughts of one whom all so honored. Think of her grief
when she shall find thee cold and careless, and shall learn that he who
should most love and cherish, deems her but a burden, and hates the wife
whom he hath vowed to wed. Ah, think of this, and smile no more upon the
slave who may not listen to her lord.

Con. Thou art right, Ione. I will obey thee, and seek to hide my sorrow
within my lonely breast. Teach me to love thy mistress as I ought, and I
will sacrifice each selfish wish, and be more worthy thy forgiveness,
and a little place within thy heart. Trust me, I will speak no more of
my unhappy love, and will seek thee only when thine own voice bids me
come.

The sunlight of thy presence is my truest joy, and banishment from thee
the punishment my wilful heart deserves. Rest here, Ione, and weep for
me no more. I am happy if thou wilt but smile again. Farewell, and may
the gods forever bless thee! [_Kisses her robe, and rushes out._]

                                CURTAIN.


                             SCENE TENTH.

                      [_A gallery in the palace._
                     _Enter_ Ione _with flowers._]

Ione. How desolate and dreary all hath grown! The garden once so bright
hath lost its beauty now, for Constantine no longer walks beside me. The
palace rooms seem sad and lonely, for his voice no longer echoes there,
and the music of his harp is never heard. His pale face haunts me
through all my waking hours, and his mournful eyes look on me in my
dreams. But soon his sorrow all shall cease, for nearer draws the day
when Princess Irene comes to claim the heart so hardly won, and will by
constancy and love so faithfully reward. Hark! I hear a step. It is
Rienzi. How shall I escape,--my veil is in the garden! He knows me and
will discover all. Stay! this curtain shall conceal me [_hides within
the drapery_].

                                       [_Enter_ Rienzi _stealthily._

Rienzi. How! not here? I told the messenger to meet me in the gallery
that leads from the garden. Curses on him! he hath delayed, and were I
discovered in this part of the palace, all might be betrayed. I'll wait,
and if he comes not, I'll bear the message to the friends myself, and
tell the bold conspirators we meet to-night near the haunted glen, to
lay yet farther plans. We must rid the kingdom of the prince, who will
be made ere long our king, for his bridal with the Princess Irene draws
more near. But ere the royal crown shall rest upon his brow, that head
shall be laid low. The queen will soon follow her young son, and then
we'll seize the kingdom and rule it as we will. Hark! methought I heard
a sound. I may be watched. I'll stay no longer, but seek the place
myself [_steals out and disappears in the garden_].

                                    [Ione _comes from her hiding-place._

Ione. Surely the gods have sent me to watch above thee, Constantine, and
save thee from the danger that surrounds thee. I will haste to tell him
all I have discovered. Yet, no! Rienzi may escape, and I can charge none
other with the crime. They meet near the haunted glen, and not a slave
would follow even his brave prince to that dark spot. How can I aid him
to discover those who seek to do him harm? Stay! I will go alone. Once
have I dared the dangers of the way to save thy life, Constantine; again
I'll tread the fearful path, and watch the traitors at their evil work.
It shall be done! I will dare all, and fail not, falter not, till thou
who art dearer to me than life itself art safe again.

                                                   [_Exit._

                                CURTAIN.


                            SCENE ELEVENTH.

            [_A wood near the haunted glen._ Ione _shrouded
             in white glides in and conceals herself among
                       the trees. Enter_ Rienzi.]

Rienzi [_looking fearfully about_]. 'Tis a wild and lonely spot, and
'tis said strange spirits have been seen to wander here. Why come they
not? 'Tis past the hour, and I who stand undaunted when the fiercest
battle rages round me, now tremble with strange fear in this dim spot.
Shame on thee, Rienzi, there is nought to fear [_opens a scroll and
reads_]. Here are their names, all pledged to see the deed accomplished.
'Tis a goodly list and Constantine must fall when foes like these are
round him. [Ione _appears within the glen._

Ha! methought I heard a sound! Nay, 'twas my foolish fancy. Spirits, I
defy thee!

Ione. Beware! Beware!

Rienzi. Ye gods, what's that? It was a voice. [_Rushes wildly towards
the glen, sees_ Ione, _drops scroll and dagger._] 'Tis a spirit! The
gods preserve me, I will not stay! [_Exit in terror._]

                                                          [_Enter_ Ione.

Ione. Saved! saved! Here are the traitors' names, and here Rienzi's
dagger to prove my story true. Now hence with all my speed, no time is
to be lost! These to thee, Constantine, and joy unfailing to my own fond
heart.

                                                           [_Exit_ Ione.

                                CURTAIN.


                             SCENE TWELFTH.

                       [_Apartment in the palace.
                          Enter_ Constantine.]

Con. This little garland of pale, withered flowers is all now left me of
Ione, faded like my own bright hopes, broken like my own sad heart. Yet
still I cherish it, for her dear hand wove the wreath, and her soft eyes
smiled above the flowers as she twined them for my brow. Those happy
days are passed; she comes no more, but leaves me sorrowing and alone.
And yet 'tis better so. The princess comes to claim my hand, and then
'twill be a sin to watch Ione, to follow her unseen, and listen to her
voice when least she thinks me near. The gods give me strength to bear
my trial worthily, and suffer silently the greatest sorrow life can
give,--that of losing her [_leans sadly upon the harp_].

                                                          [_Enter_ Ione.

Ione. My lord--He does not hear me, how bitter and how deep must be his
grief, when the voice that most he loves falls thus unheeded on his ear.
My lord--

Con. [_starting_]. And thou art really here? Ah, Ione, I have longed for
thee most earnestly. Ah, forgive me! In my joy I have disobeyed, and
told the happiness thy presence brings. What wouldst thou with me?

Ione. My lord, I have strange tidings for thine ear.

Con. Oh, tell me not the Princess Irene hath arrived!

Ione. Nay, 'tis not that. I have learned the secret of a fearful plot
against thy life. Rienzi, and a band of other traitors, seek to win thy
throne and take the life of their kind prince.

Con. It cannot be, Ione! They could not raise their hands 'gainst one
who hath striven for their good. They cannot wish the life I would so
gladly have lain down to save them. Who told thee this, Ione? I
cannot--no, I will not think they could prove so ungrateful unto their
prince.

Ione. I cannot doubt the truth of this, my lord, for one whose word I
trust learned it, and followed to the haunted glen, there saw Rienzi,
whose guilty conscience drove him from the place, leaving behind this
scroll whereon are all the traitors' names. And this dagger,--'tis his
own, as thou mayst see [_shows dagger and scroll_].

Con. I can no longer doubt; but I had rather have felt the dagger in my
heart than such a wound as this. The names are few; I fear them not, and
will ere long show them a king may pardon all save treachery like this.
But tell the name of thy brave friend who hath discovered this deep
treason, and let me offer some reward to one who hath watched above me
with such faithful care.

Ione. Nay, my lord, no gift, no thanks are needed. 'Tis a true and
loving subject, who is well rewarded if his king be safe.

Con. Thou canst not thus deceive me. It was thine own true heart that
dared so much to save my life. Oh, Ione, why wilt thou make me love thee
more by deeds like these,--why make the sorrow heavier to bear, the
parting sadder still?

Ione. Thou dost forget, my lord, I have but done my duty. May it please
thee, listen to a message I bear thee from the queen.

Con. Say on. I will gladly listen to thy voice while yet I may.

Ione. She bid me tell thee that to-morrow, ere the sun shall set, the
Princess Irene will be here. [Constantine _starts and turns aside._]
Forgive me that I pain thee, but I must obey. Yet, farther: thy bride
hath sent her statue as a gift to thee, and thou wilt find it in the
queen's pavilion. She bid me say she prayed thee to go look upon it, and
remember there thy solemn vow.

Con. Oh, Ione, could she send none but thee to tell me this? To hear it
from thy lips but makes the tidings heavier to bear. Canst thou bid me
go, and vow to love one whom I have learned to hate? Canst thou bid me
leave thee for a fate like this?

Ione. My lord, thou art soon to be a king; then for thy country's sake,
remember thy hand is plighted to the princess, and let no kindly
thoughts of a humble slave keep thy heart from its solemn duty.

Con. I am no king,--'tis I who am the slave, and thou, Ione, are more to
me than country, home, or friends. Nay, do not turn away,--think only of
the love I bear thee, and listen to my prayer.

Ione. I must not listen. Hast thou so soon forgot the vow thou made that
no word of love should pass thy lips? Remember, 'tis a slave who stands
before thee.

Con. Once more thou shalt listen to me, Ione, and then I will be still
forever. Thou shalt be my judge, thy lips _shall_ speak my fate. I
cannot love the princess. Wouldst thou bid me vow to cherish her while
my heart is wholly thine? Wouldst thou ask me to pass through life
beside her with a false vow on my lips, and, with words of love I do not
feel, conceal from her the grief of my divided heart? Must I give up all
the bright dreams of a happier lot, and feel that life is but a bitter
struggle, a ceaseless longing but for thee? Rather bid me to forget the
princess and bind with Love's sweet chains the slave unto my side,--my
bride forever.

Ione. The _slave_ Ione can never be thy bride, and thou art bound by
solemn vows to wed the Princess Irene. My duty and thine honor are more
precious than a poor slave's love. Banish all thoughts of her, and prove
thyself a faithful lord unto the wife who comes now trustingly to thee.
Ask thine own heart if life could be a bitter pilgrimage, when a
sacrifice like this had been so nobly made. A tender wife beside thee,
a mother's blessing on thy head,--oh, were not this a happier fate than
to enjoy a short, bright dream of love, but to awake and find thy
heart's peace gone, thy happiness forever fled; to see the eyes that
once looked reverently upon thee now turned aside, and lips that spoke
but tender words now whisper scornfully of broken vows thou wert not
brave enough to keep. Forgive me, but I cannot see the prince so false
to his own noble heart. Cast off this spell; forget me, and Irene shall
win thee back to happiness.

Con. Never! All her loveliness can never banish the pure, undying love I
bear to thee. Oh, Ione, canst thou doubt its truth, when I obey thee now
and prove how great thy power o'er my heart hath grown? Oh, let the
sacrifice win from _thee_ one gentle thought, one kind remembrance of
him whose life thou hast made so beautiful for a short hour. And in my
loneliness, sweet memories of thee shall cheer and gladden, and I will
bear all for thy dear sake. And now farewell. Forgive if I have grieved
thee, and at parting grant me one token to the silent love that
henceforth must lie unseen within my heart. Farewell, Ione! [_He kisses
her._]

Ione [_falling at his feet_]. Ah, forgive me,--here let me seek thy
pardon for the grief I have brought thee. May all the happiness that
earth can bring be ever thine. But, if all others should forsake thee,
in thine hour of sorrow remember there is one true heart that cannot
change. Oh, may the gods bless thee! 'Tis my last wish, last prayer
[_weeps_]. Farewell!

Con. Stay! I would claim from thee one little word which hath the power
to brighten e'en my sorrow. I have never asked thee, for I thought my
heart had read it in thine eyes that looked so kindly on me; in the lips
that spoke such gentle words of hope. But ah! tell me now at parting
dost thou _love_ me, dear Ione?

Ione. I do, most fondly, truly love thee.

Con. Ione, thy voice hath been a holy spell to win me to my duty. Thy
love shall keep me pure and faithful, till we meet above. Farewell!

Ione. Farewell!--and oh, remember how I have loved thee; and may the
memory of all I have borne for thee win thy pardon for any wrong I may
have done thee. The princess will repay the grief the slave hath caused
thy noble heart. Remember Ione, and be true.

                                                                [_Exit._

Con. Gone, gone, now lost to me forever! Remember thee! Ah, how can I
ever banish thy dear image from this heart that now hath grown so
desolate? I will be true. None shall ever know how hard a struggle hath
been mine, that I might still be worthy thee. Yes, Irene, I will strive
to love thee, and may the gods give me strength; but Ione, Ione, how can
I give thee up! [_Picks up a flower_ Ione _has dropped, and puts it in
his bosom and goes sadly out._]

                                CURTAIN.


                           SCENE THIRTEENTH.

                [The Queen's _pavilion. A dark curtain
              hangs before an alcove. Enter_ Constantine.]

Con. The hour hath come when I shall gaze upon the form of her who hath
cast so dark a shadow o'er my life. Beautiful and young, and blessed
with all that makes her worthy to be loved, and yet I fear I have not
taught my wilful heart the tenderness I ought.

I fear to draw aside the veil that hides her from me, for I cannot
banish the sweet image that forever floats before mine eyes. Ione's soft
gaze is on me, and the lips are whispering, "I love thee!" But I have
promised to be true,--no thoughts of her must lead me now astray. My
fate is here [_approaches the curtain_]. Let me gaze upon it, and think
gently of the wife so soon to be mine own. Why do I fear? Courage, my
heart! [_He draws aside the curtain, and_ Ione, _veiled, appears as a
statue upon its pedestal._] Another veil to raise! How hard the simple
deed hath grown. One last sweet thought of thee, Ione, and then I will
no longer falter. [_He turns away and bows his head._]

Ione. Constantine! [_He starts, and gazes in wonder as the statue,
casting aside the veil, comes down and kneels._] Here at thy feet kneels
thy hated bride,--the "proud, cold princess," asking thee to pardon all
the sorrow she hath given thee. Ah, smile upon me, and forget Ione, who
as a slave hath won thy love, but as the princess will repay
it,--forgive, and love me still!

Con. Thou, thou Irene,--she whom I so feared to look upon? Ah, no!--thou
art Ione, the gentle slave. Say am I dreaming? Why art thou here to make
another parting the harder to be borne? Fling by thy crown and be Ione
again.

Irene [_rising_]. Listen, Constantine, and I will tell thee all. I am
Irene. In my distant home I learned thou didst not love me, and I vowed
to win thy heart before I claimed it. Thus, unknown, the proud princess
served thee as a slave, and learned to love thee with a woman's fondest
faith. I watched above thee that no harm should fall; I cheered and
gladdened life for thee, and won the heart I longed for. I knew the
sorrow thou wouldst feel, but tried thy faith by asking thee to
sacrifice thy love and keep thine honor stainless. Here let me offer up
a woman's fondest trust and most undying love. Wilt thou believe, and
pardon mine offence? [_Kneels again before him._]

Con. Not at my feet, Irene!--'tis I who should bend low before thee,
asking thy forgiveness. For all thou hast dared for me; for every
fearless deed; for every loving thought, all I can lay before thee is a
fond and faithful heart, whose reverence and love can never die, but
through the pilgrimage of life shall be as true and tender as when I
gave it to the slave Ione [_embraces_ Irene].

                                                             [_Tableau._

                                CURTAIN.




                                  ION.


                              NOTE TO ION.

This play was found too uninteresting for presentation, and was left
unfinished, but is here given as a specimen of what the young authors
considered _very fine_ writing.

The drama was, of course, to end well. Cleon, being free, at once
assembles a noble army, returns to conquer Mohammed and release Ion, who
weds the lovely Zuleika, becomes king, and "lives happily forever
after."


                              CHARACTERS.


    Mohammed   .   .   .   .   .   .    _The Turk._

    Cleon  .   .   .   .   .   .   .    _Prince of Greece._

    Ion    .   .   .   .   .   .   .    _Son of Cleon._

    Adrastus   .   .   .   .   .   .    _A Priest._

    Hafiz  .   .   .   .   .   .   .    _Turkish Envoy._

    Hassan .   .   .   .   .   .   .    _A Slave._

    Murad  .   .   .   .   .   .   .    _A Slave._

    Abdallah   .   .   .   .   .   .    _A Slave._

    Iantha .   .   .   .   .   .   .    _Wife of Cleon._

    Zuleika    .   .   .   .   .   .    _Daughter of Mohammed._

    Medon  .   .   .   .   .   .   .    _A Slave._

    Selim  .   .   .   .   .   .   .    _A Slave._


                                  ION.


                              SCENE FIRST.

                    [_Room in the palace of_ Cleon.
                        Iantha _and_ Adrastus.]

Iantha. How wearily the days wear on, and the heavy hours so fraught
with doubt press like death upon my aching heart. To the young, the
fair, the happy, life is a blissful dream, filled with bright joys; for
hope like a star beams on their pathway. But to the grief-worn heart,
worn with weary watching, vexed with sad cares, whose hours are filled
with fear, and ever thronging sorrows, whose star burns with a dim
uncertain light,--oh, weary, weary is the pilgrimage; joyless the
present, dark the future; and the sooner all is o'er, the better.

Adrastus. Daughter, thou hast forgot. The radiant star may pale and
fade, but He who giveth it its light still liveth. Turn unto Him thy
worn and bleeding heart, and comfortless thou shalt not be.

Iantha. Father, I cannot. When I would pray for resignation, words fail
me, and my soul is filled with murmuring, while round me throng visions
of battle-fields and death. Ever comes before me the form of Cleon,--no
longer bright and beautiful as when, burning with hope and confidence in
his high calling, he went forth to conquer or to die; but fallen,
bleeding, perhaps dead, or a captive in the dungeon of the pagan, doomed
to waste in hopeless misery the long years of his manhood. And my
boy,--what will be his fate? Father, can I think on this and pray?

Adrastus. 'Tis hard, Iantha; but to His aid alone canst thou look up to
save thy husband from the horrors of a bloody war. Call on Him, and He,
the merciful, will in thy great need be near thee.

                                                         [_Enter_ Medon.

Medon. A stranger craveth audience.

Iantha [_rushing forward_]. A stranger! Cometh he from my lord?

Medon. I know not, lady; but as a messenger is he clad, and with great
haste demandeth speech of thee, saying he bore tidings of great import.

Iantha. Admit him instantly. [_Exit_ Medon.] Father, do thou follow, and
speed him hither.

Adrastus. I hasten to obey thee. Bear a brave heart, my daughter. I feel
that hope is near.

                                                       [_Exit_ Adrastus.

Iantha [_joyfully_]. Hope,--thrice blessed word!--wilt thou indeed visit
this doubting heart once more, and sweeten the cup thou hast so long
forsaken? [_Enter_ Hafiz.] Welcome! comest thou from my lord? Thy
tidings speedily!

Hafiz. To the wife of Cleon, late commander of the rebel Greeks, am I
sent to bear tidings of their defeat by Mohammed, now master of all
Greece.

Adrastus. And my lord,--the noble Cleon?

Hafiz. Betrayed, defeated, and now lying under sentence of immediate
death in the dungeon of the Sultan.

Iantha. Lost! lost! lost! [_Falls fainting on a couch._]

                                                      [_Enter_ Adrastus.

Adrastus. Daughter, look up!--there is yet hope. There is no time for
rest. Up! rouse thy brave, till now, unconquered heart and cast off this
spell. And thou, slave, hence,--away!

                                                          [_Exit_ Hafiz.

Iantha [_rousing_]. Defeated, imprisoned, condemned,--words unto one
heart fraught with such dire despair. Tell me, Father, oh, tell me
truly, do I dream?

                                   [_Enter_ Ion, _who stands listening._

Adrastus. 'Tis no dream. The rough soldier did but tell thee in rude
speech, what I was hastening in more guarded words to bear thee. 'Tis
true; thy lord is in Mohammed's power, a victim to the perfidy of
pagans, and doomed unto a speedy death. Nay, Iantha, shrink not, but as
a soldier's wife, glory in the death of thy brave knight, dying for his
country; and in his martyrdom take to thy soul sweet comfort.

Iantha. Comfort! Oh, man, thou little knowest woman's heart! What to her
is glory, when him she loveth is torn from her forever? What to the
orphan is the crown of martyrdom, the hero's fame, the praise of
nations, the homage of the great? Will they give back the noble dead,
heal the broken heart, tear bitter memories from the wounded soul to
whom earth is desolate? Nay, Father, nay. Oh, Cleon, would I could die
with thee!

Adrastus. This mighty sorrow o'erpowers her reason and will destroy all
hope. Iantha, daughter, rouse thyself; let the love thou dost bear thy
lord now aid in his deliverance. From the wealth of thy heart's true
affection, devise thou some way to save him.

Iantha. Aid me, Father; I have no power of thought. I will trust all to
_thee_.

                                                      [Ion _approaches._

Adrastus. I know not what to counsel thee; my life hath ill fitted me to
deal with soldiers and with kings. But if some messenger--

Iantha. Nay, it will not serve. None will dare brave the anger of the
pagan, and death were the doom of such as approach him other than as a
slave. And yet,--perchance he might relent. Oh, were there some true
heart, fearless and loving, to aid me now in mine hour of distress!
Where can I look for help?

Ion [_coming forward_]. Here, Mother,--_I_ will seek the camp of
Mohammed.

Iantha. Thou!--my Ion, my only one. No, no; it may not be,--thy tender
youth, thy gentle, untried spirit. 'Tis madness e'en to think on!

Ion. Mother, am I not a soldier's son, cradled 'mid warriors? Runs not
the blood of heroes in these veins? Are not my father's deeds, his
bright, untarnished name, my proud inheritance? What though this tender
form is yet untried; what though these arms have never borne the
knightly armor? No victor's laurels rest on this youthful brow, and I
bear no honored name among the great and glorious of our land; yet,
Mother, have I not a father, for whose dear sake I may yet purchase that
knighthood for which this young heart glows? Am I not the son of Cleon?

Adrastus. Verily doth a spirit move the boy. Look on him now, Iantha,
and let no weak, unworthy doubt of thine curb the proud spirit that
proves him worthy of his sire.

Iantha. My son, my fair, young Ion, thou art all now left my widowed
heart. How can I bid thee go! The barbarous pagan will doom thee to a
cruel death. How canst thou, an unknown youth, move the fierce heart
that hath slain thy sire?

Ion. Fear not, Mother; he who calls me to this glorious mission will
protect me. Shall I stand weeping while my father still breathes the air
of pagan dungeons; while the base fetters of the infidel rest on his
limbs, and his brave followers lie unavenged in their cold, bloody
graves; while my country's banner, torn, dishonored, is trampled in the
dust,--and he the proud, the brave, till now unconquered defender of
that country's honor, lies doomed to an ignominious death? Oh, Mother,
bid me go!

Adrastus. Iantha, speak to the boy! Let him not say his _mother_ taught
him fear.

Iantha. My Ion, go,--strong in thine innocence and faith, go forth upon
thy holy mission; and surely He who looketh ever with a loving face on
those who put their trust in Him, will in His mercy guard and guide thee
[_girds on his sword_]. Farewell! Go,--with thy mother's blessing on
thee!

Ion. Now is my heart filled all anew with hope and courage, and I go
forth trustingly. Father, thy blessing [_kneels before_ Adrastus].

Adrastus. Go, thou self-anointed victim on the altar of thy love. Bless
thy pure, faithful heart!

Ion [_rising_]. Farewell! Embrace me, Mother.

Iantha [_pressing_ Ion _to her breast_]. Farewell, my Ion. And if the
great Father wills it that I look not again on thee in life, into His
care do I commit thee. Farewell!

Ion. Mother, farewell! And if I fall, mourn not, but glory that I died
as best became the son of Cleon [_draws his sword_]. And now leap forth,
my sword!--henceforth is there no rest nor honor till we have conquered.
Father, I come, I come! [Ion _rushes out;_ Iantha _rushes to the window,
tears off her veil and waves it to_ Ion.]

                                CURTAIN.


                             SCENE SECOND.

                 [_Tent of_ Mohammed; _maps and arms lying
                       about._ Mohammed _and_ Hafiz.]

Moh'd. And spake they no word of ransom or of hostage?

Hafiz. None, sire. The lady lay as one struck dead; and the priest, foul
Christian dog, bade me go hence, and tarry not.

Moh'd. And held you no speech with those about the princess. Sure, there
were some to listen to thy master's word.

Hafiz. Great master, I sought in vain to set before them the royal will.
At first it were as though a spell had fallen on them. Nay, some did
turn aside and weep, rending their hair, as though all hope were lost.
Then, when I strove to win them to some counsel, they woke to such an
uproar, cursing thy perfidy, and vowing most dire and speedy vengeance
on thee, clashing their weapons and crying, "Down with the pagan dogs!"
Then, drawing forth their lances with fierce oaths, they drove me from
the gates in such warlike manner, I could but strive with haste to make
good mine escape, and without rest have I journeyed hither to bring thee
tidings.

Moh'd. By the prophet! and is it thus they serve the royal messenger.
But they shall rue it dearly. Cleon shall die. To-morrow's sun shall
never shine for him. The proud Greeks shall learn to dread Mohammed's
ire, and bend their haughty heads before him in the dust. I offer
ransom, and they will not harken. I send them honorable terms, and they
thrust my messenger rudely from their gates. They have dared to brave
me,--they shall feel my power!

Hafiz. Mighty Mohammed, if thy poor slave might offer counsel, were it
not wise to tarry till the Greeks on cooler thought shall seek thee with
some treaty which may avail thee better than such hasty vengeance. How
much more worthy were a heavy ransom than the life of a single miserable
prince.

Moh'd. Peace, slave! I have said Cleon shall die, and, by Allah! so I
have not word from these rebel dogs ere three days shall wear away, his
body swung from the battlements shall bear them tidings of Mohammed's
power. [_Enter_ Selim.] What hath befallen, Selim, that thou comest in
such haste?

Selim. Most mighty king, there waits without a youth, demanding speech
of thee.

Moh'd. A youth! Who may he be, and what seeks he with us?

Selim. Most gracious sire, I know not. Our guard surprised him wandering
without the camp,--alone, unarmed, save with a single sword; young, and
I think a Greek. Abdallah seized him as a spy, and led him hither to
await thy royal will. He doth refuse all question, demanding to be led
before thee, where he will unfold his errand.

Moh'd. A Greek! Bring him before us, an he prove a spy he shall hang
before the day waxeth older by an hour. Hence,--bring him hither!
[_Exit_ Selim.] By Allah! my proud foes have deigned to send us
messengers, and seek to win the favor so rudely scorned. They know not
Mohammed, and, so they humble not themselves, will sue in vain.

                                         [_Enter_ Selim, _dragging_ Ion.

Selim. Your Mightiness doth behold the youth. [_To_ Ion, _who stands
proudly._] Kneel, slave!

Ion. I kneel not unto tyrants.

Moh'd. How, bold stripling! Weigh with more care thy speech, and forget
not before whom thou dost stand. [_To_ Selim.] Go, slave, and stand
without; see that none enter here unbidden. [_Exit_ Selim.] Speak, boy!
Who art thou, and why dost thou seek thus fearlessly the presence of thy
foe?--and beware thou speakest truly if it is as a friend to treat in
honorable fashion, or as a spy, thou now standest before us.

Ion. I am a Greek, son to the noble Cleon, now thy captive; I seek his
rescue.

Moh'd. Son to Cleon! Now, by the Prophet, 'tis wondrous strange! And
thou hast ventured alone into the camp amid thy deadly foes? Speak,
boy,--thine errand!

Ion. To offer hostage; to treat with Mohammed for a father's life; to
move to pity or to justice the heart that hath doomed a noble soldier
unto an unjust death.

Moh'd. And where, my bold prince, are thy followers, thy slaves, thy
royal train?

Ion. On yonder plain, cold in their graves.

Moh'd. Hast thou brought ransom? Where is thy gold?

Ion. In the coffers of the Turkish Mohammed, plundered from his
slaughtered foes.

Moh'd. Thou spakest of hostage,--I see it not.

Ion. 'Tis here,--the son of Cleon.

Moh'd. Thou! and thinkest thou thy young, worthless life were a fit
hostage for the leader of a rebel band, the enemy of all true followers,
whose capture hath cost blood and slaves and gold? By Allah! boy, thou
must name a higher price to win the life thou doth seek.

Ion. I have nought else to offer. Thy hand hath rent from me friends,
followers, gold, a sire. But if this young life hath any worth to thee,
if these arms may toil for thee, this form bear burdens to thy royalty,
take them,--take all, O king, but render unto me that life without which
Greece is lost.

Moh'd. Peace! Thy speech is vain; thy life is nought to me.

Ion. I will serve thee as a slave; in all things do thy
bidding,--faithful, unwearied, unrepining. Grant but my boon, and
monarch shall never have a truer vassal than I will be to thee. Great
Mohammed, let me not plead in vain.

Moh'd. Peace, I say; anger me not.

Ion. O king, hast thou no heart? Think of the ruined home, the mourning
people, the land made desolate by thee; of her who now counts the weary
hours for tidings of those dear to her,--tidings fraught with life or
death as thou shalt decree; of the son by thee doomed to see his honored
sire, hero of a hundred battles dragged like a slave unto a shameful
death. As thou wilt have mercy shown to thee, that mercy show thou unto
me. Oh, say to me, "Thy father lives!"

Moh'd. Away! I will not listen.

Ion. Nay, I _will_ kneel to thee. I who never knelt to man before, now
implore thee with earnest supplication. 'Tis for a father's life.

Moh'd. Kneel not to me,--it is in vain. Thy father is my captive, my
deadliest foe, whom I hate, and curse,--ay, and will slay. Boy, dost
thou know to whom thou dost bow?

Ion [_rising proudly_]. To the pagan Mohammed,--he who with murderous
hand hath bathed in blood the smiling plains of Greece; profaned her
altars, enslaved her people, and filled the land with widows' tears and
orphans' cries; he who by perfidy makes captives of his foes, refusing
hostage and scorning honorable treaty; turns from all supplicants,
closes his heart to mercy, and tramples under foot all pity and all
justice,--the murderer, and the tyrant. Yes, king, I know to whom I
plead.

Moh'd. [_in great anger_]. Ho, without there, guards!--Selim! [_Enter_
Selim _and soldiers._] Away with the prisoner! Bind him fast; see he
escape not. Mohammed stands not to be braved by a beardless boy! Hence!
[_Guards approach with chains._]

Ion. Lay not hands upon me,--I am no slave! One more appeal: May a son
look once more upon his father ere death parts them forever? May I but
for an hour speak with Cleon?

Moh'd. Once more thou mayst look upon the rebel Greek. When he hangs
from yonder battlement thou mayst gaze unbidden as thou will. Away! With
to-morrow's sun, he dies.

Ion. So soon, O king!--nay, the son of Cleon kneels not to thee again
[_turns to go_].

Moh'd. Stay,--yield up thy sword! Bend thy proud knee, and surrender
unto me the arms thou art unworthy now to bear.

Ion [_drawing his sword_]. This, my sword, girded on by a mother's hand,
pledged to the deliverance of a captive sire, dedicated to the service
of my country, unstained, unconquered,--_thus_ do I surrender thee. [_He
breaks the sword, and flings it down._]

Moh'd. Again dost thou brave me! Away with the rebel! Bind him hand and
foot. He shall learn what it is to be Mohammed's slave. Hence, I say!

Ion. I am thy captive, but thy slave--never! Thou mayst chain my limbs,
thou canst _not_ bind my freeborn soul! Lead on,--I follow.

                                               [_Exit_ Ion _and guards_.

                                CURTAIN.


                              SCENE THIRD.

              [_Tent of_ Zuleika; _guitar, ottoman, etc._]

Zuleika [_pacing up and down_]. Night draweth on apace, and ever nearer
comes the fatal hour. With to-morrow's dawn all hope is o'er, for
Mohammed hath sworn the Greek shall die, and when was _he_ ere known to
fail in his dread purpose? In vain have I wept before him, imploring him
to have some mercy; in vain have I sought with golden promises to move
the stony-hearted Hafiz,--all, all hath failed, and I am in despair. And
that brave youth, his true heart filled with love's pure devotion,
seeking by the sacrifice of his own life to save a father! And now each
moment bringeth nearer the death-hour of that father, and he is mourning
in solitude that he may not say farewell. Where can I turn for help? Ah,
Hassan! my faithful slave. He is true, and loveth me like his own. He
must aid me [_claps her hands_; _enter_ Hassan]. Hassan, thou lovest me,
and would not see me grieve?

Hassan. Allah, forbid! Thou art dear to old Hassan as the breath of
life, and while life lingers he will serve thee.

Zuleika. Then must thou aid me in a deed of mercy. Who doth keep watch
to-night before the tent of the young Greek?

Hassan. Mine is the watch. Wherefore dost thou seek to know?

Zuleika. Hassan, thou hast sworn to serve me. I have a boon to ask of
thee.

Hassan. Speak, lady! thy slave doth listen.

Zuleika. Thou knowest that with the morning sun Mohammed hath sworn
Cleon shall die. Such is the fierce anger he doth bear his foe he hath
refused all mercy and scorned to listen to the prayers of the young
prince who hath journeyed hither at peril of his own life to place
himself in the power of the king as hostage for his father.

Hassan. It is indeed most true. Poor youth!

Zuleika. 'Tis of him I would speak to thee. Mohammed, angered at his
boldness, hath, as thou knowest, guarded him in yonder tent, denying him
his last sad prayer to speak once more in life with his father. Oh,
Hassan, what must be the agony of that young heart to see the hours
swift speeding by, and know no hope.

Hassan. What wouldst thou have me do?

Zuleika. Lead him to his father; give him the consolation of folding to
his breast the beloved one to save whose life he hath sacrificed his
own.

Hassan. Dear mistress, thou art dreaming, and cannot know the danger of
so rash a deed. Bethink thee of Mohammed's anger, the almost certain
doom of such as dare to brave his mighty will. I pray thee let not thy
noble heart lead thee astray. Thou canst not save him, and will but harm
thyself.

Zuleika. Hassan, thy love and true devotion, I well know, doth prompt
thee to thus counsel, and in thy fear for me thou dost forget to think
of mercy or of pity. I thank thee; but thou canst not move me from my
firm resolve. Again I ask thee, Wilt thou aid me?

Hassan [_falling at her feet_]. Pardon, but I cannot. Heed, I implore
thee, the counsel of thy faithful servant, and trust to the wisdom these
gray hairs have brought. Thou art young and brave, but believe me,
maiden, dangers of which thou dost not dream beset the path, and I were
no true friend did I not warn thee to beware. Do not tempt me; I cannot
aid thee to thy ruin.

Zuleika. Then will I go alone. I will brave the peril, and carry comfort
to a suffering soul [_turns to go_; Hassan _catches her robe_].

Hassan. Maiden! once more let thy slave entreat. Thy father places faith
in me. I am the captive's guard.

Zuleika. Peace, Hassan, peace; if life be then so dear to thee, and thy
duty to thy king greater than that thou dost owe to thy fellow-man,
Allah forbid that I should tempt thee to forget it. But did death look
me in the face, I would not tarry now.

Hassan. And thou wouldst seek the captive's cell?

Zuleika. This very hour. Soon it will be too late.

Hassan. Thou knowest not the way,--soldiers guard every turn. Oh, tarry
till the dawn, I do implore thee.

Zuleika. The darkness shall be my guide, Allah my guard; shrouded in yon
dark mantle none will deem me other than a slave. Again I ask thee, Wilt
thou go?

Hassan. I go. I were no true man to tremble when a woman fears not. I
will guide thee, and may Allah in his mercy shield us both. Say thy
prayers, Hassan, for thy head no longer rests in safety.

Zuleika. Come, let us on! The moments speed. The darkening gloom
befriends us. First to the tent of the young prince, and while I in
brief speech do acquaint him with mine errand, thou shalt keep guard
without. Then will we guide him to his father, and unto Allah leave the
rest [_shrouds herself in dark mantle and veil_]. Lead on, good Hassan.
Let us away!

Hassan. Fold thy veil closer, that none may know the daughter of
Mohammed walks thus late abroad. Come, and Allah grant we sleep not in
paradise to-morrow!

                                               [_Exit, leading_ Zuleika.

                                CURTAIN.


                             SCENE FOURTH.

                             [Ion's _tent_.
           Ion _chained, in an attitude of deep despair, upon
            a miserable couch. He does not see the entrance
                       of_ Zuleika _and_ Hassan.]

Zuleika. Stand thou without as watch, good Hassan, and warn me if any
shall approach. [_Exit_ Hassan.] Young Greek, despair not; hope is nigh.

Ion [_starting up_]. Bright vision, whence comest thou? Art thou the
phantom of a dream, or some blest visitant from that better land, come
to bear me hence? What art thou?

Zuleika. I am no vision, but a mortal maiden, come to bring thee
consolation.

Ion. Consolation! ah, then indeed thou art no mortal; for unto grief
like mine there is no consolation, save that which cometh from above.

Zuleika. Nay, believe it not. Human hearts are at this moment hoping,
and human hands are striving earnestly to spare thee the agony thou dost
dread.

Ion. Are there then hearts to feel for the poor Greek? I had thought I
was alone,--alone 'mid mine enemies. Sure, those fetters are no dream,
this dark cell, the words "Thy father dies!" No, no! it is a dread
reality. The words are burned into my brain.

Zuleika. Is death, then, so dread a thing unto a warrior? I had thought
it brought him fame and glory.

Ion. Death! Oh, maiden! To the soldier on the battle-field, fighting for
his father-land 'mid the clash of arms, the fierce blows of foemen, the
shouts of victory; 'neath the banner of his country, the gratitude of a
nation, the glory of a hero round his brow,--death were a happy, ay, a
welcome friend. But alone, 'mid foes, disgraced by fetters, dragged to a
dishonored grave, with none to whisper of hope or comfort, death is a
cruel, a most bitter foe.

Zuleika. Mine errand is to take from that death the bitterness thou dost
mourn, to give a parting joy to the life now passing.

Ion. Oh, hast thou the power to save my father's life! Oh, use it now,
and Greece shall bless thee for thy mercy!

Zuleika. Oh, that the power _were_ mine, how gladly would I use it in a
cause so glorious! I am but a woman, and tho' the heart is strong, the
arm is very weak. I cannot save thy father, but trust I may still cheer
the parting hours with a brief happiness.

Ion. Lady, thy words of kindly sympathy fall like sweet music on my
troubled heart, and at thy magic call hope springeth up anew. Thou art
unknown, and yet there is that within that doth whisper I may trust
thee.

Zuleika. Thou mayst indeed. Heaven were not more true than I will be
unto my word. [Hassan _pauses before the door_.]

Hassan. Lady, the hours are fleeting. It were best to make good speed.

Zuleika. Hassan, thou dost counsel aright; morn must not find me here.
[_To_ Ion.] Young Greek, thou knowest with the coming dawn thy father
dies.

Ion. Ay, ere another moon doth rise that life, so dear to Greece, shall
be no more; the heart that beat so nobly at his country's call be still
forever,--I know it well!

Zuleika. And hast thou no last word for him, no parting wish?

Ion. O maiden, my life were a glad sacrifice, so that I might for a
single hour look on him,--for the last time say, "My father, bless thy
Ion."

Zuleika. That hour shall be thine. Fold thyself in yonder cloak, and
follow me.

Ion. Follow thee,--and whither?

Zuleika. To thy father's presence. Thou shalt spend with him the last
hours of his earthly life. Stay not; this friendly gloom will ere long
pass away.

Ion [_falling on his knees and catching her robe_]. Art thou my guardian
angel? Oh, may the consolation thou hath poured into a suffering soul,
fall like heaven's dew upon thine own; and if the prayers of a grateful
heart bring hope and joy and peace, thy life shall bloom with choicest
blessings. O maiden, how do I bless thee! [_Kisses her robe._]

Zuleika. Speak not of that,--kneel not to me, a mortal maiden. Thy
gratitude is my best reward. Hassan, lead on!

Hassan. Lady, I do thy bidding. First let me lead thee to a place of
safety.

Zuleika. Nay, Hassan, I tarry here,--thou canst return; I will await
thee. Now make all speed,--away!

Ion. Let us hence; my heart can ill contain its joy. Oh, my father,
shall I see thee, hear thy voice, feel thine arms once more about me,
and die with thy blessing on my head. Heaven hath blessed my mission.

Zuleika. Shall we depart? The hour wanes.

Ion. I will follow whither thou shalt lead. But, stay! is there no
danger unto thee? Will thy deed of mercy bring suffering to thee, my
kind deliverer?

Zuleika. Fear not for me. Yet one pledge must I ask of thee on which my
safety doth depend. 'Tis this: Swear that from the moment thou dost
leave me until thou art again a prisoner here, though the path lie plain
before thee thou wilt not fly.

Ion. I swear. Thou mayst trust me.

Zuleika. Yet once again. Breathe not to mortal ear the _means_ by which
thou sought'st thy sire, and let the memory of this hour fade from thy
heart forever. [Ion _bows assent_.] What pledge have I of thy secrecy,
and of thy truth?

Ion. The word of a Greek is sacred, and were not my gratitude my surest
pledge to _thee_?

Zuleika. Pardon, I do trust. Now haste thee.

Ion [_pointing to his fetters_]. Thou dost forget I am a prisoner still.

Zuleika. Hassan, unloose these fetters, and give the Greek his freedom.
[Hassan _takes off the chains_; Ion _springs joyfully forward_.]

Ion. Now am I free again, and with the Turk's base fetters have I cast
off my fears and my despair. Hope smiles upon me, and my father calls.
Oh, let us tarry not.

Zuleika [_folding a dark mantle round him_]. Thus shrouded, in safety
thou mayst reach his cell; this ring will spare thee question. Hassan
will guide thee, and I--will pray for thy success. Farewell! May Allah
aid thee!

Ion. Lady, though I may never know thee, never look on thee again, the
memory of this brief hour will never fade. The blessed gift of mercy
thou dost bestow will I ever treasure with the deepest gratitude, and my
fervent prayer that all Heaven's blessings may rest upon thee cease but
with my life [_falls on his knee and kisses her hand_]. Pardon,--'tis my
only thanks. Spirit of mercy, farewell! farewell! [_Follows_ Hassan;
Zuleika _gazes after him, then sinks down weeping_.]


                                CURTAIN.


                              SCENE FIFTH.

                     [_Tent of_ Cleon _the Greek_.
                 Cleon, _chained, pacing to and fro_.]

Cleon. A few short hours and all is o'er,--Cleon sleeps with his
fathers. I could have wished to die like a hero in my harness, and have
known my grave were watered by my loved one's tears; to take my wife
once more unto my bosom; once more bless my noble Ion; and pass hence
with the blest consciousness of victory won. 'Tis bitter thus to die,
ingloriously and alone. [_Proudly raising his head._] But the name of
Cleon is too dear unto his people e'er to be forgotten. The memory that
he strove ever for his country's welfare shall strew with tearful
blessings his unhonored grave. [_Steps approach; voices are heard._] Ah,
they come! They shall find me ready. [_Enter_ Ion.] Has mine hour come?
I am here.

           [Ion _casts off his cloak, and springs forward_.]

Ion. Father! O my father!

Cleon [_starting back wildly_]. Thou? Here!

Ion. Yes, thy Ion; bless me, Father [_kneels_].

Cleon [_raising and clasping_ Ion _to his breast_]. Here, on my heart,
dear one. I turn to meet my executioners, and see thee, my boy. Great
Heaven, I bless thee! [_They embrace tenderly and weep._] Thou camest
thither--how?

Ion. Alone, with my good sword.

Cleon. Thy guide through the perils of the way, my child?

Ion. The good Father who doth guide all who trust in him.

Cleon. And thine errand?

Ion. To behold thee, my father, and with my life to strive for thy
release.

Cleon. My noble boy, thou hast come unto thy death. Oh, who could bid
thee thus brave the doom that must await thee?

Ion. My mother bid me forth; and as she girded on my sword, she bid me
seek my father, with her blessing on my mission.

Cleon. My brave Iantha, thus for thy country's sake to doom thine own
heart to so deep a sorrow [_looks sadly upon_ Ion]. Tell me, my son, did
thy mother bear bravely up against the fatal tidings? I had feared her
tender heart might but ill meet a blow so fearful. Speak to me of her.

Ion. When the rude Turk did in rough speech acquaint her with thy fell
defeat, she sank as one o'erpowered by her grief, praying the friendly
hand of death might take her hence; but soon the spirit of the Greek
rose high within her, and, banishing her fears, with brave and trusting
heart she sent me forth to seek, and if it might be, save thee. Ah, my
father, that I might die for thee!

Cleon. And thou hath come to see me die! Dost thou not know that with
the night thy father passeth hence, and when the stars again look forth
it will be upon his grave?

Ion. Father, 'tis because thou art doomed that I am here. And if my
heart speak truly, those same bright stars shall serve to guide thee
back to freedom.

Cleon. Thou doth speak wildly. What wilt thou do? Wilt _thou_ brave the
king?

Ion [_proudly_]. Nay, I have knelt for the last time unto Mohammed. I
have offered him my liberty, my service, ay, my life itself, and he hath
scorned me. I have deigned to bow before him as a suppliant, and he hath
spurned me; I have sought by all the power love and despair could teach
to move him, and his ear was closed to me. I seek him not again.

Cleon. Child, what hath led thee to the presence of the king? How didst
thou brave the frown of him before whom even armed men do tremble? Didst
thou dream thy feeble voice could reach a heart so cruel, that thy
prayers could soften one who knoweth not the name of mercy?

Ion. Love can brave all dangers. It giveth wisdom to the untaught,
strength to the weak, hope to the despairing, comfort to the mourner.
Love hath been my guide, my guard.

Cleon. My boy! my Ion! Truly doth God place in the pure heart of such as
thou his truest wisdom, his deepest faith [_embraces him with deep
emotion_]. But--art not thou in danger? Did not thy bold speech anger
the proud king? Art thou still free?

Ion. Let not thy heart be vexed with fears for me,--I am unharmed.

Cleon. Ion, deceive me not, but as thou hopest for thy father's love,
speak truly. Art thou in danger from the Turk, and in thy devotion to
thy father dost thou seek to be thyself the sacrifice? Answer me, Ion.

Ion. Father, I sought to spare thy too o'erburdened heart another grief.
I _am_ a prisoner in Mohammed's power, and know not if my fate be life
or death.

Cleon. 'Tis as I feared; and thou, the last hope of thy country, must
fall,--all, all, for me! Oh, mine own disgrace were bitter, but to see
thee die! Oh, woe is me!

Ion. Father, were it not better thus to die, than in disgraceful peace
to pass away with no thought for our fatherland, no proud consciousness
of having at the call of duty sacrificed all we held most dear, and
leave a name held sacred as one who yielded life and liberty on the
altar of his country?

Cleon. But that thou in thine innocence and bloom should meet death at
the hands of heartless foemen; and for _my_ sake! 'Tis this that tears
my heart.

Ion. The purer the victim the more acceptable the sacrifice. But fear
not, dear father. The Turk is yet a man; 'tis 'gainst thee he wars, and
he will not wreak his vengeance on a child. He may relent, and for my
love's sake, pardon mine offence.

Cleon. Child, thou knowest not Mohammed. He pardons none; all fall
before him, with relentless hand,--all strew his pathway unto victory.
Will he then spare and pity thee? Nay, sire and son must fall! [_Stands
sorrowfully._ Ion _suddenly sees_ Zuleika's _ring upon his hand, and
springs forward_.]

Ion. Father, thou shalt yet breathe the air of freedom, shall clasp my
mother to thy heart; once more shall lead thy gallant band onward to
victory.

Cleon. Raise not bright hopes to crush them at their birth; wake not to
dreams of triumph the heart that hath striven to drive hence all save
the solemn thoughts meet for one so soon to pass away.

Ion [_pointing to the door_]. See, the gray morning 'gins to glimmer in
the east. 'Tis no time for despair. Haste, Father, freedom is near!

Cleon. What doth thus move thee, Ion? Dost thou forget these chains,
the guards, the perils at each step? Thou art dreaming!

Ion. I tell thee 'tis no dream. Thou shalt be free. This mantle will
disguise thee; this ring open a pathway through the guards; these stars
shall be thy silent guide. Wilt thou go?

Cleon. 'Tis strange! Whence then that ring? How dost thou, a captive,
wander thus freely, and offer liberty with such a bounteous hand?

Ion. A solemn oath doth forbid me to reveal to living man the secret of
this hour; but if ever angels do leave their homes to minister to
suffering souls, 'twas one most bright and beautiful who hath this night
led me unto thee, and placed in mine hand the power to set thee free.

Cleon. Truth speaketh in thine earnest eye and pleading voice, and yet I
dare not listen to thy tale.

Ion. Oh, Father, heed not thy fears, thy doubts! Take thy liberty,
believing it heaven-sent. No oath binds thee to Mohammed; thou art no
rightful prisoner of war,--neither duty nor honor doth demand thy stay.
Thy country calls, and Heaven doth point the way.

Cleon. 'Tis true; no oath doth bind me to the Turk, and yet to fly--My
soldier's spirit doth ill brook such retreat.

Ion. Then stay not, my father, but whilst thou may, depart.

Cleon. Bright hopes call me hence. Life, love, fame, beckon me away.

                                                    [Hassan _looks in_.]

Hassan. The promised hour hath well-nigh gone. Prepare, young Greek; we
must away.

Ion. A moment more. [_Exit_ Hassan.] Father, time wanes. Once more I do
entreat thee,--go!

Cleon. Heaven grant I choose aright! Come Ion, we will forth together.
[Ion _folds the cloak about_ Cleon; _gives him the ring_.] Come, let us
go.

Ion. Nay, but one can pass forth. Thou goest. I await the morning here.

Cleon. Then do I tarry also. Nay, Ion, I will not go hence without thee.

Ion. Then all is lost. Father, thy stay can nought avail me. It cannot
save, and thou wilt but sacrifice thine own priceless life.

Cleon. Then fly with me; let me bear thee to thy mother. Alone, I will
not go.

Ion. I cannot go; a vow doth bid me stay,--a vow that nought shall tempt
me from the camp to-night; and when did a Greek e'er break his plighted
word?

Cleon. If thine honor bid thee stay, thy father will not tempt thee
hence; but he may stay and suffer with thee the fate of the faithful
[_throws off the mantle_].

Ion. Oh, my father, do not cast from thee the priceless boon of liberty.
Think of thy broken-hearted wife, thy faithful followers, thy
unconquered foes; think, Father, of thy country calling on thee for
deliverance. What were my worthless life weighed 'gainst her freedom.
And what happier fate for a hero's son than for a hero's sake to fall!

Cleon. Thou true son of Greece! Mayst thou yet live to wield a sword for
thine oppressed land, and gird with laurels that brow so worthy them.

                                                       [Hassan _enters_.

Hassan. No longer may I stay: thine hour is past.

Ion. I come,--yet one moment more, good Hassan; it is my last. [_Exit_
Hassan.] Once more, my father, do I entreat thee,--go. Thou dost forget
a guardian spirit watcheth over me, and the power that led me hither may
yet accomplish my deliverance. If nought else can move thee, for my sake
go, and win for me that freedom mine honor doth now forbid me to seek.
Break not my heart, nor let me plead in vain.

Cleon. My boy, for thy dear sake do I consent. I _will_ earn thy
deliverance bravely, as a soldier should; and thy dear image shall be
to me the star that leads me on to victory.

Ion [_joyfully_]. Away! Hassan will guide thee past the guards. Then
fly,--and Heaven guide thee, O my father! [Ion _again shrouds_ Cleon _in
the mantle, concealing his chains in the thick folds_.] Thus muffle thy
tell-tale fetters, that no sound may whisper to the Turks there walks a
Greek under the free heavens forth to freedom.

Cleon. My Ion, one last embrace! God grant 'tis not our last on earth!
Bless thee, thou true young heart! Heaven guard thee!

                                              [Hassan _enters in haste_.

Hassan. Art ready? We must depart. [Cleon _bows his head and follows_.
Ion _rushes after, looking from the tent_.]

Ion. Saved! saved! The morning sun that was to shine upon his grave,
will smile upon him far, far from foemen's power. And Mohammed, thinking
to look upon a dying slave, shall waken to the sound of his victorious
war-trump. Ion, thy mission is accomplished. Thou hast given a saviour
to thy fatherland, and mayst fall thyself without a murmur [_looks up
thankfully; a loud noise without_].

                                         [_Enter_ Abdallah _and_ Murad.

Abd. Where is the prisoner? Come forth!

Ion. I am here [_comes forward_].

Abd. Ha!--here is treason! Without there!--the prisoner hath escaped!

Murad. Who flieth yonder, past the camp?

Abd. 'Tis he! Forth, call for aid! Search without delay! Here is foul
work abroad. First, seize yon boy; fetter the base spy; bear him before
the king. Speed hence!

Murad [_to_ Ion]. Infidel dog, thou shalt learn what it is to brave
Mohammed's ire!

                [_They seize_ Ion, _and drag him away_.]


                                CURTAIN.




                                BIANCA.

                            OPERATIC TRAGEDY.


                            NOTE TO BIANCA.


The peculiarity of this opera was that while the words were committed to
memory, the music was _composed_ and _sung_ as the scene proceeded.

In spite of its absurdity, this play was a great favorite; for Jo was
truly superb as the hapless Bianca, while her trills and tragic agonies
were considered worthy of the famous Grisi herself.


                              CHARACTERS.


    Adelbert   .   .   .   .   .   .    _Betrothed to Bianca._

    Huon   .   .   .   .   .   .   .    _His Rival._

    Juan   .   .   .   .   .   .   .    _A Page._

    Bianca .   .   .   .   .   .   .    _A Spanish Lady._

    Hilda  .   .   .   .   .   .   .    _A Witch._


                                BIANCA.

                           OPERATIC TRAGEDY.

                              SCENE FIRST.

                               [_A wood._
                             _Enter_ Huon.]

Huon. Hist! All is still. They are not yet here. On this spot will the
happy lovers meet. O wretched Huon! she whom thou so passionately doth
love will here speak tender words to thy thrice hated rival. Yet I,
unseen, will watch them, and ere long my fierce revenge shall change
their joy to deepest woe. Hark! they come! Now, jealous heart, be still!
[_Hides among the trees._]

                                        [_Enter_ Bianca _and_ Adelbert.

Adel. Nay, dearest love, fear not; no mortal eye beholds us now, and yon
bright moon looks kindly down upon our love.

                              [_They seat themselves beneath the trees._

Bianca. Ah, dearest Adelbert, with thee I feel no fear, but thy fierce
rival Huon did vow vengeance on thee, for I did reject his suit for
thine. Beware! for his wild heart can feel no pity, tenderness, or love.

Adel. I fear him not. Ere long thou wilt be mine, and then in our fair
home we will forget all but our love. Think not, dearest, of that dark,
revengeful man; he does not truly love thee.

Bianca. Near thee I cannot fear; but when thou art far from me, my fond
heart will ever dread some danger for thee. Ah, see the moon is waning;
dear love, thou must away.

Adel. Ah, sweet moments, why so quickly fled? 'Tis hard to leave thee,
thou bright star in my life's sky, and yet I must, or all may be
betrayed. Fare thee well, dear love. One sweet kiss ere we part! [_They
embrace._]

Bianca. Farewell! Ah, when shall I again behold thee? Oh, be not long
away, for like a caged bird I pine for thee.

Adel. When next yon moon doth rise beneath thy lattice, thou shalt hear
my light guitar.

Bianca. Fail not to come. I shall watch for thee the live-long night,
and if thou comest not, this fond heart will grieve.

Both. Farewell, till yon bright moon doth rise,
      Farewell, dear love, farewell!
      Farewell, farewell, farewell!
      Farewell, dear love, farewell!

                                                       [_Exit_ Adelbert.

Bianca. Ah, love, thou magic power, thus ever make my breast thy home.
Adieu, dear spot! I fly to happiness and--

Huon. _Me_--[Bianca _shrieks, and seeks to fly_. Huon _detains her_.]

Bianca. Unmanly villain, touch me not. What dost thou here concealed?

Huon. I listen to thy lover's fond and heartless vows. What is his love
to mine? Ah, lady, he loves thee for thy wealth alone. Again I ask, nay,
I implore thee to be mine! Oh, grant me now my prayer!

Bianca. Never! never! I will not listen to thee more. My heart is all
another's; my hatred and contempt are thine.

                                                         [_Exit_ Bianca.

Huon. Now, by yon moon 'neath which thy tender vows were plighted, do I
swear to win thee, proud and haughty lady, to these arms. Thou shalt
curse the day when thou didst cast away my love, and wake my deep
revenge.

                                                           [_Exit_ Huon.

                                CURTAIN.


                             SCENE SECOND.

            [_A cave in the forest._ Hilda _leaning over a
                     boiling caldron. Enter_ Huon.]

Hilda. Ha! who art thou, and what wouldst thou with old Hilda? Speak,
and be obeyed.

Huon. O mighty wizard, I have sought thee for a charm to win a proud and
scornful woman's love,--some mystic potion that shall make her cold
heart burn for me. Ah, give me this, and gold uncounted shall be thine.

Hilda. I will give to thee a draught that shall chase her coldness and
her pride away, and make the heart now beating for another all thine
own. Hold! 'tis here,--three crimson drops when mingled in her wine,
will bring the boon thou askest [_gives_ Huon _a tiny phial_].

Huon. Oh, blessed draught that wins for me the love I seek. Proud
Bianca, now art thou in my power, and shalt ere long return the love of
the once hated and despised Huon. Great sorceress, say how can I repay
thee? Fear not to claim thy just reward.

Hilda. I ask no gold. But when thy prize is won, remember thou old
Hilda's warning. Woman's heart is a fragile thing, and they who trifle
with it should beware. Now go; I would be alone.

Huon. Farewell! When my love and my revenge are won, I'll bless this
hour and Hilda's charm.

                                                           [_Exit_ Huon.

Hilda. Poor fool! thou little thinkest thy love-charm is a deadly
draught, and they who quaff it die. When thou shalt seek thy lady,
hoping for her love, a dead bride thou wilt win. Ha! ha! old Hilda's
spells work silently and well.

                                CURTAIN.


                              SCENE THIRD.

               [_Room in the castle of_ Bianca. _Evening.
                             Enter_ Huon.]

Huon. How can I best give the draught that none may see the deed? Ha!
yonder comes her page, bearing wine. Now in her cup will I mingle these
enchanted drops, and she shall smile on me when next I plead my suit.
Ho, Juan, my boy! come hither; I would speak with thee. [_Enter_ Juan
_with wine._] Where is thy lady now?

Juan. At her lattice, watching for Lord Adelbert, and gazing on the
flowers he hath sent.

Huon [_aside_]. She shall never watch and wait for him again. [_Aloud._]
Whence bearest thou the wine, Juan? Is it to thy lady?

Juan. Yes, my lord. She bid me haste. I must away.

Huon. Stay! clasp my sandal, boy; I will repay thee if thy mistress
chide. [Juan _stoops;_ Huon _drops the potion into the wine cup._]
Thanks; here is gold for thee. Away, and tell thy lady I will be here
anon.

                                                           [_Exit_ Juan.

    Ha, ha! 'tis done! 'tis done!
    My vengeance now is won,
    And ere to-morrow's sun shall set,
    Thou, haughty lady, shalt forget
    The lover who now hastes to thee,
    And smile alone, alone on me.

                                                           [_Exit_ Huon.

                                CURTAIN.


                             SCENE FOURTH.

                  [Bianca's _castle. A moonlit balcony.
                            Enter_ Bianca.]

Bianca. He comes not. Yon bright moon will ere long set, and still I
hear not the dear voice 'neath my lattice singing. Adelbert! Ah, come!
Hist! I hear his light boat on the lake. 'Tis he! 'tis he! [_Leans over
the balcony._]

                                  [Adelbert _sings in the garden below._

    The moon is up, wake, lady, wake!
    My bark is moored on yonder lake.
    The stars' soft eyes alone can see
    My meeting, dear one, here with thee.

    Wake, dearest, wake! lean from thy bower,
    The moonlight gleams on tree and flower.
    The summer sky smiles soft above;
    Look down on me, thou star of love!

Bianca. Adelbert, dear love, now haste thee quickly up to me.

                                   [_Enter_ Adelbert _upon the balcony._

Adel. Sweet love, why fearest thou? None dare stay me when I fly to
thee. Ah, sit thee here, and I will rest beside thee. [Bianca _seats
herself;_ Adelbert _lies at her feet._]

Bianca. Thou art weary, love. I'll bring thee wine, and thou shalt rest
while I do sing to thee. [_She gives him wine; he drinks._]

Adel. Thanks to thee, dearest love, I am weary now no longer. When here
beside thee, pain, sorrow, time are all forgot. Ah! what is this?--a
deadly pang hath seized me. All grows dark before mine eyes. I cannot
see thee. Yon cup,--'twas poisoned! I am dying, dying!

Bianca. Ah, nay, thou art faint! Speak not of dying, love. [Adelbert
_falls._] Adelbert, Adelbert, speak!--speak! It is thine own Bianca
calls thee! [_Throws herself beside him._]

Adel. Farewell, dear love, farewell! Huon hath won his vengeance now.
God bless thee, dearest. Oh, farewell! [_Dies._]

Bianca. Awake! awake! All, cold and still! Thou true, brave heart, thou
art hushed forever. Huon! yes! 'twas he; and he hath sought to win me
thus. But 'tis in vain! Where is the poisoned cup that I may join thee,
Adelbert? [_Takes the cup._] Ah, 'tis gone: there is no more. Yet I will
be with thee, my murdered love. For me life hath no joy, and I will find
thee even in death [_falls fainting to the ground_].

                                CURTAIN.


                              SCENE FIFTH.

                           [Bianca's _castle.
                    The garden._ Bianca _singing._]

    Faded flowers, faded flowers,
      They are all now left to cherish;
    For the hopes and joys of my young life's spring
      I have seen so darkly perish.

    Cold, ah, cold, in the lone, dark grave,
      My murdered love lies low,
    And death alone can bring sure rest
      To this broken heart's deep woe.

    Faded flowers, faded flowers,
      They are all now left to cherish;
    For ah, his dear hand gathered them,
      And my love can never perish.

                                                               [_Weeps._

                                 [_Enter_ Huon _and kneels at her feet._

Bianca [_starting up_]. Fiend! demon! touch me not with hands that
murdered him! Hence! out of my sight,--away!

Huon. Nay, lady, nay! I swear by Heaven it was not I. The spell I
mingled in thy cup was but to win thy love. The old witch hath deceived
me, and given that deadly poison. Forgive me, I implore thee, and here
let me offer thee my love once more.

Bianca [_repulsing him_]. _Love!_ darest thou to speak of love to me,
whose bright dream of life thou hast destroyed? _Love!_ I who loathe,
scorn, hate thee with a deep and burning hate that death alone can
still! Oh, Heaven, have mercy on my tortured heart, and let it break.

Huon [_aside_]. His death hath well-nigh driven her mad. Dear lady,
grieve not thus. Let me console thee. Forget thy love, and seek in mine
the joy thou hast lost.

Bianca. Forget! Ah, never, never, till in death I join him! Forgive
thee? Not till I have told thy crime. Yes, think not I will rest till
thou, my murdered Adelbert, art well avenged. And thou!--ah, sinful
man, tremble, for thou art in my power, and my wronged heart can feel no
pity now.

Huon [_fiercely_]. Wouldst thou betray me? Never! Yield thou to my love,
or I will sheathe my dagger in thy heart, and silence thee forever!

Bianca. I will not yield. The world shall know thy guilt, and then sweet
death shall be a blessing.

Huon. Then die, and free me from the love and fear that hang like clouds
above me [_stabs her_].

Bianca. Thy sin will yet be known, and may God pardon thee! O earth,
farewell! My Adelbert, I come, I come! [_Dies._]

Huon. Dead! dead! Oh, wretched Huon! Where now seek rest from bitter
memories and remorse. Ha, a step! I must fly. Angel, fare thee well!

                                                           [_Exit_ Huon.

                                CURTAIN.


                              SCENE SIXTH.

               [Huon's _room._ Huon _asleep upon a couch.
               Enter_ Bianca's _spirit. She lays her hand
                              upon him._]

Huon [_starting in affright_]. Ha! spirit of the dead, what wouldst thou
now? For long, long nights why hast thou haunted me? Cannot my agony,
remorse, and tears win thee to forget? Ah, touch me not! Away! away! See
how the vision follows. It holds me fast. Bianca, save me! save me!
[_Falls and dies._]

                                                             [_Tableau._

                                CURTAIN.




                           THE UNLOVED WIFE;

                                  OR,

                             WOMAN'S FAITH.


                              CHARACTERS.


    Count Adrian   .   .   .   .   .    _Nina's Husband._

    Don Felix  .   .   .   .   .   .    _His Secret Rival._

    Nina   .   .   .   .   .   .   .    _The Unloved Wife._

    Hagar  .   .   .   .   .   .   .    _A Fortune Teller._


                           THE UNLOVED WIFE;

                                  OR,

                             WOMAN'S FAITH.


                              SCENE FIRST.

                 [_Room in the palace of_ Count Adrian.
                             _Enter_ Nina.]

Nina. 'Tis a fair and lovely home and well befits a gay young bride; but
ah, not if she bear a sad and weary heart like mine beneath her bridal
robes. All smile on me and call me happy, blessed with such a home and
husband; and yet 'mid all my splendor I could envy the poor cottage
maiden at her spinning-wheel. For ah, 'mid all her poverty one sweet
thought comes ever like a sunny sky to brighten e'en her darkest hours,
for she is loved; while I yet sigh in vain for one kind word, one
tender glance, from him I love so fondly. Ah, he comes, no sad tears
now, sorrow is for my lonely hours and I will smile on _him_ e'en though
my heart is breaking.

                                                  [_Enter_ Count Adrian.

Adrian [_coldly_]. Good-even, madam, I trust all things are placed
befitting a fair lady's bower and thou hast found thy home a pleasant
one.

Nina. Adrian, husband, speak not thus to me. I could find more joy in
some poor cell with thee, than all the wealth that kings could give if
thou wert gone. Look kindly on me and I ask no more. One smile from thee
can brighten all the world to these fond eyes. Oh, turn not away, but
tell me how have I angered thee, and grant thy pardon for thy young
wife's first offence.

Adrian. The pardon I could give were worthless for the time is past.
'Tis too late to ask forgiveness now. It matters not, then say no more
[_turns away_].

Nina. My lord, I charge thee tell me of what dark crime thou dost think
me guilty! Fear not to tell me; innocence is strong to bear and happy to
forgive. Ah, leave me not, I cannot rest till I know all, and if the
deep devotion of a woman's heart can still repair the wrong, it shall be
thine--but answer me.

Adrian. Canst thou unsay the solemn words that bound us at the altar
three short days ago? Canst thou give back the freedom thou hast taken,
break the vows thou hast plighted, cast away that ring and tell me I am
free? Do it, and my full forgiveness shall be thine.

Nina. Give thee back thy freedom; am I a chain to bind thee to what thou
dost not love? Take back the vows I made to honor thee; what dost thou
mean? I am thy wife and dost thou hate me?

Adrian. I do.

Nina. God help me now. Tell me, Adrian, I implore thee, tell me what
have I done to tempt such cruel words from thee? I loved thee and left
all to be thy wife, and now when my poor heart is longing for one tender
word to cheer its sorrow, thou, the husband who hath vowed to love and
cherish me, hath said thou dost hate me. Ah, am I sleeping? Wake me or
the dream will drive me mad.

Adrian. 'Tis a dream I cannot banish. We must part.

Nina. Part--go on, the blow hath fallen, I can feel no more. Go on.

Adrian. Thou knowest I wooed thee. Thou wert fair and wondrous rich; I
sought thy gold, not _thee_, for with thy wealth I would carve out a
path through life that all should honor. Well, we were wed, and when I
sought to take thy fortune it was gone, and not to me, but to thy
father's friend, Don Felix. It was all left to him, and thou wert
penniless; and thus I won a wife I loved not, and lost the gold I would
have died to gain. Thinkest thou not I am well angered? But for thee I
might yet win a noble bride whose golden fetters I would gladly wear.

Nina. And this is he to whom I gave my heart so filled with boundless
love and trust. Oh, Adrian, art thou so false? What is gold to a woman's
deathless love? Can it buy thee peace and all the holy feelings human
hearts can give? Can it cheer and comfort thee in sorrow, or weep fond,
happy tears when thou hast won the joy and honor thou dost seek? No,
none of these, the golden chains will bind thee fast till no sweet
thought, no tender hope can come to thee. I plead not now for my poor
self, but for thine own heart thou doth wrong so cruelly by such vain
dreams.

Adrian. Enough. Thou hast a noble name and men will honor thee, thou
wilt suffer neither pain nor want. I will leave thee and wander forth to
seek mine own sad lot. Farewell, and when they ask thee for thy husband,
tell them thou hast none, and so be happy [_turns to go_].

Nina. Oh, Adrian, I implore thee stay. I will bear all thy coldness, ay
even thy contempt. I will toil for thee and seek to win the gold for
which thou dost sigh, I will serve thee well and truly, for with all my
heart I love thee still. Leave me not now or I shall die! [_Kneels and
clasps his hand._]

Adrian. I am a slave till death shall set me free. We shall not meet
again. Nay, kneel not to me. I do forgive thee, but I cannot love thee
[_rushes out_].

Nina. This is more than I can bear. Oh, Father, take thy poor child
home, and still the sorrow of this broken heart.

                                CURTAIN.


                             SCENE SECOND.

                     [_Home of_ Hagar, _the gypsy.
                     Enter_ Hagar _and_ Nina.]

Hagar. What brings thee hither, gentle lady, and how can the wanderer
serve the high-born and the fair?

Nina [_sadly_]. There is often deeper sorrow in the palace than the cot,
good Hagar, and I seek thee for some counsel that will cure the pain of
a lonely heart. I have tried all others' skill in vain, and come to thee
so learned in mystic lore to give me help. I am rich and can repay thee
well.

Hagar. I can read a sad tale in thy pale and gentle face, dear lady.
Thou art young and loving, but the hope of youth is gone; and thou art
sorrowing with no fond heart whereon to lean, no tender voice to comfort
and to cheer. Ah, have I read aright? Then the only charm to still thy
pain is death.

Nina. 'Tis death I long for. That still, dreamless sleep would bring me
peace. But 'tis a fearful thing to take the life God gave, and I dare
not. Canst thou not give me help?

Hagar. Within this tiny casket there is that which brings a quiet sleep
filled with happy dreams, and they who drink the draught lie down and
slumber, and if not awakened it will end in death. But thou, sweet lady,
wouldst not leave this fair world yet. Tell me more, for this old heart
is warm and tender still, and perchance I can help thee.

Nina. 'Tis strange that I can feel such faith in thee, kind friend, but
I am young and lonely and I seek some heart for counsel. Thou art from
my own fair land and I will tell thee of my sorrow. 'Tis a short, sad
tale. I loved, was wed, and then--oh, darksome day--I learned my husband
felt no love, and sought me only for my gold. I was penniless, and thus
he cast me off; and now for long, long weeks I have not seen him, for he
would not dwell with her who loved him more than life itself. Now give
me some sweet charm to win that lost heart back. Ah, Hagar, help me.

Hagar. I can give thee no truer charm than that fair face and noble
soul, dear lady. Be thou but firm and faithful in thy love and it will
win thy husband back. God bless and grant all happiness to one who doth
so truly need it.

Nina. Give me the casket; and when life hath grown too bitter to be
borne then will I gladly lay the burden down, and blessing him I love so
well sleep that calm slumber that knows no awaking. Farewell, Hagar,
thou hast given me comfort and I thank thee.

                                                           [_Exit_ Nina.

                                CURTAIN.


                              SCENE THIRD.

              [_One year is supposed to have elapsed._ _A
              room in the palace of_ Nina. _Enter_ Adrian
                             _disguised_.]

Adrian. Here last I saw her one long year ago. How the wild, sweet voice
still rings in my ear imploring me to stay. I can find no rest save
here; and thus do I seek my home, worn out by my long wandering, and
trusting to learn tidings of poor Nina. If she be true and love me still
I will cast away my pride, my coldness, and all vain hopes of wealth,
and let the sunlight of that pure, young life brighten my life
henceforth. I hear a step, and will hide here, perchance I may thus see
her [_hides behind curtain_].

                                                          [_Enter_ Nina.

Nina. No rest for thee poor heart, ever whispering that dear name, ever
sorrowing for those hard words that gave so deep a wound. All is dark
and lonely, for he is gone. Only these withered flowers, dearer by far
than my most costly gems, for his hand hath touched them, and he smiled
on me when they were given. Oh, Adrian, wilt thou never give one tender
thought to her who still loves and prays for thee? Death will soon free
thee from thy hated wife.

                                                           [_Exit_ Nina.

Adrian [_stealing forth_]. And this is she, whose pure young love I have
cast away, the fond, trusting bride I left alone and friendless. She
still loves on, and offers up her prayers for one who sought to break
that tender heart so cruelly. I will watch well and guard thee, Nina;
and if thou art truly mine thou shalt find a happy home with him thy
patient love hath won.

                                     [_Exit_ Adrian _and re-enter_ Nina.

Nina [_with_ Adrian's _picture_]. Ah, these cold eyes smile kindly on me
here, and the lips seem speaking tender words. Other faces are
perchance more fair, but none so dear to me. Oh, husband, thou hast cast
me off; and yet, though lonely and forsaken, I still can cherish loving
thoughts of thee, and round thy image gather all the tender feelings
that a woman's heart can know. Thy cruel words I can forgive, and the
trusting love I gave thee glows as warmly now as when thou didst cast it
by and left me broken-hearted [_weeps_; _enter_ Don Felix]. My lord,
what seekest thou with me? Thou dost smile. Ah, hast thou tidings of my
husband? Tell me quickly, I beseech thee.

Don Felix. Nay, dear lady--But sit thee down and let me tell thee why I
came. [_He leads her to a sofa._] Thou knowest I have been with thee
from a child. I stood beside thee at the altar, and was the first to
cheer and comfort thee when thou wast left deserted and alone. Let me
now ask thee, Wouldst thou not gladly change thy sad lot here for a gay
and joyous life with one who loves thee fondly?

Nina. It were indeed a happy lot to be so loved and cherished; but
where, alas, is he who could thus feel for one so lonely and forsaken?

Don Felix [_kneeling_]. Here at thy feet, dear Nina. Nay, do not turn
away, but let me tell thee of the love that hath grown within my heart.
[_Nina starts up._] Thy wedded lord hath cast thee off. The law can free
thee. Ah, then be mine, and let me win and wear the lovely flower which
he hath cast away.

Nina. Lord Felix, as the wife of him thou dost so wrong, I answer thee.
Dost thou not know the more a woman's heart is crushed and wounded the
more tenderly it clings where first it loved; and though deserted, ay,
though hated, I had rather be the slighted wife of him, than the honored
bride of the false Costella. Now leave me--I would be alone.

Don Felix. A time will come, proud woman, when thou shalt bend the knee
to him whom now thou dost so scorn. Beware, for I will have a fierce
revenge for the proud words thou hast spoken.

Nina. I am strong in mine own heart and fear thee not. Work thy will and
thou shalt find the wife of Adrian de Mortemar needs no protector save
her own fearless hand.

                                                           [_Exit_ Nina.

Don Felix. Now, by my faith, thou shalt bow that haughty head, and sue
to me for mercy, and I will deny it. I'll win her yet, she shall not
idly brave my anger. Now to my work,--revenge.

                                                      [_Exit_ Don Felix.

                                CURTAIN.


                             SCENE FOURTH.

                    [_Apartment in palace of_ Nina.
                             Nina _alone_.]

Nina. Ever thus alone, mourning for him who loves me not; was ever heart
so sad as mine. Oh, Adrian, couldst thou but return even for one short
hour to thy poor Nina. [_Enter_ Adrian, _disguised_.] Ha, who art thou
that dares to enter here in such mysterious guise? Thine errand,
quickly,--speak.

Adrian. Forgive me, lady, if I cause thee fear; I would have thee know
me as a friend, one who will watch above thee, and seek to spare thee
every sorrow. Dear lady, think me not too bold, for I have known thee
long and have a right to all thy confidence. Thy husband was my nearest
friend; and, when he left thee friendless and alone, I vowed to guard
and save thee in all peril. Wilt thou trust me? See, I bear his
ring,--thou knowest it?

Nina. 'Tis indeed his ring. Whence came it? Ah, hast thou seen him? Tell
me, and I will give thee all my confidence and thanks [_takes the ring
and gazes beseechingly upon_ Adrian, _who turns aside_].

Adrian. He is well, lady, and happy as one can be who bears a cold,
proud heart within his breast. He has cast away an angel who could have
cheered and blessed his life, and sought to find in gold the happiness
thy love alone could bring. He has suffered, as he well deserves to do.
Spend not thy pity upon him.

Nina [_proudly_]. And who art thou to speak thus of him? Thou canst not
judge till thou also hast been tried and like him deceived. He sought
for wealth to bring him fame and honor; and when he found it not, what
wonder that he cast aside the love that could not bring him happiness.
Thou art no true friend to speak thus of one so worthy to be loved. And
think not I reproach him for my lonely lot. Ah, no, I still love on; and
if he wins the wealth he covets I can give my heart's best blessing, and
so pass away that he shall never know whose hand hath crushed the flower
that would have clung about his life and shed its perfume there [_turns
away weeping_].

Adrian [_aside_]. She loves me still. I'll try her further [_aloud_].
Lady, idle tongues have whispered that when thy lord deserted thee thou
didst find a solace for thy grief in a new lover's smiles. Perchance yon
picture may be some gay lord who hath cheered thy solitude and won thy
heart. I fain would ask thee.

Nina. Sir stranger, little dost thou know a woman's heart. I have found
a comfort for my lonely hours in weeping o'er the face whose smiles
could brighten life for me, or dim it by disdain and coldness. The face
is there; my first, last, only love is given to him who thinks it
worthless and hath cast it by.

Adrian [_taking the picture_]. 'Tis the Count, thy husband. Lady, he is
unworthy such true love; leave him to his fate, and let not thy life be
darkened by his cruelty and hate.

Nina. Thou canst not tempt me to forget. No other love can win me from
the only one who hath a place within my heart. Let me cherish all the
memories of him, and till life shall cease be true unto my husband. Now
leave me, unknown friend; I trust thee for his sake, and will accept thy
friendship and protection. I offer thee my gratitude and thanks for thy
kind service, and will gladly seek how best I may repay it.

Adrian. Thanks, lady. Thou shalt find me true and faithful, and my best
reward will be the joy I labor to restore to thee [_kneels and kisses
her hand_].

Nina. Farewell, again I thank thee.

                                                           [_Exit_ Nina.

Adrian. So young, so lovely, so forsaken, who would not pity and
protect. I will guard her well, and ere long claim the treasure I so
madly cast away ere I had learned its priceless value. Nina, thou shalt
yet be happy on the bosom of thy erring and repentant husband.

                                                         [_Exit_ Adrian.

                                CURTAIN.


                              SCENE FIFTH.

                     [_Hall in the palace of_ Nina.
                     _Enter_ Nina _and_ Don Felix.]

Nina. I tell thee, my lord, I will not listen, naught thou canst say
will change my firm resolve. I cannot wed thee.

Don Felix. Nay, then listen. Thy cruel husband left thee and for one
long year thou hast sorrowed in thy lonely home, and would not be
comforted. He hath returned.

Nina. Ah--[_Rushes forward._]

Don Felix. Thou may'st well start, but think not he will come to thee,
chains hold him fast and--mark ye--'twas _I_ who bound those chains.

Nina. Do I dream, my husband here and in captivity; nay, I believe thee
not. 'Tis a false tale to anger me. I heed thee not [_turns away
haughtily_].

Don Felix. Thou wilt heed me ere I am done. What thinkest thou of this
thy husband's dagger? See, here his name. 'Twas taken from his hands ere
the cold chains bound them. Ah, thou dost believe me now!

Nina. Oh, tell on. I _will_ listen now. Why hast thou done this cruel
deed? Why make this his welcome home? Thou hast fettered and imprisoned
him and now art here to tell me of it? Ah, dost thou hate him? Then give
all thy hate to me; but oh, I pray thee, comfort him.

Don Felix. When thou didst reject my suit, I told thee I would be
revenged; I said a day would come when thou, so cold and haughty then,
would kneel to me imploring mercy and I would deny thee. That time hath
come, and I am deaf to all thy prayers.

Nina. For his sake will I kneel to thee beseeching liberty for _him_. I
had no love to give thee. Ah, pardon if I spake with scorn, and pity me.
What can I do to win thee back to mercy? Ah, listen and be generous.

Don Felix. 'Tis now too late. He is in my power; and a dagger can soon
rid thee of a cruel husband, me of a hated rival.

Nina. God have pity on me now. Don Felix, let me plead once more. Set
Adrian free, and I will take his place in yon dark cell and welcome
there the dagger that shall set me free.

Don Felix. And wilt _thou_ wear the chains? Wilt enter that lone cell
and perish there? Canst thou do this?

Nina. Ay, gladly will I suffer pain, captivity, and death, for thee,
Adrian, for thee.

Don Felix. Then woman's love is stronger than man's hate, and I envy him
you would die for, Nina.

Nina. Ah, love alone can make home blest, and here it dwells not. I can
free him from his fetters and his hated wife. Tell him I loved him to
the last, and blessed him ere I died. Lead on, my lord, I am ready.

Don Felix [_aside_]. I thought I had steeled my heart with hatred and
revenge; but oh, they pass away before such holy love as this. Would I
could win her to myself, for she would lead me on to virtue and to
happiness. Yet one more trial and she may be mine at last.

                                                            [_Tableaux._

                                CURTAIN.


                              SCENE SIXTH.

                   [_Street near_ Adrian's _palace_.
                            _Enter_ Adrian.]

Adrian. 'Tis all discovered, my mysterious captivity and my release. Don
Felix, whom I trusted, wove the dark plot and sought by false words to
win Nina from me. He has dared to love her; and he shall dearly pay for
his presumption. He knows not that I watched above her in disguise; and
now while I was in captivity he hath taken her from her home. Let him
beware. If aught of harm hath come to her, woe betide him who hath
caused one tear to fall, or one sad fear to trouble her. I must seek and
save her. No peril will be too great to win her back to this heart that
longs so fondly for her now.

                                                        [_Exit_ Adrian.

                                CURTAIN.


                             SCENE SEVENTH.

                 [_A cell in the palace of_ Don Felix.
                            Nina _chained_.]

Nina. 'T is strange; here in this dark cell, tho' fettered and alone, I
feel a deeper joy than when a proud and envied bride I dwelt in my
deserted home. For here his foot hath trod; these walls have echoed to
the voice I love; these chains so cold and heavy I more gladly wear than
e'en the costly gems once clasped upon these arms, for they were his.
Here his sad tears fell perchance for his captivity; but I can smile and
bless the hour when I could win thy freedom, Adrian, with my poor
liberty. Hark--they come. Is it to claim the vow I made to yield my
bosom to the dagger meant for his? I am ready. [_Enter_ Don Felix.]
Alone, my lord; methought it were too sad a task for thee to take my
life. Well, be it so; you claim my vow. I can die still blessing thee,
my Adrian [_kneels before_ Don Felix].

Don Felix. Rise, Nina; ah, kneel not to me, nor think this hand could
take the life it prizes more than happiness or honor. I came not here to
harm thee; Heaven forbid! I came once more to offer thee my heart, my
home, and all the boundless love you have so scorned. Thy husband hath
deserted thee; no ties too fast to sever bind thee to him. Thou art
alone, a captive, and I alone can free thee. Think of the love I bear
thee, Nina, and be mine [_takes her hand_].

Nina. Where is thy boasted honor now? Where the solemn vow thou didst
make me that my lonely cell should be as sacred to thee as my palace
halls? Where is thy pity for the helpless wife of him whom thou didst
call thy friend? I never loved thee, now I scorn thee. A true and pure
affection never binds such chains as these, nor causes bitter tears like
mine to flow. Rather suffer death than cherish in my heart one tender
thought of thee. Thou hast my answer, now leave me.

Don Felix. Not yet, proud captive. I have sought to win thee gently; but
now, beware. Think not to escape me, thou shalt feel how deep a
vengeance I can bring on thee and him thou lovest. Thou shalt suffer all
the sorrow I can inflict,--shalt know thy proud lord forsaken and in
danger when a word from me can save, and _that_ word I will not speak.
All the grief and pain and hatred that my jealous heart can give will I
heap upon his head, and thus through him I will revenge myself on thee.

Nina. Thou canst not harm him, he is safe and free. Do thy worst, I care
not what fate thou hast for me, a fearless hand soon finds a way to free
a soul from sorrow and captivity. This heart thou canst not reach. It
fears thee not.

Don Felix. Can I not make thee tremble, haughty woman? I love thee
still, and I will win thee. I go to work thee sorrow; and when next we
meet I will bring thee token of thy husband's death or, what may touch
thee nearer, his hate of thee.

                                                      [_Exit_ Don Felix.

Nina. 'Tis a dark and fearful dream,--Adrian in danger, and I cannot
save him. Oh, that I were free again, naught should stay me; and I would
win him back by the power of woman's love and faith. Lord Felix will
return, he hath vowed revenge; where then can I look for a true heart to
comfort and protect me [_sinks down in despair_].

                                   [_Enter_ Adrian, _still in disguise_.]

Adrian. Here is a friend to aid thee.

Nina [_starting up_]. Who--who art thou?

Adrian. Thy guardian. Lady, thou hast said thou wouldst trust me, and I
am here to save.

Nina. Forgive me that I doubt thee; yet I do fear to trust, for I am
well-nigh crazed with sorrow. Art thou my husband's friend?

Adrian. I am true as Heaven to thee, poor lady. I have watched above
thee and can save. Here, here is the ring thou knowest; ah, do not doubt
me.

Nina. I know thee now and put all my faith in thee. Take me hence. Ah,
save me! Lead me to my home, and the thanks of a broken heart are thine.
Lead on, kind friend, I will follow thee.

Adrian [_aside_]. Oh, this is a bitter punishment for me. It breaks my
heart. [Aloud.] This way, dear lady, a secret door doth let us forth;
step thou lightly. Thus let me shroud thee.

    [_He wraps_ Nina _in a dark robe, and they disappear thro' the
        secret door_.

                                CURTAIN.


                             SCENE EIGHTH.

                           [Nina's _chamber_.
                       _Enter_ Nina _and_ Hagar.]

Nina. Welcome to thee, Hagar; sit thee down and tell me why hast thou
come to seek me in my lonely home?

Hagar. Sweet lady, fear not; no evil tidings do I bring, but a wondrous
tale of happiness in store for thee. When thy father died, few doubted
but his wealth would come to thee; and it would, indeed, have all been
thine had not that false Don Felix stolen the will away. He took the
paper that left all to thee, and thus he won the orphan's gold. But
three short days ago, a dreadful crime which he had done was brought to
light, and he hath fled. He told me all and bid me give thee, this, thy
father's will. [Hagar _gives paper to_ Nina.]

Nina. 'Tis strange, most strange. But tell me, Hagar, how didst thou
come to know that evil man?

Hagar. I knew him when he came from Italy with thee and thy father years
ago. And as I watched thy path through life so I watched his, and thus
he learned to trust me. 'Tis thus I gained for thee that wealth so long
withheld; and now my work is done. Thou wilt win thy husband's love, and
so be happy. God bless thee, gentle lady, and farewell.

Nina. Ah, stay and tell me how can I best show the gratitude I deeply
feel. Thou hast brought me wealth and happiness, how can I repay thee?

Hagar. I ask no other joy than that I see in thy fair face. I go now to
my own dear land, and we shall not meet again; but old Hagar will
remember thee, and pray that life may be one long, bright dream of love
with the husband thou hast won. Farewell.

                                                          [_Exit_ Hagar.

Nina. The clouds have passed away and I am happy now; and the wealth
_he_ longed for it is mine to give. Oh, Adrian, come back to her thou
hast cast aside. [_An arrow bearing a letter is thrown in at the window
and falls at her feet._] What means this letter? Stay, let me see what
it may tell me. 'Tis from Adrian. Ah, does an angel watch above me that
such joy is mine? [_Opens the letter and reads._]

    Think not to win me back with thy new wealth; I cannot love
    thee. Be happy with thy gold; it cannot buy the heart of the
    unhappy
                                                         Adrian.

Nina. This from him! No, no, it cannot be; he would not speak such words
to me; his wife. Yet, 't is his hand--I must believe--and a deeper
darkness gathers round me. No joy, no hope, is left to bind me unto
life. If I were gone he might be happy with another. I can never win his
love, then why live on to dim his pathway. I will leave my gold to him,
for it is worthless now; and when, with her he loves in some fair home,
he sends perchance one thought of her who died to free him, I shall be
repaid for this last sacrifice. Ah, Hagar, little didst thou think the
joy foretold would end so soon, and this thy gift would win for me the
rest I long for now [_takes from her bosom the phial and drinks_]. It
will soon be past. Now, till sleep steals o'er me, I will send one last
word, Adrian, to thee. [_She writes, then sinks upon the couch._] My
heart grows faint, and my eyes are heavy with the last slumber they
shall ever know. The poison does its work too soon; but I am done with
life, and the soft, sweet sleep of death is holding me. Oh, my husband,
may this last deed of mine give thee all the joy it could not bring to
her who could only die for thee. Farewell life, farewell love; my latest
prayer is for thee, Adrian. [_She lies down and falls gently asleep._]


                                CURTAIN.


                              SCENE NINTH.

                      [_Terrace in_ Nina's _garden_.
                      _Enter_ Adrian _with letter_.]

Adrian. What means this letter from her hand? 'Twas given me by her
servant while she slept. Does she call me home again? Ah, little can she
know how fondly now her cold, proud husband longs to fold her in his
arms and bless the hour when he lost wealth and won her noble love.
[_Opens the letter and reads._]

    I send thee back the cruel words that have banished all the
    hopes of happiness with thee. I cannot win thy heart; and this
    sad truth hath broken mine. And now, upon my dying bed, I leave
    thee all the wealth that could not win one tender smile for her
    who pined for it in vain. Thou hast scorned my love, take thou
    the gold which is worthless to me now. Farewell, my husband; I
    am faithful to the last, and my lips blessed thee ere they
    drank the draught that soon will free me from my sorrow, and
    thee from thy unloved but loving
                                                               Nina.

Adrian. My cruel words? What means this? Stay, there is another paper,
and it may tell me more. [_Reads_ Felix's _forged letter and dashes it
down_.] 'Tis false, false as the villain's heart who forged the lie and
brought agony like this to that pure, loving heart. Oh, Nina, Nina, now
when I so fondly love thee, thou hast been deceived, and died still
blessing him thou deemed so cruel and so cold. Oh, that I could but win
thee back for one short hour, that I might tell my penitence and my deep
sorrow for the grief I have brought thee. Yet, blessed thought, it may
not be too late. She slept but one short hour ago, when this was taken
from her hand. She may yet linger at the gates of death, and I may call
her back to happiness and life once more. Oh, if I may but win this
blessing to my heart, my life shall be one prayer of thankfulness for
the great boon [_rushes out_].


                                CURTAIN.


                              SCENE TENTH.

                           [Nina's _chamber_.
              Nina _lies in a deep trance upon her couch_.
                          Adrian _rushes in_.]

Adrian. Nina! Nina! wake, love, it is I thy husband who doth call thee.
Oh, can I not win thee back to life now when I have learned to love with
all my heart's faith and fondness. [_He kisses her hands and weeps._]
Calm and still she lies, all my tender words cannot awake her, and these
bitter tears but fall unheeded and in vain. Was it for this I won that
warm young heart,--for this short sorrowing life, this lonely death? Ah,
couldst thou see this proud heart humbled now, and these repentant tears
that wet thy quiet brow. Nina, wife, oh, wake and tell me I am forgiven!
[_Kneels beside her._]

Nina [_rousing_]. Adrian!

Adrian [_starting up_]. She breathes, she lives, my prayer is heard.
'Tis not too late.

Nina [_still dreaming_]. Methought I was in heaven, for Adrian bent o'er
me; the face I loved smiled lovingly upon me, sweet tender words were
spoken, and the joy of that short moment well repaid the sorrow I had
borne ere that last sleep came. I am happy now for Adrian hath said he
loves me.

Adrian. Thy deathlike sleep still hangs about thee, thou art still on
earth, and I am here to bring thee joy. Ah, waken and learn thy dream is
true. Thy husband loves thee.

Nina. So the sweet vision said, but it hath passed, and this will vanish
too. Ah, why hast thou called me back? Life is but a chain that binds me
unto sorrow, then let me sleep again and dream that Adrian is true.

Adrian. Nina! Nina! rouse thyself, it is no dream; he hath bent above
thee weeping bitter tears and pouring forth his whole heart's love,
remorse, and sorrow. His voice hath called thee back to life, and he is
here. [Nina _rises and looks wildly about her_.] Here, love, at thy feet
seeking thy pardon for the deep wrong he hath done thee, praying thy
forgiveness! [_Throws himself at her feet._ Nina _stretches forth her
arms, and they embrace with tears of joy_.]

Nina. Adrian, husband, I have naught to pardon. Thou hast won me from
the sleep of death, I am thine, thy heart is my home, and I am only
happy there.

Adrian. I am unworthy such great happiness. Oh, Nina, thou art the true
angel of my life; and thou hast led me on to win a deeper joy than all
the wealth of earth could give. I cast thy pure affection by, and sought
in selfish sorrow to forget thee; but I could not. Thy dear face shone
in all my dreams, and thy voice still lingered in mine ear, imploring me
to love thee. Then I returned to find thee drooping like a blighted
flower. All loved and honored thee; and I vowed to watch, and, if I
found thee true and loving still, to tell thee all, and give my heart to
thee forever. I have now won thee, and I love thee, dearest.

Nina. Oh, I am too blest! Life is a flower-strewn path henceforth, where
I will gladly journey if thou wilt be my guide; and here upon thy
breast, dear love, now smiles the happy wife,--no longer the lonely and
unloved one.

                                                             [_Tableau._

                                CURTAIN.




                    LOUISA M. ALCOTT'S FAMOUS BOOKS.

                [Illustration: Walton Bucketson. Sculp.

                          _Louisa May Alcott_]

                   *       *       *       *       *

JO'S BOYS, AND HOW THEY TURNED OUT. A sequel to "Little Men." With a new
portrait of "Aunt Jo." Price, $1.50.

                                    ROBERTS BROTHERS. Publishers, Boston.




                            SUSAN COOLIDGE'S

                          POPULAR STORY BOOKS.


Susan Coolidge has always possessed the affection of her young readers,
for it seems as if she had the happy instinct of planning stories that
each girl would like to act out in reality.--_The Critic._

Not even Miss Alcott apprehends child nature with finer sympathy, or
pictures its nobler traits with more skill.--_Boston Daily Advertiser._


=THE NEW YEAR'S BARGAIN.= A Christmas Story for Children. With
    Illustrations by Addie Ledyard. 16mo. $1.25.

=WHAT KATY DID.= A Story. With Illustrations by Addie Ledyard. 16mo.
    $1.25.

=WHAT KATY DID AT SCHOOL.= Being more about "What Katy Did." With
    Illustrations. 16mo. $1.25.

=MISCHIEF'S THANKSGIVING=, and other Stories. With Illustrations by
    Addie Ledyard. 16mo. $1.25.

=NINE LITTLE GOSLINGS.= With Illustrations by J. A. Mitchell. 16mo.
    $1.25.

=EYEBRIGHT.= A Story. With Illustrations. 16mo. $1.25.

=CROSS PATCH.= With Illustrations. 16mo. $1.25.

=A ROUND DOZEN.= With Illustrations. 16mo. $1.25.

=A LITTLE COUNTRY GIRL.= With Illustrations. 16mo. $1.25.

=WHAT KATY DID NEXT.= With Illustrations. 16mo. $1.25.

=CLOVER.= A Sequel to the Katy Books. With Illustrations by Jessie
    McDermott. 16mo. $1.25.

=JUST SIXTEEN.= With Illustrations. 16mo. $1.25.

=IN THE HIGH VALLEY.= With Illustrations. 16mo. $1.25.

=A GUERNSEY LILY=; or, How the Feud was Healed. A Story of the
    Channel Islands. Profusely Illustrated. 16mo. $1.25.

=THE BARBERRY BUSH=, and Seven Other Stories about Girls for Girls.
    With Illustrations by Jessie McDermott. 16mo. $1.25.


_Sold by all Booksellers. Mailed, post-paid, on receipt of price, by the
Publishers._

                                               ROBERTS BROTHERS, Boston.






EIGHT COUSINS

By Louisa M. Alcott




Preface

The Author is quite aware of the defects of this little story, many of
which were unavoidable, as it first appeared serially. But, as Uncle
Alec's experiment was intended to amuse the young folks, rather than
suggest educational improvements for the consideration of the elders,
she trusts that these shortcomings will be overlooked by the friends of
the Eight Cousins, and she will try to make amends in a second volume,
which shall attempt to show The Rose in Bloom.

L.M.A.




Chapter 1--Two Girls

Rose sat all alone in the big best parlor, with her little handkerchief
laid ready to catch the first tear, for she was thinking of her
troubles, and a shower was expected. She had retired to this room as a
good place in which to be miserable; for it was dark and still, full of
ancient furniture, sombre curtains, and hung all around with portraits
of solemn old gentlemen in wigs, severe-nosed ladies in top-heavy caps,
and staring children in little bob-tailed coats or short-waisted frocks.
It was an excellent place for woe; and the fitful spring rain that
pattered on the window-pane seemed to sob, "Cry away: I'm with you."

Rose really did have some cause to be sad; for she had no mother, and
had lately lost her father also, which left her no home but this with
her great-aunts. She had been with them only a week, and, though the
dear old ladies had tried their best to make her happy, they had not
succeeded very well, for she was unlike any child they had ever seen,
and they felt very much as if they had the care of a low-spirited
butterfly.

They had given her the freedom of the house, and for a day or two
she had amused herself roaming all over it, for it was a capital old
mansion, and was full of all manner of odd nooks, charming rooms, and
mysterious passages. Windows broke out in unexpected places, little
balconies overhung the garden most romantically, and there was a long
upper hall full of curiosities from all parts of the world; for the
Campbells had been sea-captains for generations.

Aunt Plenty had even allowed Rose to rummage in her great china closet
a spicy retreat, rich in all the "goodies" that children love; but Rose
seemed to care little for these toothsome temptations; and when that
hope failed, Aunt Plenty gave up in despair.

Gentle Aunt Peace had tried all sorts of pretty needle-work, and planned
a doll's wardrobe that would have won the heart of even an older child.
But Rose took little interest in pink satin hats and tiny hose, though
she sewed dutifully till her aunt caught her wiping tears away with the
train of a wedding-dress, and that discovery put an end to the sewing
society.

Then both old ladies put their heads together and picked out the model
child of the neighbourhood to come and play with their niece. But
Ariadne Blish was the worst failure of all, for Rose could not bear the
sight of her, and said she was so like a wax doll she longed to give
her a pinch and see if she would squeak. So prim little Ariadne was sent
home, and the exhausted aunties left Rose to her own devices for a day
or two.

Bad weather and a cold kept her in-doors, and she spent most of her time
in the library where her father's books were stored. Here she read a
great deal, cried a little, and dreamed many of the innocent bright
dreams in which imaginative children find such comfort and delight. This
suited her better than anything else, but it was not good for her, and
she grew pale, heavy-eyed and listless, though Aunt Plenty gave her iron
enough to make a cooking-stove, and Aunt Peace petted her like a poodle.

Seeing this, the poor aunties racked their brains for a new amusement
and determined to venture a bold stroke, though not very hopeful of its
success. They said nothing to Rose about their plan for this Saturday
afternoon, but let her alone till the time came for the grand surprise,
little dreaming that the odd child would find pleasure for herself in a
most unexpected quarter.

Before she had time to squeeze out a single tear a sound broke the
stillness, making her prick up her ears. It was only the soft twitter
of a bird, but it seemed to be a peculiarly gifted bird, for while she
listened the soft twitter changed to a lively whistle, then a trill, a
coo, a chirp, and ended in a musical mixture of all the notes, as if the
bird burst out laughing. Rose laughed also, and, forgetting her woes,
jumped up, saying eagerly,

"It is a mocking-bird. Where is it?"

Running down the long hall, she peeped out at both doors, but saw
nothing feathered except a draggle-tailed chicken under a burdock leaf.
She listened again, and the sound seemed to be in the house. Away she
went, much excited by the chase, and following the changeful song, it
led her to the china-closet door.

"In there? How funny!" she said. But when she entered, not a bird
appeared except the everlastingly kissing swallows on the Canton china
that lined the shelves. All of a sudden Rose's face brightened, and,
softly opening the slide, she peered into the kitchen. But the music
had stopped, and all she saw was a girl in a blue apron scrubbing the
hearth. Rose stared about her for a minute, and then asked abruptly,

"Did you hear that mocking-bird?"

"I should call it a phebe-bird," answered the girl, looking up with a
twinkle in her black eyes.

"Where did it go?"

"It is here still."

"Where?"

"In my throat. Do you want to hear it?"

"Oh, yes! I'll come in." And Rose crept through the slide to the wide
shelf on the other side, being too hurried and puzzled to go round by
the door.

The girl wiped her hands, crossed her feet on the little island of
carpet where she was stranded in a sea of soap-suds, and then, sure
enough, out of her slender throat came the swallow's twitter, the
robin's whistle, the blue-jay's call, the thrush's song, the wood-dove's
coo, and many another familiar note, all ending as before with the
musical ecstacy of a bobolink singing and swinging among the meadow
grass on a bright June day.

Rose was so astonished that she nearly fell off her perch, and when the
little concert was over clapped her hands delightedly.

"Oh, it was lovely! Who taught you?"

"The birds," answered the girl, with a smile, as she fell to work again.

"It is very wonderful! I can sing, but nothing half so fine as that.
What is your name, please?"

"Phebe Moore."

"I've heard of phebe-birds; but I don't believe the real ones could do
that," laughed Rose, adding, as she watched with interest the scattering
of dabs of soft soap over the bricks, "May I stay and see you work? It
is very lonely in the parlor."

"Yes, indeed, if you want to," answered Phebe, wringing out her cloth in
a capable sort of way that impressed Rose very much.

"It must be fun to swash the water round and dig out the soap. I'd love
to do it, only aunt wouldn't like it, I suppose," said Rose, quite taken
with the new employment.

"You'd soon get tired, so you'd better keep tidy and look on."

"I suppose you help your mother a good deal?"

"I haven't got any folks."

"Why, where do you live, then?"

"I'm going to live here, I hope. Debby wants some one to help round, and
I've come to try for a week."

"I hope you will stay, for it is very dull," said Rose, who had taken a
sudden fancy to this girl, who sung like a bird and worked like a woman.

"Hope I shall; for I'm fifteen now, and old enough to earn my own
living. You have come to stay a spell, haven't you?" asked Phebe,
looking up at her guest and wondering how life could be dull to a girl
who wore a silk frock, a daintily frilled apron, a pretty locket, and
had her hair tied up with a velvet snood.

"Yes, I shall stay till my uncle comes. He is my guardian now, and I
don't know what he will do with me. Have you a guardian?"

"My sakes, no! I was left on the poor-house steps a little mite of
a baby, and Miss Rogers took a liking to me, so I've been there ever
since. But she is dead now, and I take care of myself."

"How interesting! It is like Arabella Montgomery in the 'Gypsy's Child.'
Did you ever read that sweet story?" asked Rose, who was fond of tales
of found-lings, and had read many.

"I don't have any books to read, and all the spare time I get I run off
into the woods; that rests me better than stories," answered Phebe, as
she finished one job and began on another.

Rose watched her as she got out a great pan of beans to look over, and
wondered how it would seem to have life all work and no play. Presently
Phebe seemed to think it was her turn to ask questions, and said,
wistfully,

"You've had lots of schooling, I suppose?"

"Oh, dear me, yes! I've been at boarding school nearly a year, and I'm
almost dead with lessons. The more I got, the more Miss Power gave me,
and I was so miserable that I 'most cried my eyes out. Papa never gave
me hard things to do, and he always taught me so pleasantly I loved to
study. Oh, we were so happy and so fond of one another! But now he is
gone, and I am left all alone."

The tear that would not come when Rose sat waiting for it came now of
its own accord two of them in fact and rolled down her cheeks, telling
the tale of love and sorrow better than any words could do it.

For a minute there was no sound in the kitchen but the little daughter's
sobbing and the sympathetic patter of the rain. Phebe stopped rattling
her beans from one pan to another, and her eyes were full of pity as
they rested on the curly head bent down on Rose's knee, for she saw that
the heart under the pretty locket ached with its loss, and the dainty
apron was used to dry sadder tears than any she had ever shed.

Somehow, she felt more contented with her brown calico gown and
blue-checked pinafore; envy changed to compassion; and if she had dared
she would have gone and hugged her afflicted guest.

Fearing that might not be considered proper, she said, in her cheery
voice,

"I'm sure you ain't all alone with such a lot of folks belonging to
you, and all so rich and clever. You'll be petted to pieces, Debby says,
because you are the only girl in the family."

Phebe's last words made Rose smile in spite of her tears, and she looked
out from behind her apron with an April face, saying in a tone of comic
distress,

"That's one of my troubles! I've got six aunts, and they all want
me, and I don't know any of them very well. Papa named this place the
Aunt-hill, and now I see why."

Phebe laughed with her as she said encouragingly,

"Everyone calls it so, and it's a real good name, for all the Mrs.
Campbells live handy by, and keep coming up to see the old ladies."

"I could stand the aunts, but there are dozens of cousins, dreadful
boys all of them, and I detest boys! Some of them came to see me last
Wednesday, but I was lying down, and when auntie came to call me I went
under the quilt and pretended to be asleep. I shall have to see them
some time, but I do dread it so." And Rose gave a shudder, for, having
lived alone with her invalid father, she knew nothing of boys, and
considered them a species of wild animal.

"Oh! I guess you'll like 'em. I've seen 'em flying round when they
come over from the Point, sometimes in their boats and sometimes
on horseback. If you like boats and horses, you'll enjoy yourself
first-rate."

"But I don't! I'm afraid of horses, and boats make me ill, and I hate
boys!" And poor Rose wrung her hands at the awful prospect before her.
One of these horrors alone she could have borne, but all together were
too much for her, and she began to think of a speedy return to the
detested school.

Phebe laughed at her woe till the beans danced in the pan, but tried to
comfort her by suggesting a means of relief.

"Perhaps your uncle will take you away where there ain't any boys. Debby
says he is a real kind man, and always bring heaps of nice things when
he comes."

"Yes, but you see that is another trouble, for I don't know Uncle Alec
at all. He hardly ever came to see us, though he sent me pretty things
very often. Now I belong to him, and shall have to mind him, till I am
eighteen. I may not like him a bit, and I fret about it all the time."

"Well, I wouldn't borrow trouble, but have a real good time. I'm sure I
should think I was in clover if I had folks and money, and nothing to
do but enjoy myself," began Phebe, but got no further, for a sudden rush
and tumble outside made them both jump.

"It's thunder," said Phebe.

"It's a circus!" cried Rose, who from her elevated perch had caught
glimpses of a gay cart of some sort and several ponies with flying manes
and tails.

The sound died away, and the girls were about to continue their
confidences when old Debby appeared, looking rather cross and sleepy
after her nap.

"You are wanted in the parlor, Miss Rose."

"Has anybody come?"

"Little girls shouldn't ask questions, but do as they are bid," was all
Debby would answer.

"I do hope it isn't Aunt Myra; she always scares me out of my wits
asking how my cough is, and groaning over me as if I was going to die,"
said Rose, preparing to retire the way she came, for the slide, being
cut for the admission of bouncing Christmas turkeys and puddings, was
plenty large enough for a slender girl.

"Guess you'll wish it was Aunt Myra when you see who has come. Don't
never let me catch you coming into my kitchen that way again, or I'll
shut you up in the big b'iler," growled Debby, who thought it her duty
to snub children on all occasions.



Chapter 2--The Clan

Rose scrambled into the china-closet as rapidly as possible, and there
refreshed herself by making faces at Debby, while she settled her
plumage and screwed up her courage. Then she crept softly down the hall
and peeped into the parlor. No one appeared, and all was so still she
felt sure the company was upstairs. So she skipped boldly through the
half-open folding-doors, to behold on the other side a sight that nearly
took her breath away.

Seven boys stood in a row all ages, all sizes, all yellow-haired and
blue-eyed, all in full Scotch costume, and all smiling, nodding, and
saying as with one voice, "How are you, cousin?"

Rose gave a little gasp, and looked wildly about her as if ready to fly,
for fear magnified the seven and the room seemed full of boys. Before
she could run, however, the tallest lad stepped out of the line, saying
pleasantly,

"Don't be frightened. This is the Clan come to welcome you; and I'm the
chief, Archie, at your service."

He held out his hand as he spoke, and Rose timidly put her own into a
brown paw, which closed over the white morsel and held it as the chief
continued his introductions.

"We came in full rig, for we always turn out in style on grand
occasions. Hope you like it. Now I'll tell you who these chaps are, and
then we shall be all right. This big one is Prince Charlie, Aunt Clara's
boy. She has but one, so he is an extra good one. This old fellow is
Mac, the bookworm, called Worm for short. This sweet creature is Steve
the Dandy. Look at his gloves and top-knot, if you please. They are Aunt
Jane's lads, and a precious pair you'd better believe. These are the
Brats, my brothers, Geordie and Will, and Jamie the Baby. Now, my men,
step out and show your manners."

At this command, to Rose's great dismay, six more hands were offered,
and it was evident that she was expected to shake them all. It was a
trying moment to the bashful child; but, remembering that they were her
kinsmen come to welcome her, she tried her best to return the greeting
cordially.

This impressive ceremony being over, the Clan broke ranks, and both
rooms instantly appeared to be pervaded with boys. Rose hastily retired
to the shelter of a big chair and sat there watching the invaders and
wondering when her aunt would come and rescue her.

As if bound to do their duty manfully, yet rather oppressed by it, each
lad paused beside her chair in his wanderings, made a brief remark,
received a still briefer answer, and then sheered off with a relieved
expression.

Archie came first, and, leaning over the chair-back, observed in a
paternal tone,

"I'm glad you've come, cousin, and I hope you'll find the Aunt-hill
pretty jolly."

"I think I shall."

Mac shook his hair out of his eyes, stumbled over a stool, and asked
abruptly,

"Did you bring any books with you?"

"Four boxes full. They are in the library."

Mac vanished from the room, and Steve, striking an attitude which
displayed his costume effectively, said with an affable smile,

"We were sorry not to see you last Wednesday. I hope your cold is
better."

"Yes, thank you." And a smile began to dimple about Rose's mouth, as she
remembered her retreat under the bed-cover.

Feeling that he had been received with distinguished marks of attention,
Steve strolled away with his topknot higher than ever, and Prince
Charlie pranced across the room, saying in a free and easy tone,

"Mamma sent her love and hopes you will be well enough to come over for
a day next week. It must be desperately dull here for a little thing
like you."

"I'm thirteen and a half, though I do look small," cried Rose,
forgetting her shyness in indignation at this insult to her newly
acquired teens.

"Beg pardon, ma'am; never should have guessed it." And Charlie went off
with a laugh, glad to have struck a spark out of his meek cousin.

Geordie and Will came together, two sturdy eleven and twelve year
olders, and, fixing their round blue eyes on Rose, fired off a question
apiece, as if it was a shooting match and she the target.

"Did you bring your monkey?"

"No; he is dead."

"Are you going to have a boat?"

"I hope not."

Here the two, with a right-about-face movement, abruptly marched away,
and little Jamie demanded with childish frankness,

"Did you bring me anything nice?"

"Yes, lots of candy," answered Rose, whereupon Jamie ascended into her
lap with a sounding kiss and the announcement that he liked her very
much.

This proceeding rather startled Rose, for the other lads looked and
laughed, and in her confusion she said hastily to the young usurper,

"Did you see the circus go by?"

"When? Where?" cried all the boys in great excitement at once.

"Just before you came. At least I thought it was a circus, for I saw a
red and black sort of cart and ever so many little ponies, and--"

She got no farther, for a general shout made her pause suddenly, as
Archie explained the joke by saying in the middle of his laugh,

"It was our new dog-cart and the Shetland ponies. You'll never hear the
last of your circus, cousin."

"But there were so many, and they went so fast, and the cart was so very
red," began Rose, trying to explain her mistake.

"Come and see them all!" cried the Prince. And before she knew what was
happening, she was borne away to the barn and tumultuously introduced to
three shaggy ponies and the gay new dog-cart.

She had never visited these regions before, and had her doubts as to the
propriety of her being there now, but when she suggested that "Auntie
might not like it," there was a general cry of,

"She told us to amuse you, and we can do it ever so much better out here
than poking round in the house."

"I'm afraid I shall get cold without my sacque," began Rose, who wanted
to stay, but felt rather out of her element.

"No, you won't! We'll fix you," cried the lads, as one clapped his cap
on her head, another tied a rough jacket round her neck by the sleeves,
a third neatly smothered her in a carriage blanket, and a fourth threw
open the door of the old barouche that stood there, saying with a
flourish,

"Step in, ma'am, and make yourself comfortable while we show you some
fun."

So Rose sat in state enjoying herself very much, for the lads proceeded
to dance a Highland Fling with a spirit and skill that made her clap her
hands and laugh as she had not done for weeks.

"How is that, my lassie?" asked the Prince, coming up all flushed and
breathless when the ballet was over.

"It was splendid! I never went to the theatre but once, and the dancing
was not half so pretty as this. What clever boys you must be!" said
Rose, smiling upon her kinsmen like a little queen upon her subjects.

"Ah, we're a fine lot, and that is only the beginning of our larks. We
haven't got the pipes here or we'd,

    'Sing for you, play for you
     A dulcy melody,'"

answered Charlie, looking much elated at her praise.

"I did not know we were Scotch; papa never said anything about it, or
seemed to care about Scotland, except to have me sing the old ballads,"
said Rose, beginning to feel as if she had left America behind her
somewhere.

"Neither did we till lately. We've been reading Scott's novels, and all
of a sudden we remembered that our grandfather was a Scotchman. So we
hunted up the old stories, got a bagpipe, put on our plaids, and went
in, heart and soul, for the glory of the Clan. We've been at it some
time now, and it's great fun. Our people like it, and I think we are a
pretty canny set."

Archie said this from the other coach-step, where he had perched,
while the rest climbed up before and behind to join in the chat as they
rested.

"I'm Fitzjames and he's Roderick Dhu, and we'll give you the broadsword
combat some day. It's a great thing, you'd better believe," added the
Prince.

"Yes, and you should hear Steve play the pipes. He makes 'em skirl like
a good one," cried Will from the box, eager to air the accomplishments
of his race.

"Mac's the fellow to hunt up the old stories and tell us how to dress
right, and pick out rousing bits for us to speak and sing," put in
Geordie, saying a good word for the absent Worm.

"And what do you and Will do?" asked Rose of Jamie, who sat beside her
as if bound to keep her in sight till the promised gift had been handed
over.

"Oh, I'm the little foot-page, and do errands, and Will and Geordie are
the troops when we march, and the stags when we hunt, and the traitors
when we want to cut any heads off."

"They are very obliging, I'm sure," said Rose, whereat the "utility men"
beamed with modest pride and resolved to enact Wallace and Montrose as
soon as possible for their cousin's special benefit.

"Let's have a game of tag," cried the Prince, swinging himself up to a
beam with a sounding slap on Stevie's shoulder.

Regardless of his gloves, Dandy tore after him, and the rest swarmed in
every direction as if bent on breaking their necks and dislocating their
joints as rapidly as possible.

It was a new and astonishing spectacle to Rose, fresh from a prim
boarding-school, and she watched the active lads with breathless
interest, thinking their antics far superior to those of Mops, the dear
departed monkey.

Will had just covered himself with glory by pitching off a high loft
head first and coming up all right, when Phebe appeared with a cloak,
hood, and rubbers, also a message from Aunt Plenty that "Miss Rose was
to come in directly."

"All right; we'll bring her!" answered Archie, issuing some mysterious
order, which was so promptly obeyed that, before Rose could get out of
the carriage, the boys had caught hold of the pole and rattled her out
of the barn, round the oval and up to the front door with a cheer that
brought two caps to an upper window, and caused Debby to cry aloud from
the back porch,

"Them harum-scarum boys will certainly be the death of that delicate
little creter!"

But the "delicate little creter" seemed all the better for her trip, and
ran up the steps looking rosy, gay, and dishevelled, to be received with
lamentation by Aunt Plenty, who begged her to go and lie down at once.

"Oh, please don't! We have come to tea with our cousin, and we'll be as
good as gold if you'll let us stay, auntie," clamoured the boys, who
not only approved of "our cousin" but had no mind to lose their tea, for
Aunt Plenty's name but feebly expressed her bountiful nature.

"Well, dears, you can; only be quiet, and let Rose go and take her iron
and be made tidy, and then we will see what we can find for supper,"
said the old lady as she trotted away, followed by a volley of
directions for the approaching feast.

"Marmalade for me, auntie."

"Plenty of plum-cake, please."

"Tell Debby to trot out the baked pears."

"I'm your man for lemon-pie, ma'am."

"Do have fritters; Rose will like 'em."

"She'd rather have tarts, I know."

When Rose came down, fifteen minutes later, with every curl smoothed and
her most beruffled apron on, she found the boys loafing about the long
hall, and paused on the half-way landing to take an observation, for
till now she had not really examined her new-found cousins.

There was a strong family resemblance among them, though some of the
yellow heads were darker than others, some of the cheeks brown instead
of rosy, and the ages varied all the way from sixteen-year-old Archie
to Jamie, who was ten years younger. None of them were especially
comely but the Prince, yet all were hearty, happy-looking lads, and Rose
decided that boys were not as dreadful as she had expected to find them.

They were all so characteristically employed that she could not help
smiling as she looked. Archie and Charlie, evidently great cronies, were
pacing up and down, shoulder to shoulder, whistling "Bonnie Dundee"; Mac
was reading in a corner, with his book close to his near-sighted eyes;
Dandy was arranging his hair before the oval glass in the hat-stand;
Geordie and Will investigating the internal economy of the moon-faced
clock; and Jamie lay kicking up his heels on the mat at the foot of the
stairs, bent on demanding his sweeties the instant Rose appeared.

She guessed his intention, and forestalled his demand by dropping a
handful of sugar-plums down upon him.

At his cry of rapture the other lads looked up and smiled involuntarily,
for the little kinswoman standing there above was a winsome sight with
her shy, soft eyes, bright hair, and laughing face. The black frock
reminded them of her loss, and filled the boyish hearts with a kindly
desire to be good to "our cousin," who had no longer any home but this.

"There she is, as fine as you please," cried Steve, kissing his hand to
her.

"Come on, Missy; tea is ready," added the Prince encouragingly.

"I shall take her in." And Archie offered his arm with great dignity, an
honour that made Rose turn as red as a cherry and long to run upstairs
again.

It was a merry supper, and the two elder boys added much to the fun by
tormenting the rest with dark hints of some interesting event which was
about to occur. Something uncommonly fine, they declared it was, but
enveloped in the deepest mystery for the present.

"Did I ever see it?" asked Jamie.

"Not to remember it; but Mac and Steve have, and liked it immensely,"
answered Archie, thereby causing the two mentioned to neglect Debby's
delectable fritters for several minutes, while they cudgelled their
brains.

"Who will have it first?" asked Will, with his mouth full of marmalade.

"Aunt Plenty, I guess."

"When will she have it?" demanded Geordie, bouncing in his seat with
impatience.

"Sometime on Monday."

"Heart alive! what is the boy talking about?" cried the old lady from
behind the tall urn, which left little to be seen but the topmost bow of
her cap.

"Doesn't auntie know?" asked a chorus of voices.

"No; and that's the best of the joke, for she is desperately fond of
it."

"What colour is it?" asked Rose, joining in the fun.

"Blue and brown."

"Is it good to eat?" asked Jamie.

"Some people think so, but I shouldn't like to try it," answered
Charlie, laughing so he split his tea.

"Who does it belong to?" put in Steve.

Archie and the Prince stared at one another rather blankly for a minute,
then Archie answered with a twinkle of the eye that made Charlie explode
again,

"To Grandfather Campbell."

This was a poser, and they gave up the puzzle, though Jamie confided
to Rose that he did not think he could live till Monday without knowing
what this remarkable thing was.

Soon after tea the Clan departed, singing "All the blue bonnets are over
the border," at the tops of their voices.

"Well, dear, how do you like your cousins?" asked Aunt Plenty, as the
last pony frisked round the corner and the din died away.

"Pretty well, ma'am; but I like Phebe better." An answer which caused
Aunt Plenty to hold up her hands in despair and trot away to tell sister
Peace that she never should understand that child, and it was a mercy
Alec was coming soon to take the responsibility off their hands.

Fatigued by the unusual exertions of the afternoon, Rose curled herself
up in the sofa corner to rest and think about the great mystery, little
guessing that she was to know it first of all.

Right in the middle of her meditations she fell asleep and dreamed she
was at home again in her own little bed. She seemed to wake and see her
father bending over her; to hear him say, "My little Rose"; to answer,
"Yes, papa"; and then to feel him take her in his arms and kiss her
tenderly. So sweet, so real was the dream, that she started up with a
cry of joy to find herself in the arms of a brown, bearded man, who held
her close, and whispered in a voice so like her father's that she clung
to him involuntarily,

"This is my little girl, and I am Uncle Alec."



Chapter 3--Uncles

When Rose woke next morning, she was not sure whether she had dreamed
what occurred the night before, or it had actually happened. So she
hopped up and dressed, although it was an hour earlier than she usually
rose, for she could not sleep any more, being possessed with a strong
desire to slip down and see if the big portmanteau and packing cases
were really in the hall. She seemed to remember tumbling over them when
she went to bed, for the aunts had sent her off very punctually, because
they wanted their pet nephew all to themselves.

The sun was shining, and Rose opened her window to let in the soft May
air fresh from the sea. As she leaned over her little balcony, watching
an early bird get the worm, and wondering how she should like Uncle
Alec, she saw a man leap the garden wall and come whistling up the path.
At first she thought it was some trespasser, but a second look showed
her that it was her uncle returning from an early dip into the sea. She
had hardly dared to look at him the night before, because whenever she
tried to do so she always found a pair of keen blue eyes looking at her.
Now she could take a good stare at him as he lingered along, looking
about him as if glad to see the old place again.

A brown, breezy man, in a blue jacket, with no hat on the curly head,
which he shook now and then like a water dog; broad-shouldered, alert in
his motions, and with a general air of strength and stability about him
which pleased Rose, though she could not explain the feeling of comfort
it gave her. She had just said to herself, with a sense of relief, "I
guess I shall like him, though he looks as if he made people mind," when
he lifted his eyes to examine the budding horse-chestnut overhead,
and saw the eager face peering down at him. He waved his hand to her,
nodded, and called out in a bluff, cheery voice,

"You are on deck early, little niece."

"I got up to see if you had really come, uncle."

"Did you? Well, come down here and make sure of it."

"I'm not allowed to go out before breakfast, sir."

"Oh, indeed!" with a shrug. "Then I'll come aboard and salute," he
added; and, to Rose's great amazement, Uncle Alec went up one of the
pillars of the back piazza hand over hand, stepped across the roof,
and swung himself into her balcony, saying, as he landed on the wide
balustrade: "Have you any doubts about me now, ma'am?"

Rose was so taken aback, she could only answer with a smile as she went
to meet him.

"How does my girl do this morning?" he asked, taking the little cold
hand she gave him in both his big warm ones.

"Pretty well, thank you, sir."

"Ah, but it should be very well. Why isn't it?"

"I always wake up with a headache, and feel tired."

"Don't you sleep well?"

"I lie awake a long time, and then I dream, and my sleep does not seem
to rest me much."

"What do you do all day?"

"Oh, I read, and sew a little, and take naps, and sit with auntie."

"No running about out of doors, or house-work, or riding, hey?"

"Aunt Plenty says I'm not strong enough for much exercise. I drive out
with her sometimes, but I don't care for it."

"I'm not surprised at that," said Uncle Alec, half to himself, adding,
in his quick way: "Who have you had to play with?"

"No one but Ariadne Blish, and she was such a goose I couldn't bear
her. The boys came yesterday, and seemed rather nice; but, of course, I
couldn't play with them."

"Why not?"

"I'm too old to play with boys."

"Not a bit of it; that's just what you need, for you've been
molly-coddled too much. They are good lads, and you'll be mixed up with
them more or less for years to come, so you may as well be friends and
playmates at once. I will look you up some girls also, if I can find a
sensible one who is not spoilt by her nonsensical education."

"Phebe is sensible, I'm sure, and I like her, though I only saw her
yesterday," cried Rose, waking up suddenly.

"And who is Phebe, if you please?"

Rose eagerly told all she knew, and Uncle Alec listened, with an odd
smile lurking about his mouth, though his eyes were quite sober as he
watched the face before him.

"I'm glad to see that you are not aristocratic in your tastes, but I
don't quite make out why you like this young lady from the poor-house."

"You may laugh at me, but I do. I can't tell why, only she seems so
happy and busy, and sings so beautifully, and is strong enough to scrub
and sweep, and hasn't any troubles to plague her," said Rose, making a
funny jumble of reasons in her efforts to explain.

"How do you know that?"

"Oh, I was telling her about mine, and asked if she had any, and she
said, 'No, only I'd like to go to school, and I mean to some day."

"So she doesn't call desertion, poverty, and hard work, troubles? She's
a brave little girl, and I shall be proud to know her." And Uncle Alec
gave an approving nod, that made Rose wish she had been the one to earn
it.

"But what are these troubles of yours, child?" he asked, after a minute
of silence.

"Please don't ask me, uncle."

"Can't you tell them to me as well as to Phebe?"

Something in his tone made Rose feel that it would be better to speak
out and be done with it, so she answered, with sudden colour and averted
eyes,

"The greatest one was losing dear papa."

As she said that, Uncle Alec's arm came gently round her, and he drew
her to him, saying, in the voice so like papa's,

"That is a trouble which I cannot cure, my child; but I shall try to
make you feel it less. What else, dear?"

"I am so tired and poorly all the time, I can't do anything I want to,
and it makes me cross," sighed Rose, rubbing the aching head like a
fretful child.

"That we can cure and we will," said her uncle, with a decided nod
that made the curls bob on his head, to that Rose saw the gray ones
underneath the brown.

"Aunt Myra says I have no constitution, and never shall be strong,"
observed Rose, in a pensive tone, as if it was rather a nice thing to be
an invalid.

"Aunt Myra is a ahem! an excellent woman, but it is her hobby to believe
that everyone is tottering on the brink of the grave; and, upon my life,
I believe she is offended if people don't fall into it! We will show her
how to make constitutions and turn pale-faced little ghosts into rosy,
hearty girls. That's my business, you know," he added, more quietly, for
his sudden outburst had rather startled Rose.

"I had forgotten you were a doctor. I'm glad of it, for I do want to be
well, only I hope you won't give me much medicine, for I've taken quarts
already, and it does me no good."

As she spoke, Rose pointed to a little table just inside the window, on
which appeared a regiment of bottles.

"Ah, ha! Now we'll see what mischief these blessed women have been at."
And, making a long arm, Dr. Alec set the bottles on the wide railing
before him, examined each carefully, smiled over some, frowned over
others, and said, as he put down the last: "Now I'll show you the best
way to take these messes." And, as quick as a flash, he sent one after
another smashing down into the posy-beds below.

"But Aunt Plenty won't like it; and Aunt Myra will be angry, for she
sent most of them!" cried Rose, half frightened and half pleased at such
energetic measures.

"You are my patient now, and I'll take the responsibility. My way of
giving physic is evidently the best, for you look better already," he
said, laughing so infectiously that Rose followed suit, saying saucily,

"If I don't like your medicines any better than those, I shall throw
them into the garden, and then what will you do?"

"When I prescribe such rubbish, I'll give you leave to pitch it
overboard as soon as you like. Now what is the next trouble?"

"I hoped you would forget to ask."

"But how can I help you if I don't know them? Come, let us have No. 3."

"It is very wrong, I suppose, but I do sometimes wish I had not quite so
many aunts. They are all very good to me, and I want to please them; but
they are so different, I feel sort of pulled to pieces among them," said
Rose, trying to express the emotions of a stray chicken with six hens
all clucking over it at once.

Uncle Alec threw back his head and laughed like a boy, for he could
entirely understand how the good ladies had each put in her oar and
tried to paddle her own way, to the great disturbance of the waters and
the entire bewilderment of poor Rose.

"I intend to try a course of uncles now, and see how that suits your
constitution. I'm going to have you all to myself, and no one is to give
a word of advice unless I ask it. There is no other way to keep order
aboard, and I am captain of this little craft, for a time at least. What
comes next?"

But Rose stuck there, and grew so red, her uncle guessed what that
trouble was.

"I don't think I can tell this one. It wouldn't be polite, and I feel
pretty sure that it isn't going to be a trouble any more."

As she blushed and stammered over these words, Dr. Alec turned his eyes
away to the distant sea, and said so seriously, so tenderly, that she
felt every word and long remembered them,

"My child, I don't expect you to love and trust me all at once, but I do
want you to believe that I shall give my whole heart to this new duty;
and if I make mistakes, as I probably shall, no one will grieve over
them more bitterly than I. It is my fault that I am a stranger to you,
when I want to be your best friend. That is one of my mistakes, and I
never repented it more deeply than I do now. Your father and I had a
trouble once, and I thought I could never forgive him; so I kept away
for years. Thank God, we made it all up the last time I saw him, and he
told me then, that if he was forced to leave her he should bequeath his
little girl to me as a token of his love. I can't fill his place, but
I shall try to be a father to her; and if she learns to love me half as
well as she did the good one she has lost, I shall be a proud and happy
man. Will she believe this and try?"

Something in Uncle Alec's face touched Rose to the heart, and when he
held out his hand with that anxious troubled look in his eyes, she was
moved to put up her innocent lips and seal the contract with a confiding
kiss. The strong arm held her close a minute, and she felt the broad
chest heave once as if with a great sigh of relief; but not a word was
spoken till a tap at the door made both start.

Rose popped her head through the window to say "come in," while Dr. Alec
hastily rubbed the sleeve of his jacket across his eyes and began to
whistle again.

Phebe appeared with a cup of coffee.

"Debby told me to bring this and help you get up," she said, opening her
black eyes wide, as if she wondered how on earth "the sailor man" got
there.

"I'm all dressed, so I don't need any help. I hope that is good and
strong," added Rose, eyeing the steaming cup with an eager look.

But she did not get it, for a brown hand took possession of it as her
uncle said quickly,

"Hold hard, my lass, and let me overhaul that dose before you take it.
Do you drink all this strong coffee every morning, Rose?"

"Yes, sir, and I like it. Auntie says it 'tones' me up, and I always
feel better after it."

"This accounts for the sleepless nights, the flutter your heart gets
into at the least start, and this is why that cheek of yours is pale
yellow instead of rosy red. No more coffee for you, my dear, and by and
by you'll see that I am right. Any new milk downstairs, Phebe?"

"Yes, sir, plenty right in from the barn."

"That's the drink for my patient. Go bring me a pitcherful, and another
cup; I want a draught myself. This won't hurt the honeysuckles, for they
have no nerves to speak of." And, to Rose's great discomfort, the coffee
went after the medicine.

Dr. Alec saw the injured look she put on, but took no notice, and
presently banished it by saying pleasantly,

"I've got a capital little cup among my traps, and I'll give it to you
to drink your milk in, as it is made of wood that is supposed to improve
whatever is put into it something like a quassia cup. That reminds me;
one of the boxes Phebe wanted to lug upstairs last night is for you.
Knowing that I was coming home to find a ready-made daughter, I picked
up all sorts of odd and pretty trifles along the way, hoping she would
be able to find something she liked among them all. Early to-morrow
we'll have a grand rummage. Here's our milk! I propose the health of
Miss Rose Campbell and drink it with all my heart."

It was impossible for Rose to pout with the prospect of a delightful
boxful of gifts dancing before her eyes; so, in spite of herself, she
smiled as she drank her own health, and found that fresh milk was not a
hard dose to take.

"Now I must be off, before I am caught again with my wig in a toss,"
said Dr. Alec, preparing to descend the way he came.

"Do you always go in and out like a cat, uncle?" asked Rose, much amused
at his odd ways.

"I used to sneak out of my window when I was a boy, so I need not
disturb the aunts, and now I rather like it, for it's the shortest road,
and it keeps me limber when I have no rigging to climb. Good-bye till
breakfast." And away he went down the water-spout, over the roof, and
vanished among the budding honey-suckles below.

"Ain't he a funny guardeen?" exclaimed Phebe, as she went off with the
cups.

"He is a very kind one, I think," answered Rose, following, to prowl
round the big boxes and try to guess which was hers.

When her uncle appeared at sound of the bell, he found her surveying
with an anxious face a new dish that smoked upon the table.

"Got a fresh trouble, Rosy?" he asked, stroking her smooth head.

"Uncle, are you going to make me eat oatmeal?" asked Rose, in a tragic
tone.

"Don't you like it?"

"I de-test it!" answered Rose, with all the emphasis which a turned-up
nose, a shudder, and a groan could give to the three words.

"You are not a true Scotchwoman, if you don't like the 'parritch.' It's
a pity, for I made it myself, and thought we'd have such a good time
with all that cream to float it in. Well, never mind." And he sat down
with a disappointed air.

Rose had made up her mind to be obstinate about it, because she did
heartily "detest" the dish; but as Uncle Alec did not attempt to make
her obey, she suddenly changed her mind and thought she would.

"I'll try to eat it to please you, uncle; but people are always saying
how wholesome it is, and that makes me hate it," she said, half-ashamed
at her silly excuse.

"I do want you to like it, because I wish my girl to be as well and
strong as Jessie's boys, who are brought up on this in the good old
fashion. No hot bread and fried stuff for them, and they are the biggest
and bonniest lads of the lot. Bless you, auntie, and good morning!"

Dr. Alec turned to greet the old lady, and, with a firm resolve to eat
or die in the attempt, Rose sat down.

In five minutes she forgot what she was eating, so interested was she in
the chat that went on. It amused her very much to hear Aunt Plenty call
her forty-year-old nephew "my dear boy"; and Uncle Alec was so full
of lively gossip about all creation in general, and the Aunt-hill in
particular, that the detested porridge vanished without a murmur.

"You will go to church with us, I hope, Alec, if you are not too tired,"
said the old lady, when breakfast was over.

"I came all the way from Calcutta for that express purpose, ma'am. Only
I must send the sisters word of my arrival, for they don't expect me
till to-morrow, you know, and there will be a row in church if those
boys see me without warning."

"I'll send Ben up the hill, and you can step over to Myra's yourself; it
will please her, and you will have plenty of time."

Dr. Alec was off at once, and they saw no more of him till the old
barouche was at the door, and Aunt Plenty just rustling downstairs in
her Sunday best, with Rose like a little black shadow behind her.

Away they drove in state, and all the way Uncle Alec's hat was more off
his head than on, for everyone they met smiled and bowed, and gave him
as blithe a greeting as the day permitted.

It was evident that the warning had been a wise one, for, in spite of
time and place, the lads were in such a ferment that their elders sat
in momentary dread of an unseemly outbreak somewhere. It was simply
impossible to keep those fourteen eyes off Uncle Alec, and the dreadful
things that were done during sermon-time will hardly be believed.

Rose dared not look up after a while, for these bad boys vented their
emotions upon her till she was ready to laugh and cry with mingled
amusement and vexation. Charlie winked rapturously at her behind his
mother's fan; Mac openly pointed to the tall figure beside her; Jamie
stared fixedly over the back of his pew, till Rose thought his round
eyes would drop out of his head; George fell over a stool and dropped
three books in his excitement; Will drew sailors and Chinamen on his
clean cuffs, and displayed them, to Rose's great tribulation; Steve
nearly upset the whole party by burning his nose with salts, as he
pretended to be overcome by his joy; even dignified Archie disgraced
himself by writing in his hymn book, "Isn't he blue and brown?" and
passing it politely to Rose.

Her only salvation was trying to fix her attention upon Uncle Mac
a portly, placid gentleman, who seemed entirely unconscious of the
iniquities of the Clan, and dozed peacefully in his pew corner. This was
the only uncle Rose had met for years, for Uncle Jem and Uncle Steve,
the husbands of Aunt Jessie and Aunt Clara, were at sea, and Aunt Myra
was a widow. Uncle Mac was a merchant, very rich and busy, and as quiet
as a mouse at home, for he was in such a minority among the women folk
he dared not open his lips, and let his wife rule undisturbed.

Rose liked the big, kindly, silent man who came to her when papa died,
was always sending her splendid boxes of goodies at school, and often
invited her into his great warehouse, full of teas and spices, wines and
all sorts of foreign fruits, there to eat and carry away whatever she
liked. She had secretly regretted that he was not to be her guardian;
but since she had seen Uncle Alec she felt better about it, for she did
not particularly admire Aunt Jane.

When church was over, Dr. Alec got into the porch as quickly as
possible, and there the young bears had a hug all round, while the
sisters shook hands and welcomed him with bright faces and glad hearts.
Rose was nearly crushed flat behind a door in that dangerous passage
from pew to porch; but Uncle Mac rescued her, and put her into the
carriage for safe keeping.

"Now, girls, I want you to come and dine with Alec; Mac also, of course.
But I cannot ask the boys, for we did not expect this dear fellow till
tomorrow, you know, so I made no preparations. Send the lads home, and
let them wait till Monday, for really I was shocked at their behaviour
in church," said Aunt Plenty, as she followed Rose.

In any other place the defrauded boys would have set up a howl; as it
was, they growled and protested till Dr. Alec settled the matter by
saying,

"Never mind, old chaps, I'll make it up to you to-morrow, if you sheer
off quietly; if you don't, not a blessed thing shall you have out of my
big boxes."



Chapter 4--Aunts

All dinner-time Rose felt that she was going to be talked about, and
afterward she was sure of it, for Aunt Plenty whispered to her as they
went into the parlour,

"Run up and sit awhile with Sister Peace, my dear. She likes to have you
read while she rests, and we are going to be busy."

Rose obeyed, and the quiet rooms above were so like a church that she
soon composed her ruffled feelings, and was unconsciously a little
minister of happiness to the sweet old lady, who for years had sat there
patiently waiting to be set free from pain.

Rose knew the sad romance of her life, and it gave a certain tender
charm to this great-aunt of hers, whom she already loved. When Peace was
twenty, she was about to be married; all was done, the wedding dress lay
ready, the flowers were waiting to be put on, the happy hour at hand,
when word came that the lover was dead. They thought that gentle Peace
would die, too; but she bore it bravely, put away her bridal gear, took
up her life afresh, and lived on a beautiful, meek woman, with hair as
white as snow and cheeks that never bloomed again. She wore no black,
but soft, pale colours, as if always ready for the marriage that had
never come.

For thirty years she had lived on, fading slowly, but cheerful, busy,
and full of interest in all that went on in the family; especially the
joys and sorrows of the young girls growing up about her, and to them
she was adviser, confidante, and friend in all their tender trials and
delights. A truly beautiful old maiden, with her silvery hair, tranquil
face, and an atmosphere of repose about her that soothed whoever came to
her!

Aunt Plenty was utterly dissimilar, being a stout, brisk old lady, with
a sharp eye, a lively tongue, and a face like a winter-apple. Always
trotting, chatting, and bustling, she was a regular Martha, cumbered
with the cares of this world and quite happy in them.

Rose was right; and while she softly read psalms to Aunt Peace, the
other ladies were talking about her little self in the frankest manner.

"Well, Alec, how do you like your ward?" began Aunt Jane, as they all
settled down, and Uncle Mac deposited himself in a corner to finish his
doze.

"I should like her better if I could have begun at the beginning, and
so got a fair start. Poor George led such a solitary life that the child
has suffered in many ways, and since he died she has been going on worse
than ever, judging from the state I find her in."

"My dear boy, we did what we thought best while waiting for you to wind
up your affairs and get home. I always told George he was wrong to bring
her up as he did; but he never took my advice, and now here we are with
this poor dear child upon our hands. I, for one, freely confess that
I don't know what to do with her any more than if she was one of those
strange, outlandish birds you used to bring home from foreign parts."
And Aunt Plenty gave a perplexed shake of the head which caused great
commotion among the stiff loops of purple ribbon that bristled all over
the cap like crocus buds.

"If my advice had been taken, she would have remained at the excellent
school where I placed her. But our aunt thought best to remove her
because she complained, and she has been dawdling about ever since she
came. A most ruinous state of things for a morbid, spoilt girl like
Rose," said Mrs. Jane, severely.

She had never forgiven the old ladies for yielding to Rose's pathetic
petition that she might wait her guardian's arrival before beginning
another term at the school, which was a regular Blimber hot-bed, and
turned out many a feminine Toots.

"I never thought it the proper school for a child in good circumstances
an heiress, in fact, as Rose is. It is all very well for girls who are
to get their own living by teaching, and that sort of thing; but all
she needs is a year or two at a fashionable finishing school, so that at
eighteen she can come out with eclat," put in Aunt Clara, who had been a
beauty and a belle, and was still a handsome woman.

"Dear, dear! how short-sighted you all are to be discussing education
and plans for the future, when this unhappy child is so plainly marked
for the tomb," sighed Aunt Myra, with a lugubrious sniff and a solemn
wag of the funereal bonnet, which she refused to remove, being afflicted
with a chronic catarrh.

"Now, it is my opinion that the dear thing only wants freedom, rest, and
care. There is look in her eyes that goes to my heart, for it shows that
she feels the need of what none of us can give her a mother," said Aunt
Jessie, with tears in her own bright eyes at the thought of her boys
being left, as Rose was, to the care of others.

Uncle Alec, who had listened silently as each spoke, turned quickly
towards the last sister, and said, with a decided nod of approval,

"You've got it, Jessie; and, with you to help me, I hope to make the
child feel that she is not quite fatherless and motherless."

"I'll do my best, Alec; and I think you will need me, for, wise as you
are, you cannot understand a tender, timid little creature like Rose as
a woman can," said Mrs. Jessie, smiling back at him with a heart full of
motherly goodwill.

"I cannot help feeling that I, who have had a daughter of my own, can
best bring up a girl; and I am very much surprised that George did
not entrust her to me," observed Aunt Myra, with an air of melancholy
importance, for she was the only one who had given a daughter to
the family, and she felt that she had distinguished herself, though
ill-natured people said that she had dosed her darling to death.

"I never blamed him in the least, when I remember the perilous
experiments you tried with poor Carrie," began Mrs. Jane, in her hard
voice.

"Jane Campbell, I will not hear a word! My sainted Caroline is a sacred
object," cried Aunt Myra, rising as if to leave the room.

Dr. Alec detained her, feeling that he must define his position at once,
and maintain it manfully if he hoped to have any success in his new
undertaking.

"Now, my dear souls, don't let us quarrel and make Rose a bone of
contention though, upon my word, she is almost a bone, poor little lass!
You have had her among you for a year, and done what you liked. I cannot
say that your success is great, but that is owing to too many fingers in
the pie. Now, I intend to try my way for a year, and if at the end of it
she is not in better trim than now, I'll give up the case, and hand her
over to someone else. That's fair, I think."

"She will not be here a year hence, poor darling, so no one need dread
future responsibility," said Aunt Myra, folding her black gloves as if
all ready for the funeral.

"By Jupiter! Myra, you are enough to damp the ardour of a saint!" cried
Dr. Alec, with a sudden spark in his eyes. "Your croaking will worry
that child out of her wits, for she is an imaginative puss, and will
fret and fancy untold horrors. You have put it into her head that she
has no constitution, and she rather likes the idea. If she had not had a
pretty good one, she would have been 'marked for the tomb' by this
time, at the rate you have been going on with her. I will not have any
interference please understand that; so just wash your hands of her, and
let me manage till I want help, then I'll ask for it."

"Hear, hear!" came from the corner where Uncle Mac was apparently wrapt
in slumber.

"You were appointed guardian, so we can do nothing. But I predict that
the girl will be spoilt, utterly spoilt," answered Mrs. Jane, grimly.

"Thank you, sister. I have an idea that if a woman can bring up two boys
as perfectly as you do yours, a man, if he devotes his whole mind to it,
may at least attempt as much with one girl," replied Dr. Alec, with a
humorous look that tickled the others immensely, for it was a well-known
fact in the family that Jane's boys were more indulged than all the
other lads put together.

"I am quite easy, for I really do think that Alec will improve the
child's health; and by the time his year is out, it will be quite soon
enough for her to go to Madame Roccabella's and be finished off," said
Aunt Clara, settling her rings, and thinking, with languid satisfaction,
of the time when she could bring out a pretty and accomplished niece.

"I suppose you will stay here in the old place, unless you think of
marrying, and it's high time you did," put in Mrs. Jane, much nettled at
her brother's last hit.

"No, thank you. Come and have a cigar, Mac," said Dr. Alec, abruptly.

"Don't marry; women enough in the family already," muttered Uncle Mac;
and then the gentlemen hastily fled.

"Aunt Peace would like to see you all, she says," was the message Rose
brought before the ladies could begin again.

"Hectic, hectic! dear me, dear me!" murmured Aunt Myra, as the shadow
of her gloomy bonnet fell upon Rose, and the stiff tips of a black glove
touched the cheek where the colour deepened under so many eyes.

"I am glad these pretty curls are natural; they will be invaluable by
and by," said Aunt Clara, taking an observation with her head on one
side.

"Now that your uncle has come, I no longer expect you to review the
studies of the past year. I trust your time will not be entirely wasted
in frivolous sports, however," added Aunt Jane, sailing out of the room
with the air of a martyr.

Aunt Jessie said not a word, but kissed her little niece, with a look
of tender sympathy that made Rose cling to her a minute, and follow her
with grateful eyes as the door closed behind her.

After everybody had gone home, Dr. Alec paced up and down the lower
hall in the twilight for an hour, thinking so intently that sometimes
he frowned, sometimes he smiled, and more than once he stood still in a
brown study. All of a sudden he said, half aloud, as if he had made up
his mind,

"I might as well begin at once, and give the child something new to
think about, for Myra's dismals and Jane's lectures have made her as
blue as a little indigo bag."

Diving into one of the trunks that stood in a corner, he brought up,
after a brisk rummage, a silken cushion, prettily embroidered, and a
quaint cup of dark carved wood.

"This will do for a start," he said, as he plumped up the cushion and
dusted the cup. "It won't do to begin too energetically, or Rose will be
frightened. I must beguile her gently and pleasantly along till I've won
her confidence, and then she will be ready for anything."

Just then Phebe came out of the dining-room with a plate of brown bread,
for Rose had been allowed no hot biscuit for tea.

"I'll relieve you of some of that," said Dr. Alec, and, helping himself
to a generous slice, he retired to the study, leaving Phebe to wonder at
his appetite.

She would have wondered still more if she had seen him making that brown
bread into neat little pills, which he packed into an attractive ivory
box, out of which he emptied his own bits of lovage.

"There! if they insist on medicine, I'll order these, and no harm will
be done. I will have my own way, but I'll keep the peace, if possible,
and confess the joke when my experiment has succeeded," he said to
himself, looking very much like a mischievous boy, as he went on with
his innocent prescriptions.

Rose was playing softly on the small organ that stood in the upper hall,
so that Aunt Peace could enjoy it; and all the while he talked with the
old ladies, Uncle Alec was listening to the fitful music of the child,
and thinking of another Rose who used to play for him.

As the clock struck eight, he called out,

"Time for my girl to be abed, else she won't be up early, and I'm full
of jolly plans for to-morrow. Come and see what I've found for you to
begin upon."

Rose ran in and listened with bright attentive face, while Dr. Alec said
impressively,

"In my wanderings over the face of the earth, I have picked up some
excellent remedies, and, as they are rather agreeable ones, I think you
and I will try them. This is a herb-pillow, given to me by a wise old
woman when I was ill in India. It is filled with saffron, poppies, and
other soothing plants; so lay your little head on it to-night, sleep
sweetly without a dream, and wake to-morrow without a pain."

"Shall I really? How nice it smells." And Rose willingly received
the pretty pillow, and stood enjoying its faint, sweet odour, as she
listened to the doctor's next remedy.

"This is the cup I told you of. Its virtue depends, they say, on the
drinker filling it himself; so you must learn to milk. I'll teach you."

"I'm afraid I never can," said Rose; but she surveyed the cup with
favour, for a funny little imp danced on the handle, as if all ready to
take a header into the white sea below.

"Don't you think she ought to have something more strengthening than
milk, Alec? I really shall feel anxious if she does not have a tonic of
some sort," said Aunt Plenty, eyeing the new remedies suspiciously, for
she had more faith in her old-fashioned doses than all the magic cups
and poppy pillows of the East.

"Well, ma'am, I'm willing to give her a pill, if you think best. It is
a very simple one, and very large quantities may be taken without harm.
You know hasheesh is the extract of hemp? Well, this is a preparation of
corn and rye, much used in old times, and I hope it will be again."

"Dear me, how singular!" said Aunt Plenty, bringing her spectacles to
bear upon the pills, with a face so full of respectful interest that it
was almost too much for Dr. Alec's gravity.

"Take one in the morning, and a good-night to you, my dear," he said,
dismissing his patient with a hearty kiss.

Then, as she vanished, he put both hands into his hair, exclaiming, with
a comical mixture of anxiety and amusement,

"When I think what I have undertaken, I declare to you, aunt, I feel
like running away and not coming back till Rose is eighteen!"



Chapter 5--A Belt and a Box

When Rose came out of her chamber, cup in hand, next morning, the first
person she saw was Uncle Alec standing on the threshold of the room
opposite, which he appeared to be examining with care. When he heard her
step, he turned about and began to sing,

"Where are you going, my pretty maid?"

"I'm going a-milking, sir, she said," answered Rose, waving the cup; and
then they finished the verse together in fine style.

Before either spoke, a head, in a nightcap so large and beruffled that
it looked like a cabbage, popped out of a room farther down the hall,
and an astonished voice exclaimed,

"What in the world are you doing about so early?"

"Clearing our pipes for the day, ma'am. Look here, auntie, can I have
this room?" said Dr. Alec, making her a sailor's bow.

"Any room you like, except sister's."

"Thanks. And may I go rummaging round in the garrets and glory-holes to
furnish it as I like?"

"My dear boy, you may turn the house upside down if you will only stay
in it."

"That's a handsome offer, I'm sure. I'll stay, ma'am; here's my little
anchor, so you will get more than you want of me this time."

"That's impossible! Put on your jacket, Rose. Don't tire her out
with antics, Alec. Yes, sister, I'm coming!" and the cabbage vanished
suddenly.

The first milking lesson was a droll one; but after several scares and
many vain attempts, Rose at last managed to fill her cup, while Ben
held Clover's tail so that it could not flap, and Dr. Alec kept her
from turning to stare at the new milkmaid, who objected to both these
proceedings very much.

"You look chilly in spite of all this laughing. Take a smart run round
the garden and get up a glow," said the doctor, as they left the barn.

"I'm too old for running, uncle; Miss Power said it was not lady-like
for girls in their teens," answered Rose, primly.

"I take the liberty of differing from Madame Prunes and Prisms, and, as
your physician, I order you to run. Off with you!" said Uncle Alec, with
a look and a gesture that made Rose scurry away as fast as she could go.

Anxious to please him, she raced round the beds till she came back to
the porch where he stood, and, dropping down upon the steps, she sat
panting, with cheeks as rosy as the rigolette on her shoulders.

"Very well done, child; I see you have not lost the use of your limbs
though you are in your teens. That belt is too tight; unfasten it, then
you can take a long breath without panting so."

"It isn't tight, sir; I can breathe perfectly well," began Rose, trying
to compose herself.

Her uncle's only answer was to lift her up and unhook the new belt of
which she was so proud. The moment the clasp was open the belt flew
apart several inches, for it was impossible to restrain the involuntary
sigh of relief that flatly contradicted her words.

"Why, I didn't know it was tight! it didn't feel so a bit. Of course it
would open if I puff like this, but I never do, because I hardly ever
run," explained Rose, rather discomfited by this discovery.

"I see you don't half fill your lungs, and so you can wear this absurd
thing without feeling it. The idea of cramping a tender little waist
in a stiff band of leather and steel just when it ought to be growing,"
said Dr. Alec, surveying the belt with great disfavour as he put the
clasp forward several holes, to Rose's secret dismay, for she was proud
of her slender figure, and daily rejoiced that she wasn't as stout
as Luly Miller, a former schoolmate, who vainly tried to repress her
plumpness.

"It will fall off if it is so loose," she said anxiously, as she stood
watching him pull her precious belt about.

"Not if you keep taking long breaths to hold it on. That is what I want
you to do, and when you have filled this out we will go on enlarging it
till your waist is more like that of Hebe, goddess of health, and less
like that of a fashion-plate the ugliest thing imaginable."

"How it does look!" and Rose gave a glance of scorn at the loose belt
hanging round her trim little waist. "It will be lost, and then I shall
feel badly, for it cost ever so much, and is real steel and Russia
leather. Just smell how nice."

"If it is lost I'll give you a better one. A soft silken sash is much
fitter for a pretty child like you than a plated harness like this; and
I've got no end of Italian scarfs and Turkish sashes among my traps. Ah!
that makes you feel better, doesn't it?" and he pinched the cheek that
had suddenly dimpled with a smile.

"It is very silly of me, but I can't help liking to know that" here she
stopped and blushed and held down her head, ashamed to add, "you think I
am pretty."

Dr. Alec's eyed twinkled, but he said very soberly,

"Rose, are you vain?"

"I'm afraid I am," answered a very meek voice from behind the veil of
hair that hid the red face.

"That is a sad fault." And he sighed as if grieved at the confession.

"I know it is, and I try not to be; but people praise me, and I can't
help liking it, for I really don't think I am repulsive."

The last word and the funny tone in which it was uttered were too
much for Dr. Alec, and he laughed in spite of himself, to Rose's great
relief.

"I quite agree with you; and in order that you may be still less
repulsive, I want you to grow as fine a girl as Phebe."

"Phebe!" and Rose looked so amazed that her uncle nearly went off again.

"Yes, Phebe; for she has what you need health. If you dear little girls
would only learn what real beauty is, and not pinch and starve and
bleach yourselves out so, you'd save an immense deal of time and money
and pain. A happy soul in a healthy body makes the best sort of beauty
for man or woman. Do you understand that, my dear?"

"Yes, sir," answered Rose, much taken down by this comparison with the
girl from the poor-house. It nettled her sadly, and she showed that it
did by saying quickly,

"I suppose you would like to have me sweep and scrub, and wear an old
brown dress, and go round with my sleeves rolled up, as Phebe does?"

"I should very much, if you could work as well as she does, and show as
strong a pair of arms as she can. I haven't seen a prettier picture for
some time than she made of herself this morning, up to the elbows in
suds, singing like a blackbird whilst she scrubbed on the back stoop."

"Well, I do think you are the queerest man that ever lived!" was all
Rose could find to say after this display of bad taste.

"I haven't begun to show you my oddities yet, so you must make up your
mind to worse shocks than this," he said, with such a whimsical look
that she was glad the sound of a bell prevented her showing more plainly
what a blow her little vanities had already received.

"You will find your box all open up in auntie's parlor, and there you
can amuse her and yourself by rummaging to your heart's content; I've
got to be cruising round all the morning getting my room to rights,"
said Dr. Alec, as they rose from breakfast.

"Can't I help you, uncle?" asked Rose, quite burning to be useful.

"No, thank you, I'm going to borrow Phebe for a while, if Aunt Plenty
can spare her."

"Anybody anything, Alec. You will want me, I know, so I'll give orders
about dinner and be all ready to lend a hand"; and the old lady bustled
away full of interest and good-will.

"Uncle will find that I can do some things that Phebe can't, so now!"
thought Rose, with a toss of the head as she flew to Aunt Peace and the
long-desired box.

Every little girl can easily imagine what an extra good time she had
diving into a sea of treasures and fishing up one pretty thing after
another, till the air was full of the mingled odours of musk and
sandalwood, the room gay with bright colours, and Rose in a rapture of
delight. She began to forgive Dr. Alec for the oatmeal diet when she saw
a lovely ivory workbox; became resigned to the state of her belt when
she found a pile of rainbow-coloured sashes; and when she came to some
distractingly pretty bottles of attar of rose, she felt that they almost
atoned for the great sin of thinking Phebe the finer girl of the two.

Dr. Alec meanwhile had apparently taken Aunt Plenty at her word, and was
turning the house upside down. A general revolution was evidently going
on in the green-room, for the dark damask curtains were seen bundling
away in Phebe's arms; the air-tight stove retiring to the cellar on
Ben's shoulder; and the great bedstead going up garret in a fragmentary
state, escorted by three bearers. Aunt Plenty was constantly on the trot
among her store-rooms, camphor-chests, and linen-closets, looking as if
the new order of things both amazed and amused her.

Half the peculiar performances of Dr. Alec cannot be revealed; but as
Rose glanced up from her box now and then she caught glimpses of him
striding by, bearing a bamboo chair, a pair of ancient andirons, a queer
Japanese screen, a rug or two, and finally a large bathing-pan upon his
head.

"What a curious room it will be," she said, as she sat resting and
refreshing herself with "Lumps of Delight," all the way from Cairo.

"I fancy you will like it, deary," answered Aunt Peace, looking up with
a smile from some pretty trifle she was making with blue silk and white
muslin.

Rose did not see the smile, for just at that moment her uncle paused
at the door, and she sprang up to dance before him, saying, with a face
full of childish happiness,

"Look at me! look at me! I'm splendid I don't know myself. I haven't put
these things on right, I dare say, but I do like them so much!"

"You look as gay as a parrot in your fez and cabaja, and it does my
heart good to see the little black shadow turned into a rainbow,"
said Uncle Alec, surveying the bright figure before him with great
approbation.

He did not say it, but he thought she made a much prettier picture than
Phebe at the wash-tub, for she had stuck a purple fez on her blonde
head, tied several brilliant scarfs about her waist, and put on a truly
gorgeous scarlet jacket with a golden sun embroidered on the back, a
silver moon on the front, and stars of all sizes on the sleeves. A pair
of Turkish slippers adorned her feet, and necklaces of amber, coral, and
filigree hung about her neck, while one hand held a smelling-bottle, and
the other the spicy box of oriental sweetmeats.

"I feel like a girl in the 'Arabian Nights,' and expect to find a magic
carpet or a wonderful talisman somewhere. Only I don't see how I ever
can thank you for all these lovely things," she said, stopping her
dance, as if suddenly oppressed with gratitude.

"I'll tell you how by leaving off the black clothes, that never should
have been kept so long on such a child, and wearing the gay ones I've
brought. It will do your spirits good, and cheer up this sober old
house. Won't it, auntie?"

"I think you are right, Alec, and it is fortunate that we have not
begun on her spring clothes yet, for Myra thought she ought not to wear
anything brighter than violet, and she is too pale for that."

"You just let me direct Miss Hemming how to make some of these things.
You will be surprised to see how much I know about piping hems and
gathering arm-holes and shirring biases," began Dr. Alec, patting a pile
of muslin, cloth and silk with a knowing air.

Aunt Peace and Rose laughed so that he could not display his knowledge
any farther, till they stopped, when he said good-naturedly,

"That will go a great way toward filling out the belt, so laugh away,
Morgiana, and I'll go back to my work, or I never shall be done."

"I couldn't help it, 'shirred biases' were so very funny!" Rose said,
as she turned to her box after the splendid laugh. "But really, auntie,"
she added soberly, "I feel as if I ought not to have so many nice
things. I suppose it wouldn't do to give Phebe some of them? Uncle might
not like it."

"He would not mind; but they are not suitable for Phebe. Some of the
dresses you are done with would be more useful, if they can be made over
to fit her," answered Aunt Peace in the prudent, moderate tone which is
so trying to our feelings when we indulge in little fits of charitable
enthusiasm.

"I'd rather give her new ones, for I think she is a little bit proud
and might not like old things. If she was my sister it would do, because
sisters don't mind, but she isn't, and that makes it bad, you see. I
know how I can manage beautifully; I'll adopt her!" and Rose looked
quite radiant with this new idea.

"I'm afraid you could not do it legally till you are older, but you
might see if she likes the plan, and at any rate you can be very kind to
her, for in one sense we are all sisters, and should help one another."

The sweet old face looked at her so kindly that Rose was fired with a
desire to settle the matter at once, and rushed away to the kitchen,
just as she was. Phebe was there, polishing up the antique andirons so
busily that she started when a voice cried out: "Smell that, taste this,
and look at me!"

Phebe sniffed attar of rose, crunched the "Lump of Delight" tucked into
her mouth, and stared with all her eyes at little Morgiana prancing
about the room like a brilliant paroquet.

"My stars, ain't you splendid!" was all she could say, holding up two
dusty hands.

"I've got heaps of lovely things upstairs, and I'll show them all to
you, and I'd go halves, only auntie thinks they wouldn't be useful, so
I shall give you something else; and you won't mind, will you? because I
want to adopt you as Arabella was in the story. Won't that be nice?"

"Why, Miss Rose, have you lost your wits?"

No wonder Phebe asked, for Rose talked very fast, and looked so odd in
her new costume, and was so eager she could not stop to explain. Seeing
Phebe's bewilderment, she quieted down and said, with a pretty air of
earnestness,

"It isn't fair that I should have so much and you so little, and I want
to be as good to you as if you were my sister, for Aunt Peace says we
are all sisters really. I thought if I adopted you as much as I can now,
it would be nicer. Will you let me, please?"

To Rose's great surprise, Phebe sat down on the floor and hid her face
in her apron for a minute without answering a word.

"Oh, dear, now she's offended, and I don't know what to do," thought
Rose, much discouraged by this reception of her offer.

"Please, forgive me; I didn't mean to hurt your feelings, and hope you
won't think--" she faltered presently, feeling that she must undo the
mischief, if possible.

But Phebe gave her another surprise, by dropping the apron and showing
a face all smiles, in spite of tears in the eyes, as she put both arms
round Rose and said, with a laugh and sob,

"I think you are the dearest girl in the world, and I'll let you do
anything you like with me."

"Then you do like the plan? You didn't cry because I seemed to be kind
of patronising? I truly didn't mean to be," cried Rose, delighted.

"I guess I do like it! and cried because no one was ever so good to me
before, and I couldn't help it. As for patronising, you may walk on me
if you want to, and I won't mind," said Phebe, in a burst of gratitude,
for the words, "we are sisters" went straight to her lonely heart and
nestled there.

"Well, now, we can play I'm a good sprite out of the box, or, what is
better, a fairy godmother come down the chimney, and you are Cinderella,
and must say what you want," said Rose, trying to put the question
delicately.

Phebe understood that, for she had a good deal of natural refinement,
though she did come from the poor-house.

"I don't feel as if I wanted anything now, Miss Rose, but to find some
way of thanking you for all you've done," she said, rubbing off a tear
that went rolling down the bridge of her nose in the most unromantic
way.

"Why, I haven't done anything but given you a bit of candy! Here, have
some more, and eat 'em while you work, and think what I can do. I must
go and clear up, so good-bye, and don't forget I've adopted you."

"You've given me sweeter things than candy, and I'm not likely to forget
it." And carefully wiping off the brick-dust, Phebe pressed the little
hand Rose offered warmly in both her hard ones, while the black eyes
followed the departing visitor with a grateful look that made them very
soft and bright.



Chapter 6--Uncle Alec's Room

Soon after dinner, and before she had got acquainted with half her
new possessions, Dr. Alec proposed a drive, to carry round the first
instalment of gifts to the aunts and cousins. Rose was quite ready to
go, being anxious to try a certain soft burnous from the box, which
not only possessed a most engaging little hood, but had funny tassels
bobbing in all directions.

The big carriage was full of parcels, and even Ben's seat was loaded
with Indian war clubs, a Chinese kite of immense size, and a pair of
polished ox-horns from Africa. Uncle Alec, very blue as to his clothes,
and very brown as to his face, sat bolt upright, surveying well
known places with interest, while Rose, feeling unusually elegant and
comfortable, leaned back folded in her soft mantle, and played she was
an Eastern princess making a royal progress among her subjects.

At three of the places their calls were brief, for Aunt Myra's catarrh
was unusually bad; Aunt Clara had a room full of company; and Aunt
Jane showed such a tendency to discuss the population, productions, and
politics of Europe, Asia and Africa, that even Dr. Alec was dismayed,
and got away as soon as possible.

"Now we will have a good time! I do hope the boys will be at home," said
Rose, with a sigh of relief, as they wound yet higher up the hill to
Aunt Jessie's.

"I left this for the last call, so that we might find the lads just in
from school. Yes, there is Jamie on the gate watching for us; now you'll
see the Clan gather; they are always swarming about together."

The instant Jamie saw the approaching guests he gave a shrill whistle,
which was answered by echoes from meadow, house and barn, as the cousins
came running from all directions, shouting, "Hooray for Uncle Alec!"
They went at the carriage like highwaymen, robbed it of every parcel,
took the occupants prisoners, and marched them into the house with great
exultation.

"Little Mum! little Mum! here they are with lots of goodies! Come down
and see the fun right away! Quick!" bawled Will and Geordie amidst a
general ripping off of papers and a reckless cutting of strings that
soon turned the tidy room into a chaos.

Down came Aunt Jessie with her pretty cap half on, but such a beaming
face below it that one rather thought the fly-away head-gear an
improvement than otherwise. She had hardly time to greet Rose and the
doctor before the boys were about her, each clamouring for her to see
his gift and rejoice over it with him, for "little Mum" went halves in
everything. The great horns skirmished about her as if to toss her to
the ceiling; the war clubs hurtled over her head as if to annihilate
her; an amazing medley from the four quarters of the globe filled her
lap, and seven excited boys all talked to her at once.

But she liked it; oh dear, yes! and sat smiling, admiring, and
explaining, quite untroubled by the din, which made Rose cover up her
ears and Dr. Alec threaten instant flight if the riot was not quelled.
That threat produced a lull, and while the uncle received thanks in one
corner, the aunt had some little confidences made to her in the other.

"Well, dear, and how are things going with you now? Better, I hope, than
they were a week ago."

"Aunt Jessie, I think I'm going to be very happy, now uncle has come.
He does the queerest things, but he is so good to me I can't help
loving him"; and, nestling closer to little Mum, Rose told all that had
happened, ending with a rapturous account of the splendid box.

"I am very glad, dear. But, Rose, I must warn you of one thing; don't
let uncle spoil you."

"But I like to be spoilt, auntie."

"I don't doubt it; but if you turn out badly when the year is over he
will be blamed, and his experiment prove a failure. That would be a
pity, wouldn't it? when he wants to do so much for you, and can do it if
his kind heart does not get in the way of his good judgment."

"I never thought of that, and I'll try not to be spoilt. But how can I
help it?" asked Rose anxiously.

"By not complaining of the wholesome things he wants you to do; by
giving him cheerful obedience as well as love; and even making some
small sacrifices for his sake."

"I will, I truly will! and when I get in a worry about things may I come
to you? Uncle told me to, and I feel as if I shouldn't be afraid."

"You may, darling; this is the place where little troubles are best
cured, and this is what mothers are for, I fancy"; and Aunt Jessie drew
the curly head to her shoulder with a tender look that proved how well
she knew what medicine the child most needed.

It was so sweet and comfortable that Rose sat still enjoying it till a
little voice said,

"Mamma, don't you think Pokey would like some of my shells? Rose gave
Phebe some of her nice things, and it was very good of her. Can I?"

"Who is Pokey?" asked Rose, popping up her head, attracted by the odd
name.

"My dolly; do you want to see her?" asked Jamie, who had been much
impressed by the tale of adoption he had overheard.

"Yes; I'm fond of dollies, only don't tell the boys, or they will laugh
at me."

"They don't laugh at me, and they play with my dolly a great deal; but
she likes me best"; and Jamie ran away to produce his pet.

"I brought my old doll, but I keep her hidden because I am too big to
play with her, and yet I can't bear to throw her away, I'm so fond of
her," said Rose, continuing her confidences in a whisper.

"You can come and play with Jamie's whenever you like, for we believe in
dollies up here," began Aunt Jessie, smiling to herself as if something
amused her.

Just then Jamie came back, and Rose understood the smile, for his dolly
proved to be a pretty four-year-old little girl, who trotted in as fast
as her fat legs would carry her, and making straight for the shells,
scrambled up an armful, saying, with a laugh that showed her little
white teeth,

"All for Dimmy and me, for Dimmy and me!"

"That's my dolly; isn't she a nice one?" asked Jamie, proudly surveying
his pet with his hands behind him and his short legs rather far apart a
manly attitude copied from his brothers.

"She is a dear dolly. But why call her Pokey?" asked Rose, charmed with
the new plaything.

"She is such an inquisitive little body she is always poking that mite
of a nose into everything; and as Paul Pry did not suit, the boys fell
to calling her Pokey. Not a pretty name, but very expressive."

It certainly was, for, having examined the shells, the busy tot laid
hold of everything she could find, and continued her researches till
Archie caught her sucking his carved ivory chessmen to see if they were
not barley sugar. Rice paper pictures were also discovered crumpled up
in her tiny pocket, and she nearly smashed Will's ostrich egg by trying
to sit upon it.

"Here, Jim, take her away; she's worse than the puppies, and we can't
have her round," commanded the elder brother, picking her up and handing
her over to the little fellow, who received her with open arms and the
warning remark,

"You'd better mind what you do, for I'm going to 'dopt Pokey like
Rose did Phebe, and then you'll have to be very good to her, you big
fellows."

"'Dopt away, baby, and I'll give you a cage to keep her in, or you won't
have her long, for she is getting worse than a monkey"; and Archie went
back to his mates, while Aunt Jessie, foreseeing a crisis, proposed that
Jamie should take his dolly home, as she was borrowed, and it was time
her visit ended.

"My dolly is better than yours, isn't she? 'cause she can walk and talk
and sing and dance, and yours can't do anything, can she?" asked Jamie
with pride, as he regarded his Pokey, who just then had been moved to
execute a funny little jig and warble the well-known couplet,

    "'Puss-tat, puss-tat, where you been?'
     'I been Lunnin, to saw a Tween."'

After which superb display she retired, escorted by Jamie, both making a
fearful din blowing on conch shells.

"We must tear ourselves away, Rose, because I want to get you home
before sunset. Will you come for a drive, Jessie?" said Dr. Alec, as the
music died away in the distance.

"No, thank you; but I see the boys want a scamper, so, if you don't
mind, they may escort you home, but not go in. That is only allowed on
holidays."

The words were hardly out of Aunt Jessie's mouth when Archie said, in a
tone of command,

"Pass the word, lads. Boot and saddle, and be quick about it."

"All right!" And in a moment not a vestige of boy remained but the
litter on the floor.

The cavalcade went down the hill at a pace that made Rose cling to her
uncle's arm, for the fat old horses got excited by the antics of the
ponies careering all about them, and went as fast as they could pelt,
with the gay dog-cart rattling in front, for Archie and Charlie scorned
shelties since this magnificent equipage had been set up. Ben enjoyed
the fun, and the lads cut up capers till Rose declared that "circus" was
the proper name for them after all.

When they reached the house they dismounted, and stood, three on each
side the steps, in martial attitudes, while her ladyship was handed out
with great elegance by Uncle Alec. Then the Clan saluted, mounted at
word of command, and with a wild whoop tore down the avenue in what they
considered the true Arab style.

"That was splendid, now it is safely ended," said Rose, skipping up
the steps with her head over her shoulder to watch the dear tassels bob
about.

"I shall get you a pony as soon as you are a little stronger," said Dr.
Alec, watching her with a smile.

"Oh, I couldn't ride one of those horrid, frisky little beasts! They
roll their eyes and bounce about so, I should die of fright," cried
Rose, clasping her hands tragically.

"Are you a coward?"

"About horses I am."

"Never mind, then; come and see my new room"; and he led the way
upstairs without another word.

As Rose followed she remembered her promise to Aunt Jessie, and was
sorry she had objected so decidedly. She was a great deal more sorry
five minutes later, and well she might be.

"Now, take a good look, and tell me what you think of it," said Dr.
Alec, opening the door and letting her enter before him, while Phebe was
seen whisking down the backstairs with a dust-pan.

Rose walked to the middle of the room, stood still, and gazed about her
with eyes that brightened as they looked, for all was changed.

This chamber had been built out over the library to suit some fancy, and
had been unused for years, except at Christmas times, when the old house
overflowed. It had three windows one to the east, that overlooked the
bay; one to the south, where the horse-chestnuts waved their green
fans; and one to the west, towards the hill and the evening sky. A ruddy
sunset burned there now, filling the room with an enchanted glow; the
soft murmur of the sea was heard, and a robin chirped "Good-night!"
among the budding trees.

Rose saw and heard these things first, and felt their beauty with a
child's quick instinct; then her eye took in the altered aspect of the
room, once so shrouded, still and solitary, now so full of light and
warmth and simple luxury.

India matting covered the floor, with a gay rug here and there;
the antique andirons shone on the wide hearth, where a cheery blaze
dispelled the dampness of the long-closed room. Bamboo lounges and
chairs stood about, and quaint little tables in cosy corners; one
bearing a pretty basket, one a desk, and on a third lay several
familiar-looking books. In a recess stood a narrow white bed, with a
lovely Madonna hanging over it. The Japanese screen half-folded back
showed a delicate toilet service of blue and white set forth on a marble
slab, and near by was the great bath-pan, with Turkish towels and a
sponge as big as Rose's head.

"Uncle must love cold water like a duck," she thought, with a shiver.

Then her eye went on to the tall cabinet, where a half-open door
revealed a tempting array of the drawers, shelves and "cubby holes,"
which so delight the hearts of children.

"What a grand place for my new things," she thought, wondering what her
uncle kept in that cedar retreat.

"Oh me, what a sweet toilet table!" was her next mental exclamation, as
she approached this inviting spot.

A round old-fashioned mirror hung over it, with a gilt eagle a-top,
holding in his beak the knot of blue ribbon that tied up a curtain
of muslin falling on either side of the table, where appeared little
ivory-handled brushes, two slender silver candle-sticks, a porcelain
match-box, several pretty trays for small matters, and, most imposing of
all, a plump blue silk cushion, coquettishly trimmed with lace, and pink
rose-buds at the corners.

That cushion rather astonished Rose; in fact, the whole table did, and
she was just thinking, with a sly smile,

"Uncle is a dandy, but I never should have guessed it," when he opened
the door of a large closet, saying, with a careless wave of the hand,

"Men like plenty of room for their rattle-traps; don't you think that
ought to satisfy me?"

Rose peeped in and gave a start, though all she saw was what one usually
finds in closets clothes and boots, boxes and bags. Ah! but you see
these clothes were small black and white frocks; the row of little boots
that stood below had never been on Dr. Alec's feet; the green bandbox
had a gray veil straying out of it, and yes! the bag hanging on the door
was certainly her own piece-bag, with a hole in one corner. She gave
a quick look round the room and understood now why it had seemed too
dainty for a man, why her Testament and Prayer Book were on the table
by the bed, and what those rose-buds meant on the blue cushion. It came
upon her in one delicious burst that this little paradise was all for
her, and, not knowing how else to express her gratitude, she caught Dr.
Alec round the neck, saying impetuously,

"O uncle, you are too good to me! I'll do anything you ask me; ride wild
horses and take freezing baths and eat bad-tasting messes, and let my
clothes hang on me, to show how much I thank you for this dear, sweet,
lovely room!"

"You like it, then? But why do you think it is yours, my lass?" asked
Dr. Alec, as he sat down looking well pleased, and drew his excited
little niece to his knee.

"I don't think, I know it is for me; I see it in your face, and I feel
as if I didn't half deserve it. Aunt Jessie said you would spoil me, and
I must not let you. I'm afraid this looks like it, and perhaps oh me!
perhaps I ought not to have this beautiful room after all!" and Rose
tried to look as if she could be heroic enough to give it up if it was
best.

"I owe Mrs. Jessie one for that," said Dr. Alec, trying to frown, though
in his secret soul he felt that she was quite right. Then he smiled that
cordial smile, which was like sunshine on his brown face, as he said,

"This is part of the cure, Rose, and I put you here that you might take
my three great remedies in the best and easiest way. Plenty of sun,
fresh air, and cold water; also cheerful surroundings, and some work;
for Phebe is to show you how to take care of this room, and be your
little maid as well as friend and teacher. Does that sound hard and
disagreeable to you, dear?"

"No, sir; very, very pleasant, and I'll do my best to be a good patient.
But I really don't think anyone could be sick in this delightful
room," she said, with a long sigh of happiness as her eye went from one
pleasant object to another.

"Then you like my sort of medicine better than Aunt Myra's, and don't
want to throw it out of the window, hey?"



Chapter 7--A Trip to China

"Come, little girl, I've got another dose for you. I fancy you won't
take it as well as you did the last, but you will like it better after a
while," said Dr. Alec, about a week after the grand surprise.

Rose was sitting in her pretty room, where she would gladly have spent
all her time if it had been allowed; but she looked up with a smile, for
she had ceased to fear her uncle's remedies, and was always ready to try
a new one. The last had been a set of light gardening tools, with which
she had helped him put the flower-beds in order, learning all sorts of
new and pleasant things about the plants as she worked, for, though she
had studied botany at school, it seemed very dry stuff compared with
Uncle Alec's lively lesson.

"What is it now?" she asked, shutting her work-box without a murmur.

"Salt-water."

"How must I take it?"

"Put on the new suit Miss Hemming sent home yesterday, and come down to
the beach; then I'll show you."

"Yes, sir," answered Rose obediently, adding to herself, with a shiver,
as he went off: "It is too early for bathing, so I know it is something
to do with a dreadful boat."

Putting on the new suit of blue flannel, prettily trimmed with white,
and the little sailor-hat with long streamers, diverted her mind from
the approaching trial, till a shrill whistle reminded her that her uncle
was waiting. Away she ran through the garden, down the sandy path, out
upon the strip of beach that belonged to the house, and here she found
Dr. Alec busy with a slender red and white boat that lay rocking on the
rising tide.

"That is a dear little boat; and 'Bonnie Belle' is a pretty name," she
said, trying not to show how nervous she felt.

"It is for you; so sit in the stern and learn to steer, till you are
ready to learn to row."

"Do all boats wiggle about in that way?" she asked, lingering as if to
tie her hat more firmly.

"Oh, yes, pitch about like nutshells when the sea is a bit rough,"
answered her sailor uncle, never guessing her secret woe.

"Is it rough to-day?"

"Not very; it looks a trifle squally to the eastward, but we are all
right till the wind changes. Come."

"Can you swim, uncle?" asked Rose, clutching at his arm as he took her
hand.

"Like a fish. Now then."

"Oh, please hold me very tight till I get there! Why do you have the
stern so far away?" and, stifling several squeaks of alarm in her
passage, Rose crept to the distant seat, and sat there holding on with
both hands and looking as if she expected every wave to bring a sudden
shipwreck.

Uncle Alec took no notice of her fear, but patiently instructed her in
the art of steering, till she was so absorbed in remembering which was
starboard and which larboard, that she forgot to say "OW!" every time a
big wave slapped against the boat.

"Now where shall we go?" she asked, as the wind blew freshly in her
face, and a few, long swift strokes sent them half across the little
bay.

"Suppose we go to China?"

"Isn't that rather a long voyage?"

"Not as I go. Steer round the Point into the harbour, and I'll give you
a glimpse of China in twenty minutes or so."

"I should like that!" and Rose sat wondering what he meant, while she
enjoyed the new sights all about her.

Behind them the green Aunt-hill sloped gently upward to the grove at
the top, and all along the seaward side stood familiar houses, stately,
cosy, or picturesque. As they rounded the Point, the great bay opened
before them full of shipping, and the city lay beyond, its spires rising
above the tall masts with their gay streamers.

"Are we going there?" she asked, for she had never seen this aspect of
the rich and busy old city before.

"Yes. Uncle Mac has a ship just in from Hong Kong, and I thought you
would like to go and see it."

"Oh, I should. I love dearly to go poking about in the warehouses with
Uncle Mac; everything is so curious and new to me; and I'm specially
interested in China because you have been there."

"I'll show you two genuine Chinamen who have just arrived. You will like
to welcome Whang Lo and Fun See, I'm sure."

"Don't ask me to speak to them, uncle; I shall be sure to laugh at the
odd names and the pig-tails and the slanting eyes. Please let me just
trot round after you; I like that best."

"Very well; now steer toward the wharf where the big ship with the queer
flag is. That's the 'Rajah,' and we will go aboard if we can."

In among the ships they went, by the wharves where the water was green
and still, and queer barnacles grew on the slippery piles. Odd smells
saluted her nose, and odd sights met her eyes, but Rose liked it all,
and played she was really landing in Hong Kong when they glided up to
the steps in the shadow of the tall "Rajah." Boxes and bales were rising
out of the hold and being carried into the warehouse by stout porters,
who tugged and bawled and clattered about with small trucks, or worked
cranes with iron claws that came down and clutched heavy weights,
whisking them aloft to where wide doors like mouths swallowed them up.

Dr. Alec took her aboard the ship, and she had the satisfaction of
poking her inquisitive little nose into every available corner, at the
risk of being crushed, lost, or drowned.

"Well, child, how would you like to take a voyage round the world with
me in a jolly old craft like this?" asked her uncle, as they rested a
minute in the captain's cabin.

"I should like to see the world, but not in such a small, untidy, smelly
place as this. We would go in a yacht all clean and comfortable;
Charlie says that is the proper way," answered Rose, surveying the close
quarters with little favour.

"You are not a true Campbell if you don't like the smell of tar and
salt-water, nor Charlie either, with his luxurious yacht. Now come
ashore and chin-chin with the Celestials."

After a delightful progress through the great warehouse, peeping and
picking as they went, they found Uncle Mac and the yellow gentlemen in
his private room, where samples, gifts, curiosities, and newly arrived
treasures of all sorts were piled up in pleasing pro-fusion and
con-fusion.

As soon as possible Rose retired to a corner, with a porcelain god
on one side, a green dragon on the other, and, what was still more
embarrassing, Fun See sat on a tea-chest in front, and stared at her
with his beady black eyes till she did not know where to look.

Mr. Whang Lo was an elderly gentleman in American costume, with his
pig-tail neatly wound round his head. He spoke English, and was talking
busily with Uncle Mac in the most commonplace way so Rose considered him
a failure. But Fun See was delightfully Chinese from his junk-like shoes
to the button on his pagoda hat; for he had got himself up in style, and
was a mass of silk jackets and slouchy trousers. He was short and fat,
and waddled comically; his eyes were very "slanting," as Rose said; his
queue was long, so were his nails; his yellow face was plump and shiny,
and he was altogether a highly satisfactory Chinaman.

Uncle Alec told her that Fun See had come out to be educated and could
only speak a little pigeon English; so she must be kind to the poor
fellow, for he was only a lad, though he looked nearly as old as Mr.
Whang Lo. Rose said she would be kind; but had not the least idea how to
entertain the queer guest, who looked as if he had walked out of one of
the rice-paper landscapes on the wall, and sat nodding at her so like a
toy Mandarin that she could hardly keep sober.

In the midst of her polite perplexity, Uncle Mac saw the two young
people gazing wistfully at one another, and seemed to enjoy the joke
of this making acquaintance under difficulties. Taking a box from his
table, he gave it to Fun See, with an order that seemed to please him
very much.

Descending from his perch, he fell to unpacking it with great neatness
and despatch, while Rose watched him, wondering what was going to
happen. Presently, out from the wrappings came a teapot, which caused
her to clasp her hands with delight, for it was made in the likeness of
a plump little Chinaman. His hat was the cover, his queue the handle,
and his pipe the nose. It stood upon feet in shoes turned up at the
toes, and the smile on the fat, sleepy face was so like that on Fun's
when he displayed the teapot, that Rose couldn't help laughing, which
pleased him much.

Two pretty cups with covers, and a fine scarlet tray completed the
set, and made one long to have a "dish of tea," even in Chinese style,
without cream or sugar.

When he had arranged them on a little table before her, Fun signified in
pantomime that they were hers, from her uncle. She returned her thanks
in the same way, whereupon he returned to his tea-chest, and, having
no other means of communication, they sat smiling and nodding at one
another in an absurd sort of way till a new idea seemed to strike
Fun. Tumbling off his seat, he waddled away as fast as his petticoats
permitted, leaving Rose hoping that he had not gone to get a roasted
rat, a stewed puppy, or any other foreign mess which civility would
oblige her to eat.

While she waited for her funny new friend, she improved her mind in a
way that would have charmed Aunt Jane. The gentlemen were talking over
all sorts of things, and she listened attentively, storing up much
of what she heard, for she had an excellent memory, and longed to
distinguish herself by being able to produce some useful information
when reproached with her ignorance.

She was just trying to impress upon her mind that Amoy was two hundred
and eighty miles from Hong Kong, when Fun came scuffling back, bearing
what she thought was a small sword, till he unfurled an immense fan, and
presented it with a string of Chinese compliments, the meaning of
which would have amused her even more than the sound, if she could have
understood it.

She had never seen such an astonishing fan, and at once became absorbed
in examining it. Of course, there was no perspective whatever, which
only gave it a peculiar charm to Rose, for in one place a lovely lady,
with blue knitting-needles in her hair, sat directly upon the spire of a
stately pagoda. In another charming view a brook appeared to flow in at
the front door of a stout gentleman's house, and out at his chimney. In
a third a zig-zag wall went up into the sky like a flash of lightning,
and a bird with two tails was apparently brooding over a fisherman whose
boat was just going aground upon the moon.

It was altogether a fascinating thing, and she would have sat wafting it
to and fro all the afternoon, to Fun's great satisfaction, if Dr. Alec's
attention had not suddenly been called to her by a breeze from the big
fan that blew his hair into his eyes, and reminded him that they must
go. So the pretty china was repacked, Rose furled her fan, and with
several parcels of choice teas for the old ladies stowed away in Dr.
Alec's pockets, they took their leave, after Fun had saluted them with
"the three bendings and the nine knockings," as they salute the Emperor,
or "Son of Heaven," at home.

"I feel as if I had really been to China, and I'm sure I look so," said
Rose, as they glided out of the shadow of the "Rajah."

She certainly did, for Mr. Whang Lo had given her a Chinese umbrella;
Uncle Alec had got some lanterns to light up her balcony; the great fan
lay in her lap, and the tea-set reposed at her feet.

"This is not a bad way to study geography, is it?" asked her uncle, who
had observed her attention to the talk.

"It is a very pleasant way, and I really think I have learned more about
China to-day than in all the lessons I had at school, though I used to
rattle off the answers as fast as I could go. No one explained anything
to us, so all I remember is that tea and silk come from there, and the
women have little bits of feet. I saw Fun looking at mine, and he must
have thought them perfectly immense," answered Rose, surveying her stout
boots with sudden contempt.

"We will have out the maps and the globe, and I'll show you some of my
journeys, telling stories as we go. That will be next best to doing it
actually."

"You are so fond of travelling, I should think it would be very dull for
you here, uncle. Do you know, Aunt Plenty says she is sure you will be
off in a year or two."

"Very likely."

"Oh, me! what shall I do then?" sighed Rose, in a tone of despair that
made Uncle Alec's face brighten with a look of genuine pleasure as he
said significantly,

"Next time I go I shall take my little anchor with me. How will that
suit?"

"Really, uncle?"

"Really, niece."

Rose gave a little bounce of rapture which caused the boat to "wiggle"
in a way that speedily quieted her down. But she sat beaming joyfully
and trying to think which of some hundred questions she would ask first,
when Dr. Alec said, pointing to a boat that was coming up behind them in
great style,

"How well those fellows row! Look at them, and take notes for your own
use by and by."

The "Stormy Petrel" was manned by half a dozen jaunty looking sailors,
who made a fine display of blue shirts and shiny hats, with stars and
anchors in every direction.

"How beautifully they go, and they are only boys. Why, I do believe they
are our boys! Yes, I see Charlie laughing over his shoulder. Row, uncle,
row! Oh, please do, and not let them catch up with us!" cried Rose, in
such a state of excitement that the new umbrella nearly went overboard.

"All right, here we go!" and away they did go with a long steady sweep
of the oars that carried the "Bonnie Belle" through the water with a
rush.

The lads pulled their prettiest, but Dr. Alec would have reached the
Point first, if Rose, in her flurry, had not retarded him by jerking the
rudder ropes in a most unseamanlike way, and just as she got right again
her hat blew off. That put an end to the race, and while they were still
fishing for the hat the other boat came alongside, with all the oars in
the air, and the jolly young tars ready for a frolic.

"Did you catch a crab, uncle?"

"No, a blue-fish," he answered, as the dripping hat was landed on a seat
to dry.

"What have you been doing?"

"Seeing Fun."

"Good for you, Rose! I know what you mean. We are going to have him up
to show us how to fly the big kite, for we can't get the hang of it.
Isn't he great fun, though?"

"No, little Fun."

"Come, stop joking, and show us what you've got."

"You'd better hoist that fan for a sail."

"Lend Dandy your umbrella; he hates to burn his pretty nose."

"I say, uncle, are you going to have a Feast of Lanterns?"

"No, I'm going to have a feast of bread and butter, for it's tea-time.
If that black cloud doesn't lie, we shall have a gust before long,
so you had better get home as soon as you can, or your mother will be
anxious, Archie."

"Ay, ay, skipper. Good-night, Rose; come out often, and we'll teach you
all there is to know about rowing," was Charlie's modest invitation.

Then the boats parted company, and across the water from the "Petrel's"
crew came a verse from one of the Nonsense songs in which the boys
delighted.

    "Oh, Timballoo! how happy we are,
     We live in a sieve and a crockery jar!
     And all night long, in the starlight pale,
     We sail away, with a pea-green sail,
     And whistle and warble a moony song
     To the echoing sound of a coppery gong.
     Far and few, far and few
     Are the lands where the Jumblies live;
     Their heads are green, and their hands are blue,
     And they went to sea in a sieve."



Chapter 8--And what came of it

"Uncle, could you lend me a ninepence? I'll return it as soon as I get
my pocket-money," said Rose, coming into the library in a great hurry
that evening.

"I think I could, and I won't charge any interest for it, so you need
not be in any hurry to repay me. Come back here and help me settle these
books if you have nothing pleasanter to do," answered Dr. Alec, handing
out the money with that readiness which is so delightful when we ask
small loans.

"I'll come in a minute; I've been longing to fix my books, but didn't
dare to touch them, because you always shake your head when I read."

"I shall shake my head when you write, if you don't do it better than
you did in making out this catalogue."

"I know it's bad, but I was in a hurry when I did it, and I am in one
now." And away went Rose, glad to escape a lecture.

But she got it when she came back, for Uncle Alec was still knitting
his brows over the list of books, and sternly demanded, pointing to a
tipsy-looking title staggering down the page,

"Is that meant for 'Pulverized Bones,' ma'am?"

"No, sir; it's 'Paradise Lost.'"

"Well, I'm glad to know it, for I began to think you were planning to
study surgery or farming. And what is this, if you please? 'Babies'
Aprons' is all I can make of it."

Rose looked hard at the scrawl, and presently announced, with an air of
superior wisdom,

"Oh, that's 'Bacon's Essays.'"

"Miss Power did not teach anything so old-fashioned as writing, I see.
Now look at this memorandum Aunt Plenty gave me, and see what a handsome
plain hand that is. She went to a dame-school and learnt a few useful
things well; that is better than a smattering of half a dozen so-called
higher branches, I take the liberty of thinking."

"Well, I'm sure I was considered a bright girl at school, and learned
everything I was taught. Luly and me were the first in all our classes,
and 'specially praised for our French and music and those sort of
things," said Rose, rather offended at Uncle Alec's criticism.

"I dare say; but if your French grammar was no better than your English,
I think the praise was not deserved, my dear."

"Why, uncle, we did study English grammar, and I could parse
beautifully. Miss Power used to have us up to show off when people came.
I don't see but I talk as right as most girls."

"I dare say you do, but we are all too careless about our English. Now,
think a minute, and tell me if these expressions are correct 'Luly and
me,' 'those sort of things,' and 'as right as most girls.'"

Rose pulled her pet curl and put up her lip, but had to own that she was
wrong, and said meekly, after a pause which threatened to be sulky,

"I suppose I should have said 'Luly and I,' in that case, and 'that sort
of things' and 'rightly,' though 'correctly' would have been a better
word, I guess."

"Thank you; and if you will kindly drop 'I guess,' I shall like my
little Yankee all the better. Now, see here, Rosy, I don't pretend
to set myself up for a model in anything, and you may come down on my
grammar, manners or morals as often as you think I'm wrong, and I'll
thank you. I've been knocking about the world for years, and have got
careless, but I want my girl to be what I call well-educated, even if
she studies nothing but the three 'Rs' for a year to come. Let us be
thorough, no matter how slowly we go."

He spoke so earnestly and looked so sorry to have ruffled her that
Rose went and sat on the arm of his chair, saying, with a pretty air of
penitence,

"I'm sorry I was cross, uncle, when I ought to thank you for taking
so much interest in me. I guess no, I think you are right about being
thorough, for I used to understand a great deal better when papa taught
me a few lessons than when Miss Power hurried me through so many. I
declare my head used to be such a jumble of French and German, history
and arithmetic, grammar and music, I used to feel sometimes as if it
would split. I'm sure I don't wonder it ached." And she held on to it as
if the mere memory of the "jumble" made it swim.

"Yet that is considered an excellent school, I find, and I dare say it
would be if the benighted lady did not think it necessary to cram her
pupils like Thanks-giving turkeys, instead of feeding them in a natural
and wholesome way. It is the fault with most American schools, and the
poor little heads will go on aching till we learn better."

This was one of Dr. Alec's hobbies, and Rose was afraid he was off for
a gallop, but he reined himself in and gave her thoughts a new turn by
saying suddenly, as he pulled out a fat pocket-book,

"Uncle Mac has put all your affairs into my hands now, and here is your
month's pocket money. You keep your own little accounts, I suppose?"

"Thank you. Yes, Uncle Mac gave me an account book when I went to
school, and I used to put down my expenses, but I couldn't make them go
very well, for figures are the one thing I am not at all clever about,"
said Rose, rummaging in her desk for a dilapidated little book, which
she was ashamed to show when she found it.

"Well, as figures are rather important things to most of us, and you may
have a good many accounts to keep some day, wouldn't it be wise to
begin at once and learn to manage your pennies before the pounds come to
perplex you?"

"I thought you would do all that fussy part and take care of the pounds,
as you call them. Need I worry about it? I do hate sums, so!"

"I shall take care of things till you are of age, but I mean that you
shall know how your property is managed, and do as much of it as you can
by and by; then you won't be dependent on the honesty of other people."

"Gracious me! as if I wouldn't trust you with millions of billions if I
had them," cried Rose, scandalised at the mere suggestion.

"Ah, but I might be tempted; guardians are sometimes; so you'd better
keep your eye on me, and in order to do that you must learn all about
these affairs," answered Dr. Alec, as he made an entry in his own very
neat account-book.

Rose peeped over his shoulder at it, and then turned to the arithmetical
puzzle in her hand with a sigh of despair.

"Uncle, when you add up your expenses do you ever find you have got more
money than you had in the beginning?"

"No; I usually find that I have a good deal less than I had in the
beginning. Are you troubled in the peculiar way you mention?"

"Yes; it is very curious, but I never can make things come out square."

"Perhaps I can help you," began Uncle Alec, in the most respectful tone.

"I think you had better, for if I have got to keep accounts I may as
well begin in the right way. But please don't laugh! I know I'm very
stupid, and my book is a disgrace, but I never could get it straight."
And with great trepidation, Rose gave up her funny little accounts.

It really was good in Dr. Alec not to laugh, and Rose felt deeply
grateful when he said in a mildly suggestive tone,

"The dollars and cents seem to be rather mixed, perhaps if I just
straightened them out a bit we should find things all right."

"Please do, and then show me on a fresh leaf how to make mine look nice
and ship-shape as yours do."

As Rose stood by him watching the ease with which he quickly brought
order out of chaos, she privately resolved to hunt up her old arithmetic
and perfect herself in the four first rules, with a good tug at
fractions, before she read any more fairy tales.

"Am I a rich girl, uncle?" she asked suddenly, as he was copying a
column of figures.

"Rather a poor one, I should say, since you had to borrow a ninepence."

"That was your fault, because you forgot my pocket-money. But, really,
shall I be rich by and by?"

"I am afraid you will."

"Why afraid, uncle?"

"Too much money is a bad thing."

"But I can give it away, you know; that is always the pleasantest part
of having it I think."

"I'm glad you feel so, for you can do much good with your fortune if you
know how to use it well."

"You shall teach me, and when I am a woman we will set up a school where
nothing but the three R's shall be taught, and all the children live
on oatmeal, and the girls have waists a yard round," said Rose, with a
sudden saucy smile dimpling her cheeks.

"You are an impertinent little baggage, to turn on me in that way right
in the midst of my first attempt at teaching. Never mind, I'll have an
extra bitter dose for you next time, miss."

"I knew you wanted to laugh, so I gave you a chance. Now, I will be
good, master, and do my lesson nicely."

So Dr. Alec had his laugh, and then Rose sat down and took a lesson in
accounts which she never forgot.

"Now come and read aloud to me; my eyes are tired, and it is pleasant to
sit here by the fire while the rain pours outside and Aunt Jane lectures
upstairs," said Uncle Alec, when last month's accounts had been put in
good order and a fresh page neatly begun.

Rose liked to read aloud, and gladly gave him the chapter in "Nicholas
Nickleby" where the Miss Kenwigses take their French lesson. She did her
very best, feeling that she was being criticised, and hoping that she
might not be found wanting in this as in other things.

"Shall I go on, sir?" she asked very meekly, when the chapter ended.

"If you are not tired, dear. It is a pleasure to hear you, for you read
remarkably well," was the answer that filled her heart with pride and
pleasure.

"Do you really think so, uncle? I'm so glad! Papa taught me, and I read
for hours to him, but I thought perhaps, he liked it because he was fond
of me."

"So am I; but you really do read unusually well, and I'm very glad of
it, for it is a rare accomplishment, and one I value highly. Come here
in this cosy, low chair; the light is better, and I can pull these curls
if you go too fast. I see you are going to be a great comfort as well
as a great credit to your old uncle, Rosy." And Dr. Alec drew her close
beside him with such a fatherly look and tone that she felt it would
be very easy to love and obey him, since he knew how to mix praise and
blame so pleasantly together.

Another chapter was just finished, when the sound of a carriage warned
them that Aunt Jane was about to depart. Before they could go to meet
her, however, she appeared in the doorway looking like an unusually tall
mummy in her waterproof, with her glasses shining like cat's eyes from
the depths of the hood.

"Just as I thought! petting that child to death and letting her sit up
late reading trash. I do hope you feel the weight of the responsibility
you have taken upon yourself, Alec," she said, with a certain grim sort
of satisfaction at seeing things go wrong.

"I think I have a very realising sense of it, sister Jane," answered
Dr. Alec, with a comical shrug of the shoulders and a glance at Rose's
bright face.

"It is sad to see a great girl wasting these precious hours so. Now, my
boys have studied all day, and Mac is still at his books, I've no doubt,
while you have not had a lesson since you came, I suspect."

"I've had five to-day, ma'am," was Rose's very unexpected answer.

"I'm glad to hear it; and what were they, pray?" Rose looked very demure
as she replied,

"Navigation, geography, grammar, arithmetic, and keeping my temper."

"Queer lessons, I fancy; and what have you learned from this remarkable
mixture, I should like to know?"

A naughty sparkle came into Rose's eyes as she answered, with a droll
look at her uncle,

"I can't tell you all, ma'am, but I have collected some useful
information about China, which you may like, especially the teas. The
best are Lapsing Souchong, Assam Pekoe, rare Ankoe, Flowery Pekoe,
Howqua's mixture, Scented Caper, Padral tea, black Congou, and green
Twankey. Shanghai is on the Woosung River. Hong Kong means 'Island of
Sweet waters.' Singapore is 'Lion's Town.' 'Chops' are the boats they
live in; and they drink tea out of little saucers. Principal productions
are porcelain, tea, cinnamon, shawls, tin, tamarinds and opium. They
have beautiful temples and queer gods; and in Canton is the Dwelling of
the Holy Pigs, fourteen of them, very big, and all blind."

The effect of this remarkable burst was immense, especially the fact
last mentioned. It entirely took the wind out of Aunt Jane's sails; it
was so sudden, so varied and unexpected, that she had not a word to say.
The glasses remained fixed full upon Rose for a moment, and then, with
a hasty "Oh, indeed!" the excellent lady bundled into her carriage and
drove away, somewhat bewildered and very much disturbed.

She would have been more so if she had seen her reprehensible
brother-in-law dancing a triumphal polka down the hall with Rose in
honour of having silenced the enemy's battery for once.



Chapter 9--Phebe's Secret

"Why do you keep smiling to yourself, Phebe?" asked Rose, as they were
working together one morning, for Dr. Alec considered house-work the
best sort of gymnastics for girls; so Rose took lessons of Phebe in
sweeping, dusting and bed-making.

"I was thinking about a nice little secret I know, and couldn't help
smiling."

"Shall I know it, sometime?"

"Guess you will."

"Shall I like it?"

"Oh, won't you, though!"

"Will it happen soon?"

"Sometime this week."

"I know what it is! The boys are going to have fireworks on the fourth,
and have got some surprise for me. Haven't they?"

"That's telling."

"Well, I can wait; only tell me one thing is uncle in it?"

"Of course he is; there's never any fun without him."

"Then it's all right, and sure to be nice."

Rose went out on the balcony to shake the rugs, and, having given them
a vigorous beating, hung them on the balustrade to air, while she took a
look at her plants. Several tall vases and jars stood there, and a month
of June sun and rain had worked wonders with the seeds and slips she had
planted. Morning-glories and nasturtiums ran all over the bars, making
haste to bloom. Scarlet beans and honeysuckles were climbing up from
below to meet their pretty neighbours, and the woodbine was hanging its
green festoons wherever it could cling.

The waters of the bay were dancing in the sunshine, a fresh wind stirred
the chestnut-trees with a pleasant sound, and the garden below was full
of roses, butterflies and bees. A great chirping and twittering went on
among the birds, busy with their summer house-keeping, and, far away,
the white-winged gulls were dipping and diving in the sea, where ships,
like larger birds, went sailing to and fro.

"Oh, Phebe, it's such a lovely day, I do wish your fine secret was going
to happen right away! I feel just like having a good time; don't you?"
said Rose, waving her arms as if she was going to fly.

"I often feel that way, but I have to wait for my good times, and don't
stop working to wish for 'em. There, now you can finish as soon as the
dust settles; I must go do my stairs," and Phebe trudged away with the
broom, singing as she went.

Rose leaned where she was, and fell to thinking how many good times
she had had lately, for the gardening had prospered finely, and she was
learning to swim and row, and there were drives and walks, and quiet
hours of reading and talk with Uncle Alec, and, best of all, the old
pain and ennui seldom troubled her now. She could work and play all
day, sleep sweetly all night, and enjoy life with the zest of a healthy,
happy child. She was far from being as strong and hearty as Phebe, but
she was getting on; the once pale cheeks had colour in them now, the
hands were growing plump and brown, and the belt was not much too loose.
No one talked to her about her health, and she forgot that she had "no
constitution." She took no medicine but Dr. Alec's three great remedies,
and they seemed to suit her excellently. Aunt Plenty said it was the
pills; but, as no second batch had ever followed the first, I think the
old lady was mistaken.

Rose looked worthy of her name as she stood smiling to herself over
a happier secret than any Phebe had a secret which she did not know
herself till she found out, some years later, the magic of good health.

    "'Look only,' said the brownie,
     'At the pretty gown of blue,
     At the kerchief pinned about her head,
     And at her little shoe,"'

said a voice from below, as a great cabbage-rose came flying against her
cheek.

"What is the princess dreaming about up there in her hanging-garden?"
added Dr. Alec as she flung back a morning-glory.

"I was wishing I could do something pleasant this fine day; something
very new and interesting, for the wind makes me feel frisky and gay."

"Suppose we take a pull over to the Island? I intended to go this
afternoon; but if you feel more like it now, we can be off at once."

"I do! I do! I'll come in fifteen minutes, uncle. I must just scrabble
my room to rights, for Phebe has got a great deal to do."

Rose caught up the rugs and vanished as she spoke, while Dr. Alec went
in, saying to himself, with an indulgent smile,

"It may upset things a trifle, but half a child's pleasure consists in
having their fun when they want it."

Never did duster flap more briskly than the one Rose used that day, and
never was a room "scrabbled" to rights in such haste as hers. Tables and
chairs flew into their places as if alive; curtains shook as if a gale
was blowing; china rattled and small articles tumbled about as if a
young earthquake was playing with them. The boating suit went on in a
twinkling, and Rose was off with a hop and a skip, little dreaming how
many hours it would be before she saw her pretty room again.

Uncle Alec was putting a large basket into the boat when she arrived,
and before they were off Phebe came running down with a queer, knobby
bundle done up in a water-proof.

"We can't eat half that luncheon, and I know we shall not need so many
wraps. I wouldn't lumber the boat up so," said Rose, who still had
secret scares when on the water.

"Couldn't you make a smaller parcel, Phebe?" asked Dr. Alec, eyeing the
bundle suspiciously.

"No, sir, not in such a hurry," and Phebe laughed as she gave a
particularly large knob a good poke.

"Well, it will do for ballast. Don't forget the note to Mrs. Jessie, I
beg of you."

"No, sir. I'll send it right off," and Phebe ran up the bank as if she
had wings to her feet.

"We'll take a look at the lighthouse first, for you have not been there
yet, and it is worth seeing. By the time we have done that it will be
pretty warm, and we will have lunch under the trees on the Island."

Rose was ready for anything, and enjoyed her visit to the lighthouse on
the Point very much, especially climbing up the narrow stairs and going
inside the great lantern. They made a long stay, for Dr. Alec seemed in
no hurry to go, and kept looking through his spy-glass as if he expected
to discover something remarkable on sea or land. It was past twelve
before they reached the Island, and Rose was ready for her lunch long
before she got it.

"Now this is lovely! I do wish the boys were here. Won't it be nice to
have them with us all their vacation? Why, it begins to-day, doesn't it?
Oh, I wish I'd remembered it sooner, and perhaps they would have come
with us," she said, as they lay luxuriously eating sandwiches under the
old apple-tree.

"So we might. Next time we won't be in such a hurry. I expect the lads
will take our heads off when they find us out," answered Dr. Alec,
placidly drinking cold tea.

"Uncle, I smell a frying sort of a smell," Rose said, pausing suddenly
as she was putting away the remains of the lunch half an hour later.

"So do I; it is fish, I think."

For a moment they both sat with their noses in the air, sniffing like
hounds; then Dr. Alec sprang up, saying with great decision,

"Now, this won't do! No one is permitted on this island without asking
leave. I must see who dares to fry fish on my private property."

Taking the basket on one arm and the bundle on the other, he strode away
towards the traitorous smell, looking as fierce as a lion, while Rose
marched behind under her umbrella.

"We are Robinson Crusoe and his man Friday going to see if the savages
have come," she said presently, for her fancy was full of the dear old
stories that all children love so well.

"And there they are! Two tents and two boats, as I live! These rascals
mean to enjoy themselves, that's evident."

"There ought to be more boats and no tents. I wonder where the prisoners
are?"

"There are traces of them," and Dr. Alec pointed to the heads and tails
of fishes strewn on the grass.

"And there are more," said Rose, laughing, as she pointed to a scarlet
heap of what looked like lobsters.

"The savages are probably eating their victims now; don't you hear the
knives rattle in that tent?"

"We ought to creep up and peep; Crusoe was cautious, you know, and
Friday scared out of his wits," added Rose, still keeping up the joke.

"But this Crusoe is going to pounce upon them, regardless of
consequences. If I am killed and eaten, you seize the basket and run for
the boat; there are provisions enough for your voyage home."

With that Uncle Alec slipped round to the front of the tent and, casting
in the big bundle like a bomb-shell, roared out, in a voice of thunder,

"Pirates, surrender!"

A crash, a shout, a laugh, and out came the savages, brandishing knives
and forks, chicken bones, and tin mugs, and all fell upon the intruder,
pommelling him unmercifully as they cried,

"You came too soon! We are not half ready! You've spoilt it all! Where
is Rose?"

"Here I am," answered a half-stifled voice, and Rose was discovered
sitting on the pile of red flannel bathing clothes, which she had
mistaken for lobsters, and where she had fallen in a fit of merriment
when she discovered that the cannibals were her merry cousins.

"You good-for-nothing boys! You are always bursting out upon me in some
ridiculous way, and I always get taken in because I'm not used to such
pranks. Uncle is as bad as the rest, and it's great fun," she said,
as the lads came round her, half scolding, half welcoming, and wholly
enjoying the double surprise.

"You were not to come till afternoon, and mamma was to be here to
receive you. Everything is in a mess now, except your tent; we got that
in order the first thing, and you can sit there and see us work," said
Archie, doing the honours as usual.

"Rose felt it in her bones, as Dolly says, that something was in the
wind, and wanted to be off at once. So I let her come, and should
have kept her away an hour longer if your fish had not betrayed you,"
explained Uncle Alec, subsiding from a ferocious Crusoe into his
good-natured self again.

"As this seat is rather damp, I think I'll rise," said Rose, as the
excitement lessened a little.

Several fishy hands helped her up, and Charlie said, as he scattered the
scarlet garments over the grass with an oar,

"We had a jolly good swim before dinner, and I told the Brats to spread
these to dry. Hope you brought your things, Rose, for you belong to the
Lobsters, you know, and we can have no end of fun teaching you to dive
and float and tread water."

"I didn't bring anything--" began Rose, but was interrupted by the Brats
(otherwise Will and Geordie), who appeared bearing the big bundle, so
much demoralised by its fall that a red flannel tunic trailed out at one
end and a little blue dressing-gown at the other, while the knobs proved
to be a toilet-case, rubbers, and a silver mug.

"Oh, that sly Phebe! This was the secret, and she bundled up those
things after I went down to the boat," cried Rose, with sparkling eyes.

"Guess something is smashed inside, for a bit of glass fell out,"
observed Will, as they deposited the bundle at her feet.

"Catch a girl going anywhere without a looking-glass. We haven't got one
among the whole lot of us," added Mac, with masculine scorn.

"Dandy has; I caught him touching up his wig behind the trees after our
swim," cut in Geordie, wagging a derisive finger at Steve, who promptly
silenced him by a smart rap on the head with the drum-stick he had just
polished off.

"Come, come, you lazy lubbers, fall to work, or we shall not be ready
for mamma. Take Rose's things to her tent, and tell her all about it,
Prince. Mac and Steve, you cut away and bring up the rest of the straw;
and you small chaps, clear off the table, if you have stuffed all you
can. Please, uncle, I'd like your advice about the boundary lines and
the best place for the kitchen."

Everyone obeyed the chief, and Rose was escorted to her tent by Charlie,
who devoted himself to her service. She was charmed with her quarters,
and still more so with the programme which he unfolded before her as
they worked.

"We always camp out somewhere in vacation, and this year we thought we'd
try the Island. It is handy, and our fireworks will show off well from
here."

"Shall we stay over the Fourth? Three whole days! Oh, me! what a frolic
it will be!"

"Bless your heart, we often camp for a week, we big fellows; but this
year the small chaps wanted to come, so we let them. We have great
larks, as you'll see; for we have a cave and play Captain Kidd, and have
shipwrecks, and races, and all sorts of games. Arch and I are rather
past that kind of thing now, but we do it to please the children," added
Charlie, with a sudden recollection of his sixteen years.

"I had no idea boys had such good times. Their plays never seemed a bit
interesting before. But I suppose that was because I never knew any boys
very well, or perhaps you are unusually nice ones," observed Rose, with
an artless air of appreciation that was very flattering.

"We are a pretty clever set, I fancy; but we have a good many
advantages, you see. There are a tribe of us, to begin with; then our
family has been here for ages, and we have plenty of 'spondulics,' so
we can rather lord it over the other fellows, and do as we like. There,
ma'am, you can hang your smashed glass on that nail and do up your back
hair as fine as you please. You can have a blue blanket or a red one,
and a straw pillow or an air cushion for your head, whichever you like.
You can trim up to any extent, and be as free and easy as squaws in a
wigwam, for this corner is set apart for you ladies and we never cross
the line uncle is drawing until we ask leave. Anything more I can do for
you, cousin?"

"No, thank you. I think I'll leave the rest till auntie comes, and go
and help you somewhere else, if I may."

"Yes, indeed, come on and see to the kitchen. Can you cook?" asked
Charlie, as he led the way to the rocky nook where Archie was putting up
a sail-cloth awning.

"I can make tea and toast bread."

"Well, we'll shew you how to fry fish, and make chowder. Now you just
set these pots and pans round tastefully, and sort of tidy up a bit,
for Aunt Jessie insists on doing some of the work, and I want it to be
decent here."

By four o'clock the camp was in order, and the weary workers settled
down on Lookout Rock to watch for Mrs. Jessie and Jamie, who was never
far from mamma's apron string. They looked like a flock of blue-birds,
all being in sailor rig, with blue ribbon enough flying from the seven
hats to have set up a milliner. Very tuneful blue-birds they were, too,
for all the lads sang, and the echo of their happy voices reached Mrs.
Jessie long before she saw them.

The moment the boat hove in sight up went the Island flag, and the
blue-jackets cheered lustily, as they did on every possible occasion,
like true young Americans. This welcome was answered by the flapping of
a handkerchief and the shrill "Rah! Rah! Rah!" of the one small tar
who stood in the stern waving his hat manfully, while a maternal hand
clutched him firmly in the rear.

Cleopatra landing from her golden galley never received a heartier
greeting than "Little Mum" as she was borne to her tent by the young
folk, for love of whom she smilingly resigned herself to three days of
discomfort; while Jamie immediately attached himself to Rose, assuring
her of his protection from the manifold perils which might assail them.

Taught by long experience that boys are always hungry, Aunt Jessie soon
proposed supper, and proceeded to get it, enveloped in an immense apron,
with an old hat of Archie's stuck atop of her cap. Rose helped, and
tried to be as handy as Phebe, though the peculiar style of table she
had to set made it no easy task. It was accomplished at last, and a
very happy party lay about under the trees, eating and drinking out of
anyone's plate and cup, and quite untroubled by the frequent appearance
of ants and spiders in places which these interesting insects are not
expected to adorn.

"I never thought I should like to wash dishes, but I do," said Rose,
as she sat in a boat after supper lazily rinsing plates in the sea, and
rocking luxuriously as she wiped them.

"Mum is mighty particular; we just give 'em a scrub with sand, and dust
'em off with a bit of paper. It's much the best way, I think," replied
Geordie, who reposed in another boat alongside.

"How Phebe would like this! I wonder uncle did not have her come."

"I believe he tried to, but Dolly was as cross as two sticks, and said
she couldn't spare her. I'm sorry, for we all like the Phebe bird, and
she'd chirp like a good one out here, wouldn't she?"

"She ought to have a holiday like the rest of us. It's too bad to leave
her out."

This thought came back to Rose several times that evening, for Phebe
would have added much to the little concert they had in the moonlight,
would have enjoyed the stories told, been quick at guessing the
conundrums, and laughed with all her heart at the fun. The merry going
to bed would have been the best of all, for Rose wanted someone to
cuddle under the blue blanket with her, there to whisper and giggle and
tell secrets, as girls delight to do.

Long after the rest were asleep, Rose lay wide awake, excited by the
novelty of all about her, and a thought that had come into her mind. Far
away she heard a city clock strike twelve; a large star like a mild eye
peeped in at the opening of the tent, and the soft plash of the waves
seemed calling her to come out. Aunt Jessie lay fast asleep, with Jamie
rolled up like a kitten at her feet, and neither stirred as Rose in her
wrapper crept out to see how the world looked at midnight.

She found it very lovely, and sat down on a cracker keg to enjoy it with
a heart full of the innocent sentiment of her years. Fortunately, Dr.
Alec saw her before she had time to catch cold, for coming out to tie
back the door-flap of his tent for more air, he beheld the small
figure perched in the moonlight. Having no fear of ghosts, he quietly
approached, and, seeing that she was wide awake, said, with a hand on
her shining hair,

"What is my girl doing here?"

"Having a good time," answered Rose, not at all startled.

"I wonder what she was thinking about with such a sober look."

"The story you told of the brave sailor who gave up his place on the
raft to the woman, and the last drop of water to the poor baby. People
who make sacrifices are very much loved and admired, aren't they?" she
asked, earnestly.

"If the sacrifice is a true one. But many of the bravest never are
known, and get no praise. That does not lessen their beauty, though
perhaps it makes them harder, for we all like sympathy," and Dr. Alec
sighed a patient sort of sigh.

"I suppose you have made a great many? Would you mind telling me one of
them?" asked Rose, arrested by the sigh.

"My last was to give up smoking," was the very unromantic answer to her
pensive question.

"Why did you?"

"Bad example for the boys."

"That was very good of you, uncle! Was it hard?"

"I'm ashamed to say it was. But as a wise old fellow once said, 'It is
necessary to do right; it is not necessary to be happy.'"

Rose pondered over the saying as if it pleased her, and then said, with
a clear, bright look,

"A real sacrifice is giving up something you want or enjoy very much,
isn't it?"

"Yes."

"Doing it one's own self because one loves another person very much and
wants her to be happy?"

"Yes."

"And doing it pleasantly, and being glad about it, and not minding the
praise if it doesn't come?"

"Yes, dear, that is the true spirit of self-sacrifice; you seem to
understand it, and I dare say you will have many chances in your life to
try the real thing. I hope they won't be very hard ones."

"I think they will," began Rose, and there stopped short.

"Well, make one now, and go to sleep, or my girl will be ill to-morrow,
and then the aunts will say camping out was bad for her."

"I'll go good night!" and throwing him a kiss, the little ghost
vanished, leaving Uncle Alec to pace the shore and think about some of
the unsuspected sacrifices that had made him what he was.



Chapter 10--Rose's Sacrifice

There certainly were "larks" on Campbell's Island next day, as Charlie
had foretold, and Rose took her part in them like one intent on enjoying
every minute to the utmost. There was a merry breakfast, a successful
fishing expedition, and then the lobsters came out in full force, for
even Aunt Jessie appeared in red flannel. There was nothing Uncle Alec
could not do in the water, and the boys tried their best to equal him in
strength and skill, so there was a great diving and ducking, for every
one was bent on distinguishing himself.

Rose swam out far beyond her depth, with uncle to float her back; Aunt
Jessie splashed placidly in the shallow pools, with Jamie paddling near
by like a little whale beside its mother; while the lads careered about,
looking like a flock of distracted flamingoes, and acting like the
famous dancing party in "Alice's Adventures in Wonderland."

Nothing but chowder would have lured them from their gambols in the
briny deep; that time-honoured dish demanded the concentrated action
of several mighty minds; so the "Water Babies" came ashore and fell to
cooking.

It is unnecessary to say that, when done, it was the most remarkable
chowder ever cooked, and the quantity eaten would have amazed the
world if the secret had been divulged. After this exertion a siesta
was considered the thing, and people lay about in tents or out as they
pleased, the boys looking like warriors slumbering where they fell.

The elders had just settled to a comfortable nap when the youngsters
rose, refreshed and ready for further exploits. A hint sent them all off
to the cave, and there were discovered bows and arrows, battle clubs,
old swords, and various relics of an interesting nature. Perched upon
a commanding rock, with Jamie to "splain" things to her, Rose beheld
a series of stirring scenes enacted with great vigour and historical
accuracy by her gifted relatives.

Captain Cook was murdered by the natives of Owhyhee in the most
thrilling manner. Captain Kidd buried untold wealth in the chowder
kettle at the dead of night, and shot both the trusting villains who
shared the secret of the hiding place. Sinbad came ashore there and had
manifold adventures, and numberless wrecks bestrewed the sands.

Rose considered them by far the most exciting dramas she had ever
witnessed; and when the performance closed with a grand ballet of Feejee
Islanders, whose barbaric yells alarmed the gulls, she had no words in
which to express her gratification.

Another swim at sunset, another merry evening on the rocks watching the
lighted steamers pass seaward and the pleasure-boats come into port,
ended the second day of the camping out, and sent everyone to bed early
that they might be ready for the festivities of the morrow.

"Archie, didn't I hear uncle ask you to row home in the morning for
fresh milk and things?"

"Yes, why?"

"Please, may I go too? I have something of great importance to arrange;
you know I was carried off in a hurry," Rose said in a confidential
whisper as she was bidding her cousins good night.

"I'm willing, and I guess Charlie won't mind."

"Thank you; be sure you stand by me when I ask leave in the morning, and
don't say anything till then, except to Charlie. Promise," urged Rose,
so eagerly, that Archie struck an attitude and cried dramatically,

"By yonder moon I swear!"

"Hush! it's all right, go along"; and Rose departed as if satisfied.

"She's a queer little thing, isn't she, Prince?"

"Rather a nice little thing, I think. I'm quite fond of her."

Rose's quick ears caught both remarks, and she retired to her tent,
saying to herself with sleepy dignity,

"Little thing, indeed! Those boys talk as if I was a baby. They will
treat me with more respect after to-morrow, I guess."

Archie did stand by her in the morning, and her request was readily
granted, as the lads were coming directly back. Off they went, and Rose
waved her hand to the islanders with a somewhat pensive air, for an
heroic purpose glowed within her, and the spirit of self-sacrifice was
about to be illustrated in a new and touching manner.

While the boys got the milk Rose ran to Phebe, ordered her to leave her
dishes, to put on her hat, and take a note back to Uncle Alec, which
would explain this somewhat mysterious performance. Phebe obeyed, and
when she went to the boat Rose accompanied her, telling the boys she was
not ready to go yet, but they could, some of them, come for her when she
hung a white signal on her balcony.

"But why not come now? What are you about, miss? Uncle won't like it,"
protested Charlie, in great amazement.

"Just do as I tell you, little boy; uncle will understand and explain.
Obey, as Phebe does, and ask no questions. I can have secrets as well
as other people"; and Rose walked off with an air of lofty independence
that impressed her friends immensely.

"It's some plot between uncle and herself, so we won't meddle. All
right, Phebe? Pull away, Prince"; and off they went to be received with
much surprise by the islanders.

This was the note Phebe bore:

"Dear Uncle, I am going to take Phebe's place to-day, and let her have
all the fun she can. Please don't mind what she says, but keep her, and
tell the boys to be very good to her for my sake. Don't think it is easy
to do this; it is very hard to give up the best day of all, but I feel
so selfish to have all the pleasure and Phebe none, that I wish to make
this sacrifice. Do let me, and don't laugh at it; I truly do not wish to
be praised, and I truly want to do it. Love to all from,

"Rose."

"Bless the little dear, what a generous heart she has! Shall we go after
her, Jessie, or let her have her way?" said Dr. Alec, after the first
mingled amusement and astonishment had subsided.

"Let her alone, and don't spoil her little sacrifice. She means it, I
know, and the best way in which we can show our respect for her effort
is to give Phebe a pleasant day. I'm sure she has earned it"; and Mrs.
Jessie made a sign to the boys to suppress their disappointment and
exert themselves to please Rose's guest.

Phebe was with difficulty kept from going straight home, and declared
that she should not enjoy herself one bit without Miss Rose.

"She won't hold out all day, and we shall see her paddling back before
noon, I'll wager anything," said Charlie; and the rest so strongly
inclined to his opinion that they resigned themselves to the loss of the
little queen of the revels, sure that it would be only a temporary one.

But hour after hour passed, and no signal appeared on the balcony,
though Phebe watched it hopefully. No passing boat brought the truant
back, though more than one pair of eyes looked out for the bright hair
under the round hat; and sunset came, bringing no Rose but the lovely
colour in the western sky.

"I really did not think the child had it in her. I fancied it was a bit
of sentiment, but I see she was in earnest, and means that her sacrifice
shall be a true one. Dear little soul! I'll make it up to her a thousand
times over, and beg her pardon for thinking it might be done for
effect," Dr. Alec said remorsefully, as he strained his eyes through the
dusk, fancying he saw a small figure sitting in the garden as it had sat
on the keg the night before, laying the generous little plot that had
cost more than he could guess.

"Well, she can't help seeing the fireworks, any way, unless she is
goose enough to think she must hide in a dark closet and not look," said
Archie, who was rather disgusted at Rose's seeming ingratitude.

"She will see ours capitally, but miss the big ones on the hill, unless
papa has forgotten all about them," added Steve, cutting short the
harangue Mac had begun upon the festivals of the ancients.

"I'm sure the sight of her will be better than the finest fireworks
that ever went off," said Phebe, meditating an elopement with one of the
boats if she could get a chance.

"Let things work; if she resists a brilliant invitation we give her she
will be a heroine," added Uncle Alec, secretly hoping that she would
not.

Meanwhile Rose had spent a quiet, busy day helping Dolly, waiting on
Aunt Peace, and steadily resisting Aunt Plenty's attempts to send her
back to the happy island. It had been hard in the morning to come
in from the bright world outside, with flags flying, cannon booming,
crackers popping, and everyone making ready for a holiday, and go to
washing cups, while Dolly grumbled and the aunts lamented. It was very
hard to see the day go by, knowing how gay each hour must have been
across the water, and how a word from her would take her where she
longed to be with all her heart. But it was hardest of all when evening
came and Aunt Peace was asleep, Aunt Plenty seeing a gossip in the
parlor, Dolly established in the porch to enjoy the show, and nothing
left for the little maid to do but sit alone in her balcony and watch
the gay rockets whizz up from island, hill, and city, while bands played
and boats laden with happy people went to and fro in the fitful light.

Then it must be confessed that a tear or two dimmed the blue eyes, and
once, when a very brilliant display illuminated the island for a moment,
and she fancied she saw the tents, the curly head went down on the
railing, and a wide-awake nasturtium heard a little whisper,

"I hope someone wishes I was there!"

The tears were all gone, however, and she was watching the hill and
island answer each other with what Jamie called "whizzers, whirligigs
and busters," and smiling as she thought how hard the boys must be
working to keep up such a steady fire, when Uncle Mac came walking in
upon her, saying hurriedly,

"Come, child, put on your tippet, pelisse, or whatever you call it, and
run off with me. I came to get Phebe, but aunt says she is gone, so I
want you. I've got Fun down in the boat, and I want you to go with us
and see my fireworks. Got them up for you, and you mustn't miss them, or
I shall be disappointed."

"But, uncle," began Rose, feeling as if she ought to refuse even a
glimpse of bliss, "perhaps--"

"I know, my dear, I know; aunt told me; but no one needs you now so much
as I do, and I insist on your coming," said Uncle Mac, who seemed in a
great hurry to be off, yet was unusually kind.

So Rose went and found the little Chinaman with a funny lantern waiting
to help her in and convulse her with laughter trying to express his
emotions in pigeon English. The city clocks were striking nine as they
got out into the bay, and the island fireworks seemed to be over, for no
rocket answered the last Roman candle that shone on the Aunt-hill.

"Ours are done, I see, but they are going up all round the city, and how
pretty they are," said Rose, folding her mantle about her, and surveying
the scene with pensive interest.

"Hope my fellows have not got into trouble up there," muttered Uncle
Mac, adding with a satisfied chuckle, as a spark shone out, "No; there
it goes! Look, Rosy, and see how you like this one; it was ordered
especially in honour of your coming."

Rose looked with all her eyes, and saw the spark grow into the likeness
of a golden vase, then green leaves came out, and then a crimson flower
glowing on the darkness with a splendid lustre.

"Is it a rose, uncle?" she asked, clasping her hands with delight as she
recognised the handsome flower.

"Of course it is! Look again, and guess what those are," answered Uncle
Mac, chuckling and enjoying it all like a boy.

A wreath of what looked at first like purple brooms appeared below the
vase, but Rose guessed what they were meant for, and stood straight up,
holding by his shoulder, and crying excitedly,

"Thistles, uncle, Scotch thistles! There are seven of them one for each
boy! Oh, what a joke!" and she laughed so that she plumped into the
bottom of the boat and stayed there till the brilliant spectacle was
quite gone.

"That was rather a neat thing, I flatter myself," said Uncle Mac, in
high glee at the success of his illumination. "Now, shall I leave you
on the Island or take you home again, my good little girl?" he added,
lifting her up with such a tone of approbation in his voice that Rose
kissed him on the spot.

"Home, please uncle; and I thank you very very much for the beautiful
firework you got up for me. I'm so glad I saw it; and I know I shall
dream about it," answered Rose steadily, though a wistful glance went
toward the Island, now so near that she could smell powder and see
shadowy figures flitting about.

Home they went; and Rose fell asleep saying to herself, "It was harder
than I thought, but I'm glad I did it, and I truly don't want any reward
but Phebe's pleasure."



Chapter 11--Poor Mac

Rose's sacrifice was a failure in one respect, for, though the elders
loved her the better for it, and showed that they did, the boys were not
inspired with the sudden respect which she had hoped for. In fact, her
feelings were much hurt by overhearing Archie say that he couldn't see
any sense in it; and the Prince added another blow by pronouncing her
"the queerest chicken ever seen."

It is apt to be so, and it is hard to bear; for, though we do not want
trumpets blown, we do like to have our little virtues appreciated, and
cannot help feeling disappointed if they are not.

A time soon came, however, when Rose, quite unconsciously, won not only
the respect of her cousins, but their gratitude and affection likewise.

Soon after the Island episode, Mac had a sunstroke, and was very ill
for some time. It was so sudden that everyone was startled, and for some
days the boy's life was in danger. He pulled through, however; and then,
just as the family were rejoicing, a new trouble appeared which cast a
gloom over them all.

Poor Mac's eyes gave out; and well they might, for he had abused them,
and never being very strong, they suffered doubly now.

No one dared to tell him the dark predictions of the great oculist who
came to look at them, and the boy tried to be patient, thinking that a
few weeks of rest would repair the overwork of several years.

He was forbidden to look at a book, and as that was the one thing he
most delighted in, it was a terrible affliction to the Worm. Everyone
was very ready to read to him, and at first the lads contended for this
honour. But as week after week went by, and Mac was still condemned to
idleness and a darkened room, their zeal abated, and one after the other
fell off. It was hard for the active fellows, right in the midst of
their vacation; and nobody blamed them when they contented themselves
with brief calls, running of errands, and warm expressions of sympathy.

The elders did their best, but Uncle Mac was a busy man, Aunt Jane's
reading was of a funereal sort, impossible to listen to long, and the
other aunties were all absorbed in their own cares, though they supplied
the boy with every delicacy they could invent.

Uncle Alec was a host in himself, but he could not give all his time to
the invalid; and if it had not been for Rose, the afflicted Worm
would have fared ill. Her pleasant voice suited him, her patience was
unfailing, her time of no apparent value, and her eager good-will was
very comforting.

The womanly power of self-devotion was strong in the child, and she
remained faithfully at her post when all the rest dropped away. Hour
after hour she sat in the dusky room, with one ray of light on her book,
reading to the boy, who lay with shaded eyes silently enjoying the only
pleasure that lightened the weary days. Sometimes he was peevish and
hard to please, sometimes he growled because his reader could not manage
the dry books he wished to hear, and sometimes he was so despondent that
her heart ached to see him. Through all these trials Rose persevered,
using all her little arts to please him. When he fretted, she was
patient; when he growled, she ploughed bravely through the hard pages
not dry to her in one sense, for quiet tears dropped on them now and
then; and when Mac fell into a despairing mood, she comforted him with
every hopeful word she dared to offer.

He said little, but she knew he was grateful, for she suited him better
than anyone else. If she was late, he was impatient; when she had to go,
he seemed forlorn; and when the tired head ached worst, she could always
soothe him to sleep, crooning the old songs her father used to love.

"I don't know what I should do without that child," Aunt Jane often
said.

"She's worth all those racketing fellows put together," Mac would add,
fumbling about to discover if the little chair was ready for her coming.

That was the sort of reward Rose liked, the thanks that cheered her;
and whenever she grew very tired, one look at the green shade, the curly
head so restless on the pillow, and the poor groping hands, touched her
tender heart and put new spirit into the weary voice.

She did not know how much she was learning, both from the books she read
and the daily sacrifices she made. Stories and poetry were her delight,
but Mac did not care for them; and since his favourite Greeks and Romans
were forbidden, he satisfied himself with travels, biographies, and the
history of great inventions or discoveries. Rose despised this taste
at first, but soon got interested in Livingstone's adventures, Hobson's
stirring life in India, and the brave trials and triumphs of Watt and
Arkwright, Fulton, and "Palissy, the Potter." The true, strong books
helped the dreamy girl; her faithful service and sweet patience touched
and won the boy; and long afterward both learned to see how useful those
seemingly hard and weary hours had been to them.

One bright morning, as Rose sat down to begin a fat volume entitled
"History of the French Revolution," expecting to come to great grief
over the long names, Mac, who was lumbering about the room like a blind
bear, stopped her by asking abruptly,

"What day of the month is it?"

"The seventh of August, I believe."

"More than half my vacation gone, and I've only had a week of it! I call
that hard," and he groaned dismally.

"So it is; but there is more to come, and you may be able to enjoy
that."

"May be able! I will be able! Does that old noodle think I'm going to
stay stived up here much longer?"

"I guess he does, unless your eyes get on faster than they have yet."

"Has he said anything more lately?"

"I haven't seen him, you know. Shall I begin? this looks rather nice."

"Read away; it's all one to me." And Mac cast himself down upon the old
lounge, where his heavy head felt easiest.

Rose began with great spirit, and kept on gallantly for a couple
of chapters, getting over the unpronounceable names with unexpected
success, she thought, for her listener did not correct her once, and lay
so still she fancied he was deeply interested. All of a sudden she was
arrested in the middle of a fine paragraph by Mac, who sat bolt upright,
brought both feet down with a thump, and said, in a rough, excited tone,

"Stop! I don't hear a word, and you may as well save your breath to
answer my question."

"What is it?" asked Rose, looking uneasy, for she had something on her
mind, and feared that he suspected what it was. His next words proved
that she was right.

"Now, look here, I want to know something, and you've got to tell me."

"Please, don't--" began Rose, beseechingly.

"You must, or I'll pull off this shade and stare at the sun as hard as
ever I can stare. Come now!" and he half rose, as if ready to execute
the threat.

"I will! oh, I will tell, if I know! But don't be reckless and do
anything so crazy as that," cried Rose, in great distress.

"Very well; then listen, and don't dodge, as everyone else does. Didn't
the doctor think my eyes worse the last time he came? Mother won't say,
but you shall."

"I believe he did," faltered Rose.

"I thought so! Did he say I should be able to go to school when it
begins?"

"No, Mac," very low.

"Ah!"

That was all, but Rose saw her cousin set his lips together and take
a long breath, as if she had hit him hard. He bore the disappointment
bravely, however, and asked quite steadily in a minute,

"How soon does he think I can study again?"

It was so hard to answer that! Yet Rose knew she must, for Aunt Jane had
declared she could not do it, and Uncle Mac had begged her to break the
truth to the poor lad.

"Not for a good many months."

"How many?" he asked with a pathetic sort of gruffness.

"A year, perhaps."

"A whole year! Why, I expected to be ready for college by that time."
And, pushing up the shade, Mac stared at her with startled eyes, that
soon blinked and fell before the one ray of light.

"Plenty of time for that; you must be patient now, and get them
thoroughly well, or they will trouble you again when it will be harder
to spare them," she said, with tears in her own eyes.

"I won't do it! I will study and get through somehow. It's all humbug
about taking care so long. These doctors like to keep hold of a fellow
if they can. But I won't stand it I vow I won't!" and he banged his fist
down on the unoffending pillow as if he were pommelling the hard-hearted
doctor.

"Now, Mac, listen to me," Rose said very earnestly, though her voice
shook a little and her heart ached. "You know you have hurt your eyes
reading by fire-light and in the dusk, and sitting up late, and now
you'll have to pay for it; the doctor said so. You must be careful, and
do as he tells you, or you will be blind."

"No!"

"Yes, it is true, and he wanted us to tell you that nothing but entire
rest would cure you. I know it's dreadfully hard, but we'll all help
you; I'll read all day long, and lead you, and wait upon you, and try to
make it easier."

She stopped there, for it was evident that he did not hear a sound; the
word "blind" seemed to have knocked him down, for he had buried his
face in the pillow, and lay so still that Rose was frightened. She sat
motionless for many minutes, longing to comfort him, but not knowing
how, and wishing Uncle Alec would come, for he had promised to tell Mac.

Presently, a sort of choking sound came out of the pillow, and went
straight to her heart the most pathetic sob she ever heard, for, though
it was the most natural means of relief, the poor fellow must not
indulge in it because of the afflicted eyes. The "French Revolution"
tumbled out of her lap, and, running to the sofa, she knelt down by
it, saying, with the motherly sort of tenderness girls feel for any
sorrowing creature,

"Oh, my dear, you mustn't cry! It is so bad for your poor eyes. Take
your head out of that hot pillow, and let me cool it. I don't wonder you
feel so, but please don't cry. I'll cry for you; it won't hurt me."

As she spoke she pulled away the cushion with gentle force, and saw the
green shade all crushed and stained with the few hot tears that told how
bitter the disappointment had been. Mac felt her sympathy, but, being
a boy, did not thank her for it; only sat up with a jerk, saying, as
he tried to rub away the tell-tale drops with the sleeve of his jacket,
"Don't bother; weak eyes always water. I'm all right."

But Rose cried out, and caught his arm, "Don't touch them with that
rough woollen stuff! Lie down and let me bathe them, there's a dear boy;
then there will be no harm done."

"They do smart confoundedly. I say, don't you tell the other fellows
that I made a baby of myself, will you?" he added, yielding with a sigh
to the orders of his nurse, who had flown for the eye-wash and linen
cambric handkerchief.

"Of course I won't; but anyone would be upset at the idea of being well
troubled in this way. I'm sure you bear it splendidly, and you know it
isn't half so bad when you get used to it. Besides, it is only for a
time, and you can do lots of pleasant things if you can't study. You'll
have to wear blue goggles, perhaps; won't that be funny?"

And while she was pouring out all the comfortable words she could think
of, Rose was softly bathing the eyes and dabbing the hot forehead with
lavender-water, as her patient lay quiet with a look on his face that
grieved her sadly.

"Homer was blind, and so was Milton, and they did something to be
remembered by, in spite of it," he said, as if to himself, in a solemn
tone, for even the blue goggles did not bring a smile.

"Papa had a picture of Milton and his daughters writing for him. It
was a very sweet picture, I thought," observed Rose in a serious voice,
trying to meet the sufferer on his own ground.

"Perhaps I could study if someone read and did the eye part. Do you
suppose I could, by and by?" he asked, with a sudden ray of hope.

"I dare say, if your head is strong enough. This sunstroke, you know, is
what upset you, and your brain needs rest, the doctor says."

"I'll have a talk with the old fellow next time he comes, and find out
just what I may do; then I shall know where I am. What a fool I was that
day to be stewing my brains and letting the sun glare on my book till
the letters danced before me! I see 'em now when I shut my eyes; black
balls bobbing round, and stars and all sorts of queer things. Wonder if
all blind people do?"

"Don't think about them; I'll go on reading, shall I? We shall come
to the exciting part soon, and then you'll forget all this," suggested
Rose.

"No, I never shall forget. Hang the old 'Revolution'! I don't want to
hear another word of it. My head aches, and I'm hot. Oh, wouldn't I like
to go for a pull in the 'Stormy Petrel!"' and poor Mac tossed about as
if he did not know what to do with himself.

"Let me sing, and perhaps you'll drop off; then the day will seem
shorter," said Rose, taking up a fan and sitting down beside him.

"Perhaps I shall; I didn't sleep much last night, and when I did I
dreamed like fun. See here, you tell the people that I know, and it's
all right, and I don't want them to talk about it or howl over me.
That's all; now drone away, and I'll try to sleep. Wish I could for a
year, and wake up cured."

"Oh, I wish, I wish you could!"

Rose said it so fervently that Mac was moved to grope for her apron and
hold on to a corner of it, as if it was comfortable to feel her near
him. But all he said was,

"You are a good little soul, Rosy. Give us 'The Birks'; that is a drowsy
one that always sends me off."

Quite contented with this small return for all her sympathy, Rose waved
her fan and sang, in a dreamy tone, the pretty Scotch air, the burden of
which is,

    "Bonny lassie, will ye gang, will ye gang
     To the Birks of Aberfeldie?"

Whether the lassie went or not I cannot say, but the laddie was off to
the land of Nod, in about ten minutes, quite worn out with hearing the
bad tidings and the effort to bear them manfully.



Chapter 12--"The Other Fellows"

Rose did tell "the people" what had passed, and no one "howled" over
Mac, or said a word to trouble him. He had his talk with the doctor, and
got very little comfort out of it, for he found that "just what he might
do" was nothing at all; though the prospect of some study by and by, if
all went well, gave him courage to bear the woes of the present.
Having made up his mind to this, he behaved so well that everyone was
astonished, never having suspected so much manliness in the quiet Worm.

The boys were much impressed, both by the greatness of the affliction
which hung over him and by his way of bearing it. They were very good
to him, but not always particularly wise in their attempts to cheer
and amuse; and Rose often found him much downcast after a visit of
condolence from the Clan. She still kept her place as head-nurse and
chief-reader, though the boys did their best in an irregular sort of
way. They were rather taken aback sometimes at finding Rose's services
preferred to their's, and privately confided to one another that "Old
Mac was getting fond of being molly-coddled." But they could not help
seeing how useful she was, and owning that she alone had remained
faithful a fact which caused some of them much secret compunction now
and then.

Rose felt that she ruled in that room, if nowhere else, for Aunt Jane
left a great deal to her, finding that her experience with her invalid
father fitted her for a nurse, and in a case like this, her youth was
an advantage rather than a drawback. Mac soon came to think that no one
could take care of him so well as Rose, and Rose soon grew fond of
her patient, though at first she had considered this cousin the least
attractive of the seven. He was not polite and sensible like Archie, nor
gay and handsome like Prince Charlie, nor neat and obliging like Steve,
nor amusing like the "Brats," nor confiding and affectionate like
little Jamie. He was rough, absent-minded, careless, and awkward, rather
priggish, and not at all agreeable to a dainty, beauty-loving girl like
Rose.

But when his trouble came upon him, she discovered many good things in
this cousin of hers, and learned not only to pity but to respect and
love the poor Worm, who tried to be patient, brave, and cheerful, and
found it a harder task than anyone guessed, except the little nurse, who
saw him in his gloomiest moods. She soon came to think that his friends
did not appreciate him, and upon one occasion was moved to free her mind
in a way that made a deep impression on the boys.

Vacation was almost over, and the time drawing near when Mac would be
left outside the happy school-world which he so much enjoyed. This made
him rather low in his mind, and his cousins exerted themselves to cheer
him up, especially one afternoon when a spasm of devotion seemed
to seize them all. Jamie trudged down the hill with a basket of
blackberries which he had "picked all his ownself," as his scratched
fingers and stained lips plainly testified. Will and Geordie brought
their puppies to beguile the weary hours, and the three elder lads
called to discuss baseball, cricket, and kindred subjects, eminently
fitted to remind the invalid of his privations.

Rose had gone to drive with Uncle Alec, who declared she was getting as
pale as a potato sprout, living so much in a dark room. But her thoughts
were with her boy all the while, and she ran up to him the moment she
returned, to find things in a fine state of confusion.

With the best intentions in life, the lads had done more harm than
good, and the spectacle that met Nurse Rose's eye was a trying one.
The puppies were yelping, the small boys romping, and the big boys all
talking at once; the curtains were up, the room close, berries scattered
freely about, Mac's shade half off, his cheeks flushed, his temper
ruffled, and his voice loudest of all as he disputed hotly with Steve
about lending certain treasured books which he could no longer use.

Now Rose considered this her special kingdom, and came down upon the
invaders with an energy which amazed them and quelled the riot at once.
They had never seen her roused before, and the effect was tremendous;
also comical, for she drove the whole flock of boys out of the room like
an indignant little hen defending her brood. They all went as meekly as
sheep; the small lads fled from the house precipitately, but the three
elder ones only retired to the next room, and remained there hoping for
a chance to explain and apologise, and so appease the irate young lady,
who had suddenly turned the tables and clattered them about their ears.

As they waited, they observed her proceedings through the half-open
door, and commented upon them briefly but expressively, feeling quite
bowed down with remorse at the harm they had innocently done.

"She's put the room to rights in a jiffey. What jacks we were to let
those dogs in and kick up such a row," observed Steve, after a prolonged
peep.

"The poor old Worm turns as if she was treading on him instead of
cuddling him like a pussy cat. Isn't he cross, though?" added Charlie,
as Mac was heard growling about his "confounded head."

"She will manage him; but it's mean in us to rumple him up and then
leave her to smooth him down. I'd go and help, but I don't know how,"
said Archie, looking much depressed, for he was a conscientious fellow,
and blamed himself for his want of thought.

"No, more do I. Odd, isn't it, what a knack women have for taking care
of sick folks?" and Charlie fell a-musing over this undeniable fact.

"She has been ever so good to Mac," began Steve, in a self-reproachful
tone.

"Better than his own brother, hey?" cut in Archie, finding relief for
his own regret in the delinquencies of another.

"Well, you needn't preach; you didn't any of you do any more, and you
might have, for Mac likes you better than he does me. I always fret him,
he says, and it isn't my fault if I am a quiddle," protested Steve, in
self-defence.

"We have all been selfish and neglected him, so we won't fight about
it, but try and do better," said Archie, generously taking more than
his share of blame, for he had been less inattentive than either of the
others.

"Rose has stood by him like a good one, and it's no wonder he likes to
have her round best. I should myself if I was down on my luck as he is,"
put in Charlie, feeling that he really had not done "the little thing"
justice.

"I'll tell you what it is, boys we haven't been half good enough to
Rose, and we've got to make it up to her somehow," said Archie, who had
a very manly sense of honour about paying his debts, even to a girl.

"I'm awfully sorry I made fun of her doll when Jamie lugged it out; and
I called her 'baby bunting' when she cried over the dead kitten. Girls
are such geese sometimes, I can't help it," said Steve, confessing his
transgressions handsomely, and feeling quite ready to atone for them if
he only knew how.

"I'll go down on my knees and beg her pardon for treating her as if she
was a child. Don't it make her mad, though? Come to think of it, she's
only two years or so younger than I am. But she is so small and pretty,
she always seems like a dolly to me," and the Prince looked down from
his lofty height of five feet five as if Rose was indeed a pygmy beside
him.

"That dolly has got a real good little heart, and a bright mind of her
own, you'd better believe. Mac says she understands some things quicker
than he can, and mother thinks she is an uncommonly nice girl, though
she don't know all creation. You needn't put on airs, Charlie, though
you are a tall one, for Rose likes Archie better than you; she said she
did because he treated her respectfully."

"Steve looks as fierce as a game-cock; but don't you get excited, my
son, for it won't do a bit of good. Of course, everybody likes the Chief
best; they ought to, and I'll punch their heads if they don't. So calm
yourself, Dandy, and mend your own manners before you come down on other
people's."

Thus the Prince with great dignity and perfect good nature, while Archie
looked modestly gratified with the flattering opinions of his kinsfolk,
and Steve subsided, feeling he had done his duty as a cousin and a
brother. A pause ensued, during which Aunt Jane appeared in the other
room, accompanied by a tea-tray sumptuously spread, and prepared to feed
her big nestling, as that was a task she allowed no one to share with
her.

"If you have a minute to spare before you go, child, I wish you'd just
make Mac a fresh shade; this has got a berry stain on it, and he must
be tidy, for he is to go out to-morrow if it is a cloudy day," said Mrs.
Jane, spreading toast in a stately manner, while Mac slopped his tea
about without receiving a word of reproof.

"Yes, aunt," answered Rose, so meekly that the boys could hardly believe
it could be the same voice which had issued the stern command, "Out of
this room, every one of you!" not very long ago.

They had not time to retire, without unseemly haste, before she walked
into the parlour and sat down at the work-table without a word. It was
funny to see the look the three tall lads cast at the little person
sedately threading a needle with green silk. They all wanted to say
something expressive of repentance, but no one knew how to begin, and it
was evident, from the prim expression of Rose's face, that she intended
to stand upon her dignity till they had properly abased themselves. The
pause was becoming very awkward, when Charlie, who possessed all the
persuasive arts of a born scapegrace, went slowly down upon his knees
before her, beat his breast, and said, in a heart-broken tone,

"Please forgive me this time, and I'll never do so any more."

It was very hard to keep sober, but Rose managed it and answered gravely,

"It is Mac's pardon you should ask, not mine, for you haven't hurt me,
and I shouldn't wonder if you had him a great deal, with all that light
and racket, and talk about things that only worry him."

"Do you really think we've hurt him, cousin?" asked Archie, with a
troubled look, while Charlie settled down in a remorseful heap among the
table legs.

"Yes, I do, for he has got a raging headache, and his eyes are as red as
as this emery bag," answered Rose, solemnly plunging her needle into a
fat flannel strawberry.

Steve tore his hair, metaphorically speaking, for he clutched his
cherished top-knot, and wildly dishevelled it, as if that was the
heaviest penance he could inflict upon himself at such short notice.
Charlie laid himself out flat, melodramatically begging someone to take
him away and hang him; but Archie, who felt worst of all, said nothing
except to vow within himself that he would read to Mac till his own eyes
were as red as a dozen emery bags combined.

Seeing the wholesome effects of her treatment upon these culprits, Rose
felt that she might relent and allow them a gleam of hope. She found
it impossible to help trampling upon the prostrate Prince a little, in
words at least, for he had hurt her feelings oftener than he knew; so
she gave him a thimble-pie on the top of his head, and said, with an air
of an infinitely superior being,

"Don't be silly, but get up, and I'll tell you something much better to
do than sprawling on the floor and getting all over lint."

Charlie obediently sat himself upon a hassock at her feet; the other
sinners drew near to catch the words of wisdom about to fall from her
lips, and Rose, softened by this gratifying humility, addressed them in
her most maternal tone.

"Now, boys, if you really want to be good to Mac, you can do it in this
way. Don't keep talking about things he can't do, or go and tell what
fun you have had batting your ridiculous balls about. Get some nice book
and read quietly; cheer him up about school, and offer to help him study
by and by; you can do that better than I, because I'm only a girl, and
don't learn Greek and Latin and all sorts of headachy stuff."

"Yes, but you can do heaps of things better than we can; you've proved
that," said Archie, with an approving look that delighted Rose, though
she could not resist giving Charlie one more rebuke, by saying, with a
little bridling of the head, and a curl of the lip that wanted to smile
instead,

"I'm glad you think so, though I am a 'queer chicken."'

This scathing remark caused the Prince to hide his face for shame, and
Steve to erect his head in the proud consciousness that this shot was
not meant for him. Archie laughed, and Rose, seeing a merry blue
eye winking at her from behind two brown hands, gave Charlie's ear a
friendly tweak, and extended the olive-branch of peace.

"Now we'll all be good, and plan nice things for poor Mac," she said,
smiling so graciously that the boys felt as if the sun had suddenly
burst out from behind a heavy cloud and was shining with great
brilliancy.

The storm had cleared the air, and quite a heavenly calm succeeded,
during which plans of a most varied and surprising sort were laid, for
everyone burned to make noble sacrifices upon the shrine of "poor
Mac," and Rose was the guiding star to whom the others looked with most
gratifying submission. Of course, this elevated state of things could
not endure long, but it was very nice while it lasted, and left an
excellent effect upon the minds of all when the first ardour had
subsided.

"There, that's ready for to-morrow, and I do hope it will be cloudy,"
said Rose, as she finished off the new shade, the progress of which the
boys had watched with interest.

"I'd bespoken an extra sunny day, but I'll tell the clerk of the weather
to change it. He's an obliging fellow, and he'll attend to it, so make
yourself easy," said Charlie, who had become quite perky again.

"It is very easy for you to joke, but how would you like to wear a
blinder like that for weeks and weeks, sir?" and Rose quenched his
rising spirits by slipping the shade over his eyes, as he still sat on
the cushion at her feet.

"It's horrid! Take it off, take it off! I don't wonder the poor old boy
has the blues with a thing like that on"; and Charlie sat looking at
what seemed to him an instrument of torture, with such a sober face that
Rose took it gently away, and went in to bid Mac good-night.

"I shall go home with her, for it is getting darkish, and she is rather
timid," said Archie, forgetting that he had often laughed at this very
timidity.

"I think I might, for she's taking care of my brother," put in Steve,
asserting his rights.

"Let's all go, that will please her"; proposed Charlie, with a burst of
gallantry which electrified his mates.

"We will!" they said with one voice, and they did, to Rose's great
surprise and secret contentment; though Archie had all the care of
her, for the other two were leaping fences, running races, and having
wrestling matches all the way down.

They composed themselves on reaching the door, however; shook hands
cordially all round, made their best bows, and retired with great
elegance and dignity, leaving Rose to say to herself, with girlish
satisfaction, as she went in,

"Now, that is the way I like to be treated."



Chapter 13--Cosey Corner

Vacation was over, the boys went back to school, and poor Mac was left
lamenting. He was out of the darkened room now, and promoted to blue
goggles, through which he took a gloomy view of life, as might have been
expected; for there was nothing he could do but wander about, and try to
amuse himself without using his eyes. Anyone who has ever been condemned
to that sort of idleness knows how irksome it is, and can understand the
state of mind which caused Mac to say to Rose in a desperate tone one
day,

"Look here, if you don't invent some new employment or amusement for me,
I shall knock myself on the head as sure as you live."

Rose flew to Uncle Alec for advice, and he ordered both patient and
nurse to the mountains for a month, with Aunt Jessie and Jamie as
escort. Pokey and her mother joined the party, and one bright September
morning six very happy-looking people were aboard the express train for
Portland two smiling mammas, laden with luncheon baskets and wraps; a
pretty young girl with a bag of books on her arm; a tall thin lad with
his hat over his eyes; and two small children, who sat with their short
legs straight out before them, and their chubby faces beaming with the
first speechless delight of "truly travelling."

An especially splendid sunset seemed to have been prepared to welcome
them when, after a long day's journey, they drove into a wide, green
door-yard, where a white colt, a red cow, two cats, four kittens,
many hens, and a dozen people, old and young, were gaily disporting
themselves. Everyone nodded and smiled in the friendliest manner, and a
lively old lady kissed the new-comers all round, as she said heartily,

"Well, now, I'm proper glad to see you! Come right in and rest, and
we'll have tea in less than no time, for you must be tired. Lizzie, you
show the folks upstairs; Kitty, you fly round and help father in with
the trunks; and Jenny and I will have the table all ready by the time
you come down. Bless the dears, they want to go see the pussies, and so
they shall!"

The three pretty daughters did "fly round," and everyone felt at home at
once, all were so hospitable and kind. Aunt Jessie had raptures over the
home-made carpets, quilts and quaint furniture; Rose could not keep away
from the windows, for each framed a lovely picture; and the little folks
made friends at once with the other children, who filled their arms with
chickens and kittens, and did the honours handsomely.

The toot of a horn called all to supper, and a goodly party, including
six children besides the Camp-bells, assembled in the long dining-room,
armed with mountain appetites and the gayest spirits. It was impossible
for anyone to be shy or sober, for such gales of merriment arose they
blew the starch out of the stiffest, and made the saddest jolly. Mother
Atkinson, as all called their hostess, was the merriest there, and the
busiest; for she kept flying up to wait on the children, to bring out
some new dish, or to banish the live stock, who were of such a social
turn that the colt came into the entry and demanded sugar; the cats sat
about in people's laps, winking suggestively at the food; and speckled
hens cleared the kitchen floor of crumbs, as they joined in the chat
with a cheerful clucking.

Everybody turned out after tea to watch the sunset till all the lovely
red was gone, and mosquitoes wound their shrill horns to sound the
retreat. The music of an organ surprised the new-comers, and in
the parlor they found Father Atkinson playing sweetly on the little
instrument made by himself. All the children gathered about him, and,
led by the tuneful sisters, sang prettily till Pokey fell asleep behind
the door, and Jamie gaped audibly right in the middle of his favourite,

    "Coo," said the little doves: "Coo," said she,
    "All in the top of the old pine-tree."

The older travellers, being tired, went to "bye low" at the same time,
and slept like tops in home-spun sheets, on husk mattresses made by
Mother Atkinson, who seemed to have put some soothing powder among them,
so deep and sweet was the slumber that came.

Next day began the wholesome out-of-door life, which works such wonders
with tired minds and feeble bodies. The weather was perfect, and the
mountain air made the children as frisky as young lambs; while the
elders went about smiling at one another, and saying, "Isn't it
splendid?" Even Mac, the "slow coach," was seen to leap over a fence
as if he really could not help it; and when Rose ran after him with his
broad-brimmed hat, he made the spirited proposal to go into the woods
and hunt for a catamount.

Jamie and Pokey were at once enrolled in the Cosey Corner Light Infantry
a truly superb company, composed entirely of officers, all wearing
cocked hats, carrying flags, waving swords, or beating drums. It was a
spectacle to stir the dullest soul when this gallant band marched out of
the yard in full regimentals, with Captain Dove a solemn, big-headed
boy of eleven issuing his orders with the gravity of a general, and his
Falstaffian regiment obeying them with more docility than skill. The
little Snow children did very well, and Lieutenant Jack Dove was fine
to see; so was Drummer Frank, the errand-boy of the house, as he
rub-a-dub-dubbed with all his heart and drumsticks. Jamie had "trained"
before, and was made a colonel at once; but Pokey was the best of all,
and called forth a spontaneous burst of applause from the spectators
as she brought up the rear, her cocked hat all over one eye, her flag
trailing over her shoulder, and her wooden sword straight up in the air;
her face beaming and every curl bobbing with delight as her fat legs
tottered in the vain attempt to keep step manfully.

Mac and Rose were picking blackberries in the bushes beside the road
when the soldiers passed without seeing them, and they witnessed a sight
that was both pretty and comical. A little farther on was one of the
family burial spots so common in those parts, and just this side of it
Captain Fred Dove ordered his company to halt, explaining his reason for
so doing in the following words,

"That's a graveyard, and it's proper to muffle the drums and lower the
flags as we go by, and we'd better take off our hats, too; it's more
respectable, I think."

"Isn't that cunning of the dears?" whispered Rose, as the little troop
marched slowly by to the muffled roll of the drums, every flag and sword
held low, all the little heads uncovered, and the childish faces very
sober as the leafy shadows flickered over them.

"Let's follow and see what they are after," proposed Mac, who found
sitting on the wall and being fed with blackberries luxurious but
tiresome.

So they followed and heard the music grow lively, saw the banners wave
in the breeze again when the graveyard was passed, and watched the
company file into the dilapidated old church that stood at the corner of
three woodland roads. Presently the sound of singing made the outsiders
quicken their steps, and, stealing up, they peeped in at one of the
broken windows.

Captain Dove was up in the old wooden pulpit, gazing solemnly down upon
his company, who, having stacked their arms in the porch, now sat in the
bare pews singing a Sunday-school hymn with great vigour and relish.

"Let us pray," said Captain Dove, with as much reverence as an army
chaplain; and, folding his hands, he repeated a prayer which he thought
all would know an excellent little prayer, but not exactly appropriate
to the morning, for it was,

    "Now I lay me down to sleep."

Everyone joined in saying it, and it was a pretty sight to see the
little creatures bowing their curly heads and lisping out the words they
knew so well. Tears came into Rose's eyes as she looked; Mac took his
hat off involuntarily, and then clapped it on again as if ashamed of
showing any feeling.

"Now I shall preach you a short sermon, and my text is, 'Little
children, love one another.' I asked mamma to give me one, and she
thought that would be good; so you all sit still and I'll preach it. You
mustn't whisper, Marion, but hear me. It means that we should be good to
each other, and play fair, and not quarrel as we did this very day about
the wagon. Jack can't always drive, and needn't be mad because I like
to go with Frank. Annette ought to be horse sometimes and not always
driver; and Willie may as well make up his mind to let Marion build her
house by his, for she will do it, and he needn't fuss about it. Jamie
seems to be a good boy, but I shall preach to him if he isn't. No,
Pokey, people don't kiss in church or put their hats on. Now you must
all remember what I tell you, because I am the captain, and you should
mind me."

Here Lieutenant Jack spoke right out in meeting with the rebellious
remark,

"Don't care if you are; you'd better mind yourself, and tell how you
took away my strap, and kept the biggest doughnut, and didn't draw fair
when we had the truck."

"Yes, and you slapped Frank; I saw you!" bawled Willie Snow, bobbing up
in his pew.

"And you took my book away and hid it 'cause I wouldn't go and swing
when you wanted me to," added Annette, the oldest of the Snow trio.

"I shan't build my house by Willie's if he don't want me to, so now!"
put in little Marion, joining the mutiny.

"I will tiss Dimmy! and I tored up my hat 'tause a pin picked me,"
shouted Pokey, regardless of Jamie's efforts to restrain her.

Captain Dove looked rather taken aback at this outbreak in the ranks;
but, being a dignified and calm personage, he quelled the rising
rebellion with great tact and skill, by saying, briefly,

"We'll sing the last hymn; 'Sweet, sweet good-by' you all know that, so
do it nicely, and then we will go and have luncheon."

Peace was instantly restored, and a burst of melody drowned the
suppressed giggles of Rose and Mac, who found it impossible to keep
sober during the latter part of this somewhat remarkable service.
Fifteen minutes of repose rendered it a physical impossibility for the
company to march out as quietly as they had marched in. I grieve to
state that the entire troop raced home as hard as they could pelt, and
were soon skirmishing briskly over their lunch, utterly oblivious of
what Jamie (who had been much impressed by the sermon) called "the
captain's beautiful teck."

It was astonishing how much they all found to do at Cosey Corner;
and Mac, instead of lying in a hammock and being read to, as he had
expected, was busiest of all. He was invited to survey and lay out
Skeeterville, a town which the children were getting up in a huckleberry
pasture; and he found much amusement in planning little roads, staking
off house-lots, attending to the water-works, and consulting with the
"selectmen" about the best sites for public buildings; for Mac was a boy
still, in spite of his fifteen years and his love of books.

Then he went fishing with a certain jovial gentleman from the West; and
though they seldom caught anything but colds, they had great fun and
exercise chasing the phantom trout they were bound to have. Mac also
developed a geological mania, and went tapping about at rocks and
stones, discoursing wisely of "strata, periods, and fossil remains";
while Rose picked up leaves and lichens, and gave him lessons in botany
in return for his lectures on geology.

They led a very merry life; for the Atkinson girls kept up a sort of
perpetual picnic; and did it so capitally, that one was never tired of
it. So their visitors throve finely, and long before the month was out
it was evident that Dr. Alec had prescribed the right medicine for his
patients.



Chapter 14--A Happy Birthday

The twelfth of October was Rose's birthday, but no one seemed to
remember that interesting fact, and she felt delicate about mentioning
it, so fell asleep the night before wondering if she would have any
presents. That question was settled early the next morning, for she was
awakened by a soft tap on her face, and opening her eyes she beheld a
little black and white figure sitting on her pillow, staring at her with
a pair of round eyes very like blueberries, while one downy paw patted
her nose to attract her notice. It was Kitty Comet, the prettiest of all
the pussies, and Comet evidently had a mission to perform, for a pink
bow adorned her neck, and a bit of paper was pinned to it bearing the
words, "For Miss Rose, from Frank."

That pleased her extremely, and that was only the beginning of the
fun, for surprises and presents kept popping out in the most delightful
manner all through the day, the Atkinson girls being famous jokers and
Rose a favourite. But the best gift of all came on the way to Mount
Windy-Top, where it was decided to picnic in honour of the great
occasion. Three jolly loads set off soon after breakfast, for everybody
went, and everybody seemed bound to have an extra good time, especially
Mother Atkinson, who wore a hat as broad-brimmed as an umbrella, and
took the dinner-horn to keep her flock from straying away.

"I'm going to drive auntie and a lot of the babies, so you must ride the
pony. And please stay behind us a good bit when we go to the station,
for a parcel is coming, and you are not to see it till dinner-time. You
won't mind, will you?" said Mac, in a confidential aside during the wild
flurry of the start.

"Not a bit," answered Rose. "It hurts my feelings very much to be told
to keep out of the way at any other time, but birthdays and Christmas it
is part of the fun to be blind and stupid, and poked into corners. I'll
be ready as soon as you are, Giglamps."

"Stop under the big maple till I call then you can't possibly see
anything," added Mac, as he mounted her on the pony his father had sent
up for his use. "Barkis" was so gentle and so "willin'," however, that
Rose was ashamed to be afraid to ride him; so she had learned, that she
might surprise Dr. Alec when she got home; meantime she had many a
fine canter "over the hills and far away" with Mac, who preferred Mr.
Atkinson's old Sorrel.

Away they went, and, coming to the red maple, Rose obediently paused;
but could not help stealing a glance in the forbidden direction before
the call came. Yes, there was a hamper going under the seat, and then
she caught sight of a tall man whom Mac seemed to be hustling into
the carriage in a great hurry. One look was enough, and with a cry of
delight, Rose was off down the road as fast as Barkis could go.

"Now I'll astonish uncle," she thought. "I'll dash up in grand style,
and show him that I am not a coward, after all."

Fired by this ambition, she startled Barkis by a sharp cut, and still
more bewildered him by leaving him to his own guidance down the steep,
stony road. The approach would have been a fine success if, just as Rose
was about to pull up and salute, two or three distracted hens had not
scuttled across the road with a great squawking, which caused Barkis
to shy and stop so suddenly that his careless rider landed in an
ignominious heap just under old Sorrel's astonished nose.

Rose was up again before Dr. Alec was out of the carryall, and threw two
dusty arms about his neck crying with a breathless voice,

"O uncle, I'm so glad to see you! It is better than a cart-load of
goodies, and so dear of you to come!"

"But aren't you hurt, child! That was a rough tumble, and I'm afraid you
must be damaged somewhere," answered the Doctor, full of fond anxiety,
as he surveyed his girl with pride.

"My feelings are hurt, but my bones are all safe. It's too bad! I was
going to do it so nicely, and those stupid hens spoilt it all," said
Rose, quite crestfallen, as well as much shaken.

"I couldn't believe my eyes when I asked 'Where is Rose?' and Mac
pointed to the little Amazon pelting down the hill at such a rate. You
couldn't have done anything that would please me more, and I'm delighted
to see how well you ride. Now, will you mount again, or shall we turn
Mac out and take you in?" asked Dr. Alec, as Aunt Jessie proposed a
start, for the others were beckoning them to follow.

"Pride goeth before a fall better not try to show off again, ma'am,"
said Mac, who would have been more than mortal if he had refrained from
teasing when so good a chance offered.

"Pride does go before a fall, but I wonder if a sprained ankle always
comes after it?" thought Rose, bravely concealing her pain, as she
answered, with great dignity,

"I prefer to ride. Come on, and see who will catch up first."

She was up and away as she spoke, doing her best to efface the memory
of her downfall by sitting very erect, elbows down, head well up, and
taking the motion of the pony as Barkis cantered along as easily as a
rocking-chair.

"You ought to see her go over a fence and race when we ride together.
She can scud, too, like a deer when we play 'Follow the leader,' and
skip stones and bat balls almost as well as I can," said Mac, in reply
to his uncle's praise of his pupil.

"I'm afraid you will think her a sad tomboy, Alec; but really she seems
so well and happy, I have not the heart to check her. She has broken
out in the most unexpected way, and frisks like a colt; for she says she
feels so full of spirits she must run and shout whether it is proper or
not," added Mrs. Jessie, who had been a pretty hoyden years ago herself.

"Good good! that's the best news you could tell me," and Dr. Alec rubbed
his hands heartily. "Let the girl run and shout as much as she will it
is a sure sign of health, and as natural to a happy child as frisking is
to any young animal full of life. Tomboys make strong women usually, and
I had far rather find Rose playing football with Mac than puttering over
bead-work like that affected midget, Ariadne Blish."

"But she cannot go on playing football very long, and we must not forget
that she has a woman's work to do by and by," began Mrs. Jessie.

"Neither will Mac play football much longer, but he will be all the
better fitted for business, because of the health it gives him. Polish
is easily added, if the foundations are strong; but no amount of gilding
will be of use if your timber is not sound. I'm sure I'm right, Jessie;
and if I can do as well by my girl during the next six months as I have
the last, my experiment will succeed."

"It certainly will; for when I contrast that bright, blooming face
with the pale, listless one that made my heart ache a while ago, I can
believe in almost any miracle," said Mrs. Jessie, as Rose looked round
to point out a lovely view, with cheeks like the ruddy apples in the
orchard near by, eyes clear as the autumn sky overhead, and vigour in
every line of her girlish figure.

A general scramble among the rocks was followed by a regular gypsy
lunch, which the young folks had the rapture of helping to prepare.
Mother Atkinson put on her apron, turned up her sleeves, and fell to
work as gaily as if in her own kitchen, boiling the kettle slung on
three sticks, over a fire of cones and fir boughs; while the girls
spread the mossy table with a feast of country goodies, and the children
tumbled about in everyone's way till the toot of the horn made them
settle down like a flock of hungry birds.

As soon as the merry meal and a brief interval of repose were over,
it was unanimously voted to have some charades. A smooth, green spot
between two stately pines was chosen for the stage; shawls hung up,
properties collected, audience and actors separated, and a word quickly
chosen.

The first scene discovered Mac in a despondent attitude and shabby
dress, evidently much troubled in mind. To him entered a remarkable
creature with a brown paper bag over its head. A little pink nose peeped
through one hole in the middle, white teeth through another, and above
two eyes glared fiercely. Spires of grass stuck in each side of the
mouth seemed meant to represent whiskers; the upper corners of the bag
were twisted like ears, and no one could doubt for a moment that the
black scarf pinned on behind was a tail.

This singular animal seemed in pantomime to be comforting his master and
offering advice, which was finally acted upon, for Mac pulled off his
boots, helped the little beast into them, and gave him a bag; then,
kissing his paw, with a hopeful gesture, the creature retired, purring
so successfully that there was a general cry of "Cat, puss, boots!"

"Cat is the word," replied a voice, and the curtain fell.

The next scene was a puzzler, for in came another animal, on all-fours
this time, with a new sort of tail and long ears. A gray shawl concealed
its face, but an inquisitive sunbeam betrayed the glitter as of goggles
under the fringe. On its back rode a small gentleman in Eastern costume,
who appeared to find some difficulty in keeping his seat as his steed
jogged along. Suddenly a spirit appeared, all in white, with long
newspaper wings upon its back and golden locks about its face.
Singularly enough, the beast beheld this apparition and backed
instantly, but the rider evidently saw nothing and whipped up
unmercifully, also unsuccessfully, for the spirit stood directly in the
path, and the amiable beast would not budge a foot. A lively skirmish
followed, which ended in the Eastern gentleman being upset into a
sweet-fern bush, while the better bred animal abased itself before the
shining one.

The children were all in the dark till Mother Atkinson said, in an
inquiring tone,

"If that isn't Balaam and the ass, I'd like to know what it is. Rose
makes a sweet angel, doesn't she?"

"Ass" was evidently the word, and the angel retired, smiling with
mundane satisfaction over the compliment that reached her ears.

The next was a pretty little scene from the immortal story of "Babes in
the Wood." Jamie and Pokey came trotting in, hand in hand, and, having
been through the parts many times before, acted with great ease and much
fluency, audibly directing each other from time to time as they
went along. The berries were picked, the way lost, tears shed, baby
consolation administered, and then the little pair lay down among the
brakes and died with their eyes wide open and the toes of their four
little boots turned up to the daisies in the most pathetic manner.

"Now the wobins tum. You be twite dead, Dimmy, and I'll peep in and see
'em," one defunct innocent was heard to say.

"I hope they'll be quick, for I'm lying on a stone, and ants are walking
up my leg like fury," murmured the other.

Here the robins came flapping in with red scarves over their breasts
and leaves in their mouths, which they carefully laid upon the babes
wherever they would show best. A prickly blackberry leaf placed directly
over Pokey's nose caused her to sneeze so violently that her little legs
flew into the air; Jamie gave a startled "Ow!" and the pitying fowls
fled giggling.

After some discussion it was decided that the syllable must be "strew or
strow" and then they waited to see if it was a good guess.

This scene discovered Annette Snow in bed, evidently very ill; Miss
Jenny was her anxious mamma, and her merry conversation amused the
audience till Mac came in as a physician, and made great fun with his
big watch, pompous manner, and absurd questions. He prescribed one
pellet with an unpronounceable name, and left after demanding twenty
dollars for his brief visit.

The pellet was administered, and such awful agonies immediately set in
that the distracted mamma bade a sympathetic neighbour run for Mother
Know-all. The neighbour ran, and in came a brisk little old lady in
cap and specs, with a bundle of herbs under her arm, which she at once
applied in all sorts of funny ways, explaining their virtues as she
clapped a plantain poultice here, put a pounded catnip plaster there,
or tied a couple of mullein leaves round the sufferer's throat. Instant
relief ensued, the dying child sat up and demanded baked beans. The
grateful parent offered fifty dollars; but Mother Know-all indignantly
refused it and went smiling away, declaring that a neighbourly turn
needed no reward, and a doctor's fee was all a humbug.

The audience were in fits of laughter over this scene, for Rose imitated
Mrs. Atkinson capitally, and the herb cure was a good hit at the
excellent lady's belief that "yarbs" would save mankind if properly
applied. No one enjoyed it more than herself, and the saucy children
prepared for the grand finale in high feather.

This closing scene was brief but striking, for two trains of cars
whizzed in from opposite sides, met with a terrible collision in
the middle of the stage, and a general smash-up completed the word
catastrophe.

"Now let us act a proverb. I've got one all ready," said Rose, who was
dying to distinguish herself in some way before Uncle Alec.

So everyone but Mac, the gay Westerner, and Rose, took their places on
the rocky seats and discussed the late beautiful and varied charade, in
which Pokey frankly pronounced her own scene the "bestest of all."

In five minutes the curtain was lifted; nothing appeared but a very
large sheet of brown paper pinned to a tree, and on it was drawn a
clock-face, the hands pointing to four. A small note below informed the
public that 4 A.M. was the time. Hardly had the audience grasped this
important fact when a long waterproof serpent was seen uncoiling
itself from behind a stump. An inch-worm, perhaps, would be a better
description, for it travelled in the same humpy way as that pleasing
reptile. Suddenly a very wide-awake and active fowl advanced, pecking,
chirping, and scratching vigorously. A tuft of green leaves waved upon
his crest, a larger tuft of brakes made an umbrageous tail, and a shawl
of many colours formed his flapping wings. A truly noble bird, whose
legs had the genuine strut, whose eyes shone watchfully, and whose voice
had a ring that evidently struck terror into the catterpillar's soul, if
it was a catterpillar. He squirmed, he wriggled, he humped as fast as
he could, trying to escape; but all in vain. The tufted bird espied
him, gave one warbling sort of crow, pounced upon him, and flapped
triumphantly away.

"That early bird got such a big worm he could hardly carry him off,"
laughed Aunt Jessie, as the children shouted over the joke suggested by
Mac's nickname.

"That is one of uncle's favourite proverbs, so I got it up for his
especial benefit," said Rose, coming up with the two-legged worm beside
her.

"Very clever; what next?" asked Dr. Alec as she sat down beside him.

"The Dove boys are going to give us an 'Incident in the Life of
Napoleon,' as they call it; the children think it very splendid, and the
little fellows do it rather nicely," answered Mac with condescension.

A tent appeared, and pacing to and fro before it was a little sentinel,
who, in a brief soliloquy, informed the observers that the elements were
in a great state of confusion, that he had marched some hundred miles
or so that day, and that he was dying for want of sleep. Then he
paused, leaned upon his gun, and seemed to doze; dropped slowly down,
overpowered with slumber, and finally lay flat, with his gun beside him,
a faithless little sentinel. Enter Napoleon, cocked hat, gray coat, high
boots, folded arms, grim mouth, and a melodramatic stride. Freddy Dove
always covered himself with glory in this part, and "took the stage"
with a Napoleonic attitude that brought down the house; for the
big-headed boy, with solemn, dark eyes and square brow, was "the very
moral of that rascal, Boneyparty," Mother Atkinson said.

Some great scheme was evidently brewing in his mighty mind a trip across
the Alps, a bonfire at Moscow, or a little skirmish at Waterloo perhaps,
for he marched in silent majesty till suddenly a gentle snore disturbed
the imperial reverie. He saw the sleeping soldier and glared upon him,
saying in an awful tone,

"Ha! asleep at his post! Death is the penalty he must die!"

Picking up the musket, he is about to execute summary justice, as
emperors are in the habit of doing, when something in the face of the
weary sentinel appears to touch him. And well it might, for a most
engaging little warrior was Jack as he lay with his shako half off, his
childish face trying to keep sober, and a great black moustache over his
rosy mouth. It would have softened the heart of any Napoleon, and the
Little Corporal proved himself a man by relenting, and saying, with a
lofty gesture of forgiveness,

"Brave fellow, he is worn out; I will let him sleep, and mount guard in
his place."

Then, shouldering the gun, this noble being strode to and fro with a
dignity which thrilled the younger spectators. The sentinel awakes,
sees what has happened, and gives himself up for lost. But the Emperor
restores his weapon, and, with that smile which won all hearts, says,
pointing to a high rock whereon a crow happens to be sitting, "Be brave,
be vigilant, and remember that from yonder Pyramid generations are
beholding you," and with these memorable words he vanishes, leaving the
grateful soldier bolt upright, with his hand at his temple and deathless
devotion stamped upon his youthful countenance.

The applause which followed this superb piece had hardly subsided,
when a sudden splash and a shrill cry caused a general rush toward the
waterfall that went gambolling down the rocks, singing sweetly as it
ran. Pokey had tried to gambol also, and had tumbled into a shallow
pool, whither Jamie had gallantly followed, in a vain attempt to fish
her out, and both were paddling about half frightened, half pleased with
the unexpected bath.

This mishap made it necessary to get the dripping infants home as soon
as possible; so the wagons were loaded up, and away they went, as merry
as if the mountain air had really been "Oxygenated Sweets not Bitters,"
as Dr. Alec suggested when Mac said he felt as jolly as if he had been
drinking champagne instead of the current wine that came with a great
frosted cake wreathed with sugar roses in Aunt Plenty's hamper of
goodies.

Rose took part in all the fun, and never betrayed by look or word the
twinges of pain she suffered in her ankle. She excused herself from the
games in the evening, however, and sat talking to Uncle Alec in a lively
way, that both amazed and delighted him; for she confided to him that
she played horse with the children, drilled with the light infantry,
climbed trees, and did other dreadful things that would have caused the
aunts to cry aloud if they knew of them.

"I don't care a pin what they say if you don't mind, uncle," she
answered, when he pictured the dismay of the good ladies.

"Ah, it's all very well to defy them, but you are getting so rampant,
I'm afraid you will defy me next, and then where are we?"

"No, I won't! I shouldn't dare; because you are my guardian, and can put
me in a strait-jacket if you like;" and Rose laughed in his face, even
while she nestled closer with a confiding gesture pleasant to see.

"Upon my word, Rosy, I begin to feel like the man who bought an
elephant, and then didn't know what to do with him. I thought I had got
a pet and plaything for years to come; but here you are growing up like
a bean-stalk, and I shall find I've got a strong-minded little woman on
my hands before I can turn round. There's predicament for a man and an
uncle!"

Dr. Alec's comic distress was mercifully relieved for the time being
by a dance of goblins on the lawn, where the children, with pumpkin
lanterns on their heads, frisked about like will-o'-the-wisps, as a
parting surprise.

When Rose went to bed, she found that Uncle Alec had not forgotten her;
for on the table stood a delicate little easel, holding two miniatures
set in velvet. She knew them both, and stood looking at them till her
eyes brimmed over with tears that were both sweet and sad; for they were
the faces of her father and mother, beautifully copied from portraits
fast fading away.

Presently, she knelt down, and, putting her arms round the little
shrine, kissed one after the other, saying with an earnest voice, "I'll
truly try to make them glad to see me by and by."

And that was Rose's little prayer on the night of her fourteenth
birthday.

Two days later the Campbells went home, a larger party than when they
came; for Dr. Alec was escort and Kitty Comet was borne in state in a
basket, with a bottle of milk, some tiny sandwiches, and a doll's dish
to drink out of, as well as a bit of carpet to lie on in her palace car,
out of which she kept popping her head in the most fascinating manner.

There was a great kissing and cuddling, waving of handkerchiefs, and
last good-byes, as they went; and when they had started, Mother Atkinson
came running after them, to tuck in some little pies, hot from the oven,
"for the dears, who might get tired of bread and butter during that long
day's travel."

Another start, and another halt; for the Snow children came shrieking
up to demand the three kittens that Pokey was cooly carrying off in
a travelling bag. The unhappy kits were rescued, half smothered, and
restored to their lawful owners, amid dire lamentation from the little
kidnapper, who declared that she only "tooked um 'cause they'd want to
go wid their sister Tomit."

Start number three and stoppage number three, as Frank hailed them
with the luncheon basket, which had been forgotten, after everyone had
protested that it was safely in.

All went well after that, and the long journey was pleasantly beguiled
by Pokey and Pussy, who played together so prettily that they were
considered public benefactors.

"Rose doesn't want to go home, for she knows the aunts won't let her
rampage as she did up at Cosey Corner," said Mac, as they approached the
old house.

"I can't rampage if I want to for a time, at least; and I'll tell you
why. I sprained my ankle when I tumbled off of Barkis, and it gets worse
and worse; though I've done all I know to cure it and hide it, so it
shouldn't trouble anyone," whispered Rose, knitting her brows with pain,
as she prepared to descend, wishing her uncle would take her instead of
her bundles.

How he did it, she never knew; but Mac had her up the steps and on the
parlour sofa before she could put her foot to the ground.

"There you are right side up with care; and mind, now, if your ankle
bothers you, and you are laid up with it, I am to be your footman. It's
only fair, you know; for I don't forget how good you have been to me."
And Mac went to call Phebe, so full of gratitude and good-will that his
very goggles shone.



Chapter 15--Ear-Rings

Rose's sprain proved to be a serious one, owing to neglect, and Dr. Alec
ordered her to lie on the sofa for a fortnight at least; whereat she
groaned dismally, but dared not openly complain, lest the boys turn
upon her with some of the wise little sermons on patience which she had
delivered for their benefit.

It was Mac's turn now, and honourably did he repay his debt; for, as
school was still forbidden, he had plenty of leisure, and devoted most
of it to Rose. He took many steps for her, and even allowed her to teach
him to knit, after assuring himself that many a brave Scotchman knew how
to "click the pricks." She was obliged to take a solemn vow of secrecy,
however, before he would consent; for, though he did not mind being
called "Giglamps," "Granny" was more than his boyish soul could bear,
and at the approach of any of the Clan his knitting vanished as if by
magic, which frequent "chucking" out of sight did not improve the stripe
he was doing for Rose's new afghan.

She was busy with this pretty work one bright October afternoon, all
nicely established on her sofa in the upper hall, while Jamie and Pokey
(lent for her amusement) were keeping house in a corner, with Comet and
Rose's old doll for their "childerns."

Presently, Phebe appeared with a card. Rose read it, made a grimace,
then laughed and said,

"I'll see Miss Blish," and immediately put on her company face, pulled
out her locket, and settled her curls.

"You dear thing, how do you do? I've been trying to call every day since
you got back, but I have so many engagements, I really couldn't manage
it till to-day. So glad you are alone, for mamma said I could sit
awhile, and I brought my lace-work to show you, for it's perfectly
lovely." cried Miss Blish, greeting Rose with a kiss, which was not very
warmly returned, though Rose politely thanked her for coming, and bid
Phebe roll up the easy chair.

"How nice to have a maid!" said Ariadne, as she settled herself with
much commotion. "Still, dear, you must be very lonely, and feel the need
of a bosom friend."

"I have my cousins," began Rose, with dignity, for her visitor's
patronising manner ruffled her temper.

"Gracious, child! you don't make friends of those great boys, do you?
Mamma says she really doesn't think it's proper for you to be with them
so much."

"They are like brothers, and my aunts do think it's proper," replied
Rose, rather sharply, for it struck her that this was none of Miss
Blish's business.

"I was merely going to say I should be glad to have you for my bosom
friend, for Hatty Mason and I have had an awful quarrel, and don't
speak. She is too mean to live, so I gave her up. Just think, she never
paid back one of the caramels I've given her, and never invited me to
her party. I could have forgiven the caramels, but to be left out in
that rude way was more than I could bear, and I told her never to look
at me again as long as she lived."

"You are very kind, but I don't think I want a bosom friend, thank you,"
said Rose, as Ariadne stopped to bridle and shake her flaxen head over
the delinquent Hatty Mason.

Now, in her heart Miss Blish thought Rose "a stuck-up puss," but
the other girls wanted to know her and couldn't, the old house was a
charming place to visit, the lads were considered fine fellows, and
the Campbells "are one of our first families," mamma said. So Ariadne
concealed her vexation at Rose's coolness, and changed the subject as
fast as possible.

"Studying French, I see; who is your teacher?" she asked, flitting over
the leaves of "Paul and Virginia," that lay on the table.

"I don't study it, for I read French as well as English, and uncle and
I often speak it for hours. He talks like a native, and says I have a
remarkably good accent."

Rose really could not help this small display of superiority, for French
was one of her strong points, and she was vain of it, though she usually
managed to hide this weakness. She felt that Ariadne would be the better
for a little crushing, and could not resist the temptation to patronise
in her turn.

"Oh, indeed!" said Miss Blish, rather blankly, for French was not her
strong point by any means.

"I am to go abroad with uncle in a year or two, and he knows how
important it is to understand the languages. Half the girls who leave
school can't speak decent French, and when they go abroad they are
so mortified. I shall be very glad to help you, if you like, for, of
course, you have no one to talk with at home."

Now Ariadne, though she looked like a wax doll, had feelings within her
instead of sawdust, and these feelings were hurt by Rose's lofty tone.
She thought her more "stuck up" than ever, but did not know how to bring
her down, yet longed to do it, for she felt as if she had received a
box on the ear, and involuntarily put her hand up to it. The touch of an
ear-ring consoled her, and suggested a way of returning tit for tat in a
telling manner.

"Thank you, dear; I don't need any help, for our teacher is from Paris,
and of course he speaks better French than your uncle." Then she added,
with a gesture of her head that set the little bells on her ears to
tingling: "How do you like my new ear-rings? Papa gave them to me last
week, and everyone says they are lovely."

Rose came down from her high horse with a rapidity that was comical,
for Ariadne had the upper hand now. Rose adored pretty things, longed
to wear them, and the desire of her girlish soul was to have her ears
bored, only Dr. Alec thought it foolish, so she never had done it. She
would gladly have given all the French she could jabber for a pair of
golden bells with pearl-tipped tongues, like those Ariadne wore; and,
clasping her hands, she answered, in a tone that went to the hearer's
heart,

"They are too sweet for anything! If uncle would only let me wear some,
I should be perfectly happy."

"I wouldn't mind what he says. Papa laughed at me at first, but he likes
them now, and says I shall have diamond solitaires when I am eighteen,"
said Ariadne, quite satisfied with her shot.

"I've got a pair now that were mamma's, and a beautiful little pair of
pearl and turquoise ones, that I am dying to wear," sighed Rose.

"Then do it. I'll pierce your ears, and you must wear a bit of silk in
them till they are well; your curls will hide them nicely; then, some
day, slip in your smallest ear-rings, and see if your uncle don't like
them."

"I asked him if it wouldn't do my eyes good once when they were red, and
he only laughed. People do cure weak eyes that way, don't they?"

"Yes, indeed, and yours are sort of red. Let me see. Yes, I really think
you ought to do it before they get worse," said Ariadne, peering into
the large clear eye offered for inspection.

"Does it hurt much?" asked Rose, wavering.

"Oh dear, no; just a prick and a pull, and it's all over. I've done
lots of ears, and know just how. Come, push up your hair and get a big
needle."

"I don't quite like to do it without asking uncle's leave," faltered
Rose, when all was ready for the operation.

"Did he ever forbid it?" demanded Ariadne, hovering over her prey like a
vampire.

"No, never!"

"Then do it, unless you are afraid," cried Miss Blish, bent on
accomplishing the deed.

That last word settled the matter, and, closing her eyes, Rose said
"Punch!" in the tone of one giving the fatal order "Fire!"

Ariadne punched, and the victim bore it in heroic silence, though she
turned pale and her eyes were full of tears of anguish.

"There! Now pull the bits of silk often, and cold-cream your ears every
night, and you'll soon be ready for the rings," said Ariadne, well
pleased with her job, for the girl who spoke French with "a fine accent"
lay flat upon the sofa, looking as exhausted as if she had had both ears
cut off.

"It does hurt dreadfully, and I know uncle won't like it," sighed Rose,
as remorse began to gnaw. "Promise not to tell, or I shall be teased
to death," she added, anxiously, entirely forgetting the two little
pitchers gifted with eyes as well as ears, who had been watching the
whole performance from afar.

"Never. Mercy me, what's that?" and Ariadne started as a sudden sound of
steps and voices came up from below.

"It's the boys! Hide the needle. Do my ears show? Don't breathe a word!"
whispered Rose, scrambling about to conceal all traces of their iniquity
from the sharp eyes of the Clan.

Up they came, all in good order, laden with the proceeds of a nutting
expedition, for they always reported to Rose and paid tribute to their
queen in the handsomest manner.

"How many, and how big! We'll have a grand roasting frolic after tea,
won't we?" said Rose, plunging both hands into a bag of glossy brown
nuts, while the Clan "stood at ease" and nodded to Ariadne.

"That lot was picked especially for you, Rosy. I got every one myself,
and they are extra whackers," said Mac, presenting a bushel or so.

"You should have seen Giglamps when he was after them. He pitched out
of the tree, and would have broken his blessed old neck if Arch had
not caught him," observed Steve, as he lounged gracefully in the window
seat.

"You needn't talk, Dandy, when you didn't know a chestnut from a beech,
and kept on thrashing till I told you of it," retorted Mac, festooning
himself over the back of the sofa, being a privileged boy.

"I don't make mistakes when I thrash you, old Worm, so you'd better mind
what you are about," answered Steve, without a ray of proper respect for
his elder brother.

"It is getting dark, and I must go, or mamma will be alarmed," said
Ariadne, rising in sudden haste, though she hoped to be asked to remain
to the nut-party.

No one invited her; and all the while she was putting on her things and
chatting to Rose the boys were telegraphing to one another the sad fact
that someone ought to escort the young lady home. Not a boy felt heroic
enough to cast himself into the breach, however; even polite Archie
shirked the duty, saying to Charlie, as they quietly slipped into an
adjoining room,

"I'm not going to do all the gallivanting. Let Steve take that chit home
and show his manners."

"I'll be hanged if I do!" answered Prince, who disliked Miss Blish
because she tried to be coquettish with him.

"Then I will," and, to the dismay of both recreant lads, Dr. Alec walked
out of the room to offer his services to the "chit."

He was too late, however, for Mac, obeying a look from Rose, had already
made a victim of himself, and trudged meekly away, wishing the gentle
Ariadne at the bottom of the Red Sea.

"Then I will take this lady down to tea, as the other one has found a
gentleman to go home with her. I see the lamps are lighted below, and I
smell a smell which tells me that auntie has something extra nice for us
to-night."

As he spoke, Dr. Alec was preparing to carry Rose downstairs as usual;
but Archie and Prince rushed forward, begging with penitent eagerness
for the honour of carrying her in an arm-chair. Rose consented, fearing
that her uncle's keen eye would discover the fatal bits of silk; so the
boys crossed hands, and, taking a good grip of each curly pate, she was
borne down in state, while the others followed by way of the banisters.

Tea was ordered earlier than usual, so that Jamie and his dolly could
have a taste, at least, of the holiday fun, for they were to stay till
seven, and be allowed twelve roasted chestnuts apiece, which they were
under bonds not to eat till next day.

Tea was despatched rapidly, therefore, and the party gathered round the
wide hearth in the dining-room, where the nuts were soon dancing gaily
on hot shovels or bouncing out among the company, thereby causing
delightful panics among the little ones.

"Come, Rosy, tell us a story while we work, for you can't help much,
and must amuse us as your share," proposed Mac, who sat in the shade
pricking nuts, and who knew by experience what a capital little
Scheherazade his cousin was.

"Yes, we poor monkeys can't burn our paws for nothing, so tell away,
Pussy," added Charlie, as he threw several hot nuts into her lap and
shook his fingers afterwards.

"Well, I happen to have a little story with a moral to it in my mind,
and I will tell it, though it is intended for younger children than
you," answered Rose, who was rather fond of telling instructive tales.

"Fire away," said Geordie, and she obeyed, little thinking what a
disastrous story it would prove to herself.

"Well, once upon a time, a little girl went to see a young lady who was
very fond of her. Now, the young lady happened to be lame, and had
to have her foot bandaged up every day; so she kept a basketful of
bandages, all nicely rolled and ready. The little girl liked to play
with this basket, and one day, when she thought no one saw her, she took
one of the rolls without asking leave, and put it in her pocket."

Here Pokey, who had been peering lovingly down at the five warm nuts
that lay at the bottom of her tiny pocket, suddenly looked up and said,
"Oh!" in a startled tone, as if the moral tale had become intensely
interesting all at once.

Rose heard and saw the innocent betrayal of the small sinner, and went
on in a most impressive manner, while the boys nudged one another and
winked as they caught the joke.

"But an eye did see this naughty little girl, and whose eye do you think
it was?"

"Eye of Dod," murmured conscience-stricken Pokey, spreading two chubby
little hands before the round face, which they were not half big enough
to hide.

Rose was rather taken aback by this reply, but, feeling that she was
producing a good effect, she added seriously,

"Yes, God saw her, and so did the young lady, but she did not say
anything; she waited to see what the little girl would do about it. She
had been very happy before she took the bandage, but when it was in her
pocket she seemed troubled, and pretty soon stopped playing, and sat
down in a corner looking very sober. She thought a few minutes, and then
went and put back the roll very softly, and her face cleared up, and
she was a happy child again. The young lady was glad to see that, and
wondered what made the little girl put it back."

"Tonscience p'icked her," murmured a contrite voice from behind the
small hands pressed tightly over Pokey's red face.

"And why did she take it, do you suppose?" asked Rose, in a
school-marmish tone, feeling that all the listeners were interested in
her tale and its unexpected application.

"It was so nice and wound, and she wanted it deffly," answered the
little voice.

"Well, I'm glad she had such a good conscience. The moral is that people
who steal don't enjoy what they take, and are not happy till they put
it back. What makes that little girl hide her face?" asked Rose, as she
concluded.

"Me's so 'shamed of Pokey," sobbed the small culprit, quite overcome by
remorse and confusion at this awful disclosure.

"Come, Rose, it's too bad to tell her little tricks before everyone,
and preach at her in that way; you wouldn't like it yourself," began Dr.
Alec, taking the weeper on his knee and administering consolation in the
shape of kisses and nuts.

Before Rose could express her regret, Jamie, who had been reddening
and ruffling like a little turkey-cock for several minutes, burst out
indignantly, bent on avenging the wound given to his beloved dolly.

"I know something bad that you did, and I'm going to tell right out. You
thought we didn't see you, but we did, and you said uncle wouldn't like
it, and the boys would tease, and you made Ariadne promise not to tell,
and she punched holes in your ears to put ear-rings in. So now! and
that's much badder than to take an old piece of rag; and I hate you for
making my Pokey cry."

Jamie's somewhat incoherent explosion produced such an effect that
Pokey's small sin was instantly forgotten, and Rose felt that her hour
had come.

"What! what! what!" cried the boys in a chorus, dropping their shovels
and knives to gather round Rose, for a guilty clutching at her ears
betrayed her, and with a feeble cry of "Ariadne made me!" she hid her
head among the pillows like an absurd little ostrich.

"Now she'll go prancing round with bird cages and baskets and carts and
pigs, for all I know, in her ears, as the other girls do, and won't she
look like a goose?" asked one tormentor, tweaking a curl that strayed
out from the cushions.

"I didn't think she'd be so silly," said Mac, in a tone of
disappointment that told Rose she had sunk in the esteem of her wise
cousin.

"That Blish girl is a nuisance, and ought not to be allowed to come here
with her nonsensical notions," said the Prince, feeling a strong desire
to shake that young person as an angry dog might shake a mischievous
kitten.

"How do you like it, uncle?" asked Archie, who, being the head of a
family himself, believed in preserving discipline at all costs.

"I am very much surprised; but I see she is a girl, after all, and must
have her vanities like all the rest of them," answered Dr. Alec, with
a sigh, as if he had expected to find Rose a sort of angel, above all
earthly temptations.

"What shall you do about it, sir?" inquired Geordie, wondering what
punishment would be inflicted on a feminine culprit.

"As she is fond of ornaments, perhaps we had better give her a nose-ring
also. I have one somewhere that a Fiji belle once wore; I'll look it
up," and, leaving Pokey to Jamie's care, Dr. Alec rose as if to carry
out his suggestion in earnest.

"Good! good! We'll do it right away! Here's a gimlet, so you hold
her, boys, while I get her dear little nose all ready," cried Charlie,
whisking away the pillow as the other boys danced about the sofa in true
Fiji style.

It was a dreadful moment, for Rose could not run away she could only
grasp her precious nose with one hand and extend the other, crying
distractedly,

"O uncle, save me, save me!"

Of course he saved her; and when she was securely barricaded by his
strong arm, she confessed her folly in such humiliation of spirit, that
the lads, after a good laugh at her, decided to forgive her and lay all
the blame on the tempter, Ariadne. Even Dr. Alec relented so far as to
propose two gold rings for the ears instead of one copper one for the
nose; a proceeding which proved that if Rose had all the weakness of
her sex for jewellery, he had all the inconsistency of his in giving a
pretty penitent exactly what she wanted, spite of his better judgment.



Chapter 16--Bread and Button-Holes

"What in the world is my girl thinking about all alone here, with such
a solemn face?" asked Dr. Alec, coming into the study, one November
day, to find Rose sitting there with folded hands and a very thoughtful
aspect.

"Uncle, I want to have some serious conversation with you, if you have
time," she said, coming out of a brown study, as if she had not heard
his question.

"I'm entirely at your service, and most happy to listen," he answered,
in his politest manner, for when Rose put on her womanly little airs he
always treated her with a playful sort of respect that pleased her very
much.

Now, as he sat down beside her, she said, very soberly,

"I've been trying to decide what trade I would learn, and I want you to
advise me."

"Trade, my dear?" and Dr. Alec looked so astonished that she hastened to
explain.

"I forgot that you didn't hear the talk about it up at Cosey Corner. You
see we used to sit under the pines and sew, and talk a great deal all
the ladies, I mean and I liked it very much. Mother Atkinson thought
that everyone should have a trade, or something to make a living out of,
for rich people may grow poor, you know, and poor people have to work.
Her girls were very clever, and could do ever so many things, and Aunt
Jessie thought the old lady was right; so when I saw how happy and
independent those young ladies were, I wanted to have a trade, and then
it wouldn't matter about money, though I like to have it well enough."

Dr. Alec listened to this explanation with a curious mixture of
surprise, pleasure, and amusement in his face, and looked at his little
niece as if she had suddenly changed into a young woman. She had grown a
good deal in the last six months, and an amount of thinking had gone on
in that young head which would have astonished him greatly could he have
known it all, for Rose was one of the children who observe and meditate
much, and now and then nonplus their friends by a wise or curious
remark.

"I quite agree with the ladies, and shall be glad to help you decide on
something if I can," said the Doctor seriously. "What do you incline to?
A natural taste or talent is a great help in choosing, you know."

"I haven't any talent, or any especial taste that I can see, and that is
why I can't decide, uncle. So, I think it would be a good plan to pick
out some very useful business and learn it, because I don't do it for
pleasure, you see, but as a part of my education, and to be ready in
case I'm ever poor," answered Rose, looking as if she rather longed for
a little poverty so that her useful gift might be exercised.

"Well, now, there is one very excellent, necessary, and womanly
accomplishment that no girl should be without, for it is a help to rich
and poor, and the comfort of families depends upon it. This fine talent
is neglected nowadays, and considered old-fashioned, which is a sad
mistake, and one that I don't mean to make in bringing up my girl.
It should be a part of every girl's education, and I know of a most
accomplished lady who will teach you in the best and pleasantest
manner."

"Oh, what is it?" cried Rose eagerly, charmed to be met in this helpful
and cordial way.

"Housekeeping!" answered Dr. Alec.

"Is that an accomplishment?" asked Rose, while her face fell, for she
had indulged in all sorts of vague, delightful dreams.

"Yes; it is one of the most beautiful as well as useful of all the
arts a woman can learn. Not so romantic, perhaps, as singing,
painting, writing, or teaching, even; but one that makes many happy and
comfortable, and home the sweetest place in the world. Yes, you may
open your big eyes; but it is a fact that I had rather see you a good
housekeeper than the greatest belle in the city. It need not interfere
with any talent you may possess, but it is a necessary part of your
training, and I hope that you will set about it at once, now that you
are well and strong."

"Who is the lady?" asked Rose, rather impressed by her uncle's earnest
speech.

"Aunt Plenty."

"Is she accomplished?" began Rose in a wondering tone, for this
great-aunt of hers had seemed the least cultivated of them all.

"In the good old-fashioned way she is very accomplished, and has made
this house a happy home to us all, ever since we can remember. She is
not elegant, but genuinely good, and so beloved and respected that there
will be universal mourning for her when her place is empty. No one can
fill it, for the solid, homely virtues of the dear soul have gone out of
fashion, as I say, and nothing new can be half so satisfactory, to me at
least."

"I should like to have people feel so about me. Can she teach me to do
what she does, and to grow as good?" asked Rose, with a little prick of
remorse for even thinking that Aunt Plenty was a commonplace old lady.

"Yes, if you don't despise such simple lessons as she can give. I know
it would fill her dear old heart with pride and pleasure to feel that
anyone cared to learn of her, for she fancies her day gone by. Let
her teach you how to be what she has been a skilful, frugal, cheerful
housewife; the maker and the keeper of a happy home, and by and by you
will see what a valuable lesson it is."

"I will, uncle. But how shall I begin?"

"I'll speak to her about it, and she will make it all right with Dolly,
for cooking is one of the main things, you know."

"So it is! I don't mind that a bit, for I like to mess, and used to try
at home; but I had no one to tell me, so I never did much but spoil my
aprons. Pies are great fun, only Dolly is so cross, I don't believe she
will ever let me do a thing in the kitchen."

"Then we'll cook in the parlour. I fancy Aunt Plenty will manage her,
so don't be troubled. Only mind this, I'd rather you learned how to make
good bread than the best pies ever baked. When you bring me a handsome,
wholesome loaf, entirely made by yourself, I shall be more pleased than
if you offered me a pair of slippers embroidered in the very latest
style. I don't wish to bribe you, but I'll give you my heartiest kiss,
and promise to eat every crumb of the loaf myself."

"It's a bargain! it's a bargain! Come and tell aunty all about it, for
I'm in a hurry to begin," cried Rose, dancing before him toward the
parlor, where Miss Plenty sat alone knitting contentedly, yet ready to
run at the first call for help of any sort, from any quarter.

No need to tell how surprised and gratified she was at the invitation
she received to teach the child the domestic arts which were her only
accomplishments, nor to relate how energetically she set about her
pleasant task. Dolly dared not grumble, for Miss Plenty was the one
person whom she obeyed, and Phebe openly rejoiced, for these new lessons
brought Rose nearer to her, and glorified the kitchen in the good girl's
eyes.

To tell the truth, the elder aunts had sometimes felt that they did not
have quite their share of the little niece who had won their hearts long
ago, and was the sunshine of the house. They talked it over together
sometimes, but always ended by saying that as Alec had all the
responsibility, he should have the larger share of the dear girl's love
and time, and they would be contented with such crumbs of comfort as
they could get.

Dr. Alec had found out this little secret, and, after reproaching
himself for being blind and selfish, was trying to devise some way of
mending matters without troubling anyone, when Rose's new whim suggested
an excellent method of weaning her a little from himself. He did not
know how fond he was of her till he gave her up to the new teacher, and
often could not resist peeping in at the door to see how she got on,
or stealing sly looks through the slide when she was deep in dough, or
listening intently to some impressive lecture from Aunt Plenty. They
caught him at it now and then, and ordered him off the premises at the
point of the rolling-pin; or, if unusually successful, and, therefore,
in a milder mood, they lured him away with bribes of ginger-bread, a
stray pickle, or a tart that was not quite symmetrical enough to suit
their critical eyes.

Of course he made a point of partaking copiously of all the delectable
messes that now appeared at table, for both the cooks were on their
mettle, and he fared sumptuously every day. But an especial relish
was given to any dish when, in reply to his honest praise of it, Rose
coloured up with innocent pride, and said modestly,

"I made that, uncle, and I'm glad you like it."

It was some time before the perfect loaf appeared, for bread-making
is an art not easily learned, and Aunt Plenty was very thorough in her
teaching; so Rose studied yeast first, and through various stages of
cake and biscuit came at last to the crowning glory of the "handsome,
wholesome loaf." It appeared at tea-time, on a silver salver, proudly
borne in by Phebe, who could not refrain from whispering, with a beaming
face, as she set it down before Dr. Alec,

"Ain't it just lovely, sir?"

"It is a regularly splendid loaf! Did my girl make it all herself?" he
asked, surveying the shapely, sweet-smelling object with real interest
and pleasure.

"Every particle herself, and never asked a bit of help or advice
from anyone," answered Aunt Plenty, folding her hands with an air of
unmitigated satisfaction, for her pupil certainly did her great credit.

"I've had so many failures and troubles that I really thought I never
should be able to do it alone. Dolly let one splendid batch burn up
because I forgot it. She was there and smelt it, but never did a thing,
for she said, when I undertook to bake bread I must give my whole mind
to it. Wasn't it hard? She might have called me at least," said Rose,
recollecting, with a sigh, the anguish of that moment.

"She meant you should learn by experience, as Rosamond did in that
little affair of the purple jar, you remember."

"I always thought it very unfair in her mother not to warn the poor
thing a little bit; and she was regularly mean when Rosamond asked for a
bowl to put the purple stuff in, and she said, in such a provoking way,
'I did not agree to lend you a bowl, but I will, my dear.' Ugh! I always
want to shake that hateful woman, though she was a moral mamma."

"Never mind her now, but tell me all about my loaf," said Dr. Alec, much
amused at Rose's burst of indignation.

"There's nothing to tell, uncle, except that I did my best, gave my mind
to it, and sat watching over it all the while it was in the oven till I
was quite baked myself. Everything went right this time, and it came out
a nice, round, crusty loaf, as you see. Now taste it, and tell me if it
is good as well as handsome."

"Must I cut it? Can't I put it under a glass cover and keep it in the
parlor as they do wax flowers and fine works of that sort?"

"What an idea, uncle! It would mould and be spoilt. Besides, people
would laugh at us, and make fun of my old-fashioned accomplishment. You
promised to eat it, and you must; not all at once, but as soon as you
can, so I can make you some more."

Dr. Alec solemnly cut off his favourite crusty slice, and solemnly ate
it; then wiped his lips, and brushing back Rose's hair, solemnly kissed
her on the forehead, saying, heartily,

"My dear, it is perfect bread, and you are an honour to your teacher.
When we have our model school I shall offer a prize for the best bread,
and you will get it."

"I've got it already, and I'm quite satisfied," said Rose, slipping into
her seat, and trying to hide her right hand which had a burn on it.

But Dr. Alec saw it, guessed how it came there, and after tea insisted
on easing the pain which she would hardly confess.

"Aunt Clara says I am spoiling my hands, but I don't care, for I've had
such good times with Aunt Plenty, and I think she has enjoyed it as
much as I have. Only one thing troubles me, uncle, and I want to ask
you about it," said Rose, as they paced up and down the hall in the
twilight, the bandaged hand very carefully laid on Dr. Alec's arm.

"More little confidences? I like them immensely, so tell away, my dear."

"Well, you see I feel as if Aunt Peace would like to do something for
me, and I've found out what it can be. You know she can't go about like
Aunty Plen, and we are so busy nowadays that she is rather lonely,
I'm afraid. So I want to take lessons in sewing of her. She works so
beautifully, and it is a useful thing, you know, and I ought to be a
good needlewoman as well as housekeeper, oughtn't I?"

"Bless your kind little heart, that is what I was thinking of the other
day when Aunt Peace said she saw you very seldom now, you were so busy I
wanted to speak of it, but fancied you had as much on your hands as
you could manage. It would delight the dear woman to teach you all her
delicate handicraft, especially button-holes, for I believe that is
where young ladies fail; at least, I've heard them say so. So, do you
devote your mind to button-holes; make 'em all over my clothes if you
want something to practice on. I'll wear any quantity."

Rose laughed at this reckless offer, but promised to attend to that
important branch, though she confessed that darning was her weak point.
Whereupon Uncle Alec engaged to supply her with socks in all stages of
dilapidation, and to have a new set at once, so that she could run the
heels for him as a pleasant beginning.

Then they went up to make their request in due form, to the great
delight of gentle Aunt Peace, who got quite excited with the fun that
went on while they would yarn, looked up darning needles, and fitted out
a nice little mending basket for her pupil.

Very busy and very happy were Rose's days now, for in the morning she
went about the house with Aunt Plenty attending to linen-closets and
store-rooms, pickling and preserving, exploring garret and cellar to see
that all was right, and learning, in the good old-fashioned manner, to
look well after the ways of the household.

In the afternoon, after her walk or drive, she sat with Aunt Peace
plying her needle, while Aunt Plenty, whose eyes were failing, knitted
and chatted briskly, telling many a pleasant story of old times, till
the three were moved to laugh and cry together, for the busy needles
were embroidering all sorts of bright patterns on the lives of the
workers, though they seemed to be only stitching cotton and darning
hose.

It was a pretty sight to see the rosy-faced little maid sitting between
the two old ladies, listening dutifully to their instructions, and
cheering the lessons with her lively chatter and blithe laugh. If the
kitchen had proved attractive to Dr. Alec when Rose was there at work,
the sewing-room was quite irresistible, and he made himself so agreeable
that no one had the heart to drive him away, especially when he read
aloud or spun yarns.

"There! I've made you a new set of warm night-gowns with four
button-holes in each. See if they are not neatly done," said Rose, one
day, some weeks after the new lessons began.

"Even to a thread, and nice little bars across the end so I can't tear
them when I twitch the buttons out. Most superior work, ma'am, and I'm
deeply grateful; so much so, that I'll sew on these buttons myself, and
save those tired fingers from another prick."

"You sew them on?" cried Rose, with her eyes wide open in amazement.

"Wait a bit till I get my sewing tackle, and then you shall see what I
can do."

"Can he, really?" asked Rose of Aunt Peace, as Uncle Alec marched off
with a comical air of importance.

"Oh, yes, I taught him years ago, before he went to sea; and I suppose
he has had to do things for himself, more or less, ever since; so he has
kept his hand in."

He evidently had, for he was soon back with a funny little work-bag, out
of which he produced a thimble without a top; and, having threaded his
needle, he proceeded to sew on the buttons so handily that Rose was much
impressed and amused.

"I wonder if there is anything in the world that you cannot do," she
said, in a tone of respectful admiration.

"There are one or two things that I am not up to yet," he answered,
with a laugh in the corner of his eye, as he waxed his thread with a
flourish.

"I should like to know what?"

"Bread and button-holes, ma'am."



Chapter 17--Good Bargains

It was a rainy Sunday afternoon, and four boys were trying to spend it
quietly in the "liberry," as Jamie called the room devoted to books and
boys, at Aunt Jessie's. Will and Geordie were sprawling on the sofa,
deep in the adventures of the scapegraces and ragamuffins whose
histories are now the fashion. Archie lounged in the easy chair,
surrounded by newspapers; Charlie stood upon the rug, in an Englishman's
favourite attitude, and, I regret to say, both were smoking cigars.

"It is my opinion that this day will never come to an end," said Prince,
with a yawn that nearly rent him asunder.

"Read and improve your mind, my son," answered Archie, peering solemnly
over the paper behind which he had been dozing.

"Don't you preach, parson, but put on your boots and come out for a
tramp, instead of mulling over the fire like a granny."

"No, thank you, tramps in an easterly storm don't strike me as amusing."
There Archie stopped and held up his hand, for a pleasant voice was
heard saying outside,

"Are the boys in the library, auntie?"

"Yes, dear, and longing for sunshine; so run in and make it for them,"
answered Mrs. Jessie.

"It's Rose," and Archie threw his cigar into the fire.

"What's that for?" asked Charlie.

"Gentlemen don't smoke before ladies."

"True; but I'm not going to waste my weed," and Prince poked his into
the empty inkstand that served them for an ash tray.

A gentle tap at the door was answered by a chorus of "Come in," and Rose
appeared, looking blooming and breezy with the chilly air.

"If I disturb you, say so, and I'll go away," she began, pausing on the
threshold with modest hesitation, for something in the elder boys' faces
excited her curiosity.

"You never disturb us, cousin," said the smokers, while the readers tore
themselves from the heroes of the bar-room and gutter long enough to nod
affably to their guest.

As Rose bent to warm her hands, one end of Archie's cigar stuck out of
the ashes, smoking furiously and smelling strongly.

"Oh, you bad boys, how could you do it, to-day of all days?" she said
reproachfully.

"Where's the harm?" asked Archie.

"You know as well as I do; your mother doesn't like it, and it's a bad
habit, for it wastes money and does you no good."

"Fiddlesticks! every man smokes, even Uncle Alec, whom you think so
perfect," began Charlie, in his teasing way.

"No, he doesn't! He has given it up, and I know why," cried Rose
eagerly.

"Now I think of it, I haven't seen the old meerschaum since he came
home. Did he stop it on our account?" asked Archie.

"Yes," and Rose told the little scene on the seashore in the camping-out
time.

Archie seemed much impressed, and said manfully, "He won't have done
that in vain so far as I'm concerned. I don't care a pin about smoking,
so can give it up as easy as not, and I promise you I will. I only do it
now and then for fun."

"You too?" and Rose looked up at the bonny Prince, who never looked less
bonny than at that moment, for he had resumed his cigar just to torment
her.

Now Charlie cared as little as Archie about smoking, but it would not
do to yield too soon: so he shook his head, gave a great puff, and said
loftily,

"You women are always asking us to give up harmless little things just
because you don't approve of them. How would you like it if we did the
same by you, miss?"

"If I did harmful or silly things, I'd thank you for telling me of them,
and I'd try to mend my ways," answered Rose heartily.

"Well, now, we'll see if you mean what you say. I'll give up smoking to
please you, if you will give up something to please me," said Prince,
seeing a good chance to lord it over the weaker vessel at small cost to
himself.

"I'll agree if it is as foolish as cigars."

"Oh, it's ever so much sillier."

"Then I promise; what is it?" and Rose quite trembled with anxiety to
know which of her pet habits or possessions she must lose.

"Give up your ear-rings," and Charlie laughed wickedly, sure that she
would never hold to that bargain.

Rose uttered a cry and clapped both hands to her ears where the gold
rings hung.

"Oh, Charlie, wouldn't anything else do as well? I've been through so
much teasing and trouble, I do want to enjoy my pretty ear-rings, for I
can wear them now."

"Wear as many as you like, and I'll smoke in peace," returned this bad
boy.

"Will nothing else satisfy you?" imploringly.

"Nothing," sternly.

Rose stood silent for a minute, thinking of something Aunt Jessie once
said "You have more influence over the boys than you know; use it for
their good, and I shall thank you all my life." Here was a chance to
do some good by sacrificing a little vanity of her own. She felt it was
right to do it, yet found it very hard, and asked wistfully,

"Do you mean never wear them, Charlie?"

"Never, unless you want me to smoke."

"I never do."

"Then clinch the bargain."

He had no idea she would do it, and was much surprised when she took
the dear rings from her ears, with a quick gesture, and held them out to
him, saying, in a tone that made the colour come up to his brown cheek,
it was so full of sweet good will,

"I care more for my cousins than for my ear-rings, so I promise, and
I'll keep my word."

"For shame, Prince! let her wear her little danglers if she likes, and
don't bargain about doing what you know is right," cried Archie, coming
out of his grove of newspapers with an indignant bounce.

But Rose was bent on showing her aunt that she could use her influence
for the boys' good, and said steadily,

"It is fair, and I want it to be so, then you will believe I'm in
earnest. Here, each of you wear one of these on your watch-guard
to remind you. I shall not forget, because very soon I cannot wear
ear-rings if I want to."

As she spoke, Rose offered a little ring to each cousin, and the boys,
seeing how sincere she was, obeyed her. When the pledges were safe, Rose
stretched a hand to each, and the lads gave hers a hearty grip, half
pleased and half ashamed of their part in the compact.

Just at that moment Dr. Alec and Mrs. Jessie came in.

"What's this? Dancing Ladies' Triumph on Sunday?" exclaimed Uncle Alec,
surveying the trio with surprise.

"No, sir, it is the Anti-Tobacco League. Will you join?" said Charlie,
while Rose slipped away to her aunt, and Archie buried both cigars
behind the back log.

When the mystery was explained, the elders were well pleased, and Rose
received a vote of thanks, which made her feel as if she had done a
service to her country, as she had, for every boy who grows up free from
bad habits bids fair to make a good citizen.

"I wish Rose would drive a bargain with Will and Geordie also, for I
think these books are as bad for the small boys as cigars for the large
ones," said Mrs. Jessie, sitting down on the sofa between the readers,
who politely curled up their legs to make room for her.

"I thought they were all the fashion," answered Dr. Alec, settling in
the big chair with Rose.

"So is smoking, but it is harmful. The writers of these popular stories
intend to do good, I have no doubt, but it seems to me they fail because
their motto is, 'Be smart, and you will be rich,' instead of 'Be honest,
and you will be happy.' I do not judge hastily, Alec, for I have read a
dozen, at least, of these stories, and, with much that is attractive to
boys, I find a great deal to condemn in them, and other parents say the
same when I ask them."

"Now, Mum, that's too bad! I like 'em tip-top. This one is a regular
screamer," cried Will.

"They're bully books, and I'd like to know where's the harm," added
Geordie.

"You have just shown us one of the chief evils, and that is slang,"
answered their mother quickly.

"Must have it, ma'am. If these chaps talked all right, there'd be no fun
in 'em," protested Will.

"A boot-black mustn't use good grammar, and a newsboy must swear a
little, or he wouldn't be natural," explained Geordie, both boys ready
to fight gallantly for their favourites.

"But my sons are neither boot-blacks nor newsboys, and I object to
hearing them use such words as 'screamer,' 'bully,' and 'buster.' In
fact, I fail to see the advantage of writing books about such people
unless it is done in a very different way. I cannot think they will help
to refine the ragamuffins if they read them, and I'm sure they can do no
good to the better class of boys, who through these books are introduced
to police courts, counterfeiters' dens, gambling houses, drinking
saloons, and all sorts of low life."

"Some of them are about first-rate boys, mother; and they go to sea and
study, and sail round the world, having great larks all the way."

"I have read about them, Geordie, and though they are better than the
others, I am not satisfied with these optical delusions, as I call
them. Now, I put it to you, boys, is it natural for lads from fifteen
to eighteen to command ships, defeat pirates, outwit smugglers, and
so cover themselves with glory, that Admiral Farragut invites them to
dinner, saying, 'Noble boy, you are an honour to your country!' Or,
if the hero is in the army, he has hair-breadth escapes and adventures
enough in one small volume to turn his hair white, and in the end
he goes to Washington at the express desire of the President or
Commander-in-chief to be promoted to no end of stars and bars. Even if
the hero is merely an honest boy trying to get his living, he is not
permitted to do so in a natural way, by hard work and years of patient
effort, but is suddenly adopted by a millionaire whose pocket-book he
has returned; or a rich uncle appears from sea just in the nick of time;
or the remarkable boy earns a few dollars, speculates in pea-nuts or
neckties, and grows rich so rapidly that Sinbad in the diamond valley is
a pauper compared to him. Isn't it so, boys?"

"Well, the fellows in these books are mighty lucky, and very smart, I
must say," answered Will, surveying an illustration on the open page
before him, where a small but virtuous youth is upsetting a tipsy giant
in a bar-room, and under it the elegant inscription, "Dick Dauntless
punches the head of Sam Soaker."

"It gives boys such wrong ideas of life and business; shows them so
much evil and vulgarity that they need not know about, and makes the
one success worth having a fortune, a lord's daughter, or some worldly
honour, often not worth the time it takes to win. It does seem to me
that some one might write stories that should be lively, natural and
helpful tales in which the English should be good, the morals pure, and
the characters such as we can love in spite of the faults that all may
have. I can't bear to see such crowds of eager little fellows at the
libraries reading such trash; weak, when it is not wicked, and totally
unfit to feed the hungry minds that feast on it for want of something
better. There! my lecture is done; now I should like to hear what you
gentlemen have to say," and Aunt Jessie subsided with a pretty flush on
the face that was full of motherly anxiety for her boys.

"Tom Brown just suits mother, and me too, so I wish Mr. Hughes would
write another story as good," said Archie.

"You don't find things of this sort in Tom Brown; yet these books are
all in the Sunday-school libraries" and Mrs. Jessie read the following
paragraph from the book she had taken from Will's hand,

"'In this place we saw a tooth of John the Baptist. Ben said he could
see locust and wild honey sticking to it. I couldn't. Perhaps John used
a piece of the true cross for a tooth-pick.'"

"A larky sort of a boy says that, Mum, and we skip the parts where they
describe what they saw in the different countries," cried Will.

"And those descriptions, taken mostly from guidebooks, I fancy, are the
only parts of any real worth. The scrapes of the bad boys make up the
rest of the story, and it is for those you read these books, I think,"
answered his mother, stroking back the hair off the honest little face
that looked rather abashed at this true statement of the case.

"Anyway, mother, the ship part is useful, for we learn how to sail
her, and by and by that will all come handy when we go to sea," put in
Geordie.

"Indeed, then you can explain this manoeuvre to me, of course," and Mrs.
Jessie read from another page the following nautical paragraph,

"The wind is south-south-west, and we can have her up four points closer
to the wind, and still be six points off the wind. As she luffs up we
shall man the fore and main sheets, slack on the weather, and haul on
the lee braces."

"I guess I could, if I wasn't afraid of uncle. He knows so much
more than I do, he'd laugh," began Geordie, evidently puzzled by the
question.

"Ho, you know you can't, so why make believe? We don't understand half
of the sea lingo, Mum, and I dare say it's all wrong," cried Will,
suddenly going over to the enemy, to Geordie's great disgust.

"I do wish the boys wouldn't talk to me as if I was a ship," said Rose,
bringing forward a private grievance. "Coming home from church this
morning, the wind blew me about, and Will called out, right in the
street, 'Brail up the foresail, and take in the flying-jib, that will
ease her.'"

The boys shouted at the plaintive tone in which Rose repeated the words
that offended her, and Will vainly endeavoured to explain that he only
meant to tell her to wrap her cloak closer, and tie a veil over the
tempest-tossed feathers in her hat.

"To tell the truth, if the boys must have slang, I can bear the 'sea
lingo,' as Will calls it, better than the other. It afflicts me less to
hear my sons talk about 'brailing up the foresail' than doing as they
'darn please,' and 'cut your cable' is decidedly preferable to 'let her
rip.' I once made a rule that I would have no slang in the house. I give
it up now, for I cannot keep it; but I will not have rubbishy books; so,
Archie, please send these two after your cigars."

Mrs. Jessie held both the small boys fast with an arm round each neck,
and when she took this base advantage of them they could only
squirm with dismay. "Yes, right behind the back log," she continued,
energetically. "There, my hearties (you like sea slang, so I'll give
you a bit) now, I want you to promise not to read any more stuff for a
month, and I'll agree to supply you with wholesome fare."

"Oh, mother, not a single one?" cried Will.

"Couldn't we just finish those?" pleaded Geordie.

"The boys threw away half-smoked cigars; and your books must go after
them. Surely you would not be outdone by the 'old fellows,' as you call
them, or be less obedient to little Mum than they were to Rose."

"Course not! Come on, Geordie," and Will took the vow like a hero. His
brother sighed and obeyed, but privately resolved to finish his story
the minute the month was over.

"You have laid out a hard task for yourself, Jessie, in trying to
provide good reading for boys who have been living on sensation stories.
It will be like going from raspberry tarts to plain bread and butter;
but you will probably save them from a bilious fever," said Dr. Alec,
much amused at the proceedings.

"I remember hearing grandpa say that a love for good books was one
of the best safeguards a man could have," began Archie, staring
thoughtfully at the fine library before him.

"Yes, but there's no time to read nowadays; a fellow has to keep
scratching round to make money or he's nobody," cut in Charlie, trying
to look worldly-wise.

"This love of money is the curse of America, and for the sake of it men
will sell honour and honesty, till we don't know whom to trust, and it
is only a genius like Agassiz who dares to say, 'I cannot waste my time
in getting rich,'" said Mrs. Jessie sadly.

"Do you want us to be poor, mother?" asked Archie, wondering.

"No, dear, and you never need be, while you can use your hands; but I am
afraid of this thirst for wealth, and the temptations it brings. O, my
boys! I tremble for the time when I must let you go, because I think it
would break my heart to have you fail as so many fail. It would be far
easier to see you dead if it could be said of you as of Sumner 'No man
dared offer him a bribe.'"

Mrs. Jessie was so earnest in her motherly anxiety that her voice
faltered over the last words, and she hugged the yellow heads closer in
her arms, as if she feared to let them leave that safe harbour for the
great sea where so many little boats go down. The younger lads nestled
closer to her, and Archie said, in his quiet, resolute way,

"I cannot promise to be an Agassiz or a Sumner, mother; but I do promise
to be an honest man, please God."

"Then I'm satisfied!" and holding fast the hand he gave her, she sealed
his promise with a kiss that had all a mother's hope and faith in it.

"I don't see how they ever can be bad, she is so fond and proud of
them," whispered Rose, quite touched by the little scene.

"You must help her make them what they should be. You have begun
already, and when I see those rings where they are, my girl is prettier
in my sight than if the biggest diamonds that ever twinkled shone in her
ears," answered Dr. Alec, looking at her with approving eyes.

"I'm so glad you think I can do anything, for I perfectly ache to be
useful; everyone is so good to me, especially Aunt Jessie."

"I think you are in a fair way to pay your debts, Rosy, for when girls
give up their little vanities, and boys their small vices, and try to
strengthen each other in well-doing, matters are going as they ought.
Work away, my dear, and help their mother keep these sons fit friends
for an innocent creature like yourself; they will be the manlier men for
it, I can assure you."



Chapter 18--Fashion and Physiology

"Please, sir, I guess you'd better step up right away, or it will be too
late, for I heard Miss Rose say she knew you wouldn't like it, and she'd
never dare to let you see her."

Phebe said this as she popped her head into the study, where Dr. Alec
sat reading a new book.

"They are at it, are they?" he said, looking up quickly, and giving
himself a shake, as if ready for a battle of some sort.

"Yes, sir, as hard as they can talk, and Miss Rose don't seem to know
what to do, for the things are ever so stylish, and she looks elegant in
'em; though I like her best in the old ones," answered Phebe.

"You are a girl of sense. I'll settle matters for Rosy, and you'll lend
a hand. Is everything ready in her room, and are you sure you understand
how they go?"

"Oh, yes, sir; but they are so funny! I know Miss Rose will think it's a
joke," and Phebe laughed as if something tickled her immensely.

"Never mind what she thinks so long as she obeys. Tell her to do it for
my sake, and she will find it the best joke she ever saw. I expect to
have a tough time of it, but we'll win yet," said the Doctor, as he
marched upstairs with the book in his hand, and an odd smile on his
face.

There was such a clatter of tongues in the sewing-room that no one heard
his tap at the door, so he pushed it open and took an observation. Aunt
Plenty, Aunt Clara, and Aunt Jessie were all absorbed in gazing at Rose,
who slowly revolved between them and the great mirror, in a full winter
costume of the latest fashion.

"Bless my heart! worse even than I expected," thought the Doctor, with
an inward groan, for, to his benighted eyes, the girl looked like a
trussed fowl, and the fine new dress had neither grace, beauty, nor
fitness to recommend it.

The suit was of two peculiar shades of blue, so arranged that patches of
light and dark distracted the eye. The upper skirt was tied so lightly
back that it was impossible to take a long step, and the under one
was so loaded with plaited frills that it "wobbled" no other word
will express it ungracefully, both fore and aft. A bunch of folds was
gathered up just below the waist behind, and a great bow rode a-top. A
small jacket of the same material was adorned with a high ruff at the
back, and laid well open over the breast, to display some lace and a
locket. Heavy fringes, bows, puffs, ruffles, and revers finished off the
dress, making one's head ache to think of the amount of work wasted,
for not a single graceful line struck the eye, and the beauty of the
material was quite lost in the profusion of ornament.

A high velvet hat, audaciously turned up in front, with a bunch of pink
roses and a sweeping plume, was cocked over one ear, and, with her curls
braided into a club at the back of her neck, Rose's head looked more
like that of a dashing young cavalier than a modest little girl's.
High-heeled boots tilted her well forward, a tiny muff pinioned her
arms, and a spotted veil, tied so closely over her face that her
eyelashes were rumpled by it, gave the last touch of absurdity to her
appearance.

"Now she looks like other girls, and as I like to see her," Mrs. Clara
was saying, with an air of great satisfaction.

"She does look like a fashionable young lady, but somehow I miss my
little Rose, for children dressed like children in my day," answered
Aunt Plenty, peering through her glasses with a troubled look, for
she could not imagine the creature before her ever sitting in her lap,
running to wait upon her, or making the house gay with a child's blithe
presence.

"Things have changed since your day, Aunt, and it takes time to get used
to new ways. But you, Jessie, surely like this costume better than the
dowdy things Rose has been wearing all summer. Now, be honest, and own
you do," said Mrs. Clara, bent on being praised for her work.

"Well, dear to be quite honest, then, I think it is frightful," answered
Mrs. Jessie, with a candour that caused revolving Rose to stop in
dismay.

"Hear, hear," cried a deep voice, and with a general start the ladies
became aware that the enemy was among them.

Rose blushed up to her hat brim, and stood, looking, as she felt, like a
fool, while Mrs. Clara hastened to explain.

"Of course, I don't expect you to like it, Alec, but I don't consider
you a judge of what is proper and becoming for a young lady. Therefore,
I have taken the liberty of providing a pretty street suit for Rose.
She need not wear it if you object, for I know we promised to let you do
what you liked with the poor dear for a year."

"It is a street costume, is it?" asked the Doctor, mildly. "Do you know,
I never should have guessed that it was meant for winter weather and
brisk locomotion. Take a turn, Rosy, and let me see all its beauties and
advantages."

Rose tried to walk off with her usual free tread, but the under-skirt
got in her way, the over-skirt was so tight she could not take a long
step, and her boots made it impossible to carry herself perfectly erect.

"I haven't got used to it yet," she said, petulantly, kicking at her
train, as she turned to toddle back again.

"Suppose a mad dog or a runaway horse was after you, could you get out
of the way without upsetting, Colonel," asked the Doctor, with a twinkle
in the eyes that were fixed on the rakish hat.

"Don't think I could, but I'll try," and Rose made a rush across the
room. Her boot-heels caught on a rug, several strings broke, her hat
tipped over her eyes, and she plunged promiscuously into a chair, where
she sat laughing so infectiously that all but Mrs. Clara joined in her
mirth.

"I should say that a walking suit in which one could not walk, and a
winter suit which exposes the throat, head, and feet to cold and damp,
was rather a failure, Clara, especially as it has no beauty to reconcile
one to its utter unfitness," said Dr. Alec, as he helped Rose undo her
veil, adding, in a low tone, "Nice thing for the eyes; you'll soon see
spots when it's off as well as when it's on, and, by and by, be a case
for an oculist."

"No beauty!" cried Mrs. Clara, warmly, "Now, that is just a man's
blindness. This is the best of silk and camel's hair, real ostrich
feathers, and an expensive ermine muff. What could be in better taste,
or more proper for a young girl?"

"I'll shew you, if Rose will go to her room and oblige me by putting on
what she finds there," answered the Doctor, with unexpected readiness.

"Alec, if it is a Bloomer, I shall protest. I've been expecting it, but
I know I cannot bear to see that pretty child sacrificed to your wild
ideas of health. Tell me it isn't a Bloomer!" and Mrs. Clara clasped her
hands imploringly.

"It is not."

"Thank Heaven!" and she resigned herself with a sigh of relief, adding
plaintively, "I did hope you'd accept my suit, for poor Rose has been
afflicted with frightful clothes long enough to spoil the taste of any
girl."

"You talk of my afflicting the child, and then make a helpless guy like
that of her!" answered the Doctor, pointing to the little fashion plate
that was scuttling out of sight as fast as it could go.

He closed the door with a shrug, but before anyone could speak, his
quick eye fell upon an object which caused him to frown, and demand in
an indignant tone,

"After all I have said, were you really going to tempt my girl with
those abominable things?"

"I thought we put them away when she wouldn't wear them," murmured Mrs.
Clara, whisking a little pair of corsets out of sight with guilty haste.
"I only brought them to try, for Rose is growing stout, and will have
no figure if it is not attended to soon," she added, with an air of calm
conviction that roused the Doctor still more, for this was one of his
especial abominations.

"Growing stout! Yes, thank Heaven, she is, and shall continue to do it,
for Nature knows how to mould a woman better than any corset-maker,
and I won't have her interfered with. My dear Clara, have you lost your
senses that you can for a moment dream of putting a growing girl into an
instrument of torture like this?" and with a sudden gesture he plucked
forth the offending corsets from under the sofa cushion, and held them
out with the expression one would wear on beholding the thumbscrews or
the rack of ancient times.

"Don't be absurd, Alec. There is no torture about it, for tight lacing
is out of fashion, and we have nice, sensible things nowadays. Everyone
wears them; even babies have stiffened waists to support their weak
little backs," began Mrs. Clara, rushing to the defence of the pet
delusion of most women.

"I know it, and so the poor little souls have weak backs all their days,
as their mothers had before them. It is vain to argue the matter, and I
won't try, but I wish to state, once for all, that if I ever see a pair
of corsets near Rose, I'll put them in the fire, and you may send the
bill to me."

As he spoke the corsets were on their way to destruction, but Mrs.
Jessie caught his arm, exclaiming merrily, "Don't burn them, for mercy
sake, Alec; they are full of whalebones, and will make a dreadful odour.
Give them to me. I'll see that they do no harm."

"Whalebones, indeed! A regular fence of them, and metal gate-posts in
front. As if our own bones were not enough, if we'd give them a
chance to do their duty," growled the Doctor, yielding up the bone
of contention with a last shake of contempt. Then his face cleared
suddenly, and he held up his finger, saying, with a smile, "Hear those
girls laugh; cramped lungs could not make hearty music like that."

Peals of laughter issued from Rose's room, and smiles involuntarily
touched the lips of those who listened to the happy sound.

"Some new prank of yours, Alec?" asked Aunt Plenty, indulgently, for she
had come to believe in most of her nephew's odd notions, because they
seemed to work so well.

"Yes, ma'am, my last, and I hope you will like it. I discovered what
Clara was at, and got my rival suit ready for to-day. I'm not going to
'afflict' Rose, but let her choose, and if I'm not entirely mistaken,
she will like my rig best. While we wait I'll explain, and then you will
appreciate the general effect better. I got hold of this little book,
and was struck with its good sense and good taste, for it suggests a
way to clothe women both healthfully and handsomely, and that is a great
point. It begins at the foundations, as you will see if you will look
at these pictures, and I should think women would rejoice at this
lightening of their burdens."

As he spoke, the Doctor laid the book before Aunt Plenty, who obediently
brought her spectacles to bear upon the illustrations, and after a long
look exclaimed, with a scandalised face,

"Mercy on us, these things are like the night-drawers Jamie wears! You
don't mean to say you want Rose to come out in this costume? It's not
proper, and I won't consent to it!"

"I do mean it, and I'm sure my sensible aunt will consent when she
understands that these well I'll call them by an Indian name, and say
pajamas are for underwear, and Rose can have as pretty frocks as she
likes outside. These two suits of flannel, each in one piece from head
to foot, with a skirt or so hung on this easily-fitting waist, will
keep the child warm without burdening her with belts, and gathers, and
buckles, and bunches round the waist, and leave free the muscles that
need plenty of room to work in. She shall never have the back-ache if I
can help it, nor the long list of ills you dear women think you cannot
escape."

"I don't consider it modest, and I'm sure Rose will be shocked at it,"
began Mrs. Clara, but stopped suddenly, as Rose appeared in the doorway,
not looking shocked a bit.

"Come on, my hygienic model, and let us see you," said her uncle, with
an approving glance, as she walked in, looking so mischievously merry,
that it was evident she enjoyed the joke.

"Well, I don't see anything remarkable. That is a neat, plain suit; the
materials are good, and it's not unbecoming, if you want her to look
like a little school-girl; but it has not a particle of style, and no
one would ever give it a second glance," said Mrs. Clara, feeling that
her last remark condemned the whole thing.

"Exactly what I want," answered the provoking Doctor, rubbing his hands
with a satisfied air. "Rosy looks now like what she is, a modest little
girl, who does not want to be stared at. I think she would get a glance
of approval, though, from people who like sense and simplicity rather
than fuss and feathers. Revolve, my Hebe, and let me refresh my eyes by
the sight of you."

There was very little to see, however, only a pretty Gabrielle dress, of
a soft warm shade of brown, coming to the tops of a trim pair of boots
with low heels. A seal-skin sack, cap, and mittens, with a glimpse of
scarlet at the throat, and the pretty curls tied up with a bright velvet
of the same colour, completed the external adornment, making her look
like a robin redbreast wintry, yet warm.

"How do you like it, Rosy?" asked the Doctor, feeling that her opinion
was more important to the success of his new idea than that of all the
aunts on the hill.

"I feel very odd and light, but I'm warm as a toast, and nothing seems
to be in my way," answered Rose, with a skip which displayed shapely
gaiters on legs that now might be as free and active as a boy's under
the modest skirts of the girl.

"You can run away from the mad dogs, and walk off at a smart pace
without tumbling on your nose, now, I fancy?"

"Yes, uncle! suppose the dog coming, I just hop over a wall so and when
I walk of a cold day, I go like this."

Entering fully into the spirit of the thing, Rose swung herself over
the high back of the sofa as easily as one of her cousins, and then
went down the long hall as if her stout boots were related to the famous
seven-leaguers.

"There! you see how it will be; dress her in that boyish way and she
will act like a boy. I do hate all these inventions of strong-minded
women!" exclaimed Mrs. Clara, as Rose came back at a run.

"Ah, but you see some of these sensible inventions come from the brain
of a fashionable modiste, who will make you more lovely, or what you
value more 'stylish' outside and comfortable within. Mrs. Van Tassel
has been to Madame Stone, and is wearing a full suit of this sort. Van
himself told me, when I asked how she was, that she had given up lying
on the sofa, and was going about in a most astonishing way, considering
her feeble health."

"You don't say so! Let me see that book a moment," and Aunt Clara
examined the new patterns with a more respectful air, for if the elegant
Mrs. Van Tassel wore these "dreadful things" it would never do to be
left behind, in spite of her prejudices.

Dr. Alec looked at Mrs. Jessie, and both smiled, for "little Mum" had
been in the secret, and enjoyed it mightily.

"I thought that would settle it," he said with a nod.

"I didn't wait for Mrs. Van to lead the way, and for once in my life I
have adopted a new fashion before Clara. My freedom suit is ordered, and
you may see me playing tag with Rose and the boys before long," answered
Mrs. Jessie, nodding back at him.

Meantime Aunt Plenty was examining Rose's costume, for the hat and sack
were off, and the girl was eagerly explaining the new under-garments.

"See, auntie, all nice scarlet flannel, and a gay little petticoat, and
long stockings, oh, so warm! Phebe and I nearly died laughing when I put
this rig on, but I like it ever so much. The dress is so comfortable,
and doesn't need any belt or sash, and I can sit without rumpling any
trimming, that's such a comfort! I like to be tidy, and so, when I wear
fussed-up things, I'm thinking of my clothes all the time, and that's
tiresome. Do say you like it. I resolved I would, just to please uncle,
for he does know more about health than anyone else, I'm sure, and I'd
wear a bag if he asked me to do it."

"I don't ask that, Rose, but I wish you'd weigh and compare the
two suits, and then choose which seems best. I leave it to your own
commonsense," answered Dr. Alec, feeling pretty sure he had won.

"Why, I take this one, of course, uncle. The other is fashionable, and
yes I must say I think it's pretty but it's very heavy, and I should
have to go round like a walking doll if I wore it. I'm much obliged to
auntie, but I'll keep this, please."

Rose spoke gently but decidedly, though there was a look of regret when
her eye fell on the other suit which Phebe had brought in; and it was
very natural to like to look as other girls did. Aunt Clara sighed;
Uncle Alec smiled, and said heartily,

"Thank you, dear; now read this book and you will understand why I ask
it of you. Then, if you like, I'll give you a new lesson; you asked for
one yesterday, and this is more necessary than French or housekeeping."

"Oh, what?" and Rose caught up the book which Mrs. Clara had thrown down
with a disgusted look.

Though Dr. Alec was forty, the boyish love of teasing was not yet dead
in him, and, being much elated at his victory, he could not resist the
temptation of shocking Mrs. Clara by suggesting dreadful possibilities,
so he answered, half in earnest, half in jest, "Physiology, Rose.
Wouldn't you like to be a little medical student, with Uncle Doctor for
teacher, and be ready to take up his practice when he has to stop? If
you agree, I'll hunt up my old skeleton to-morrow."

That was too much for Aunt Clara, and she hastily departed, with her
mind in a sad state of perturbation about Mrs. Van Tassel's new costume
and Rose's new study.



Chapter 19--Brother Bones

Rose accepted her uncle's offer, as Aunt Myra discovered two or three
days later. Coming in for an early call, and hearing voices in the
study, she opened the door, gave a cry and shut it quickly, looking a
good deal startled. The Doctor appeared in a moment, and begged to know
what the matter was.

"How can you ask when that long box looks so like a coffin I thought it
was one, and that dreadful thing stared me in the face as I opened the
door," answered Mrs. Myra, pointing to the skeleton that hung from the
chandelier cheerfully grinning at all beholders.

"This is a medical college where women are freely admitted, so walk in,
madam, and join the class if you'll do me the honour," said the Doctor,
waving her forward with his politest bow.

"Do, auntie, it's perfectly splendid," cried Rose's voice, and Rose's
blooming face was seen behind the ribs of the skeleton, smiling and
nodding in the gayest possible manner.

"What are you doing, child?" demanded Aunt Myra, dropping into a chair
and staring about her.

"Oh, I'm learning bones to-day, and I like it so much. There are twelve
ribs, you know, and the two lower ones are called floating ribs, because
they are not fastened to the breastbone. That's why they go in so easily
if you lace tight and squeeze the lungs and heart in the let me see,
what was that big word oh, I know thoracic cavity," and Rose beamed with
pride as she aired her little bit of knowledge.

"Do you think that is a good sort of thing for her to be poking over?
She is a nervous child, and I'm afraid it will be bad for her," said
Aunt Myra, watching Rose as she counted vertebrae, and waggled a
hip-joint in its socket with an inquiring expression.

"An excellent study, for she enjoys it, and I mean to teach her how
to manage her nerves so that they won't be a curse to her, as many a
woman's become through ignorance or want of thought. To make a mystery
or terror of these things is a mistake, and I mean Rose shall understand
and respect her body so well that she won't dare to trifle with it as
most women do."

"And she really likes it?"

"Very much, auntie! It's all so wonderful, and so nicely planned, you
can hardly believe what you see. Just think, there are 600,000,000 air
cells in one pair of lungs, and 2,000 pores to a square inch of surface;
so you see what quantities of air we must have, and what care we should
take of our skin so all the little doors will open and shut right. And
brains, auntie, you've no idea how curious they are; I haven't got to
them yet, but I long to, and uncle is going to show me a manikin that
you can take to pieces. Just think how nice it will be to see all the
organs in their places; I only wish they could be made to work as ours
do."

It was funny to see Aunt Myra's face as Rose stood before her talking
rapidly with one hand laid in the friendliest manner on the skeleton's
shoulder. Every word both the Doctor and Rose uttered hit the good lady
in her weakest spot, and as she looked and listened a long array of
bottles and pill-boxes rose up before her, reproaching her with the
"ignorance and want of thought" that made her what she was, a nervous,
dyspeptic, unhappy old woman.

"Well, I don't know but you may be right, Alec, only I wouldn't carry
it too far. Women don't need much of this sort of knowledge, and are not
fit for it. I couldn't bear to touch that ugly thing, and it gives me
the creeps to hear about 'organs,'" said Aunt Myra, with a sigh and her
hand on her side.

"Wouldn't it be a comfort to know that your liver was on the right side,
auntie, and not on the left!" asked Rose with a naughty laugh in her
eyes, for she had lately learnt that Aunt Myra's liver complaint was not
in the proper place.

"It's a dying world, child, and it don't much matter where the pain
is, for sooner or later we all drop off and are seen no more," was Aunt
Myra's cheerful reply.

"Well, I intend to know what kills me if I can, and meantime, I'm going
to enjoy myself in spite of a dying world. I wish you'd do so too, and
come and study with uncle, it would do you good, I'm sure," and Rose
went back to counting vertebrae with such a happy face, that Aunt Myra
had not the heart to say a word to dampen her ardour.

"Perhaps it's as well to let her do what she likes the little while
she is with us. But pray be careful of her, Alec, and not allow her to
overwork," she whispered as she went out.

"That's exactly what I'm trying to do, ma'am, and rather a hard job
I find it," he added, as he shut the door, for the dear aunts were
dreadfully in his way sometimes.

Half an hour later came another interruption in the shape of Mac, who
announced his arrival by the brief but elegant remark,

"Hullo! what new game is this?"

Rose explained, Mac gave a long whistle of surprise, and then took a
promenade round the skeleton, observing gravely,

"Brother Bones looks very jolly, but I can't say much for his beauty."

"You mustn't make fun of him, for he's a good old fellow, and you'd be
just as ugly if your flesh was off," said Rose, defending her new friend
with warmth.

"I dare say, so I'll keep my flesh on, thank you. You are so busy you
can't read to a fellow, I suppose?" asked Mac, whose eyes were better,
but still too weak for books.

"Don't you want to come and join my class? Uncle explains it all to us,
and you can take a look at the plates as they come along. We'll give
up bones today and have eyes instead; that will be more interesting to
you," added Rose, seeing no ardent thirst for physiological information
in his face.

"Rose, we must not fly about from one thing to another in this way,"
began Dr. Alec, but she whispered quickly, with a nod towards Mac, whose
goggles were turned wistfully in the direction of the forbidden books,

"He's blue to-day, and we must amuse him; give a little lecture on eyes,
and it will do him good. No matter about me, uncle."

"Very well; the class will please be seated," and the Doctor gave a
sounding rap on the table.

"Come, sit by me, dear, then we can both see the pictures; and if your
head gets tired you can lie down," said Rose, generously opening her
little college to a brother, and kindly providing for the weaknesses
that all humanity is subject to.

Side by side they sat and listened to a very simple explanation of the
mechanism of the eye, finding it as wonderful as a fairy tale, for fine
plates illustrated it, and a very willing teacher did his best to make
the lesson pleasant.

"Jove! if I'd known what mischief I was doing to that mighty delicate
machine of mine, you wouldn't have caught me reading by firelight,
or studying with a glare of sunshine on my book," said Mac, peering
solemnly at a magnified eye-ball; then, pushing it away, he added
indignantly, "Why isn't a fellow taught all about his works, and how
to manage 'em, and not left to go blundering into all sorts of worries?
Telling him after he's down isn't much use, for then he's found it out
himself and won't thank you."

"Ah, Mac, that's just what I keep lecturing about, and people won't
listen. You lads need that sort of knowledge so much, and fathers and
mothers ought to be able to give it to you. Few of them are able, and
so we all go blundering, as you say. Less Greek and Latin and more
knowledge of the laws of health for my boys, if I had them. Mathematics
are all very well, but morals are better, and I wish, how I wish that I
could help teachers and parents to feel it as they ought."

"Some do; Aunt Jessie and her boys have capital talks, and I wish we
could; but mother's so busy with her housekeeping, and father with his
business, there never seems to be any time for that sort of thing; even
if there was, it don't seem as if it would be easy to talk to them,
because we've never got into the way of it, you know."

Poor Mac was right there, and expressed a want that many a boy and girl
feels. Fathers and mothers are too absorbed in business and housekeeping
to study their children, and cherish that sweet and natural confidence
which is a child's surest safeguard, and a parent's subtlest power. So
the young hearts hide trouble or temptation till the harm is done, and
mutual regret comes too late. Happy the boys and girls who tell all
things freely to father or mother, sure of pity, help, and pardon; and
thrice happy the parents who, out of their own experience, and by
their own virtues, can teach and uplift the souls for which they are
responsible.

This longing stirred in the hearts of Rose and Mac, and by a natural
impulse both turned to Dr. Alec, for in this queer world of ours,
fatherly and motherly hearts often beat warm and wise in the breasts
of bachelor uncles and maiden aunts; and it is my private opinion that
these worthy creatures are a beautiful provision of nature for the
cherishing of other people's children. They certainly get great comfort
out of it, and receive much innocent affection that otherwise would be
lost.

Dr. Alec was one of these, and his big heart had room for every one of
the eight cousins, especially orphaned Rose and afflicted Mac; so, when
the boy uttered that unconscious reproach to his parents, and Rose added
with a sigh, "It must be beautiful to have a mother!" the good Doctor
yearned over them, and, shutting his book with a decided slam, said in
that cordial voice of his,

"Now, look here, children, you just come and tell me all your worries,
and with God's help, I'll settle them for you. That is what I'm here
for, I believe, and it will be a great happiness to me if you can trust
me."

"We can, uncle, and we will!" both answered, with a heartiness that
gratified him much.

"Good! now school is dismissed, and I advise you to go and refresh your
600,000,000 air cells by a brisk run in the garden. Come again whenever
you like, Mac, and we'll teach you all we can about your 'works,' as you
call them, so you can keep them running smoothly."

"We'll come, sir, much obliged," and the class in physiology went out to
walk.

Mac did come again, glad to find something he could study in spite of
his weak eyes, and learned much that was of more value than anything his
school had ever taught him.

Of course, the other lads made great fun of the whole thing, and
plagued Dr. Alec's students half out of their lives. But they kept
on persistently, and one day something happened which made the other
fellows behave themselves for ever after.

It was a holiday, and Rose up in her room thought she heard the voices
of her cousins, so she ran down to welcome them, but found no one there.

"Never mind, they will be here soon, and then we'll have a frolic," she
said to herself, and thinking she had been mistaken she went into the
study to wait. She was lounging over the table looking at a map when an
odd noise caught her ear. A gentle tapping somewhere, and following the
sound it seemed to come from the inside of the long case in which the
skeleton lived when not professionally engaged. This case st